THE CHARIOT and Horsemen of ISRAEL. A Discourse of Prayer: showing what it is,
as also the means to attain to the practice of it. AN EXERCISE SO RARE in the
world, and yet so requisite, as few use it aright, and none may omit it.

By HENRY LANGLEY, Minister of the Word of God, at Treswell in the County of
Nottingham.

IAM. 4.2,3, -- Ye fight and war, yet ye have not, because ye ask not.

Ye ask and receive not, because ye ask amiss.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Edmund Weauer. 1616.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE EDMUND Lord SHEFFEILD, Knight of the most Noble Order
of the Garter, Lord President of his Majesty's learned Counsel established in
the North, and Lord Lieutenant there; Grace and Peace in Jesus Christ.
THere be two points (Right Honorable) as witnesses that worthy Orator Cic.
Offic. lib. 2.
, to be observed in committing things to public view. That they be not
satis nota, sufficiently known before: and that they be Cognitione digna,
worthy to be known.

If the first, they are tedious: If not the second, they are odious. If either,
idle at the least, if not naught. If both, both idle and naught.

I hope, this little Treatise need fear just exception on neither part. Many
(I confess) have written on this Subject: and justly may it be asked, what I
have found, which in their learned labors has not already been brought to
light: yet dare I profess, that this small Tractate, (absit inuidia verbo)
will afford, unto the illiterate some things, for manner at the least, if not
likewise for matter, worth the reading.

And for Prayer, The nature of it is high, it being a peculiar fruit of the
Spirit, the Immunities great, the power wonderful, and the profit
incomparable. As, did not this succeeding discourse show it, I could discover
at large. In a word, It is the Chariot and Horsemen of Israel.

Why want we necessaries for soul and body; seeing the earth is the Lords,
yea, the Heavens and the Heaven of Heavens: and our God is abundant in
goodness and truth? We pray not. Why are we, with Ephraim, in crosses, as a
cake unturned Hos. 7.8.
? We pray not. Why are the Heavens as brass, and the earth as iron? Why is
there such decay, from year to year, in our stock, and complaining in our
streets? We pray not.

For could the carnal man pray: and did the man already regenerate, use this
duty, as he ought: mercies would be more plentiful, judgments not so
usual, and the rod of the wicked would not be suffered to lie so long upon
the lot of the righteous.

Requisite is it therefore, and of special consequence, that we learn this
great lesson, (taught so carefully of John to his disciples: and begged so
instantly, of Christ, by his dis^ples: I mean) How to pray.

The Doctrine is here handled, the which out of my thankful remembrance of the
many favors received from your Lordship, for my quiet liberty in my
Ministry, and preferment, as also in respect of the reverend opinion, which
the Church of God has a long time (and I hope shall have occasion to do no
less unto the end) conceived of your Lordshippes Christian affection toward
God and godliness, I do humbly dedicate unto your Honor.

Now the God of peace, Heb. 13.20,21.
that brought again, from the dead, our Lord Jesus, the great Shepherd of the
sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you perfect in
every good work to do his will, working in you that which is well-pleasing in
his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever and ever, Amen.
Your Honors in the Lord most humbly HENRY LANGLEY.

The particulars of this Discourse.
CHAP. I.
I. The definition, showing what prayer is. II. The Notation, whence the term
is fetched, in Hebrew. III. The Genus of Prayer, viz. Invocation: and what
Prayer has in common with the other kinds of Invocation: the which are, An
Oath. A Vow.
IV. What it chalengeth to it self in special: noted here, handled after, in
the doctrine of the form, more at large. V. How God is our Father, considered
as the Object of Prayer.
CHAP. II.
The Causes of Prayer, or the things whereby Prayer comes to be that which it
is. And they are four: I. The Efficient: and therein, 1. The maine efficient,
and that in respect of both the Form of prayer. Matter of prayer.
Where is handled the state of Adoption, in which every one that prays, is of
necessity, to stand; because, otherwise, God becomes not fit to be prayed
to: Man fit to pray: nor the things we want, fit to be prayed for. 2. The
Motives working from Within. Without.
3. The means of performance: and they such as do Fit us before. Serve in
performance. Further.

II. The Matter, whereon our prayers are made, and of praying, or of exhibiting
our prayers to God. III. The Form, the soul of prayer, ministering life unto
it. And therein is considered Faiths twofold work. 1. The one whereby we are
assured, that the promises, as they are true in Christ, so do they concern
us. 2. And we shall have these requests, put up according to his will.
IV. The Ends, or wherefore we do pray: and they are considered, 1. Either
simply, 2. Or in respect of, God the father. Christ. The holy Ghost. The Word.
Our selves. Prayer. The things our prayers do concern.



CHAP. III.
The Effects of prayer: considered in regard of, 1. God. 2. The things aimed
at. 3. Our selves.

CHAP. IV.
The Subject of Prayer: and that, I. Receiving: the which is, Mental. Verbal.
Local.
II. Whereabout Prayer is exercised: consisting in, Things. Persons. Where is
handled, For whom, we are to pray. Through whom, we are to pray. To whom, we
are to pray.

And there withal is showed, how we are, 1. To conceive of God, in prayer. 2.
To direct our prayers to him.


CHAP. V.
The Adjuncts of Prayer, considered, I. Simply. II. In respect of these four
things, viz. The person praying The Ends of prayer. The Subject. The Time.


CHAP. VI.
The distribution of Prayer, into, I. The parts: the which are, Confession.
Petition. Thanksgiving.
II. The kinds: considered in respect of, the Effects of Prayer. Subject of
Prayer. Object of Prayer.


THE CHARIOT and Horsemen of ISRAEL.
The Preface
MAster, say the Disciples to our Savior, teach us to pray, Luke 11.1.
as John also taught his Disciples. Whence it appears, that though ye Holy
Ghost be our schoolmaster, teaching us what to pray as we should: yet, for the
guiding our desires in things warrantable, expressing our minds in fitting
terms, and the co^triuing our matter in order and form; In a word, for the
doctrine of prayer, we may and should be helped, wherein we are defective, by
ordinary means.

I have, therefore, adventured upon it. A Subject, as worthy to be well
known: so no less weighty to be thoroughly handled.

My purpose is not to enter into any large discourse: but summarily to run
over these six heads following: namely,

The particulars of this discourse.
The 1. Definition, 2. Causes, 3. Effects, 4. Subjects, 5. Adjuncts, 6.
Distribution,
of Prayer.

CHAP. I. The definition of prayer.
The Definition of prayer.
Prayer is a calling upon the name of God, as a Father. THis may be the
definition of prayer. Wherein two things are to be considered. I. The thing
defined. II. The definition it self.


1. The thing defined.
The thing here defined, is Prayer: which, in Hebrew, comes of a word which
signifies judgment. (...) of (...)


For a man apprehending the wrath of God due for sin, and denounced against
sinners, runs to the Lord: as we may see in David, Psalm. 32.5.
I acknowledged (says he) my sin unto thee, and mine iniquity have I not
hid.

Again, coming to entreaty, it shows plainly, that he can ask nothing,
as of due. In like manner, giving thanks for blessings received, it argues
mercy, and secludes merit. For to him that works, (says the Apostle) Romans
4.4.
the wages are not counted by favor, but by debt.

Lastly, Prayer is a pleading before God. If (says Eli to his sons) 1. Sam.
2.25
one man sin against another, the Magistrates shall judge him: but if a man
sin against the Lord, who shall entreat for him, or plead for him? Now, in
prayer, we plead three things. I. The Fathers gracious promises, in his Son
Christ. As David, Psalm. 89.49.
Lord, where are thy former loving kindnesses, sworn to David in thy truth?
II. The great Charter purchased by Jesus Christ, for all his members. If ye
shall ask any thing (says Christ) Ioh. 14.14.
in my name, I will do it. III. The graces of the Spirit: as the tokens and
signs of those to whom all the former belong. Remember now, O Lord, I beseech
thee, (says Hezekiah) Isai. 38.3.
how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart, and have
done that which is good in thy sight.


Adam. And how could he pray; having neither sin to confess, because he had
not fallen, nor Christ to plead?

Adam, even in his innocence, should have judged himself to have been, but a
creature, for workmanship; dust and ashes, for matter; and for place, a
subject: and whatsoever good thing his good God bestowed upon him, it came out
of his special grace and bounty. And his plea, then, was the covenant of
works. And thus much for the thing defined.

. 2. What prayer has in common.
2. The definition it self.
The Definition it self follows. Wherein we may consider two things. I. The
Genus. II. The Form.


That, is in these words, A calling upon the name of God. This, in the words
following, As a Father. The former it has common to it, with both an oath and
a vow: The latter it does challenge to it self, in proper.

Prayer, then, is an inuocating or calling upon. Many and great privileges
has the Lord bestowed on his Church: whereof this is not the least, that
frail man may have access unto his God, and he not be molested with his many
and rude requests.

For which cause (doubtless) David glories in his tongue, above all his other
parts: it being an instrument of so glorious a work as conference with God. O
God (says he) Psalm. 108.1.
my heart is fixed: I will sing and give praise, even with my glory. So Psalm.
30.12.

Invocation consists in, I. A lifting up of the mind unto God. II. A fixing
of the mind upon God. III. A pouring out our mind before God.


The kinds of Invocation are three. I. Prayer. II. An Oath. III. A Vow,


Prayer is a calling upon the name of God, as a Father. As has been before
defined.

An Oath is a calling upon the name of God, as supreme Judge.

A Vow is a calling upon the name of God, as dread Sovereign.

. 3. What it chalengeth to it self in proper.
That which Prayer chalengeth to it self, in proper, is, that it is a calling
upon the name of God, as a Father.

judgment: how, then, can it be a calling upon the name of God, as a Father?



And so, by confession, clearing his justice, we appeal from justice to mercy,
which admits us in our Mediator.

In whom we find the Lord not a Judge, but a Father. Before whom we plead (as
I have in part showed before) the promise in his Christ, our elder-brother,
showing him our hands Genesis 27.22.
covered with the skin of the spotless Lamb, even the graces of his Spirit,
the lively tokens of our birthright.

But upon this may be made a double reply. some say, that part of prayer,
namely, confession, is made to God as Judge.

I have sinned, he called Father. Father (says he) Luke 15.21.
I have sinned.





Namely, that if he should lay judgment to the rule, and righteousness to
the balance, we were not able to answer one of a thousand evils committed
against him, by us, even us, who have this free and hopeful access to come
before him, and cry, Abba Father.

In a word: To have what to confess, we consider the Lord in his justice:
but, as we do confess these things, we consider him in his mercy, even our
Father.

David in the Psalms, Psalm. 35.1.
Plead my cause, O Lord, with them that strive with me: fight against them that
fight against me?



We pray to him, then, as a Father: desiring, that he as a Father, hearing our
prayer, would, as a Judge, 2. Chro. 6.39.
plead our cause.

. 4. How the term, Father, is taken in the definition.
Let us now come to the acception of the term, Father. And the Lord God is a
Father, in three respects of relation. I. By generation. II. By Creation. III.
By Adoption.


By Generation, he is only the Father of Christ, his only begotten: even as
his type Isaac was the only lawfull-begotten of Abraham by Sarah. And
therefore he says not to his Disciples, jointly, I go to our Father: but
distinctly, I go to my Father, Ioh. 20.17
and to your Father. A Father to both: but in diverse respects: to him by
generation, to them by adoption.

By Creation God is a Father to all his creatures. One God and Father of all,
says the Apostle. Ephesians. 4.6.
And Adam Luke 3.
is called the son of God.

But, Father, is not so taken here. The covenant is broken on our parts, and
his image is defaced. And there is no specialtie of creation that will hold
plea: but all make directly against us.

Therefore, in the third place, God is a Father, by adoption: viz. to that
peculiar company which is according to the election of grace; who hold all
things by virtue of the Evangelical covenant: having disclaimed the
unwarrantable right of Creation, and sued out a fine of recovery, from God, in
Jesus Christ, by hearty prayer, and faith unfeigned.

Adoption is to make choice of another man's child to be ours, and so to make
him our heir, or ioynt-heire. Now, we were all estranged and cut off from
God, in Adam: and became the bastards of that grand-Fornicatour the Devil, and
old Strumpet the world. Insomuch, that we must all confess, that our first
Father was an Amorite, and our Mother a Hittite, Ezekiel. 16.3.
.

But it pleased the Lord, to choose, out of this forlorn company, a number to
himself, to make them a holy nation, a royal Priesthood, a peculiar people,
even partakers of the adoption of Sons.

Here then, by Father, is meant, God in Christ, who has in him, I. Chosen us
before time. II. Redeemed us in time. III. And made us, in part, personally
partakers of both: abounding toward us, in all wisdom and prudence: Ephesians.
1.8.9.
having made known unto us the mystery of his will.

CHAP. II. The causes of Prayer.
The Causes of prayer.
THe Causes of Prayer, are four. I. The Efficient. II. The Matter. III. The
Form. IV. The End.


I. Efficient.
The maine Efficient in respect of, 1. The Form. 2. The Matter. Every one that
prays, must stand in the state of election: the which makes, 1. The Lord fit
to be prayed to. 2. The person fit to pray. 3 The things fit to be prayed for,
etc.

The Efficient, or cause making prayer, is Principal, or lesse-principall. The
lesse-principall is either Impulsive, or adiuuant. Here, then, are three things
to be handled, in general. I. The Main-efficient. II. The Motives. III. The
means of performance.






But in respect of ability, it is only the elect called, justified and
sanctified: In a word, The adopted ones of God.

In which state that every one must stand which prays, we may see, if we
consider the use of it, in respect of, I. The Object God, to whom we pray. II.
The Person praying. III. The Things desired in Prayer.


And therefore not being within Adoption, there is no right relation between
God and us.

This was intimated by the veil, Exodus 24.
which excluded the people of the Jews out of the Holy of Holies. Into the
which (says the Apostle) Heb. 10.16.20.
We have liberty to enter, in the blood of Jesus, by the new and living way,
which he has prepared for us, through the veil, that is to say, his flesh.

Here we may take notice of three faults in prayer.

I. Many pray to the Lord: but put no difference between his being in
himself, and what he is to his Church in Christ. But, so they pray to God, it
serves.

II. Many conceiving aright of God, in general, as a Father, are not
persuaded, neither labor to be persuaded, in special, that he is their
Father. They hope well: but naught can they believe. They but go to God by
hearsay.

III. Some do persuade themselves, that God is their Father. Not from the
earnest of the Spirit: but rather from the ignorance of sin, want of due
examination, and from carnal presumption.



I. Hence arises his ability, to call God Father, and pour out his heart
aright before him. For otherwise, as there is an antipathy between the Lord
and his heart: so likewise, he wants that new tongue, requisite in every one
that would call upon the Lord: without which his words are barbarous, and not
of the right dialect of Canaan. For which cause the Lord calls the Jews
crying, howling Hos. 7.14.
.

II. Without this Adoption, his Person is in disgrace: and his offering must
needs be rejected, as Genesis 4.
Cains was.

III. Hereby we are made fit objects of Gods blessings. The which we are not,
unless we be his adopted ones, called etc. For,

I. Otherwise the Lord has made no promise to us. If ye abide in me (says
Christ Ioh. 15.7.
) and my words abide in you: ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done
for you.

II. Otherwise we have no part in Christ's Prayer. I pray for them (says
Christ) Ioh. 15.7.20.
, I pray not for the world: and who they are, we may see after; Neither, says
he, pray I for these alone, but for them also, which shall believe on me
through their word.

III. The Lord gives all things for the glory of his name. Now, would thou
not willingly give a man a staff to strike thy self with? And can thou
look that GOD will give thee any good thing, to dishonor him withal, whiles
thou art out of Christ, called, and like a distempered stomach, turns wholesome
meat into noisome humors?

prayed for, being all of them parcels of our spiritual inheritance, as also,
such as with comfort, we may be thankful for.

. 2. The Impulsive, or moving cause works from within, or from without.
The Motives working. 1. From within. 2. From without.

I. Conscience of our duty: as prayer is commanded us by God. II. Love of God:
as it is a conference with God. III. Zeal: as it is a sacrifice to God. IV. A
Christian love of our selves: as by it we receive supply from God. V. Hope: as
we have a promise to be heard of God.




higher, and conceiueth, in these, the chastisement of God, with many
spiritual evils. II. Nature, upon the sight of our wants, stirs us up to
use natural means: and if to prayer, yet as morally considered, as the
Philosopher cried, Being of beings have mercy upon me! Ens entium miserere
mei!
But grace draws us unto GOD in Christ: using secondary means, in submission
to his command, for conscience sake.

Impulsive causes working from without, and stirring us up to prayer, are
especially these:

I. The word of God: and it moving us three ways: namely, by, I. Commandment.
II. Promise. III. Examples of the children of God, and above all, of Christ our
Head, therein recorded.

II. Our miserable condition, by reason of sin: as namely, I. Our wants: that
of our selves we have nothing. II. Our weakness: that by our selves we can
get nothing. III. Our unworthiness: that for ourselves, that is, our own
sakes, we can look for nothing.

III. The worth of prayer: whose, 1. Privilege, 2. Power, 3. Profit,
is exceeding great: as we may see afterward.

IV. Accidents of mercy and judgment, which befall us. As, at the deliverance
of Israel, when Pharaoh and his host were overthrown in the sea, Exodus
15.1,2, etc.
Moses and the children of Israel praised the Lord. And when the children of
Ammon and Moab and mount Seir came against Iehosaphat, he proclaimed a fast,
2. Chron. 20.3,4,5, etc.
and Judah gathered themselves together to ask help of the Lord.

. 3. The means of performance:
and they, such as do, 1. Fit us before. 2. Serve in the performance. 3.
Further.

The Adiuuant or helping causes, are such as do, I. Fit us before. II. Serve
in the performance. III. Further.


fit us for prayer, are, I. The word of God, in general. II. More
particularly, the Lords Prayer. The Forms of godly affected men helping
withal. III. Meditation.

And we are to meditate especially of three things. I. Of God, in himself, and
in his covenant to us. II. Of our own estate. III. Of the manner of pouring out
our hearts before God, by prayer.



The helping causes of use, in the performance, are the instruments therein
used. The which are either natural, or spiritual.

The natural are three: I. The heart conceiving or consenting. II, The mind
contriuing. III. The mouth uttering.

The spiritual instrument, is faith. Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed?

David commends a Psalm to the people, to be used for him. Wherein they are
taught to say, Psalm. 20.2,3,4.
The Lord hear thee, etc. When Moses his hands were heavy, Exodus 17.12.
Aaron and Hur stayed them. II. Fasting. Defraud not one another (says the
Apostle) 1. Cor. 7.5.
except it be with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting
and prayer. So Anna Luke 2.
served God with fastings and prayers.



The use of fasting. In a general humiliation, under Gods judgments, it is
most meet that all should fast. For, though fasting be not simply required, as
of the essence of the duty to be performed: yet it is required, by inevitable
consequence, as an appendix. For, I. The Lord requires, in such cases, Ierem.
8.6.
a due consideration of his judgment for sin, and that out of his deep
displeasure. II. He requires, then, a thorough humiliation. His sacrifice,
must be at all times (much more at that time) a broken Psalm. 51.17.
and a contrite heart. III. We should judge our selves, that we be not judged of
the Lord. And therefore the King of Niniue commanded, Ion. 3.5,7.
not only that men should fast: but withal, that neither beast, heard nor
flock, should taste any thing, feed nor drink water.

But for our ordinary conversation, touching both persons and times, I answer
with the Apostle, Romans 14.17
The kingdom of God is not meat and drink: but righteousness and peace, and
joy in the Holy Ghost. Earthly food is subordinate to these. If therefore,
meat and drink further righteousness, etc. we may, nay we must, eat and
drink. But if they hinder, or if abstinence would further: as there is a time
to eat, so we must find a time to fast.



The kingdom of God is not meat and drink. Always provided, that the meat,
for both quantity and quality, do argue mere necessity. When Moses his
hands were heavy, Exodus 17.8, etc.
he uses means of help. But what? such as did afford neither state nor
pleasure. They took a stone, says the text, and put it under him, and he
sat thereon.

. 4.
II. Material: and, I. Of Prayer: and 1. The first matter. 2. The second or
proportioned. II. Of praying.

We come now to the matter. And that of Prayer, and of Praying.



Pour out (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 62.8.
your heart before him. And again, Psalm. 38.9.
Lord all my desire is before thee.



And though the Lord do please; in his Christ, to hear faithful prayer, be
it never so confused: yet should we labor to perform it in the best manner.
For our God is the God of order.

Now, (not to tie thee (Reader) to one strict form: but yet, to prescribe a
few rules, that thou may at the least, pray in some form) for thy direction,
if herein thou be defective, consider these eight particulars following.

I. Propound God in Christ, setting him forth so, in words, as thou art taught,
to conceive of him, in the Scriptures: and as best befitteth thy case. II. Then
deal concerning sin; (as that which especially troubles thee, and makes
thee unapt to ask, and incapable to receive any good thing) touching which thou
must deal by way of, 1. Confession of the act, and the evil both of guilt and
desert of punishment. 2. Petition of forgiveness and acceptance. 3. Profession
of thankfulness and amendment. III. Desire spiritual blessings. All which the
Apostle James James 1.5.
comprehends under Wisdom. IV. Then temporal. V. As we pray for our
selves: so must we also, for others. VI. As we desire what we want: so must we
remember to be thankful for what we have. VII. We may use reasons, from the
promises, examples of Gods dealings with others, our own experience, etc, to
strengthen our faith. VIII. As faith in the promise is showed, in the beginning
(by such terms as these, Our gracious and merciful father in Jesus Christ,
etc): so must our hope of the performance be manifested in the Conclusion. The
which is ordinarily, by this term, Amen.

I. A lifting up of the mind unto God. Let us lift up (says Jeremy) our heart
with our hands, Lam. 3.41.
unto GOD in the heavens. II. A fixing of the mind upon GOD. Unto thee (says
the Psalmist Ps. 123.1.2.
) lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwell in the heavens. Behold, as the eyes
of servants, look unto the hand of their masters, and as the eyes of a maiden,
unto the hand of her mistress: so our eyes wait upon the Lord our God, until
that he have mercy upon us. III. A pouring out of our hearts before the Lord.
Trust in him, at all times, ye people (says the Psalmist Psalm. 62.8.
), pour out your heart before him. Again, Ps. 142.2.
I poured out my complaint before him: I showed before him my trouble.


. 5.
III. The form of prayer. Faiths double work, in prayer. Three degrees, of
this latter work of faith.

The Form of Prayer, is in these words, as a Father, as has been showed
before, in the definition.

And it consists in the apprehension and application of the promises made to
us in Jesus Christ, as appears by that of the Psalmist, Ps. 62.8.
Trust in him at all times, ye people, pour out your heart before him: and of
James, Iam. 1.
But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. And herein faith performs a
double work.

yea, and in him Amen: so do they belong unto us, as the adopted sons of
God. And in this respect Christ teaches us, in his Prayer, to begin with our
Father.

Amen.

And of this latter work of Faith, there are three degrees.

Revel. 8.
to be put into the golden Censor. That is, to apply to our prayers, the
powerful intercession of Jesus Christ, our High Priest over the house of God:
assuring our selves, that it is able to make supply of all our wants: that much
incense, wherewith he is furnished, being given unto him, that he might offer
it with the prayers of all the Saints.

euaporate and fume up, out of the Angels hand, in the smoke of the incense,
into the nostrils of the Lord. That is, to believe, that, by the virtue of
Christ's intercession, our prayers do most sweetly ascend before the Lord. And
so (as it were) even beholding the Lord look cheerfully upon us, in his
Christ, smelling a sacrifice of peace.

the former, a true and comfortable assurance, of the performance of what we
have prayed for, in matter of petition: and of the acceptance of our
thankfulness.

. 6.
IV. The End of prayer. I. In general. II. In special.

The ends of Prayer follow. And they are to be considered, I. In general, as
it is a duty. II. In special, as it is the duty of Prayer.


The ends of Prayer in general, are,



I. God the Father. II. Christ. III. The Holy Ghost. IV. The Word. V. Our
selves. VI. Prayer it self. VII. The things aimed at in Prayer.


Holy Ghost are not excluded: neither the Father, from them, in these two
following.



Holy Ghost, is, to use the means whereby he may be pleased to work in and
upon us.

the Gospel, qualifying the severe, (but most just) rigor of the Law.







CHAP. III. The Effects of Prayer.
THE Effects of Prayer follow: namely, what Prayer works. And they may be
considered in regard of, I. God. II. The things aimed at in prayer. III. Our
selves.


Effects considered in regard of, 1. God. 2. The things aimed at.

Who so offers praise, (says the Lord) Psa. 50.23.
glorifieth me. II. It prevails powerfully even with the Lord himself. As,
to insist upon some particulars: I. It changes the Lords threatenings: Ion.
3.8.10.11. II. It keeps the Lord with us. Mal. 1.10.11. III. It calls the
Lord back, when he is gone from us. Exodus 33.13.14.15.16.17. IV. It turns
away his wrath, when he would in judgment burst in upon us, Psalm. 106.23.
Ezech. 22.30.

Effects of Prayer, in respect of the things aimed at, may be referred to four
heads. I. It preuenteth the dangers that we fear. As, destruction Ion. 3.8.10
from Niniuee: and the sword Esa. 38.14.15.16.17.18. etc.
from Jerusalem. It stayed Genesis 31.24
for Jacob, Labans hand: and Genesis 32.9.10. etc.
assuaged Esaus wrath.

II. It remooueth the evils that we feel. When Israel groaned under their
taske-masters in Egypt, the Lord removed their shoulder from the burden, Ps.
81.6.
and their hands were delivered from the pots, Psalm. 32.4.5.

III. It procures what we desire. Elias, says James, Iam. 5.17.18.
Was a man subject to like passions, as we are, and he prayed earnestly that
it might not rain: and it rained not on the earth, by the space of three
years and six months. And he prayed again, and the heaven gave rain, and
the earth brought forth her fruit. And if any man lack wisdom: James 1.5.
he bids that we ask of God.

IV. It sanctifies what we have. Every creature of God is good, says the
Apostle, 1. Tim. 4.4.5
and nothing to be refused, if it be received with thanksgiving: for it is
sanctified by the word of God and prayer. To be short, it can do any thing.
Phil. 4.6.



whom we pray, is abundant in goodness and truth, and rich to all that call
upon him.

. 2.
Effects considered in regard of, 3. Our selves.

The Effects of Prayer, in respect of our selves, may be referred to two
heads. I. The Commodities. II. The Symptoms.


Touching the good and profitable work of Prayer, in us. I. It is a most
special exercise, for the stirring up the graces of God in us. II. It
nourishes, as all the graces of God, in us, so especially hope and patience,
1. Sam. 1.15,18. III. It fulfilleth our joy, Ioh. 16.24.

The Effects of Prayer, which, as symptoms and signs do demonstrate true
feeling prayer, are three. I. It causes a holy heat in our affections.
Whereby a man finds himself, after a while, much more heauenlily affected,
then in the beginning of his prayer. II. A weaning from the thoughts of the
world, for the present, immediately after his prayer. As he that beholds the
Sun, has not his eyes instantly fit to look upon earthly things. And
therefore, he that can, presently after prayer, think and speak of worldly
affairs, with as much ease and delight, as if he had but come from a worldly
exercise: it is much to be doubted (to say no worse) that he prayed not
heartily. III. It gives a man a heavenly aspect, for the present: making him
look like one, that has had converse with God.

CHAP. IV. The Subject of Prayer.
THE Subject of Prayer is twofold. I. Receiving. II. Whereabout Prayer is
exercised.


Subject. I. Receiving. 1. Mental. 2. Verbal. 3. The two former may,
considered in another relation, be called Adjuncts.
3. Local: considered, in respect of, 1. Place. 2. Prayer.

The Subject receiving, is, I. Mental. II. Verbal. III. Local.


mental, which consists in the cogitations of our minds. For we may
conceive a prayer, though it be not uttered. And those, which are uttered in
words, were first in thought.

the altring and changing of our words, are herein of great use.

subiect-receiuing is the place. The which is to be considered, in regard of,
I. The place it self. II. Prayer.


Believe me, says our Savior to the woman of Samaria, Ioh. 4.21. etc.
the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain, nor yet at
Jerusalem, worship the Father. -- But the hour comes, and now is, when the
true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: for the Father
seeks such to worship him. And the Apostle wills, 1. Tim. 2.8.
that men pray euery-where. Reas. 1. The Lord is euery-where. II. All places
are Gods, and for his glory. III. Respect of place was ceremonial, pointing
at Christ our spiritual Temple, in whom alone God will accept us.

done decently, and in order. In respect, therefore, of prayer,

I. Public prayer should be in a public place. Reason 1. That all might more
conveniently assemble. II. In more fitting manner to make a public profession
of our faith and obedience. III. For the more lively manifestation of the
liberty, which (by Gods blessing) we enjoy.

II. More private prayer, (I mean of a family) in every family apart. As for
me and my house (says Iosuah Ios. 24.15.
), we will serve the Lord. III. Most private, (that is, of every particular
person) in a secret place. When thou prayest, says our Savior, Matthew. 6.6.
enter into thy closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father
which is in secret. Reas. I. To avoid imputations of hypocrisy. II. For the
more liberty, in both word and iesture.

. 2.
II. Occupying, or where about prayer is exercised: the which is, 1. Real.
and. 1. What they are. 2. How objects 3. How far.

The subject whereabout prayer is exercised (which is properly the Object)
follows. And it is, I. Either Real. II. Or Personal.


things which are the objects of Prayer, we may consider, I. What they are.
II. How they are objects of our Prayers. III. How far.


Iam. 1.17.
2. Righteousness has the promise of both. Heb. 13.5.
3. We are commanded to go to God Iam. 1.5. Matthew. 6.9.10.11. etc.
for both. II. They are simply good: or being evil in themselves, the
considerations respected in Prayer, are good. For good things we desire, The
continuance of what we have: and the bestowing of what we want. And, of evil
things, we desire, their prevention, profitable use, and remouall, and are
answerably thankful. III. As all good things, are our object, so all good
means. IV. Lastly, as all good things: so a blessing in the getting, keeping
and using of them.



Hence arises a special comfort in prayer. For have we an inheritance? Then
whatsoever we ask, is ours before; as we may see, in the Lords Prayer: where
we are taught to say, Give us this day, our daily bread. When we pray, we ask
our pension. Our several wants, are so many pay-daies.

Many will pray willingly, when they need nothing: but in a strait, they can
hardly be drawn to the Lord. Alas, they mis-conceiue of prayer; we can never
pray more comfortably, then in a want, For then, and not before, comes the
promise in force.

Call upon me, in the evil day, (says the Lord Ps. 50.^
) I will deliver thee. Mark: the means and the time must both concur. If
we pray not for deliverance, we omit the means. And if it be not the day of
trouble, when we pray, we mistake the time. So, Psalm. 102.17. Luke 1.53.

on our parts, required in duty.

. 2.
Personal, referred to three heads. 1. For whom.

The Personal Objects follow: which may be referred to three heads. I. For
whom we are to pray. II. Through whom we are to pray. III. To whom we are to
pray.


I exhort therefore, (says the Apostle 1. Tim. 2.1.
) that first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of
thanks be made for all men.

That is, always excepted, whom the Scriptures have elsewhere excepted. And
they are, In whole,

I. Of the living, Such as sin against the Holy Ghost. As the Apostle
advises us, 1. Ioh. 5.16
If any man see his brother sin, a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and
he shall give him life, for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto
death, I do not say; that he shall pray for it.

II. The Dead are not to be prayed for. Because, I. There is no command for
it: and consequently, no promise. II. We have no example, in all the
Scriptures. III. Solomon says peremptorily, Eccles. 9.6.
that they have no portion of all that is done under the Sun. IV. After death,
there is no change, either from Hell to Heaven, or from Heaven to Hell. As
Abraham tells Dives. And Dives desires not, that Lazarus might be sent to
his brethren, Luke 16.27.28.
to certify them where he was, to the end, they might pray for his
deliverance: but to warn them, (because they had yet time) least they came
into that place of torment. Again the persons excepted, in part, are men so
far as their purposes, plots, and practices are derogatorie to Gods glory,
and against Christian charity, 2. Ioh. 10.12.

. 3.
Personal, referred to three heads. 2. Through whom.

The person through whom we are to put up our prayers, is Jesus Christ, the
Mediator between God and man. And he only is a fit Mediator, as the work
was to be performed, I. For man. II. To God. III. Between God and man.


He was most fit to be the Mediator for man: Because, he was man, meet to
take his sin upon him; and God, able to discharge it. Man, to undertake his
duty: and God, able to perform it.

He was the fittest to be Mediator to God. Because, he was man borne under
the Law, that could be made subject to the Law, and die a cursed death. And
God, able to add infinite merit, to give the Lord infinite satisfaction.

He was the fittest between God and man. Because, I. Being God, he could not
but respect Gods glory. Being man, he could not but be touched with the
feeling of man's misery. II. Being God, he has free access to God: being man,
we have free access to him. III. Being God, he could prevail with God: being
man, we can prevail with him. God will deny him, nothing: he will deny, his,
nothing.

It was meet, (says Augustine) Tom. 1. confess. 10. c. 42. Mediator autem
inter Deu^ and homines oportebat vt haberet aliquid simile Deo, and aliquid
simile hominibus: ne in vtroque similis hominibus long esset a Deo: aut in
vtroque similis Deo, long esset ab hominibus, atque ita Mediator non esset.
that the Mediator between God and men, should have something like God, and
something like men: lest being in both like men, he should be too far from
God; or in both like God, he were too far from men: and so were not a
Mediator.

Now, we are to consider, touching this Mediator, two things. I. His
satisfaction. II His intercession.


His Satisfaction, was the absolute discharge, and infinitely meritorious
performance, of whatsoeeuer the Law requires. He being obedient to the death,
even the cursed death of the Cross.

His Intercession, is not a petition put up to the Father, as we do, and as he
did in the days of his flesh: but, it is his appearing for ever, for us, in
the sight of God, with the merit and worth of his obedience and bloodshed: the
which speaks better things, then Heb. 22.24
that of Abel.

And as Prayer moves one, and prevails with him: so, the sweet savor of
Christ his sacrifice and satisfaction, is ever in Gods nostrils, as the smell
of a field which the Lord has blessed.

Answerably to these two, we are to consider two things, in whatsoever we
desire at the Lords hands. I. The right we have to them. II. Our receiving of
them.


The Right we have to them, comes by Christ his Sacrifice and Satisfaction.
But now, in Christ Jesus, says the Apostle, Ephe. 2.13.
ye who sometimes were far off, are made nigh by the blood of Christ.

His Intercession respects the performance of the promises, and the personal
bestowing of those good things. And, herein, he performs a double work. I.
He prays for us, Romans 8.34. II. He prays with us, perfecting and perfuming
our prayers, that they may be accepted of God his Father: and so, presents
them unto him, Revel. 8.3.4

. 4.
Personal, referred to three heads. 3. To whom. and that, 1. God.

The Person to whom our prayers must be directed, follows. Touching whom, we
are to consider two things. I. That God is our Object. II. How.


Call upon me, says he, in the Psalms: Ps. 50.
And our Savior teaches us, in that his universal form of prayer, to say,
Our Father which art in heaven.

And that, by Father, he means only God, does evidently appear, I. By things
desired, viz. the hallowing of his name, the coming of his Kingdom, etc. II.
By the Reasons, For thine is the Kingdom, etc. III. By his speech to his
Disciples elsewhere. Mat. 23.9.
Call no man your Father upon the earth: for there is but one your Father,
which is in Heaven. This is his direction. And otherwise to pray, then Christ
has taught us, is, (says Chrysostom,) Ser. 6. De Orat. Dom. Aliter orare
quam docuit Christus, non ignorantia sola est, sed and culpa.
not only an error, but a fault. For the confirmation hereof, I will keep me
within the limits of this discourse. The reasons, then, are these.

There is one that judges me, the Lord.

us, yea praying for us: whom to make a petitioner to Saints or Angels, or any
creature, were horrible blasphemy.

Ps. 50.
if we call upon him. The Son assures us, Ioh. 16.23.
that he will do, whatsoever we ask the Father. And the Holy Ghost does
testify unto us, yt 1. Ioh. 5.15
we shall have the requests we do ask of him. And for the latter, The Lord
does appropriate to himself, the searching of the heart: Ier. 17.10.
I the Lord, search the heart.

in force, and such means be used, as the Lord has appointed. All which are,
when we pray to God: not one particular being otherwise attained unto.

Ephesians. 3.14
only by the outward gesture, whereby this adoration is expressed. For this
cause, I bow my knees, says he, unto the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ: as
also, that all divine adoration is peculiar to the Lord, may be seen in the
second commandment: where it is forbidden, so much as to bow down and worship
any thing besides the Lord. And thus the Church, in her purer times, did use
this duty. As, to content us with one testimony, we may see in the Epistle
written in the name of the Church of Smyrna, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap.
15.
touching the martyrdom of that renowned Polycarpus, mentioned by Eusebius. --
Being ignorant (says the Church, speaking of their adversaries) that we can
never forsake Christ, which died for the salvation of the whole world: that we
can worship none other. For we worship Christ as the Son of God, the Martyrs
we love as Disciples and followers of the Lord, and that worthily, for the
invincible good love they bear to their King and master, whose companions and
disciples we desire to be.

. 5.
3. To whom. and that, 2. His name, or God in his name.

The other point, is, how God is our Object: and that is, in his name. For,
Prayer is a calling upon the name of God.

I will take the cup of salvation, (says the Psalmist Ps. 116.13.
) and call on the name of the Lord. And the Apostle says, Romans 10.13
Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved.

The name of God, is any significant title, attributed to him, for our
capacity.

I. Then Prayer is not a confused calling upon God. But he that prays, must
know how the Lord has revealed himself, in the word: that so accordingly he
may conceive of him. How shall they call on him, says the Apostle, Romans 10.14.
in whom they have not believed? and how shall they believe in him, of whom
they have not heard?

2.
II. In the second place, we must not only know GOD, to whom we pray, in some
good measure: But, we are also to consider those proprieties in GOD, which do
the best sort with our matter.

As, if our speech concern the searching of our hearts, and the Lords knowing
of our sins, we must consider his omniscience. If our misery to be
confessed, and how he might deal with us: then we are to consider his
justice. If pardon, his mercy. If help, his power. If faith and hope, his
unchangeable verity, etc.

An example hereof we have in David. Psalm. 4 1.
Hear me calling, O God of my righteousness, (says he) thou have set me at
liberty, in a strait, be gracious unto me, and hear my prayer.

Here the Psalmist three ways affected, considers the Lord, answerably, in
three proprieties. I. As an innocent, he does consider the Lord as Patron of
Innocents, and innocent causes. Hear me calling, O God of my righteousness.
II. Being in misery and great distress, he calls to mind the gracious
providence of the Lord, confirmed by the experience of former deliverance. Thou
have set me at liberty in a strait. III. In the sense of his frailties, from
which none are free, and for which the Lord might justly reject him, he
appealleth unto mercy. Be gracious unto me, and hear my prayer.

And thus doing, we shall find the relation between the proprieties in God,
and their objects in us, a powerful means to move us, touching humiliation,
or consolation.

And thus much for the object of Prayer, to wit, God, and that in his name:
that is, so conceived and called upon, as he has pleased, for our direction
and comfort, to make himself known unto us.

. 6.
How to conceive of God in prayer.


Here, before we proceed, we will answer two Questions. The first whereof is
this.

Thou must, touching thy praying, note three things: I. Thy presenting thy
self. II. Thy Prayer. III. Thy actions and iestures.


is the object of thy prayer: and in heaven, is the object of thy actions and
gestures.

I. For the first, setting thy self to prayer, thou art to present thy self
before the essence and all-being of God, who fills heaven and earth, and is
beyond al heavens: before whom thou art to acknowledge thy self to stand
naked, thy most secret thoughts being manifest in his sight.

II. Touching thy Prayer, thou art to consider how the Lord has revealed
himself in his word: as to be just, merciful, etc. In regard of which, or any
of which, as they concern thee, being considered as in this al-being God, or
God in them, thou art to be convinced and affected accordingly.

III. And lastly, thy gestures, as kneeling, holding up thy hands, etc: thy
actions of speaking, sighing, etc: as also, thy humbling thy self in thy
heart, and thy desires of what thou want, etc: are all to be directed
toward heaven, not a representation of Gods essence: but because, I. There
sits the Manhood of Christ, our Head and Mediator. II. Heaven is the Lords
storehouse: and from thence comes every good giving, and every perfect gift.
III. And there the Lord reueales his glory.

The child sits on the mothers knee, and looking her in the face, asks
beer, pointing with the finger to the glass, or buttrie door. I. The child
is with the mother: so we present our selves before God, in his omni-presence.
II. The child does look the mother in the face: even so our spiritual eyes
behold God, in ye face of his Christ, as he is manifested in the word. III.
The child makes signs to the place, where that is, which he would have. So
do we toward heaven.

The Papist, because he would have something sensibly before him, to kneel,
look and speak to, has invented Images, the work of the craftsman, which
have eyes and see not, ears and hear not, neither speak they through their
throat.

But the Lord has provided for us a better object, even God-in-Heauen. And, I.
Whether should the instinct of our renewed nature lead us; but toward Heaven,
where sits our Lord and Head, in whom does rest our fullness? II. Whether
should our affections draw us; but to that place, where our inheritance lies,
and our good things are laid up? III. How can we prostrate our selves so
fitly, as toward Heaven, where the Lord reuealeth that glory, which makes
the very Angels to cover their faces?

Here we may take notice of many defects, in prayer, and errors touching the
conceiving of God. I. Some place him only in Heaven. Others, only in the
Church-top, Chamber, or place where they pray. II. Some but suppose God to be
before them: and so pray to a fained God. And so, whilst they pray, they do,
indeed, but play, acting, like Interluders, on a stage. III. Some acknowledging
God his both presence, and all-presence, conceive him of many fashions.

All which proceeds, I. Partly, from our ignorance, being not rightly
instructed in the knowledge of God. II. Partly, from our finitnes of capacity,
which must consider one thing after another. And so, whiles we are busied about
one, we forget another. III. And partly, because our nature cannot conceive a
thing to be, but conceiueth it of some fashion. For, in natural things, the
form gives the being. Forma dat esse.
Whence it comes, that we are ever clothing the Dietie, with some shape or
other.

These things must be helped: I. By instruction, to learn aright. II. By
Meditation aforehand, to conceive aright. III. By raising up our selves, in
prayer, from these low earthly conceits, (so often as they do offer themselves)
to the true and right considerations spoken of before.

. 7.
How to direct our prayers to God.



I. Simply, as an act. II. Respectively, in regard of the doing.


As, to insist upon this duty in hand, Our prayer simply respects God in
unity: but, in regard of putting it up, the Trinity.

For, by the gracious assistance of the Holy Ghost, through the mediation of
the well-beloved Son, we exhibit our prayers to the eternal Father.

As in every ordinary petition put up to a man, The petition simply respects
him to whom it is to be presented. But in regard of the putting it up, there
must be, I. A drawing. II. A presenting. III. A receiving.

So likewise, in our prayers, simply we put them up to God. But, for the
manner, I. The Holy Ghost draws them: teaching us what to pray as we should.
Likewise (says the Apostle) Romans 8.26.
the Spirit also helps our infirmities: for we know not what we should pray
for as we ought: but the spirit it self makes intercession for us with
gronings, which cannot be uttered. II. The Son does perfect, perfume and
present them. And another Angel (says John) Reu. 8.3.
came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer, and there was given unto
him much incense, that he should offer it with the prayers of all Saints, upon
the golden altar which was before the throne. III. The Father does receive
them. And the smoke of the incense (says John) Reu. 8.4.
which came with the prayers of the Saints, ascended up before God, out of the
Angels hand. And thus much for an answer to the first part of the Question.

In the second place, we may direct our prayers to any Person in the Trinity.
I. To the Father: as to the Ephesians, Ephesians. 3.14 15.
For this cause (says the Apostle) I bow my knees unto the father of our Lord
Jesus Christ, etc. II. To the Son: as to Timothy, 2. Tim. 4.22
The Lord Jesus Christ be with thy spirit, etc. And Steven cried, Act. 7.59,
Lord Jesus receive my spirit. III. To the Holy Ghost: as to the Romans, Romans
15.5.
Now, the God of patience and consolation, grant you to be like minded, etc.
Yet not exclusiuely, but inclusiuely: in any one understanding al. For, every
of their working does argue one another manner, in the Trinity, and all one
matter, in the unity.

Touching which, we may consider three things further. I. When we alter. II.
How far. III. Wherefore.


For the first, we are to know, that the three Persons are distinguished in
their proprieties, and manner of working: as also, that these three general
Effects, (Creation, Redemption, and Regeneration) are attributed (though
inclusiuely, yet) distinctlie to ye three Persons: Creation, to the Father:
Redemption, to the Son: Regeneration, to the Holy Ghost. As we may see in the
Creed.

Now, as our matter does alter, in any of these regards, so may we alter our
object.

For the second, namely, how far we alter. We must consider that, in regard
of, I. Our object. II. Our Prayers. III. Our selves.


In regard of the Object, God, our altring is Personal, not Essential. For
there is but one indivisible Godhead.

In regard of our Prayer, our altring does not respect the prayer simply: but
respectively, as a prayer containing such or such matter.

Lastly, in regard of our selves, we vary our phrase, not our faith. We direct
our prayer, or speech in prayer, to this or that Person: but, our faith is one
and the same, grounded upon the promises, made to us, by that one indivisible
Deity, equally respecting each Person in the Trinity.

In the last place, the reasons why we alter our object, that is, direct our
speech in prayer, to this or that Person, are, I. To conform our prayers and
terms, to the Trinities distinct manner of working. II. To stir up, in us, a
greater reverent respect of every Person, as God. The which our Savior shows
to be a special reason of their distinct manner of working. Ioh. 5.22.23.
The Father (says he) judges no man: but has committed all judgment to the
Son: that men might honor the Son, as they honor the Father. III. The
better to stir up and strengthen our Faith. And that by mentioning the very
distinct Efficients, and workers of the good things we desire. As also, to move
affection, in thanksgiving. Having, so, the more liberty to use the terms,
that do concern their incommunicable proprieties.

Yet, usually we direct our prayers only to the Father. Because, by office, I.
He is the fountain of all goodness. II. He is First-willer. III. It belongs
to him, to receive our prayers.

CHAP. V.
THE Adjuncts of Prayer follow. And they are to be considered, as concerning
it, I. Simply. II. Respectively.


The Adjuncts considered, 1. Simply.

The Adjuncts of prayer, simply considered, are these.

I. That prayer is a duty belonging to every man. As appears in that, it is
commanded in the moral, and a general rule is prescribed, by our Savior in
the Gospel.

II. It is a duty to which the Lord has pleased, to tie most gracious
promises; as, Ps. 50.
Call upon me, in the evil day, so will I deliver thee. Ask, says our
Savior, Ioh. 16.24.
and ye shall receive. And the Apostle James, Iam. 4.2.
lays the cause of want, upon the neglect of this duty.

III. It has goodly immunities. No place, no time, no person, no thing) so far
as God may be glorified, and we have good) can prescribe against it.

Daniel Da^. 6.10.22
in his Chamber, and in the den: David Ps. 55.17.
morning, evening, and at noone day: they both called upon the Lord, and he
heard them.

The Craft of Achitophel, 2. Sa^. 15.31
The power of Senacherib, Isa. 37.16. etc.
the walls of Jericho, Josh. 6.20.
The waters of the red sea, Exodus 14.
The Clouds, Iam. 5.17.
nay the Sun and Moon Josh. 10.12.
could no ways infringe it.

It raises fruit out of the earth: Iam. 5.18.
and pulls grace down from Iam. 1.5.
heaven.

IV. The Profit is unspeakable. Yet, to insist upon some particulars: Besides
what may be gathered from the former properties, it is a faithful servant, it
will never deceive us. It is a sure messenger, it cannot be intercepted, but
goes to heaven invisible. It is a swift Post, if we be brought into a strait,
it is with God in a moment. In a word, it is our only means, of duty, which
we have to the Lord, both in prosperity and adversity.

V. The Power is irresistible. For what says the Apostle Heb. 11.33.34.
of Faith, which may not be likewise said of Prayer? For by it have the
worthies of God, subdued Kingdoms, wrought righteousness, obtained promises,
stopped the mouths of Lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge
of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, waxed valiant in fight,
turned to flight the armies of the aliens. To be short, it is the Chariot and
Horsemen of Israel.

VI. Lastly, It is so worthy, so essential a fruit of religion, and of such
general use, that it is often put for all religion. And therefore is the Temple
Mat. 27.13
called the house of prayer.

. 2.
The Adjuncts considered, II. Attributed to it in respect of, 1. The Person
praying, and 1. His condition. 2. His person, and 1. Soul. 2. Body. 3. Both.

The Adjuncts of Prayer, in the second place, are such as are attributed to it,
in respect of, I. The Person praying. II. The Ends of prayer. III. The Subject.
IV. The Time.


I. Either his Condition. II. Or his Person.


that they be the prayers.

I. Of a man that is regenerate. Genesis 4.
For the Lord rejected the offering of Cain, because he had a quarrel with his
person. And the Spirit, who helps our infirmities, and teaches us to pray as
we ought, is said Romans 8.26.27.
to make intercession for the Saints: that is, only for the Saints.

II. Of a man repentant, for his evils which from time to time do escape him;
as we may see in the prophecy of Jeremy, Ier. 14.10.11.12.
Thus (says the Lord) unto his people, thus have they loved to wander, they
have not refrained their feet, therefore the Lord does not accept them, he
will now remember their iniquity, and visit their sins. Then said the Lord
unto me, pray not for this people, for their good. When they fast, I will not
hear their cry, and when they offer burnt offering, and an oblation, I will
not accept them.

III. Of a diligent and dutiful hearer of the Word of GOD. Ier. 11.9.10.11.
And the Lord said unto me, says Jeremy, A conspiracy is found among the men
of Judah, and among the inhabitants of Jerusalem. They are turned back to the
iniquities of their forefathers, which refused to hear my words, etc. --
Therefore, (thus says the Lord) Behold, I will bring evil upon them, which
they shall not be able to escape; and though they shall cry unto me, I will
not hearken unto them.

IV. Of one that is charitable, Mar. 11.25.
And when ye stand praying, says our Savior, forgive, if ye have ought
against any: that your Father also which is in heaven, may forgive you your
trespasses.

Adjuncts of prayer, in respect of the person of him that prays, do
concern. 1. Soul. 2. Body. 3. Or both.




I. The understanding, our prayers be

1. Of knowledge. Our Savior Mat. 20.22.
tells the sons of Zebedee, by way of reproof, that they asked they knew
not what.

2. Of conscience, in submission to Gods command. Isa. 1.12.
When ye come to appear before me, (says the Lord) who has required this at
your hand, to tread my courts. The Lord did require their appearance, but not
such an appearing: they came, but not right: they came for custom, and not for
conscience. And therefore the Lord had no pleasure in them.

II. The will: that there be always, in our prayers,

1. A submission of our wills to Gods will. Mat. 26.39
Hereof we have a worthy example in our Savior, O my Father, (says he) if it
be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless, not as I will, but as
thou will.

2. A resigning up our selves to rest upon God. Ier. 14.22.
Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles, says the Prophet, that can
cause rain? or can the heavens give showers? Art thou not he, O Lord, our
God? therefore we will wait upon thee: for thou have made all these things.

III. The affections. There must be, 1. Feeling. 2. Feruency. 3. Sighs and
groans.


Adjuncts, which do concern prayer, in respect of the body, are the gestures
fitting and requisite to be used.

The which are indifferent. Yet God is the God of order: and therefore all
things are to be done decently and in order.

These then are usually observed.

1. Casting down the eyes, in confession of sin and judgment, in sign of
confusion. Thus, our Savior says, that the Publicane standing a far off,
would not lift up so much as his eyes to heaven: Luke 18.13.
but smoate upon his breast.

2. Looking up toward Heaven, in petition, in sign of hope, as also, in
thanksgiving. By this gesture the Psalmist describes prayer it self. Ps.
123.1.
Unto thee lift I up mine eyes: O thou that dwell in the heavens.

3. Holding up the hands, as appears by that exhortation of Jeremy; Lam. 3.41.
Let us lift up, says he, our heart with our hands unto God in the heavens.

Adiunct, which concerns both soul and body, is Adoration: consisting in a
devout humbling our selves before the high and reverend Majesty of our God, in
our hearts: expressed by an answerable carriage of the body, which is
especially kneeling, if conveniently we can.

. 3.
II. The Ends of prayer. III. The subject, and 1. Verbal. 2. Real. 3.
Personal.

The Adjuncts of Prayer, in respect of the ends of prayer, are answerable to
the ends handled before. I will note only three. Gospel. pray continually.
But more of that hereafter.


Adjuncts, in respect of the subject, and,

I. Verbal, are these: Our words must not be,

1. Affected, but plain. We use not words and terms for themselves, but to
express our minds, and lay open our desires. If, then they be coined and
curious, and nothing or little to the purpose, they are idle; and to use the
Apostles words, 1. Cor. 14.14.
Thy spirit prays, but thy understanding is unfruitful.

Again, if thy words be plain, and thy terms ordinary, and yet suit with thy
mind, they are profitable, and to great good purpose.

What profits a golden key, if it cannot open what we would have opened? or
what hurts a wooden key, if it can do this? seeing we desire nothing, but to
open that which is shut, says Saint Augustine Aug. de doctri. Christ. lib. 4.
cap. 11. Quid prodest clauis aurea, si aperire quod volumus non potest? aut
quid obest lignea, si hoc potest? qua^do nihil quarimus, nisi aperire, quod
clausum erat.


2. Vain and idle: but pertinent and to the purpose. When we pray, says our
Savior, Mat. 6.7.
use not vain repetitions as the heathen do: for they think that they shall
be heard for their much speaking.

3. In a strange tongue, but known and familiar. The Greeks, says Origin,
Orig. contr. Celsum, lib. 8. Graeci quidem grace Deum nominant, and Latin
Romani, and singuli item natiua and vernacula lingua Deum preca^tur, etc.
name God in Greek, and the Latins in Latin, and all pray to God, and praise
him in their native and mother tongue.



1. Cor. 14.16
that occupies the room of the unlearned say, Amen, at thy giving of thanks,
seeing he understands not what thou say?

But in exercises of Scholer-ship, and in private, (provided a man understand
what himself says) it is not unlawful. For he that is the Lord of all
tongues, says Origin, Orig. cont. Cells. lib. 8. Ille enim qui est linguarum
omnium Dominus, audit quaeuis lingua orantes, idque non secus, quam si vna^
vocem exciperet e variis linguis expressam. Deus enim cum praesit machinae
vniuersi, non est quasi vnus aliquit, qui linguam vel graecam vel Barbaram sit
sortitus, vt caeteras nesciat.
hears them that pray in any tongue, as if he should hear one voice
pronounced from diverse tongues. For God, seeing he rules the whole world, is
not as some one, that has gotten the Greek or Latin tongue so as he knows
none other.

Yet in private where men have liberty, it is not good to abuse it, to the
hinderance of the gracious work of Gods holy Spirit, but always to use that
language, in prayer, whereby the mind may be the least distracted, and the
affections most inflamed.

Real, Touching the things desired in prayer,

1. Our prayers must always be for good things. And that, in respect of both
the things themselves, the means and manner of coming by them, as also our
intent of using them.

2. Temporal blessings, the measure of spiritual, with the special means and
circumstances of all, must moderately be referred to the Lord, and to his
wisdom.

3. The more worthy the things are, the more instant we may and must be for
them.

Personal. Touching which, this is an inseparable Adiunct of prayer under the
Gospel, that it must always be put up, to God, in and by the Mediation of
another, viz, Jesus Christ.

. 4.
IV. The time: considered in respect, 1. Of the opportunity: and that in
respect of 1. The action of prayer. 2. The occasion, and 1. Ordinary-continued.
2. Now and the^.

Lastly, To every thing, says Solomon, Eccles. 3.1.
is a season, and a time to every purpose under the heaven. And so to prayer,
then. Concerning which we are to consider two things. I. The Opportunity for
prayer. II. The Continuance of it.


Reas. I. Time is bestowed on us for the glory of God. II. The Lord is
unchangeable, the same at all times.

It cannot be said of him, as Elias said of Baal, that he is talking, or
pursuing his enemies, etc, or that any action, or accident can hinder him.

For he sees and knows all things together, at once, always: Simul, semel,
semper. neither does he that keeps Israel, ever slumber or sleep.

But if we look to the duty, the time is to be considered in respect of, I.
The action. II. The occasion.
of prayer.

action, It being a calling upon the name of God, the time must be free, (I
speak of set prayers now) from worldly business. Otherwise, the mind must
needs be incombred, and the body cannot perform duties requisite.

I. Ordinary-continued. II. Now and then.




1. Either concerning the public worship of God, to wit, from Sabbath to
Sabbath, principally, or other-whiles.

2. Or in regard of the general courses of things, in our several places.
Concerning which (as I understand it) Daniel Dan. 6.10.
prayed three times a day: and David says, Ps. 55.17.
In the morning, and evening, and at noone day, will I praise thee.

Especially, morning and euenning, it should not be omitted. For which cause
prayer is called, of some, the key of the day, and the bolt of the night:
Clauis dici, sera noctis.
that is, The holy means whereby, a comfortable passage is made, to a blessed
and prosperous day following: and the only stop-gap to prevent judgments, and
keep forth crosses, for the delightful inioying of safety and quiet, in the
night season.

For examples, consider these two. When Jacob had seen the vision at Bethel,
Genesis 28.18.19.20.21.22.
as he was going to seek for his safety: rising up early in the morning, he
first shows his thankfulness, setting apart that place to the service of
that God, that had appeared unto him: He took the stone, says the text, that
he had put for his pillowes, and set it up for a pillar, and powered oil upon
the top of it. Having done this, he calls upon the name of the Lord, for a
blessing, for the time following: And Jacob vowed a vow, saying, If God will be
with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will give me bread to
eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my fathers house in peace:
then shall the Lord be my God, etc.

The other, is the practice of the Israelites, Exodus 11.7 Chapter 12.29.30
the night in which the Lord destroyed the Firstborn in Egypt. The Egyptians
go carnally to bed, they call not upon the Lord, they regard not the watchman
of Israel: But the Israelites eat the Passover, and besprinkle the posts of
their houses with the blood of the Lamb.

Now, what was the success? At midnight the Lord smote all the firstborn in
the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh that sat on his throne,
unto the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon, and all the
first-bred of cattle. -- And there was a great cry in Egypt: for there was not
a house where there was not one dead. But against any of the children of
Israel, did not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast. Thus much for
the ordinary-continued occasion of prayer.

David praised God, Ps. 119.164
seven times a day: that is, many times, even so often as occasion was offered.

This is done by eiaculations, that is, short sententious speeches, or liftings
up of the heart to the Lord. Hitherto of the opportunity of prayer.

. 5.
II. Of the continuance.

Touching the continuance of prayer, we are to consider two things: I. How often
we must pray to God. II. How long.


For the First, we are to pray so often as occasion is offered: pray
continually, says the Apostle, 1. The. 5.17
we are to omit no opportunity; but to take all occasions: yea, we should
seek occasions to have an errand to God. Poor children will make many
errands, and be glad to be sent to a house where they fare well. And where
fare we so well, as at Gods house?

The other point propounded, is, how long we are to continue praying. And that
is to be considered in respect of, 1. Prayer. 2. The thing prayed for.


For the First, we are to continue our action of praying, so long as matter is
afforded, and we can keep our minds and affections, in such temper, as
becomes that heavenly duty. Provided always,

1. That when we are praying alone, we forget not the call of other occasions.
Remembering, as I alleged before out of Ecclesiastes, that to every thing there
is a season.

2. That when others join with us, we have respect of their employments, as
the time requires, and of their weakness, at all times.

Lastly, touching the continuance of our prayers, in respect of the things
prayed for, we are exhorted by our Savior, Luke 18.1.2. etc.
to be constant, and to persevere: after the example of the woman, who, by her
importunity, prevailed with the careless Judge.

This continuance is by succession, but not without intermission.

Again, this succession is not only of set-praiers: but even when we are
about other exercises, we are to send forth eiaculations, with sighs and
groans, till the Lord please to make his good will known unto us.

And this we are, especially to do, when the things we desire, or (in the
case of thanksgiving) the things we have received, come into our minds. I
thank my God, says the Apostle to the Philippians, Phil. 1.3.
upon every remembrance of you.

CHAP. VI.
WE come now to the distribution of prayer. Wherein we are to consider, The
parts.
1.
I. The Parts. 2.
II. The Kinds.
of Prayer.

The distribution, and, into The parts. 1. Confession. The which confession
must be free.

The Parts of prayer are two. I. Confession. II. A dealing with God, concerning
the things confessed.


Majesty: or, how the case is with us.

O Lord of boasts, says Hezekiah, Esa. 37.16.
God of Israel, that dwell between the Cherubims, thou art the God, even
thou alone, of all the Kingdoms of the earth, thou have made heaven and earth
so, Genesis 32.9. Psalm. 51.6.



I. Of our wants: viz. I. Sin: as David, Ps. 51.4.
Against thee, thee only have I sinned. II. The inconveniences and troubles
arising from sin. As the same David, elsewhere, Ps. 6.2.3.
Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me, for my bones
are vexed: my soul is also sore vexed. And again, Ps. 25.16.17.
Turn thee unto me, and have mercy upon me: for I am desolate and afflicted.
The troubles of my heart are enlarged. III. How short we are of what the Lord
requires of us. Behold, says the Psalmist, Psalm. 51.5.6.7.
I was shapen in iniquity: and in sin did my mother conceive me. Behold
thou desire truth in the inward parts.

II. Of Gods goodness: considered as, I. bestowed on us, II. or promised to
us. And both, in, I. spiritual things. As in that thanksgiving of our Savior:
Luke 10.21.
I thank thee O father of heaven and earth, that thou have hid these things
from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes: even so father,
for so it seemed good in thy sight. 2. Or in temporal things: as Jacob, Genesis
32.10
I am not worthy of the least of all the mercies, and of all the truth, which
thou have showed unto thy servant: for with my staff I passed over this
Jorden, and now I am become two bands. This our Confession, as I said, must be
free: namely,

1. A heart disclaiming all other helps, as vain. 2. A resolute setting-vp of
the Lord to be our God, sole and all-sufficient. 3. A comfortable conceit of
his gracious disposition toward us, in his Christ. Wherefore we will not hide
from our God, how the case is with us.


1. Our unfeigned hatred of sin: which we will in no-wise conceal. 2. Our
love of good things: for which cause we will acknowledge our defects. 3. Our
zeal of Gods glory: every way exalting him, by all means debasing our
selves.


1. An acknowledgement of our unworthiness, to have the least of them. 2.
Inabilitie to get them: were not our good God so bounteous and free-hearted
toward us. 3. The great need we have of them: and consequently the exceeding
benefit and sweet, that we have found by them.


Insomuch, that our souls are filled, by reason of them, Psalm. 63.5.
as with marrow and fatnes.

. 2.
II. The second part of prayer: which consists in, I. Petition. 1.
Supplication. 2. Precation. 3. Intercession. How intercession is used, in that,
1. to Tim. the 2.

The other part is a dealing with God, concerning the things confessed, in the
two latter places. And that by way of, I. Petition. II. Thanksgiving.
These strictly accepted are kinds of prayer, and not parts: Supplication,
Petition, and Intercession, being several prayers: but we using them jointly,
I so call them.


The first is agreeable to our confession of our wants. The other, to the
confession of good things received.

The acknowledgement of God, in the first place, what he is in himself, and to
us, is the propounding of God, and placing him as our object: and the ground of
our dealing with him, in both these cases: I mean, both in petition, and
thanksgiving. Let us come to the particulars.

Petition, is a calling upon the name of God, as a Father: desiring relief, in
respect of our wants. And it is subdivided, by the Apostle, to Timothy, 1.
Tim. 2.1.
into three branches, I. Supplication. II. Precation Called also Prayers, (...).
. III. Intercession.


Supplication, is an humble request unto God, for remission and reconciliation,
upon the conscience of that state wherein we stand, by reason of sin.

Precation, is a suite exhibited to the Lord, for his good blessings and
favors, concerning both soul and body.

Intercession, is usually taken for a request put up for others. And so,
indeed, it is ordinarily used in the Scriptures. But it seems to be otherwise
taken here.

My reason is, because that if this be the proper acception of it, in this
place, giving it the difference from supplication, and precation: then they two
are to be performed for others, respecting only every man's own particular.

But the Apostle commands, that supplication and precation be performed for
others also: In a word, he wills that all the four duties be performed for
all men.

Again, Intercession seems to be taken here, for such a duty as may be
performed of a man for himself. For the Apostle does not here command the
duties simply: but he inlargeth them, in respect of the object: willing that
they should perform them, not only for themselves and some few others, to wit,
believers: but that withal, they ought to remember all men, and, as Persons of
most special respect, Kings and all that are in authority.

To show briefly, then, what I think. I take it to be a duty, to be
performed, in the case of judgments and corrections.

For Intercession is a coming between, as party, and party, so part and
part. As, to interrupt a man in his speech, is intercession.

And only in the case of judgment, we labor to interrupt the Lord,
stepping, with our repentance and humble invocation, between his threatenings
and the accomplishment, or between the desert of sin justly provoking him, and
the punishment: or when he has entered into judgment with us, by holy
interpellation, between the beginning and consummation of his punishments,
thereby laboring to break off the course of those proceedings.

And the Apostles method seems to favor this exposition. For he sets
supplication in the first place, which is a dealing with the Lord, in the case
of forgiveness, etc. Then precation, whereby we desire blessings, whereof daily
and hourly we have need. And, in the last place, intercession, whereby we
deal with the Lord, but now and then. The which is in the case of judgment,
when the Lord pleases to correct.

. 3.
II. Thanksgiving. The use of thanksgiving. Reasons to move us to the
performance of it.

thanksgiving: added by the Apostle, in that former place to Timothy. And
that it is a part of prayer, (howsoever many make it a distinct thing from
prayer) as appears both in the new Testament and the old.

In the old, in that song of Hannah, 1. Sam. 2.1.
where it is said, that she prayed: and yet, as is plain to be seen, it was a
song of thanksgiving. (...)
And Hannah prayed, and said, My heart rejoices in the Lord, etc. In the new:
as in the 1. Cor. 14.14,15,16.17.

Thanksgiving, is a calling upon the name of God, as a Father, blessing him
for his good mercies, bestowed, or promised.

Unto the performance of which duty, David inciteth his soul: Psalm. 103.1.2.
saying, Bless the Lord, O my soul: and all that is within me, bless his
holy name. Bless the Lord, O my soul: and forget not all his benefits. So
likewise, Psalm. 107.1,2,8.15.21.31. Where he does not only exhort to the duty:
but also, four times bewail the neglect of it: in these words, O that men
would praise the Lord for his goodness: and for his wonderful works to the
children of men.

This duty must be renewed, as the Lord pleases to renew his mercies. As we
have a worthy example in David: Psalm. 40.3.
He has put a new song in my mouth, even praise unto our God.

And if new fail, old blessings may never be forgotten. Therefore, David
(though the children of Israel had praised the Lord, long before, for his
wonders in Egypt: and though they were long before his time, yet) composeth a
Psalm Psalm. 105.
of thanksgiving for the same.

Again, not only personal and particular blessings: but also general and
public, bind us to be thankful. When the foundation of the Temple of the
Lord was laid, Esra. 3.11.
they praised the Lord: and all the people (says the text) shouted with a
great shoute, when they praised the Lord. Yea, not only for extraordinary:
but we must be thankful for ordinary mercies, as our living, our moving and
our being: For even these, as the Apostle witnesses, Act. 17.28.
we have not of our selves, but of God.

Lastly, we must be thankful, not only in private: but likewise in public. I
will praise the Lord (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 111.1.
with my whole heart: in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation.
So Psalm. 66.16.

To the performance of which worthy duty, (I mean thanksgiving) these
Reasons may move us.

Who so offreth praise, (says he) Psalm. 50.23.
glorifieth me. It is the Lords freehold, and his goodliest portion. Thou art
holy, (says the Psalmist)s O thou that inhabitest the praises of Israel. And
for this end is he good unto us. For all things are for your sakes, (says the
Apostle) 2. Cor. 4.15
that the abundant grace might, through the thanksgiving of many, redound to
the glory of God.

Petition honors the Lord: but thanksgiving more. Not simply in respect of
the duty: but because our wants may hasten us to seek supply: but if a man,
after he have received what he would, do return, with the leper, Luke 17.16.
to give God thanks: it is most likely, that that is done, for God, without
sinister and by-respects.

David could find, after he had expostulated the matter, so seriously, with
his own soul, Psalm. 116.12,13,14.
What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me? The
conclusion is, I will take the cup of salvation: and call upon the name of the
Lord, etc.

Ps. 50.15.
Call upon me, in the day of trouble; I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. Here the Lord binds himself to us, in a gracious covenant, to
help us in the evil day.

And the Condition of this obligation is, that we glorify him, without which,
what we have is no blessing: neither can we look for any other, but the next
time to go without.

For in death their is no remembrance of thee, says the Psalmist, Ps. 6.5.
In the grave who shall give thee thanks. And Hezekiah, Isa. 38.18.19.
The grave cannot praise thee, death cannot celebrate thee: -- The living, the
living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day. For this cause he is
thankful for his life Verse. 20.
: And to this end, Ps. 118.17.
David desires to live.

. 4.
The Kinds of prayer, and it is, 1. Legal. 2. Or Evangelical, considered in
respect of. 1. The Effects. 2. The subject. 3. The Object. The uses of this
whole discourse. 1. Why carnal men are not heard. 2. Use. How we may learn to
pray.

The Kinds of prayer follow. And it is either, I. Legal. II. Or Evangelical.


Adam, in his state of innocence, can none of his frail and degenerate
offspring pray.

subject of this discourse.

And the kinds of it may be considered in respect of, I. The Effects. II. The
Subject. III. The Object.


Effects, there is a prayer of, I. Sense: when instantly that is accomplished,
which is desired: so Elias prayed, and presently fire came down from heaven,
1. Ki. 18.38
and consumed the sacrifice. II. Hope: When we do not instantly receive the
good things we desire: but do, by hope expect them, 1. Ioh. 5.14.15.


For though the Lord do ordinarily, for many weighty causes, take day with
his children, for the performance of his promises: yet it pleases him to give
them an earnest in hand: even the earnest of his Spirit.

subject: and first Personal; Prayer is, I. Either wholly conceived in the
mind: As, it is most likely, Moses his was. For the Lord said to him, Exodus
14.15
Wherefore cryest thou unto me? and yet the text does not mention that he spoke
any thing. II. Or expressed and uttered, withal, in words.


And both these are, 1. Either continued exercises, 2. Or short eiaculations.

And touching the local subject, prayer is, I. Either public: as in the
prophecy of Isaiah, Esa. 66.23.
And it shall come to pass, that from the new moon to another, and from one
Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship before me, (says the
Lord). II. Or private: as in the Gospel, Matthew. 6.5.
But when thou prayest, (says our Savior) enter into thy closet, and when
thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father which is in secret.


I. Either temporal blessings alone: as in that of Jacobs, Genesis 28.20.21.
If God will be with me, and will keep me in this way that I go, and will
give me bread to eat, and raiment to put on, so that I come again to my
Fathers house in peace. II. Or for spiritual and eternal: as in the Epistle
of James, James, 1.5.
If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God. III. Or for both: as in the
Lords Prayer.


And thus much for the doctrine of prayer: The use of all may be referred to
two heads.



That a man may be heard, at any time, these six things must ordinarily
concur.

I. He must speak. II. To some. III. His words must be intelligible. IV. His
voice must be audible. V. The mean between the speaker, and the hearer, must
be indifferent. VI. And lastly, the hearer must set himself to hear, as well
as the speaker does to speak.
These do not concur spiritually, no, not one of them can be found in the
prayers of carnal men.

I. They speak not. For though their lips walk, and their mouths utter many
words; yet are none of them true words of prayer. Because they do not express
that spiritual feeling, and gracious affection of the heart, which is required.

II. Those superficial, and liuelesse words which they utter, are not spoken
to God. Because, either they know him not at all: and so, make an idol of him,
or rather an idol like him. Or knowing how he is revealed in the Word, they
cannot apply him to themselves, as their God and Father in Christ: and
otherwise he is not the object of prayer.

III. Their words are not intelligible. Because, 1. Either they come not near
themselves, and their own estate: as, confessing sin, they lay not theirs
open, desiring mercies; they conceive, either not at all, or not aright, of
their own wants, etc: 2. Or if they do in terms, yet carelessly, or
sensually; in a word, never aiming at the right ends of any thing.

IV. Their voice is not audible: wanting the proiectiue power of Faith and
Zeal, to send it into the Lords ears.

V. The mean, between the Lord, and a carnal man, is not indifferent. For
look how wide the East is from the West, so far are they separated, yea
further: For the Lord is infinitely displeased with him.

VI. Lastly, the Lord does not set himself to hear: nay, he turns away his
ear, and he will not hear. As he says by Isaiah, Esa. 1.15.
When you shall stretch out your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you: and
though you make many prayers, I will not hear.



I. He that would pray, must be regenerate. Otherwise, he has no access to
God, nor ability to call upon God, neither shall he find acceptance with God.

II. Labor for an order, and method. Of which something has been spoken
before.

III. For matter, we must daily take a suruay of our estate. For our
confession, must be exercised about, either those things wherein the Lord is
good unto us: or about those evils wherinto we have fallen, or whereunto we
are subject, etc. And this survey must be by the help of Conscience.

IV. For words and terms, we must search the Scriptures, and read the Forms
of Prayer, set forth to the same purpose. And refer them to their proper
heads: As for example.

Concerning God in himself, we find him thus set forth. 1. God, Romans 16.27
only wise. 2. God, Act. 15.8.
which knows the hearts. 3. Whose is every beast of the forest, Ps. 50.10.
and the cattle upon a thousand hills. 4. From whom Iam. 1.17
comes every good gift, and every perfect gift. 5. Who only has
immortality, 1. Tim. 6.16
dwelling in the light, which no man can approach unto, which no man has
seen, nor can see, etc.


Concerning what he is unto us in Christ: he is said to be. 1. Merciful and
Gracious, Exodus 34.6
long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy for
thousands, etc. 2. The God of peace Romans 16.20
. 3. The God of our Lord Jesus Christ, Ephe. 1.17.
the Father of glory. 4. The Father of our Lord Jesus 2. Cor. 1.3.4.
Christ, the Father of mercies, and the God of all comforts, who comfort us
in all our tribulation. 5. God even our Father, 2. The. 2.16
which has loved us, and has given us everlasting consolation, and good hope
through grace, etc.


Concerning sins, they are contained in the Decalogue, or ten Commandments;
(except those against the Evangelical commandment, Repent and believe the
Gospel), and are laid open euery-where in the Scriptures. And especially, we
may find a multitude of them, heaped up together by inductions, in these
places, Psalm. 15. 1. Cor. 6.9. Gal. 5.19.20.21. Ephesians. 4.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.
Coloss. 3.5.8.9. Iam. 3.14. Reu. 22.15. All which, or any, to know how they
concern us, we must lay them to our lives.

For the guilt of sin: we are taught to confess, 1. That we are wretched
Romans 7.14.
. 2. Yea, wretched Revel. 3.17
and miserable, poor, blind, and naked. 3. O my God, Esra. 9.6.
I am ashamed: and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God: for our iniquities
are increased over our head, and our guiltiness is grown up unto the
heavens, etc.


For the punishment. 1. Thou, our God, Esra. 9.13.
have punished us less, then our iniquities deserve. 2. It is of the Lords
mercies, that we are not consumed, Lam. 3.
because his compassions fail not. 3. The wages Romans 6.23.
of our sins is death, etc.


For pardon. 1. Hide thy face from my sins, Ps. 51.9.
and blot out all mine iniquities. 2. That he would blot out, Esa. 44.22.
as a thick cloud our transgressions, and as a cloud our sins.


To go over every head, and at large, were too much for so small a Treatise.

V. We must digest these terms, into the order and form propounded to our
selves.

VI. Then the Spirit, putting into them the life of faith, makes a prayer.

A Threefold Analysis of the Lords Prayer.
A threefold Analysis of the Lords Prayer.
Having Finished this short discourse: because the Lords Prayer is both the
complete treasury, as likewise the absolute pattern of prayer, I have annexed
this threefold Analysis following.

And First, This is common to them all, That the prayer consists of, I. A
Preface. II. The body of Prayer. III. The Conclusion.


The Preface is contained in these words, Our Father which art in Heaven.
Wherein is prefixed the Object of Prayer, God: described by that which he is,
I. Relatiuely. II. Simply.


Relatiuely, to his Church: apprehended in general, Father: and applied
particularly, Our.

Simply, in himself, Jehovah, that keeps mercy and covenant, and El-shaddai,
God all-sufficient: both being inferred, by that he is said to be in Heaven.

In the body of the prayer, are laid down, I. The Petitions: the special
objects of our affections. II. The Reasons: The special objects of our Faith.
Not the reasons simply, but that which may be conceived of God in them. For
only God is faiths object.
And these reasons are three. I. Kingdom, which respects the wel-spring and
fountain of all good things. II. Power, which respects the means. III. Glory,
which respects the end.



For, (as the Apostle witnesses) Romans 11.36
Of him, (there is Kingdom) and through him, (there is power) and to him,
(there is glory) are al things.

The Conclusion is in the last word, Amen: which is as much to say, as, I.
Lord, let it be as I have prayed. II. Lord, I believe it shall be so. III.
Lord, help mine unbelief.


All this, as I have said before, is common to all the three divisions. the
variety is only in the six petitions.

The I. Analysis.
The First, is the common received Division of them into two threes. The First
three concerning God. The last three, our selves.


The ground of which division, is not, from the Efficient, or Author bestowing
these blessings. For, it is one and the same God, which halloweth his name,
sends his Kingdom, enableth to do his will, gives bread, forgiueth sins,
and preserves from evil.

Nor from our Head, containing these good things for us, and communicating them
unto us: For from the fullness of one and the same Christ comes all.

Neither yet, from the final cause, or end, either maine, for the Lord is
glorified in both: or subordinate, for we are benefitted by both.

But it proceeds from the real subject, or object, viz: the things
where-about our prayers in asking, and Gods grace in giving, are exercised.

The first general branch, containing God his, I. Name. II. Kingdom. III.
Will.


The second, our, I. Earthly necessaries. II. Sins committed. III. Dangers
eminent.


In the former, There is, I. The End of all, besides God; in the, 1. Petition.
II. The subject of all happiness from God: in the 2. petition. III. The rule of
all obedience to be performed to God: in the 3. petition.


In the latter three, there is contained, I. The space of repentance: in the,
4. petition. II. The exercise of the grace of repentance: in the, 5. Petition.
III. The sovereign preservative of a Christian, from evil, after repentance:
in the, 6. petition.


The II. Analysis.
I. In the first petition is laid down, the maine end of all to be aimed at.

II. In the other five is laid down the means: consisting in things which do
respect the hallowing of Gods name.

I. In this world: in all the petitions.

II. In the world to come: in the second petition: viz. the revealing the
Kingdom of glory.

All which do concern the life of a Christian. And that, I. Simply. II.
Respectively.


The things simply concerning the life of a Christian, (to insist upon those
that respect this life) are, I. Spiritual. II. Temporal.


The Spiritual are laid down, I. Causiuely, in the 2. petition. II.
Effectiuely, in the 3. petition.


The temporal, or earthly, are laid down in the 4. petition.

The Accidental are such as do respect a Christian, over and besides the
simple course of Christianity, and the honest resolution of his own heart.

The which are referred to two heads. I. Pardon of evils committed: in the 5.
petition. II. Prevention of those whereof he is in danger: in the 6. petition.


Here, before I proceed to the third division, I would crave leave to show my
opinion, concerning one observation usually collected, from the method of the
three last petitions: namely, that there is, in them, an inuersion of Christ's
method, recorded elsewhere, in the Scriptures: to wit, Mat. 6.33.
Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these
things shall be added unto you.

The spirits of the Prophets, are subject to the Prophets: and I willingly
submit my conceit to the learned. To show, then, what I think, I find, here,
no inuersion.

For the things which concern a Christian simply, are to be preferred before
those that do concern him, but respectively and accidentally.

Now, in the 2. 3. and 4. petitions, are contained those things which concern
him simply. In which three petitions, that other method of our Savior, is
most strictly and precisely observed. For what says he?

Seek ye first the Kingdom of God, (that is laid down in the 2. petition,
Thy Kingdom come): and his righteousness, (in the 3. petition, Thy will be
done: For that is the righteousness of the Kingdom of God), and all these
things shall be ministered unto you: (in the fourth petition, Give us this day,
our daily bread.)

Where our Savior brings a Christian. I. To the Graces and Glory of a
Christian: in the 2. petition. II. To the duties of a Christian: in the 3.
petition. III. And at the last, to the subject wherein, and time when a
Christian is to exercise his graces, in the performance of the good works
which his God has created for him to walk in: that with comfort, he may
look for that blessed hope, Tit. 2.13.
and the glorious appearing of that great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ.

Then, this poor Christian, coming to his calling, to exercise these good
duties, finds (contrary to the exaction of his God, and the resolution of his
own heart, which was to walk in all the good ways of his God) that when he
would do good, Romans 7.
evil is present with him: In so much that the good he would do, he does not:
but rather, the evil which he would not do, that he does: by reason of the
Law of sin, which remains in his members. I say, this being so: Our Savior
teaches us in the next place, to pray, Forgive us our trespasses, etc.

And lastly, because, when sin committed is pardoned, we are subject still
to fall, in part: Satan continuing his malice, our Cananitish lusts (not being
altogether extirpated and rooted out): and withal, our sufficiency being wholly
of God; he adds, Lead us not into tentation, but deliver us from evil.

The III. Analysis.
In the six petitions, are two things to be considered in general.

I. The maine end of all to be aimed at: in the first petition.

II. The means whereby this end is achieved: in the five petitions following.
All which do concern the person praying, or prayed for. And in a threefold
respect: viz. of, I. Our new man. II. Our outward man. III. Our old man.


Our new man, in the second and third petitions. 1. Causiue, in the 2.
petition. 2. Effectiue, in the 3. petition.


Our Outward man: in the 4. petition.

Our old man, to wit, the remains of our corruptions, in the fifth and sixth
petitions: and that considered in respect of, 1. Sin committed, to be
pardoned: in the 5. petition. 2. Evil eminent, to be prevented: in the 6.
petition.


To come to a Mathematical demonstration, here is a sphere: wherein we may
consider, I. The Center. II. The Lines. III. The Circumference.


The Center is the fourth petition. For it is a subject necessarily to be
granted, in the first place, that a man must live: otherwise, he is not
capable of the gracious dealing of the Lord,

I. In respect of the new man, in visiting him with his Kingdom of grace, to
enable him to walk in the way of obedience to his will, through Jesus Christ,
unto his Kingdom of glory.

II. Neither in respect of the old man, in pardoning sin past, or preventing
evil to come. All which do infer, that a man must live.

The lines are, I. Super-circuler, above the diameter. II. Or subcirculer,
under the diamiter.

The lines above the diamiter, are the 2. and 3. petitions.

The lines under the diamiter, are the 5. and 6. petitions.

And these do in opposition, answer one another, ex diametro.

The third petition is, Thy will be done, etc. The fifth petition, Forgive us
our trespasses, etc, answers it, on the contrary. For these trespasses are
disobediences against the will of God, by way of omission, and commission.

The second petition is, Thy Kingdom come: that is, the Kingdom of grace, in
this world, and the Kingdom of glory, in the world to come.

The sixth petition answers it, likewise, on the contrary: Lead us not into
tentation: but deliver us from evil: that is, the evil of sin, in this
world, opposite to the Kingdom of grace: and the evil of death, in the world
to come, opposite to the Kingdom of glory.

The circumference terminating the lines, and compassing the Center, is the
first petition, Hallowed be thy name. For the Lord does send down his
Kingdom, for the glory of his name: enable us to do his will, for the glory of
his name: forgive our sins, for the glory of his name: and deliver from
evil, for the glory of his name. And to conclude, he gives temporal
blessings, for the glory of his name.

1. TIM. 1.17. Now unto the King eternal, immortal, invisible, the only wise
God, be honor and glory, for ever and ever, Amen.


FINIS.

