THE FAVOVRITES CHRONICLE. *

Printed according to the French Copy. M.DC.XXI.

THE FAVOVRITES CHRONICLE.
CVrious Gentlemen, that spend your time and take pleasure to recreate your
spirits with the consideration of the Tragedies that are acted upon the Theater
of this World; I cannot be persuaded but that you have heretofore read that
which learned Aesope rehearses in his Fables, of certain Hares, who running
away when they heard the hounds open, by chance past along by the side of a
ditch, where there were great store of frogs upon the grass, who as soon as
they saw the hares, leapt as fast as they could into the water. This action
being noted by the timorous hares, did in such manner encourage them, that the
same only sufficed to make them stay their running any further; at which time,
one of them (who it may be had studied the French eloquence, practiced by
Master William du Vair) told them, that from thence forward it behooved them to
esteem more of their valors then ever they had done before; that it was a
shame for them always to have bin held and esteemed to be fearful, and a
sign of reproachful dastardlinesse unto their ancestors, continually to have
used to run away, and never durst look in their enemies faces, seeing they
were capable to overcome and subdue others, as they might well perceive by
experience of these croaking frogs, whose only presence had put them (...),
without any stroke given.

(...) his notable oration, (as plausibly pronounced, as that which my Lord
Constable made to those of Thoulonze) so much encouraged his companions, that
presently they resolved, not to set upon Montaubon, but in time to come to show
themselves more valiant, and to magnify and exalt their generositie, and from
thenceforward determined to act some glorious enterprise against those accursed
hounds, and to turn their faces against their enemies to assail them: which
counsel put in execution, took so bad effect, and fell out so unfortunately
for the authors thereof, that thereby they were not only taken, but torn in
pieces, to serve for a prey unto their enemies, and a jest unto other more
judicious and subtle beasts.

This fable, in my opinion, may properly be applied unto the levying of arms
at this time, whereinto so improvidently we have bin led by the plausible
inducements of certain prating companions, that have so much advanced and
magnified the Favorite Hares, that they have made them to busy their brains
about the ambitious reach of their proud fortunes.

Every man knows what coffeehouse the great personages of this Realm have
had, to behold the Crown of France within these four years to be as it were
besieged by Luynes and his brethren; who to the great prejudice of the Kings
affairs and the Commonwealth, absolutely disposed both of the ordinary and
casual matters of State, to the great desolation of the whole monarchy: which
to oppose and prevent, the greatest part of the Princes and principal Officers
of the Realm in Anno 1620. made a kind of league. But the number of the
Leaguers being extreme great, the business could not be so securely managed as
the case required: whereupon it fell out so, that it was presently discovered,
by the infidelity of certain persons that betrayed them. In pursuit whereof,
the vanquishers had the victory without combat, and the vanquished overthrew
themselves.

Now appropriating the sense of this fable to my present discourse, I must tell
you that my Masters the Favorite Hares, the last year being made afraid and
abashed with the apprehension that they conceived of so many young Princes that
sought to overthrow and cross their insolent fortune, they were constrained to
abandon the delights of the Court, to seek and find out some means to shadow
and cover themselves from the great tempest which as then seemed to menace
them. And so shaking and trembling with fear, they went into Normandy, where
by good fortune they met with certain people, that like true frogs, hid
themselves in the reeds, at the noise of their horses feet. Which made the
Favorites set up their ears, and from that time forwards to conceive a
wonderful opinion of their affairs. But when they entered into the meadows in
Angers, and perceived that at their only presence, the frogs of Pont de See
slipped down from off the bridge of Pont to hide themselves in the water, they
did then begin upon that occasion to conceive so great an opinion of their
valors, that they were of the mind presently in a manner to set forward to
fight against the great Turk, without once staying till the Duke de Nevers
vessels were made ready, or the new Knights of the Christian war were
prepared to fight, imagining themselves to be three Caesar's, able to overcome
and rule over all men, whereupon they resolved to lay hold upon all occasions,
and to command all, and so far, as to presume to make, not only the Princes
of the blood, but also the Regal authority, to serve them for a footstool or
a step unto their greatness.

Whereupon our neighbors (having Argus eyes) being always vigilant, and never
sleep, and with their spectacles continually beholding our proceedings, to
draw some profit from thence, accommodating them to the interest of their
affairs, perceiving the haughty deseignes of the Favorite Hares; and that the
pride which they conceived in their hearts of those ridiculous victories, was
available to thrust them forward and embarke them into some great enterprise,
how dangerous soever it were, so the peril that should be ministered were well
gilded over: they advised with themselves that a civil war in France would
fall out well to the purpose, to be a means for them to attain to the end of
the Germane revolts, and of the usurpation which they pretended to make upon
the Palatinate, Inlliers and Valtolina.

And to make them the more eagerly and easily to catch at the bait, they
practiced to re-assemble all the old rags and pieces of the holy league,
therewith to make a fair cloak of religion, finely sowed by the fathers of
the Jesuitical society, and thereof to make a rich present unto the eldest
Favorite, showing him what a glory it would be unto him to wear the same, as
in times past a certain Duke of Guise had done; and that the only way for
him, without any trouble to attain the Constables office, was to gild the
scabberd of his sword with the spoils of the foolish hare-braind heretics,
without speaking of the great sums of money that he might by that means levy
of the people, under pretense of so pious a quarrel, as that of religion would
be; besides the hazard that he incurred to be canonized, according to the
ordinary manner, with the Cardinals de Ioyense, and the Earl de Fiesque.

This glorious advice, presented with as plausible words as those of father
Cotton, moved our new warriers to a desire and great appetite to be doing
somewhat: and their deseigne was presently confirmed by the Archbishop of Sens,
and the Keeper of the Seals, to whom were showed red Hats, woven by the hand
of an Archangell, with a letter written by Pontchartrain, containing an
assurance that those Hats were for them: for the which the Cardinals de la
Rochefoucault and de Rets were sureties, upon the certificate of father Berule,
and of the Marquis de Maignelay.

Touching the execution of the ruin of the heretics, it was solemnly sworn
by a Catholic Council holden in Fontainebleau by diverse great persons of the
Realm, where the future Constable sat as President, apparelled like another
Alexander, holding a sword of damask of Genes in his hand, about the which was
graven, He that kills with the sword, shall die by the sheath. Now with more
ease to bring this enterprise to effect, Luynes like an expert falconer,
esteemed it requifite for him to have a Duke to draw the simpler sort of birds
to the lure: and for that certain years together he had fixed both his eyes
upon the office of Constable, although long before he had made an offer
thereof to the Duke de Lesdiguieres, to see what the great personages would say
to the reestablishment of that office; he purposed to renew that proposition
unto him again, and caused him to come to the Court, not with an intent to
honor him with that dignity, but on the contrary, to make him desist from it,
for his own advantage, and ciuilly to hold him as a prisoner, by his wives
means, who under pretense of some particular profit, has exposed her husbands
honor to the open view of the world. Thus the said Lord Marshall being fallen
into the nets that were laid abroad for him, presently father Arnoux was seen
to sweat water and blood, to procure the conversion of the poor Huguenots;
who paying him well, he did happily bring into the lap of the Church, thereby
to warm and encourage the spirits of those that were zealous, and to animate
them with more cruelty against the heretics. While the Earl de Schomberg
had commission given unto him to furnish a mass of treasure, to defray the
charges which should be convenient (at what price soever it should cost) to
seek both on hills and in valleys for the band which in times past had so often
and victoriously bin borne against the Saracins, that it might once again be
displayed in so holy a war. And because it could not be found, what diligent
search soever the fathers made, they were forced to have recourse unto some
other expedient thing, agreeable to the greatness of that enterprise. And
behold, for want of the banner, unexpectedly the Constables sword rose up,
which Luynes had long time hidden in the breasts of the Dukes de Guise, and de
Mayenne, and de Lesdiguieres, from whence he pulled it artificially, to lay hold
on it. And it is to be noted, that the first time that he hung it by his side,
he held it a while naked in his hand, admiring his own valor, esteeming it
equal unto that of Caesar; and without further consideration of the
difficulties of that war, cried out for joy, and said like another Alexander,
Nodos virtute resolvo, and then put the sword into the scabberd, from whence it
never came out again, by the advice of Cadnet and de Branthe, that they might
not be reproched, that one of them was more valiant then the other. In the
mean time, it was resolved to go directly to Saumur, there to do homage for
that warlike sword, to our good Lady de Ardvilliers, for the first fruits of
his military actions, to sacrifice unto her the breaking up of blind Monsieur
du Plessis Mornays Library, who for that he was as ill sighted as the
Countess de Moret, was deceived by the intercession of Villarnoud his son in
law; so it may well be said, that it was the first match that set fire, not
only in the Temples of the Huguenots, du Plessis and les Touers, but also in
all the Cantons of the Realm, for that upon the good success of the yielding
up of that place, the Favorite Hares resolved to add the conquest of S. John
d' Angely unto their triumphs, into the which Town they had sent Lo^drieres to
betray his companions, and in recompense thereof they promised to discharge him
of 1000 crowns yearly rent that he ought to the Treasurer Moran, besides
15000 crowns which they gave him in ready money. Thus from place to place their
conquests extended so far, till they came before Montauban, which my Lord
Constable thought to take as easily as he could take up his Ladies smock, as
he made known by his letters sent to diverse places, by the which he assured
his friends, that he had sowed so good corn in that accursed place, as he made
no doubt but that it would take root. That was the cause that Te Deum was sung
in Boulogne, Lions and many other places for the yielding up thereof, grounding
upon the infallible assurance yt some men had, that he would take it, because
he took all other places but only Montauban. But therein he was not to be
blamed, for he had sent Sauuage into the Town, who had promised to deliver
that Town into his hands, as he had done Clerac: but the traitor deceived my
Lord Constable, and standing on the walls, mocked him.

This device failing, diverse batteries were erected, supposing by that means
to put the inhabitants thereof in some fear. Trenches were cast up, and
furious skirmishes were made. Father Arnoux to encourage the soldiers, assured
them by his part of Paradise, that all those that died in so holy a quarrel,
should never go into Purgatory. Whereupon every man sought and strove to show
forth his valor. Branthe and Cadnet made a goodly show with their great plumes
of feathers, a great many of brave gentlemen were killed, and every day more and
more were slain.

The report of this siege was spread abroad throughout all Europe; and the late
deceased King Henry the fourth had news thereof carried unto him in the
Elizian fields: so that as when he lived he did tenderly and fatherly love and
nourish France; the care of the quietness, together with the desire he had to
know the state thereof continually vexed his soul. For which cause he sent
messengers into every place, to discover whether any French men had past over
the river of Styx. The late Baron de Villeroy brought him news, that by chance
he had met with a Spaniard of his old acquaintance, who had told him for
certain, that the Constable of France had begun a glorious war against the
heretics, wherein he had proceeded so happily, that in less then two months
he had reduced threescore Towns under his obedience, battered, taken and
unwalled S. John, Pont Nerac, Bergerac and Clerac, and that as then he lay
before Montauban with forty great pieces of cannon. That the Marquis de
Villars and diverse others had bin burnt before it, though they were no
heretics. That the Marquis de Themines and the Duke de Mayenne also had bin
slain there, besides 400 gentlemen of name and quality, and above 15000
soldiers killed. That touching the raising up of the siege, he could say
nothing, for that the reverend father Dominique de Jesus Maria had there lost
the subtlety of his revelations; and that there was none but the Duke de
Branthe, the Duke de Cadmet, and the Duke de Luynes that were capable to take
it: but they were not men to expose their bodies in all enterprises, because of
the importance of their persons.

Are they Spaniards? said the King. They are, said Villeroy, the only
faithful Counselors to the King your son, by whose advice all the Realm is
governed. Wherewith King Henry the fourth scratching his head, stood as if he
had bin in a dream, and staying a great while without speaking a word, at last
sighing with a sad countenance and sorrowful voice, he said: Alas, now I see
well that these men by little and little will undo my son, and that that which
my enemies could not do while I lived, they will enforce themselves to effect
it in his life time, by the means of those three petie Kings. Let search be
made in every place, to kuow if there be any of my old servants to be found,
among all those that have bin killed before S. John, Clerac and Montauban, that I
may discourse with them touching those lamentable things that are done in my
poor country of France.

Truly, said the Chancellor de Belieure, even now I saw almost 20000 persons of
all sorts and qualities, which stand on the other side of the river of Stix,
desiring to pass over; but the Boate-man Caron refused them all, until they
have bin purged in the (...) of Purgatory. They maintaining and constantly
aff^^ing, that they were exempted from it, because they ha^ ^ost their lives
before the heretics forts, according to the assurance given them in the other
world, by the Jesuits ^f Thoulouse and Bourdeaux, and namely by father
Russelay.

That grieves me much, said the King, I could be content to have given 100000
crowns to marry the Nuns in Paris, upon condition that this contention were
ended, I have so great a desire to see some one Frenchman or other, that might
ease me of my care, for the apprehension that I have conceived of the troubles
of the King my son, of the Queen my wife, and of my children.

Therewith the Baron de Liencourt stepped forth and said to the King: Sir, your
Grace is much troubled to know the truth of the affairs in the other world,
you need but direct your self unto some Jesuits, for they have letters from
all places. I came but now from speaking with father Gontrie, he cannot choose
but know something; if you will have me enquire of him, it may be my wife has
written him a word or two thereof. No, no, said Samet, those kind of people are
too crafty and subtle, the truth never comes directly out of their mouths,
you shall know nothing that way; I know a better way, Caron the boatman is my
friend, he and I have many times drank together, I will deal so well with
him, that for my sake he shall not make difficulty to suffer some Frenchmen
(upon my recommendation) to pass over, or else let me go over to them, to
hear what they can say touching your Graces desire. Venture S. Gry, said the
King, your invention is very good. Wherewith M. Guilliaume, who in the mean
time stood attentively to hear that discourse, began to say unto the King: My
Lord, if you think it good, I will gladly bear Sebastian Zamet company, and
will aid him finely to pass over, as the succors did into Montauban, while
he stands speaking with old Caron, and then I will speedily make a journey to
Louviers, to know how ^ll fares there, and whether the Normands are well co^^t
to be bowls of Quillibeuf, in recompense of their service. I will not have you
stir from thence, said the King, you shall stand sentinel on the South side,
and only mark when the Archduke Albertus shall lean off his Monks cowle.
Zamet dispatched away, went to the river side, where being arived, he heard
news that the Cardinal de Guise was come thither with bulls, to cause all
those to pass over, that died as he did in that holy war, but that there was
some dispute happened among those that stayed to pass over; for which cause
Caron would not let them pass, for fear lest they should fight together while
they were in his boat. Thereupon Zamet to further the business, gave his
advice, that it was convenient to sprinkle all those that quarelled together,
with water of oblivion, before they entered into the boat, that so forgetting
their quarrels, they might pass over peaceably. This counsel was instantly
followed; but as things are full of crosses, another controversy happened after
that, between the said Cardinal and the Duke de Mayenne, who should first go
into the boat. The strife was long, which much displeased Zamet, because it
staid him from returning back unto the King. The dispute was maintained by
reasons on either side. The Cardinal said, he died first, and by consequence
yt he ought to go first. The Duke denied not that, but said, he was to be
preferred before him, because he had bin slain in the Kings service, and that
the Cardinal died only of sickness. The Cardinal replied, that for Gods sake
he had abandoned both wife and children; and to prove it, desired no other
witness but the Duke de Nevers; and that he had not done so. At last they stood
upon the difference of their degrees and qualities; and for that the Church
always has the pre-eminence, it was judged that the Cardinal should enter
first into the boat, as also because he had brought the bulls to free them to
pass over the river, without going into Purgatory; and so all of them past
over with this decree, that those who thereafter should come from the siege of
Montauban, should enjoy the like privilege.

When they were set on shore on the banks of the Elizian fields, Zamet recived
and saluted them, with both his arms about their middles, jesting and sporting
with them, and assuring them that King Henry the great would be exceeding glad
to see them, because of the desire he had to understand the state of the
affairs of France.

The impatience that troubled the spirit of that good Prince, had moved him to
walk with the greatest part of his old servitors to the side of the river, to
meet with Zamet the late Baron de la Guiche, because he was very tall, was he
that first afar off discovered that French troop, and said to the King S.
Fiacre: Sir, I think these are the men of Montauban before us, they are a
great number, I wonder how so many brave men have suffered themselves to be made
nestle-birds; you will say, that it is a great army, and I marvel that your
Majesty does not see the foul dust which they cause to rise up into the air
with their feet. I perceive it well, said the King, let us stay here for them;
in the mean time take your prospective glass (as the Constable did at
Piquerox) the better to know them afar off.

And as the King walked somewhat aside, the Marshall d' Aumont said: Sir, we
shall speedily hear some news, for I see a carrabin among the myrtle trees,
that runs as fast as he can, to get before his fellows; he seems to be some
harbinger or quarter master, that seeks to come to the camp before the rest,
that he may take up the best lodging: but coming nearer, they knew him to be a
Jesuit, that was sent in great haste by his General, to persuade the King,
not to believe all that should be told him touching the lamentable state
whereinto the affairs of France are now reduced: and he was no sooner come to
the King, but on the other side Hautefontaine suddenly was at his heels, who
had slipped out of the company, that he might excuse himself touching the
miserable disorder happened in S. John d' Angely. And as soon as he spied the
Jesuit, he suddenly cried out, and said: What does this Iannisarie here? does
it not suffice his Society to have supported the authors of the division
between the mother and the son, but must he come hither also, to trouble and
disturb the peace of the blessed? What noise is that which I hear, said the
King? Varenne made answer: It is Hautefontaine that quarrels with this good
father which even now came to your Majesty. Hautefontaine, said the King, bid
him come hither that I may speak with him. Who coming to the King-presence, he
asked him, who had sent him into these quarters? By the Lord, Sir, (excuse me,
said he, if I do not swear as the Huguenots do, for I am angry) I am not come
hither for mine own pleasure, it is true that I make no account of my life,
but I am half mad to see this Spanish Iannisarie presume to speak unto you,
after they have dealt with you as they have done, and Catholikly set fire in
the four quarters of your sons Realm. Why do you call them Iannisaries,
said the King? Do not you know, said Hautefontaine, yt the Turks Ianisaries
have neither father nor native country, acknowledging no Lord but the great
Turk: so the Jesuits neither respect their country nor their parents, but
only bend their minds and all their studies to accomplish the will and desire
of Yo el Rey, their Sovereign Lord; and the better to effect his will and
pleasure they have troubled all Christendom, and are the cause of the death of
all these brave Knights which are now coming hither to your Majesty.

The King looking back saw all those that had past over the river, who all
together began to kneel down. Are these moale-catchers or takers of
Montauban, said the late Admiral d' Anvile? The King therewith sharply reproved
him, saying, Hold you your peace, this is no spectacle to be laughed at; and
therewith his heart was so much grieved, that he could hardly speak, yet he
refrained not to entertain them friendly; and then particularly embracing the
Cardinal de Guise, the Duke de Mayenne, and the rest of the Lords, he prayed
them to go and rest themselves; and having eased their bodies awhile, he would
confer with them at leisure; and therewith he commanded Zamet to entertain
them well, and so drew himself aside with his most confident friends until the
next day. While the King spoke unto them, Hautefontaine stood talking with
Beringhen touching the motives of the secret mysteries of Bearn, and entered
into so profound a discourse with him, that they past over a great part of the
night therein. At last the King desiring to take some rest, asked for
Beringhen; and answer being made, That he was without, walking with
Hautefontaine. He commanded that they should both come to him. And turning to
Hautefonte, he asked him, what occasions had moved them to rebel against the
King his son? saying hide nothing from me, but speak boldly like a true
Huguenot. Sir said he, if I should die once again by a musket shot at me from
the wall by a false brother of the company, I will tell you our affairs truly
how they past, and will not lie in any point. It is long time since we perceived
that the Spaniard doubting the end of the truce between him and the
Hollanders, and that for the good of his affairs he sought to trouble France by
some civil war, finding no better means then to make us wrangle among our
selves with blows of Pater nosters and Clement Marots Psalms, his device from
yt time effected what it could; and to give us matter and subject to enter into
the field, many things which your Majesty had formerly granted unto us by your
Edicts, were denied us. The affairs of Bearn were brought in question, as a
country near bordering upon Spain; his principal agents there dispersed a
certain quantity of Medales, for marks of Catholics, on the back side
having Julius secundus.

The Marquis d' Ancre was no sooner slain, but du Vair Keeper of the Seals,
author of the assembly of special persons, holden in Roane in the beginning of
an. 1618. caused that notable decree of the privy Council for the restoring
of the temporal goods and lands unto the spiritual persons in Bearn to be
pronounced; but the great difficulties touching this restitution, caused the
execution thereof to be delayed. The Spaniard, that still sought to set fire on
France, caused the Bishop to trot up and down Paris, to have an end and order
of their suite. Thereupon our Ministers made a general assembly in Loudun, in
the mean time we were undermined by all the malcontents in the Realm, but yet
they could not win us in any sort to estrange our selves from the fidelity
which we owe unto our King. Luynes and his brethren fearing lest we should make
a escape, promised us in the Kings name, that within six months the special
points of our complaints should be answered, and that in the mean time nothing
should be innovated in the country of Bearn. Upon this assurance we brake up
our assembly, with promise by word of mouth that we should have leave to
reassemble if that were not performed within the said time which was promised
unto us. But that word was not held with us, but on the contrary we were mocked;
and without staying till the six months were expired, your old servant de la
Salle was driven out of Navarrens and at the same ^^me the Jesuits were
established in P(...) hereupon w^ presented our most humble supplications to
the King your son, and in stead of an answer thereunto, we had a flat
denial. Whereupon we assembled the Deputies to renew our complaint, but
without giving them audience, we were proclaimed Traitors. Then we saw all the
Transmontaine faction to arise; and the better to disguise the action, in stead
of speaking openly against the heretics, because that would have savoured too
much of the old league, it was reported in all places that we were not good
common wealths men, and that we had called the virgin Marie, la Guimbard,
thereby to move all the Catholics under that pretense to seek revenge against
all those that aided you against the leaguers. And in truth, Sir, your Majesty
may well note and perceive, and so may all good Frenchmen likewise, that they
have assailed and spoiled none but those Towns which in time past served your
Majesty for a retraict in the time of your greatest troubles, witness S. John,
Nerac, Clerac, and the Town Burbon de Montauban, which bears the name of your
house, to show how much they that caused it to be built, were affected to your
blood. This in few words, Sir, is the history of France and Spain.

I have heard you well, said the King, but who thrust Luynes forward to destroy
that which I have made? A design to make himself great by our ruins, and the
decay of your state, said Hautefontaine. There is a great appearance thereof,
said the King; call Vair unto me, said he, let me hear his reasons;
Beaulide-ruze go you and seek him out. That Is to no end, said the Marshall d'
Ornano, for I have heard that he is out of his wits for grief that he had to
have bin so unfortunate, that he could not be at the funeral of the Chancellor
de Sillery. Let that Stoic schoolmaster to Veron alone, you have all these
Lords and Gentlemen here, Sir, who will truly and plainly tell you the truth of
the desolations of France, to morrow in the morning, saluting your Grace, they
will let you know more, then you would know. You say true, said the King. The
next day the Marquis de Terms was the first that showed himself when the King
came out of his chamber, who with a smiling countenance bad him welcome, and
then asked him for Monsieur le Grand, and what Lords and gentlemen had past
over the river with the Duke de Mayenne, as also how many men were slain in
those brave enterprises made by the bucklers of France.

Sir, said the Marquis, my brother has always bin a most humble servant to
your Majesty, and so he is still unto the King your son, and to all the
blood Royal* Luynes has put him back from deling with the affairs of the
State, and therefore he meddles not therewith. Touching those that came with
the Duke de Mayenne, they are 400 gentlemen of good quality, and about 2000
soldiers.

Show me particularly the original of so many mischiefs? Sir, said he, the
pride of three Falconers, whom you placed about your son upon the
recommendation of Varenne, who stands there behind you, are and will be the
cause of the dissipation of your Crown, they have won the King your sons
favor, they do not tell him of the affairs of his Realms, but clean
contrary, and as they would have him know it; they have clean altered the
whole Court; the Court is filled with their brethren, brothers and sisters in
law, nephews, nieces, cousins and allies, and all sorts of rascals, having
driven out all your old servitors, and those of the Queen mother, it being
most true, that no man (what, or whosoever) can have access to his Majesty,
but only by their means; they keep the Prince brother to the King your
son, as their servant; they have laid hold upon the forces of the State,
drawn the treasures thereof clean dry, and in a word they govern all. What,
said the King, do not the Council speak against those disorders? In truth,
Sir, said de Terms, they have changed both the Council and the Counselors.
Does my wife endure that? why does she not oppose her self against it? said
the King. Oppose against it, said the Marquis; if she should but once open her
mouth to speak against it, they would presently clap her up in hold, like the
Descomans. You jest, said the King; if I were she, I would let them know that I
am the Queenemother. Alas, Sir, said the Marquis, if you knew how they have
used her within these four years and a half, there is no slave but would
rather enjoy his condition then hers; they have driven her shamefully out of
Paris, they limited her two years together to stay in the castle of Blois,
they pursued her by force of arms, they have made her follow their army like
a Lanceknights wife; to conclude, they have in such manner made her subject to
their dominion, that she dares not once complain of the rigor which they use
against her. Does the King my son know that? said the King. No, Sir, said the
Marquis, they are wary enough to let him know it; on the contrary, they seek
all the means they can to divert from her all the good affection that the King
bears unto her, still whispering him in the ear, that she hates him, that she
seeks to make his brother King, that she is an Italian, and other diabolical
inventions to fear him, without once putting him in mind that she is his
mother, or what love she does bear unto him in that respect. Those are three
villainies, said the King, I would that Rapin had them under his hands in the
place of execution: but I wonder why the Pope does not take on him to stop the
courses of such sowers of division between the mother and the son; it would
be a great good for Christendom, and an honor unto him. It is hard, said the
Marquis, to make an answer thereunto, Sir; yet I will show you what I have heard
from father Raude a Charterux Monk, a great friend to our house, your Majesty
shall understand, if it please you, that at such time as those three brethren
usurped upon the authority Royal, they also joined with the body of the
Society of the name of Jesus for two causes, and the Jesuits for two causes
entered into league with them. Luynes uses their help, to get in the money
belonging to the Marquis d' Ancre, which was in the Mount de Prete in Rome, and
in requital thereof he promised to reestablish them in their college in
Paris, in despite of the Court of Parliament, as he has done; and further he
has sent the Marquis de Quemere Ambassador to Rome, in the Kings name, to
solicit their reestablishment in Venice. The Jesuits in recompense promised
him, that they would aid him in all things and in every place, and that they
would in such sort obtain his Holiness good will toward them, that he
should be favorable unto them during their usurpation; and that neither the
Pope nor they would exclame in any sort against the bad dealing which they
should offer unto the Queen mother: and it is certain that his Holiness
never wrote any thing thereof, neither makes any complant against the
insolences of those Favorites. On the contrary, the Nuncius Bentivole resident
in Paris, is wholly for Luynes, who has made him Cardinal, and Comprotector of
the French nation in Rome, to the prejudice of the Prince Cardinal of Savoy,
to whom the King had given that protection. Thus Luynes is upholden on that
side. And to the end that the King of Spain should not be offended to see the
Queen his sister governed by Luynes and his wife, he has consented to let him
lay hold upon the Grisons, the Palatinate and Iuliers, which is under the
protection of France, and which the Queen mother following your design, has
kept out of the Spaniards claws; whereas on the contrary, that villain
suffers so important a country bordering upon the Realm, to be lost. He has
alienated 120000 crowns yearly rent of the Church, whereof he has imbursed
200000 crowns for his part: of your sons revenues, he and his brethren
possess at the least 500000 franks yearly rent, without disbursing one penie
for it.

How this discourse grieves me, said the King, I would you had never spoken to
me thereof, let us leave for this time; here comes the Duke de Mayenne, and a
great number of Noblemen to visit me. All these, said the Marquis de Terms,
will confirm that which I have said unto your Majesty, and you may know of
them what has past since I left them at Clerac.

The Duke de Mayenne coming near with all his company, made humble obeisance
to the King; and his Majesty bowing his head, welcomed them with tears in his
eyes: Cousin, said the King, and all you my faithful servants, it grieves me
that you have bin deceived by three villains, who, as I hear, until this
time have abused the favor and bounty of my son, and generally your free
spirits. The Duke speaking for them all, said, Sir, I know not who has made
your Grace so well acquainted with the pride of those three Falconers, that have
used all the means they can, to put all men both great and mean out of the
King your sons favor by their devices, sold all France by their covetousnes,
and brought all the realm into disorder by their monstrous ambition. All men
know how little cause I have to speak well of the Marquis d' Ancre, but I may
well say, that he was an Angel in respect of these three devils incarnate,
enemies both to men and all valor, and such as never employed them but to
their overthrow: all they that have past over the river with me, know what they
are; besides that for mine own part I have every way tried and proved their
divellish malice in that respect. It is true, that Marquis d' Ancre was wicked
as well as they, but yet he had some humanity in him, he did good to many, he
was a man of his word, if he crossed some great persons, he made much of others:
but these three plagiaries have bin a scourge to them all, thinking it a glory
by their dissembling salutations to deceive all the world with brazen faces. I
will not trouble your Majesty with the rehearsal of their detestable actions,
nor put you in mind of the rude dealing that they have showed to the Queen
your wife, neither how they have scorned my Lord the Prince, nor of their
ingratitude against my Lady the Countess, nor what tricks they have played
with all the Nobility: it suffiseth, Sir, that you generally know their proud
proceedings, they have fully gotten the government of the King your son and of
the authority royal into their hands, making him believe, that they three
only held the Crown upon his head, as if those of his blood had conspired the
usurpation thereof. For the space of four years they have caused all the
affairs of importance to pass under their hands; they have made the King
march with them in all places for their own particular interest; upon the
frontiers of the Realm Luynes has bin so proud as to make his entry into
towns, accompanied with a Prince of the blood, and in the presence of the King
his Sovereign; he sent his brother Cadnet into Flanders, under pretense to go
seek his wife, where he spoke with Marquis Spinola; and after that, with a
most incomparable pride, covered with precious stones appertaining to the
Crown, he has been in England, not one of the Kings Council knowing the
secret of his embassage; after that voyage he undertook to make himself Duke
of Britaigne; and it is not known whether since he has bin keeper of the
Seals, he has dispatched letters patents for the same. In favor of Castille
he has neglected all ancient alliances of the Crown; he has suffered the
Palatinate and the Grisons to be lost, to make the Spaniard favorable to him.
The Queen mother preserved Iuliers, under the protection of the King your
sons forces, and those three villains have suffered it to be besieged by
Spinola. To the disgrace of your glorious memory, Branthe a mean fellow, that
never had 200 franks yearly rent, has bin so audacious as to ravish the heir
of Luxeburg, and to force that young Princess being but eleven years old, and
at such a time when all France was in arms by their means; and if the
ravishing of a maid be punishable, as it is, her action in all circumstances
is much more punishable. Luynes has exposed the King and the Prince his
brother into the inconveniences of a long voyage, and into the perils of the
bad air in the army, in such manner that the Prince was there sick and like to
die, and yet he would not suffer him to be carried out of the infections of the
camp: he has resolved upon the war against the Huguenots, without taking,
yea and against the advice of your old Councellers: he has bin so audacious
as to keep the Kings seals in his hands, to promise them to many, but gives
them to no man, busying himself during the dangers of the siege before
Montauban, with sealing expeditions, in stead of going to the war, for which
cause the soldiers made these four verses of him: What shall we of this
valiant Warrier say,
That uses us like slaves both night and day?
He that in peace the Constables office hie,
And in war does the Chancellers place supply.
In such manner, that if there be any capital crime that may be objected
against a bad servant, that is one of the most notorious and greatest. All the
money appointed for paying of the soldiers in the army, he stayed in Blayes,
in such sort, that more soldiers have died of want and necessity, then of
wounds, for want of relief. To be short, their covetousnes and villainies are
the cause of all the bad success happened as well during that siege as in other
public affairs. That which I find to be most strange, said Balagny, is,
that not one of them has bin hurt in any of the exploits of their conquests. I
will show you a pertinent reason for that, said the Duke, it is because they
never sought after blows, and blows never met with them; and that is it which
Luynes Surgeon wrote to his wife, that was in doubt lest her husband was slain
in the army: Wife, take no care for me, but be quiet, and fear nothing, for I
incur no danger, my Lord Constable does me that honor to affect me much, and
to keep still near unto his person. Thus you see how those gallants are
miraculously preserved and kept out of the danger of blows, while they cause
others to lose their lives.

Our posterity, said the King, will hardly believe, that men of no degree, and
void of all valor, should in so short a time lay hold upon the government of
France. Sir, said Pluninel, I did never so easily with bit and bridle manage
your Graces great horses in the stable, (without comparison) as I have seen
them manage all the Princes of your Realm.

What, said the Marshall de Brisac, was not Cadnet so bold as to threaten the
Prince, that he should not go out of Bois de Vincennes, if he did not consent
to give him the Princess of Orange to be his wife, who died for grief
thereof? You jest, said the King. He has done more then that, said he, for he
was so presumptuous as to press the Earl de Soyssons to give over the office
of high Steward unto him. The late Earl taking the word out of his mouth,
said, If my son had bin wise, he should have caused him to be well beaten for
his impudency. You have reason, said old Courtenay, if he had Rambure, or such
another Knight as he for his governer, but he has a block to be his
schoolmasters, that knows not what belongs to honor and courage; and
therefore those companions know with whom they have to do.

Let us enter into some other discourse, said the King; as I remember, one of
you told me, that during all these businesses, Luynes and his brethren carried
their wives with them unto the war, and that they were with them during the
important siege of Montauban; if it were so, it is very likely that their
intent was no other but only to make their battery under curtains. At that
word M. William gave a nod, and said to the King, Indeed my Lord, you have
often bin told, that they play the Kings, and that I acknowledge, they have
heretofore sitting by the fire heard how you in times past rid upon the League,
and those gallants would imitate you, and think by riding their wives, to ride
upon the Huguenots: but those wicked heretics have knavishly ridden upon them
before Montauban. Whereat all of them began to laugh. But the King enquired of
the miracle of the Spy, and much desired to know it, and speaking thereof,
asked, why, after he had escaped in such manner, he was not sent into the Town,
to convert the inhabitants. Faith of a gentleman, said de Loppe, that had bin
no safety for him, for so the people might have hanged him up in good earnest.
God is strong every where, said the King, and can defend those that are his, at
all times and in all places: but tell me who sent father Dominicke de Jesus
Maria into France? what manner of man is he? And it please your Majesty, said
the Earl de Fiefque, he is a holy man, I yet have a portatise cloak that he
gave me; your Majesty will not believe what honor the Parisians did unto him,
and yet know not wherefore; every woman cut off a piece of his gown; and he
came thither only to show us that all the Spaniards are not Saracins, and that
there are some holy men among them. If I had bin of the Kings Council, said
the Abbot du Bois, I would in counter-change have sent father Berule to Madril,
I am sure that the women of Castile would also have cut his fustian. That were
good, said the Marshall de Fervaques, if French cloth were as fine as Spanish
cloth; but if I were of the Council, as the Cardinal de Rets is, and as
forward as the Earl de Chomberg, (who is capable to redress all Luynes
faults, so that he does not join with foreign faction) I would make the
Spaniard know, that he is not a better Catholic then I my self am, and would
keep him from having secret intelligences with our Favorites, to the great
detriment of the Kings service and the Realm, which goes to decay, if remedy
be not speedily had therein.

I confess, said the King, that since I have heard of all the bad and
perfidious practices which that gallant and his brethren have done and
performed, my son never knowing thereof, my spirit has bin in continual
perplexity, fearing lest they should destroy their good master and great
benefactor. Sir, said the Marquis de Villars, the earth never bare more
traitorous and ambitious villains then they are; they have bin so bold the
last year to cause a Mask to be made in Burbon hall, wherein they presented
diverse mystical figures, and among the rest, a great Lady and diverse Giants
chained, whom Luynes apparelled like Phoebus, drew after him, whereof the
greatest resembled the Duke de Mayenne, upon whose head Luynes set his foot,
for a sign of servitude. Truly, said the Baron de Plancy, he made another more
impudent in the Castle of Piquerox, for there perceiving the King to be grieved
for the loss he had received by the death of the Duke de Mayenne, he devised a
little Comedy to make his Majesty merry, wherein he presented a great Moore
making diverse strange jestures; and for that he resembled the Duke de Mayenne,
the King commanded them to leave and act no more. Why? said Luynes. Because,
said the King, that this man in all respects resembles the Duke de Mayenne; I
cannot endure to see it. Truly Sir, said he, his death needs not minister cause
of sadness to your Majesty, for he was a turbulent fellow, that troubled all
your affairs; you were no King as long as he lived; we have discovered and
found out that he made a third party, and since his death we have found all
his practices.

Thus this villain always sought to divert all the good opinion that his
Majesty had of his servants, and of all those of his blood. He did another
matter, said the Secretary of State for the Seals, he was so impudent as to
write unto the Pope, that the Queen mother was the cause that Montauban was not
taken, thereby thinking to cover his own cowardlinesse; from whence it may be
conjectured how many false reports he has made to the king your son, seeing
he was so bold to send such a message to his Holiness. You shall never have
done Sir, said the Earl de Lude, if you will hearken unto all their arrogant
actions, who knows them better then my self that brought them up? as long as
any of that race are near about the King your son, they will spoil all,
there being no kind of wickedness whereof they are not capable: and above all
things believe it, Sir, my Lord the Prince may well offer a great candle unto
God when he shall escape out of their hands; your Majesty must foresee these
things.

As the King was discoursing with the Lords touching the sorrowful state of
the affairs of France, and about the means to remedy the same, all the
assistants partaking with the grief of that good Prince, on a sudden Monsieur
de Vury breaking through the prease came to his Majesty, and to comfort him,
said, Corbien Sir, you have sufficiently lamented the miseries of the time, I
must now make you merry a while, by telling you that which I presently saw: as
I was hawking after a partridge along by the river side, by chance I came to as
merry a combat as ever was acted upon the Theater de Tabarim in the place
Dauphine. Between whom said the King. Your Majesty must know, said Vitry,
that Marshall d' Ancre walking along by the river side with Dole, when Charon
set on shore the new Constable of France, with his sword of say.

What, said the King, is he here? Corbien said he, he is there, I assure your
Grace, I have seen him, and when I saw him, I laughed for joy, he has the
countenance of as notable a rascal as ever I saw. But before I proceed
further, I must tell you of the pleasant salutation of these two combattants:
Marshall d' Ancre walking as I said before, stood still to contemplate the
proud gestvre of that new come guest, and beholding his face, he knew it was
Luynes; wherewith suddenly the blood rose in his face, and he said to Dole,
Behold the traitor that caused me to be killed, I will now kill him; and without
speaking any more words, casting his cloak over his face, went to meet with
him; and as soon as he got to him, he gave him a great bob on the nose,
saying, Traitor, now I Will make thee pay for thy villainy. The Constable abasht
thereat, said, You are deceived, you mistake me for another, I understand no
Italian. Pardieus, I undestand French well. Lay hand on thy sword, said the
Marquis. Are not single combats forbidden here, said the Constable? Villain,
said the Marquis, thou art afraid; and saying so, he fell upon the Constable,
and gave him diverse great blows with the flat side of his sword, in such
manner, that never any curtall jade was so well beaten. The Archbishop of Sens
that stood hard by them, had a great desire to help him, but he durst not go
between them, still remembering the blows with spits which were given him in
Tours by the Marquis de Noirmontiers cooks, when he was Soliciter of his
house; and so for want of aid, the villainous Constable was as well beaten as
ever was Dieret Chiury, when he imagined that the blows with a cudgel which
were given him, were pistols shot: for Marquis d' Ancre still laid on like
Rovillac, and Luynes cried out as loud as he could, like Ronsselay. at S.
Germains Fair: which was the cause that Radamanthus Lackeys ran thither, and
laid hold upon those two champions, intending to carry them before the ludge to
be punished for their insolences.

Marquis d' Ancre alleged that he was not the man that first brake the peace,
and spoke them so fair, that they let him go; in the mean time du Travail
came thither, who fiercely laid hold on the Constables collar, in such manner
that I thought he would have strangled him; but when he had set his foot upon
his belly, and taken his sword from him, he ran away, leaving him there in a
manner half dead, saying nothing to him, but only, Remember thy self
Provincial. I that took pity to see that Rodomond favorite so hardly used,
found the means, that without taking the advice of de Modenne or de Contade, I
pulled him slily out of their claws, and brought the gallant hither to make your
Majesty some sport. Truly, said the King, you have done me good service, let
him come in, that we may see that great Warrier and great Statesman all in one.
Whereupon Colonel Galatis with a das tich Gods sacrament, caused the prease to
open, and therewith Vitry brought him in, every man as well as he could fixing
their eyes upon him to behold his physiognomie. The Poet Desportes at his
entering, giving him a welcome according to his Art, and speaking aloud, said:
Give place, give place to this companion,
Who while he lived was like a great Monarchus:
But being borne in Champianion,
In Poiteiou he was cut off by Parcus.
Being in the middle of the company, all of them began to cry, saying, The
fox, the fox, wherewith you never saw villain more ashamed; and after silence
was made, the King asked him, who he was, I am, said he, the Constable of
France, your most humble subject and servant. Constable? said the King; by what
title got you that office? it is not above four years since you were but a
Falconer, and in so short a time have you attained to so high a degree? you
have made great haste. You must not muse thereat, Sir, said Haeren, if he had
not put me out of countenance, I had had as good fortune as he. Hold your
tongue, said the King. Parmafe, and it please your Majesty, said M. William, I
could be well content to pay his breech with a whip full of points to be
revenged on him for the pension that he took from me, to give it unto de Mons
his brother in law. Truly M. William, said Saroque, you are misinformed to
believe such things, my Lord Constable was not so foolish to imagine that he
could make that small matter of Province greater then it is, notwithstanding
that he is the most valiant man of them all, for he alone took Montauban, or
else they of Montauban took him. What extravagant words are these, said the
King? give us leave quietly to hearken unto the mystical discourse of this new
conqueror. Sir, said the Duke de Mayenne, he will but abuse you with words, he
is a perfect liar, command him to go directly to the matter, otherwise I cannot
abstain from giving him a blow on the lips at the first lie he makes. With that
the King turning to the champion, said briefly unto him, Hear you my Lord
Constable made in haste, abuse not my leisure, tell me all your notable
proceedings, without dissimulation, if you desire to find mercy at my hands
for your misdeeds: all these gentlemen know your actions, and the Earl de Lude
that stands here, is wholly acquainted with your life, go directly to work,
otherwise you shall find Lugoly ready to give you your hire.

Sir, said Luynes, now I perceive well that I am undone, In manus tuas commendo
spiritum meum, my process is made, and further all these noble gentlemen that
are here, will never pardon me, for that as many Lords as are here about your
Majesty, are as many witnesses to convince me of all the perfidious actions
that I have committed both against the one and the other, and the worst is,
that I have not the authority Royal to cover my faults any more, nor to
support my insolences; I must needs confess, that I have offended God, the
King my master, and all men, and that there is no punishment great enough to
recompense my deserts: but I will gladly say with Caesar, Si violandum est ius,
regnandi causa; all that I have done, was not effected by any wicked
inclination that was in me, but only by a generous ambition to reign. I knew
how easily Marquis d' Ancre obtained the government of the State, I believed
and was verily persuaded, that in that point I could do more then a stranger,
that only had a woman to support him, and that I possessing the Kings heart,
was the more able to dispossess all men, and to possess all things: for my
design was to surmount that Italian; and if any of my good friends sought to
divert me from that generous enterprise, presently du Agent, Contade and
Ronsselay, cried out in mine ears, saying, What are you afraid of? If Marquis
d' Ancre could make the Frenchmen cullions, why should not you being a great
Falconer take them for birds? Audaces fortuna invat, said my father in law; we
must draw water when we are at the well side, said my wife; we are of the same
kind of wood whereof men make Princes, said my brethren; and I said Modene, of
the same that the Marshals of France are made. All these motions encouraged me,
and in truth my first bringing up to fowling taught me so well to fly, that in
four years space I surpast all those that meddled with the affairs of State
before me.

I caused Marquis d' Ancre to be killed, to have his place; I urged the
Parliament to put his wife to death, that I might have his goods. I kept the
Queen mother as much as I could from the presence and favor of the King her
son, that I might only enjoy it. I kept the Prince of Conde prisoner, and
let him not come forth, but then when I thought he could no more hurt me, and
that he might serve my turn. I used charms to trouble the spirit of the King
and of the Queen, employing Boisgandrie to that effect, whom I caused to be
committed prisoner in the Bastile, because he would have disclosed me. I set
division among the Princes, and estranged them all from the Kings favor. I
abused all those that had any thing to do with me, with promises and fair
words. All places that were void, I got into my hands. With the Kings money I
bought all the governments that I could get; and constrained some to yield
theirs unto me. I had whole Provinces under my obedience; there is no part of
the Realm, but therein I have towns. I have drawn France dry of money. The
greatest part of the Kings domaines is mine, or my brethrens. I did absolutely
dispose of the sale of offices; and as I disanulled the annual right, I also
established it. I made all mine enemies stoop, and as much as I could, I made
all the world know what power I had over the genius of the King, that men might
address themselves unto me, and be persuaded that the King could do nothing
without me. This, Sir, is that whereof I may be accused: but he that will
consider of that which rests, without passion, he shall find that these are
not actions of a dull spirit, but of a brave courage, which rather deserve
commendation then blame, and for the which I was never reproved by my Confessor.

Marquis d' Ancre could never equalize himself with me in this respect; his
designs were base in regard of mine; he could not attain to any degree, but
only to be Marshall of France, and I for my part made at least twelve
Marshals. He could neither make himself Knight of the Order of the holy Ghost,
nor Duke; and all you my Lords that are here know well, that I gave that Order
to whom I would, and that I made more Dukes then there are sparrow-hawkes in
the Kings Mewes, and so many, that the Parliament of Paris was forced to say,
it was too much. But those four cornerd caps know not, that my intent was to
extirpe the heretics; and that for so dangerous a war I had need of many
Dukes, Marshals and Knights, to honor the Constables sword which I reserved
for my self, by the Jesuits counsel, and his Holiness himself, who assured
me by his Nuncius, that if I undertook that Catholic design, that heaven
would reserve the diadem and the purple for me, as in effect I wanted not the
latter; and if I had not bin constrained to leave the siege before that cursed
town of Montauban, the accomplishment of destiny had given me the Scepter.

I doubt not, Sir, but you have bin entertained with a thousand jests touching
the impertinent proceedings of my military exploits, and specially upon the
subject of my approches made before ville Burbon. I take not upon me to defend
my self against bad speeches, it suffices me that my actions seemed to be
heroical, and my designs haughty. Further, I care li^^e what the world can
say, and that is it which I wrote for an answer to a letter sent us by our most
dear uncle the Duke de Modene in France, touching the slanders that were
published in Toulouse against me and my quality; I could easily have
restrained and punished the liberty of such tongues, but like an old Courtier,
I use not to be afraid of reports, as I made it well appear in the strongest
assaults of the siege before that filthy town, where I refrained not from
sleeping sweetly in my bed, notwithstanding the roaring of the cannons, upon
the assurance that I had that they could not hurt me. Did not the soldiers
call my quarter, the place of villainy? but for all that I never made less
cheer. They also mocked my wife as often as she came to visit me in the camp,
in mockery saying, that she went oftener to combat with me, then I did with the
enemy: but such reproaches moved me not, seeing that my wife and I had no other
intent but to do well, as we always did well, thanks be to God; and believe
me, Sir, that those malicious evil speakers spoke but of envy, as grieved to
see us take our pleasures, while they were at blows, and by the ears together
in the trenches like rascals, suffering themselves to be beaten, which made
them vomit out their rage, not only against me, but also against my brethren
and their wives, who like true Amazons never fainted in all the combats wherein
they happened to be, encouraged thereunto by the wise discourses of Madame de
Guimbarde and of my sister du Vernet the true mirror of chastity, of whom I
learned never to be angry for that which men said, so I do well. This also that
I show you, Sir, is not to give you cause to think that such things grieved me
not much, but only to make my great patience, my exceeding bounty, the force
of my spirit, and the gentleness of my courage apparent. Who but my self
(except the Duke de Vzes) would not have sunk under the burden of the
continual watchings and pains which I endured in the conduction of this war?
Like another Atlas, I was forced to bear all the burden of the Realm upon my
shoulders, ordain all, provide for all, resolve upon all, and besides that was
charged not only with the affairs of the Realm, but also with Gods cause,
which particularly was to be respected in that holy enterprise, as father
Arnoux assured me, and the holy Earl of Fiasque that stands there, who
oftentimes told me in my ears, that it was revealed unto him when he was a
Capucin, which was the cause that made him leave the habit, once again to
employ his sword, and wear temporal apparel, and for my particular that was
the cause that made me imbarke my self therein, with so much more zeal as I
saw the success to be easy, the conquest glorious, and the spoils profitable
for my glory.

What better beginning could your Majesty have wished, then the first
progress of our victories? Blind Morney at our first arrival did obedience
unto us; we did rigorously punish the rebellion of those of S. John; we powered
our curse upon Pons; we cast the arrows of our anger upon Clerac, where we had
that good luck to rid our selves of that brave Marquis de Terms, upon which
subject father Arnoux and I wrote two comfortable letters to Monsieur le Grand
in most eloquent manner. In every place they brought us the keys of the towns.
They of Toulonze came in great haste to offer us their arms and their lives,
with a good sum of money, to move us in all haste to besiege that execrable
town of Montauban, which at my first arivall I thought to take with a lure,
like a hungry sparrow-hawke; and I will confidently tell your Majesty, that I
had determined to have erected it in a Duchy for my son, as to seal the
letters patents my self, with an addition of the Earledomes of Armagnac and
Albert; that was the cause that I could not consent to the ruin of the brave
fortifications of that place, desiring to make use of them for my self. And to
minister some comfort to those of Toulouse for their money which I had sent to
the Castle of Blaye, I and my brethren had devised to take the Hugonet throne
out of their feet, and to place another Catholic therein, which we had
happily done, if those of Montauban would have believed us, or at least have
suffered us to do as la Faydeau.

To conclude, Sir, what have I not done to have an honorable issue of that
miserable siege, all the inventions in the world were there put in practice.
What have I not promised to the third and fourth? What can men reproach me of,
but only that I was not at the trenches? Alas, it was my only desire not to
stir; but these gentlemen here present know, that it ws impossible for me, in
respect of the continual employments that I had about the Seals. I trusted
touching the war, to the generositie of this valiant Duke de Mayenne, whom we
have thereby caused to see the joys of Paradise, and in recompense thereof he
has made us heirs of that he left in the camp.

It is true, that to lure the world like a hawke, we caused the government of
Guyenne to fall into the Prince the Kings brothers hands, but I would never
seal his letters patents for the same, that he might still be like Lent, and
my brother Branthe like Shrovetide, that is, Lent taking her beginning. Thus we
made our profit a thousand ways, by the hurt and disgrace of others. If we had
a care of our own lives, we had no less of the soldiers; having sought as
much as possibly we might, all gentle means and practices to overcome those
rebels, before we would proceed unto extremities.

Did not I with great care and diligence cause father Dominicke de Jesus Maria
to come into the army, believing that his holy prayers would make the taking
of that place the more easy, and that he would make a second S. Bartholmewes
day of the Huguenots in Paris. And if he has thought much to do as much for
France before Montauban, as he did for Spain before Prague, I could not do
withal; I did the best I could to keep him there, that his presence might
animate the soldiers, and convert those headstrong heretics, which father
Arnoux a true spiritual mirror did not well like of, alleging that it was
sufficient to have one Charlatan in the Court, in the mean time all is laid
upon me, although I am innocent of the unfortunate success of the siege.

What shall I say more, did I not invent a subtle stratageme, therewith to
mollify the hearts of those rebels, that is the miraculous hanging of that
villainous spy, that brake the rope three times upon the gallows? nevertheles
they within the town, as also a great part of the army, would not believe
that miracle, because he rather commended himself to our Lady of Monferrat in
Spain, then to the good Lady de Liesse in France. Further, my brethren and I
made provision of a great number of invisible regiments, but it was reported
that we would put them into our own purses, whereas our design was to serve
our turns with them, to cast them invisibly into the town, thereby to take it
the easier. And if we failed therein, I am no more the cause thereof, then of
the rain and sickness which continually troubled the soldiers, and which made
an end of setting us forth. No, Sir, I cannot warrant men against the works of
God, no more then I can from those which are imputed unto me, by means of my
ambition and villainy; but if I had lived a little longer, I would have made all
the world see and perceive that I intended to be a soldier.

I confess that I was but a new beginner in the Art, when I made my self
Constable, and that I had never seen siege nor battle, but I was resolved
this Winter to learn the military Art with all perfection, in stead of
practicing to dance. The Baron de Caban, otherwise called de Maine, having
promised me in three months space to make me as good a Captain as himself, who
of a Musition in two years became a great warrier, whatsoever the Marshall de
Roquelauere said, who in despite that I employed him in the siege of Monheur,
swear, cap de Bions, that he would not go to the war with a Musition: and
being taught by so good a master, this Spring time I would have paid those of
Montauban, but God did prevent me in all my designs.

Truly, said the King, your discourses are notable, but your actions are not
much worth, such men as you are always punished by the hand of God; get you
away out of my presence, and let me see you no more.

After that, the King taking the advice of his old servants, ordained, that as
Luynes had played with great personages in his life time, he would have him
serve to make them sport after his death, and therefore appointed him to carry
fourmes every time that they ran at the Ring, or with their Lances; and to
begin his prentiseship, that he should be delivered into the hands of the Duke
de Mayennes pages.

According to this decree he was presently laid hold on, who then speaking to
the Cardinal de Guise, showed him that he died without confession and
receiving of the Sacrament, praying him to give him absolution for his sins.

To whom do you speak, said the Cardinal? do you not know that I am no
Priest? Then he turned to the Bishop of Marselles, to whom he made the like
request. And he made him the like answer that the Cardinal had done, adding
further and saying, Before you went out of the other world you should have
caused your self to be absolved by the Cardinal de Rets your creature, or
rather by the Bishop of Lusson your kinsman, he would never have denied you
his blessing, notwithstanding that you put him beside the Cardinals hat, so you
had promised him upon the security of Marillac and le Seq. to abstain from
making pernicious reports unto the King, thereby to alienate the good will
which his Majesty bears to the Queen his mother; as for me, I cannot help
you, save your self as well as you can. With that the late Marshall de Rets
went to Luynes, and speaking unto him in his ear, said, Alas poor fool, thou
should have plucked the goose without crying like me; if with humility thou
have honored the great personages, they would have upholden thee, and thou
had enjoyed thy fortunes with security. Then turning his head here and there
about him, he perceived the late Earl de Lude, which three times he called
his good master, of whom he asked pardon for the ducale perfidiousnes which
he offered unto him being in Touraine. Then he said to the Bishop of
Carcassone, Monsieur my good benefactor, if ever you took pity on the
affliction of a miserable person, I conjure you to take the pains to advertise
my brethren to take example by me, that they may govern themselves more wisely
then I have done, if they desire to escape the shipwreck that I have endured,
and before all things that they suffer not my body to pass through Paris,
lest it should receive the same entertainment that the body of the Marquis d'
Ancre had.

As he spoke those last words, Losieres Themines son came unto him, and said,
Comfort your self in your misfortunes, your brethren labor for their
conservation, they yield not themselves, I bring you great store of news, you
are not the Keeper of the Seals, Monsieur de Virg has your place: all shall
go well, it seems that he and his are in some sort bound to support your
house; but if the chance should turn, I advise you in good time that I will be
surety no longer. Further, since your departure, the King has benignely
entertained all his friends, and looks on his servants with a kind
countenance; there is free access unto his Majesty, he goes every day to sit
with the Council; I could tell you more, but I must go to salute the King;
farewell, and remember that for want of balm they have your body with long
barks of trees.

The Pages that as then laid hold on the neck and breeches of their
apprentice, would suffer him to speak no more, every one of them teaching him
a lesson as they thought good. The Parisians never took greater pleasure to
see the Marquis d' Ancres body drawn about the city, then all the spirits in
the Elizian fields had to see that brave Constable so instructed and taught by
those good schoolmasters, who in less then an hours space made him a martyr
at least twenty times, and yet killed him not. To conclude, du Bourdet brought
him a writing to set upon his back, containing these words: Long be this
apprentice lived,
Whose spirit has not deceived
The hope of our progenitors:
He is fit for a Porter, without doubt,
And in short time it will fall out,
He will be capable to teach his brothers.


The judgment given, all the Lords took their leave of the King, and as they
returned with Zamet their guide, the Marquis de Terms espied a man that sat
writing under a great olive tree: wherewith he asked, if in that country there
were any Sollicitors or Attourneys, that lived by pleading other men's causes.
None at all, said Zamet. What then, said he, does this writer here? And going
near unto him, they knew it was Marshall de Beron, who was so earnestly
studying, that he thought upon nothing else. De Terms seeing him to be in that
humor, went softly behind him, after the manner of great personages in the
Court, and laid his hand upon his shoulder. Wherewith the Marshall in great
choler, said, What is he that touches me? and looking back, saw the Marquis.
Wherewith changing his choler into gladness, he embraced him friendly, asking
him, if he were one of those gentlemen of Montauban. No, said de Terms, I am
of Clerac. What in Gods name make you here? said the Marshall. And what goodly
passion, said de Terms, ravisheth you into such an ecstasy? Cap de Bions, said
he, I was in a deep humor of Poetry, and was studying to make verses for an
Epitaph to be set upon your tombs.

What, are you a Poet, said de Terms? No, said Biron, but there being no war
in this country, sometimes I have a conceit to pass the time in Poetry, like
my Lady de Rosau. I pray you then, said de Terms, let us see something of your
doing, as well as my Lady d'Entragues. Pardions I am content, said the
Marshall, I was but beginning; see here is that which I have done; I pray you
tell me truly whether I have done it fitly or no, and hear it without passion.

Here lies a company of fools, in respect of warriers brave,
That in the middle of their foes did lose their lives,
While three cowards, authors of the war we have,
Merely past the time in riding of their wives.
Truly, said de Terms, you use us unworthily. Morbions, said the Marshall,
what, do I not say the truth? Are you not great fools, that suffered your
selves to be slain for a company of dastards that serve their own turns,
under pretense of religion, to establish their future greatness at your costs
and charges. Cap de Bions, what blows with my sword would I have laid about
their ears, if I had bin in their places. Monsieur d'Espernon is a subtle
Catholic, he besieged Rochell afar off, and upon Pont neuf there were more
overthrowes given by him, then by any other in France; but tell me, I pray you,
are not the Jesuits ashamed that they preached against him during the league,
in their pulpits calling him Astarot and Arch-hereticke, and yet in the mean
time they must confess, that at this day he is one of the pilars of the faith,
although he be the same that he was, were they exclaimed against his person,
only that in those times he was none of the company, as he is at this
present. Mafoy, said the Marquis, I must confess that Mousieur d'Espernon is a
Mathos, and one that can manage his affairs better then any other in the
Court; it is true that Luynes has given him many bad nights, but the fathers
have recompensed all that.

While these things past, the King withdrew himself into his chamber, where
having wept long time for the grief that he had for the miseries of France,
praying unto God to divert the storms thereof from it; he called for his most
confident servants, with whom he conferred touching the disorders of the
Realm, and then said with a loud voice, God help the bounty of my son, and
give him grace speedily to root out the pernicious factions of such Favorites.
Now I am truly informed of the lamentable affairs, into the extremity whereof
his Crown is plunged, I can speak pertinently with the experience that I have
of things past.

This then is that which me thinks the King my son should do, as well for
his own preservation, as for the tranquillity of his subjects. First, he
ought to respect those that give him good counsel, which is the soul of every
monarchy. I am not of opinion, that he should give my wife the sole direction
of his affairs; neither that my nephew the Prince of Cende should have it, in
that respect he ought to shun jealousy: it is requisite that every one, as
near as may be, should participate both in the honors and in the care, and
that every one in general should contribute toward the relieving of the
Flowers de Lis.

My judgment, to prevent and withstand the continual disorders that have
troubled France since my death, is, That my son should make a Council, not
of Favorites, but of those who by blood and affection have a particular
interest in the preservation of his person and of his State. That he commit
part of the managing of the State affairs, to the Queen his mother. That he
shall hold her in good correspondence with himself, and my nephews de Conde
and de Soissons near unto him. That he should manage all things by order of
the Council, and with plurality of voices. That he shall refer himself to
the prudent advice of the old (...) and officers of the Crown, that served me.
That he shall commit the ordering of his conscience to some good Doctor. That
he should embrace the ancient Sorbonites, and put the new Transmontaine
Theologians from him. That by little and little he shall lessen his great
charges. That he shall protect those of his blood. That he shall not neglect
his Parliaments. That he shall take Luynes lands and goods to supply his
necessities, and for the comfort of the poor people. That he shall cause the
citadell of Amiens to be opened on that side toward the Town, to prevent the
inconveniences which one day that fort may cause, and take an Inventorie of the
great riches which are in that place, as also in La Fere, Calais, and Blaye.
That he shall give all the governments which the three brethren have, unto his
old and faithful servants. That he shall drive all their kindred from the
Court. That he shall by absolute authority hold and maintain the Edicts of
Parliament. That he shall conserve the ancient alliances of the Crown. That he
shall stop his ears against factious strangers. That he shall call to mind the
dangerous public happened within these four years within Paris, as signs
sent by God to warn us of the scourges that threaten France. That he shall
take heed of, and shun civil war, which cannot choose but procure the ruin of
his affairs and of his people, while his neighbor seeks all the means he can
to prejudice his Realm. That he must call to mind the Embassage of
Bassompiere in Spain, and of the breach of promise made touching Valtolina.
That he must have an eye unto the designs of strangers, who under pretense of
religion, aspire unto the dissipation of his state. That he shall procure peace
unto his people. That he must recompense those that deserve it, and punish
those that are wicked. And doing so, God will bless him, the Crown shall
flourish, his country will be enriched, his friends will love him, his subjects
serve him, and his neigbours fear him.

There Is nothing in the world that perfe^^^
For if 'twere so, nothing would be amiss:
This book is not so perfect as it is true,
Which you shall find, if you give it the due.
FINIS.

