An introduction into phisycke, with an universal diet, gathered by Christofer
Laugton. E W

To the right worshypfull knight sir Arthure Darcye his humble servant
Christofer Langton wyssheth health and increase of virtue.
A Soft as I remember your kyndenesse and benevolence toward me (my singular
good master) it is hard to say, how greatly I desire to recompense the same:
lest I should either seem unkind and unthankful, or else not to understand
and perceive the greatness of your manifold benefytes, employed vpo^me: of
ye which, as ye one is a sign of a noughty heart, so the other is a toke^ of a
dull wit: but they be both very evident arguments of unthankfulness and
ingratitude. From the which, as I have always hitherto abhorred, so I desire
now to be void from all suspicion of the same. For me think, I perceive
every day more and more, how much shame and fylthynesse is in that vice,
almost by the testimony of every wise man in somoche that I think him to
trespass greatly, against the society of this our commune life, which does
vnthankefullye receive benefytes of any man. For as gratitude or thankfulness
does increase lyberalitye, which is the especial part of justice: so
ingratitude dissolueth utterly, and abolysheth the same: the which liberality,
if it fall ones in decay, it takes away the co^mutation of offices and the
doing of one for an other, the which ones taken away, what help I pray you is
left to the co^seruation of ye common wealth, seeing yt the hole course of our
life, consysteth in ye society and mutual doing one for an other. Wherefore
the wise kings of the Parcians made laws, for to punysh such as were unkind
and unthankful persons, because they thought none to be so unnatural as
they, nor any to trespass more against the common weal. These and other
such (mine especial good master) has caused me to desire vehementlye, to
show some token of the pure zeal and love which I have ever borne unto you,
lest I should be found unnatural, either unto you, or to this my native
country. Wherefore saying that fortune has given me no richesse, wherewith I
might long yer this have reco^penced some part of your kyndenesse, I thought
mete to offer unto you, the first fruits of my studyes and learning, verily
trusting, that your wisdom will esteem for the best, my loyal heart, and
dilligent endeavor, although my book peradventure shall not satisfye your
expectation.

Physyke speaks in her own person, to her mynisters and Phisicious.
AFter that Prometheus had stolen fire out of heaven, the father and ruler
of the gods Jupiter, being sore offended with his malicious fact, swore by
a great oath, that he would not only be revenged upon him, but of all his
posterity, wherefore, commaundyng his son Vulcanus to shape a beautyfull
woman, called all the gods, and goddesses together, to who^ he spoke on this
fassyon: what avails us our scepter and crown most valiauntlye conquered,
of our father Saturn? whom we deposed for tyranny: what avails us the
notable victory of Thiphocus and his brethren? or the punyshmentes of Titius,
Tantalus, Siliphus, and Ixion? seeing that one can not be ware by an others
harm. I am sure none of you be ignorant of our iniuryes, which we have
received of the hands of Prometheus: my wife and sister Juno, for Paris his
sake destroyed the whole nation of the Trojans, and my daughter Minerua burned
an hole navy of the Grecians, for one man's offense: and shall we Jupiter father
of all the gods, and ruler of heaven and earth, suffer our eternal fire to
be stolen out of heaven unpunished? while he spoke these words, Mulciber his
son brought in the lady which was now already shapen, tha^ Jupiter,
co^maundyng as well gods as goddesses, to trymme and deck her to the
uttermost, named her Pa^dora, because every god and goddess had given her
something, and he him self gyuyng her a box, wherein was enclosed al manner of
diseases and maladyes, sent her to Epimetheus, by his son and faithful
messenger Mercurius, which Epimetheus, although he were warned of his broher
Prometheus to receive no gift from Jupiter, most louyngly retained her: and
openyng her box, let forth abroad al manner of maladyes, and diseases,
wherewith al mankind was cruellye punyshed, until such time as Jupiters furour
and indignation was su^what slaked through the prayer of Esculapius, to whom
he sent me as a remedy and medicine, to all such euyls and gryeffes. whom
for his faythefull service, I made a god. And I pray you, have I not rewarded
both Hypocrates and Gallene accordynglye? saying that at this day they are
glorified in fame as much as either Alexander Magnus, or any other notable
prince? but out alas what cruel fate of fortune is this, that I sometime the
spryng and well of al felicity and goodness unto man, am now clean turned
to the contrary. For where as before I was author of health, to every
ma^sekyng for me: now I am not only a common murderer, and a common thief,
but also a mayntayner of Paricides, much more vile then ye stynkynge whore of
Babylon. For you that be my mynisters and Phisicio^s to you I speak: I pray
you tell me, why does every man now utterly abhor my company? trumpyng
eftsoon in my way, who is wyllyng to dye, let him goo to Phisyke: who is
wyllyng to be robbed of his money, let him go to Phisyke, if I be not a thief
and a murderer? But what said I, did I call you my servants? no, I know ye
not, and much less ye know me: woe shall be unto you, which rauyshyng me
against my will, has thus brought me in captivity and bondage, woe shall be
unto you, which for your own lucre and advantage, has made me an instrument
of mischefe: woo shall be unto you which have sclaundered me with the death of
so many thousands: woo shall be unto you that have robbed and polled of their
money so many nacyons. But paraduenture ye will say that I wrongfully and
without all cause do sclaundre you, laying the fault in me, that ye heal not
as other, that were my servants and mynisters did, because there is not like
virtue in me now, as was then: and whereof I beseech you comes that? of me, or
of you, which know me not? For what soever he be that has not exactly learned
natural Philosophye, be he never so well practiced, he never knew me.
Therefore whosoever will be my servant, let him first be sure that he have a
good natural wit that he may be able to practyse any thing that is taught
him, and tha^ let him be exercysed, even from his tender age, in dialect,
arithmaticke, and mathematicke, he must also be very payneful, setting his
mind on nothing but only on learning, and conferryng his studyes always with
the best, and ought always to be a very diligent sercher of the truth,
forsakynge all other things, and cleauynge hollye unto it. Moreover he must
take an order in his studyes, not beginning as the most part of you do, with
the symples, and practyse at the first, ouerleapynge the elements, the
temperatures, the section of the body, with all the faculties and actions of
the same: then after he has constitute an order, in his studyes, he must
exercise the same: and so doing he shall not need to seek on me, for I will
offer my self to him, without any sekyng. But as for you that have not sought
my service of this sort, ye little know me: yet with your lying and craking,
calling your selves excellent Physicians, ye have brought me in deep sclau^dre
with you, but I counsel ye take heed, and leave your lying, lest I put you to a
foul rebuke: and if there be any of you that knowledgeth his fault, and would
serve me, I have already showed him a way, without the which it is not possible
to know me. Now ye know my mind, beware how ye presume to my service.

The.i. Chapter.
Of the diversity of sects in phisike, and which are to be followed.
THe old and aunciente physicians, among the Greeks which passed al other in
phisike were divided into.iii. sects. They that were of the first sect, were
called Empirici: and they that were of the second sect, were called
Methodici: the last and best were called dogmatici. Empirici were they that
wroughte only by experience, and thought it a great point of wisdom in no
case to admyt reason, markynge very diligently, by what manner means they had
healed any maladyes or diseases, in the which if they had like success
afterward by healpe of the same medicines, than they were bold to call that
same medicine, by the which they had helped oftentimes one kind of disease,
Preceptum fidele, which is as much to say as a faithful precepte, and when
they had gathered of these a great number, they called the whole gatheriges in
greek, (...): which in Latin word for word, is as much to say, as
Intuitus proprius. and in our vulgar tongue, it may very well be called a
certain memory of those things, the which has been seen oftentimes to
chance of one sort, the which also may very well be called experience, for it
is nothing, but an observation and memory of that which has chaunsed
oftentimes after one fassion. Than after that they had gathered after th^s
fasshion, a great many of experime^tes, they did utterly abolyshe, and
condemn all reason as void, and of none effect to the learning of phisyke.
They did also nothing regard the time of the year, the temperature of the
wether, nor yet the powers of ye patient, putting no dyfference betwyxte young
and old, weak or strong, whote or could, dry or moist, but thought that
they might safelye venture that upon one, with the which they had healed
another in like disease, and of this sect was Thessalus, and Cornelius Celsus,
with all their scholars. The second sect was called Methodica, the which did
nothing regard the place affected, nor ye cause of the gryefe, nor the age of
the pacient, nor the time of the year: nor the temperature of the country, nor
the habyte of the sick manne, nor yet the kind of his former life, and
constantly affirming that there was but two dyseases, the one the stoppynge of
the pores, and the other the ouermuche openyng of the same: condemned utterly
Hyppocrates, because he said that physike was a long art and that man's life
was very short: for they affirm that it is clean contrary, that is to say,
that man's life is long, and phisyke is so short an art, that if all things
which (as they say) be superfluous, were cut out: it might be learned
easily in.vi. months. They descent also from the first sect of physicians,
in that they think there comes no profit of expe^ience, until such time
as they have learned the virtues and faculties of medicines and remedies And
moreover that it is not possible to find any remedy or medicyne, by diligent
markynge, seeing that all remedies, be gathered of such things as be evident
to the sense, and of this sect and opinion was Erassistratus, and Asclepiades
with all their retinue. The third and last sect were called Dogmatici, the
which joined experience always with reason (co^syderynge very diligently the
causes of the evil, as well those that be obscure, and hard to find as those
also, which are euydent and open to every man's eye) and does give much both to
the nature of the air and water, and region, where the sick abides,
steadfastly affyrmyng that it is most necessary for the Physicians, both to
know and consydre the differences of the same, and also to mark diligently
his accustomed diet, as well in meats and drynkes, as bathes, exercyses, and
other things. And to compare things that be past, with such as be present,
and to know perfytely the powers and virtues of medicines, by the which they
may take easily away the cause of al maladyes, and finally that he be such a
one the which ca^ prove and improve by good reason, that this medycyne has
this facultye of nature, to the which he may attain, by the help of
Logycke, he must know also (they say) the internal parts, by dyligent
search, and cuttynges of bodies, he must be seen also in natural Phylosophye,
Astronomye, Mathematycke, and Arithmatycke. Of this sect was Gallen, and long
before him Hipocrates, whom would to God our Physicians would set as a glass
before their eyes, I would then think, that Physycke should not be so little
set by as it is. But alas, there is no man's Physycke so little regarded now a
days as Galennes is, and in deed to say the truth, it may very well be
perceived, by their doings, that they werneuer Galennes scholars: for he
teaches them, not to judge all dyseases by the vryne, where as the most part
of them (I do not say all) after that they have ones seen the water of the
sick, yea though they never knew him, nor can not be enfourmed by the bearer
in what state he is in, will not stycke to write the Appotecarie a byl for such
manner of drugges, ye if they were laid before their eyes, they could not
tell, whether they were the same yt they write for, or no. How is it possible
for these Physicians, to do any less then kill their pacientes, but it makes
ye less matter, saying they be hired to it, with gold and silver.

Well, I will say no more at this time, but surely, if I were disposed I
could prove that there is as much iugglyng, and deceyuyng of the people now a
days amongst our physicians, I will name none (but every man knows his
own weakness and infirmity) as ever was amongst the Popysh priests, and a
redress might be had, if it pleased the kings highness, yt none might be
suffered to practyse, but such as be learned.

The.ii. Chapter.
Of the Elements.
NOw after that I have declared and opened the sects and opynions of the
most noble and most ancient Physicians, I I think it very mete to show
the nature of the Elements, which be iiii. in number: the fire, air, water,
and earth. But to avoid ambiguitie, I will (by gods grace) first declare the
signification of this word Elementum, which we may very well call in our
tongue a beginning of any thing: and thereof it comes yt the Alphabete
letters be called eleme^tes, because they are beginners of al manner of
languages, and the principles also of every art be called Elements, because
they are begynners of the same. The Physicians also do call the veins pulses,
and bones, with all other such parts as the Latyne men call similares, sensible
elements: because they are the first beginners of man's body, as much as
may be perceived by sense. For the fire, air, water and earth, (of the which
all things under the moon be made) can not be perceived by any sense:
wherefore as they are ye first begynners of man's body, so they are not the
first sensyble begynners. For if they could be perceived by sense, then every
man as he passes other in quycknesse of sense, so should he se, and feale most
fine elements as the Aegle, because his sight is most perfyte, should
easelyest perceive the least Element, but percase some will say unto me, that
there is no man so mad to say, that the fire, air, earth, and water, can not
be felt, and perceived by sense: But whosoever shall move this doubt, I will
answer him, of this fassyon: that if he mean our fire, our water or our earth,
I will say as he says which is, that they may be felt and perceived by sense.
For in deed they are no Elements, but things mixed and corruptyble: having
their composition of diverse things, where as the pure element is a body most
simple, without all generation or corruption. Now be it, of fire made thycke,
comes air: and of air made thycke, comes water: and of water made thycke,
comes earth. And yet here is neither corruption, nor yet generation of the
whole, for this is a mutatio^ of the parts only. Then as I said before,
Elementu^ in this signification is a body most pure and simple, and the leest
part of the same, wherein it is: which can not be divided into any other
kind, and of it all things natural have their original beginning. This
definition is taken both out of Gallen and Aristotle: therefore I trust, no man
will be so impudent to contrary or impugn it. And there be also as is
aforesaid.iiii. Elements, of the which the fire is extreme hot, and
moderatly dry: the air extreme moist, and moderatly hot: the water extreme
cold, and moderatelye moist: the earth is extreme dry, and moderatelye cold.
In heat the fire with the air, and in dryness with the earth, in moisture the
air with the water, and in heat with the fire, in coldenesse the water with the
earth, and in moisture with the air, the earth in dryness with the fire, and in
coldness with the water, does consent and agree. And as ye water to ye fire is
extreme contrary, so is the air to the earth. Of the myxture of these
elements, al natural bodies have their composition, and yet it is nothing
necessary yt they be equally myngled in the body but according to that, that
has dominion, the body is named either choleryke, sanguyne, phlegmatycke, or
melancholye: and these names be given of.iiii. natural humors, that is choler,
blood, phlegm, and melancholy, which take their qualityes of the elements,
for choler is hot and dry according to the nature of the fire, and blood is
hot and moist, according to the nature of the air, phlegm is cold and
moist, according to the water, and melancholye in no point dyssenteth from the
earth.

The third Chapter.
The differences of temperatures.
How that I have declared unto you, how all natural bodies be made by the
mixture of the elements, I think it most necessary, to show in as few
words as I can, the differences of temperatures.

Temperatures in number are.ix. of the which.viii. do excede, and therefore in
my fantasy, they may better be called distemperatures, than temperate crases:
the nynthe in deed is temperate, for it excedeth in no quality. Of the
distemperate.iiii. be simple, and.iiii. be composide. the simple are heat,
cold, drynes and moisture, of the which coupled and joined together, the rest
which be distemperate are made. The nynth is neither hot, cold, dry nor
moist, and yet is made of them all: and therefore the greeks call it (...),
which is as much to say in latin, as Been temperatum, and in English: well
tempered. And this is that which Arithmetricions call Temperamentu^ ad pondus,
which we may call in our language, a complexion measured by weight, because
there are as many degrees of heat, as there is of cold, of dryenes as of
moisture: the other which are distemperate crases, be measured not by weight,
but by dignity, as in the heart well tempered, heat does excede, in the brain
well tempered, moisture does exceade, in the fat well tempered, cold: in the
boones well tempered, dryenes.

And this is called Temperamentum, secundum iustitiam distributatiuam.

Which is as much for to say, as a temperature measured according to
justice, which gives every man his own. But peradventure this declaration
shall seem some what hard to such as be unlearned: and therefore I entende to
declare ye same again, both more largely and also more playnelye.

First ye shall understand, that these.iiii. heat, cold, dryenes and
moisture, which are called the first qualities, because all other come of them,
have each of them.iii. diverse significations. Whansoeuer ye find heat, cold,
drynes or moisture, absolutely and simply spoken, than understand that it is
meante by those simple bodies, which be hot, cold, dry and moist, in the
hygheste degree: and that is only the fire, water, earth and air, which be
the.iiii. elements whereof we spoke before. And when ye find the same
qualities myxt in any natural body, by the which it is named either hot cold,
dry or moist, than suppose yt it is spoken either by comparison, as hot for
hotter, cold for coulder, dry for dryer, or moist for moyster, orels that it
is hot, cold, dry or moist by nature, as when there is in one body, more
heat than cold, more drynes than moisture, or otherwise. as Summer is called
hot, because it has more heat? than cold: Winter also is called cold, be
cause that it has more cold than heat: and hereof it comes, that one body
is choleryke, because in the myxture of the four humors, which is choler,
blood, phlegm and melancholy, there is more of choler, than of any other, and
therefore choler has the dominion, causynge the body to be named cholerycke
after it: and in like manner does each of the other, where he bears rule and
governance. But he that will know perfectly how to judge the differences of
bodies in temperature by comparison, must constitute in every kind of things,
that same temperate mean, which before we called Eucraton to the which he
must refer the same body or complexio^, of the which he dowteth, and than
if it do excede the mean, either in heat, cold, dryness or moisture, it
shall take name thereof, and be called either hot, cold, dry or moist,
because it exceadeth the mean which is named Eucraton, when it is either
hot, cold, dry or moist.

Sum do use to judge the diversity of complexions, by comparynge one
distemperate body, to an other of the same kind distemperate also, as in
man's kind, Socrates compared with Aristotle, is hot, because he is hotter
than he, but in respect of Aristippus, he is cold, because Aristippus is
much hotter, and thus one man compared to diverse, may be both hot, cold,
dry and moist: And some by comparynge distemperate bodies of diverse kinds
learn to know ye constitution, as a dog compared with a man is hot, with a
lion, is cold, and with a sheep, is dry: with a pysmyre or a fly is moist,
and of this fashion contraries may be in one body, and none otherwise. How
be it (as I think) the best way is to seek out the mean, to the which all that be of the same kind, ought to be referred, and afterward as he excedeth
in any quality to have his nomination according to ye same But percha^ce ye will
say it is hard to find in every kind a co^plexioned body measured by weight,
which is the mean, I grant yt, for in deed there was never any such, nor
shall be, yet as that sect of Philosophers which were called Stoykes, what
time they defyned a wise man, did descrybe such one, as was not possible to be
found any where: and as Quintilian descrybeth his orator, so we, to bring our
purpose about, must ymagyne such an one in our mind by cogitation, as
never was made, neither is like to be, by consent of nature, as thus. In the
hole kind of living things, that that is most temperate and perfect, is as
a mean to the rest, which by the hole consent as well of the philosofers, as
of the physicians, is man, by cause any of the other kinds compared with him,
is distemperate, than if ye will prove man also to be distemperate, ye must
seek amongst the hole kind, the most perfect and temperate: and he that is
perfyt and temperate, and worthy to be a mean to the rest, is neither over
thick, nor sclendre, nor very full of here, nor yet smooth and without here,
nor soft, nor yet hard, black nor white, hot nor cold, dry nor moist:
and to be short, keeping a mean without all excess. If ye can find such a
one in the hole kind, then are ye sure of the complexyoned body measured by
weight, which we spoke of before. In case ye can find none such, ye must
imagyne a like in your brain: and ye must not do this only in mankind, but
also in other natural and lively creatures, as well in the kind of lions,
dogs, elephauntes, and wolves: as also of birds, fysshes, worms and trees,
co^paryng every one in his own kind. But in case ye will find what of all
things is most temperate: then must ye go again to the man before said which
is neither hot nor cold, and the skin in the myddest of the insyde of his
hand, is of all things most temperate. For the temperatest part of every
man's body, is the skin in the myddeste of the paulme of the hand: then the
temperatest part of the most temperate man must neades be the most
temperate thing in the world, seeing that of al living creatures man is most
temperate.

Now that I have showed how by comparison made, in every kind, the
differences of the body may ease lie be known, there remains behind to
declare how to find out the same without comparison. Where as I said before,
that every qualitye, might be taken three diverse ways as heat in the highest
degree, is only in the fire, and in a natural body myxt of the Elements, it
is either referred to an other, by comparison: as hot for hotter, or else it
is so of nature, which may be taken two manner of ways, as hot in act or
in power. Things that be hot in act, may easelye be judged by sense of
fealynge: for who has so dull sense in fealynge, that he can not perceive the
fire to be hot: if he put his finger in it. But to know which is hot in
power is a thing of more difficultye. For it can not at the first brunt be
perceived by any sense, neither of fealyng, smelling, hearing, saying, nor
tastynge. For who can perceive by any of these, yt castoreu^, or euphorbiu^ or
nasturciu^ is hot, or that Mandragora, Salamandra or Papauer is cold. But in
case ye take any part of them inwardlye, either as meat, drink, or medicine:
then ye shall easily discern which is hot and which is cold. But
peradventure ye will condemn this proof as naught, because it is dangerous
medlyng with poyso^s: I grant that, and therefore it is much safer, to lay
them as a plaster, to some utter part of your skyn, where as they can not
hurt, and after that they have lain there a while, they will show their power
and quality, which shall be perceived quycklye by sense in felyng. But to judge
things moist, or dry, I can show you a mochesurer rule, what soever thing is
soft, and moderately hot, that of nature is moist: whatsoever is hard and
moderatly hot, yt of nature and power is dry: and this is always true, as
well in lively bodies, as is other things.

The.iiii. Chapter.
The geueration of the liver, bert, and brain.
FOr asmoche as there is nothing so necessary to attain to any perfyte
knowledge in Physic, as to be perfyte both in cuttyng and in opening the
body, and parts of the same. And seeing it is shame for a man to be learned
in so many arts, and have knowledge of so many things (as the most part
of men now a days have) and be ignorant in his own body, the which he
should most perfytely know: I think it no less then my bounden duty, to
employe my labor and diligence to the furtheraunce of the same, that such as
be but begynners as yet very raw in Physycke, whose bringing up has not ben
amongst learned men of the universities, whereby they are destitute, both of
dialecte, natural Philosophye, and other arts, with out the which Physycke
can hardlye be learned, may have some help by this my little rude book, both
to attain some learning in Physycke, and also to know their body. Blood and
the seed of the man be beginners of our generation, of the which blood is the
substance and matter whereof our body is made, and the seed of man is next
under God, the maker and fashyoner of the same, and these same be made of the
same elements which I have spoken of already, which is the fire, air,
earth, and water, and these two dyffer one from an other in temperature. For in
the seed there is more of fire and eyer then of water and earth, and in the
blood there is less of fire and air, then there is of water and earth: and
yet in the same there is more heat then cold, and more moisture then
dryness. After that these two be received, and.vi. days retained wtin the
womb of the woman, the great heat which is there does so bake the seed and
blood being mirt together, yt it co^passeth them about with a skyn, or a crust,
not unlike the utter cote of an egg, which the Greeks call (...), and in
latin is called secu^dine, or secu^dina: what our mydwyues call it I can not
tell: how beit, it may very well be called a skyn wherein is wrapped yt that is
conceived, and this is made in ye first.vi. days, with diverse pulses and
veins, as fine and small as any thredes, which serves afterward to nourysh
the infant by the nauyll. For in this same skin, which before is called
Chorion, there are many fine holes, much like the little holes in the small
lamparie heedes, by the which the nauyll after the seventh day, does draw
unto it both spirit and blood, to the nourishment of the infant. Then in the
mean season the rest of the seed boylynge all hot, does make three little
bladers, which is the place of the liver, heart, and brain. For a vein which
is stretched right upward from the nauil does draw up the grossed blood,
which for lack of heat easelye congeleth in ye seed. And there is made also
a double forked vein, and to one of the forkes of the same vein is fashyoned
this forsayde congeled blood, which is the liver: and like as from the nauyll,
the vein bryngyng gross blood into the forsayde little bladder was cause of
the generation of the liver, so likewise a pulse or an artery bryngyng fine
blood and spirit, coming from the same place, sumwhat nere ye back, into
another like bladdar, is cause of making of the heart, which is made of
very sound flesh, thycke and gross, mete for such a purpose, and of the
most fine and subtyle blood, that comes from the heart, the lyghtes be made
and the whole breast also wherein they are closed. In to the third bladdar,
which is mentioned before, a great part of the seed being full of spirit,
is driven, the which to keep him self moist, does draw a great part of the
seed to it, and makes a little sell, which is the brain, to ye which there is
added afortres of hard bone. And thus the brain, is made of the seed only,
that he might be furnysshed with most fine spirits, whom the brain conserueth
and alters, the which are the cause of sense, and voluntary mouynge, as
shall be declared more plainly hereafter.

Next to the brain grows ye marye of the backebone, which the Arabians
call Nucha, it is of the same nature, that the brain is, and differs very
much from the marye, of the other parts.

I have showed to you now, thoghe very rudely, the original beginning of
man's body* Of the sede is only made all the bones, gristels, veins, pulses,
strings, synowes, tyinges, selles and skynnes, which be called Spermatyke
parts, because they be made of ye seed and not of the blood. They are the
very same, which I said before that the Latyne men called Parts
similares, and the Physicians, sensible elements, all the rest be made of the
blood, as the liver, the heart, and the lyghtes, with all the flesh, and
fat of the body.

The infant whiles he is within his mothers woumbe, is nourysshed of that blood
which is called Sanguis menstruus. drawing it at his nauyl, and after he is
delivered, it is turned all to milk, which is his meat long after, and
therefore there is many conduytes from the woumbe, to the pappes.

After that the infant is fully proportioned, and figured, i^ the first
months he pisseth by the conduyte, that comes through his nauyl, in the
later months that is shut up, and he pysseth with his yerde, he auoydeth no
excrementes at his fundament, because he receives no norysshemente by his
mouth. There is a skin, much like a puddynge, which receives his urine
and excrementes, lest they should hurt either him, or else his mother. I should
seem both to long and also to tedious, if I descrybed the hole body, but
because the action of the instruments, can not be understand, except I
should touch ye most principal parts, therefore it was necessary to
entermedle with the descryption of the body, in the which I will not be so
scrupulous, as to rehearse every little part or the situation or figure of every
bone and vain, no nor the knyttynge of every muscle, (for why should I make me
more cu^nyng than I am) in deed it passes my learning as yet, but I entende
to show, and set forth the greatest, and most noble parts, the which he
must needs know that will profyt in physic.

The.v. Chapter.
The sections of the body.
THere was no need in y^ old time, to write of the body, for than children
were excersised in their young and tender age, daily in cuttynge and openyng
of the same, but now that this diligence is utterly extyncte, we have very
great need of writing, wherefore I have taken this little pain upon me, which
I shall think well bestowed, if it shall either healpe the studyes of those
that be rude and raw in physic, or satisfye them that be learned. And first
I will declare (by gods grace) such parts as covers the head without, and
afterward those that be wtin, beginning with the hears though they be but
excrementes, and superfluities, next underneath the hear, there is a skin
somewhat thycke and fleshye, wherein the hear is rooted: underneath this skin,
there is a little flesh, about the browe and temples. Than next underneath,
there is a fine kell, which is made of synowes and tyenges, coming through the
seames of the scull, which the Greeks call (...), under the which immediately,
is the skulle, in greek called (...), and for the defense of the brain, it is
made like an helmet, the latyne men call it Caluariam, and it is not one hole
continual bone but is divided by certain semes in to seven bones. Then within
ye head underneath the sculle, is Dura matter, which Galen calls Crassum (...)
it is a thycke and hard kel or skin made of many strong sinowes and bonds,
to the intent it might hold up and sustain the veins, which nouryssheth the
brain: After this is pia matter. which is an exceeding fine skin, made of
synowes, not only compassyng the hole sub^tance of the brain, but also
penetratyng into diverse parts, that are within the brain, and noryssheth it
as much as the skin which before we called Chorion, does nouryshe the sede,
and because it is made of synowes, it gives sense to the brain. At the last
we be come to the brain, the which when I consider that it is made of the
seed, I can not chose, but maruayle, how all our cogitations and ymaginacions
should come from thence and how the brain being so gross and massye of
substance, should hang as it does without any stey or vndersettyng, in such holow
and wide places, we se y^ housen be underset with posts, or else they would
ouerwhelme ye flower under the^, but the brain being underset with nothing, how
fortuneth it, that so long as life remains in the body it choketh and
ouerwhelmeth not the wide holowe chambers underneath* When I did depely
consider the cause of this, I thought the brain had a certain similitude of
the sky. For as the sky being a great and heavy substance without any
proppes, or vndersettes, does not fall, nor is stricken out of his place: so
the brayn by a certain divine nature yt it has does consist without any stay
or fortress that can be perceived by sense, and thereof it comes that man is
called (...), which we may call in our touge a little world, and surely the
bright spirits which come from the brain to the eye, does declare, that
there is a certain cognation or kynderede between the sky, and man's brain,
which though it be made of the seed (as I said before) yet it is some divine
and celestial thing: yea and the nature of ye seed is so much the more to
be meruayled at: how much it passes our knowledge and capacity, to show and
declare the causes whereby it works such wonders in the brain, which is full
of holes, as eyes, replenyshed with spirit, may very well be the cause why
the brain falls not down. Howbeit, both the substance of it, and the
wonderful motions also may better be maruayled at, then descrybed. This I dare
say, that it is made of the fynest part of the seed, and of that, that is
fullest of spirit, and is divided into two partys, by that same skin whyth
before is called Dura matter, ye one lies before and the other behind.

That which is before, (as it is of the finest and most pure substance) so
it brings out most fine and subtyle synowes, and is the place of reason and
intelligence: the other (as it is course of substance) so there grows of it
great and strong synowes, not unlike them that grow of the mary of the back
bone, and it is thought to be the place of memory: now that after a rude
fassyon we have descrybed the brain, there remains behind the description
of his selles, and chambres, which in number be.iii. in the former part of yt
heed, there are.ii. deep holow places, not unlike ye figure of the moon when
she is new changed, and of ye bygnesse of an egg, reaching down almost to
the ears. The same cauities (though they be.ii. of them, one on ye right side
and another on ye left side) yet for the most part they be called ye first
chaumbre of the brain, which always is full of spyrite, having his sides
covered, and cladde, with the same rymme or skin, which before is called Pia
matter, which is full of veins and pulses for ye nutrime^t of the brain: under
each of these cha^bers there is (if I may so call it) a long rope, which is made
of veins and pulses, covered with a fine skyn yt grows of Pia matter, these
small long ropes has ioyninges, whereby they claspe, and be red, much like
worms, wherefore they be called worms, and do extend in length as far as
the ears, and the myddle chaumbre of the brain, whom they replenysshe with
spirit. In the same place at the end of the first cauities, under them is an
other cauitie. For at the latter end of the foresaid worms or ropes there are
two lumpes, which of the very similitude of buttockes be called Nates, and be
cladde with the skyn of the worms which when the said cauitie or chamber: is
drawn together do touch one an other, and when it is open, they also be
separate. This chamber or selle is as bygge as the yolke of an egg, and being
covered round about with the brain, is called the myddle chamber or sell,
which is shut with a pessule or bar of the bygnesse of a little walnut, and
therefore it is called in latin Glanduia or, conarium, and it is just betwyxt
the myddell chamber, and the entryng into ye third, his office is to sustain,
and bear up, the veins and pulses, which bring spirit to the myddle
chamber. The third chamber is behind in the last part of the heed, which
before we supposed to be the place and seet, of the memory, and in this
chamber is a great part of the brain, which the Grecians call (...), in
latyne it is called Cerebellum: in our tungue we have no propre name for it,
which I can do no less then count the negligence of our Physicians to be the
cause of: for if they had written of their art in their mother tunge, as they
do in other places, why should we lack englysh names, more then we lack
either Latin names or Greek names? and yet to say the truth, it is better for
us English men to have English names, then either Latin or Greek. Of this part
of the brain grows the mary of the back bone, which is called ^^cha, under
the mydle chamber, th^^^ is an holow cauitie, which receyue^^ the excreme^tes
and superfluyties of the brain, the which being turned into spettyll, comes
out after at the nose, the Greeks call this cauitie (...), the Latin men
infusorium, or infundibulum, we have no proper name for it: how be it it may
be called a droppyng pan. Next underneath be the jaws, furnyshed with xxxii.
teeth: the four foremost of each side be called deuiders, because they tear
the meat: the next of each side be called dogteeth, because they be like
tuskes: all the rest inlatyn be called Genuini, or Molares, which we call
gu^mes: and they have two roots at the leest, where as the other have but one:
with those teeth the mouth is compassed round about, and defended: wherein as
a precious Iew^ll in a strong tower or fortress, is ^^closed the tungue,
which is ma^^ of very soft and raw flesh, full of ^^les and full of pulses,
veins and synowes: full of synowes, to the intent it may move dyuerselye, and
also feale and taste: full of pulses or arteryes, because it has great neade
of spyryte, and natural heat, saying it has so many dynerse mouynges: and
it is full of veins, that it may be well nouryshed. There is also added to it
a certain moisture, lest it should wax dry, because it is moved daily:
above ye tunge, is a pype, which the Grecyans use to call (...), and the
Latynistes call it Gulam, the unlearned or ignorant call it the wesaunt, and
it is a long pype, having two skynnes or cootes, the which draw down the
meat and drink into the mawe or bag, and the utter cote helps the
stomach to vomyte.

There is also in the former part of the neck an other pype, which (to the
intent that nothing should go that way, but only air) is covered with the
root of the tunge, and it is made of hard grassels, joined together like
rings, and does conduct only air and spirit to the lyghtes, and heart,
being nothing so long as the other, which draws meat and drink, down to
the stomach or mawe, and it has a great knobbe al most at the end, next
the iawe, which the Greeks call (...), in latin Nodus gutturis, which in Englysh
is the knotte of the throat, and whenever we swalowe any thing, it goth up
above the iawe. The wind pipe is the formoost part of the neck, to the
intent it may take air and spyryte the easelyer. And the wesaunt or meat
pype (for why should we be ashamed of these names, seeing we have no better)
is put far whythin the neck, because it should have the more heat, howebeit
we will omytte to speak of it until such time as the lyghtes and heart, with
all that is contained in the breaste, which the Physicians call the myddle
bellye, be declared so well as my simple wit and learning will give me leave.

To the loweste part of the wind pype, (for it is as well the instrument of
brethynge, as of speaking) be fastened the lyghtes, which being made of light,
and most subtyle and fine flesh, not unlike the foam of choleryke blood
congeled, has the figure of an ox houfe, cloven in to.ii. parts, and does
compass the heart, round about with.v. globes.iii. on the right side, and.ii.
on the lift.

And look as the pulses does conserre and keep temperat the natural heat,
thoroweout the hole body, so ye lights preserve the heart from choking by the
receyuynge of external air, which least it should hurt the heart with cold
coming suddenly upon it, is tempered there before, so that I can never wonder
enough at ye high and divine providence of god, which foreseyng al these
things, has constitute such an order in man's body, as I dare say was
never in any publyke weal. For what publycke weal, either is there, or has
been, syns the world began, in which the subjects have been found ever
obedient without all grudgynge to their lord and prince, were he never so
noble or valiau^t? yet in man's body though there be infinite subjects there can
be found no disobedience to their lord and gouerner, which is the heart:
for if any poison be gathered there within the body: or otherwise, which
with his venym, would pearse the heart, I pray you is not every part ready
to defend him? though it be to the utter destruction of them al for ever? and
to say truth, he is worthy to have no less homage or service, seeing he is
auctor of life to all the rest, helpyng his subjects and servants, at al such
times as they be in danger.

And to the intent that no one part, might be destitute more of help then
another, by reason of the distance between him and his governor, Nature has
provided the heart to be set so egallye in the midst of the breast, as is
possible to be devised, by all the mathematikes in the world, which is
compassed about with a cote, the which Galen calls (...) it is made of
synowes so thycke, and so strong, that it is softer than a bone and yet it is
sufficient to defend the heart, it is tied to the skin which covers the
rybbes, and to the mydryfe, and the heart strings, containing a little
quantity of water that never dries up, until such time as life and all
natural heat is departed from the body: There is also a little fat, least
the heart thorough his contynual mouynge, should be dried up: within this
foresaid cote, enclosed as a most precious iuell, the heart, having.ii.
chambres, one on the right side, and an other on the left. To the chamber on
the right side, the great master vain, which grows on the liver, does
bring blood, that is distributed in to.iii. parts, ye subtylest and most
choleryke, to the nutrimente of lyghtes: The second part, is carried in to the
chamber of the lift side, where by the virtue of the heart, it is formed in to
vytal spirit, the third and last part is reserved to the nourysshement of
the hole body, after that it has received of the heart both vital heat and
spirit. And like as from the chamber of the right side, the great master
vain, brings blood thorough the hole body, so from the least chamber the
master pulse brings vital spirit, of the which the liver takes his power,
and facultye, whereby he nourysheth the body and brayn, by his virtue, by which
he gives both felyng and mouyng to the same.

I would not now that any manne should think, that I do defend the error of
Aristotle, which thought that the heart, as he is author of life, so to be the
gyuer both of feeling and mouynge, to the hole body: for that the synowes
grow of the brain, every man having his syghte, may perceive easelye, and
that they give both feeling and mouyng to the body: ye may know if ye take a
dog and tie both his pulses and veins and let him go, and he shall both
feel and run, so long as ye animal spirit lasts, which is all ready in his
synowes, but in case ye tie his synowes, he shall not be able to styre one
foot. This is a very manifest proof, that the heart gives not sense and
mouynge, to the body, yet as I said before, both the brain, and also the
liver, take their power of the heart, for after that the heart has engendered
vytall spirit, part is carried to the liver, and part to the brain. The
liver of his, engenders new spirits, called natural, the which he does
distribute by his veins, thoroghout the body so the nuryshement of the same.

The brain also tourneth those spirits which he received of the heart, in to
other spirits, called animal and these being dispersed amongst the synowes,
is cause both of mouyng and feelyng.

Sythens that I have according to my promise made before, declared by what
means the brain gives sense and mouynge to the body, I will as bryefelye as
I can descrybe the residue of the parts, which I think most necessary to be
known beginning there, where as I left with the heart, which beside his
chambres, has also two ears, the which be grassels made of synowes being
full of wrynkles and foldynges, and they be also called the selles or butteries
of the heart.

I promised before to declare as nere as I could, those parts yt the breast
which is called the myddle bellye, does conteyne, and I have al ready so to my
little power, descrybed both ye heart, the lyghtes and the instruments of the
voice, and brethyng with the parts and couerynges, of the same therefore now
there remains the mydryfe, which in latyne is called Mediastinus. and the
skin, that compasses the rybbes, which in Greek is called (...) and the
heart strings, which in greek is called (...) The mydryfe does deuyde the
breast (...) in length, and makes.ii. cha^bers one on the right side, and an
other on the left side: And because it is a very strong skin, it does
fashyon both veins, pulses and synowes to the breast, and it is tied before to
the brestbone, and behind to the joints of the backebone. The second skin
is that, that is called (...), which covers the rybbes on the insyde, and the
muscles also that be betwyxt the rybbes. Next underneath this is (...), which
the Latyne men call Trausuersum septu^, or p^cordia: we may call it an
overthwart bridge or the hertstrynges, it is made of synowes and flesh,
covered with.ii. fine rymes, made to move the lyghtes, and also to draw in and
let out air, and to separate the lowest belly from the mydle belly, underneath
the hertstrynges, somewhat toward the ryghtside the mawe or paunche, which
before we called the lowest bellye, being round, with a great bottom, and
somthyng narowe toward the left side is fastened to the.xiii. ioynte of the
back bone, and in the same place the wesau^t that before we called the
stomach, is tied to the mawe, which has.ii. mouths, one at the lowest part
of the wesaunt, and the other in the right side of ye mawe or pa^che The mouth
by the which the meat is received into the mawe, does shut the nether part of
the wesaunt, and is called, the hither mouth of the mawe: the mouth that
lets out the meat, shytteth the nether part of the mawe, and is called in
Greek (...), in Latyne Iauitor, in our tung a portar or a keeper of the gate,
and both these mouths (to the intent that the meat and drink may not fall
out at any time vnconcocte) be set in the side of the belly or pauche, which
be fast shut as soon as ever the bellye has received meat, and thereby
natural heat is very much increased within the mawe, being made of synowes
and of flesh, and it has also two cootes, of the which the innermoost, has
more synowes then flesh, and it is very thycke and rough, full of wryncles, by
the which the meat is drawn down and retained. The utter cote is more flesh,
and serves only to expel that, that the belly refuses and has done wtal.
The temperature of the belly is cold and dry, according to the nature of
synowes, whereof it has abu^daunce that it may be delyted with such things as be
convenient and mete for it, and may abhor such as be noyful and hurtful unto
it. I have spoken somewhat brefely of the bellye and mawe, but before we
descrybe the liver, I will first rehearse.ii. cotes or coueringes of the belly,
which (nature by her divine and high sapie^ce) has provided for the defense of
the belly and entrails The first coueryng is called iu latin Omentu^, ye
Grecians do call it (...) our bouchers call it the kell, and it is wouen like a
net, of veins, pulses and senowes, being covered with a great deal of
fat, to the intent that it may hold in, the natural heat, which is in the
mawe and guts, for it covers all the belly from the top to the too, the
next cote or covering the Greeks call (...), which covers not only the
bellye, but also the liver, mylte, and reins, and it grows of the bladder,
being thycker in some place then in some, it tyeth the lowest parts of the
belly to ye back, and does sustain the muscles of the belly, which the Latin
men call Musculos abdominis, upon the which muscules is a great deal of fat,
and then the skin that covers the whole body. Next unto the mawe,
immediately downewarde be the guts and entrayles, the which although they be
all one whole and continual body yet they may be decerned both by their
figure, situation, and action.

The first, which is fastened to the nether mouth of the mawe, is called
Duodenum, because it is.xii. inches long, and it is in the right side, in the
region of the liver. Next unto Duodenum is I eiunium, which is so called
because it is always emptye. For to this gutte there comes much choler from
the liver, and because it of all the rest is next the liver: therefore the
liver draws from it very quycklye by his small veins, such iuise as came
from the stomach before. And from this gutte there comes choler into the
rest, to expel the excrementes. The next is called of Galene (...), which
has many circuites and boughtes, because it should retain the juice longer,
and it does far pass all the rest: joined unto this, is the gutte called
Cecum, which does receive the excrementes and it is called Saccus, because it
is the wydest of all. Then follows (...)* being two cubytes of length, having
diverse boughtes* and compassynges, lest the excrement should fall strayte out:
and in this gutte the excrement takes his color. The last gutte which we
call the fundament begins under the left reyne and is stretched down even
to the very hole in the tail: it is tied to the great back bone, being large
and wide to the intent that the excrement may go down more at ease. Since I have
descrybed the guts and entrayles, I will add somthyng as concerning ye
matter that they be made of. They be made of flesh and sinowes, having broad
stri^ges, by ye which they expel the excrementes. There is a certain skyn mixed
amongst the guts, which is no gutte but a fortress or a stay for ye small
veins which come from ye liver and it is called in Greek (...), and thereupon
all the small veins be called Mesaraice, and it is a fine and subtyle skyn,
made of very small veins gathered on an heap together, amongst the which
there is a lump of flesh, like unto a kernel, which we call the swyt bread.
Underneth ye bastard ribs in ye rightside of ye maw or stomach is ye liver,
whose substance is red flesh, not much unlike co^geled blood being replenished
with veins, which be ye branches of ye great master veins, yt is of ye vein
which is called Porta, and also of yt, that is called Caua vena, we have no
names in our tungue which be propre or peculier to them only, but must be
feign to call them master veins, and in deed so that we understand the
thing, it shall make but little matter for names: howbeit Gallen says, that
the one is called Porta, because that the juice comes through it, from the
stomach to the liver: and the other I think is called Caua, because it is a
great hollow vein, well what so ever it be called, it grows of the liver,
and carries blood from the liver to the heart, and though it to be byg: yet
there grows many fine and small veins, both of it, and of the other, which be
dispersed throughout the whole body of the liver, to the intent that the juice
may more easelye be turned into blood: for the very duty and office of the
liver, is to engendre blood, for the nouryshmente of ye body, and therefore it
is hot and moist according to the nature of blood.

Moreover it is the very flesh of the liver, which does change the juice in
to blood, making it red like unto it self. Although that su^me think the
heart to be the well, and original spring of blood, notwythstandyng I had
rather say as Galene says, that it is the flesh of the liver, which
engenders blood, although the liver receive both vytall heat, and spirit of
the heart, and therefore from the great master pulse, which in greek is
called (...), there comes many little pulses to the liver, bringing with them
vital spirit, but so sone as ye juice is concocte, it is made blood, and
purified in ye mids of the liver (...) receives choler, of the small veins,
in the mids of the liver, while the blood is purifyinge and cleansynge,
which conduyte or way, if it fortune to be stopped, by any manner of chance,
so that the choler can not be separate from the blood, then there follows
hot fyeuers, or else the yelowe Iandies.

On the lift side, the spleen or mylte enbraseth the stomach, which being
black of color, is made of subtyle and rare flesh, and is the same, which
before is called the receptacle of melancholy, it is tied unto the back
about the mids of the bastard ryb and does draw unto it melancholye or
black choler, by a vein which comes from the liver, receyuyng heat of the
heart, to digest the forsaid black choler, by certain pulses annexed unto it.
From the mylte also there is a conduyt to the vppermoste mouth of the
stomach, bringing melancholye thither, partly to draw together the mouth of
the stomach, and partlye to provoke appetyte.

There be.ii. kydneys that be called in latyne. Renes, of the which one is set
underneath the liver toward ye back and the other is set on the other side,
right against ye mylte, they be made of soude and thycke flesh, least they
should be dissolved of the water, that they draw daily from the blood, by two
veins, which be called Mulgentes, and in our tongue, suckynge veins, there
is drawn also, beside the water, su^me blood to the noryshment of the reins
or kydneis, in the mids of the which there is as it were a little pa^ne, into
the which the forsayde kydnies do sweat out the water, which they received of
ye suckynge veins, and in this pan the vryne takes his color, from whe^s
it is brought down, after the concoction had therbefore, by certain conduites
that be called (...) in greek and in latyne, Vrinarii, we may call them the
conduytes of the vryne, from the raynes to the bladdar. The bladdar in man
joins to the taylegutte or fundiment, from whens the neck of it recheth to
the yard, but in women it is set upon the mouth of their woumbe, and therefore
they have both shorter and wyder necked bladdars than men have, and also be
less disesed with stone in that place, It is made of skynnye synowes, and there
cummeth to it, both veins and pulses. the neck only is of flesh, and has
certain turnynges and boughtes, that it may houlde the water more easily,
there is added a muscle to the mouth of the bladder, to the intent yt we may
either letout or retain the water, at our own will and pleasure. But how
small and fine the holes be by the which the water is received into the bladder
may easelye be perceived, because that when it is taken out of any deed body,
that there appears none at all, more than that, which is in the neck, to
let out the urine or water.

Manne surely has great profitte of the bladar, for if that same superfluouse
water, should not be carried away, but be permitted to run to gyther in the
veins, with the blood after that the body were ones fulle, most part of
the members should crack, and break and man should be suffocated or choked.

Therefore the bladder is made for this purpose, to receive the superfluous
watery substance of the blood and reteyne it so long, until the due time of
lettynge of it out, be come.

Now I have descrybed all ye parts of the lowest bellye, so well as I could,
saving the privy parts both of man and woman, which for diverse causes I will
omytte at this time, first because I will give no occasion to youth of
wanto^nes, and then that I will offend no honest ears, in descrybynge them
plainly and seeing my promise was to tuche but certain parts, I think I may
as well omyt them, as a great many that I have spoken nothing of.

The.vi. Chapter.
Of veins, pulses, and synowes.
Veins be co^dytes with thin cotes, which caryeth the thyckest blood,
throughout the body, wherewith it is nouryshed, and they grow all of the liver,
for the master vein (which passes all the other in largeness and wydenesse)
comes from thence. Aristotel thought ye heart to be the author and begynner
of ye veins, but Hypocrates thought otherwise and Galen also (whom we follow)
has evidently confuted Aristotels opinion. Pulses, or arteryes, be conduytes
that grow of the heart, and do carye vital spirit, and some part also of the
fynest blood, therefore it was necessary that they should be both thycker and
stronger, then ye veins, lest the spirit being so fine of substance, might
break out, wherefore nature has enclosed it in.ii. cotes of the which the
inner is.v. times as thyck as the utter, and yet is it as thick as any cote of
ye veins, yt encloseth ye gross and thickest blood: Veins, and pulses be so
nygh cosyns, yt there is no vein in any part of the body, without his pulse:
nor no pulse without his vein, to the intent that the veins may minister
nourishment to the spyrites. And again the spyrites may refresh the blood with
lively heat: and as ye se in a la^pe, ye flame to be nouryshed with oil or
wax, so ye spirit plucketh to him blood out of ye veins, with the which he is
fed with. And here (as me think) nature has showed us a marvelous notable
example of doing one for an other, in this civil life. Synowes grow of the
brain, and also of the marye of the back bone. From whence they bring sense
and voluntary mouynge to all parts of the body. There has been much to do
amongst the old Physicians, whether the synowes have any holownesse or
co^cauitie in the^, to receive the animal spirit, wherewith they give mouyng and
fealing to ye body, or else whether they take their power of the spirit, as the
lute or harp string does of the finger: howbeit, it is now concluded, yt there
is none holowe, but only.ii. which bring spirit to ye eyes, and be called
Optici, and yt the rest do take their power of ye spirits There grow of ye
brain.vii. pair of synowes, of ye which, some be distributed to ye se^ses, and
some to other parts: as to ye stomach or maw, and those yt grow of ye brain
be much fyner and softer tha^ those yt grow of the back, which be not only ye
instrument of sense but also of volu^tary mouyng, and there be of the^.xxx.
pair, which be dispersed every where through all ye body.

The.vii. Chapter.
Of humors.
ALthough that the spryng and well of humors may then best be perceived, when
the manner and way how to nourish the body is delared, yet because we be still
occupied, in descrybynge ye parts of the body, I am not wyllyng to omytte the
differences of humors, which be.viii. in number.iiii. natural and.iiii.
unnatural. The natural is blood, fleume, yellowe color, and black, and the
unnatural is the same also, turned by putrefaction, or else some otherwise, from
their own natyue qualities. As concerning the generation of the natural
humors, I have some deal mentioned before, wherefore I will omyt at this time
to speak or reason any further in that matter, saving ye I put you in
remembrance, that the same food which is received by the wesaunt into the
stomach, for the preserving of the body, is the matter and substance,
whereby, by the virtue of the liver, they be made and engendered.

The.viii. Chapter.
Of blood.
BLood is hot and moist, and the greatest part of yt that nourysheth the
body. For notwythstandynge, that other humors be carried together with the
blood to nourysshe the body, as blood delayed with fleume, both greatly nourysh
such parts yt be cold, and moist, as the brain: and coleryke blood the
lyghtes, and melancholycke blood the bones, and splen: yet the especial part
of the noryshment, is that that is properlye called blood. For the
nouryshmente ought to be sweet, or else delayed with sweet juice, and such is the
blood.

The.ix. Chapter.
Of fleume.
FLeume is a watrysh humor cold and moist, which is begone to be altered into
blood, and is not yet thoroughly co^coct, therefore it is white, thynne, and
unsavory: not fat, nor colored like blood, it serves to mittigate the
outragyous heat of the blood, and nourysheth the blood, making it thin and
being myngled with the blood, conforteth such parts as be flegmatik.

The.x. Chapter.
Of choler.
CHoler is the foam or flower of ye blood, which is made of the hottest and
driest parts of ye blood or juice, after that it is boiled, wherefore it is
also hot and dry, and of a bitter taste, and therefore it is called of Galen
(...), which in latin is Amarus and in Englysh bitter. Natural choler is as well
red as yelowe, and when it is mixed with the blood, it opens ye veins, and does
norysh cholerike parts, as the lights: nor it is not carried al with the
blood, but the more part of it is reserved in the bladder, under ye mydle globe
of the liver, to cleanse the lowest bellye, or entrayles: ye may, (and ye will)
call them guts.

The.xi. chapter.
Of melancholye or black choler.
Black choler or melancholy is a thycke terrestrial humor that in the blood
falls down to ye botome, very like unto old red wine, that is thick and
black, and it is cold and dry: part of it is carried with the blood, both to
make it thycker and also to help, and increase the power rete^tyue, in the
veins and other places where it comes, and also to nourysh the melancholyke
parts, as the bones and splen.

The.xii. Chapter.
Of the unnatural humors.
NOughty humors be called unnatural: and they be made naught, or corrupted
each of them two manner of ways, either because the substance of them without
the admixtio^ of any other, does degenerate: or else, that they be myngled,
with such as be already putrifyed and corrupted: blood is made naught, and
goes from his kind when he putrifieth in the veins, because the pores be
shurt, or else when he is myngled with some other evil humor, as in the dropsy,
where he is myxt with water.

The.xiii. Chapter.
Of noughty phlegm or unnatural.
Unnatural phlegm is a raw wateryshe humor, cold and moist, redoundynge in
that body, where as is a weak concoction, and it is sumtyme much thinner than
spyttle, that falls from the mouth or nose. There is an other kind of
naughtye and unnatural phlegm, which is salt in taste, that comes of the
mixture of choler with phlegm, which is plentiful in such bodies, as feed for
the most part of salt meats.

The xiiii. Chapter.
Of unnatural yelowe choler.
YElowe choler, degenerateth from his nature, when it is bourned black, and is
made thycke and bytynge, or when sumother humor is mixed with it as watrye
phlegm, and this is called citrine choler, Galene calls it pale choler,
because it is of the color of lead. But if it be thick phlegm wherewith it is
myngled, than it is called of ye latynes, Uitilina bilis because it is like in
color, to the yolke of an egg, and of this kind of choler, for the most
part are engendered all fyeuers tertian.

The.xv, chapter.
Melancholy, or black choler unnatural.
MElancholye or black choler, is made vnnaturalle, when other humors, or
else it self, is burned as dry as a^^hes. For Hypocrates says that both
blood and red choler will be turned soon into Melancholye, when for lack of
air, they be smothered in the veins, and the stoppyng also of the pores, does
make a body which all redye is sanguine or cholerycke of nature, melancholye.
And hereof comes so many kinds of madness. For if Melancholy, be delayed
with a little blood, it makes a man merye mad, if it be mixte with a great
deal of red choler, tha^ it makes him stark wood, as Hercules and Ajax was.
But if it be mixte with phlegm it makes him slothful without all mean or
measure.

If melancholye it self, without the admixtion of other humors be burned,
than it makes him sad and solitarye, as Bellerophon, which as Homer says,
being full of sorrow and care, forsook all company, and wandered in desolate
feyldes solitarye al alone.

How be it the same humors has not like effect in every body, for in
sum they are not so outeragious, as in sum: Homer him self dyed for sorrow,
that he could not dissolve a certain hard question which was propounded unto
him: and the old philosofer Haracletus, being borne an Ephesian, did always
lamente with weeping, the manyfolde miseries of man's life, which as
Theophrastus says, was of nature melancholye, because he lived solitarye
alone, and wrote confused and obscure things, well at the last through his
fylthy and unclean living, he caught the dropsy, wherefore trustyng to dry up
the water that was betwyxt his skin and flesh, commanded his body to be
anointed with doung of oxen, and laid abroad in the hot sun, from whence
he was brought dead. Yet Democritus madness was so^mewhat more pleasant,
which laughed always at men's folyshnes, whereby he prolonged his life an
hole hundred years.

Empedocles was so outeragious mad, that he lepte alive in to the burning
fire of the hyl Ethna, but Sophocles madness was much sweter, the which did
ease the incommodities of old age, with making of verses. Marius when he was
mad, fantasied nothing but fighting. But Lucullus being mad, was merry,
full of game and sport.

The.xvi. Chapter.
Of Spirits
Spirit is a subtyle vapor of the blood, which by the virtue of the heart,
gives power to the body, to do all manner of works and actions, and although
there is but one well or spryng of all spirits, yet they be diserned by their
places. Vital spirit is a flambe in the heart, made of blood, carrying vital
heat to ye other parts: the pulses be made to carye this spirit, whose
dignity and worthiness may be esteemed hereof, that every part of the body has
need of vital and lively heat, to ye conservation of their substance And this
vital or lyuelye blood, is preserved and kept, by that same little sparc^e of
vital spirit, which in old time wise men did so much marvel at, that su^me
thought it to be man's soul, and sum the instrumente of man's soul. And
Aristotle says that death is nothing but the quenching and putting forth of
lyuelye heat, and thereof it comes that so many precepts be given of the
physicians for the conservation and instauratio^ of spirits, the which
doubtless be corrupted and extincte, either with evil diet, orels with disease,
and sickness, or with the weakness of ye heart, in mouynge affections, or finallye
with immoderate labor.

The.xvii. Chapter.
Of animal spirits.
Spirit animal, is a spirit that by virtue of the brain, is made bryghter
and convenient to the works of the senses, and also to move and stir the
sinowes. For I houlde well with them, that affirm constantly, the heart to be
the first authoure and begynner of spirit, and afterward, to take a new
nature of the brain.

And in deed there appears a certain affinity between the vital and animal
spirit: For look with what spirits the heart is best tempered, the same in
the brain, bring forth most noble and excellent affectes, how be it for all
yt there is differences between them, because they have diverse offices and
effects. For the vital spirit ministers heat to the body, the animal
spirit styrreth up the senses, and moves the synowes. Some add unto these
another kind of spirit, called natural, which nourysheth the blood in the
liver: But Galene douteth of it, saying, (...), id est Si spiritus naturalis
est aliquid, which is as much to say, as if the natural spirit be any
thing. For although it can not be chosen, but that there must be spirit in
the liver, yet it is brought thither by ye pulces, which is a token that it
comes from the heart, but I will determyne or constitute nothing of this
matter: leaving every man to his own judgment.

The.ii. book.
The first chapter.
Of natural powers or actions.
Whosoever will perfytely know, how many natural powers is in every body, he
must dyligently search out the natural works of the same body, for every
work comes of some action, and also every action of some cause, for whiles
ye infant is within his mothers womb, as yet imperfect) all his parts is but
one natural work, procedynge of a natural action called generation but after
that it is brought forth, an other natural work is to bring the same to their
full grows, which is done by the faculty called auction, and that they may
long continue and endure, nutrition only does make and bring to pass.
Howbeit, generation is not one simple natural action, as the other be, but
rather co^pounde, of alteration and formation. For how could either been,
synowe or vein be made without any alteration of their substance: or how
could they be well figured or proporcioned, except they were first out of all
fassyon, and order. Auction is an amplification or encreaseme^t, in length,
breadth, and depenesse, of al parts of ye body, and ye child, whiles he is in
his mothers womb, is destitute neither of this, nor of nutrition: yet
generation has tha^ ye chief rule and dominion, and the other be as handmaydes
unto it: but after it is delivered (until such time as it com to ye full
growth) auction has governance, and alteration and nutrition, be but
inferioure powers. Then as I said before, it apperteyneth only to the power or
virtue called auctio^, to encrese in le^ght, breadth and depenes, al such parts
as by help of generation has already their due figure and fassion. But how
every part is made bygger, it ca^ not better be known, then by an example:
children be wo^t to take the bladders of oxen and swyne and blow them full of
spirit, rubbyng them very much before ye fire, that they may take heat
without any burning or harm otherwise: and when they have stretched or
drawn them out aboundauntlye, they blow them full of spirit again,
stretchynge them out more then they did before: and after they rub them, and
chafe them still as is aforesaid until such time as they think the^ large
enough, but in this chyldysshe work, look how much the insyde of the foresaid
bladders is made wyder so much the bladder is thynner, and if that were not, I
might well say that children could make (as well as nature) little bladders,
great.

Howbeit, the wysest man in ye world can not do that: so much the less
children: For that is only propre unto nature. Wherefore it is very euydent
that nothing can be increased as it ought to be, without nouryshment: and they
only be made longer, brother and deper at one time, which grow naturallye:
or else if they be stretched along, they decay in breadth nor there is any thing
in the world without breakyng, may be stretched forth every way at one time.
For that pertayneth to nature alone: and therefore auction is such a thing as
can not possibly be without nouryshment: whereof now by gods grace, we entende
to speak.

The, ii. Chapter.
Of nutrition.
NUtrition is the making like of that which nourysheth, to that, that is
nourysshed: and in nutrition, there is alteration, but not like as was in
generation. For in generation that is made flesh, which before was none: but
in nutrition, the meat or nouryshment is made like to that that is nourysshed:
therefore the one may be called (and not without a cause) generation, and the
other assimulation: but because we have spoken suffycie^tly of these.iii.
natural faculties and because no living creature neadeth any other having how
he may be increased, and also having, how he may long continue, it shall not
need to rehearse any mo natural powers. But again, if a man cast in his mind
saying to him self, he has mentioned as yet, no action of the stomach,
entrails, liver, nor of any other part of the body, he shall think this, but
the beginning and Proheme, of more profitable and better learning. Generation,
auction, and nutrition, be the first fountaynes or sprynges all the natural
works: and yet they are so perfyte of them selves, that without external
help of other, or (at the leest amongst them selves) mutual service, they
can almooste do nothing. And as concerning what generation and auction de
need we have spoken before: but what is required unto nutrition, we entende now
to declare: for I shall be thought about to show (as well the very instruments
prepared for concoction of the nouryshment) as also the powers and faculty in
the^, to be made for the same purpose. For seeing that assimulation is the
only action of nutrition, and saying that nothing can be made like, which
in quality differs, or be contrary. Therefore every living creature can not
be nourysshed with every meat, neither can be nouryshed incontinent, with
such as afterward at more leisure, peradventure he may: and by reason of
this necessity (not only man) but brute beasts also, endued with life, have
neade of mean instruments, to the alteryng of the nouryshment. for that
yelowe may be made red, or red yelowe, one simple alteration or change, is
suffycient: but ye white may be made black, or black white: all the
alterations or chaungynges which be betwyxte black and white: be required
before, so that yt is softest can not be made at the first hardest: neither
that that is hardest, foftest. Then if this be true, how shall a bone be made of
blood, except the blood first be made thycke, and afterward white, or how
shall blood be made of bread, except the bread change his color before, from
white to red. For it is no great matter, to make flesh of blood: for so
soon as it is ones made so thycke, that it can not ru^ne, it is by and by
flesh, but that the same may be made a boue, it must both have long time,
and much alteration, and this is one cause why there be many instruments
provided of nature, for the alteryng of the meat: another cause is the nature
of the excrementes. For as we can not be nouryshed with grass, although bestes
are nouryshed with it, so we may be nouryshed with roots, but nothing so well
as with flesh.

For our nature may change, or alter it easily in to good blood, but in a
root, that that is convenient to norysshe the body, and may be changed
though very hardely and not with out great concoction, is but a very little,
for the most part of it, is full of excrementes, and does pass the
instruments of concoction, wherefore there is but a small portion of it drawn
up in to the veins, of ye which al is not profitable, for ye body, wherefore
nature did lack another separation of such excrementes as be in ye (...) that
nature has ordained only for nutrition, which as I said before, is the
assimilation or making like of that that norysheth, to that which is
nouryshed, the which to be done as there must needs go before, agglutination
or adhesio^, so before agglutination, there must of necessity, be apposition,
or putting to of the nouryshment, to that that is noryshed.

For after that the juice is fallen out of the veins, first it is dispersed
abroad, and by and by, it is joined or put unto that part, which shall be
noryshed, and afterward fastened, or glued to the same, and last of al made
like. And than it may very well be called nouryshment, and not before, But yt
there is difference between assimulation and agglutination, it is very evident
in that kind of scurfe, which of the Latyns is called viti, ligo, we call it
the Morphewe.

And also yt kind of dropsy which in greek is named (...) declare a certain
difference between admixtion and agglutination. For this kind of dropsy,
cu^meth not for lack of humiditie, as consumptions do, seeing that their
flesh which is troubled with this dropsy, is as weete, as if it had be
swylled in water, which causes that the noryshment can not cleue, because it
can neither be made dry enough nor thycke like glue, which comes only, of
natural heat.

In the Morphewe, which in greek is called (...), and in latyne Vitiligo,
there is agglutination, but there lacks assimulation, wherefore it is very
evident, that as we said before in nutrition, there must first be
adiunction, and then agglutination, and fynallye assimilation: and properlye
that is named nutrimcutum and in our tongue, nouryshment which has noryshed all
ready, wherefore that same that is in the morphew, or that that is in the
dropesie, can not well be called norysshment, because they have not noryshed as
yet, and of this fasshyon that that is in the veins, and also that which is
in the stomach, yea and all good meats may be called nutrimenta, or in
englysh norysshementes, because they will nouryshe at the length, if they be
well digested, and hereof it is that Hyppocrates says in his book, that he
writes of dyete. Nutrimentum quod nutrit Nutrimentum quod est, veluti
nutrimentum, nutrimentum, quod est nutriturum. which is as much to say as
nourysshement that does nourysshe altedye, and norysshmente that is like
rysshement, and norysshement, that hereafter will noryshe.

For that that already is made like, Hyppocrates does call nutrimente, but
that which is but put unto, or that which is fastened only, and not made
like, he names it to be like nutriment, and all that which is in the veins
or mawe, he calls nutrimente in time to come, because if it be well digested,
it will norysshe hereafter. Wherefore now I think it very euydentlye proved,
that noryshment is the making like of that that nouryssheth, to that which is
nourysshed.

The third chapter.
Of such faculties or virtues, as nature has furnyshed every part with,
seruyng to nutrition.
THere be.iiii. powers of faculties, ye may if ye will call them virtues,
which is in every part, that is either nourysshed it self, or serves for
the nourysshment of other, of the which the first is named attracti^e the
second retentyue, the third concoctyue, and the fowerth and last ex pulsyue.
If nature had not endued ever sins the beginning, all the nutrityue parts of
every living creature, with these.iiii. virtues: it had not be possible either
for men or beasts, to have continued alive.x. days. For if neither God, nor
nature took care of us, and if we were also destitute of all art and
prouidens, being ruled with the sudden momentes of our substance only,
having no facultye or virtue, that could draw such things unto it as
should be mete for it, nor any that could put away or expel things
noyfull, or such as were hurtful unto it, or that could altre and fassyon, or
glewe, such as should nourysh it, I can not think, but we should be thought
foolysh, if we should despute of any natural action, and much foolysher if we
speak of any animal action, yea or of our hole life, either. For it shall not
be possible for any creature that has so many diverse parts, set so far
one from an other, to live or continue a very short time: if he lack ye powers
aforesaid. For first, if the attractyue virtue were not, there could be no
admixtion: if there could be no admixtion, there could ensue no agglutination,
and without agglutination, there could never be any assimulation, without the
which nutritio^ can not be had, and whether anything could live not nourished,
that I leave to your judgment.

The.iiii. Chapter.
Of the power or virtue attractiue.
THe power attractiue is a virtue which being in every part, seruyng for
nutrition, does draw unto it things of like qualities, and such as be mete
and convenient for it, as the adama^t stone draws yro^, the iette stone
chafe, or straw. How be it, peradventure some defending the Epicure and his
train, will say and constauntlye affirm, that there is no such power in
stones, attributynge the drawing up of the iron, or chafe unto other causes,
as the Epicure did to his little mottes. The which opinyon, because it is
very foolysshe, and has been confuted of diverse noble Philosophers, but
especially of Galene the most excellent Phisitio^ and Philosopher, (I except
always Hipocrates) that ever was, I will not ones touch or meddle with all:
partlye, because I can say nothing in it, which is not said before of them,
but chefely that I will not be so arrogant or proud to meddle with it after
Aristotle and Galene (as who should say) I trusting ouermoche in my self,
could find somethynge to say against the Epicure, more then they could.

Therefore whosoever delyteth to know parsytely the Epicures opinyon, let him go to
Galenes first book of natural facultyes, and there he shall be satisfied. Yet
this I darre say, that the Epicure with all his adherentes, is shamefullye
deceived.

For, not only stones have power to draw things of like qualities, but also
medicines, insomoche that some will draw out thorns, which have lain.iii.
or.iiii. days within the flesh and some (which is much to be maruayled at)
will draw the poison of a snake only, and other some the poison of a tode,
and in such men as have short necks, and wide throtes we se oftentimes the
meat drawn from their jaws, before it be half chawed: what is it that
draws the meat so greadelye? if there be no power attractyue? neither in the
mawe nor in the wesaunt: and how could the watrye substance be separated
from the blood, if there were no attractyue power in the reins or kidneys, or
if there were no attractyue power in ye bladder, or the gall, why should it
not be filled rather with water then with choler? saying that water, is more
fine and subtyle then choler is. Wherefore I dare conclude with Galen, that no
part of any living creature, being nourished, does lack this power or virtue
named attractyue.

The.v. Chapter.
Of the power or virtue retentyue.
THe power retentyue is a virtue which retayneth that, that the faculty
attractyue has drawn. For if that juice that is already drawn, should not
rest there, whyther it is drawn: but should be carried to some other part,
still chaungynge his place, it were not possible yt there might ensue either
agglutination or assimulation, which is the very end wherefore nature has
endued every body with this power or virtue, that of the very action or
office, is called in Latyne Retentiua virtus, and in our tung retention, or else
ye virtue rete^tyue which in some parts of ye body is so euydent, yt it needs
no demo^stration, for it may be perceived by senee: and in other some it may
better be known by reason and cogitation then by sense, as in a woman, how is
the infant retained.ix. months, in her womb, if there be no virtue retentyue
there, and that the meat, is retained in the stomach or mawe, until such time
as it is altered and co^cocted, every man may know yt will take a dog, or any
other brute beast, and feed him, and tha^ after he has rest an hour, ryp his
mawe, for look what ye fed him with, ye shall find it there vnconcoct, which is
an evident proof that there is some virtue there yt reteineth it. But peaduenture
some will say that it is retained because the nether mouth of the stomach is
very narowe. Then how fortuneth it that the stomach does not only retain
meat, but drink also, which for his slyppernesse and subtillitie, would pass
throughout a very little hole, and not drink only, but also all manner of
decoctions and sorbitions, as myske wine, mead, with such other. And in such
men's stomakes as be weak and feeble, all decoctions and liquyde things (for ye
most part) do swym long above in the higher mouth of the stomach, so much
the less they pass through straight way, after they be received and taken.
And that this is true, eueryman may know by ye belches and crying in their
bellyes after drink or any like thing: ye same is also manifestlye proved by
their vomyting.ii. hours, yea sometime hole vi. after they have eaten, or
dronken.

The.vi. Chapter.
Of concoction, or the virtue concoctiue.
COncoction is a mutation or an alteration of the meat, into his substance
that is nouryshed.

And this kind of concoctyng, dyffereth as much from the alteration of the
meat into the juice, as nutrition from the chaungyng of the juice into blood.
For there be many kinds of concoctions, and the first is in the mawe or
stomach, where as ye meat is altered, and turned into juice, the next is in
the liver, where as it is made of juice, blood. The third is in the veins,
where as ye blood is prepared, for the nourysshmente of the whole body. The
fourth and last, is in the parts, where as it is made flesh, or at leest
like unto that, that is nouryshed. And man's body may very well be compared to
a Princes house, where as is kept daily a great many of tables, at diverse times
of the day, so in man's body, all be not fed at ones, but sum wait till
the other have done, as the stomach liver and heart, be first fed, and
than the veins, after the which, every part, as he is best able, so he is
served before the other, for as it is a common saying, he that worst may shall
hold the candell, so in man's body the weakeste part goes ever to the
worst, yet it chaunseth sum time that the weaker plucketh from the stronger
as the stomach from the liver, when the liver is full of meat and the stomach
is empty and has none. For it is no matter for a boy, to take apples or nuttes
from a man which has more than he can hold in his hands: But if they be
both loded a like, than I think it impossible for the weaker to take any
thing from the stronger, by violence. And look as the weakest has lest part
of yt that is good, so he has enough of excrementes, and of that that is
naught, and thereof it cummeth that the utter skin of our body does receive
all the excrementes which afterward breaks forth in byles or scabbes, for
if the virtue expulsive were as strong in it, as in other parts, why should
it be more laded with excrementes, then the rest be? how be it nature has
made it a receptacle for the excrementes of all the hole body, therefore it
has neither animal nor vital action, but only serves to the use before
said.

The vii. chapter.
Of the virtue expulsyue.
Even as the attractyue virtue draws unto it things convenient, even so ye
power expulsyue, expulseth from it things noyfull or hurtful, and this may
be evidently perceived in the example aforesaid of the woman going with
child, for so long as every thing about the child frames well, so long
the power expulsive rests, as there were none such. But in case any thing be
amiss, so that nature dispayreth to bring it to good pass or effect, then
forth with all it is expelled, which the virtue expulsive only does, and none
other.

If this be not sufficient, to prove that there is a facultye or power in
every part, which does expel from it things hurtful, I would ye told me what
it is, that in the mawe parts the excrement from the good juice, or in the
liver, the water from the blood. Wherefore I may iustelye think, that nature
passes all the artifycers in the world. For Praxitiles or Phideas, which in
their time were most excellent, did but trym their images only without, leuyng
the innersyde very raw and rude, without al work manshyppe, because they
could not come to every part of it. But nature which does extend to every
part of the body, trimmeth the innerside more gorgious than the outsyde
making every part of bone, bone: and every part of flesh, flesh: keeping
in every part, due and just proportion, and furnyshyng them with most noble
and excelent virtues, faculties and powers. Moreover neither Phideas nor
Praxitiles, no nor yet Apelles could make of wax, Iuerye or gold, nor of
gold wax. For every one of these, tarying ever sins his first generation, in
his own figure, and shape, saving for the workmanship that he has on the
vtterside is made an image, where as nature is always full of variety, or else
all the parts of man's body, should be only blood.

The.viii. Chapter.
Of the prouokyng of appetyte.
APpetite is provoked in the higher mouth of the maw, when the parts being
very mouche wasted, does lack nouryshement, and endeuoreth to draw of the
veins, the veins of the liver and the liver of ye stomach or mawe, the mawe
of his over mouth, which is drawn together, and vehemently desires meat.
This drawyng to gyther comes of the melancholye. which is brought thither by
a vein coming from the milte, and of this fasshyon hunger or appetyte is
styrred up and provoked, if it be long unslaked, it may turn to farther in
conuenience. For in such case always the liver fylleth the stomach, with
excrementes, and thereof it cummeth that many me^nes stomakes, be good
about.viii. of the clock in the morand at ten or.xi. though they be still
fasting, have lust to eat nothing. Sum think that hunger comes not as I
have descrybed, but yt there is a peculyer power in the nutrityue parts, as in
the stomach and liver which do provoke it, as in fysshes that be called
pykes, when they follow their pray, sumwhat gredely, they be so moved by
very feruente desire, to overtake it, that their stomach ryseth up to their
mouth, in the which example, the nature of gluttons is very well painted as
I thyncke, and truly for the most part they be rauenars, and great eaters,
which has short necks and wide mouths.

The, ix. Chapter.
Of the diversity of meats and drynkes.
IT is very profitable, for every man, as well for them that be hole, as for
those, that be sick to know ye dyuersite of meats and drynckes. For such as
be whole, to the end that they, knowing the right use of them, may keep
their health stylle. and such as be sick, may recover again their
pristinat estate and sanitye.

Wherefore I entende to declare, as bryeflye as I can, what difference I have
(by long observation, and partelye by mine own experyence) marked in meats,
and drynckes.

First ye shall understand, that all bread corn, is of great power and
strength: I call that strongest, that nouryssheth most. Also all.iiii. footed
bestes that be brought up tame, in the house, and be daily used for mente, and
every great best, as gootes, hearts, swyne, oxen, and sheep, and also every
great bird or foul, as goose, swanne, pecocke and crane and moreover honye
and chese, how much less it is to be marueyled at, if that kind of bread,
that the old ancient Romans used, were of great nouryshme^t, seeing that it
was made of wheat, fat, honey, and chese. Howbeit in the myddle form, and
in a lower degree of nouryshmentes be numbered, all those herbs, of the which
we eat the roots, and of.iiii footed beasts, the conye and hare: and all
wild foul, exceptynge neither hens nor capons. Also all fyshes yt can not
well suffer salt, nor can be bryned hole. In the lowest kind or form of
nouryshmentes, is reckened all manner of sallettes, and whatsoever grows in a
little stauke, as cucu^mers, gourdes, or capers, and such like: and apples,
olyues, and also cokles. But although we have distributed the whole kinds
in.iii. parts, yet some that be of one kind, dyffer very much one from an
other. For one is either stronger or weaker tha^ an other. For there is more
nouryshment in flesh, then in any other meat and wheat is stronger, and
nouryssheth more then myll, and myll more then barley: and of whete, the
stro^gest and hartyest is that, yt we call rye: in latin it is called Siligo
next in strength is the mele, having nothing taken from it: weakest of all is
fine wheat flower, and beans also be of stronger nouryshment then pease. And
of roots, the rape roots nourishes more then either the pasnepe, or
radysshe. And of herbs, beetes be much stronger then lettuse: and offrute,
grapes fygges, and nuttes, be stronger tha^ such as properly be called apples:
and also of those birds which be of the myddle order: they be stronger that
seek their meat on their feet, then they that fly abroad, and of such as
fly continually abroad, the byggest be the strongest nouryshmente, and their
flesh is lyghter that live in the water, tha^ they that live in the land. But
amongst the.iiii. footed beasts, hogs flesh is lyghtest, and beaffe
hardest: and also of wild beasts, ye byggest be of the strongest nutrime^t Of
those fysshes that be in the myddel order, the strongest is lynge, and such as
be salted, then tenche, carpe, hadocke, codlynges, and whytinges after these,
gurnardes, pikes, roches dace, perches, and gudginges. And there is not only
difference in ye kinds of beasts, but also in them selves, as in their age
and certain parts, and in ye te^perature of ye wether, and country where they
be brought up and bred: For every sucking beast of.iiii. feet, nourishes less
tha^ such as suck not: also fysh in the mydle age, which be not come as yet
to their full bigness, norisheth not so much as they yt be full grown. And of
lamb, or kydde, the purtenaunce, is of less strength, then the other parts
be: and therefore they may be put in the myddle order. Of birds, the necks and
wings, be of lyghtest nouryshment as concerning the ground: that wheat is
better that grows on an hill, then that yt grows abroad in the field, and
fysshe bredde amongst the stones, is lyghter nouryshment then that yt is bred
in the sand: and in the sand, lyghter tha^ in the mudde. And therefore such
as be breedde in fennes and standing pooles be harder of digestion, then ye
same bredde in ru^nyng waters, or amongst stones: and yt is lighter and
easlyer of co^coction, which lives in the deep, tha^ yt that lives in ye
shallowe. And wild bestes be of lyghter flesh, then tame: and that yt is bred
in moist wether, is lighter, tha^ that yt is bred in dry wether. And morouer
such as be fat, be better tha^ such as be lene: though they be of one kind:
and they that be fresh, be easelyer of digestyon then they that be salt: and
new be better tha^ stale or old: and that that is sodden better then that
that is either roasted or fried. Hard eggs be of a very strong nouryshment,
and soft and rere, very weak. Of drynkes, ale is the stro^gest feder: and
tha^ milk: and wine that is made of the mulberye, and all old wynes: And
therefore such as be of weak natures should never drink any old wine: and of
all drink, water nourysheth leest: and that is strongest ale, which is made of
stro^gest malte: and those wynes, whose grapes grow in fat ground, are of
much stronger nouryshment then the wine of such as grow in lean. Of waters,
the lightest, is rain water, and next unto it is the water of a fair spryng
or fou^tayne, then of a runnyng floude, and after of a well, then snowewater,
and worse then snowewater is frose^ water: and worse then frosen water is the
water of a standing poole: and worst of all is fennewater, and for such as be
dilligent serchers, it is easy to know the nature of waters, for the best is
lyghtest, and if there be two like in weight, the fynest and best is that, yt
will sonest be hot, and sonest cold. And for the most part, this is
always true, that every thing, as it is of strongest substance, so it is
hardest to be digested, or altered into good juice, but where it can be
altered, it nouryssheth more then that, that is much fyner. Therefore, there
must be an order observed in these meats, and drynkes aforesaid.

As he that has all his natural powers and actions lusty, and is himself of
a strong and hard complexion, leadynge his life in great labor, may
safelye eat the strongest meats: but he that is of a weak body, and lives
ydelye, must be fed with the weakest meat, and with that, yt is easy of
digestion, and will sonest be turned into good juice and blood.

The.x. chapter.
Of the diverse qualities in meats
NEither be these only the differences, for some meats breed evil juice, and
some good, and some make much grosser fleume then other some do, and other
some be more mete for the stomach, then other some be: and some be full of
wind, and other some be not, and some engender heat: and again, there be
other some breed cold.

Some putrifieth easily in ye stomach, and some will not putrify at al: some make
leuse the belie, and some bind ye same: some provoke vryne: and some
restrayneth it: some causes sleep, and some, styrryng up the senses,
provoke watch. The which, all ought to be known, because one profyteth the
body, or the health, more then an other does.

The.xi. Chapter.
What things have good juice.
Wheat, rye, and wheat broth, and ryesse, be of good juice and be gentle, and
very mete for the stomach, making it moderately hot: barley broth, some call
it prysane, milk, and soft chese, and all birds of the myddle order, with
some of the bygger, as feysau^t, pecocke, curlewe, and capon, breed or
engendre very good juice, and of fysshes, such as be betwyxt tender, and
hard, as mullettes, pykes, gurnardes and perches. And of herbs, as lettuce,
mallows, cucumers, and gourdes: of eggs, such as be reere and soft: of
fructe, all that be sweet and also sweet wine, and to conclude all fat or
chammye flesh.

The.xii. Chapter.
What things have euel juice.
MIll, barlye, and all poudered flesh, and also all salt fyshe, and old
chese, and the grain like pease, called fytches, certain rotes also, as rapes
and radysshe, and moreover, beetes, thyme, onyons, garlyke, hysope, rue,
fenell, cumyue, dyll, musterd? seed, lyekes, and also myltes, kydneys, and
entrayles almost of every great beast, bredeth evil juice and noughty blood,
furthermore all sower and tarte fruit, and to be brefe al things that be
sharp, tarte, or bitter, and almost all fysshe that live in fennes, lakes, or
muddye pondes, or such as we call ouergrowen fysshe.

The.xiii. chapter.
What things of their nature be gentle, and mylde, and again what be keen and
sharp.
SUppynges, brothes, ptisans both of barley, and also of wheat, and all fat
flesh, and clammye, the which almost is in every beast yt is tame, and
brought up within the house, but especilly in pigs and calves feet, and in
lambs, kyddes or calves heads, and also the brains of the same, as well as of
birds, be gentle and mylde, but all things that be sower, or bitter, and all
that be salt, also garlyke, onions, rue, leekes, cucumers, beetes and all
herbs, for the most part be sharp and keen.

The xiiii. chapter.
What meats make thycke fleume, and what makes thin.
REere eggs, ptisanes of wheat rise, and ptisanes of barley, and milk, and
all clammye meats make thycke fleume, and al salt meats, sharp meats, and
tarte meats engender thynne fleume.

The.xv. Chapter.
What meats be good for the stomach.
ALl sharp and rarte meats, and such also as be lyghtely poudered, be very
mete and wholesome for the stomach, and besides these, unleavened bread, and
rise, or ptisans and all wyldefowle, having white flesh, and of domestical
beasts, beaffe has no fellow.

Of other beasts, the lean is better for the stomach then the fat: and
beside these, swynes feet and ears and the woumbes of barrayn best. Of
herbs, lettuce, pasneppes, and sodden cucumers. Of fruit cheries mulberies,
tender pears, orenges, and quynces, beside these steped grapes, reere eggs,
pineapples, white olyues soked in sharp vinegre, orels black: that were not
gathered before they were through ripe, or else have been kept in sweet wine,
be very meet and convenient for the stomach.

The xvi. chapter.
What be euel for the stomach.
All hot meats, all salt meats, all manner of potages, and al things, that
be very sweet, and all fattye meats, all suppynges, and leuened bread and
also oil that is made of myll or barley, and salades yt be sawesed with salt
and oil: moreover almaner of these milk, green fygges, and dry, and
finallye all that engender wind, do greatly hurt the stomach. Here it may
be perceived, that all meats which engender good juice, be not good for the
stomach, no nor yt that is good for the stomach, therefore bredeth good juice
because it is holsom for the stomach.

The.xvii. Chapter.
What meats make the bellye swell, and what delay the same.
AL manner of corn, and all manner of sweet meats, and fat meats, and
potages and new wynes also, make the bellye swell, and of herbs, garlyke,
onions and lekes, and all manner of roots, except pasnepes, and read carretes,
also both dry and grene fygges, but of both the grene by ye worse, morouer
grene grapes, and al manner of nuttes, milk also and chese, and all meat that
is eaten raw, provoke the swellyng of the bellye. Birds yt have white
flesh, and all manner of venerie, and all fysshe of the myddle order, and al
manner of shel fyshe, and beside these rere or soft eggs, and old wine make
no manner of swellynge in the bellye, Where note that fenelle seed and anyse
seed, do greatly ease and help the swellynge of the bellye.

The.xviii. chapter.
What things engender either heat or cold,
PEper, salt, flesh sodden in pottage, garlyke, onyons, dry fygges, salt
fysshe, and wine, do engender heat, lettuce, and the most part of herbs
eaten raw, as sucorye, endyue, borage, violet leaves, man dragon and pople.
Also coriander, cucumers, and gourdes sodden. Of fruits, mulberies, cheries,
sour apples and tender pears, and specially vine egre, taken either as meat
or drink do augment cold.

The.xix. chapter.
What things putrifye easelye in the mawe, and what do not.
LEuened bread, ye and all manner, of bread, yt is not made of wheat and milk,
and honey, and all manner of chese and wynes, either yt be over sweet, orels over
thynne, do easily putrify in ye maw or stomach Howebe it unleavened bread, and
all wild foul, of the myddle order, beoffe also, and all hard and lean
flesh, and all salt meats, and sharp wynes, will continue long without any
putrefaction.

The.xix. chapter.
What things do leuse the belly.
Unleavened barley bread, lettuce, purslane, dyl, onions, garlyke, mallows,
beetes, cucumers, cheries, mulberies, raysins, dry fygges, oysters, muscles,
and all manner of shell fysshe, but especially, broth made with them, also young
and tender fysshe, and fat flesh in potage, or else boiled, or such birds
as swymme, and besides these, milk, raw honey, sweet wine, and all that that is
drunk luke warm, and all fat or sweet meats, do make the bellye laxatyue.

The.xx. Chapter.
What things bind the bellye.
RYe bread unleavened, hard roasted eggs, little birds, but especyally such as
be tame brought up in the house, and uses not to fly abroad: also crane,
hare, and gootes flesh: and beside these, beaffe, and hard chese, and honey,
yt has sodden long on the fire, peers also that be not ripe, and specially
such as be called rollyng peers. Also orynges and quynces, white olyues, and
wine yt is tart and sharp: and finally al things yt be hard, lean, tart, or
sharp, and of flesh that yt is roasted, sooner tha^ that that is sodden, have
power to bind the belly.

The.xxi. Chapter.
What things provoke vryne.
AL things (for ye most part) that smell fraga^tlye, help to provoke urine:
mynt also and rue, dyll, anysseede, parcelye seed, and fenellseede, besides
these, time, coriandre, onyons, and wormwood, thynne wynes also, and both
round and long pepper, also musterd seed, and pyneapples.

The. xxii. chapter.
What things provoke sleep. and what cause watch.
LEttuce, pople, mandragon, mulberyes, and garlyke, provoke sleep. Time, rue,
hysope and vnyons styre up the senses, whereby they cause watch.

The end of the. ii. book.
The. iij. book,
The first Chapter.
Of exercise.
Exercise is necessary for ii. causes, the one to pourge the body of
excrementes, and the other to change it from a worse state to a better. For
saying that every labor is not an exercice, but only that ye is veheme^nt,
these. iii. must needs co^seque^tly follow exercise. Hardness of ye limes, or
of such parts as be exercised, encrese of natural heat, and swifter moving of
ye spirits. These profits exercise brings with him, of necessity beside a
great many other yt come of these, as of ye hardness of ye parts the body is
made both apt to endure much labor without pain, and also quicker, redier,
and finally stronger to ye same Of ye increase of natural heat, ye power or
virtue attractiue is quickened in all parts serving to nutrition, and moreover
the alteration, or concoctio^ in the same is made much stronger, by reason
whereof the body is nouryshed much better, and more luckely, then it should
have been: and every part also sprynkled, with a sweet moisture or dew, that
makes such members as be hard, soft: and also mollifying the pores or fine
holes of the skin, do open the same, which by reason of the strong and often
moving of the spirits be clean purged of all their excrementes and filthes,
and also the excrementes of the hole body be had away. Now if al these come of
exercise, as no doubt they do, peradventure it is an hard matter to show the
due and seasonable time of taking it: for because it helps ye concoction
throughout the whole body, there may be no quantity of raw juice, neither in
the mawe, nor in the small veins about the liver, lest the same be snatched
into every part of the body, before it be made mete or profitable to the same
by concoxion. Therefore because it does cleanse and purge the little pores, and
also expel the experimentes, it may well be taken before meat. For Hypocrates
says: If thou nouryshe unclean bodies, and such as be full of excreme^tes,
thou shall do them more harm, then good. Wherefore it is very euyde^t that the
best and metest time for excercyse is when yesterdayes meat is concoted, both
in the stomach and also in the veins. For if it be taken at any other time,
either before or after, it must either fill the body full of crude and raw
humors, or else augment pale, and citrine choler. Doubtless, the true mark of
this time is taken of the urine. For white water betokens cruditie, readde,
ouermoche concoction, and that, that is somewhat pale, and a little turned to
yelowe, is a token that the second concoction is now already down: and so
long as the water or vryne is not infected with choler, it is still white: and
when it has taken to much of choler, then it is red. Therefore when it is
betwyxte readde and white, then it is time to begin exercise, first easynge
the body of the excrementes, of the guts or entrails, as well as of the
vryne or water, in the bladder, lest some part of the foresaid excrementes,
be either changed into the habyte of the body, or else (through the vyolence
of the great heat, which exercise and the vehement exagitation causes) do
putrifye, whereof there may ensue much inconvenience. Therefore seeing that
exercise (as we said before) is a vehement mouynge, it is very mete and
necessary to show for what bodies exercise is most conuenyent and holesoome:
for Hypocrates counsayleth them, whose bodies excede in heat, to beware of all
vyolent and vehement mouinges. Then shall such bodies live in idleness,
without exercise? or any mouynge? no. For although Hypocrates forbid such to
use any exercise that is vyolent: yet nevertheless he forbyddeth them
idleness, commaundyng them to use those kinds of exercise which be not
vehement, as walking and rydinge: but such as be cold of nature, or at the
leest excede not in heat, and especially they that have many wast and
supersluous humors, may safe lie use the vehement excersyces that be, in case
they observe the time beforesayde, and do not sodeynlye, and at the first
brunt, excercyse the^ selfs as vehementlye as afterward. For as ye se lute or
harpestringes, if they be sodeynely and vehementlye stretched, be put in great
danger of breauynge, so the synowes, and the fine small veins, if they be
vehemently plucked any way with any sodden mouynge of the body, be in no
less danger then of breakyng. Therefore whosoever will excercyse him self
vehemently, even at the first, let him after he has put of his clothes, chafe
his lymmes softly, until they wax read, and be moderatelye hot, and then
annoint his joints with oil and after let him not spare to exercise him
self su^me what vehementlye, but such as may take their exercise at their
own will and pleasure, let them begin softely encresynge their labowre, still
more and more, until such time as their flesh be throghlye swelled, and
begin to sweat, but then it is time to leave, lest such humors as be good, and
profitable to the nouryshment of the body be expelled, as well as they yt be
naught And also immoderate excersise, dries up the body, and consumes as
well the natural heat, as the natural moisture, whereby the spirits decay
which shortneth life, and hasteneth old age.

There be many kinds of exersyses, which may all well be allowed: as
shotynge, dyggynge with a spade or mattocke, bowelynge, either in the fyelde or
in the alley, haukynge, hunting, daunsyng, runnyng, leapyng, tennes, and
footebal, but of these, or else of other, which is not rehearsed, the best be
they that excersyse al parts egally, as shotynge and tennyse, for dyggyng does
excersise the back to much, and runnyng or daunsing, the legs. Wherefore
they be not so well to be allowed, as the rest, which exercyseth all parts a
like.

The.ii. Chapter.
Of dinner or eating time.
DIogenes being asked when it was best for a man to be refresshed with meat,
answered on this fasshyon saying, a rich manne when he will, and a poor man
when he may. As I do well allow that a poor manne shall not eat before he
have meat, so I do utterly condemn that a rich manne shall eat when he
will. For meat taken either out of time, or to much in quantitye, is cause of
many euyls and maladies, to the body.

It is taken out of time, either wha^ the accustomed hour of eating is
broken, as to defer dinner till.iii. of the clock at after noone, orels when
that time is spente in eating, which is ordained for an other purpose as to
eat in the night, which is ordained for sleep, and it may be taken to much
in quantity, many ways.

For sum man eating but.iii. bittes, of beaffe, shall surfeit as sore of it
as su^me other that peradventure be side other meats, deuowreth four grotes
woorthe of beaffe.

And he also takes to much which ceasseth not from eating, so long as he
is able to eat or swalowe any more as well as he yt eats so much that his
belly is hard wythal.

Of these kinds of repletion, comes either sudden death by breakyng of the
skin, called Peritoneum, or else a continual laske, called Lienteria, which
always brings with it, a consumption, with many other diseases, of the
which. I entende not to speak of, at this time. wherefore it is good, and
wholesome for every man to leave eating, with an appetyte, and not to eat so
much at one meal, as might well suffice nature, iiii. and also to feade of
such meats, as is most holsom for his body. If he be cholerycke, and strong
of nature ledynge a laboursu^me life, than he may feed of gross and strong
meats, as beaffe and such meats, as is put in the first order, but if he be
flenmatyke, and of a weak nature, than let him take heed of gross meats,
and feed of such as be in the myddle order, of the which repletion is
nothing so dangerous, as of the other.

As concerning the time of eating, every man when he is hungered, if he may
have it, yet one time is better than another, and the very best time is after
excersyce. For then the body is clear pourged of all excrementes, and natural
heat is increased, and made much stronger. And the next time is at.xi. of the
clock before dinner, and again at.vi. a clock of the night. Howebeit children
and such as be not yet at their fulle grows, and old men which be weak
and feeble, had need to eat oftener, so that they take the less at ones, and
put four hours, at the least, between every meal. (...)

and also of the synnowes, which be the instruments of mouynge, and that the
foresaid vapors whythe do fume up to the brain may not be crude or raw,
the heart plucketh in to it both the blood and natural heat, that is in the
utter parts. And this same rest is good for.iii. causes, first to moyster the
brain, and then to the generation of spirits, and last of all, to make an
end of the concoction both in the stomach and liver. The material cause of
sleep, are the sweet vapors, the which when they be made moist, styllyng
down, do stop the co^duytes of the sensis. For they be not cla^mye or gross
humors, such as hurt the brain, but they be sweet fumes, the which after
they be ascended, be made thycke by the coldenes of the brain, and ru^ne
down, sprinkelyng the brain with moisture. Therefore Aristotle does compare
the same motion of vapors to the floude Euripus, because in their goinge up
they turn back again, and other follow, and come after, but the efficient
cause is somewhat more dark and obscure. For it is certain that the heat and
blood of the utter parts, is (as Hypocrates says) drawenin to the heart,
and though the body then be hotter with in, it is cold without: therefore when
we sleep, we have need of many clothes. The heat and blood is drawn in
because that when the concoction is begone, the vapors do fume up, naturally:
and when they be disolued they come down fulbut on ye heat of the heart,
which dryueth the^ back to the utter parts: and thus ye heat is driven still
more and more to the heart: the which heat gathered together does make an
end of co^coction, that the vapors which ascend to the brain, may both be
more ple^tifull and also sweter. But I think that the heat is drawn into ye
heart, not somoche for the coming down of vapors, as that the vital and
animal powers be sociate and cowpled together by the divine prouydence of god.
For what part soever be diseased, the heart, straight like a natural Prince
or governor, endeavors all that he can to help it, and therefore he callethe
in his heat, that he may help ye necessary action, both of the stomach and
liver. And when the utter parts of the body be at rest then the heart labors
most, drawing unto him both heat and blood: of the which he enhendreth
vital spyrytes. And truly I se not a suffycyent cause, why so much heat
should be called in, except this same society of the powers were ordained of
God, that as soon as the utter parts were at rest, the heart either for his
own cause, or else for the stomach or liver, might draw unto him more
plentiful heat to help the innermore actions, which be necessary for the
conservation of nature, and as every man is most grieved, and afraid of his
own iepardye, and does couete first to defend him self: so every part of
the body first prouydeth for him self, and this natural inclination is given
to all manner of creatures, to coueyte first to save them selves. And therefore
the heart especially for his own cause, draws to him self heat, because he
has neade of blood, and because his spirits be almost spent. And therefore
he also healpeth the well of the blood, which is the liver, that it may
cherysh it self, and bring forth, new, and fresshe spirits, and moreover the
brain being werye and desyryng rest, leueth mouyng of the utter parts, and
whenever the body has need of recreation or quietness, the actions of all the virtues be agreed by and by. And this same consent or agreement, god has
given to all the parts, that after defatigation or werynesse, they may be
refreshed with rest and quietness. The final causes be great benefytes, the
which sleep gives to every virtue or power, one by one: it helps nutrition
because it makes an end of concoction, and there is nothing more certain
tha^ that the crudities which come for lack of sleep is incurable, because
not only the meat is left undigested, but also the virtue of the stomach, is
utterly destroyed, partly by the burden and weight of of the crude and raw
meat, and partlye because the synowes be hurt by the wekenes of ye brain
that comes for lack of sleep, as Hypocrates speking generally, says that
ouermoch watch brings most cruel crampes, and there have been many which
for lack of sleep have felt often crampes in their necks, and the palsye in
their legs, and also a great imbecillitie and weakness in their stomach.
And bysyde these the natural heat, throughoute the whole body decays sore,
because it is not cheryshed with vital spirit. And hereof it may be
perceived, how much need we have of sleep, to the conservation of nutrition.
For when the concoctio^ is done well, and as it should be, there is
nouryshment distributed to every part of the body, wherwt they be cheryshed:
and there is also spyrites engendered, which mynistreth new strength to the
body, and yet the boylyng heat of the body is mittigated with taking rest,
and the body it self is sprynkled with a sweet dew, that comes from the
brain: and the brain also takes strength wherewith ye fynowes be made more
lustye. It helps the vital power, because the heart drawing to him heat,
does bring forth great plentye of spyrites, the which be made so much more
brighter how much the blood is purer. And again it helps the animal
powers (for whose conservation it is ordained of God) because ye virtue both of
the brain and synowes should be destroyed clean, with ouermoche dryness,
except yt it were cherysshed, with sleep, in the which the brain is made
moist, gatherynge to him again his pristinate strength. How acceptable also
is sleep in diseases, and sorrows, the which many times it only heals, to
man's great profit and ease.

The.v. Chapter.
Of slepyng time, and of the wholesome lying in bed.
Sleep ought to be taken in the beginning of ye night and there ought to be but
a little space betwyxt supper and sleep, therefore after a little soft walking,
to the intent that the meat may go down into the maw, and also that the upper
mouth of the mawe, may be shut. I would counsel every man to take rest, lying
him down first on ye right side, lest with lying on ye left side, he open the
upper mouth of his stomach, howbeit after his first sleep, he may safelye
lie on the left side: and whosoever has a weak stomach, let him lie grouelyng
upon his face, for it helps co^coction, and lets the generation of fleume,
increasing natural heat, by reason whereof evil and noughty humors be degested
and concocted.

And no man that is wise, sleep upon his back: for thereof comes many sore
diseases. It is very wholesome to sleep, the shulders and heed lying on hye: for
so the heat is easelye gathered together, which makes concoction perfyte, and
destroys all crudities and rawnesse, concerning also natural heat,
enge^dreth good blood whereof the body takes both strength and lively color.

The.vi. Chapter.
What cummeth of long watchynge.
WIthout doubt, there is no thing that decays the strength more, either of
the body, or of the wit, then to watch long after supper, because there
follows not only cruditie; but also natural heat is dispersed abroad, and
the virtue of the stomach faynteth and decays, and noughtye and unclean
blood is engendered which is cause that the body is filled with evil humors,
whereof comes an evil habyte, as palenesse or leanenesse, and the troublynge
of the spirits with great infirmity and weakness of the brain.

Wherefore youth ought to be accustomed and used to omytte study in the
beginning of the night, and so much the less to haunt banketynge and
drinking till mydnyght no nor to spend the time in exitious labor which god
has ordained for every creature to rest in. I have heard in this matter, the
diligence of many noble men, which being trowebled with matters of the
common wealth, have ever observed this custom, that after supper, they went
straight to bed, and in the mornings they did always dispatch their business.
Sener writes that Asinius would not so much as unseal a letter at after
supper, so much the less read one, to the entente that he might go to bed
with a quiet mind. And if thou will sleep swetely (as Homer says) thou
must take heed of cruditie in thy stomach, and also have a quiet mind.

For the sorrow and pensifnes, of the heart, also the boylynge and great
heat of the blood and spirits, and earnest anger, distempereth ye brayn with
unquietness, and will not suffer the heart to go about any natural action, and
besides these, think ye that it is no sin before god: to punyshe so cruellye
and corrupt the nature of our bodies? seeing that holy scripture, commands
to give honor and reverence to the body.

Therefore we ought to give dylygence that (as much as we may) we use well
this rest and quietness ordained of god, by the which we are warned of our
resurrection after the mortyfyenge of our bodies. As this rest which we call
sleep is ordained of God, that in it our life may be renewed, because there is
then a great number of spirits engendered, so let us think that death is not
eternal misery, to the faythefull, but a little space, in the which, it is
mete and convenient for us, to be borne again, to a better life.

The.vii. chapter.
Of dreams.
ALthough the question of dreams pertayneth to the inner se^ses, yet I will
speak of them even now. For I purpose not to prosecute the long
circumstances of the natural philosophers, which endeavor to show a natural
cause of every dream. Homer the old and ancient poet iesteth exceeding
featlye of the.ii. gates of dreams, of the which gates, the one is the way
or entranse of vain dreams, and the other of such as do signifye sum
thing. A dream is nothing, but an ymagination made in the sleep, when that
diverse spirits meet together in the brain, which being the instrument of
our thoughts, do make diverse images.

Furthermore in sleep, the inner senses be a great deal more at lybertye than
the utter be.

The.viii. Chapter.
Of dreams natural.
THe first kind of dreams, be common to every manne, therefore they may
well be called natural. These dreams be, when we fancy such things in the
night as we thought on, when we were waking, whereupon Claudian the poet
says, judges dream of strife, and controversies of the law, and carters
dream of their carts, orels when our dreams, answer dyrectelye to certain
humors, the redowndyng or mouyng, of the which does move our imagination, or
spirits.

As they that have plenty of fleume, dream of swimming or drownyng and of
this fashyon night mares trouble us in our sleep, whanso ever any thycke or
gross humor is either in the brain or breast, lettyng the breast to move, the
which moves our ymagination, that it thinks our breast be pressed down of
sum other.

The. ix. Chapter.
Of that kind of dreams that foreseeth things to come.
THe second kind of dreams, foreseeth things to cumme, but not be any
divine power for every man as he has a good tempered body and as he has
peculier gifts, and properties of nature, before other men: as one man is
better skylled, in musycke then an other, and an other more nimble to clyme
than he, so many by a peculyar gift of nature, have dreams that declare
things to come by allegories and proverbs: Such were the dreams of Scilla,
and Lucullus. And Augustus Cesers Physician called Musa, dremed that Augustus
his own tente was taken of his enemies.

Wherefore Augustus warned of it, departed from thence, and even as the
physician had dreamed, it chaunsed. For that wynge where his tente was being
put to flight, his own tente, and tabernacle, was taken, of his enemies.

Tullye the eloquent romayne, reherseth many like examples, and he him self
dreamed, that Octauius should be emperor of Rome, long before he knew him.
And Pontanus writes of a certain manne of war, which dreamed yt he was
devoured of a serpent, wherefore wha^ other of his fellows took shyppyng to
fight against their enemies, he only tarried at home, and it chanced that there
was a fraye in the city yt day where it fortuned him to be slain, with a
gunstoone, which in their tongue was called a serpent.

Gallen also writes of a certain man that dreamed himself to be bathed in
his own blood, and the next day when he opened his dream to the Physicians,
they said that he had ouermuche blood: wherefore contrary to Galenes counsayl,
they let him blood, so he being destitute of strength dyed as he had dreamed
before, bathed and washed in his own blood. Of these kinds of dreams there
is no evident cause, neither in the mouynge of humors, nor yet in their
quantity or quality, but that there be certain natures that foreseeth
things to come, which have dreams oftentimes that signifye somethynge. Nor I
will not be against them that think this propertye to come of the excellent
temperature of the body, as the Astronomers do: but I think them not wise
which give precepts of the interpretation of dreams, attributynge the cause^
to the motion of humors, saying that one man has not always like dreams.

The. x. chapter.
Of that kind of dreams the which prophecieth of things to come, by divine
power.
THe third kind of dreams is godly, which god works in men's minds,
either by him self, or else by his angels, such were the prophecies of
Jacob, Joseph, and Daniel, and other like, which holy scripture does affirm to
come from god, and not of light or tryflyng matters, but of Christ, and of the
governing of the church, and king domes, and of their order. This kind of
dremes ought well to be decerned from the other: for in the other there is no
truth. And this one kind of dreams is very certain and true, as it shall
appear better hereafter.

The. xi. chapter.
What kind of dreams is deuilysh.
THe fourth kind of dreams is diuylysh, as when wytches and coniurers do
dream of feasts, and plays. And the devil him self also oftentimes shows
horrible spectacles to men in their sleep, as Valerius writes of the Romayn
Cassius. And there was a certain Romayne called Latinus, which was commanded
in his sleep to remember ye consul, of certain things as concerning the stage
plays, the which because he had not done, the devil killed his son. Here
both the cause and the effect also does declare, that the dream was
deuylysshe.

For the devil always endeavors to stablish such customs as be wicked, and
noughtye, and he is delyted with unjust death: there has chanced many like
unto this in the old time, no less superstitious. And we have heard now of
late days, the vain dreams of the Anabaptists, commaundyng sin, or
confirmyng errors, and heresies: the which doubtless may be perceived and
judged of godly and wise men.

The. x. chapter.
To what kind of dreams we ought only to give credit.
I Have rehearsed.iiii kinds of dremes the why^h if they be well ^onsydred and
looked upon, it shall be easy to judge of this commune question, that is:
whether any thing may be coniectured of dreams, or no: and whether any man
ought to give credit or to trust to dreams or no. One kind of dreams is
true and certain: wherefore every man ought to give credit unto it, which is
the same kind, that prophecyeth of things to come, by revelation from God,
insomoch that they which have such dreams, know that they come from God.
Jacob and Joseph knew that their dreams came from God, and therefore they
knew the signification of them. Also god does add a noble testimony of this
unto the profit Daniel, when Nabuchodonozor had forgotten his dream, god
showed it again unto Daniel, that it should be known, that it came from him.
Therefore this kind of dreams is except from that rule which forbyddeth us to
give credit unto dreams For when they come from God, and when God testifyeth
that he is the author of them, then it is necessary to believe them: of the
other dreams there ought nothing to be affirmed. And as concerning the.iiii.
kind of dreams, it is utterly to be abhorred. Dreams of the second kind,
although theybe conjectures, yet there ought to be no affirmation of them:
wherefore we ought to give no credit unto them, and for the most part, they
be full of ambiguitie. Therefore many kings and capitaynes have been deceived
with such dreams. The last battle which Pompeius fought with Caesar, he was
moved to it with a dream, which promised him victory, because he had dremed
yt he was in his royal seat at Rome: and thought the people reioysyng in him,
clapped their hands for joy: but Pompeius was deceived in the interpretation.
For that same reioysynge with the hands of the people, did not pretend
victory, but rather the encouragementes annd prouokementes of Domitius
Lentulus and Labienus, which the morrow after his dream, counsayled him to
fight, promysyng him victory, and setting his mind on fire with vain hope.
Darius also dreamed, that he saw the host of the Macedonians to go through
Asia burni^g, and to come to Babilo^, and there Alexander him self having a
Percians robe, to go into the church, and straight to vanysh out of sight.
Therefore Darius thought that the stames of fire did p^^^ende death to
Alexanders army, and that Alexander should become captyue, because he was
decked after his country fassyon: but by ye fire was fignifyed the great have
of Alexander, and his victoryes, and his garment betokened that he should be
king and lord over the whole dominion, and empire of the Pertians. Hamilcar
captain of the Carthageneans dreamed that he supped in Siracusa therefore the
next day purposyng to take the town, made battlement to the walls, where it
fortuned him to be taken by reason of a tumult in his own army: so being a
captyue he supped in the city, as he had dreamed before. Wherefore we ought to
give no credit to this kind of dreams: saying they be so varyable and
deceytfull. Therefore let them be as conjectures, which sometime chance or
happen. But I would that everye man should think, that they be both deceytfull
conjectures, and also uncertain, as many mo be. Let superstition be set aside,
and let us remember the saying of Solomon: where many dreams be, there is
much vanity and error.

The. xiii. chapter.
Of Venus or bodily pleasure.
HIppocrates says that Venus or bodily lust, is a part of the falling euel
Therefore it is not to be desired, over gredely, nor yet utterly to be
abhorred, seeing that the kind of al living rreatures, is conserved by
generation, and as Celsus says: If it be used but seldom, it makes the
body to grow, and used often, it does not only dry the body, but also it
dissolueth it, utterly because both vital, animal, and natural spirit is
wasted with the immoderate use of it, and the body is begyled also of his
nouryshement.

Howebeit when there follows neither greyfe nor sorrow after it, there can
comme no great harm of it, and the use of it, is worse in summer, and in
autumn, then either in the winter or in the spryng, and it is holsommer in the
night, then in the day, and also it is better full, then emptye, and all
manner of labor after it, is utterly pernicious.

The. xiiii. Chapter.
Of the times of the year.
THe holsemest time of the year is the spring, and next unto it is winter,
su^mer is not so good, and autumn is extreme perilous. For they be best, which
be most temperate and egal, whether they be hot or cold. Therefore autumn
is very dangerous because it is hot then about noone, the morning and
euenyng both being cold, thereof it comes that the body resolved with the heat
at noone, is made stark, with the sodayn cold of the euenyng, which causes
many diseases. And in the spring, where as is equality (if there be any in
the year) the fairest days be most wholesome, and raynye days be better than
clowdye without rain, and in winter those days are best, that be not wyndye,
and in summer, when the western wind blows.

Sum peradventure will look that I should have writ of bathes seeing that
there is nothing that is more medicinable than they be: But forasmuch as we
englyshmen have no use of them, and also seeing that there are diverse, which
have wryt of them very well in English, I thought I had no need to
entermedle with them, yet if any man will use them, let him bathe him in
warm water, before meat, and after meat, in cold, and he shall not greatly
err in the taking of them.

Finis.
The contents of this book.
The first book.
An exhortation of Physic to her ministers. Fol. iiii. The diversity of
sects in phisike. Fol. vi. Of the Elements. Fol. xii. The dyfference of
temperatures. Fol. xiii. The generation of the liver, of the heart, and of the
brain. Fol. xix. The sections of the especial parts of the body. Fol.
xxiii. Of veins, pulses, and sinowes. Fol. xl. Of humors. Fol. xlii. Of
blood. Fol. xliii. Of fleume. Fol. eodem. Of choler. Fol. eodem. Of
melancholy, or black choler. Fol. xliiii. Of unnatural humors. Fol. eod. Of
unnatural fleume. Fol. xlv. Of unnatural yelowe choler. Fol. eod. Of
melancholy unnatural. Fol. eod. Of Spirits. Fol. xlvii. Of animal spirits.
Fol. xlviii.
The second book.
Of natural powers and actions. Fol. xlix. Of nutrition. Fol. li. Of the
faculties or virtues, with which nature has furnisshed every part, serving
to nutrition. Fol. lvi. Of the power or virtue attractiue. Fo. lvll. Of the
virtue retentiue. Fol. lix. Of concoction. Fol. lx. Of the virtue expulsive.
Fol. eod. Of the provoking of appetite. Fo. lxiii. Of the diversity of food.
Fol. lxiiii. Of diverse qualities of meats. Fol. lxxiii Meats of good juice.
Fol. eod. Meats of evil juice. Fol. liix. Of meats that be mylde and gentle
of Nature, and of the contrary. Fol. eod. Of meats engendring fleume. Fol.
lxx. Meats good for the stomach. Fol. lxx. Euel meats for the stomach. Fol.
eod Of meats that make the belly to swelle, and what delay the same Fol.
lxxi. Of things engendring heat or cold. fo. eod. Of meats that putrifye in
the mawe, and other that do not. Fol. lxxii. Of things that leuse the body.
Fol. eod. Of things byndyng the belly. Fol. lxxil. Of things provoking
urine. Fol. eod. Of things prouokyng sleep, and other that cause watch. Fol.
eodem.
The third book.
Of exercise. Fol. lxxiiii. Of dinner or eating time. Fol. lxxvii Of rest
after meat. Fol. lxxix. Of Sleep. Fol. lxxx. Of Slepynge time and of the
wholesome lyinge in bed. Fol. lxxxiiii. Of long watchynge. Fol. lxxxv. Of the
diversity of dreams. Fol. lxxxvi. Of Venus. Fol. xciii. Of the times of the
year Fol. xciiii.
FINIS.
Fol. 4. Pagi. i. Line. 4. read Tipheus. Fol. 6. page i. line. 12. read to
perceive. Fol. 6. page ii. line. 15. read gathering. Fol. 14. page i. lin. 69.
read distributiua^. Fol. 15. page i. line. 17. read (...). Fol. 27. page ii.
line. 22. read rare. Fol. 35. page ii. line. 14. read Ieiunum. Fol. 69. page i.
lin. 8. read clammye. Fol. 79. page i. line. 14. read noone.
Finis.
Imprinted at London by Edward Whytchurche. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum
solum.


