TOM TEL-TROTHS MESSAGE, AND HIS PENS COMPLAINT.

A work not unpleasant to be read, nor unprofitable to be followed.

Written by IO. LA. Gent.

Nullum in correcto crimine crimen erit. LONDON Imprinted for R. Howell, and
are to be sold at his shop, near the great North door of Paul's, at the sign
of the white horse. 1600.

TO THE WORSIPFVLL MASTER GEORGE DOVVSE GENTLEMAN, IO. LA. WISHES FRVITIon of
endless felicity.
IF writings may quittance benefits, or goodwill more then common courtesy,
then accept I beseech you, these first fruits of my barren brain, the token
of my love, the seal of my affection, and the true cognizance of my unfeigned
affection. And for so much as the plot of my Pamphlet is rude, though true, the
matter mean, the manner meaner, let me humbly desire, though slenderly I
deserve, to have it patronized under the wings of your favor; in requital
whereof I will be,

Yours ever to command, IO. LA.

TO THE GENTLEMEN READERS.
IVdiciall Readers, wise Apolloes flock,
Whose eyes like keys do open learnings lock;
Daigne with your eye-lampes to behold this book,
And in all courtesy thereon to look:
Thus being patronized by your view,
I shall not be ashamed of his hew.
Oh grant my suite, my suite you understand,
That I may you commend, you me command.
IO. LA.

TOM TEL-TROTHS Message, and his pens complaint.
THou that did erst Romes Capital defend,
Defend this sacred relic of thy wing,
And by this power Divine some succor send,
To save the same from carping Momus sting:
That like a tell-troth it may boldly blaze,
And pensill-like paint forth a just dispraise.
Go naked pen the hearts true secretary,
Imbath'd in sable liquor mixed with gall,
And from thy master these rude verses carry,
Sent to the world, and in the world to all:
In mournful verse lament the faults of men,
Do this, and then return heart-easing pen.
Time sits him down to weep in sorrows sell,
And Truth bewailes man's present wickedness,
Both Time and Truth a doleful tale do tell,
Deploring for man's future wretchedness:
With teare-bedewed cheeks help, help therefore,
Sad tragic muse to weep, bewail, deplore.
Me thinks I see the ghost of Conscience,
Raisde from the dark grave of security,
Viewing the world, who once was banished thence,
Her cheeks with tears made wet, with sighs made dry:
And this did aggrauate her grief the more,
To see the world much worse then it was before.
She wept, I saw her weep, and wept to see
The salt tears trickling from her aged eyes,
Yea and my pen copartner needs would be,
With black-inke tears, our tears to simpathize:
So long we wept that all our eyes were dry,
And then our tongues began aloud to cry.
Come sad Melpomene thou tragic Muse,
To bear a part in these our doleful cries,
Spare not with taunting verses to accuse,
The wicked world of his iniquities,
Tell him his own, be bold and not ashamed,
Nor cease to speak till thou his faults have blamed.
I seem to hear resounding Echoes tatling,
Of misdemeanors reigning here and there,
And party-colored Pyes on green bows prattling*
Of foolish fashions raging every where:
Then blame not my muse what so ere she say,
Since birds and Echoes men's fond faults bewray.
O world, no world, but rather sink of sin,
Where blind and fickle Fortune Empress reigns;
O men, no men, but swine that lie therein,
Among whom virtue wronged by vice complains:
Thus world bad, men worse, men in world, worldly men,
Do give occasion to my plaintiff pen.
Sin like the monster Hydra has more heads,
Then heavens hie roof has siluer-spangled stars,
And in his jaws men's souls to hell he leads,
Where fiery fiends meet them in flaming Charres:
This Pirate like a Pilate keeps each coast,
Bringing his guests unto their hellish host.
If all the earth were writing paper made,
All plowshares pens, all furrows lines in writing,
The Ocean, ink, wherein the sea-Nimphes wade,
And all men's consciences scribes inditing:
Too much could not be written of man's sin,
Since sin did in the first man first begin.
But as the Egyptian dog runs on the brinke,
Of Nilus seuen-fold ouer-flowing flood,
And staying not, now here, now there does drink,
For fear of Crocodiles which lurk in mudde:
So shall my pen run briefly over all,
Reciting these misdeeds which work man's thral.
Nature that whilome bore the chiefest sway,
Bridling man's body with the reigns of Reason,
Is now enforced in uncouth walks to stray
Exilde by custom which encrocht through treason:
Instead of Art, Natures companion,
Fancy with custom holds dominion.
Ovid could testify that in his time,
Astraea fled from earth to heaven above,
Loathing injustice as a damned crime,
Which she with equal poised schoales did prove:
And this pen in my time shall justify,
That true religion is constrainde to fly.
The two leafe-dores of quondam honesty,
Which on four virtues Cardinal were turned,
By Cardinals degree and popery,
Are now as heretike-like relics burned:
Now carnal vice, not virtue Cardinal,
Plays Christmas gambals in the Popes great hall.
Well, since the Popes name pops so fitly in,
From Pope i will take the Latin P. away,
And Pope shall with the Greek e then bgin,
Whose type and tippe that he may climb i will pray:
Pray all with me that he may climb this letter:
For in this prayer each man is his detter.
I pass not although with bell, book, and candle,
His bald-pate Priests and shoren Friars curse,
My plaintiff pen his railing text shall handle:
Nor do I think my self one jot the worse:
Yea though my pen were in their Purgatory,
Yet should my pen hold on his plaintiff story.
Oh what a world is it for one to see,
How Monks and Friars would religious seem?
Whose heads make humble congies to the knee,
That of their humble minds all men might deem:
These be the sycophants whose fained zeal,
Has brought in woe to every commonweal.
The Monks like monkies having long black tails,
Tell old wives tales to busy simple brains,
The baudie Friars do hunt to catch females,
To shriue and free them from infernal pains.
Thus Monks and Friars, firebrarnds of hell,
Like to incarnate devils with us dwell.
But I as loath, so will I leave to write,
Against this popish ribble rabble route,
Hoping ere long some other will indite,
Whole volumes against their stander-bearers stout:
Poets and Painters mean while shall descry,
With pens and pensils their hypocrisy.
As thus my pen does glance at every vice,
Needs must I hear poor Learnings lamentation,
Which whilome was esteemed at highest price,
But now rejected is of every nation:
She loves men yet is she wronged by men,
Her wronged love gives matter to my pen.
Pallas the nurse of Nature-helping Art,
Whose babes are Scholars, and whose cradels, schools,
From whose milch teates no pupils would depart,
Till they by cunning shund the names of fools:
She, even she, wanders in open streets,
Seeking for scholars, but no scholars meets.
Englands two eyes, Englands two Nurceries,
Englands two nests, Englands two holy mounts,
I mean Englands two Universities,
Englands two Lamps, Englands two sacred founts,
Are so pulled at, pulled out, and eke pulled down,
That they can scarce maintain a wide sleeu'd gown.
Lately as one CAME ore a BRIDGE, he saw
An OX stand ore a FORDE to quench his drouth:
But lo the Ox his dry lips did withdraw,
And from the water lifted up his mouth.
Like Tantalus this dry Ox there did stand,
God grant this dark Aenigma may be scand.
The Liberal Sciences in number seven,
Which in seven ages like seven Monarchs reigned,
And shined on earth as Planets seven in heaven,
Are now like Almesfolkes beggarly maintained,
Whilst in their room seven deadly sins bear sway,
Which makes these seven Arts like seven slaves obey.
Grammar the ground and strong foundation,
Upon which Lady Learning builds her tower,
Grammar the pathway and direction,
That leads unto Pallas sacred bower,
Stands bondslaue-like of Stationers to be sold,
Whom all in free Schools erst might free behold.
And Rhetoric adornde with figures fine,
Trickt up with tropes, and clad in comely speech,
Is gone as Pilgrim to the Muses nine,
For her late wrong assistance to beseech.
Now rich Curmudgions best orations make,
Whilst in their pouches gingling coin they shake.
Logic which like a whetstone sharpes the brain,
Logic which like a touchstone tries the mind,
Logic which like a lodestone erst drew gain,
Is now for want of maintenance half pinde.
And since in Colleges no maids may dwell,
Many from Colleges do her expel.
Music I much bemourne thy misery,
Whose well-tunde notes delight the Gods above,
Who with thine eare-bewitching melody,
Do unto men and beasts such pleasure move:
Though wayling cannot help, I wayle thy wrong,
Bearing a part with thee in thy sad song.
Arithmeticke she next in number stands,
Numbering her cares in teaching how to number;
Which cares in number passing salt-sea sands,
Disturb her mind, and still her corpse incumber:
Care adds grief, grief multiplies her woe,
Whose ebb substracting, brings reducing floe.
Geometry as servile prentise bound,
Unto the Mother earth for many years,
Has long since meated out the massy ground,
Which ground the impression of her footsteps bears.
Great was her labor, great should be her gain,
But her great labor was repaid with pain.
Astronomy not least, though last, has lost
By cruel fate her starre-embroidred coat:
Her spherie globe in danger's seas is tossed,
And in mishap her instruments do floate.
All Almanacks hereof can witness bear,
Else would my self hereof as witness swear.
But how should I with style poetical,
Proceed to rhyme in meeter or in verse?
If Poetry the Queen of verses all,
Should not be heard, whose plaint mine ear does pierce?
Oh help Apollo with apology,
To blaze her undeserved injury.
Horace did write the Art of Poetry,
The Art of Poetry Virgill commended:
Ovid thereto his studies did apply,
Whose life and death still Poetry defended.
Thrice happy they, but thrice unhappy I,
They sang her praise, but I her injury.
O princely Poetry, true Prophetess,
Perfections pattern, Matrone of the Muses,
I weep to think how rude men do oppress,
And wrong thine Art with their absurd abuses.
They are but dross, thine Art it is divine,
Cast not therefore thy pearls to such swine.
The sugared songs that sweet Swannes use to sing,
Floting adowne Meanders silver shore,
To country swains no kind of solace bring;
The winding of an horn they fancy more.
No marvel then though Lady Poetry,
Do suffer undeserved injury.
Like to Batillus every ballet-maker,
That never climbd unto Pernassus Mount,
Will so incroach that he will be partaker,
To drink with Maro at the Castale fount.
Yea more then this to wear a laurel Crown,
By penning new gigges for a country clown.
When Marsias with his bagpipes did contend,
To make far better Music then Apollo:
When Thameras in self conceit would mend
The Muses sweet songs note, what then did follow?
Convicted both, to both this was assignde,
The first was hanged, the last was stricken blind.
And may it happen to those bastard brains,
Whose base times strive to better Poetry,
That they may suffer like deserved pains,
For these be they that work her infamy.
Thus having blazd false Poets in their hew,
Dear Poetry (though loath) I bid adieu.
As Poetry in poesy I leave,
I see seven sins which crossed seven Liberal Arts,
Which with their fained show do men deceive,
And on the wide worlds stage do play their parts:
As thus men follow them, they follow men,
They move more matter to my plaintiff pen.
These mincing maids and fine-trict truls ride post
To Plutoes palace, like purueyers proud;
Thither they lead many a damned ghost,
With howling consorts carroling aloude:
And as one after one they post to hell,
My plaintiff pen shall their abuses tell.
First praunceth Pride with principality,
Guarded with troops of newfound fashions:
Her hand-maides are Fancy and Vanity:
These three a progress go throughout all nations:
And as by any town they pass along,
People to see them gather in a throng.
Now fine-ruft Ruffines in their bravery,
Make cringing cuts with new invention:
New-cut at Cards brings some to beggarie,
But this new-cut brings most unto destruction:
So long they cut, that in their purse no groate
They leave, but cut some others purse or throat.
Bedawbd with gold like Apuleius Ass
Some princk and pranck it: others more precise,
Full trick and trim tired in the looking-glass,
With strange apparel do themselves disguise.
But could they see what others in them see,
Folly might fly, and they might wiser be.
Some gogle with the eyes, some squint-eyd look,
Some at their fellows squemish sheepes-eyes cast:
Some turn the whites up, some look to the foot,
Some wink, some twinke, some blinke, some stare as fast.
The sum is infinite, eye were a detter,
If all should answer I, with I the letter.
Many desire to foot it with a grace,
Or Lion-like to walk maiesticall:
But whilst they strive to keep an equipace,
Their gate is foolish and fantastical.
As Hobby-horses, or as Anticks dance,
So do these fools unseemly seem to praunce.
I will not write of sweatie long shag hair,
Or curled locks with frisled periwigs:
The first the badge that Ruffins use to wear,
The last the cognizance of wanton rigs.
But sure I think as in Medusaes head,
So in their hairs are craulling Adders bred.
Men Proteus-like resemble every shape,
And like Camelions every color feign,
How dear so ere, no fashion may escape
The hands of those whose gold may it attain:
Like ebb and flow these fashions go and come,
Whose price amounts to a massy sum.
The sharp-set jaws of greedy sheeres devour,
And seize on every cloth as on a pray,
Like Atropose cutting that in an hour,
Which weauers Lachese-like wrought in a day.
These snip-snap sheeres in all shieres get great shares,
And are partakers of the dearest wares.
When fig tree leaves did shroude man's nakedness,
And homespun cloth was counted clothing gay,
Then was man's body clad with comeliness,
And honor shrouded was in rude array:
But since those times by future times were changed,
Thousands of fashions through the world have ranged.
Ambitious thoughts, hearts haughty, minds aspiring,
Proud looks, fond gates, and what not vndescreete,
As servants wait men's body still atyring.
With far-fetcht gewgawes for young children meet:
Where with whilst they themselves do daily deck,
Brauado-wise they scorn to brook the check.
Some covet winged sleeves like Mercury,
Others round hose much like to Fortunes wheel:
(Noting thereby their own inconstancy)
Some wear short cloakes, some cloakes that reach their heel.
These Apish tricks used in their daily weeds,
Bewray phantasticke thoughts, fond words, foul deeds.
Bold Bettresse braues and brags it in her wiers,
And buskt she must be, or not bust at all:
Their riggish heads must be adornd with tires,
With Periwigs, or with a golden Call.
Tut, tut, it is nothing in The Exchange to change,
Monthly as does the Moon their fashions strange.
It seems strange birds in England now are bred,
And that rare fowls in England build their nest,
When Englishmen with plumes adorn their head,
As with a Cocks-combe or a Peacocks crest.
These painted plumes men in their caps do wear,
And women in their hands do trickly bear.
Perhaps some women being foul, do use
Fowls feathers to shroude their deformity:
Others perchance these plumes do rather choose,
From weather and wind to shield their phisnomie.
But whilst both men and women use these feathers,
They are deemed light as feathers, wind and weathers.
Some dames are pumpt, because they live in pomp,
That with Herodias they might nimbly dance:
Some in their pantophels too stately stompe,
And most in corked shoes do nicely praunce.
But here I doubtful stand whether to blame
The shoomakers, or them that wear the same.
In country towns men use fannes for their corn,
And such like fannes I cannot discommend:
But in great cities fannes by truls are borne,
The sight of which does greatly God offend.
And were it not I should be deemed precise,
I could approve these fond fanned fools unwise.
A Painter lately with his pensill drew
The picture of a Frenchman and Italian,
With whom he placed the Spaniard, Turk and Jew,
But by himself he sat the Englishman.
Before these laughing went Democritus,
Behind these weeping went Heraclitus.
All these in comely vestures were atired,
According to the custom of their land,
The Englishman excepted, who desired
With others feathers like a lay to stand.
Thus whilst he seeks foreign bravery,
He is accused of inconstancy.
Some call him Ape, because he imitates,
Some fool, because he fancies every babble:
Some liken him to fishes caught with baits,
Some to the wind, because he is unstable.
Then blame him not, although against Englishmen,
This Englishman writ with his plaintiff pen.
But hush no more, enough's enough, fie, fie,
Will thou thy countries faults in verse compile?
Desist betimes, least thou peccaui cry,
For no bird sure his own nest will defile.
Well, since thou brak'st his head and made a sore,
With silence give a salve, and write no more.
The world began, and so will end with Pride,
With Pride this point began, with Pride it ends:
And whilst in pleasures Chariot she does ride,
My plaintiff pen page-like still by her wends.
Thus having painted out Prides roysting race,
At this points end a periods point I place.
Now pyning Envy whining does appear,
With body lean, with visage pale and wan,
With withered face, and with vnkeamed hair,
She does both fret, and fume, swear, curse and ban:
She fares ill, when other men fare well,
Others prosperity is made her hell.
She peepes and pries into all actions,
And she is never well but when she iarres:
She is the mother of all factions,
She broacheth quarrels, and increases wars:
Anger is hot, and Wrath does roughly rage,
But nothing Enuies heating hate can swage.
This Trull enticed Pompey to contend,
And with great Caesar civil wars to move:
This dame allured Kings their lives to spend,
In bloody broils and braules deuoyd of love:
Incensing subjects against their governors,
Sons against Sires, Captives against Conquerors.
As Iron does consume it self with rust,
By eating which it self it still does eat:
So does the envious man soon come to dust,
And does consume himself whilst he does fret.
Thus Envy still conspires to end his life,
That living with another, lives at strife.
We read that Envy twixt two men did grow,
And that the one of them one eye would lose,
So that he might pluck both eyes from his foe,
And plucking both eyes out his eyes might close.
O who would think a man should bear the mind,
To lose one eye to make another blind!
What trade so base but there is Envy in it,
When Minstrels with blind Fiddlers daily strive?
What strife is there but Envy does begin it,
When iusling Iacks to walls their betters drive?
The truth hereof I shall not need to swear,
Since Hesiode old hereof does witness bear.
What is the cause that many mop and more,
That many scoff, and scorn, and gibe, and jest,
With rimes and riddles rating at their foe,
Flouting the base, and powting at the best?
What is the cause? the cause one line shall show,
Envy is cause, which in men's hearts does grow.
Knowledge within the heart of man does dwell,
And love within the liver builds his nest:
But Envy in the gall of man does swell,
And plays the rebel in his boiling breast.
O would to God men had no gall at all,
That Envy might not harbor in the gall.
Envy and Charity together strove,
Which of them two a man should entertain:
The one with spite, the other sought with love;
The first in gall, the last in heart would reign:
So long they strove that Envy lost the field,
And Charity made Envy captive yield.
Envy adieu, and welcome Charity,
The bond of peace and all perfection,
The way that leads to true felicity,
Filling the soul with most divine refection.
Envy shall go, I Will cleave unto thy lore,
Thee will I serve, and thee will I adore.
Next follows Wrath, Enuies fierce fellow-mate,
Attired in a roaring Lions skin,
Ietting along with a giant-like gate,
Which aye a tyrant terrible has bin.
A butcher-like within his hands does bear
Their hearts, which he with woluish teeth does tear.
Wrath moved Herod with blood-thirstie heart,
To slaughter infants from their mothers breast;
Like lambs scarce can'd, or doves new-hatcht to part,
And with lives loss to leave both damme and nest.
O had King Herod known what would ensue,
He had not done what he did after rue.
He shed their blood, their blood did vengeance crave;
They first too soon, he last too late did dye;
They led the way, he followed to the grave;
Both they and he a pray for worms did lie.
Yet thus they differ, worms them dead did eat,
But him alive the worms did make their meat.
Wrath in Caligulaes mad head did grow,
Making him wish that Rome had but one head,
That he might smite off that head at a blow,
Whose pomp he saw like many heads to spread:
But whilst he thought Romes heads in one to lop,
Romes heads in one his flower of life did crop.
Wrath is the cause that men in Smith-field meet,
(Which may be called smite-field properly)
Wrath is the cause that makes every street
A shambles, and a bloody butcherie,
Where roysting ruffins quarrel for their drabs,
And for slight causes one the other stabs.
Wrath puffes men up with minds Thrasonicall,
And makes them brave it braggadochio-like:
Wrath makes men triumph Tyrannical,
With sword, with shield, with gunne, with bill and pike:
Yea now adays Wrath causes him to dye,
That to his fellow dares to give the lie.
Mars is the Chieftaine of this wrathful host,
Whose embrewd standard is with blood dyed red;
Of many he spares few, and kills the most,
And with their corpse his bloody panch is fed.
Tara tantara, sa, sa, kill, kill, he cries,
Filling with blood the earth, with scrikes the skies.
VVraths fierce forerunner is Timeritie,
And after Wrath Repentance shortly follows:
The first rides gallop into misery,
The last procures sadness, despair and sorrow.
Who therefore do desire to live at rest,
Let them not harbor wrath within their breast.
VVraths contrary is Lady Patience,
Who conquers most when she is conquered,
She teaches beasts that they by common sense,
Might teach to vanquish, being vanquished.
Rams running back with greater force return,
And Lime most hot, in most cold springs does burn.
Patience a cousin has calde Sufferance,
Nearly a kind, because she is so kind;
She is most like a Dove in countenance,
And like an Angel in her humble mind;
All Phaenix-like she is but rarely found,
Would God she might be seen on English ground.
Then naked swords themselves would never cloth,
With wounded skins of men whom men did maime:
Then quarrellers would after quaffing loath,
With stabs and strokes to kill or make men lame.
Then, then I say, swords might in scabberts sleep,
And some might laugh which are constrainde to weep.
As thus my pen writing of Vice spares none,
It brings into my sight a lazy Gill,
A sleeping sluggard and a drowsy drone,
Which snorts and snores, and ever sits still:
Some call her Sloth, some call her Idleness,
A friend to need, a foe to wealthinesse.
They term her Mother of all other vices,
Bearing a spawne of many new-bred sins:
Many she lures, and many she entices,
Whereof most part is trapped in her ginnes:
She is the But at which foul Lust does shoot,
And where she touches there she takes root.
I once did hear of one Lipotopo,
(Whose pace was equal with the shell-housde snaile)
That to a fig tree lasily did go,
Whose broad-leau'd branches made a shady veil:
Thither this lusking lubber softly creeped,
And there this lazy lizard soundly sleeped.
But as one Goffo by the fig tree went,
He wakened him from out his drowsy sleep,
And earnestly did ask him what he meant,
Under that fig tree all alone to keep.
As thus he did Lipotopo awake,
Yawning and gaping thus he idly spoke.
Good friend it is a pain for me to speak,
Because I use nothing but only sleeping:
Yet unto thee my mind I Will shortly break,
And show the cause of my here daily keeping.
The cause is this, that when these ripe figs fall,
My gaping mouth might then receive them all.
As thus he spoke, Goffo from off the tree
Plucked a ripe fig, and in his mouth did put it:
Which when he began to feel, my friend (quoth he)
I pray thee stir my jaws that I may glut it.
Goffo admiring this his laziness,
Left him as he him found in idleness.
O would my pen were now a pensill made,
And I a Poet might a Painter be,
That picture-like this pattern might be laid
Before men's eyes, that it their eyes might see;
By which they seeing Sloths deformity,
Might fly from sloth and follow industry.
Now does appear dame niggard Avarice,
Who being laden with gold gapes for gold:
She raises cheap things to the highest price,
And in Cheapside makes nothing chaepe be sold,
Which coin, her chests filled full, fulfill her eye,
Whilst poor folks perish in great misery.
She has been troubled long with one disease,
Which some a Dropsy call, or drouth of gain;
She drinks and drinks again, yet cannot ease
Her thirsty sickness and her greedy pain:
Still is she sick, yet is she never dead,
Because her sickness still is nourished.
Her body gross, engrosseth all the corn,
And of the grossest wares makes greatest gain:
Yea Grocers now adays as men forlorn,
Auerre that they against her have cause to plain:
Yet does she live, yet does she tyrannize,
Because her coin her works does wantantize.
This Avarice a cosin-germane has,
Which many Londoners call Usury,
Which like a brave comptroller boldly says,
She will bring England into misery:
Who under color of a friendly lending,
Seems of her bad trade to make just defending.
They hand in hand do walk in every street,
Making the proudest Caualiers to stoop:
If with their debtors they do chance to meet,
They pen them up within the Poultries coope.
And if for gold lent, men would counters pay,
In VVoodstreets Counter there them fast they lay.
Now Charity which is the band of peace,
Is turned to a Scriueners scribbling band,
To Indentura facta, or a lease,
To racking houses, tenements and land:
All this can gold, all this can silver do,
And more then this if need require thereto.
From whence comes gold but from the earth below?
Whereof, if not of earth are all men made?
Like will to like, and like with like will grow,
Growing they flourish, flourishing they fade.
But where are gold and men? in hell, where is hell?
On earth, where gold and men with gold do dwell.
The proverb old I do approve most true,
Better to fill the belly then the eye:
For whilst rich misers feeds on moneys view,
Sparing they live in wilful penury:
Yea more then this, they live upon a crust,
Whilst in their heaped bags their gold does rust.
Come plaintiff pen and whip them with thy rod,
And plainly tell them their Idolatry,
Which make their gold their love, their life, their god,
Which with their gold desire to live and die.
Tell them if to no better use they turn
Their gold, they with their gold in hell shall burn.
Thus leaving Usury and Avarice,
As Satan's limbs or firebrarnds of hell,
As ravening wolves that live by prejudice,
Or greedy hogs that on men's grounds do dwell:
I post to that which I had almost past,
But now have overtaken at the last.
The name of her whom here I meet withal,
Is Gluttony the mother of excess,
Which making dainty feasts, does many call
To eat with her the meat that she did dress:
Who being set to eat her toothsome meat:
Eating does eat and never cease to eat.
This trull makes youngsters spend their patrimony,
In sauced meats and sugared delicates,
And makes men stray from state of Matrimony,
To spend their substance upon whorish mates:
That by their lavish prodigality,
She may maintain her fleshly vanity.
With gobs she fills and stuffes her greedy gorge,
And never is her gaping stomach fed,
Bits vnchaw'de in her bulk as in a forge,
Kindle the coals whereof foul lust is bred:
Thus do we see how lazy gluttony,
Consorts her self with Lady Lechery.
One other mate she has called Drunkenness,
A bibbing swilbowle and a bowzing gull,
Which never drinks but with excessiveness,
And drinks so long until her paunch is full:
She drinks as much as she can well contain,
Which being voyded, then she drinks again.
But when the drink does work within her head,
She rowles and reekes, and pimpers with the eyes,
She stamps, she stares, she thinks white black, black red,
She tears and swears, she geeres, she laughes and cries:
And as her giddie head thinks all turns round,
She belching falls, and vomits on the ground.
Some men are drunk, and being drunk will fight,
Some men are drunk, and being drunk are merry,
Some men are drunk, and secrets bring to light,
Some men are drunk, and being drunk are sorry:
Thus may we see that drunken men have passions,
And drunkenness has many foolish fashions.
Fishes that in the seas do drink their fill,
Teach men by nature to shun drunkenness,
What bird is there that with his chirping bill,
Of any liquour ever took excess?
Thus beasts on earth, fish in seas, birds in sky,
Teach men to shun all superfluity.
Would any hear the discommodities,
That do arise from our excess of drink:
It duls the brain, it hurts the memory,
It blinds the sight, it makes men bleare-eyd blinke,
It kills the body, and it wounds the soul,
Leave therefore leave, O leave this vice so foul.
Now last of all though perhaps chief of all,
My pen has hunted out lewd Lechery,
Which many sins and many faults does call,
To be pertakers to her treachery:
Her love is lust, her lust is sugared sower,
Her pain is long, her pleasure but a flower.
When chaste Adonis came to man's estate,
Venus straight courted him with many a wile;
Lucrece once seen, straight Tarquine laid a bait,
With foul incest her body to defile:
Thus men by women, women wrongde by men,
Give matter still unto my plaintiff pen.
Thousands of whores maintained by their wooers,
Entice by land as Sirens do by seas,
Which being like path-waies or open doors,
Infect men's bodies with the French disease:
Thus women woe of men though wooed by men,
Still add new matter to my plaintiff pen.
VVhilome by nature men and women loved,
And prone enough they were to love thereby,
But when they Ouids ars amandi proved,
Both men and women fell to lechery:
By nature sinning art of sin was found,
To make man's sin still more and more abound.
If that I could paint out foul lechery,
In her deformed shape and loathsome plight,
Or if I could paint spotless Chastity,
In her true portraiture and colors bright:
I think no maid would ever prove an whore,
But every maid would chastity adore.
Then married men might vild reproaches scorn,
And shun the Hars crest to their hearts content,
With cornucopia, Cornwall, and the horn,
Which their bad wives bid from their bed be sent:
Then should no old Cocks, nor no cocke-olds crow,
But every man might in his own ground sow.
Then light-taylde huswiues which like Sirens sing,
And like to Circes with their drugs enchant,
Would not unto the Banke-sides round house fling,
In open sight themselves to show and vaunt:
Then then I say they would not masked go,
Though unseen to see those they feign would know.
But in this Labyrinth I list not tread,
Nor combat with the minotaure-like lust,
Hence therefore will I wend by methods thread,
And wend I will because needs wend I must:
Farewell, nay fare-ill filthy lechery,
And welcome undefiled chastity.
Vesta I do adore thy purity,
And in thy Temples will I tapers bear,
Thou O Diana for virginity,
Shall be the matrone of my modest fear,
That both in one, both being Goddesses,
May of my maden-head be witnesses.
O may my flesh like to the Ermiline,
Unspotted live, and so unspotted die,
That when I come before the sacred shrine,
My untouched corpse themselves may guiltless try:
Then shall I glory that I have bin taught,
To shun the snare wherein most folks are caught.
Thus has my pen described and descried,
Sin with his seven heads of seven deadly vices,
And now my plaintiff pen has verified,
That sin from virtue mortal men entices*
If any wicked Momus carpe the same,
In blaming this I pass not for his blame.
Dictator-like I must confess I write,
And like a Nomothetes critical,
Perhaps my pen does crabedly endite
In plaintiff humors merely Cinicall:
But sooth to say, Tom-teltroth will not lie,
We here have blazed Englands iniquity.
And for because my pen does liquour want,
Here (being dry) he willing is to rest,
Not for that he does further matter want,
For so to think were but a simple jest:
And if (as he has not) he have offended,
He hopes (as you) so he will be amended.
FINIS.

