A COLLECTION OF CERTAIN LETTERS AND CONFERENCES LATELY PASSED BETWIXT
CERTAIN PREACHERS and TWO PRISONERS IN THE FLEET.

1590.

To the Reader.
COnsidering the reformist Preachers are now become the BB^. trusty actors in
their most conning and cruel enterprises, who erewhile would make the world
believe that they neither pleaded for the BBs. took their ministry from them,
submitted it unto them, or subscribed unto their proceedings, no^ would ever
oppose against the truth or any part thereof, muchlesse be at the commaundment
of their LLs. the BBs. to persequute Christ's afflicted, or be partakers in
their innocent bloudshedding; again, that they pitied the ignorance of those
that went to far, and charitablie sought to reduce them. I thought it therefore
my duty (that the truth of these things might appear) to give thee to
understand how they have behaved themselves in this business, and what was the
power of their weapens in conference against those men, whom they have so
r^prochfully published in their Pulpits and wrytings to be silye men, whot
spirited, ignorant, Brownists, Schismatics etc. to the intent thou might
equally consider of both sides (by these few things discussed between them)
the estate of their controversies, as also how many of these Prisoners
Arguments against their Church, ministry, and administation lie upon them
vnans^red. For the Conferences, the truth of them thou may perceive in
certain Letters which passed betwixt them, how carefully and upon what sure
ground the Prisoners related them; And if tho^ find not such pith or substance
in the matters discussed betwixt them of weighty doctrines as might be
expected of such men, thou must consider and may perceive that these
Preachers were loath to have the sore touched, but by euasions sought always to
darke^ and torn away the truth with indirect answers and co^ning
distinctions. And to make the matter more evident, I have at the latter end
anexed certain Arguments, given their chief Teachers long ago to have
answered by writing, the which they have (as these Prisoners report) closely
put up, and with an evil conscience spoken evil in their Pulpits, in stead of
consent and repentance. Which course of railing and denying of free conference
thou see^t they still are wholly bent to proceed in, how unchristian soever it
be, thinking thereby their auditorie shall still be held in false reports and
blindness; sufficiently satisfied upon these men's words to persequute these
poor afflicted Prisoners, who love not their lives unto death, that the truth
might come to light to thy salvation. And (to my grief) I must desire thee to
remember, that the Preachers are to nothing more unwilling, then to grant these
sillye men a free conference, making no scruple in the mean time to speak all
manner evil sayings of them, vnconuicted by them of any error or crime, which
bewrays both their corrupt ways wherein they walk, that may not be brought
to trial, and also their spirit to be void of true Christian love, howsoever
they pretend outward holiness. As ^hou find God give thee grace without
pa^tialitie to valewe and esteem the truth of God, not after m^ns persons, but
as the cause it self requires; and the peace of God shall rest upon thee for
ever.

The sum of the Conference betwixt Mr. THOMAS SPERIN and me HENRY BARROVV
upon the 14 of the third Month in the Fleet, as nere as my ill memory could
carry away.
SPER. FIrst Mr. Sperin signified unto me that he was sent by the Bishop of
London to confer with me concerning certain things that I was said to hold,
Namely that there was no Church in England.


BAR. I answered that for the Bishop of London I had nothing to do with him,
neither he with me; what I hold concerning their Church of England the
Bishhopps knew long ago, and never as yet would grant either public or
private conference, where the Book of GOD might quietly decide the
controversies betwixt us; but they had ymprisoned me in close and most straight
ymprisonment now two years and well nigh an half, besides many more grievous
injuries offered unto us, as publishing us Heretics, Schismatiks, Anabaptists,
Recusants, turbulent, sedicious, and what not in their Pulpits, priuileged
books, sparsed libells, accused us for such unto ou^ most honorable
magistrates at publ^cke Sessio^s etc. Therefore I had just cause to suspect any
conferencc that he could send unto me, considering his manifold mischeivous
practices against the Gospel and true servants of CHRIST continually.


SPER. Herevppon Mr. Sperin protested his coming to be in love to conser
brotherly and christianly with me, not unto my harm or prejudice any kind of
way, and began in some faint ^ermes to def^nd the B. of London to be learned,
grave, wise etc.


BAR. I said that could not be, he was a grievous enemy unto the truth, to
CHRIST, and his Saints, now holding above 60. of them in sundry Prisons
without cause, law, or conscience; Y^a I affirmed him to be an APOSTATA, a
persecuter of that truth he sometime gladly (...) and defended, and therefore
his name was grievous and hateful unto me; and further I demanded of Mr. Sperin
his name, which being understood, I willed him from henceforth to use his own
n^me unto me, for so I would not deny any kind of conference at any time,
which was in my power to grant; but I said that I merueled to see him come now
in the BBs. name, because I had heard he had sometimes been otherwise minded.


SPER. To this he answered that he ever thought reverently of the Bishopps,
both for their learning, as also because her Majesty has authorized them.


BAR. I showed their unlawful ANTICHRISTIAN Beastlike power and authority, as
also their barbarous hauock they exercised in the Church, confounding and
subuerting all Gods ordinances, and setting up their own devises in stead
thereof; And therefore they that reverence these men call CHRIST execrable, and
worship the beast.


SPER. Here Mr. Sperin objected against me the place of IVDE, that I despised
government, and spoke evil of them in authority.


BAR. If the things I have spoken be true, or that their authority be not of
God (both which I affirm and will approve by the word of God) then you greatly
iniure both this Scripture and me.


SPER. Their authority is of God, in as much as it is of the Prince.


BAR. The Prince cannot make lawful that which God forbids, namely to have
and exercise both ecclesiastical and civil authority, as this man does from
whom you come.


SPER. I justify not his ecclesiastical authority, but that authority he
has from the Prince.


BAR. If he be a civil magistrate why is he called a Bishop, and usurps an
ecclesiastical function?


SPER. May not civil magistrates be called Bishops?


BAR. I never read that they were so in the new Testament, yet I acknowledge
they are called Shepherds in EZEKIEL and MICAH, but this man we speak of was
fometimes a Parson of a Town, if not of more then one, then an Archdeacon,
now a Lord B. which offices by their use appear, and by the laws of our land
are held to be ecclesiastical.


SPER. Much is to be given to the Princes authority.


BAR. We will afterward speak of the Princes authority, let us first enquire
of these their offices.


SPER. I will not here reason further of them; For there were many in the
windows, and by this time was my keeper returned with paper and ynke, which he
was a little before sent for.

I had forgotten to insert certain speech we had concerning the Church: I told
Mr. Sperin that I neu^r deni^d that CHRIST h^d his Church in England, but that
Church was s^perate and gathered from the profane of the land, and now in gr^t
p^rsecution under the malignant Church. He then demanded of me what I thouht of
their parish assemblies; I answered that as they stood in this confusion and
Idolatry, they could not be held the true e^tablished Churches of CHRIST. Now
the ynke and paper being brought Mr. Sperin set down this Proposition.


SPER. The parish assemblies which have preaching Ministers who for life and
doctrine are unreprovable, and which themselves pr^fesse the true faith and
Christian obedience, are Churches.


BAR. Hereunto I set down this other Proposition.

Your parish assemblies as they generally consist of all profane, wicked
etc. mingled together in one body, worshipping God after the deui^es of men,
s^anding in subjection ^o the An^ichristian power and Courts of the BBs. etc.
though they have a preaching Ministry, yet are not the true established
Churches of Christ.

I denied also his Proposition, Namely that there were any such parishes which
made such profession of faith and obedience, and had such a Minister as he
spoke of, which he endeavored to prove thus.


SPER. They are as lawful Churches of Christ, as the assembly of believers in
Corinth was a lawful Church of Christ; But tha^ assembly was a lawful
Church of Christ 1. Corinthians. 1. 2.


BAR. Your first Proposition is denied.


SPER. What soever was necessary to the decerning of the Church of God in the
assembly of Corinth, is in our assemblies.


BAR. It is still denied.


SPER. The profession of faith and obedience, ministry and Sacraments, were
the necessary points whereby to discern that Church, but these we have in as
good or better manner then they.


BAR. It is not so with you, you have not these things in such manner as the
Church of Corinth had.


SPER. I will insist upon my Parish in milkstreet; It makes such profession
of faith, has such a ministry of the Gosp^ll etc.


BAR. It makes not such profession, nor has such a ministry of the Gospel.


SPER. Some of the Church of Corinth erred in chief points o^ the faith,
denying the resurrection etc. They erred in manners being given to fornication,
incest, oppression, Drunkenness, their ministry were vaineglorious, mixing and
teaching their doctrines with the words that ma^s wisdom affords,
de^iuering their Sacraments after a corrupt and evil manner etc. Yet for all
these faults they were pronounced by the holy Gho^t the Church of God; But in
my Parish in milkstreet we hold no such opinions or errors, we have no such
faults either in life or manners, nor in our ministry; so ours is much more
the Church of God.


BAR. It is veri^ preposterous to reason of the ministraco^n of, and i^ the
Church, before you have proved your Pari^h to be an established Church, which
you see I deny, and require you to prove; In all this you have reasoned from a
Church to no Church, and so no comparison betwixt them, nor sequel of your
Argument. The best Church that ever was or shall be whilst it consists of
mortal me^ is daily subject to many errors, which faults being showed in the
glass of Gods word, it by and by washes and purges them away in that
fountain which is opened to the house of DAVID for s^nne and uncleanness;
sondrie of the Church of Corinth erred in many of these things, the whole
Church in some, as in the abuse of both the Sacraments, the neglect of their
^cclesiasticall cen^ures; But the Church of Corinth upon the Apostles
admonition by one letter repented, showed great sorrow, and amended. But now
for your Parish it consists of a co^fuse company of profane; Atheists,
covetous, glu^tons, vain, light, ignorant, and wicked people of al degrees and
estates, of each sex^ and age, they being all generally without the knowledge,
faith, or fear of God, without care of this life or of the life to come* to
all which you indifferently administer and sell your Sacraments, delyuering
them in a false manner not according to CHRIST'S Testament; Your whole ministry
and ministraco^n is false and Antichristian; Further you have neither the
freedom to practice CHRIST'S Testament, nor the power or will to redress any
thing that is amiss emongst you, but e^ther run to the Antichristian power
and Courts of the Bishopps, or else continue obstinat and careless in your
sins. Thus you see no comparison any way betwixt the Church of Corinth and
your Parish.


SPER. I know the contrary to this, I both know and visit all the householders
and their families, and I admit not any to the Sacraments which have not
knowledge and make true profession of faith.


BAR. I know this I have said to be true, and that you have and do admit some
to your Sacraments which have no such knowledge and make no such profession of
faith.


SPER. What is true profession?


BAR. Where faith and obedience are joined to the word of God.


S^. They all make true profession and belelee^e accordingly, who so does not,
I separate him from the Sacraments.


BAR* Their ungodly life and false manner of worshipping of God show, that they
neither profess nor believe aright; further thi^ your manner of suspending or
seperating, is as popish as the rest, even the Instrument of that foolish
Shepherd: where find you in all CHRIST'S Testament that one man may separate
any alone?


SPER. I do it with the consent of the people.


BAR. How should that be when they know not of it: Do no^ you yt by virtue of
your Idol Seruice-booke, and by that power your Lord the Bishop allows you?
for CHRIST neue^ gave any such censure as this suspenco^n ^o his Church, or
such power to any one man to separate any from the Sacraments, which is not
pronounced excommunicat.


SPER. PAVL to the Thessa^ians wills that such as are found disobedient
should be noted with a letter, and his company avoided that he might be
ashamed.


BAR. You alledg not the text right, neither does the Apostle there mean of
Suspenco^n: It is wonderful how you and some others that have written of, and
seemed to seek reformation, dare thus apparently innouate the Testament of
CHRIST, by bringing in your devises into the Church and putting them in stead
of a Scepter into CHRIST'S hand, making him to reign by them, and exercise them
over the souls of men.

By this time many being gotten into the Parlour and more into the wyndowes,
we thought it meet to remove up to the chamber where I lie: Being come
thither and set down, I willed Mr. Sperin to find out and apply his place of
the Thessal^nia^s, which he did: It was 2. Thessal. 3. 14. and could serve
nothing for suspenco^n. The place not being further enforced or stood upon by
Mr. Sperin, I called back again to the point where we left, or rather where we
began viz. That he should prove his Parish in milkstreet to be a true
established Church of CHRIST; And thervppon I set him down this Argumen^ in
writing.

In your Congregation in Milkstreet you have no holy or orderly commu^ion nor
true Ministry of the Gospel, no Christian power, freedom ^r order, therefore
no true established church of Christ.


SPER. Here Mr. Sperin affirmed again his parishioners to be a faithful,
holy, free people, walking orderly according to the Gospel, and proved it
thus; because he does administer the Sacraments to none but unto such as he
knows faithful, saying that he knows all the parishioners both men and
women to be such, excep^ one household, neither did he admit any of their (...)
to the Communion before they came to him, and fetch^ his token, at which time
he examined them.


BAR. Were not all the parish of your Church, and did not you administer the
Sacraments unto them all and to their seed, even the first day you were made
their Pastor? how could you then have this assurance of their faith?


SPER. They had before a faithful and godly man to their P^stor (naming Mr.
Paget) by whom they were instructed, therefore there was no cause that I should
doubt of their faithfulness.


BAR. I wene that man still lives; Thus you buy and sell, chop and change your
^cclesiasticall offices and lyuings of your Church as horses in a fair; he was
eue^ as unlawful a minister as your self, he showed himself a hireling in that
he forsook his flock.


SPER. Why is ^t not lawful with consent of the flock, upon some occasions to
remove?


BAR. But the Priests of England come and go at their own pleasure as best
is for their gain, without the priuitie or goodwill of the people; he showed
himself a hireling both at his entrance and departure, so could he no way
^ustifie or approve this whole parish unto you; But let me ask you a question,
how found Mr. Paget this parish?


SPER. Peradventure they had a Preacher before; But why ask you?


BAR. For this reason, because in Q. MARY'S time they were all apostate and
fallen to Idolatry; at the beginning of Q. ELISABETH^ r^igne they were all
found in that estate, and by the first sound of her Trompet all made
Protestants, had this ministry set oue^ them, the Gospel and Sacraments
ymmed^atlie administered* eu^ in the same parishes and estate as they now stand:
So that I would know of you whether this people in this estate were a fit flock
or Congregaco^n to receive the ministry of the Gospel and Sacraments or no;
and also whether any Preacher (^ow conning soever) can make this people, which
co^tynue in the same estate, without any repentance or amend^me^t of their
former doing^* the true Church of CHRIST or no.


SPER. Neither did they all apostate in Q. MARY'S days, neither do I think
they thereby forsook their christianity, or were no Church.


BA^. Idolatry was the^ publikly set up and exercised in their Church, all the
parish resorted and gave outward obedience to the same, such as refreined were
either forthwith persecuted unto the death, or out of the land; therefore I may
affirm that all the pa^ that remained were generally apostate, and so found
and received in that estate of this ministry to these Sacraments, and so
successively have they continued to administer unto them for the wage of
BALAA^. Now that in this ^ime of popery and Idolatry they could be no Church,
the whole first Table of the law shows plainly. There is but one God, one
Spirit, one Faith, one Christ, one Church, one Ministry: Christ is not
divided* he is not here and there, neither does he communicate with Antichrist
or Idols.

There must needs then be a separation made of the faithful from the
vnbeleeners, Idolaters, profane, before there can be a flock or fit people for
the Lord.

There must needs also be a flock befo^ there can be a Pastor or true ministry
erected or exercised; but as yet your parish in milk^treet was never thus
separate from the profane of the land, or prepared to receive or exercise the
ministry of CHRIST; therefore both people and ministry are still in confusion
and disorder, and cannot be held the true established Church of CHRIST.


SPER. They are separate from the propha^e, neither suffer I ani^ such to
communicate there.


BAR. They still stand in the same estate and confusion that they were first
received at the beginning of our Q. ELIZABETH'S reign, even all the pari^h that
now dwell there, or hereafter shall dwell there, without exception of any
person, all are of your Church, none all this while seperat, no not one put
from emongst you; therefore you stand in the same estate that the rest do, eve
one body with all the wocked of the land, vnless^ you also think that there are
none wicked emongst you, none wicked in the land.


SPER. I know none wicked in all my parish.


BAR. What not one wicked all this while? s^re you then have a more excellent
Church the^ ever was on the earth: But trow you ^re none wicked in all the
land, with whom you stand one body? (for all are of your Church) will you
justify also all the Pari^ of England?


SPER. I will justify all those Parishes that have preaching ministers.


BAR. And what think you of those that have vnpre^ching ministers?


SPER. I think not such to be true Churches.


Mr. Speri^ ^as here requested to set down this under his h^nd, but would not.

BAR. Surely these Preachers are wondrous men, they can do more then ever our
Savior CHRIST or his Apostles could do with their preaching, that in all places
wheresoever they become can eftsoons ymmediatly make that Church which ere
while was none, the true Church of Christ, and that all the Parish without
exception of an^e one person, and that even as soon as they are become
ministers of the same. But what if that Parish where an unpreaching Priest is,
make the same profession that the other do that have Preachers, are they then
no Churches?


SPER. Yes if they make the same profession of faith, then I hold them Churches
also.


BAR. That they do: All the Parishes in England have the same confession,
Creed, and english Seruice-booke read, as the Papists also have the same
Creedes, Pater-nosters, Pistles, Gospels, and much of this Seruice-booke,
therefore they are all of the Church, and so we are again where we began, and
all the land of your Church, without seperaco^ or exceptio of person; for all
the land makes this confession after this manner.

But we have enough now spoken of these Parishes, let us come to the ministry
of your Church of England, what shall we think of the unpreaching ministry, is
it a ministry or no?


SPER. It is necessary that the Church should have the Scriptures read, and
that by a minister.


BAR. You answer not the point; the question is, whither they be ministers or
no.


SPER. I think they are Ministers.


BAR. Pastors they cannot be, because they cannot teach; which Mr. SP^RIN
consented unto: Yet adventure they to deliver, and the Parishes to receive
their Sacraments, which none but Pastors can do; They also both possess and
supply the rooms of parish-Parsons. But I would now see how you can approve
your own ministry by the Testament of CHRIST; which he cnde uored to do by
this Proposition.


Sper. My Ministry is from God, with the appro^ion of the assembly of (...)
Church where I am.


BAR. That cannot be, you were presented by your L. Patron, instituted by your
L. Bishop in some place at his appointment, not in the presence of your
Congregation, they were not called neither had they any thing to do with the
action, they must take of force such an one as is thrust upon them by these
LLs* the Patron and Bishop; they have neither consent nor descent nor any
thing to do in this action; they can neither choose nor refuse nor put away for
any fault that their Parson can commit, be it never so heinous; be he an
Heretic, Coniurer, Adulterer, Drunkerd, they can for no error or crime put him
away, they mu^ join unto him in prayer and Sacraments until the Bishop remou^
him. Thus have ye not that approbation eue^ of this people you speak of, which
though you had could nothing avail but rather overthrow your ministry, they
being as yet ungathered to Christ, and therefore neither may in this estate
choose a Minister; nor any exe^ise a ministry unto them, without ^eynous
sacrilege: But this your ministry both in your entrance, office, and whole
administration is Antichristian, your entrance being by the Patron and Bishop,
your office to be a town Priest or parish Parson, your administraco^n
according to the prescriptio^ and limitatio^ of your L the Bishop, to whom you
have sworn your Cannonicall obedience.


SPER. The Patron does elect by consent of the people, who have yielded their
right unto him, as unto the wisest and worthiest emongst them, and so they
approve his choice.


BAR. Whether the Patron had that power and priuiledg of the people o^ no is
doubtful I think rather of the Pope: But that he does it without their
priuitie and maugre their wylls, it is evident; For be the Patron an hundredth
miles of, be he^ child, a woman, yet they both may and will give the Benefice
without the knowledge, priuitie, or consent of the parish. Now which way can
either this election be justified by the Testament of Christ, or be joined unto
the ministry of Christ?


SPER. I make less matter of my ordinaco^n then of my ministry.


BAR. Yet without a true calling you cannot exercise any true offic^.


SPER. The calling is not the substance of the ministry.


BAR. Thus whilst you profess science you make shipwreck of faith, and with
your logic put away the Testament of Christ. Christ faith that he which
ascends into the shepefolde any other way is a thief and a spoyler; and in
^other place; No man takes this honor to himself, but he that is called of
God etc. Christ has ordained to every offic^ laws for the gifts, lif, and
conversation of the Officer, for his probation, election, ordinaco^n,
administraco^n: He which wants the calling of Christ unto the ministry
cannot have or exercise any ministry in the Church; but you want the calling
of Christ unto your ministry; therefore the ministry you exercise is not of
Christ.


SPER. I have the true calling of Christ unto my ministry in my conscience.


BAR. The Conscience only is assured, and re^h upon the word of God; But your
calling unto this ministry cannot be (...) by the word of God, but is found
thereby to be unlawful and antichristian; Therefore etc.


SPER. I stand not upon my outward calling by the Bishop so much as upon my
inward calling and the consent of the people.


BAR. But the people you said erewhile consented to the election of the Patron,
the ordinaco^n of the B. etc. therefore their consent was unto and in enill, and
so can no way justify your ministry, neither have the people any power to
make any other or better Election, all of them standing under the
antichristian yoke of these Babilonish Bishopps.


SPER. I will not stand to justify the calling of the Bishopps, I have a
better calling then the calling of the Bishopps.


BAR. But what then think you of the calling of these BB^*


SPER. I confess it to be unlawful.


BAR. Set down that under your hand.


SPER. To wh^t end; that were to bring my self into danger.


BAR. Are you afraid to witness unto the truth? Well, but being unlawful how
(...) you were not afeard to receive it, and still to re^eine it?


SPER. I did i^ in ignor^nce, I have since repented yt.


BAR. Which way could you be a true minister that knew not so much as the true
entrance unto a true ministry; how durst you adventure to administer before
the Lord, and take the care of the souls of men in this ignorance? Further how
can you be said to have truly repented that calling which you still retain,
still administering by the same the Bishops license, and still standing under
his yoke and obedience?


SPER. I attribute much to the civil magistrate, I do it because of the civil
magistrate that authoriseth the B.


BAR. But may the civil magistrate either comm^d any thing contrary to the
(...) of God* or if he do is ^e to be obeyed therein, or ca he excuse you befo^
the Tribunal of Christ for the breach of Gods laws?


SPER. Why then you affirm that the Queen and the Parliament do wickedly in
gyuing this power and authority unto the BBs. will you write that?


BAR. Yea that I will by the grace of God whilst I have breath, and (...) it
with my blood also (if so God will) yt being directly contrary to the Testament
of Christ as your self confesses, and yet continue to do contrary to your own
Conscience O take heed, God is greater then your conscience: It is a fearful
thing to fall into the hands of the living God.


SPER. I thank God I have his calling unto my ministry, which is the inward
calling, being approved by my gyft^s unto my Flock, so that though there were
error in my outward calling (which I have repented) yet my ministry is not
disanulled.


BAR. With what conscience can you now call that an error in a true calling,
which even now you confessed to be a false calling? Is not this to diminish,
excuse, and hide your sin? call you this true repentance, how can you be
thought, or dare you affirm to have repeted this error in your entrance into
your ministry, when you still plead for and justify that calling by the
civil magistrate, when you confess it repugnant unto, and condemned in the
Testamet of CHRIST, how can you be said to have repented it when you still
retain it, stand and administer by yt, and join unto such as still enter that
way? neither in deed have you a^ie other calling unto your ministry in your
Church: make it therefore either good or evil, lawful or unlawful by the word
of God, let us bring it to the trial.


SPER. I stand not so much by their calling as by the calling of God, by whom I
am enabled to my ministry.


BAR. This is Anabap^isticall to justify open transgression by the inward
conscience or gifts; might not any thus usurp the civil magistrates office
also by their inward gifts, wisdom, knowledge, fitness etc. but God has
ordained a lawful calling to every lawful office, which may at no hand be
severed from the office* which calling who so wants and takes honor to
himself to administer etc. breaks the bounds of God and usurps: You have
no gifts which you have not received of God, God knows his own gifts which
he has given to every one best whom h^ sees meet and has appointed to the
ministry, unto such he always gives a lawful calling unto the ministry;
wherefore you must either approve your calling by the word of God, or else be
held (...) usurper, for all your gifts.


SPER. The BBs. tolerate many things with us.


BAR. They allow nothing but their own proceedings, neither does the land
receive or allow any other.


SPER. I say not allow, they may suffer that they allow not.


BAR. Here is good work emongst you, they tolerate with you, and you subscribe
unto them; thus are you together in conspiracy against CHRIST.


SPER. Will you say that Mr. EGERTON and Mr. GARDENER are not true ministers of
the Gospel because they have no such calling as you require?


BAR. I require no other calling then CHRIST enioyneth, which calling if they
want (as I am sure they do) I dare affirm that they do not serve Christ in the
ministry of the Gospel* all extraordinary offices and callings thereunto
being now ceased.


SPER. All the Churches and learned in EVROPE give us consent and allow us for
Ministers.


BAR. But until you approve your selves such by the word of God yt will
nothing avail you.


SPER. Our gifts and Doctrines approve our ministry: Did you ever hear Mr.
EGERTON and Mr. GARDENER?


BAR. You still oppose your gifts against God, and hold the faith in respect
of men's persons: The me^ you speak of I never heard in their ministry, but I
know them by their ministry to be notable Sectories and false Teachers.


SPER. They be men of singular gifts, and how can you give out this of them
and know them not, neither ever heard them teach.


BAR. I am taught to know the tree by the fruit, a false Minister by his
antichristian entrance, office, and administration, all which are notably found
upon them and upon you all; neither will I say that the one of the^ bought
his Benefice, or that the other has been convinced of false Doctrines by his
own Auditorye sundry times.


SPER. The first has repented that, and you have the other but by hearesay:
they are known to be learned men, and such as teach sound Doctrines.


BA^. My hearesay has better proof then your know; But how can these or any
of you teach sound Doctrine sincerely in a false ministry? BALAAM, and the
Pharisees, and Satan himself had and has as great gifts and learning as they
or any of you: But if we would come even to this preaching you boste of, I
suppose more corrupt Teachers cannot be found in any age then these, they
teaching nothing almost truly, much less sincerely.


SPER. I teach Christ Jesus very God and very man, and him crucified, and that
truly.


BAR. I will not press you with any Arguments drawn from your, false
entrance and administraco^n, all which undoubtedly convince that you cannot
preach CHRIST soundly, yet is there no heretic that holds not some truth:
But this I affirm and will approve that you deny the whole anointing of CHRIST
in his three Offices of KING, PRIEST, and PROPHET, and therefore you deny CHRIST
to be come in the flesh, and cannot preach him soundly; I grant indeed that
you preach him crucified in your Sermons and Church, buffet^d, skourged,
cr^wned with thorn^s, by ^ayling, blasph^ming, and impri^ning le is faithful
witnesses and servants daily at all hand^s, you preach him blindfoulded by
drawing a veil over his fac^, that the people should not see to the end of his
ministry, not one of you either Priest or people as yet knowing what
belongs to a true profession, a true Communion, a true Office, or a true
entrance, much less to true administration: CHRIST crucified you all abhor,
you cannot abide his cross, you will not suffer or abide by any truth, but
daily seek new cauills, distinctions and ^uasions to hide any truth which
brings d^nger, or to avoid the cross of CHRIST, and therefore you shall not
reign with him. It were an infinite thing to reckon up the diuerfitie of
opinions, sects, errors that are found emongst you of the ministry, it being
almost an impossible thing to find two of you of one ^udgment, or any one of
you constant to your selves, except it be in evil; one preaching one Doctrine
in one place, and another the quite contrary in another place, y^a some of your
chief Teachers have preached p^linoda^ concerning your ministry and
Sacraments of your Church: But I would now know what office these men you
speak of, or your self do execute.


SPER. Mr. EGERTON is a Doctor, Mr. GARDENER and my self are pastors.


BAR. Your Church of England has no such office as the Teachers Office, yt
has no other then University Doctors, which are not in any office, or thereby
Ministers: I wene also he has a dumb Minister one that cannot preach for his
Pastor; so that he is a hireling Curat and no Christian Teacher. As for Mr.
GARDENER and your self, you be parish Parsons, and therefore cannot be held
christian Pastors.


SPER. I deny your Argument, it follows not because they are termed Parsons,
therefore they are not Pastors.


BAR. Both the name and Office are diverse, therefore not the same.


SPER. The Parson is called in latin Rector Ecclesiae, which name properly
agrees to the Pastor.


BAR. Your latin name is popish, one of the names of blasphemy written upon
the heads of the Beast, for CHRIST has appointed many to the office of
governing and ouerseeing, and not the Pastor only: And therefore this name is
not proper to the Pastor.


SPER. The Pastor should govern the Church.


BAR. But the Pastor is not to govern yt alone, there are others joined in
Commission with him, therefore he cannot in this manner be called the rector of
the Church, though he be a governor emongst the rest: But the office of a
parish Parson is as greatly diverse from the office of a Pastor, as the name
is, for if Mr. FOX say true, they were first created when the Metropolitan
BBs. spra^g up, as Baylifes unto them; Further, I never read in the new
Testament that the Pastor of a Church should be so stinted and limited by other
Ministers, as you are by your Lord Bishop, his Chancell^r, Commissary and
Arch-Deaco^; I marvel what ecclesiastical offices these men that thus rule
over so many Pastors and Churches also, have.


SPER. Though the Parson be called rector Ecclesiae yet he does not govern
alone, there are others joined with him.


BAR. Who be these? I never heard of any such.


SPER. The Churchwardens and Sidemen etc.


BAR. What are these governors also? SPE. Yea.


BAR. To say the truth neither the one nor the other do govern but stand in
most miserable and servile subjection to the BBs. and to their substitutes: or
if this government should be their own (as you surmise) most Antichristian it
is, and such as no true Pastors or Elders may execute in the Church of CHRIST:
But are you not afeard Mr. SPERIN thus to gloss and counterfeit to cover these
marked soldiers of the Beast, with the names and titles of Christ's Officers?
will you set down this under your hand?


Whervppon Mr. SPERIN set down this Proposition.

Some Pa^sons may be Pastors Ephe 4. Some Churchwardens and Sydemen may be
Elders ^ Timoth. 4. But those that cannot preach are no Pastors, and those
Churchwardens that cannot govern are no Elders.

BAR. Those are wonderful governors as ever I heard of, I had thought these
Churchwardens had rather been the Collectors or Deacons of your Church,
because they gather and dispense th'almes of your Churches. But now to your
Parsons, they have a diverse and discrepant 1. Name 2. Office 3. Entrance unto
their Office both in Election and Ordination, 4. Administraco^n, 5.
maintenance or living: For all which reasons severed, and joined none of your
Parsons can be true Pastors.


SPER. The name of Pastor is of no moment, for they are also called Governors
and Overseers, as well as Pastors.


BAR. But this name of Pastor is only peculiar and does distinguish the office
of the Pastor from others, and so does neither the name of Elder nor Ouerseer,
but being in Counsel and government common to him with others, are also given
indifferently to him with other: Therefore this name of Pastor is of great
monent and can neither be altered nor spared, as whereby the wisdom of GOD does
both distinguish and express the Office, therefore if you take away or change
this name, you also take away and change the Office, no other name that can be
devised by man sufficing to distinguish and express this Office, as this does.

Thus the time not suffering to follow or urge the other points alleged
against this Office, we for this time ceased; Mr. SPERIN making promise to come
again, and if he could to bring some other with him.


The sum of a Conference had between Mr. SPERIN and Mr. EGERTON of the one
side* And HENRY BARROVV and JOHN GREENVVOOD of the other side in their Chamber
where they were kept close Prisoners in the Fleet, upon the 20. of the 3.
Month 1590.
Mr. SPERIN coming before Mr. EGERTON more then half an hour, and not being
certain of M. EGERTONS coming, they not staying therevppo^, straight ways
entered speech.

SPER. I would know the causes of your forsaking our Church.


BAR. Why, have you forgot all our last Conference? I then showed you many
causes.


SPER. I took it, because all the people were received into the Church at the
beginning of her Majesty's reign (without any proof of their Faith or due
order) was the cause.


BAR. The unworthiness and confusion of the people, together with


BAR. the unlawful ministry, ministration and ecclesiastical government now
exercised emongst you, were assedged for causes.


SPER. But neither our ministry or people are such now.


BAR. All the land in the beginning of her Majesty's reign were compelled and
received into your Church in one day from open Apostacy and gross Idolatry,
without the preaching of the Gospel going before, this self same ministry set
over them, and Sacraments administered unto them, in this estate wherein they
are now found and remain.


SPER. I know not what then was done, I was but. 8. years old, neither suppose
I that you can remember it: Therefore I will no^ meddle therewith.


BAR. I reason from the first gathering and planting of your Church, which I
proo^e unto you to be unlawful, and contrary to Christ's Testament: For it was
never read there, that any Church has been gathered and planted by civil
force and without the preaching of the Gospel going before; or that all so
suddenly and confusedly were received into the Church.


SPER. I will not justify their doings then: But now I affirm all my people
to profess.


BAR. How should they profess, when they stand in the same estate and
transgression they then did?


SPER. I deny that: They which were the^ vnbele^uers do now believe.


BAR. That can not be.


GREN. But before you proceed further, it is necessary that Mr. SPERIN either
justify or disalowe of the gathering of the Church then.


SPER. I will not justify that gathering by constraint.


GREN. Set down that under your hand.


SPER. What need that, you hear I say it.


BAR. But for the better prooceeding set it down under your hand, or else
defend it, and we will disprooue it.

Where upon Mr. SPERIN set down this Propositi^n under his hand.


SPER. I do not maintain that Church that was gathered, and as it was from
papisterie compelled to b^ protestants in the beginning of her Majesty's Reign.


BAR. I will prove that your Parishes still remain in the same estate, as
they were then gathered*

Your Parishes now consist of the same people and their seed, as yet no
separation made, still remaining under the same Ministry, worship,
Sacraments, Courts, Ecclesiastical government: Therefore they are in the same
estate.


SPER. Most of these that at the beginning of her Mats. Reign were received
into the Church, are dead and changed, and new come into their rooms.


GREN. You have them or their seed.


SPER. Once in twelve years lightly the most part of the Parish changes, as
I by experience know, some goinge, and others coming.


GREN. But none come but such as then were received, or their seed: For they
go but from one parish to another, all the Parishes being one body, one
Church.


BAR. I would have you answer unto my former Proposition, wherein I have showed
your Parishes to be in the same estate, wherein they then were planted.


SPER. I deny that: For neither all the people remain, neither are they the
same people, for they were then vnbelee^ers, and now they that remain believe
or profess the faith, now they willingly profess faith, which then
constrainedlie confessed faith.


BAR. This distinction of AVGSTINE will deceive you, for how should the
unlawful and ungodly actions of any past, be justified by his faith
following: Faith does not justify but forsake transgression: Again how should
they be said to have Faith, or to have left their sins, which still continue
in the same confusion, disorder, false ministry, false worshipp, false
government.


SPER. They do not so.


BAR. I will prove all this in due order. And first that you have the same
people and their seed in the same confusion.


GREEN. All the land is now of your Church.


SPER. It is not so.


BAR. All the Queens natural subjects that dwell in any Parish are of your
Church, because every Parish is of your Church.


SPER. All the Queens subjects that dwell in our parishes are not of our
Church.


BAR. They are of the parish: Therefore of the Church.


SPER. There dwell many papists that are not of our Church.


BAR. Even those papists are of your Church: And thus I prove it.

None but those of the Church may offer in the Church or have any communion
with the Saints, or have any interest in the ministry: But the papists
communicate with your Church and ^aue interest in the ministry, in that they
contribute together with the parish unto the ministry. Therefore the papists
that dwell among you are of your Church.


SPER. Why is it not lawful for the Minister to be maintained with the goods
of unbelievers.


BAR. Unbelievers have nothing a do, neither are bound to the maintenance of
the ministry: This contribution is called in the new Testament a duty and
communion of the Saints, an offering and sweet odoure unto God.

But unbelievers may have no spiritual communion with the Saints neither may
offer with them in the Church, neither have interest or any thing to do with
the ministry.

Therefore may not be bound, nor received to contribute unto the maintenance of
the ministry.


SPER. I deny that.


BAR. Why, it is proved by all these reasons. Further it is expresslie
forbidden. Leuit. 22. 25. that the Priest might not receive any manner of
offering, were it never so perfect at the hand of a stranger: Therefore much
less may the Minister of Christ.

Mr. Sperin in reading the text would give no judgment of it, until he had
further considered thereof.


BAR. I will prove it by a necessary reason unto you. None that was not a
Jew, or come unto the faith might enter into the Temple, much less contribute
or offer in the Temple.

At this time Mr. EGERTON entered, who being set down with them and made
acquainted with the present discourse, they proceeded as follows.

The place of Leuit. being read again and further enforced thus: The oblations
of the wicked are an obhomination unto the Lord. But the tithes and
contributions of the papists are oblations of the wicked: Therefore they are an
abomination etc.


SPER. But may not the minister receive any gifts of unbelievers?


BAR. Yea, they may receive or inherit civil things, that are given by, or
belonged to unbelievers.


SPER. It is w^itten. 1. Cor. 10. If the unbelievers bidd you to a feast etc.
eat, making no question.


GREEN. We doubt not but all Christians may receive in private or Civil
respects, the goods or benevolence of unbelievers: But you must put difference
between that contribution in communion, to and with the Church, and civil and
private ben^volence.


SPER. The Apostle Gala. 6. wills all that are taught in the word to
communicate of their goods unto them that teach them: But the papists are
taught by us in the word: Therefore they may contribute unto us in our
ministry.


GREEN. This place is to be understood of such as are received into, and taught
in the Church, and not of all them that are without the Church, and hear the
ministry thereof: The Apostle gave not this rule to them.


BAR. The recusant papists are not instructed of you, the other papists are both
instructed, and they and their seed admitted unto the sacraments: But all
contribute and pay tithes and so are all of your Church.


SPER. In my Parish I admit no papists or open unworthy unto the Sacraments.


GREEN. Your Parish has as yet made no seperatio^ from the papists or profane
of the land: Therefore you do not separate the unworthy.


SPER. They are now believers, that before were unbelievers; they now profess
willingly that before professed by constraint; and If there be any wicked, I
put them from the Sacraments.


BAR. You so fix your eyes upon your own assertions, as that you give no ear
to other men's reasons. How often has this been denied and disprooued unto you:
you have never as yet made any seperatio^, but still remain in the stepps and
sins of your forefathers, neither have you any power to separate any from
among you.


SPER. I have power, and do put the wicked from the Sacraments.


BAR. What your self alone?


SPER. Yea with the consent of the Church.


BAR. I showed you the last day what kind of instrument your suspention and
puttinge from the Sacraments is; you and your parish have not the power to
^xcommunicat any.


SPER. This is not true. we have power, and do excommunicat.


BAR. It is the^ by the power of the BBs. and not by the power of Christ.


SPER. It is not by the power of the Bishopps, but by the power of Christ.


BAR. That is not so, you have neither power from Christ, nor from the Bishopps
to excommunicat any: you have leave in your seruice-booke to suspend from your
sacrament, but not to excommunicat without the Bishop.


SPER. We do excommunicat without the Bishop.


BAR. Then your Church has two manner of excommunications.


SPER. That follows not, the Bishopps excomunication is but an approbation of
ours.


BAR. That is not so, The Bishop has power to excommunicate, when and whom he
will of your Parish, and that without your priuitie or consent: Moreover the
Bishopps do excommunicate by a latin writ; but if your excomunication be
such, then is it Amichristian, if it be after another manner, then have you two
sorts of exco^munications in your Church.


SPER. When any deserves to be excommunicated, then I and the Churchwardens
present such to the Bishop, and he exco^municateth them.


BAR. Then the Bishop exco^municateth, and not you; you are but as they that
gi^e evidence and information to the Judge: The Bishop is the Judge.


GREEN. The Bishop does not excommunicate upon your information, neither for
any sin, how heinous soever. But only for not appeeringe at, or disobeying
their Courts. Moreover as the Ordinary does exco^municat so does he absolve
whom he list, without the priuitie of your Congregaco^n.


EGERT. SPER. The Bishop his excommunication is but a Civil disco^munion.


BAR. GREEN. What, will you make the excommunication of your Church a Civil
action? we never heard of any such excomunication, until Cooper and Gwalter
published their conceits thereof.


EGER. SPE. May not the Civil magistrate approueth' excommunication of the
Church.


BAR. GREN. Yes, but the Civil magistrate may not excommunicate any, as your
Bishopps do; And that as you say, by virtue of the Civil authority.


SPER. The Bishop does not excommunicat, he does but approve our
excommunication.


BAR. Why, erewhile you co^fefsed that you did but present your sheep to the
wolf, and that the Bishop did excommunicat: and we proved that the Bishop did
both excommunicate and absolve whom and when he would in your Parish, without
your priuities or co^sents: as also that your Church has none other
excommunication, then that of his.


SPE. We have the same excommunication that they had in the Church of Cori^th.
1 Cor. 5.


BAR. You have neither such a faithful people gathered out of the world unto
Christ, neither have you the power of Christ, neither do you yt after that
holy order of the Church of Corinth: But you are driven to run unto your
Lord the Bishop, who does it of his sole authority, by his commissarie in
form of a latin Writ, which you are compelled to read and publishe in your
parish Church: How can you call this that excommunication they had in the
Church of Cori^th.


SPER. We excommunicate in the name and power of Christ, as the Church of
Cori^th did.


BAR. That is not so, it is don in the name and power of the Bishop, and not in
that manner as is expressed. 1 Cor. 5.


SPE. The Bishopps power is Civil, but this actio^ ecclesiastical.


BAR. And may a Civil person execute any ecclesiastical Office or action?


GREN. Do you hold the Bishopps, their Commissaries and substituts merely
Civil, and not ecclesiastical?


SPE. Yea I hold them merely Civil, and not ecclesiastical.


BAR. Write that, and set it down under your hand.


SPE. So I will: and took unto him pen and ynke.


EGER. Why so, what need it to be written?


BAR. That we may the better know, whereof we reason and hold to the point.


GREN. This is a needful point to be set down in writing: For if the Bishopps
and their substituts be merely Civil then you have as yet no Church, no
ministry, no Sacraments.


EGER. Their offices and actions are Civil as we esteem them.


SPE. I hold them merely Civil and not ecclesiastical, because they are
constituted by the Prince, and not by Christ in his Testament.


BAR. Write that, let us have it set down.


But he delaying because of Mr. EGERTON, Mr. BAROVV set down as follows.

The Bishopps Commissari^s and their (...) are merely ci^ile and (...)
^asticall, because the^ are constitu^d by the Prince, and not by (...) in his
Testament.

This being written was read and showed unto them, but duringe the time of
drawing them to this Proposition, and the wryti^ge thereof, Mr. GREENVVOOD
enforcing the conclusions and sequel that would ensue thereof: Mr. SPERIN here
began^ to retract his Proposition and quallifie it by puttinge in this wo^d (
a^) inst^ede of ( be (...)) so that now, he allows them, both Civil and
ecclesiastical O^ficers.

BAR. What, may the Bishopp execute both Civil and ecclesiastical offices?


SPE^. Why not?


BA^. Because it is contrary to the ordinance of God, who has appointed unto
these diverse and distinct offices, diverse persons to execute the same.


GREEN. Let him that has an office wait on his office.


SPER. Their Civil authority is of the Prince.


BAR. It is not thereby iustifi^d, seeing it is unlawful for any eccles^asticall
officer to execu^e also a Civil office, or sor one man to hau^ both an
^cciesiasticall and Civil office at once.


EGER. DAVID was both a King and a Prophet.


BA^. What then?


EGER. He executed both a Civil and ecclesiastical office thereby.


BAR. That is not so.


EGER. A Proph^t was an office of the Temple.


BAR. None but a L^uite might be a Minister of the Temple.


SPER. But sundry have executed both.


BA^. MOSES and SAMVEL did so for a season, but it was by express warrant from
Gods mouth; neither continued they so to do, neither gave they example, or may
be presidents for us to do the like, without the like warrant: Make therefore
your Bishopps either wholly Civil, or wholly ecclesiastical, let us know
what to hold them?


EGER. They are Ministers.


BAR. And they are civil Magistrates, LLs of the Parliame^t-house, Justices of
peace, Judges of civil causes etc.


EGER. Though their power be mixed, yet is it not simplye unlawful.


BAR. By the word of GOD it is symplie unlawful for any one man to execute
both a civil and ecclesiastical office at once.


GREN. This mixture is the mystery of iniquity, and the power of the Beast.


EG^R. Though they have civil Offices, yet keep they the ministry, and
their ministerial actions are good*


BAR. This is strange Doctrine, that one man may administer both in civil and
ecclesiastical Offic^s at once: May a civil Magistrate intermeddle with the
ministry in the Church, or a Minister of the Church execute any civil
Magistracie^ what a confusion were this.


EGER. Their ciu^le authority does not abolish their mi^isteriall actions.


BAR. The civil Magistrates may not intermeddle with the execution of the
Pastors Office, as they do in delyuering their Sacraments, no more then VZZIAH
might burn incense.


EGER. The example does not hold: The BBs. were Ministers before they were
civil Magistrates.


BAR. Yet the Doctrine holds; That the civil Magistrate may not administer
in the Church, neither (...) man execute fuch diverse Offices.


EGER. Though it be vnlawf^ll, yet their ministerial actions are not unlawful.


BAR. It is not lawful for a ^inile Magistrate to (...) in the Church vvhilest
he keeps his civil office: But the BBs. are civil Magistrates, and keep
and ^xecute their civil Offices: Therefore it is not lawful for them to
administer in the Church vvhilest they keep their civil Offices.


EGE^. Your Argument is not good; You put that in the conclusion, which you
should have put in the second Proposition.


BAR. I regard not the form. If it be unlawful for them to admi^ister, then
their ministerial actions are unlawful.


EGER. SPER. The Consequ^t of the Mayor is denied.


BAR. It of necessity follows: For GOD only will be served in his Church by
his own Ministers and in the ministeric, by such as he has appointed and
called thereunto, all strange ministries and their ministerial actions being
an abhominatio^ unto him.


GREN. All their actions are accursed in the Lord sight that presume to offer
in his Church in an office whereunto they are not called of GOD, and their
ministry under the curse of KORAHS censure Nom 16. 40.


EGER. The Bi^hopps are not under that curse; For they are Ministers.


BAR. What, and civil Magistrates also?


SPER. The Bishopps Office, as it is given of the Prince, is civil; as they
superintend diverse Flock^s and Pastors, they are ^siasticall Officers.


BAR. This is a rare distinction to make one and the self same Office both
civil and ecclesiastical: I never heard that the Office of a Bishop was
civil, or of any such Office in the Church of GOD as a L. Bishop: And seeing
we are entered into speech of their ministry, I would feign know what
ecclesiastical Office they execute iu ^our Church.


EGER. They are Pastors.


BAR. Why each of them does superintend and ouersee diverse, yea many hundredth
Flocks and Pastors: These are st^ange Pastors as ever I heard of.


EGER. I say not as they are Bishopps they are Pastors; But as they were
Ministers of the Gospel before; which ministry they have not lost by being
Bishopps.


BAR. You mean when they were Parish-Parsons: But that Office they have forgon
when they were made Bishopps.


EGER. That is not so.


BAR. The office of a Parson and the office of a Bishop are diverse and distinct
offices of your Church: one man cannot be both a Bishop and a Parson.


EGER. A Bishop may be a Pastor as you call it a Parson.


BAR. Then a ma may execute diverse offices of your Church at one time: This was
never heard of in the Church of CHRIST since the Apostles time.


EGER. Might not the Evangelists also execute diverse offices, after the
Apostles time?


BAR. I have not read that they did: But you hold not your Bishops
Evangelists, yet they by your saying execute diverse ecclesiastical offices at
one time: As to be Parsons and Lord Bishopps, both which are distinct and
diverse offices of the Church. Hold you it lawful for one man to exercise
diverse offices of your Church at one time also?


EGER. To execute diverse Offices is unlawful.


BAR. But the office of a Lo. Bishop and of a Parish Parson are diverse Offices
of your Church which one man exercises: Therefore their ministerial actions
in these Offices are unlawful.


EGER. These Offices are not so diverse to disanull their first ministry which
they had when they were Preachers.


BAR. These Offices are so diverse as one man cannot execute them both, but he
must of force do the one by his substitute: Moreover, the Office of a Lo.
Bishop does abolish and swallow up the other: For he cannot be both an Ouerseer
of so many Churches and Pastors, and be a private peculiar Pastor of one Church
too.


EGER. The Bishopps Office is but a civil addico^n which he joins unto his
former ministry.


BAR. Why you see the office of a Lo. Bishop is one of the chief
ecclesiastical Offices of your Church, and this office is wholye conversant in
ecclesiastical affairs.


EGER. They are Peers and Lords of the Parliament house.


BAR. Yea, but spiritual Lords by virtue of their ecclesiastical office:
Therefore the Office of a Parish Priest and of a Lo. Bishop are diverse and
distinct Offices of your Church.


EGER. Yet are they not so diue^se as by taking the Office of a Bishop they
loose their first ministry.


BAR. Every ministry in the Church is belonging unto and in regard of an
Office neither can be otherwise, or longer executed, then in that office to
which it belongs: But the BBs. have resigned that ecclesiastical Office
vvher unto their first Ministry belonged: Therefore when they keep not that
office they cannot keep that ministry.


EGER. The Bishopps have not resigned their first Office.


BAR. It is manifest that they have: For it is impossible that they should be
both Superintendents over so many Churches, and execute the Pastors Office
over one Church together.


EGER. Though one man execute diverse Offices, his actions are not simple
unlawful.


BAR. What a monstrous confusion and commixture of all GODS ordinances is made
by this Doctrine of yours. GOD has utterly forbidden any one man to manage
both a civil and ecclesiastical office at once: You (notwithstanding the
Bishopps exercise both civil and ecclesiastical authority, and execute many
ecclesiastical Offices of the Church) yet in this estate would have their
ministerial actions lawful.


EGER. Though to exercise diverse Offices be unlawful, yet it is not so
unlawful as to disanull their ministriall actions.


BAR. I have proved that ecclesiastical ministry and ministration to be
unlawful, which has no foundation in GODS word: But this their mixed ministry
and confused ministraco^n has not only no warrant in, but is found expresslie
contrary to the whole word and Ordinances of GOD: Therefore this their
ministry and ministerial actions are simply and utterly unlawful.


EGER. Though a Tyrant be an unlawful Magistrate, yet may his actions in his
regiment be lawful.


GREN. You must make difference between the usurping of a civil Office in a
Commonwealth by a Tyrant, and the v^urping of an ecclesiastical office in the
Church.


BAR. There is no comparison betwixt the regiment of a Tyrant in a
Commonwealth, and the ministration of an usurper or wre^ched person in the
Church. With the first, we which are but subjects have not to meddle, either to
place or displace, but to obey in the Lord such Civil Magistrates as are set
over us of the Lord. The second, namely of all ecclesiastical offices, we have
the sole choice and oversight; power to create, power to depose: neither are we
to suffer a^ie unlawful ministry or ministration. But now to speak simply
of the regiment of a Tyrant as considered in it self, it is altog^ther
unlawful unto himself, because he usurps that office by intrusion, contrary
to the law of GOD, and ^hal therefore account before the Lord.


EGER. But in as much as the Bishopps were once lawful P^stors they cannot
loose their first office and ministry; and so their ministerial actions (as
preaching of the word and ministratio^ of the Sacraments) are still lawful.


BAR. They many ways have forfeyted their m^nistrie and place, if so be it
were so, by taking and executing two Offices, by taking other ecclesiastical
offices, and those such, as they cannot execute their Pastoral Office whilst
they keep them: Therefore they can be no Pastors, neither their administrations
of the word and Sacraments whilst they remain in this estate, lawful.


EGER. They may notwithstanding these other Offices, execute their Pastoral
Offices; as to preach the word, and minister the Sacraments; which are the
chief things of the Pastors Office.


BAR. They can not do these things duly, in as much as they cannot duly
attend and watch over their peculiar Flock, whilst they keep these other
Offices: But I would feign know of you, when they had this true pastoral
office whereof you speak so much? For surely if ever they were true Pastors
they are now wondrouslie apostate.


EGERT. When they were first made Ministers.


BAR. Your ministry is large: Do you not mean when they were first made
pari^h-Parsons?


EGER. They were then Pastors, when they were such Parsons as you term them.


BAR. You hold then the Parsons Office to be the Pastors Office:


EGER. Yea.


BAR. I will let pass their having many Parsonages, as also the
insufficiencye of sondrie that profess the same: And only show in general why
a Parish-Parson cannot be held a true Pastor, according to the Gospel and
Testament of CHRIST.

The Parish-Pars^n h^th not the (1) NAME (2) OFFICE (3) CALLING (...) ^is
Office (4) ADMINIS^SRATION in his Office, (5) POWER, ^or that (6) MAINTENANCE
of his living the ^ tr^e ^astor (...): Therefore a Parish-Parson cannot ^e
called or held a true Pastor.


EGER. The Antecedent is not true.


BAR. Let me prove it. First you see they have a diverse name, the one a
Parish-Parson, the other a Pastor.


EGER. No man of knowlegd will now call them Parsons.


BAR. This is the peculiar and proper name belonging to their Office: therefore
reserved as dounge to be cast in their faces by all have that knowledge: Yea it
is an open mark to every one that has knowledge whereby to discern them from
true Pastors: ^he true Pastor will never bear the mark and Caracte of the
Beast of Antichrist.


EGER. The name is of no moment: What shall we call a Parson*


BAR. A Parson, or Baals P^iest.


SPER. A Parson is called Rector in latin.


BAR. And I showed you the last day, that his Romish name was one (...) the
nam^s of (...) written upon the heads of the Beast.


EGER. The Parson has sondrie names in the Scripture: as an Elder, an
Ouer^eer, a Steward etc.


BAR. But none of these names do distinguish his office, as the name of Pastor
does: But if we come to their Office we shall find it as strange as the name
thereof.


SPER. Prove that.


BAR. If Mr. FOX say truly, the Parsons Office took beginning when the
M^tropolitane Bishopps sprung, and were as their Baylifes: But it is the same
Office that was and is executed in the Romish Church; Therefore not the Pastors
Office.


EGER. It is not the same Office.


BAR. The self same: You take it as they left it, as also all the ministry you
have beside: Only you put in new men in those old Offices.


EGER. The entrance and ministration is qui^e changed: the Priests were
Massing and Sacrificing Priests, prayed for the dead, worshipped Saints etc.
so do not we.


GREN. So do you also, your whole worship being changed but o^t of Latin into
English.


EGER. We do not so.


BAR. We shall hereafter have occasion to discuss these matters when w^ come
to handle your ministration: Only w^ still find the O^fice of the (...) the
self (...) that then it was, and this none know better th^n they that have the
gifts of the same Benefices. But I will draw an Argumen^ from some Doctrine.

In the Church of Christ there is no ecclesiastical Office ^boue the Pastor:
But in your Church there are sondri^ ec^lefiasticall Off^ces about the Parson:
Therefore the Parsons Office is not the Pastors Office.


EGER. The Apostles Office was above the Pa^tors Office in the Church of CHRIST.


BAR. But that was temporary and but for a time: we reason not what was, but
what now is in the Church since extraordinary Offices ceased: We read of no
Office in the Church of CHRIST above the Pastors Office: Therefore it cannot be
the Office of a Parson.


EGER. A true Pastor may exercise his Office under another ecclesiastical
Office above him.


BAR. God has instituted no eccles^asticall Office a^oue him: Therefore he may
exercise his Office under n^ ecclesiastical Office about him.


EGERT. I deny the Argument: Those things are not now simply unlawful, which
at some times were lawful.


BAR. That is very false: All things are now simply unlawful which


GREEN. are forbidden in the word of GOD as the Leuiticall Priesthood and all
extraordinary ministries now are, which yet sometimes were lawful.


EGER. Did not sondrye Pastors and Ministers exercise their ministry under
Diotr^phes?


BAR. Never that I ever heard of: But if they had, should it therefore be
lawful?


EGER. But if the Pa^tor should execute his Office under another
ecclesiastical Office, should he therefore be no true Pastor?


BAR. A true Pastor cannot execute under another ^cclesiasticall Office in the
Church of CHRIST; Therefore the question is vain, the thing being impossible.


EGER. But if there be any Office above him, should he therefore cease to be a
Pastor?


BAR. What so ever ecclesiastical Office is now above the Pastor is
Antichristian, neither is he a true Pastor that exercises his Office under
such.


EGER. I deny that.


BAR. Whatsoever ecciesiasticall Office is not expressed in the Testament of
CHRIST is Autichristian: But there is no mention of any ecclesiastical Office
to be now above the Pa^tors Office in the Testament of CHRIST: Therefore ^l such
Offices as are above the Pastors Office, are Antichri^tian.


EGER. I deny the Mayor: All ecclesiastical offices that are above the Pastors
Office are not Antichristian.


BAR. You may as well deny the whole ministry of the new Testament, and bring
in any other: But thus I prove it.

CHRIST has left a per^ect ministry: Therefore nothing may be added unto it.
All other Ministries are Antichristian save that which CHRIST has left in his
Testament: But CHRIST has left no such ministry as these in his Testament:
Therefore etc.


EGER. Though CHRIST has left a perfect ministry, yet all things that are
added unto it are not ANTICHRISTIAN.


BAR. Yes, all new ministries are ANTICHRISTIAN and he of ANTICHRIST that
executes, stands under or justifies them: For he that brings in a new
ministry takes CHRITS Office and sits in his place, and is that ANTICHRIST
spoken of the Apo^tle 2. These. 2. and by our Savior CHRIST Mat. 24. and all
that stand under such a new devised ministry stand under ANTICHRIST.


Mr. SPERIN here would have denied the Bishop to be ANTICHRIST: But Mr. EGERTON
willed him never to deny^ that, which they had agreed upon.

BAR. Do you hold the faith in respect of men's persons? ^hal no more be truth
then you have agreed upon.


These Doctrines following were holden and affirmed by Mr. EGERTON in discourse
with Mr. GREENVVOOD as Mr. BARROVV was writing other Arguments and Assertions.

(1) Eger. That the true Church may be without the power of CHRIST to ce^sure
and redre^e.


GREEN. I never read of any such Church in the Scriptures CHRIST has given to
every Church his power to censure and redress.


EGER. Though we want Discipline, yet we have the power of CHRIST by the
Scepter of his word in Doctrine.


GREN. By the word Discipline you turn away the whole practice of the Gospel,
neither are you governed by CHRIST his Scepter, howsoever you may take his word
in your mouth.


(2)EGER. That the name of a Bishop spoken of 1. Tim. 3. is on^y peculiar unto
the Pastor and Teacher; because it is said verse 2. he must be ap^ to teach.


GREN. Though some particular rules in that general Doctrine be only spoken of
the Pastoral and Teachers Office, yet it is ^uident by the whole scope of the
place, that there are also rules given for other Elders, which are also called
BBs. in sondrye places of the Scriptures.


(3) EGER. That no man may preach the word without an external calling.


GREEN. Gifts of interpretations are sufficient calling to speak of the word
in the Congregation, in due order and place.


EGER. That is not so.


(4) EGER. We abstain from Excommunication, because we have no Elder^ as yet.


GREEN. The Church is never without the power to excommunicate.


(5) EGER. Our Pastors only now want some Censurers.


BAR. The lea^t member of the Church that is a Co^municant has as much
interest in all the censures of the Church as the Pastor, and have equal power
according to the rules of the word, to censure the Pastor for error or
transgression, as the Pastor has to ^ensure them.


To Mr. EGERTON deliver this.
Almighty G^d, whose Spirit is one, and joins in one all his elect
v^ssells, in his good time bringing them forth from dark^es to light, gy^e you
and us ^o be of one mind, and of one judgment in the truth, to the glory of
his own name, our rejoicing in his mereyes for ever, and the present
conuer^ion of many, to the ^bedience of CHRIST.

Seeing it has pleased God, after our long imprisonment, once of late to send
you unto us (by what means, or to what further purpose, we yet know not) to
give us a beginning and ^n entrance into the discussing of his truth, by some
kind of conference: which, because it was not with that harmonye that it may
please God to effect, if your heart as ours be set to know his will, and to
proceed by one rule, even the rule of his authentical Testament: We are moved
to write unto you, rather by your modest, honest, and sober behavior showed to
us the Lords most unworthy witnesses, then for any procurement of peace to
our selves; For most of all we desire your salvation, and with all the good of
many, by the measure of spiritual guyftes given you, and as we trust, you
will bestow them to the furtherance of his Church. Yet in your last conference,
(to speak the truth) we found your spirit in no loving consent to the truth,
but dangerously corrupted, or at least set to oppose with poisoned
distinctions by vain philosophy, yea against that truth your self would not
insist to deny, whether to try our strength or to abuse the hearers, or for
endangering your self: Yet against al these PAVL says we cannot any thing
against the truth but for the truth. We have since often merueiled we heard no
more from you, or of your estate, which the^ was made manifest to be without
promise, whiles you exercise a ministerial function under ANTICHRIST, in a
false office, unto a confuse assembli^ of all sorts of people, one with the
world. Whereupon, hearing no further yet of you, we thought it good, in tender
care of your salvation, and for the advancement of the Lords truth, to show
you, so near as our frail memories could collect, the sum of such Arguments
or Positions and Answers as passed between us, having set down nothing but
that, whereof we have the positio^s to show under writing at that present, and
honest witnesses to testify our vprightnes herein: And least you should
otherwise conceive, that we should some ways injury you, we have sent you a
Copy to pervse; and if you make yet any other a^swere to our Assertions, then
there is contained, we freely give you liberty so to do: But cheiflie the end
of our writing is, to stir you up not to lean the matter thus, considering
the seriousnes thereof, but either yield thereunto, or procure some more large
and free place and time to make our mynds plain and Faith open one to another,
that the truth may appear, and they that depart from the same, be known. And
the same we write unto you herein, we hereby offer to all the rest of your
fellow Ministers, our hearts (as the Lord knows) being open to all men to
their good, and the glory of our GOD the father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST: only
the Lord deliver us from unreasonable men, and suppress all his adversaries
and opposers against his glorious truth, Amen.

Most desirous of your fellowship in the Faith of Christ. HENRY BARROVV IHON
GREENVVOOD.

To Mr. BARROVV and Mr. GREENVVOOD.
The Lord Jesus open o^r eyes to ^ee the truth, and sanctify our tongues (...)
pen^es to declare the same.

Ireceyued a Letter from you, and also a Conference in writing, Touching your
Letter, this I answer. First for those poisoned distinctions you mention, if
you had named them, I hope no poison would have appeared in them, except it had
come from the contagion of your own Spirits. Secondly for vain Philosophy,
if you mean thereby (for other I remember none) that help which GOD has lent
us by Logic to reason breiflie and plainly, you do but as Brown^ has done,
whose braynlesse reasons to pro^e the van^tie thereof, are not only easy to be
answered by other men, but also abundantly confuted by his own practice, both
in speech and writing. Touching your feined Conference, this I say. I find in
it some things wanting that were spoken, many things expressed that were never
spoken (no not ymagined on my behalf) and most things that were spoken,
perverted: Finally, I find it so full of partiality, so void of upright and
true dealing, and so far out of order, that I have neither leisure, muchlesse
any lu^t to deal with it. And if you shall proceed to give out Copies, I
shall be ready to disclayme you wheresoe^er I come, not only for men void of
piety, but even of civil honesty also. Now concerning a free conference, I
have neither power nor will to perform it: my reasons I reserve (...) further
opportunity. But if you will deal with me, do this: send me under your hand
some 6. or 7. (or as you think good for the number) of your chief reasons,
why you refuse to come to our public assemblies breiflie and plainly
concluded; and I will (by the help of GOD) as my leisure shall serve, set you
down my answer in the like sort under my own hand, with reasons why you
ought to come. This course if you like I will deal with you as I may,
otherwise I will not meddle. Written the 14. April 1590.

Written by him, that not only desires your good in the Lord, but also is
ready by any peaceable and christian course of proceeding, to further the same.

I: EGERTON. so I write.

To Mr. EGERTON.
MOre Grace and fear of GOD unto you. This your reply unto our Letter we have
received and read with little comfort, perceiving thereby even that small spark
of hope (which began to appear in you) to be utterly extinct; the bellows
burnt the dross will not be purged from the silver, that there might proceed a
vessel to the Fyner, so that the Founder should melt in vain, where the Lord
has not made choice of the metal. Greatly sorry we are to behold your
f^arefull estate, who not being able to approve the ministry you exercise, by
the word of God, yet to your own further judgment, and the seducing of many
souls, continue to plead for, and practice the same, for the fear of men and
the love of the world to avoid persecution, submitting your self, your whole
church, ministry and Doctrines unto the pro fessed enemies of CHRIST and of
his gospel, such whom your self has confessed to be Antichristian* with who^
you have not only sit amongst the other Commissioners in Caiaphas house, but
also by an especial ticket according to their Mandat^, were sent out amongst
the chosen band of their guard to feight against the poor persecuted
witnesses of Christ, yea amongst the rest of your subornate witnesses to lay in
wait against the blood of the Saints; endeavoring by the deep learning of
Sa^an to entangle them into the same counterfeit walking with your self, as also
by your Sophistical distinctio^s to obscure and turn away the truth,
perverting and co^founding al Gods ordinaces, calling light darkness, and
darkness light; laboring to persuade, that one man may execute both civil and
ecclesiastical offices at once; Yea though he so do, yet his ministry in both
of the^ is lawful. Likewise, that though one man executed sundry Offices of
the Church at one time, yet this his ministry in them all is lawful also;
Yea though the Bishop execute a strange and tyra^nicall ministry, never read
nor heard of in the Testament of CHRIST, usurping authority over so many
Churches and Pastors, possessing the very Chair of ANTICHRIST, corrupting and
changing the whole ministry and Ordinances of the Gospeletc. Yet are they to
be esteemed true Ministers of CHRIST, and their ministerial actions good.
These and sondrye other enormous and blasphemous Doctrines you strowed emongst
us, and sought to confirm them by these and such like poisoned distinctions,
Not simply evil: Not simply unlawful. Good in part. Though it be unlawful
to execute diverse Offices, yet are not his actions therein unlawful; Though
his Office he executes in the Church be unlawful, yet are his ministerial
actions lawful. Of the substance of the essen etc. without which you cannot
reason, nor by the evident testimony of Gods word approve your doings unto all
men. Now let the christian, or but indifferent Reader, judge of the leaven and
poison of these distinctions and cauills, of what spirit they proced and by
whom they are used, whither by you or by us. As for the opinions and name of
Brown, there is no cause you should vpbraid us therewith, he being a man with
whom we had never any thing to do, neither may have in this estate of his
Apostasy. He is now a member of your Church, toward whom (we think) you walk
not according to CHRIST'S rule, neither yet deal brotherly with him (much less
as beseems a guide and teacher of the Church) thus to publish and rail of
your Brother Brown, without and before christian admonition and orderly
censure. But having thus behaved your self toward him that is so ^ere unto
you, we must not think it strange if you multiply your reproaches upon us,
that are divided so far from you, as Sion is from Babylon. Concerning that
Conference, or rather that sum of our conference, this we say. We, in all
loving manner sent it unto you to peruse and correct, or to show your dislike
wherein you judged it faultye; Yea we gave you free liberty, if you disliked
any of those answers which you then made unto our reasons, to alter and
change them as your self upon better advise should think meet: so loath
were we to give you the least cause of offense, and so desirous to have the
truth further brought to light. which if you had performed with that
faithfullnes and modesty that beseemed you, and we expected in so high causes,
then had you not gained this just blame and public infamy you now by these
your dealings have brought upon your self. But in stead of this, lo you have
pronounced the whole writing which we sent, feyned; Some things there vvanting
which were spoken; Many things there expressed which vv^re never spoken,
nor imagined by you; And most things there spoken peruer^ed by ^s: Finally, you
found it so full of partialitye, so void of upright and true dealing, and so
far out of order, as you have neither leisure nor lust to deal with yt. First
we say, there was no cause you should expect to have every thing written, that
was then spoken, both in regard of our frail and slippery memories, as also
that we signified unto you our intent to be but to sum up the discourse of
such chief points as were then handled, willingly passing by other impertinent
and less necessary speeches. But yet, if you can call any to remembrance
which may any way benefit you, or prejudice us, if you shall signify them
unto us, we will most willingly insert them. For the order we will not greatly
contend, because it is of little moment unto us; Yet is there cause we should
as well remember it as you, because we were both alyke in the action, and had
the Propositions before us, which you know were written, as the matters fell
out in handling. But now touching your other chardges of adding, perverting,
falsefying etc. Surely if these things stood thus, great were our sin toward
God and toward you; Yea woe unto our selves, if we should walk with such
festered consciences: How should we the^ appear before God or men with
comfort? Though the measure of our gyfts be small, yet God accepts the work
of his own Spirit: We need not, neither ever did defend his most plain and
pure truth against the most subtle and malignant adversaries, with lies,
falsefying, sclaundering etc. muchlesse in this actio^ as you chardg us. No God
is witness unto our consciences, with what care and vprightnes we have set
down these things, being guyltie to our selves of no such crimes as you
accuse us. Yea for our further clearing herein, we have set down no one
point of importance which we took not in writing from your own mouths,
even before your eyes, and read it in your presence, and in the hearing of
sundry honest vvitnesses: which Propositions and vvitnesses, still remain to
be produced in record of the truth, against you or us, wherein we depart from
the same. And surely much better had you provided for your own credit, and
much more impeached ours, if you had set down some perticulers, vvherin we
had thus falsified and perverted, before you had in this manner reproched us,
especially being requested thereunto by us; who, not trusting to much to our
own memories, first sent our Copy unto the vvitnesses, then unto you, to
correct or reprove what you dislyked or thought amiss therein, we being
alvvayes ready and most desirous to alter it, according to the truth: But you,
as though there were no Judge in heaven, no witnesses in earth of the things
that passed betwixt us, have most boldlye, without all fear, shame, or truth
denied eue^ what your own mouth uttered, accusing us as void of all
vprightnes and true dealing, full of partiality etc. and all to hide your own
corrupt estate, and the vanity and weakness of your defenses from the eyes of
the world: Not being able, nor daring to produce or allege any one point in
particular, which we have either falsified or perverted, least you should be
taken and reproved, as your associate Mr. SPERIN was this other day in the
exceptions he took, both by these written prapositions, and by sundry ear
witnesses that were present unto his face; Yea even of that heinous perilous
Proposition which you now so feign would call back viz. That you had agreed
amongst your selves, that the Bishops be Antichristian. Whereunto, though you
were then enforced to yield, through the inevitable power of God his word,
wherewith you were pressed; Yet since, for the fear of men's faces, and to
avoid per^ecution, you have both denied the undoubted truth of God, or that
ever you spoke the same, contrary to your own conscience: Yea, for the
preservation of your worldly e^timation, and for this cor^upt dissembled peace,
you hold with your LLs. the Bishops, you are not ashamed unto the rest of the
vituperie wherewith you have laden us, to add these most unchristian and
undeserved threats; Namely: tha^ you will disclaim us in all places
vvbersoeuer you come, not only for men void of (...), but even of civil
honesty; and all this without either fault of offense made you at any time,
unless to witness unto that truth which we have seen and heard, be so
greiuous unto you. Alas Mr. EGERTON, what shall you gain by this? Suppose you
to buyld or repair your credit upon or by the ruynes of ours? Can you
immagine to stay the course of that truth which God has sent forth by so many
witnesses which heard you? Or can you think by these vain threats to stop our
mouths from testifying or publishing this or any other truth of our God unto
all men, by all means? We fear not the curse causeles, neither shun we the
light. Our Religion and honesty we willingly submit, both in this or in any
other thing we affirm or do, to the christian judgment of all men. The
further you shall proceed in this intemperate and vnchristia^ course, the
greater shall be your own shame and judgment, when God shall return the venom
and malice of your own tongue into your own bosom. In that you will neither
meddle with the Conference past, nor accept of any to come, the reasons you
reseru^ and keep so secret, are manifest unto all men: Namely because your
deeds are evil and cannot abide the fiery trial by Gods word* therefore seek
you by all means to hide them from the light; being for nothing so sorye, as
that you cannot call back that, which has already passed you; knowing that
the further you meddle with it, and the more you strive, the further and faster
you shall but entangle your self. Wherefore with one consent you and your fellow
ministers, study and strive to suppress that truth you cannot resist. But he
whose eyes are like a flame of fire, shall shortly discover your practices, and
fight against you with that sword of his mouth. As to your offer of answer by
writing unto 6. or 7. of our chiefest reasons why we refuse your public
assemblies, we hold it needles to trouble you with more, until you have
answered those unanswerable reasons, brought in one sentence of our former
letter unto you against your own counterfei^ and antichristian ministry,
which you were said to have derived from, and to exercise 1. under Antichrist:
2. In a false office 3 to a confuse assembly of all sorts of people. All which
severally, and plainly, are proved unto you in that our conference with you;
All which you have willingly balked, as also denied what your self in the said
Conference affirmed, and utterly refused all further conference. Wherefore we
cannot be induced to think, that you have any meaning christianly and freely
to discuss these points by writing; especyallie, since you could by no means
be drawn to write at our being together, yea you were afraid to speak what
truth you knew. But we manifestly discern this pretense to be but one of your
sleights to uphold your crazed credit, and to withdraw us, and the eyes of
others, from these unrecoverable breaches, as though you had some better power
or skill to defend your doings by writing, then either you have done or dare
yeilde to do by free conference of mouth. As to your disordered parish
asse^blies, wherein you will needs be still powered out in the error of BALAAM
for wage, we have long since prou^d them wholly Antichristian by sundry
reasons, drawn from the description of the true established Church of CHRIST:
which reasons, a year and a half since, were delivered unto some of your chief
ministers, whereunto we never yet received any answer. Wherefore we have no
more to say unto you, but to desire you and them to look to your estates, and
no longer to seduce the people in the bye ways of men's devises, to their
assured destruction, and your own fearful reckoninge, except God give you
repentance. Which grace that you may find, we will not cease ever, so long as
we may, to pray for you.

And this with unfeigned desire of your salvation HENRY BARROVV IHON GRENEVVOOD,
close Prisoners in the Fleet for the testimony of the truth of the Gospel of
our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to whom be glory for ever.

To Mr. BARROVV and Mr. GREENVVOODE.
MOre truth and love etc. The question I named (to my remembrance) was, whether
yt were lawful to come to our Church assemblies, or no. But because that which
you have chosen tends to the same end, I willingli^ accept yt. You^ Arguments
are three, and may be thus concluded. That ministry which is. 1. Derived from,
and exercised under ANTICHRIST. 2. a false Office 3. in a confused people, is
not lawful. But such is ours: Therefore our ministry is not lawful. For
answer whereof, I deny your Assumption or minor Proposition, and return the
same reasons upon your head thus. That ministry which is 1. Derived from and
exercised under CHRIST. 2. in a true Office 3. among a faithful people, is
lawful; but such is ours. ergo. Prove your Assumption and I will mine: In the
mean time I trust mine affirmation shall be as authentical as yours. Your
Letter came the 2. of this 5. (...), and I write the 4. Valete; and ^stote sani:

He that wishes your conuertion. I. EGERTON.

To Mr. EGERTON.
GRace unto you from the Father of lights, to see and yield unto the truth.
Your Letter of the 4. of this 5. Month we have received, and perceive thereby
your Controversy (touching the truth of that Brief of our conference which we
sent unto you) to be ceased. And now your speech turned back again to the
question there handled amongst us; which we hoped to have then been thus far
forth discussed and decided, that now you had no cause to deny or retract
that, which there was enforced, and you cond^scended unto; espeacially, without
adding any one reason unto your former, or disprouing any one reason brought
by us; except peradventure you would have your own bare affirmation be held as
authentical with us, as yt is with your miserable* Auditorie, that have no
power or freedom publicly to censure or reprove any false Doctrines that you
publicly deliver. But for the truth and proof of these assumptious. we still
refer you (as before we referred you) to a further consideration of that sum
of our said conference, with sum better heed and conscience. Where you shall
find these things you now den^e sufficiently proved, and in effect wholly
yielded unto by your self. For if these your lords Arch-bishopps and Bishopps
be agreed upon amongst your selves to be that Antichrist, how should that
ministry which is Derived from them, and exercised under them, be held the
true ministry of Christ, except the same ministry may be derived from, and
exercised under two diverse heads, and those so contrary as Christ and
Antichrist. Now that your whole ministry is thus derived and held of your
Lords these Arch-Bishopps and Bishopps, we hope we n^ede not stand to prove,
neither dare stand you to deny: not so mich for breaking the oath of your
Ca^onicall obedience, which you have sworn unto them, as least you be therefore
called before them, scilenced, deprived, imprisoned by them. As to the people
to whom you stand a Minister, they were all by your own conf^ssions,
immediately from Idolatry received by constreint into your Church, without the
preaching of the Gospel goinge before to call them to the Faith, or before
any Chri^tian voluntary profession made by them in particular, to witness
their Faith and true conuertion: But yt is manifest they all still remain in
the same confusion, disorder and servile subjection together with you unto
these your Lords Bishops, their Courts, Officers, and Canons: Unto which
people, in this estate, you for the wage and hire of BALAAM are powered forth,
and administer the Sacraments to them, by your Lord Bishop his Commandment,
and that in a Doctors Office, as you pretend* Or else at such times flee touch,
and hide your self out of the way, withdrawing your self from their fellowship
at such solemn^ feasts as this your Easter etc. when, by the laws of your
Church* you were to administer the Communion unto them. Thus you may see your
naked denial, nor all the Conning any of you have, will not serve to cover,
mich less to cure, these Egiptian malignant ulcers that are found upon the
me^ that have the marck of the Beast, and that worship his Image. Wherefore we
still exhort you, in the name and fear of God, not any longer to strive
against the pricks, or gnawe your tongue for grief, remayninge imp^nitent and
hardened in your ungodly works: But rather (whil^st grace is offered) to purge
your self through vnf^yned repentance in that fountain which is opened to the
house of DAVID for sin and for uncleanness, by forsaking your evil ways and
Antichristian ministry, and now yet at length taking up your cross, to join
your self unto the holy army^ of Saints, that war in all faithful and
patient manner, under the conduct of the Lamb, against all the trumpery and
tyranny of Antichrist; that so you may have comfort and assurance unto your
own soul. Which grace that you may find, and show; we shall not cease
heartily to pray, and by all the means we may, to procure unto you. In the
mean time wishing you so to fare and prosper, as your soul prospers, and as
you walk according to the rule of Gods word.

HENRY BARROVV IHON GRENEVVOOD Prisoners for the truth of the gospel and
wi^nesses against all Antichrists marcked soldiers and proceedings.

In that you received our second Letter no soones, you are to impute yt to your
own absence, that could no sooner be spoken withal by our Messenger, who was
at your house to deliver yt you, upon the 18. of the 4. Month, and at sondrie
other times since.

Written this 5. day of this 5. Month.
To Mr. BARROVV and Mr. GREENVVOOD.
MOre truth and love to you etc. Because your Letters received the 6. of the 5.
Month, has in it as many lies, as mine to you (to my remembrance) has
lines; I think it the best course to set them before you, to move in you some
remorse; except it be with you as the Prophet says (...) impius erubescere. 1.
That Lies.
my bare affirmations are held authentical of my auditorye: 1.
2. That it was sufficiently proved the last conference, our BBs. 2.
were that Antichrist: 3. That it was in effect wholly yielded unto 3.
by me: 4 That it is agreed upon amongst our selves, that they 4.
be that Antichrist: 5 That I have broken my oath of Canonical 5.
obedience: 6. That I have sworn Canonical obedience unto 6.
the BBs. 7 That I dare not deny their authority, for fear of silence, 7.
prison etc. 8. That the people, by our own confessions, 8.
were all rec^iued by constraint immediately from Idolatry into our Church,
without preaching of the Gospel: 9. That all the 9.
people remain still in the same disorder, confusion etc. 10 That 10
I am powered out in the wages of BALAAM: 11 That I administer 11
the Sacraments at the L. Bishopps Commandment: 12 That 12
I hid my self at Easter: 13 That I am bound to minister the 13
Lords Supper at Easter: 14 That I have the mark of the Beast: 14
15 That I worship his Image. What shall be thy reward o thou lying tongue etc.
Without shall be dogs, enchaunters etc. and all that loves and make^h lies: If
BARROVV and GREENVVOOD be so void of grace, what should we think of that
pitiful band of seduced Schismatics. The Lord give you repentance Amen. 5 of
May. 1590.

I. EGERTON.

To Mr. EGERTON.
Their poison as the poison of a Serpent, As the deaf Adder s^opping (...)
ear. Psalm. 58.

THe Lord rebuke SATAN and judge bet^ixt us. This your reproachful Letter of
the 6. of this 5. Month, we received the 10. of the same Month. We find it
so full of vanity, vituperie, and blasphemy, as it deserves none answer or
speaking of, either in regard of the matter contained, or Author thereof, were
it not for the satisfying of others to whom these our controversies may come;
Wherefore as your best profes either to convince us or to defend your self, have
hitherto been the naked as^ertions and false chardg^s of your own mouth,
without a^ie place of Scripture or weight of reason aledged, so when we shall
make ^ut a short and sudden demonstration of the truth of these Positions which
you have collected out of our Letter, and as rashly pronounced, lies; we doubt
not, your present evil estate and bad dealing shall as suddenly lie open unto
all men, and to your self also if you be not of those evil men and imposters
the Apostle speaks of, that shall go forward to the worse, seducing and
being seduced etc.

Touching your cattologue of lies whereof you accuse us, we thus through the
grace of God shall clear our selves, and show the truth of as many as we
acknowledge etc.

The first Lie you chardge us with, is, that your bare affirmations are held
authentical of your auditorye. Our answer is, That you have drawn an
absolute Proposition from conditional words.

We in our Letter reproved you for not adding Doctrine to your lypps, some
proof to your assertions, saying; that except you would have your own bare
affirmation to be held as authentical with us as it is with your miserable
auditorie, that have no power or freedom publicly to censure or reprove any
false Doctrine that you publicly deliver etc. Here is in these words no
untruth; be your Doctrines never so blasphemous and pernicious, your Church
has no power presently and publicly to ce^sure you or them, but must join
unto you still in prayer and Sacraments, until their Lord Ordinary redress
the matter; or if he will not, they must then swallow all up, how impious
soever they be. Lo^ke for this law in the book of your aduertisments in the
Articles for doctrine and preaching. Now how far your Doctrines are
authentical to that woeful people, that have no power in themselves to call
them into question, to examine, try, or censure the^, judge you; Yea how
Authentical you would have your own bare affirmations esteemed, let these
your 3. letters show; where you have not added one reason to prove or disprove
any thing you affirm or deny, but your own bare word: But they must not be
so with us, who mean to examine them by the Scriptures before we receive them.
The word authentical peradventure we had not used, had not you given occasion
in your former letter in these words. I trust my affirmation shall be as
authentical as yours. Which presumptuous words you would not have used, if you
had not thought well of your self, and some special authority to be given to
your words; As for us, we seek no credit further then we speak according to
truth; neither hold or would have any thing held authentical, besides or with
the holy word of God.

The second lie should be that it was sufficiently proved in our last
Conference, 2.
that your BBs. were that Antichrist.

2. This we doubt not to affirm, and you cannot deny but your Scriptures in
stead of Lies.
Bishopps were there proved to usurp both Civil and ecclesiastical Offices
and jurisdiction; that they hold and execute diverse ecclesiastical Offices of
your Church at one time: as to be Doctors, Romans 18. 1
Pastors, Superintendents, L. Bishops L. Archbishops; and Romans 12. 6. 7. 8.
these together with their Civil Offices being Judges in Courts, Justices of
peace, many LLs. Palatyne, all Lords of 1. Cor. 12. entier
Parliament, and states of the land. That they usurp and exercise the whole
power of the Church, in making ministers, in the use Mat. 20. 25 26.
of excommunication, hereby confounding and commingling the Luke. 12. 14
whole order of God, all the Ordinances both of Church and Common wealth, and
inue^t all the Ordinances of CHRIST his Act. 20. 29
Testament. It was there showed and proved, that they which Mat. 18. 17.
presume into CHRIST'S place, usurp his title and offices, are Dany^l. 11. 36.
etc.
those An^ichrists or that Ant^christ; and that your Bishops usurp CHRIST'S
place, in that they take and hold his Bride unto 2. These. 2. 4.
the^, making the whole Church to hear their voice, and to bear John. 3. 29.
their yoke of their antichristian burdenous tradit^o^s; that they Came, 8. 12.
usurp CHRIST his titles, CHRIST being the only Lord, John. 13. 13.
Arch-cheif, high Bishop of Bishopps, to whom all Bishops shall 1. P^t. 5. 4.
1. Cor. 8. 6.
account; And therefore these titles are upon them but the names Reu. 13. 1.
of blasphemye written upon the heads of that Beast; That they usurp CHRIST'S
Offices, in that they take upon them to rule and ouersee so many Pastors and
Churches, to walk in the Reu. 1. 1^. etc.
midst of the 7. golden Ca^dlesticks, to give laws to the church etc. To be
short they were proved unto you to be that Antichrist James 5. 12.
or those Antichrists (for we hope you will not tie the title to the Psalm. 74.
person of one man only) in that they change and inuert, yea overthrow Dan. 7.
24.
and cast out all the Offices and ordinacs which CHRIST has appointed unto his
Church, eue^ the whole ministry and Testament of CHRIST; And have in place
thereof brought in, and Reu. 9.
set up their own new forged antichristian ministry of Archbishopps, L. BBs.
Archdeacons, Comissaries, Parsons, Vickers, Curatts, Deacons or half Priests,
even all the horned Clergy, Romish Officers, popish Courts, and innuberable
enormous Gal. 1. 6. 7. 8.
Canons and Co^stituco^ns of Antichrist: As also their new devised Mat. 15. 9.
public Liturgy, whereby the whole worship and ministraco^n of your Church,
yea vvherby the whole word of God is stinted 1. Ioh. 4. 3.
and lymited to Eaues, and Days, and hours, to fasts and feasts etc. what
parts and shredds thereof they will have read, what parts suppressed and cast
out etc. Now if all these evident concurring peremptory marks do not
manifestly prove them to be that and Mat. 24. 15
those Antichrists, even that abomination of desolation standing in the holy
place, let him that reads consider. And for your further assurance, let us now
ad unto their barbarous havoc, their daily and beastlike crueltye, tyranny,
persecution and blasphemy of the truth and servants of CHRIST, and you may
then (the Lord opening the eyes of your understanding) evidently Revel. 13. and
17.
see them to be that monsterous Beast, spoken of in the Revelation. Judge now
in your self which way you could or can with all the learning you have or want,
with stand these reasons, or how all the false Prophets that flow from and
guarde the throne of Antichrist, can find any phisique or Baulme for these
wounds of the Beast.

So then your 3. and 4. Lies That it should be in effect wholy yielded unto 3.
and 4.
by you 4. And agreed upon a^ongst your selves that the BBs. are Antichrists.
We hope will not prove so incredible; especially when they shall be confirmed to
your face (as they were unto your fellow Mr. SPERINS) by sondrye credible ear
witnesses that were present, if you continue so shameless to deny it.

Unto your 5. Lie That you have broken the o^th of your Canonical obedience. 5.
We answer that you greatly mistake the matter, we never so sclaundered you;
we always thought you ouerwell observed that ungodly oath: Our words in our
letter were, that we need not stand to prove that your ministry was derived
from, and exercised under these BBs. neither durst you stand to deny it; not
so much for breaking the oath of your Canonical obedience which you have
sworn unto them, as least you should therefore be called before them etc. Here
leaving the whole estate of the BBs. who were proved by us, and confessed by
you to be A^tichristes, as also passing by the present estate of your own
ministry, which is derived from and exercised under them, and therefore proved
unto you to be Antichristian, unless yt and you may belong unto, and stand
under two diverse heads, and these so contrary as CHRIST and ANTICHRIST. But all
these weighty matters you willingly passed bye (after the manner of all
timeseruing Pharisees) and picking a quarrel at these 3. points in your 5. 6.
and 7. Lies: the vvorst we vvish you is, that you had never made, or else had
now broken this ungodly oath, and that you had clearly cast of their
antichristian yoke, and had delivered your soul from them, and that you durst
indeed boldly speak and stand against their Antichristian authority and
ungodly proceedings: we are willing upon these condico^ns, for your so great
good, to suffer more then a little reproach.

The 6. Lie should be That you have sworn C^nonicall obedience unto the 6.
BBs. We find the laws of your Church to be, that none be suffered to preach
or administer in your Church, or be made full Priest, except he first swear
his Canonical obedience unto his Ordinary, diligently to appear at his
Courts, and to obs^rue their decrees: none may preach without the BBs. license,
or if he speak against any thing by public authority established, or by
the same authority that shall be established in your Church hereafter. These
laws we find gene^rall, and no particular exception to the same; therefore we
see not how or why you should more be exempt from this oath, license, laws,
then the rest of your brethren and fellow Priests. Further, you do preach and
administer after these orders and Canons prescribed by your LLs. the BBs
therefore it is likely you have taken the same oath and license, or that which
is all one, it is most sure you stand under the same Antichristian laws and
yoke.

We will believe your 7. to be a lie when you shall have forsaken your
Antichristian ministry, which you now execute etc. and speak and suffer
boldly and sincerely against the BBs. authority and proceedings: till then you
must bear with us if we esteem you as we find you, and g^ue no credit to
your ambiguous speeches, whereby we know not whither you will or will not speak
against the BBs. authority.

This your 8. lie That the people by you^ confessions vver^ all received by
constraint 8.
ymmediatly from Idolatry into your Church without preaching of the gospel
you have half marred by the Figure of Omissio^, in an evil conscience leaving
out the one half of your matter, least if you had justly reported it, you might
have been ashamed to have called it a l^e; seeing it should to all men appear a
most manifest truth, confirmed by the times past and present. Let us therefore
help you out with the rest, that the lie may be more notorious. It follows in
our letter thus. To call them to the faith or any Christian and volun^rie
profession made by them in particular to witness their faith, and tr^e
confession. Now you have your whole tale, let us see with what face or truth
you ca^ deny this: At the first planting of your Church in the beginning of
our Queen Elizabeth's reign, and for your confession we have the effect of
this under your f^llow Mr. SPERIN his hand, which being read before you and
reported unto you, you neither gainsay^d it in any thing, neither would or
could stand to justify their order in the first establi^hing of your Church.

Your 9 Lie is that all the people remain still in the same disorder confusi^
etc. 9.
That little which you here also by the same figure in all evil conscience
suppress, would have done better in this place then etc. and peradventure
might so have cleared the point, as it might have saved both you and us from
the imputation of this lie also. the words that lack are these, and servile
subjection unto these your Lord Bishopps, their Courts, Officers and Canons
tog^ather with you. put it now together and see if you can deny it, or ani^
part of it. It is manifest you still have and retain all the same people or
their seed in the same confusion, false worship, the same Antichristian
ministry and ordinances, no separation, no reformation as yet made: this,
that our Conference, but the present estate of your Church best of all shows.

And these things standing thus, your 10. Lie will likewise prove 10.
a truth to your f^rder chardge. viz. that you are poured ou^ in the wages ^f
Balaam. Seeing you still administer to this profane miscelyne people in this
confusion, subjection for their hyre etc. we need not doubt with the Apostle
Jude to say that you are powered out in Jude. 11.
the error of Balaam for wage; and with the Apostle Pe^er, that for^aking 2.
Pe^. ^. 15
saking the right way you have gone astray, following the way of Balaa^ of
Boz^r that loved the wage of iniquity, thinking that 1. Tim. 6. 5.
g^yne is godlynes, making marcha^dise of the word like an hire^ing: John. 10.
12. 13.
Yea it were no hard matter to prove, that you maintain the Doctrine of Balaam
that taught Balac to set a trap before the (...). ^. 14.
children of Israel, to eat things sacrificed to Idols and to commit
fornication; If your sitting in Commission in Caiaphas hall with that old false
Prophet of London, your finger in his bloudye Mand^te by name and especial
ticket, your subtle conference with CHRIST'S persecuted servants in their
Prysons, and your continual clamors in your Pulpit, were duly skanned.

That you do or ought to administer the Sacraments at your Lord 11.
Bi^hops Commandment, is manifest in that you are full Priest, Every full
minister of your Church, ought by the laws of your Church, and may deliver the
Sacraments. That we here vrdge not your Lord BBs. late edict unto all Curats or
hireling Preach^rs that were full ministers, to that effect.

That you hid and with drew your self from the fellowship and 12.
Communion of your parishion^rs and flock at your last Easter, leaving them to
the ministry and conduct of your dumb Pastor, is to be proved by many
witnesses, and the words of your own wife and servants unto our messenger that
was to d^lyuer our letter unto you, if you might have been then found.

And that you and all the Curats and full Priests in England are by the 13.
law of your Church bound to administer the Communion at Easter, peruse your
Por^uis or seruice-booke better.

That you have the mark of the Beast and that in the foreheade is manifest; 14.
in that the Archbishops and BBs. are proved that Antichris^ that Beast, and
you stand a waged Minister under them by their license, in their kingdom.

That you worship the Beast his Image is as manifest; in that you administer
15.
by the constitutions and decrees of their devices, seruicebooke or liturgy,
which is set up in all your Churches; unto and by which you burn your incense,
join and apply your Doctrines and preachings, else could you stand no minister
in their market.

Thus may you see all your lies returned home to their resting place to the
land of Shinar even your own bozome, from whence they proceeded; thus may you
see your self taken and ensnared, eue^ in eu^ry word that has come out of your
mouth; thus may you s^e, the further and more you strive against the truth, the
further and faster you entoyle your self. How much be^er therefore were it for
you to wash your self in that fountain which was showed you zach. 13. and with
the false Prophet there, to be ashamed of your vision and rough gown to
deceive; acknowledging the^e woun^s to be given you in the house of your
lovers, then thus to fulfill the words and judgments of God in your self, in
gnawing your tongue for grief, and casting the poisoned darts of your Reu. 16.
^0.
virulent tongue at the innocent, even the^ that se^ke your good. Take heed and
be warned, you were told of these judgments, and may see how they are daily
more and more fulfilled upon you; take heed you be not judged of your own
mouth, and be shut out with those liars, dogs, and enchanters you mention.
Your lies you see whither they are returned, and upon who^ they rest: how you
have barked at and bitte^, not only us, but all the dear servants of God, and
faithful witnesses of CHRIST, speaking out of the mouth of that Dragon, and of
that Beast, and o^ that false P^ophet, by this blasphemy in your letter
appears. The enchanters you speak of, are those false Prophets that do their
miracles before the throne of the Beast; those merchantmen, that help to deck
and adorn the harlot the false Church; those mediciners, that seek to heal
the wound of the Beast; those deceivers that by the effectual working or SATAN
in all power, and signs, and lying wonders seduce such as receive not the love
of the truth, that they might be saved; those Sorcerers that did al their
miracles in Egypt still to keep the people of God in bondage and to hinder them
from their iornye toward Sion, that resist the truth as IANNES and IAMBRES
withstood MOSES, whose madness as it was made kowe^ unto all men, so shall yours
also be. As you have alledg^d, these Ly^rs, Dogs, enchanters shall be rejected
in the buylding of Sion, shall be shut out of the heavenly Jerusalem the Church
and Bryde of CHRIST; but the Beast shall be taken, and with him the false Prophet
Reu. 19. 2^*
that did these signs before him, in which he deceived the^ that received the
mark of the Beast, and that vvorshiped his Image: these two shall be cast alive
into that lake of fire burning with brimstone. Be warned therefore and tremble,
consider of your estate: God send you of his grace.

This 11. of this 5. Month. HENRY BARROVV JOHN GREENVVOOD.
Except your letters hereafter be ceasoned with more gravity and grace, we
shall be unwilling to receive any more of them, or at the least forbear any
further to answer or follow you in this intemperate course; leaving you to
the judgment of God for all the wicked sayings you shall speak against the
servants and truth of CHRIST, which you cannot impunge.



The sum of a confuse conference had the 3 of the 4 Month, betwixt Mr.
SPERIN and Mr. COOPER, JOHN GREENVVOOD and HENRY BARROVV in the Fleet.
AT the first being set down at the Table, Mr. SPERIN used certain speech
openly in way of prayer.

GREN. Wh^e do you here take upon you to offer up the prayers of us all
without our consent, we not being met together to that purpose (...) but as
you know differing in judgment, and disalowing your Church and ministry.


SPER. I used it for my self and such as would join unto yt.


GREN. If for your self, yt was to Pharisaicall, and not to have been public:
As for us, you know we would not join unto yt.


SPE. All actions ought to be undertaken with prayer going before.


BAR. But prayer ought to be made with one accord, where with one mind and
one mouth they may praise GOD the Father of our Lord JESUS CHRIST Romans 15. 6.


COOP. CHRIST and his Apostles used prayer when they reasoned with the
adversary.


BAR. That is not so. where find you that?


GREN. Your prayers and all your actions are accursed in this popish ministry
you execute.


SPE. None will say so but such Schismatickes as you, that have rent your
selves from the Church.


BAR. Yt should seem you know not what either a Schismaticke or the true
Church is: Have we so largely disprooued your church unto you at your former
being here, yet you now call us Schismatickes, not being able to approve your
Church.


SPE. You never could disprove our Church.


BAR. We proved yt unto you to consist of a confuse assembly of profane
people, received immediately from open Idolatry upon one day by constreint
without any instruction in the word of GOD going before into your Church, this
ministry, Sacra^e^ts, worship set over them, which you confessed and would not
appro^e.


SPE. It is not so; I never denied yt to be a Church.


BAR. Will you now deny yt? I will produce your own hand against you. And
fetched a paper where indeed that Proposition was not but some Argument^s
ensuing thervppon. Whervppon Mr. SPERIN began to insult. The Proposition indeed
being under his hand i^ an other paper, which I then remembered not


BAR. There are many witnesses of this assertion. But I will bring you unto it
by circumstances, or convince it by proof. Did you not deny to meddle with
that time, because neither you nor I were of age to remember yt?


SPER. That is true.


GREN. You then confessed, (and it is manifest) that all the people were then
received to the Sacraments, without any conuertion by Doctrine.


BAR. You confessed also that this was done by force, and did not allow thereof.


SPER. Neither do I now allow of it, if it were so.


BAR. Why should you make question of so clear a thing? we proved it: as also
that all your parishes now consisted of the same people and their seed, had
still the same ministry, worship, government etc.


SPER. I then denied and still deny, that the people or ministry are the same.


COO^. There is now great alteration in the Faith and knowledge of the people
over was then.


GREN. Had you not the^ a ministry set over an ignorant people, and have you
not the same ministry over the same people and their seed now?


SPER. COOP. The people are now vvonne to the Faith.


GREN. But have you not still the same ministry which was then set over them
in this disorder and confusion? has there since been any separation or
amendment emongst you? remain you not in the same sins still? what change
can you show us?


BAR. Are not all still of your Church? Or what wicked man of the land is not
of your Church?


SPE. Such Schismatickes as you, are not of our Church.


BAR. You know neither what a Church or Schismaticke is: You can neither prove
your Church, nor show us Schismatickes.


SPE. You are such Schismatickes as were in the Church of Corinth and are
spoken of 1 Cor. 1. 10.


BAR. You read there of no Schismatickes in the Church of Corrin^h, neither
understand you that Scripture aright.


SPE. I will read the Text. Now I beseech you brethren by the name of our
Lord Jesus Christ that ye all speak one thing, and that there be no Schisms
amongst you: But be you kint together in on^ mind and in one judgment. Are
not here Schismatickes spok^n of?


BAR. What then?


SPE. Then were there Schismatickes.


BAR. It should seem you know not what a Schismaticke is, that can put no
difference betwixt a Sectorie and a Schismaticke. The Apostle there speaks of
Sectories, and not of Schismatickes.


SPER. The Apostle there speaks of Schismatickes, such as were vai^ glorious
and despised them that taught sincerely.


BAR. The Apostle there speaks of Sectories, such as you are: that sought to
draw the people after them, and to have the^ to follow, hear, and rely upon
themselves: so that some would hear one man, some an other, according to their
ytching humors: which Sectories were Teachers in the Church; neither does
the apostle there speak of Schismatics. A Sectorie is always one that raises
factio^s in the Church; a Schismatic is he which draws from the fellowship,
and rendeth or s^ereth himself from the Church, of whom you read H^br. 10,


COO^. The word Schism is a general word, and is read promiscue.


BAR. That is true. A Sect also is contained under the word Schism^.


SP^R. The Apostle uses the word (...) therefore they were Schismat.


BAR. Can you not yet learn a bett^r constructio^ of this word Schisms in
this place? Mr. COOPER has taught you a better co^struction: You will not say
that these were cut from the Church?


SPE. Why not?


GREN. The 11. verse of the 1. Chapter of the Epistle shows that they were of
the Church for it ha^h been declared unto me (my brethren) that there are
c^ntentions emongst yo^.


BAR. They were famous Teach^rs of and in the church, therefore they were not
cut off, or Schismatics.


COOP. 1 Cor. 11. It is said that there shall be Schisms and heresies emo^gst
them.


BAR. I grant well: what of that, therefore heretics and Schismatics are of
the Church: You will not conclude so?


COOP. Schism and a Schismatic are Coniugata.


GREN. By your Logic and propha^e Arts you pervert the truth of the
Scriptures.


SPER. COOP. Logic is a help to the understanding of the Scriptures.


GREN. You make it a cloak for your wickedness, with shifts to torn away the
truth.


BAR. You can put no difference betwixt a Schism and a Schismatic, the
offense and the Offender.


SPE. There cannot be a schism, but there must be a schismaticke.


BAR. But may not the Apostle speak of a schism where he speaks not of a
schismatic.


GREN. There may a schismatic arise in the Church, and yet not be of the
Church: as Antichrist is said to ari^e in the Church of GOD, yet is not of the
Church. He cannot be a schismatic, until he have cut himself from the Church.


S^E. The Apostle says there were Schisms and Schismatics emongst the^, for
some held of Paul, some of Apollo, some of Cephas. But Christ is not divided.


BAR. The Apostle th^re speaks of such sectorie Teachers and people following
them, as thus were led into parts and factions of such Teachers as bo^sted of
their gifts, and of the nombers they had baptized, and that followed them: Yet
all this shows, in that they were still Teachers and baptized, that they were
still of the Church, and not Schismatics.

But if you had judgment duly to consider of this place, you should find the
faults there reproved to be found mich more rife upon the Teachers of your
Church then they were in Corinth, where are almost so mainie Sects as Teachers.


SPER. It is understood of such Brownistes and Schismatickes as you are.


BAR. It is your custom to bless Christ's enemies and blaspheme Christ's
servants. We are no Brownistes, we hold not our faith in respect of any
mortal men, neither were we instructed by him or baptized into his name,
until by such as you we were so termed. Schismatickes we are not: we hold
communion with all Christ's servants in true Faith and ^oue: only we have
seperat our selves from the false church and false ministry, which we have
p^oued you to be.


GREN. BROWN is an Apostata, now one of your church; you receceiue all such
Apostataes from Christ: we never had any thing to do with BROWN, neither are
we members of your Church.


SPER. You were sometime a Minister of our Church, were you not? and now are
gonne back.


GREN. Seeing this matter concerns me, I pray you give me leave to show the^
what kind of Ministry I then had, and why I left yt. I was sometimes indeed a
Minister of your Church, after your popi^h orders; but finding my ministry to
be wholly vnlawf^ll in the very Office, entrance and administration, by the
rules of Christ's Testament, I, according to the Commandment of GOD zecha. 13.
Hezr. 2. and as many places as command to abstain from ^uill and to do that
which is good, by repentance left yt.


COOP. Because there were some corruptions in yt, will you therefore forsake
your whole ministry?


GREN. My ministry was wholly evil, both in office, entrance, and
administration, so that I left yt not for some corruptions. But if you can
prove ^t to be a true and lawful ministry, though with some corruptions,
whereof I may repent and yet keep my ministry* I will willingly go out of
prison with you, and labor in yt again.


COOP. And if you can prove it wholly unlawful, I will leave my ministry and
come and sit with you in prison.


BAR. It is not in your power so to do, repentance is the gift of GOD.


GREN. It is writt^ Reu. 16. that when the sins of the false church shall be
discouer^d, the Ministers thereof shall be so far from repe^tanc^, as they shall
g^awe their tongues for sorrow, and blaspheme the GOD of heaven. Let us then
have pen and ynke, that our reasons and answers may be set down.


COOP. To what purpose? You seek writing buth to catch.


BAR. We seek vvriting to avoid sclander, and that the truth might the
better appear, when both our reasons and answers are set down.


COOP. It were but to spend time: I will not write:


GREN. Let us grow to some head: we will write though you will not. Let me
show you my Ministry that I had in your Church I pray you. I was first made
Deacon by the Bishop of London, to no peculiar Congregation: afterward made
full Priest by the B. of Lyncolne, you know after what a popish order.


COOP. Because there might be some defaultes in your entrance, do you therefore
think all your ministry unlawful?


GREN. If I had no true entrance unto the ministry, and yet should exercise a
ministry, I were in the number of those whom CHRIST pronounces thieues and
murderers John. 10.


COOP. Though there be defaults in your entrance, your ministry may be
lawful. You must prove your whole ministry unlawful.


GREN. My ministry was unlawful, both in the entrance, Office and
administration: therefore wholly unlawful.


SPER. COOP. Our ministry is not wholly unlawful in the entrance, Office, and
administraco^n.


GREN. I will begin with mine entrance, which I thus prove to be wholy
unlawful. There was no Flock called me to the ministry. therfore^ could
have no lawful calling to exercise any ministry in any Office unto them.


COOP. You might be a Minister and exercise your ministry unto them, though
you were not called by them; because you might offer your gifts unto them, and
so be a Minister by an inward calling.


GREN. Though this be no answer to my Argument, yet let it be set down in
wtiting. Whervppon this Proposition was set down.


Coop. It may so fall out some times that a man, not being called of the
Flock, may ye^ offer his ministry unto the Church; and that shall be a (...)
calling for him to be either Pastor or Doctor, because there is an inward
calling.


GREN. Do you hold that by an inward calling a man may exercise an Office in
the Church of GOD without an outvvard calling thereunto? If I should hold it, I
should quicklye be drawn forth for an Anabaptist.


COOP. With these circumstances he may: As a man endued with gifts should
offer the^ in pity and compassion unto an ignorant people.


GREN. But vvhither does he offer himself as a minister, or as no Minister unto
them?


COOP. He offreth himself as a Minister by an inward calling.


GREN. He could not offer himself as a Minister unto them, because he had
neither Office nor calling unto the ministry before.


COOP. SPER. He may be a Minister Pastor or Teacher before he be chosen of a
Flock, because he may have an inward calling.


GREN. No man can be an Officer in the Church, except he have a true outward
calling thereunto.


COOP. You hold him no true minister, without he have a perfect calling.


GREN. I plead not for perfect outward calling, but for a true outward calling.


COOP. Then you grant that though there be some defaults in his outward
calling, yet he may be a true Minister.


BAR. We are so far from looking for a Church or ministry without faults here
in this life, that we affirm there ca^ be no church or ministry here without
fault.


GREN. BAR. But you go from the question: we reason not of a perfect, but of
a true outward calling, without which there can be now no true Minister in the
Church. Answer therefore directly to the Argument, either deny or affirm.


COOP. SPER. We will answer by distinguishing: and repeated their first
Proposition. That a man by his inward calling might be received as a Minister
of the people, without an outward calling.


GREN. ^hen you deny my Proposition That of necessity every true Minister
must have a true outward calling to his Office.


SPER. A man may be a Minister without a true outward calling in an
extraordinary time, having an inward calling.


GREN. The rules of CHRIST'S Testament are now perfect, and perpetual in all
times: therefore there is no such extraordinary time, that any man may take
upon him a ministry without a true outward calling according to the rules of
the word.


SPER. LVTHER and CALVIN etc. were true Ministers in these extraordinary times
without a true outward calling.


GREN. BAR. We are not now to co^te^d about their ministry, they are now dead:
will you oppose their ministry against the rules of CHRIST'S Testament? We
affirm no man can be a true Minister, without a true outward calling thereunto.


COOP. We do affirm that there may be a ministry without a true outward
calling: But by circumstances.


GREN. This is contrary to your former Assersion: that there might be a
Minister without an outward calling at all ^t supra. Answer therefore directly,
yea or n^.


COOP. His offering, his gifts unto the people, and their receiving of him is
some outward calling.


GREN. Hold you this a true and sufficient outward calling?


COOP. For such times as these, I hold it a true and sufficient outward calling.


BAR. An unbelieving people cannot call or elect a minister: But you confess
the people to be such.


COOP. He may be a Ministe^ to the people, they accepting of him, before they
be called to the faith: How else would you have them called to the faith?


GREN. Not by placing CHRIST'S Ministry over an vnbele^uing people. The
infidels ought to hear the word, but cannot choose a Minister


COOP. Thus he may be a Minister. The people, what people soe^er, before they
be called, are to take this man thus offering himself as a teacher unto them by
his i^vvard calling, as a Minister in the offic^ of Pastor or Teacher.


BAR. GREN. May the Sacraments then be delivered to an unbelieving people?


COOP. Not before they be taught.


GREN. Is any of the flock and yet incapable of the Sacraments, or may there
be a Pastor and a flock and yet no Sacraments delivered?


COOP. As they are instructed they are to have the Sacraments delivered unto
them.


BAR. But all your people receive the Sacraments, all being baptized without
the exception of any, either heretic, witch, or Co^iurer and their seed
before they were instructed, and you stand ministers unto such.


SPER. This is but your sclander: we stand ministers to no such.


BAR. Let the Prisons and estate of the land be searched whether the^ be no
such to be found: all the land is baptized in ^our Church, and you stand
Ministers to all the land in high sacrilege.


SPER. I deliver the Sacraments to none, but unto such whose faith ^ know.


BAR. Yt should seem you know not what faith is, or unto whom to deliver the
Sacraments: what wicked person is there in your Parish, or in the whole land,
that is not baptized and received to your Sacraments?


SPER. You judge uncharitably of the whole land: I pray what think^ you of
your self when you were of our Church.


BAR. I then was as you now are, and went where I was ledd away unto dumb
Idols by such as you are.


COOP. You abuse the Scripture: The Apostle there speaks of the heathen and
of stocks and stones.


SPER. We lead you not to Idols, neither to worship Images; these are your
sclanders.


BAR. I abuse not the place, neither scla^der you: We are ledd unto Idols
when we are ledd unto such Ministers as you, which stand for that you are not
in the Church, and are Idol Shepherds and Ministers zecha. 11. Again you
lead us to open and gross Idolatry; as the worshipping of dead Saints and
Angels; yea your selves worship Images, even that Image of that Beast.


SPER. These are but your railings and sclanders: we worship neither Angels,
nor Saints, nor the Image of the Beast.


BAR. You give unto Angels and dead Saints in your Church and solemnlie
indict an Eaue, a day, on the one a fast, on the other a solemn feast, with an
especial worship devised of purpose unto peculiar Saints and Angels, the
day proclaimed and kept holy. Call you not this Idolatry, do you not now
worship Saints and Angels?


SPER. We do not worship the^ though we use these ceremonies.


BAR. You show your self a man without sense or shame. I purpose not at this
time to meddle with your gross Idolatries, it were from the purpose and an
endless work. Let me now show you how you worship the Image of the Beast. You
worship and use in your worship the constituco^ns and devises of these
Antichristian Bishopps, as your seruice-boke etc.


SPER. You speak you know not what. You know not what the Image of the Beast
is.


BAR. Yes, I know that speaking Image of the Beast which is set up in all
your Churches, even the humane constitutions of all these Antichristian BBs;
which and vvherby, you and all your people worship. This I affirm to you and
unto all the world, to be that Image of the Beast: that (...).

All devises of men brought into the worship of GOD are Idols: as your
^pochripha writings in stead of GODS spiritual worship.


SPER. That is not so; how prove you that?


BAR. I prove it by the second Commandment. Thou shall no^ make to thy self
any graven Image or Idol.


SPER. Lo, you understand not the second Commandment; Yt speaks only of
Stocks and stones etc.


BAR. See what a good Teacher you are that understand not the Law, and yet
would be a Teacher of the Law. The second Commandment is not only understood
of worshipping creatures, but of all manner false and devised worship, when we
worship GOD after the devises of men.


SPE. It is not so, you understand not this Commandment.


GREN. CHRIST himself so expounds yt Math. 15. you (...) me in vain,
teaching doctrines men's precepts.


BAR. You are ignorant of these Doctrines, are unworthy to be ^ Pastor: for
any thing I have seen in you, you understand no Scriptures.


COOP. You have very shamefullie perverted the place to the Corinthes. which
is spoken of dombe Idols, stocks, and stones.


GREN. He used not the place of the Corinthes at all, but only spoke according
to that Phrase. So that if his Doctrine be true the p^ce has no injury.


COOP. He used the place.


BAR. It is not so; I alleged not the place: but only spoke according to the
phrase. We are Commanded to speak with holy words, and as the words of God.


COOP. Speak of your conscience whether you meant not to use the place.


BAR. I use not to speak against mie Conscience in or for any thing. I have
told you how ^ meant to use the place: Neither can yt be otherwise collected
from mie speech. But read you never, that our Savior Christ and his Apo^tles
have used places in the Prophets and Psalms, and otherwise applied them then
they were in their Context?


COOP. Those the Apostle there spoke of, were the Idols of the heathen, and to
the heathen people, and therefore can not be applied to us.


GREN. All Idols are of the same nature and in the same detestatio^ with the
Lord, whether they be blocks, or stocks, or spiritual Idols which are more
subtle.


BAR. I have showed your Idolatry to be gross enough: as the worshipping of
Saints, Angels, keeping holy Days and holy Eaues unto them, holy fasts and
holy feasts. But yt were a wearines to rip up your popish, Jewish, heathenish
ministrations.


COOP. These are but railing and foolish words.


GREN. I pray you follow the^ no further. Let us be no longer ledd away with
their cauills, and by shifts from our present purpose; else we shall conclude of
nothing.


BAR. I pray you then go to yt again. For I am vvearied with them, and will no
more deal with such unreasonable men.


COOP. I can no longer stay I must be gonne. And so he arose up, and would
have broken of.


GREN. Will you openly declare that you had no purpose to edify your selves or
us? wherefore then did you come, will ^ou conclud^ of no point of Doctrine?
answer this Argument I beseech you.

Every true minister of the Church must have election, approbation and
ordination, in and of a true Congregation of CHRIST. But you have not suc^
^lection, approbation, ordination, Therefore you are ^o true minis^ers of CHRIST.


COOP. We have election, approbation, ordination, in a Christian congregation.


GREN. That is not true. For neither have you a people truly called and
gathered unto CHRIST, nether were you chosen and ordained by the people, but by
the Bishop.


BAR. Here must be noted your vnco^stancie, that agree not unto your self.
Erwhile you defen^ed your ministry by your inward calling without any outward
calling; and now you justify your outward calling. But let me not trouble you:
follow your Argument.


COOP. I had the peoples acceptance when I was made Minister.


GREN. The peoples acceptance was but your agreement with them for you wadges.


COOP. That is not true. I could have mie vvadges without the peoples consent
by law.


GRE. The law allows a Curate but ten Pounds by year. but that will not
content you* you must therefore compovvnd with the people for more.


BAR. You could not have the peoples acceptance, when you were made minister,
you had no flock then.


GREN. Before you had a flock Mrs. Lawson got a lyce^s for you from the
Archbishop to preach in that Parish.


BAR. What office do you exercise in your Church Mr. COOPER? are you a Pastor?


COOP. I am no Pastor, I am a Doctor.


BAR. There is no such office in your Church. Every parish is but allowed his
parson or vickar; endowed Curats or such Doctors are but the Parsons
substitutes to help a dumb or plurified Parson.


COOP. We have the Doctors office in our Church.


BAR. It is evident you have not.


GREN. You were made Minister by the B. before you came to your parish by
Powles.


COOP. I was made Minister to a flock.


BAR. That could not be, saying you are no Parso^. You were made minister to
any that would hire you.


GRE. You are those (...) those wandering stars Jude speaks of. like the
Leuite that ran from place to place where he might get the best wadges.


COOP. SPER. You falsely apply the Scriptures against us. we are not those
stellae Erraticae Jude speaks of.


BAR. Yes, and in the error of Bala^ being powered fourth for wadge. How many
parishes have you been at, runninge from one to an other.


SPER. COOP. Is it not lawful for a Minister upon some occasions to remou^
from one Congregation unto an other?


GREN. That Minister that forsakes his flock is an hireling, comes but to
rob and spoil. But you both are placed in, and removed from your flock
without the consent of your flock; And are silenced in your flocks by the
Bishopps, by whom you were made Priests.


COOP. SPER. We had not our ministry from the B. but from a congregaco^n


GREN. What congregation was that, when each of you have had so many?


SPER. COOP. What if we were made by a Congregation of Ministers.


GREN. How can that be, can there be a Pastor of Pastors, or a congregation of
Pastors. You were made Ministers by the BBs. and not by any Christian
congregation.


SPER. COOP. We had not our ministry of the BBs. but by consent of a
congregation.


GREN. Thus I prove you had your ministry from the Bishop. By the Bishops
calling you administer and by none other. Therefore.


COOP. SPER. We had not our ministry by the Bishops only.


GREN. By the Bs. callings you administer, and without the Bs. calling you
cannot administer. Therefore by the Bs. calling only.


SPER. We have the Approbation of the congregation also.


BAR. You have not. Your Curats (as is said) are made Ministers i^ nubibus.
without any flock. Your Parsons are nominat by the Patron, and made by the
B. Thus trust upon the flock without either the knowledge, priuity,
approbatio^, or choice of the people.


SPER. The Patrons choice is the peoples choice.


BAR. How can you say the Patrons choice is the peoples, when they have
neither priuitie, consent nor assent. Be the Patro^ a woman, an Infant, an
Ideote, have he 40. benefices and those in all the pa^ts of the land, such as
he has never seen or known, yet does he present, and the people must accept.


SPER. I had the approbation of the flock before I went unto the Bishop, and
was a Minister before I was at the Bishop.


BAR. You could not have your parsonadge before you had been a^ the B. neither
be a Minister without the B. were you not a Minister before you came to your
flock? answer directly.


SPER. I was made Minister by a Bishop before I had the approbation of the
People.


BAR. What truth or agreement is in your speech? Even now you said your were a
Minister before you came at the B. and had the approbatio^ of your flock
before. Now you say (which indeed is true) you were made Minister by the B.
before you had the approbation of the people.


SPER. I meant the B. London. I had the approbatio^ of my flock before I went
to him.


BAR. We reasoned all this while of the Bishopps indefinitely, and not of any
one B. more then of an other.

But to what end serves now the approbatio^ of the people, when you are made
full Minister before.


SPER. I was a Minister in part, but no full Minister before I had the
approbation of the people.


BAR. See how you entangle your self. How can you make this agree unto your
second Proposition. That you were made Minister by a B. before you had the
approbation of the people.


SPER. I hold not my self a Minister in the sight of GOD by the Bishops
ordination, Until I have the peoples approbation.


BAR. GOD sees and knows all his works from before all beginnings. GOD
knows all that he has appointed and set apart to the work of his ministry,
even before he made them or in their cradles. So that God in his fore knowledge
may ordain chosen vessels unto his ministry, which yet in the ^ight of me^
are not to be held Ministers, until they have that lawful calling which GOD
has perscribed thereunto. which calling, seeing you want, you are to be held no
Minister in the sight of men also. Moreover, the B. without the approbation of
your flock ordained you a Minister. Now which way should you not hold your
self a Minister after their Orders: Or to what end served the ordinatio^ of the
Bishop, if you were not the^ made Minister?


Here Mr. COOPER hasted away and said he could no longer tarry. whereupon we
ended this general conference. yet notwithstanding (the chamber Door being
locked, and no Porter near to let them out) Mr. COOPER used speech to the
standers by which after follows.

We have omit^ed one especial point that fell out in our Conference not
perfectly remembering the due place where yt should com^ in.

COOP. If you would not have a ministry set over the unbelieving people, how
should the unbelieving people be called unto the faith.


GREN. We shall show you an other order to call the people to the faith
according to CHRIST'S Testament. And not without warrant to set the ministry
of CHRIST over an unbelieving people, to the perverting of all GODS ordinances,
and committinge of Sacrilege, having no promise of any action you do in that
^state.


COOP. Which way would you then have the^ called, if they should not be
instructed.


GREN. Both the Magistrate ought to compel the Infidells to hear the Doctrine
of the Church, and also with the approbation of the church to send fourth meet
men with gifts and graces to instruct the infidells, being as yet no ministers
or officers unto them.


BAR. Further every Christian is bound both in his family and co^uersaco^n to
call others by all means he may, unto the faith.


COOP. What if the Church be where there is no magistrate? is there alwai^s a
magistrate?


BAR. Yea the Church cannot be without a Magistrate, neither can there be a
Common wealth or estate without a Magistrate. There is always a M^gistrate,
though not always a Christian Magistrate.


COOP. There is not always a M^gistrate.


BAR. Without a Magistrate there can be no society, no trade, no calling had.


COOP. T^er has not been always a (...) over the Church.


GREN. The Church has always been in some common wealth or other. There can
be no Common wealth without a Magistrate.


COOP. What Magistrate was there in H^bells time?


BAR. When the Church and all the world was in ADAMS household he no doubt was
a Father, a Magistrate, a teacher, a governor.


COOP. The^ was no Magistrate over the Church before the law.


BAR. That is not so. was not Mel^hisedeck a Mag^strate.


COOP. Melchisedeck was a figure of CHRIST not an ordinary King.


BAR. Does not the Scripture say he was king of Salem?


GREN. Was not Abra^am a Magistrate over the Church?


COOP. Abraham was no Magistrate.


GREN. He was a Magistrate over his hou^hold, his household was then the
Church.


BAR. Was not Joseph a Magistrate think you?


COOP. Over the Eg^ptians after the heathen manner.


BAR. Heathens ma^e be lawful Magistrates over the Church also. But Joseph was
a Magistrate over the Church.


COOP. He was not a Magistrate over the Church.


BAR. He was a Magistrate over all Egypt and over all Pharao his servants. Bu^
the Church was then in Egypt emongst Pharao his servants. Therefore he was a
Magistrate over the church, as plentifully appears in the history: his
brethren acknowledged him their Lord.


GREN. It was so prophesied of him before, as the visions and dr^ames Declared.


COOP. Joseph was a figure of CHRIST.


BAR. What the^? So were all the Kings of Iud^ therefore no Magistrates.


GREN. Moses also was a Civil Magistr^te over the Church before the law.


COOP. He was an extraordinary Magistrate, he was not chos^n by the people.


BAR. Why is every Magistrate to be chosen by the people? was not the
ordinance of GOD a sufficient calling to the Magistracy*


GREN. MOSES was both called of GOD, and approved his calling unto and before
the people of Isr^el.


COOP. MOSES was a Prophet: therefore he could be no ordinary Magistrate.


BAR. DAVID also and SOLOMON were Prophets, yet you will not say that they were
not ordinary Magistrates.


GRE. Every Prophet was not a Minister of the temple in the priests office.


COOP. SPER. The Prophetts office was a ministerial office.


BAR. None but Levites might b^ Ministers of the Tabernacle. bu^ there were
many Prophetts which were not of the tribe of Leui. But what is this to our
purpose? was not MOSES. JOSEPH and these others civil Magistrates? Mr. COOPER
will you confess your error?


COOP. They were no ordinary Magistrates.


BAR. Yt is evident they were civil Magistrates, and ordinary, and excellent
magistrates according to the revealed will of GOD. But you will y^ild unto no
truth, but cauil perue^slie against the evident Scriptures.

Amongst mich co^fused speech that passed betwixt Mr. SPERIN and me HENRY
BARROVV. after that our conference was broken up in following his last
assertion. That he held not himself a Minister by the Bishops Ordination until
he had the ^pprobation of the people.

He first confessed the BBs. ordinatio^ to be a civil constitution. 1.


Then that the Bishops by the Princes Commandment may 2.
ordeyne Ministers by their sole authority; Because Timo^hi and Ti^us did
ordenie Elders alone.

When it was alleged that Timothi and Titus did ordeine them according 3.
to the Apostles constitutions and as the Apostles themselves used to do. which
always was by the free election of the flock. 1. Cor. 4. 17. Act. 1^. 23. he
said that Timothi and Titus as also the Apostles were Ministers alone, without
the peoples election. And that the world (...)* Act. 14. 23. had relation unto
the Apostles, that li^ed up their hands before they laid them on; and not unto
the people, that lifted up their ^andes to signify their approbation in the
election.

He said that if ^o b^ this Act. 14. were to be understood of the 4.
peoples election, yet the^ were no more places to prove that the (...) ought
to choose their Ministers: Being demanded what he thought of Acts. 1. and Acts.
6. of 1. Timo^. 3. and Titus 1. he said that Acts. 6. was but of Deacons only.
and as for the other places they proved not that the people might choose their
Elders. Being demanded who then were to make choice and probation of the
Elders, he said that Timothi and Titus in those chapters. Being asked who now
was to succeed Timothi and Ti^us seeing they had lest no heirs apparent behind
them: he said the BBs. were to choose and ordeine them, who now being old and
able to take no more pains, were to govern over many Churches, as they did.

Being asked of 1. Timoth. 3. verse. 10. who was to choose and make ^.
probatio^ there, he confessed that the Church: being asked whether that rule
of probation belonged not also, and were spoken of Elders in like manner. he
said no. but only of Deacons: being asked if the wo^d hos^utos in the 8. verse
had not relation unto the ^ame chusers and gave not now rules unto them
concerning Deacons also; And how he could by that chapter make any
distinction, or show why the former rules ^o^cerning the choosing of Elders
should not as well belong unto the Church, as these concerning Deacons; or why
if the former belonged unto Timothi, these also should not belong unto
Timothi^; he answered still that the Church was to choose Deacons, but not
Elders.

In further discourse of these rules for the gifts, manners, and rules 6.
of the conversation and life of these Elders, which were such as could be
known unto, and examined by none, but by the church where they lived, which
showed that these rules of their Election were given unto the Church, wherein
Timothy was rather to help and instruct the Church, then any way to pluck
away the power, authority, and interest of the church: he answered that
Timothi could only best try the gifts and learning of these Ministers, and
therefore the choice and approbation were given to him only. Being dem^unded
whether there were not many rules concerning sondrie christian virtues of
manners, conversation toward all men, of the governing of themselves, of their
wives, children, families, which belonged and were Common to the teaching and
gouerninge Elders, which the Church when they li^ed, could only best judge: He
said that. 1. Timothi. 3. and Titus 1. were only wri^ten and understood of
P^stors and Teachers because yt is there said a B^hop must b^ didacticos which
is only pe^ulier unto the Pastor and Teacher. Neither would he yield though yt
were showed him, that the name and care of Elders were common unto all as well
the governing as teaching Elders, that most of the rules accorded unto them
indifferently Acts ^0. Further that he could show no ^ther rules i^ the
Testament of CHRIST for the election of the governing Elders then there.

Whereupon he fell into this gross opinion also. That those Elders 7.
and De^cons were one office. Not understanding To. 12. 8. 1. Tim. 5. 17. Phil.
1. 1.

Retorning again unto the BBs. being demanded by what warrant 8.
they may usurp this inordinate power over all the churches. In process of
speech he was driven to acknowledge yt only to be by the Princes authority,
and not by the Testament of CHRIST: and so held them to be merely civil. Being
demanded what the^ ^e thought of their ministry and Sacraments which they
delivered; he awhile denying that they meddled with the Sacraments or ministry;
in the end being pressed, because they in all the Parishes of their diocesses
did and might at their pleasure preach and deliver the Sacraments, whether the
Church and Parson would or no: yea they will make the Parson follow them with
the Cupp and book. yea the B. will scilence, suspend, or remove what Minister
or Parson he list. Here M^. SPERIN said that the Bishop did not, neither should
administer any Sacraments in his P^rish.

Thus with one breath he affirming and denying, grau^ting and retracting, I
^old him that I would not from hencefourth (...) more reason or Conf^r with
him until he brought a better Conscience with him.

To conclude, seeing he neither understood the Scriptures whereof he so boldly
affirmed or denied, seeing he understood not the very first Doctrines and
beginnings of CHRIST, as the Doctrines of laying on of hands of Election,
ordination etc. neither yet knew so mich as the offices that belonged to the
Church of CHRIST, he was altogether unworthy and unfit to be a teacher or
exercise any government in the Church of CHRIST: Saying that God would er long
show who were fit Ministers to draw near unto him.

He said unto me that I meddled which more then I needed, and that I did but
take a wolf by the ears. I said that he abused and understood not that
Proverb, also that I did not immiscere alienae liti. That yt was a matter of
mine own salvation that I stood for, in refusing all subjection or Communion
with ANTICHRIST and his detestable enormities; that every true Christian ought
to contend for the maintenance of the faith that was once given unto the
Saints. Re^. 14. 9. etc. Jude. ^.

Mr. COOPER to shift off the answer of our Arguments wherewith he was pressed,
when he perceived the issue of them, he rose from the table and brake off
Conference with us, pretending have to be gonne* but the door being locked, he
turned him to two g^lemen which sat behind as hear^rs of our conference, and
fell ^ persuading of them whereupon I JOHN GREN* left Mr. BAR^OVV Mr. SPERIN in
conference still, and went to give ear to Mr. COOPER, whose deceipt^ I fownde
so pernitions and D^ctrines so foul that I again replied upon him, and
received certain errors from his mouth, some whereof I shall hear insert with
mine answer in breife, not following our whole discourse.


COOP. A private man ought not to make question our doubt of the 1.
Ministers ou^ward calling, but if he find comfort in heart by his Doctrine, he
ought to approve of his ministry, what calling soever he have.


GREN. This is sweet Doctrine that you sow here; has not the ^orde given as
great Commandment to avoid false Prophetts as to hear and obey the true
messengers, and all true messengers thereupon approving their sending to all
men's conscience by the evident testimony of Gods reueyled will, shall not the
flock know their Pastor, yea choose and call their Pastor?


COOP. If one come into a Congregaco^n and hear one preach, he ought not to
make question of the Ministers calling, or refuse his Doctrine.


GREN. If one come so, and before know that that preacher has a false outward
calling, yea that he has no office in a true Church but is a false Prophet, he
offends in hearing of him, especially in a false Church, for there is no false
teacher but teach^th some truth etc.


COOP. A man may be a true Minister to a people uncalled, and they are 2.
a true Church or faithful Congregation potentia though not actu. and he may
be an officer or minister unto them, they b^ing a true Church Potentia.


GREN. This is such Doctrine as I never heard, that a Pastor can be ordained
and exercise the duties of a Pastor, to a Church that as yet is not. But your
Ministers most sacrilegiouslie give them the Sac^aments also in this estate.


COOP. Though the Minister do deliver the Sacraments to the open 3.
known unworthy, and so commit sacrilege, yet may a private man communicate
with the Minister, and that party not be partaker of their sin.


GREN. If I associat a theife and Communicate in his ^uill* shall I not be
guilty, how mich more if I reprove not this transgressio^ against God, and
abstain from their fellowship till they repent, or by due ^rder be censured.


BARTLET Here Mr. BARTLET a gentleman said yt was not well we had not some more
orderly Conference about these weighty causes that the truth might appea^e.


GREN. You see they will not come to ani^ point of Doctrine to conclude any
thing, we have long made suit to have some free Conference and never could
obtain any, but are locked up close prisoners.


COOP. They deny our Church and ministry and therefore are not to be disputed
with.


BARTL. Yet their reasons would be seen and co^uinced orderly; if they deserve
yt, then to suffer punishment.


GREN. We have often showed causes why we hold your Church and ministry to
be false, and not to be joined with of any that will be saved: as for example.
you have not a people rightly gathered unto CHRIST, but stand one with the
world, so that your parishes cannot be called (...) a people called fourth 2.
you have set a popish ministry over this whole ^ande 3. you most
sacrilegiously give the Sacraments in this order to all comers 4. you wor^hipp
God after men's devises and not according to CHRIST'S Testament. 5. you have not
the power or freedom to redress sin by due censure, being all Subject to
these wicked Courts. etc.


BARTL. These things would be answered and convinced.


COOP. We grant the things they seek are good, and many of 5.
us have written and taught fully the same, but they seek them not by due
order.


GREN. This is not true, you are limited what to preach, to conform your
Doctrines to these Antichristian Orders, and still practice contrary i^ you
write or teach any truth. And as for us we seek to do the will of God after
the same order that all true Prophets, CHRIST, and his Apostles have taught and
practiced for Conscience toward God: to have no fellowship with that
ministry and Church which rejects CHRIST'S Testament, and will not be
guided by him and his Ordinances.


COOP. We profess and teach truly all the Articles of faith. 6.



GREN. The Papists teach the same Articles in general words, but nether you
nor they, either teach the particular Doctrines, our practice the same truly.
But both you and they deny speaciall Doctrines of our Justification.


COOP. What Article of faith do we not truli^ teach.


GREN. You teach that CHRIST descended into hell after his death and burial.


COOP. We hold it not neither teach yt, many of us have taught and written
against yt, you therefore do us wrong to chardge us with vt.


GREN. It is set out with privilege as an Article of your faith and received
and redd in all your Parishes*


COOP. Though the governors of our Church set yt out and we ca^ not help yt,
yet we are not to be chardged with yt.


GREN. Besides that you daily communicate with them that do hold yt (if not
read yt to the people) you have subscribed to this and all other such errors
in your Church of late, as I hear.

Here Mr. COOPER was smitten with mutenes and the gentleman said, have you
done so?


COOP. He cares not wh^t he says of us.


GREN. Will you deny yt. I will bring witness to prove yt unto you before to
morrow at 8* of the clock, if you deny yt.


COOP. I will not make you acquainted with my private actions.


GREN. I desire not to know your private actions, but this is a public
matter of your subjection to Antichrist in your whole ministry against your
conscience; but yt seems your deeds ar evil, and therefore you would hide
them, least they should be reproved of the light.

The gentleman said yt was thought we held some error about the lords prayer,
as they call yt: whervppon I showed him ou^ judgment in writing, and said that
we would not continue in any error to our knowledge. and when he read thatwe
said yt could not be called the Lords prayer, because he never prayed yt, Mr.
COOPER took exception thus.


COOP. It may be called the Lords prayer in respect he taught yt his Disciples.


GREN. This proves it cannot be called the lords prayer, for Doctrine is one
thing, and prayer is an other. Prayer is a pouring fourth of our hearts unto
the Lord, according to our present wa^ts; Doctrine is an instruction of others;
so that yt cannot be called the Lords pray^r.


BARTLET But this troubles us that you hold yt not lawful to say oue^ those
words in prayer etc.


GREN. You see that we deny no man to use the very words, all o^ any part
of them in prayer, by explication, or application, according to our present
occasions, as any other Scripture.


COOP. What is the meaning of that explication or application.


GREN. Explication and application is meant thus: as when I desire that the
Pope and such Ministers of popery might be suppressed I say. Do this Lord for
th'aduancement of thy kingdom. Let thy Kingdom come etc.

And without this explication or application to say over the whole words
containing all things that can be praid, were but abuse of that form of
prayer, seeing they that so pray cannot understand what he (that is the mo^th
of all) asks* for we cannot pray for all thing at once, but that which is
within the compass of our faith; otherwise yt is but babbling.


COOP. For the whole Church yt may be said over as a prayer.


GREN. All prayer must be of faith for such things as are within our knowledge,
and as we know the Church to be in present need of, and those things to be
particularly craved at GODS hand, else we do but babble as the papists do.


COOP. I grant that al our prayers ought to be of faith and expressing our
present necessities. Yet ought we every day to say over the Lords prayer for
the whole Church.


GREN. This is popish Doctrine, and such prayer were superstitious babbling etc.


The righteous me^ they shall judge them after the manner of (...) and after the
manner of murderers, for they are harlots and blo^d is in their b^nds: Ezekiel.
23. 45.
Before we can judge the false Church, it is expedient that we discern the
true Church, which is thus described in the scriptures.

THe true planted and rightly established Church of CHRIST is a company of
Faithful people: separated from the unbelievers and heathen of the land:
gathered in the name of CHRIST, whom they truly worship, and redily obey as
their only King Priest and Prophet: joined together as members of one body:
ordered and governed by such officers and laws as CHRIST in his last will and
Testament has thereunto ordained: all and each one of them standing in and for
their Christian liberty to practice whatsoener God has commanded and
revealed unto them in his holy word within the limits of their callings,
executing the lords judgments against all trangressio and disobedience which
arises among them, and cutting it off accordingly by the power which their
lord and King CHRIST JESUS has committed unto them.

Now who so shall measure thies parish assemblies as they generally stand in
England, by this rule: shall evidently find them in every point so
transgressing and defective: as he that has eyes to see, or but a will to
search cannot be deceived or mistake these parish Churches for the true
churches of Christ.

Thies parishes consisting of a company of profane and ignorant people:
gathered by the sound of a Bell in the name of Antichrist: worshipping God
after a false and Idolatrous manner: denying all obedience unto CHRIST in his 3.
offices as their only King, Priest, and Prophet. living in disorder among
themselves: standing in confusion being disordered and ouerruled by such laws
and officers as the Pope left and not as CHRIST left, standing in bondage to
the Romi^h courts and cannons: having no power to execute the lords judgments
or to redress the least sin or transgression amongst themselves: but are
driven to the Comissaries Courts, and so cast out SATAN by the power of SATAN.

1. Their Churches consiste not of a company of faithful people, (1) ^ere. 31.
34. Act. 10. 43 Act. 15. 9. ^. Cor. 1. 2.
but of a multitude of profane people: Therefore they are not the true Church.

2. They have made no separation from the heathen of the (2) Isay. 65. 11* 12.
Leu. 20. 24 Iere. 15. 19. Ez^k. 16. 25 Eze. 23. 44 I^h. 15. 1. 9. 2 Cor. 6. 14
land: but all are received and retained in the bozome of their Churches:
Therefore: etc.

3. They are not gathered in the name of Christ, but in the name of Antichrist,
whom they obey as shall afterward appear. Therefore etc. (3) Isay. 11. 10, 12.
John. 12. 32 Mat. 18. 20 1 Pet. 2. 4. 5


4. They worship not God truly, but after a false and Idolatrous manner, as
witnesses their popish leiturgie, their stinted book of ^hier common prayer:
Therefore etc. (4) Deu^. 5. 8. 1 Cor. 10. 28 Revel. 21. 8


^ They receive not, nor obey not Christ as their King, Priest, and Prophet:
Therefore etc. (5) Deuteronomy. 18. 15 Isay. 42. 1. Mat. 17. 5. Act. 3. 22. ^. Io. 4.
3. Mal. 1. 6. Luke 19. 27 John. 3. 3 Ezekiel. 16* 17. 19. and 44. 7. Lam. 1. 10.


Not as their King; rejecting his government and receiving and ^tanding vuder
the Antichrist^a yoke of their popi^h government.

Not as their Priest; sacraligiously profaning his name with ^hier Idolatry,
prostituting his blood: and making him a priest and sacrifice to Infidells and
the most wicked offenders:

Not as their Prophet; giving no obedience to his word, using De^t. 13. 3.
Mat: 7. 15* and 15. 14. Romans 16. 17 2. Tim. 3. 5. 2 John. 10. Iere. 23. 29
(...) as a mantill to cover their sin, rather then as a rule whereby (...)
direct their lives, not seeking a true ministry but maintey^ing a false, of
which sort the wholl ministry of the land is which are permitted to teach in
their public places, to whom ^ey give ear.

Their people are not kint together as members each of (6) 1 Cor. 12. 12 1
Pet. 2. 4. 5 Romans 12. 5
other in one congregation, but both roue and go, assemble, and depart, at
their pleasure when they will, whether they will, and as they will themselves;
As also live in continual disorder.

7 Thies parishes are not ordered and governed by such officers (7) Romans 12. 8.
Ephesians. 4. 11. Psalm. 2. 2. 3. L^k. 19. 14.
as Christ has appointed to his Church: They have no true Pastors, Teachers,
Elders, Deacons, Releeuers: But insteade of thies they remain most seruilely
s^biect to the Antichristian government of their popish Archbishops, Bishops,
Chauncellors, Archdeacons, De^nes, Commissaries, Doctors, Proctors, Aduocats,
Notaries, Regesters Purseuants Cursetors, Sumners etc. And from the
Apostoli^all seat of the Bi^hops, they receue as Antechristia^ and false a
ministry, as their (...), (...), hirelings, lecturers, mercenarie preachers,
etc. which togeither with this people stand bound and subject to thies Bishops
and their popish courts, of high commission, of faculties, of Arch^es, of
prerogative of delega^s, of their Co^missaries etc. Therefore, etc.

8 Thi^s assemblies are not ruled by the old and new Testament, (8) 1 Timothy 6*
13 14. Ephesians. 4. 11 12. 1 Cor. 14. 37 Heb. 12. 28.
but by the Cannons, Injunctions, and decrees of thi^s Antichristian and popish
courts. Therefore etc.

9 Thies people stand not in and for their Christian liberty, (9) Io^n. 8. 36.
Gal. 4. 26 1. Pet. 2. 9.
but all of them remain in bondage to thies Egyptian and Babilonish yoakes,
yiedling obedience unto thies courts and their Cannons: Therefore etc.

10 Thies assemblies have not the power which Christ has g^uen 10) Psalm. 14*
9. 9 Isay. 45. 17. Man. 18. 17. Luk* 10. 19 1. Co^. 5. 4. 2 Cor. 10. 4 5. 6.
unto his Church unto the worlds end, and all the powers in earth and hell
cannot take from them; viz. to bind and loose and to refo^me things that are
amiss, but are driven to the Comissary Courts: Therefore etc.

11 Thies asse^blies cast out Satan by the power of Satan, namely ((...))
(...). 12. 25.
by thies Impes of Antichrist the Bishops Commissaryes and priests: Therefore
they are not, and for all th^er reasons several and io^ned, cannot be held in
any Christian judgment, the true Churches of Christ.

Infinite were the reasons which from thies several heads, as likewise from
their particular transgressions and defaults might be drawn: But the be^
Argument to confute and cut down all this trumprie at once, is, according to
the commandments of God, to perserue our bodies and souls free from thies
abominations* by a speedy separation and withdrawing our selves from amongst
them, and to confute their l^st and only Argument whereby they uphold their
ruinous kingdom, namely their penal law, by Christian patience, and an
upright and godly life.

Her^ is the patience of the saints: here are they that keep the commandments
of God and the faith of Jesus. Revel. 14. 12. He that ouercometh shall be clothed
in white array, and I will not put out his name out of the book of life* but
I will confess ^is name before my father and before his Angels. Revel. 3. 5.
THESE Arguments were more then a year and an half since delivered to Mr.
CARTWRIGHT Mr. TRAVERS Mr. CHARKE and Mr. FLOYDE which still remain upon them
unanswered.

FINIS.

