MARY SITTING AT CHRIST'S FEET.

A Sermon preached at the Funeral of Mris Mary Swain, the wife of Mr William
Swain, at Saint Buttolphs without Aldersgate.

Declaring her Christian life, and comfortable death, for the encouraging of
all Christian Gentlewomen, and others, to walk in the steps of this religious
gentlewoman already departed.

By Lancelot Langhorne, Preacher of the word of God.

Vade sed incultus.

PROVE. 31.10. Who shall find a virtuous woman? For her price is far above
the pearls.

LONDON, Printed for Arthur Johnson, 1611.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and virtuous Lady, Christiana Leueson, wife to the
Right Worshipful, Sir John Leueson, Knight, grace and peace in Christ Jesus.
MADAME,
COnsidering with my self, that our nature is such, as we cannot endure that
these praises should be ascribed unto others (though they duly deserve them)
which we think our selves worthy of (though indeed most unworthy) I resolved
with my self to commit this Sermon to the patronage of some one, who might be
able to defend the truth of it against the malicious traducing, and repining of
the envious, and amongst many, I could find none more fit then your self;
partly because with MARY, you have chosen the better part, and that (according
to your name) your heart is the seat and temple of virtue: partly by reason of
that long continued love and familiarity which has been between you; as also
because of that full experience, and true trial you had of her spotless
conversation: therefore pardon my boldness, and as you love virtue, and have
the praises of this rare Jewel enclosed in your breast: so let them have your
loving protection, and holy imitation, to your unspeakable comfort in this
life, and the eternal salvation of your own soul in the life to come.

Yours in the Lord, Lancelot Langhorne.

To the Reader.
CONDEMN not me, gentle Reader, for publishing this Sermon, because I seek
not my self, but the continual remembrance of this virtuous Gentlewoman upon
earth; and was moved thereunto by persuasions of others, who also procured it
to be licenced. Accuse me not of flattery: for my conscience bears me
witness (as thousands can also testify) that all I have said is but a part of
her praises. Tax not my too much breuity, that I have not enlarged it as I
might, because I would have no more printed then was first preached; and this
length best befits a Funeral, which (like life of man) is but a spanne long.

Yours in the Lord, L. L.

MARY SITTING AT CHRIST'S FEET.
LVKE. 10.42. Mary has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken away
from her.


IN this Story, recorded by the Evangelist, there is mention made of two
Sisters, two Actions, and a twofold Censure upon both, by our Savior; The
Sisters, Martha and Mary: the Actions, Martha troubled her self about many
things; Mary sat at Jesus feet, and heard his preaching: whereupon Martha was
displeased that Mary did not help her: But Christ answers, that Martha was
troubled about many things, whereas one was needful, and that Mary had chosen
the better part, which should not be taken away from her. Christ loved them
both, and they both show their love to Christ: Martha in entertaining him, Mary
in hearing him: For as Calvin says: Laud digna Marthae hospitalitas: Martha
is praiseworthy for her hospitality; but in that she busied herself above
measure, and did not with Mary, choose the better part, therefore Christ blames
her. Non Dominus opus reprehendit, sed munus distinxit, says S. Aug. Se^ 27.
de verbis Dom.
Augustine: The Lord does not blame her work, but does distinguish of both
their offices: Nec Martha in bono ministerio reprehenditur, sed Maria quod
meliorem partem sibi elegerit antefertur, says S. Ambros. i^. Luc.
Ambrose upon this place: Neither is Martha blamed in her good service, but
Mary is preferred, because she chose the better part. Martha in domum suam
recepit Saluatorem in terris: Maria potius cogitat quemadmodum suscipiatur ab
eo in domo, non manufacta, sed aeterna in coelis says S. Bernard de assump.
Mariae Ser. 3.
Bernard: Martha receives her Savior into her house upon earth: Mary rather
thinks how she may be received by him in a house 2 Co. 5.1
Not made with hands, but eternal in the Heavens. The one is busy in
entertaining Christ into her house, the other is careful to receive him into
her heart. And this Christ preferres before the other: That Mary had chosen the
better part, which shall not be taken away from her.

Some, by Martha and Mary, understand the Active and Contemplative life; that
they must be as sisters, both dwelling in one house, both lodging in one heart:
or that they are the two Wings of the Soul, by which it soars up from earth
to Heaven. And why may we not apply them to the Body and the Soul of every
faithful Christian? both beloved of Christ, both entertaining him: two sisters
united in life, and separated only by death: The Body (the elder sister) is
troubled about many things, as delicate feeding, warm Clothing, daily
Sustentation, Mat. 6.23.
Continual recreation: whereas the Soul (Mary) thinks one thing necessary:
To sit at Christ's feet, and to hear his preaching. Martha (the Body) is here
presented to our eyes: Mary (her blessed Soul) rests at the feet of Jesus
Christ, which sits at the right hand of God in heaven.

But leaving Allegories, let us fall upon the literal sense, which is Christ's
approbation of Mary's choice, and leaving to compare Martha with Mary, let us
compare Mary with Mary; this Mary before our eyes, with Mary in the text: one
commended by God, the other no less commendable before God; as Christ vouch
safeth with his own mouth to commend the one: so the tongue of an Angel were
but sufficient to praise the other: For as the Philosophers say: Excellens
obiectum corr umpit sensum: The brightness of the object does weaken the
sense: So my mouth is too rude to speak the praises of so excellent a
creature: when I have said all I can, I shall say too little. Momus may well
accuse me of speaking too rudely, or too sparingly, but not of flattery.

I fear nothing but sinking, while I wade into the depth of her virtues:
Therefore, with Math. 14.30.31.
Peter upon the water, I will take Christ by the hand, and from Christ's mouth
speak Mary's commendation: I come not to extol flesh and blood, but to
describe those graces God had endowed her withal, and not only from report
(for I have conuersed with her almost these four years, and was present with
her the most part of her sickness) and sure I am, out of mine own experience,
that Mary with Mary has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken away
from her.

In the words observe in general two things.

1. The person approved. 2. Her wisdom for which Christ approues her.
The person commended, Mary; her wisdom for which she is commended: That she
did choose the better part, which shall not be taken from her.

In her wisdom two things.

1. The Action. 2. The Object.
The action, That she did choose; the object, the better part, which should
not be taken from her.

In the Object two things.

1. The Excellency. 2. The Perpetuity.
The excellency, that it was Better: The perpetuity, It should never be taken
from her.

In each of these, three things shall be handled.

1. Mary's Commendation. 2. Mary's Imitation. 3. Our Application.
Mary's Commendation: laid down in the Text: That she did choose the better
part, which shall not be taken, etc.

Mary's Imitation: the same with the Text: That she likewise has chosen the
better part, which shall not, etc,

Our Application: taught from the Text, That we also make choice of the better
part, which shall not etc. That so we may make these two Mary's our examples,
to follow in the way to Heaven, that thereby we may find favor with God and
men, That with Mary we may live in Gods fear, and with Mary die in Gods
favor: of these in their order, and first of the person approved.

The person approved is named by Christ Mary: we find but three Mary's spoken
of in the Gospel, and all for good: Mary, the mother of Jesus, Mary Magdalene,
which (as most affirm) is this Mary in my Text: and Mary, the mother of James
and Ioses. One bears Christ in her womb, the other washes his feet with her
tears, and wipes them with the hair of her head, Her Commendation.
and here sits at Christ's feet: the third, with the two other, stand by his
cross, when he is crucified, and seek him in his grave after he was buried.
We find not so many virtuous women of any other name in Scripture, not that
the name makes them the holier, but that their virtues make the remembrance of
their names blessed, I could stand upon the letters of the name if it were so
profitable, Maria.
(M) standing upon three bases or feet, M
to signify their steadfast faith in the blessed Trinity, one God and three
persons: A
(a) an interiection of sorrowing, their repentance: R
(r) with two branches like a tree, the sweet fruit of their virtue and
holiness: I
(i) the least of the letters, Their great humility: A
(a) the first letter in the Alphabet, and the last in the name, Their charity;
the chiefest of all virtues, because it 1. Cor. 13 13. 2 Mary's imitation. Luke
11.27.28.
continues last.

This Mary paralels the other Mary's; She bore Christ, though not in her womb,
yet (which is more) in her heart: often she washed his feet with the tears
of repentance: stood at his Cross, to the washing away of her sins in his
blood: often she sought him in his grave, to the mortifying of her sins: and
daily sought him at the right hand of God in Heaven, for the pardon of her
sins; we shall find more virtues in her life, then letters in her name. Mary
by interpretation is as much as Stella maris, the Star of the Sea, which
standing immovable in the midst of heaven, does direct the Mariners. As the
Stars are fixed in the volume of the heavens, so Mary in my Text, is a fixed
Star in the volume of Gods written book: A direction for all Christians to
the Haven of happiness. Though this Mary presented to our eyes, be not in Gods
written book, yet in the Lambs book of life, her name is written in Heaven. A
Star, for purity of heart: A Star, for the shining light of life and
conversation, A fixed Star, for her heart was fixed upon the Lord, yet never
moved backward, nor never stood still, but as (The Sun in the firmament)
rejoiced to run her course.

3 Our Application.
For our Application: Let us become shining Stars, grace our names with
virtues, that with Mary, the memorial of our names may be blessed.

Wisdom as ( Augustine says) consists chiefly in Choosing and Refusing: In
choosing the Good, and Refusing the Evil: The first thing in her wisdom is,
Elegit; The Action: She has chosen; But how was it in Mary's power to choose
the better part? Howsoever in civil actions we have Free Will, to choose or
refuse, yet as the same actions are good, we have no ability at all in our
selves. Of our selves we are not able to think one good thought: says the
Apostle:, ^ Her commendation
Power we have to think, but no power to think that which is good: To come to
Church, to hear the word, is a Civil Action; we have power to come, or not to
come, but to come with a desire and love to the word, to glorify God for the
saving of our souls, by Nature we have no power at all. Therefore in that Mary
chooses, it is Actus Naturae, an act of Nature; but in that she chooses the
better part, it is Actus Gratiae, an act of Grace: He that commends her for her
choice, gave her power to choose the beter part. Elegit, as one says, (id est)
Deus volentem trahit, and coronat sua dona in nobis, vt dicamur fecisse and
elegisse nos, quae ipse in nobis est operatus. She has chosen (that is) God
drew her being made willing, and he does crown his gifts in us, that we may
be said to have done, and to have chosen those things, which he himself has
wrought in us. Unless God did first choose us, we should never choose him: Ye
have not chosen me, but I have chosen you, says Christ.

1. Ioh. 4.19
We love him, because he loved us first, says his Apostle. For even as the
heat of the Sun falling upon our body increases our heat: so the feeling of
Gods love toward us, makes us love God again; His election of us, makes us
elect and choose him. The word in the Original is (...) has chosen: that she
did not embrace the pleasures of this world all her life, and made choice of
the better part, at her death; they that do defer it so long, it is to be
feared, it will be too late: for Sera poenitentia non est vera poenitentia:
Late repentance is seldom true repentance; but Elegit, She has chosen.

So this Mary being a chosen and elect vessel of God, 2 Mary's imitation.
sanctified from the Womb, by Gods grace did choose the better part: not at
her Death, but all the time of her pilgrimage, she led an Angelical and holy
life. This Good part was her Treasure all her Life, and at her Death (as you
shall hear) she had the comfort of it.

For our application; 3 Our application.
let us not wallow in the pleasure of sin all our life, and think it shall
be in our power at our Death, to choose the better part: but with this Mary
let every one of us prepare and provide for the time to come, and be sure that
we can say every one to his own soul, Elegi: I have chosen the better part,
which shall not be taken away from me.

And now I come to the Object, the Center and heart of the body of my Text: The
better part: That as Martha was troubled about many things, she had chosen the
better part, etc. Christ here uses a metaphor taken from heirs that divide
their inheritance: for amongst the Romans, and other Nations, as Seneca says,
there was a custom, that the eldest child must divide the inheritance into as
equal parts as he could, and then the youngest did first choose: So Martha and
Mary (being sisters) they divide Christ as an inheritance, between them:
Martha dividing, as being the eldest, 1 Her commendation.
and Mary did choose, as being the youngest: And she chose the better part,
etc. Now the part that she did choose, is, that she sat at Christ's feet, and
heard his preaching: sought her salvation, neglected all, in regard of this:
esteeming it no profit to gain the whole world, and to loose her soul. It is
said by some, that she never looked man in the face, after her conversion, but
Christ: And this we may note, that she never came unto Christ, but she fell
down at his feet: When she anointed him: Luke 7.38. John. 11.32 John. 12.3.
Mat. 28.9.
When she besought him for her brother Lazarus: At the supper in Bethania:
After his Resurrection: And now when she heard him preach. And herein appeared
her great humility.

2 Mary's imitation.
But this Mary has not fallen at Christ's feet five times, but all the days of
her life: how she loved the Temple of God, the House of Prayer? She considered
that one thing was needful: though she had but a weak body, yet she
respected neither health, nor life, so she might sit at Christ's feet, and hear
his word. How often did she fall at Christ's feet to pray unto him? She prayed,
not three times a day, with Daniel, but Continually. I have often observed her,
that all the time she was not employed in household business, she spent it in
meditation and prayer; and if at any time she used ordinary recreation, to
bear her Husband and his friends company, her affections were so wholly set
upon heavenly things, as she often used this gracious and sanctified speech:
This is a passing away of the time, but no redeeming of the time. And such a
care she had to prepare her self for an other world, to have oil in her
lamp, when the Bridegroom came, as she was still afraid, lest God should take
her away when she was so employed: Her whole care and desire was (with Mary) to
sit at Christ's feet, to hear God speaking unto her, or else to speak unto God
by prayer: And the oftener she fell down and kissed her Saviors feet, the more
desirous she was: The oftener she heard the word, the oftener she prayed: the
more ardent and strong her desires were, the more Gods graces were increased in
her. And as it is said, that when Anthaeus wrestled with Hercules, the oftener
he fell to the ground, receiving strength thereby, he became more valiant in
fight: So the oftener she fell down at the feet of her Savior, and wrestled
with God, the more strength she received against the assaults of sin and
Satan, and rose up more rich in grace then before.

3 Our application.
For our application: Let us learn to humble our selves at the feet of Jesus
Christ, and then we shall profit by his word to the saving of our souls: and
our prayers shall be heard, as the Apostle says: Cast down your selves before
God, and he will lift you up, The higher men intend to build, the lower they
lay the Foundation: So God will never exalt thee, except thou be first
humbled, and fall down at his feet: Christ himself was not exalted, Phil. 2.
but by Humiliation: the lowest Valleys are most fruitful: God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the Humble: yet few imitate Mary herein, they will
set Christ at their feet, Tread the blood of the Lamb under their feet: But
they will not fall down at the feet of Christ, and (with Mary) choose the
better part, etc.

Now let us come to the Excellency of this Object, in that he calls it (...):
The good part. Augustine he turns it meliorem partem: the better part: The
word in the original is the Positive, but I understand the words to be
spoken Comparatively, that Christ compares Mary's part with Martha's, and that
the Positive is either put for the Comparatiue, as some translate it, meliorem,
the better part, or else for the Superlatiue, as others translate it, Optimam,
the best part, as Mat. 18.8. where the word is in the original (...): It is
good for thee; and yet the Positive is there put for the Comparatiue: It is
better for thee, etc. as we translate it: So here it is called the good part,
which is better then Martha's, and also the best: for they have the best part
that have the Lord for their portion. 1 Mary's commendation.
This good part is that Summum bonum, the chief good, even Christ Jesus and
his merits, in comparison of which, Phil. 3.8.
all things else are but Dongue: for having Christ she had all things; no
graces which did belong to the comfort, or saving of her soul, could be
wanting unto her: for She did choose to hear the word, which is the power of
God to salvation, to every one that believes, which wrought grace in her
heart, which is crowned with glory in heaven. 2 Mary's imitation.


But let us leave Mary in our Text, and behold what rich graces this good part
wrought in the breast of this our Mary; which appeared both in her life, and at
her death. First, for her piety toward God; She was truly religious, her
Profession was not Hypocritical, nor Verbal, but she feared God with her
heart: For her conversation in the world; it was Pure and unspotted: so as Envy
might carpe, but malice could not condemn: she was of wonderful meek and
quiet spirit, which before God is a thing much set by, and as they that knew her
had experience of it: so especially her Husband, with whom she lived for the
space of 33 years, and I have heard him often say: That in all that time he
never received an unkind word from her mouth, or cause of discontent; where
also we may behold Her great wisdom in Household government: And moreover, so
great was her love unto her Husband, as she expressed it in her exceeding great
love, and care of his own kindred: for she loved him in them, as appeared
both in her life, and at her death. Her greatest and last care upon earth was,
that seeing God had given him no children by her, he would be a father in
providing for them, which were left unto her, as to a mother. Again, for her
modesty and gravity she was matchless: In her attire she condemned the
monstrous pride of this age, which is amongst women, 1 Pet. 3.3.
as the Apostle enioines virtuous wommen: Her apparel was not outward in
broidred hair, or gold put about, or in putting on of apparel, but the Hid man
of her heart was vncorrupt. Her carriage generally toward all was so mild, so
wise, so discreet, so loving, as it pleased all, wrought an admiration in the
eyes of all at her death, caused great lamentation in the hearts of all, drew
tears from the eyes of all; Her name by her Father was Winhall.
and lastly did Win-all that knew her. And as all shall miss her, so
especially the poor: for she was so charitable, as if she were made of the
bowels of mercy and compassion: full of pity toward the distressed, full of
mercy toward the needy: her poor neighbors shall have cause daily to bewail
her death: For she stretched out her hand to the poor, Pro. 31.20
and put forth her hand to the needy: And what she had, she bestowed it not
upon vain toies, but laid it upon the backs of the poor members of Christ,
in clothing the naked, and feeding the hungry; She was a Nurse to the
Fatherless Children, eyes to the blind, feet to the lame; the blessing of
them that were ready to perish, came upon her. Thus in her life she chose the
better part, laid up her treasure in heaven, a good foundation for the time to
come, that when Christ shall give the last Sentence, she shall hear these
comfortable words: Come thou blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for thee: For what thou have done unto one of these, thou have done
unto me. And when God summoned her with sickness to leave this world, and with
the New-yeare to set her heart in order for a new world, though her whole life
were a meditation of death, her whole life a preparation for death; yet out of
her great humility, she confessed her great unworthiness at the feet of her
Savior, that she was an Unprofitable servant: and being taught by the Spirit
of God, that none shall be saved, but such as continue to the end, she still
prayed unto our Savior for perseverance: and (which is worthy to be observed)
though through the whole course of her life, her soul was still powered out in
prayer unto her God, yet she found by experience, that when the body is weak
with sickness, the heart is not so fit for prayer. Let us hear her words, which
she uttered unto two reverend Divines, Mr Chark. Mr Paget.
and often repeated to us that were present with her in time of her sickness:
Let none deferr their preparation, nor their prayers unto the bed of their
sickness: for then the mind is too much troubled with the grief of the body,
to be employed as they ought in spiritual exercises: Yet she was strong in
faith, and had strong consolations, and still did cast her hope (the sure and
steadfast anchor of her soul) upon Christ Jesus, the forerunner in heaven: and
often she desired in her prayers that Death might not be bitter unto her, to
shake her faith, or remove her affections from her God, but that she might have
an easy passage; And behold the Lords mercy; all that day before she departed
(though her memory was good, and her senses perfect) yet she said she felt no
pain, and so could not be persuaded that Death was so near. But she left the
world with no more striving or grief, then if she had been cast into a
slumber, or fallen asleep, as Saint Hierome says of John the Evangelist: Quod
fuit a dolor mortis extraneus: That he was freed from the sorrows of Death:
and as it is written of HENOCH That walking with God he was taken away. So
though her body must remain in the dust, until the last resurrection, yet her
death was so easy, that it seemed rather to be a Change, then a Death; rather a
Blessed Assumption, then a Violent dissolution: Now she found to her endless
comfort, that with Mary She had chosen the better part, which should not be
taken away from her. 3 Our Application.


Let us all for our application learn of a woman of the weaker sex: especially
women, imitate her in her Piety, in her meekness of spirit, in her obedience
to her Husband, her Modesty, her Gravity, Mildness of Nature, in her Charity;
Imitate her in her Life, that you may be like her in her Death; Imitate her in
her Grace, that you may be partaker of her Glory: Make choice of this part,
which shall never be taken from you.

As it is good, so it is perpetual: Many excellent earthly blessings are
bestowed upon man by God: Sed pereunt cum pereunte, they perish with the using,
either they will leave us, or we must leave them, but whosoever does inherit
this part, shall keep it without fear of loosing: 1 Mary's commendation.
Non auferetur, It shall not be taken from them. Mary considered that all
things under the Sun are vanity, and therefore she made choice of the better
part, which shall never be taken from her. 2 Mary's imitation.


So this Mary had many outward blessings, which flesh and blood might have
rejoiced in; She was well descended, but she considered that of all other
vanities, Honor is but a vain title: For her person, a comely and grave
Matron; but she remembered what Salomons Mother says: That favor is
deceitful, Pro. 31.30.
and beauty vanity, but the woman that fears the Lord, she shall be praised.
She lived very comfortably with a loving and kind Husband; yet she knew that
once they must part. God blessed her with plenty in the world; but she knew
that riches are uncertain: For long life that she knew by her own experience,
that longa vita, est longa agritudo, long life is a long sickness, the things
that were vantage unto her, she accounted loss for Christ's sake; as she said
the same day she departed, She would not change her estate, in that she was
removing out of the body to the Lord, for all the world.

3 Our Application.
For our application let us imitate her happy choice, set our affections on
things that are above, and not on things that are on the earth, weane our
selves from the love of these worldly vanities, which at last we must loose or
leave, and set our selves to attain this good part, which shall never be
taken from us: To have Christ dwell in our hearts in this world, that we may
dwell with him in the world to come, where is true Nobility, in that we shall
be Heirs and Co-heires with Christ: where is true Honor, in that we shall
be crowned with the crown of righteousness: where is true Beauty, Mat. 13.43.
in that we shine as the Sun for evermore: where we shall have long life, even
life everlasting: where we shall have true Riches, an immortal inheritance
reserved for us in the Heavens: where for the Company of our dearest friends
whom we love best, Psalm. 16.11.
we shall enjoy the company of holy Angels, blessed Saints, even the presence
of God, Where is fullness of joy and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for evermore: where we shall have more comfort and happiness in one day, the^,
possibly we could have in ten thousand upon earth, if the world should make us
her Minions: and (which is worth all) we shall enjoy them with a Non
auferentur, never to be taken from us. Let us then cast down our selves at
Christ's feet, that we may with Mary have everlasting joy in the kingdom of
heaven. Let us with this Mary live like Saints in this world, that with Mary
and the rest of the Saints we may be glorified in the world to come: Which the
Lord grant unto us all for Christ Jesus sake, that sits at the right hand of
God in heaven, to whom with the holy Ghost, one God, and three persons be
ascribed all Honor, Glory, Power, praise, Dominion, and Thanksgiving of us,
and all creatures, now and evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

