The Profit of Imprisonment.

A PARADOX, Written in French by Odet de la Noue, Lord of Teligni, being
prisoner in the Castle of Tournay.

Translated by IOSVAH SILVESTER.

printer's or publisher's device ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA

Printed at London by Peter Short, for Edward Blunt. 1594.

To the worshipful his approved friend master Robert Nicolson merchant, Iosuah
Siluester wishes ever all true content.
TO you, youth's Loadstar, London's ornament,
Friend to the Muses, and the well-inclinde,
Loving, and loved of every virtuous mind:
To you these tuneles accents I present,
Of humble style, and uncouth argument,
Not to requight, but to record your kind
And gentle favors, by the which you bind,
My best endeavors to acknowledgment.
Accept (I pray) this present in good part,
This simple pleadge of my sincere affection,
Weigh not the worth, but weigh my willing heart
(Perfect good will suplies all imperfection)
So may I one day wright your worthy name,
In better tunes upon a bigger frame.
A Sonnet of the author to his book
THe body euer-prone to pleasures and delights
Of soft, frail, dainty flesh, and to selfe-ease adicted,
Abhorrs imprisonment as a base pain inflicted
To punish the defaults of most unhappy wights.
The soul as much surprisde with love of heavenly sights
And longing to behold the place that appertains her
Does loath the body, as a prison that detain her
From her high happiness among the blessed sprights
Then, since both body and soul their bondage neur brook
But soul and body both do love their liberty:
Tell, tell me (o my muse) who will believe our book?
He that has learnd aright both these to mortefie,
And serve our savior Christ in body and in spirit
Who both from thrall has freed by his own only merit.
A Paradox That adversity is more necessary then prosperity: and that of all
afflictions, close prison is most pleasant and most profitable.
By the Lord of Teligni.
HOw ever fondlie-false a uaine opinion be,
If the vile vulgar once approve it, commonly
Most men esteem it true: so great a credit brings
Consent of multitude, even in absurdest things.
Nor any mean remains when it is once received,
To wrest it from the most of erring minds deceived.
Nay, who so shall but say, they ought to alter it,
He headlong casts himself in dangers deepest pit.
For never nimble bark that on adventure runns
Through those blewe bounding hills where horie Neptun wunns
Was set upon so sore with neuer-ceast assault
Maintaind on every side by winds and waters salt,
When raging most they raise their roughest tempest dreaded
As th'idiot multitude, that monster many-headed
Bestirrs it self with wrath, spite, fury, full of terror
Against what soever man that dares reprove her error.
Who undertakes that task, must make account at first
To take hot wars in hand and bear away the worst.
Therefore a many works, worthy the light, have died
Before their birth, in breasts of fathers terrified
Not by rough deeds alone; but even by foolish threats:
"Yet only noise of words base cowards only beats.
Then fear who list for me the common peoples cry,
And who so list be mute, if other minded: I
(Skorning the feeble force of such a vain endeavor)
Will freely, spite of fear; say what I censure ever:
And though my present state permit me not such scope,
Mine vnforbiden pen with error's pride shall cope.
Close prison now adays the extremest misery
The world does deem, I deem direct the contrary:
And therwithall will prove that even adversities
Are to be wished more then most prosperities:
And for imprisonment though that be most lamented,
Of all the greefs wherewith men fear to be tormented,
Yet that is the state most stoar'd with pleasure and delight,
And the most gainful too to any christian wight.
A Paradox no doubt more true, then creditable,
The which my self sometimes have also thought a fable,
While guilfull vanities, fed not, but filled my mind,
For strengthening sustenance, with vnsubstanciall wind.
I hated death to death, I also did detest
All sickness and disease that might a man molest.
But most I did abhor that base-esteemed state,
Which to subiections law our selves does subiugate,
And our sweet life enthralls unto an others will,
For as my fancy wished I would have walked still.
Death (thought I) soon has don, and every grief besides,
The more extreme it is the lesser time abides:
But now, besides that I esteemd the prisoners trouble
Much worse, me thought the time his martyrdom did dubble.
So that to escape that skourge so irksome to my heart,
I could have bin content to suffer any smart.
Lo by blind ignorance how judgments are miss-led:
Now that full thirty months I have, experienced,
That so much-feared ill, it is now so vsd to me
That I a prisoner live much more content and free,
Then when as under cloak of a false freedom vain,
I was base slave indeed to many a bitter pain.
But now I see my self mocked every where almost
And feeble me alone met by a mighty host
Of such as, as in this case do not conceive as I,
But do esteem them selves offended much thereby.
And therefore (father dear) this weak abortiue child,
For refuge runs between the arms of his gransire mild,
If you accept of it, my labor has his hire,
For careless of the rest all that I here desire,
Is only that your self as in a glass may see
The image of the estate of my captivity,
Where, though I nothing can avail the common weal,
Yet I avail my self at least some little deal.
Praising the all powerful Lord, that thus vouchsafes to pour,
Such favors manifold upon me every hour;
Whereof your self yer while so sweet sure proof have tasted,
In cruel bitterness of bands that longer lasted,
Now I beseech his grace to bless mine enterprise,
My heart and hand at once to govern in such wise,
That what, I wright, may naught displeasing him contain:
For void of his sweet aid who works he works in vain.
Within the wide-spred space of these round Elements,
What soever is indewd with living soul and sense,
Seeks of it self selfe-good; this instinct natural
Nature her self has graven in hearts of creatures all,
And of all living things from largest to the least
Each one to fly his ill does evermore his best.
Thereof it comes (we see) the wild horse full of strength,
Tamelie to take the bit into his mouth at length,
And so by force we tame each most untamed beast,
Which of it self, discreet, of evils takes the least:
And though that, that which seems to be his chief restraint
He often times despise, that is by a worse constraint,
As when the Lion fierce, fearlesse pursues the shining
Of bright keen-pearcing blades, and's royal crest declining
Full of the valiant fire, that courage woonts to lend,
Runs midst a million swords his whelplings to defend,
More fearing far that they their liberty should lose,
Than on himself the smart of thousand wounding blows.
But all things have not now the self same goods and ils,
What helps one, the same another hurts and kills:
There Is ods between the good that savage beasts do like,
And that good (good indeed) which soul-wise man must seek:
When beasts have store of food, and free from foe's annoy,
Smart-lesse, and sound, and safe, may as they list enjoy
Their fill of those delights, that most delight the sense:
That, that is the happiness that fully them contents.
But reasonable souls (as God has made mankind)
Can with so wretched good not satisfy their mind.
But by how much the more their inlie sight excels
The brutish appetite of every creature else,
So much more excellent the good for which they thirst,
Man of two parts is made, the body is the wurst,
The heav'n-borne soul, the best, wherein man's bliss abides,
In body that of beasts, naught having else besides:
This body stands in need of many an accessorie,
To make it somewhat seem: the soul reciues this glory
That selfelie she subsists; and her abundant wealth.
(Unlike the bodies store) is ever safe from stealth.
Our body took his birth of this terrestrial clod.
Our spirit, it was inspired of th'inlie breath of God;
And either of them still strives to his proper place,
This earth-born, stoopes to earth; that sties to heaven apace.
But as the silly bird, whose wings are wrapped in lime,
Feign, but in vain, attempts to fly full many a time:
So our fair soul surcharg'de with this foul robe of mudd,
Is too-too often held from mounting to her GOOD.
She strives, she strikes, sometimes she lifts her up aloft,
But, as the worser part (we see) preualeth often,
This false frail flesh of ours with pleasure's painted lure,
Straight makes her stoop again down to the dust impure,
Happy who the honor has of such a victory,
He crowns his conquering head with more true majesty
Then if he had subdued those nations, by his might,
Which do discover first Aurora's early light,
And those whom Phoebus sees from his Meridian mount,
The Anti-podes, and all; more then the sand to count.
For small the honor is to be acknowledgd King
And monarke of the world, ones self vn-maistering.
But each man on his head this garland cannot set,
Nor is it given to all this victory to get,
Only a very few, gods dear beloved elect
This happy goal have got by vertew's live effect,
The rest, soon werie of this same so painful war,
Like well of heaven, but love the earth before it far:
Some, druncke with poisonie dreggs of worldly pleasures brute,
Know where true good consists, bur never do ensew't:
Some, do ensue the same, but with so faint a heart,
That at the first assalt they do retire and start;
Some, more courageous, vow more then they bring to pass
(So much more easy it is to say, then do, alas)
And al through too much love of this vain worlds alureme^ts
or too much idle fear of sufferings and endurements:
Mere vanities, whereto, the more men do incline
The farther of they are from their chief good divine.
Therefore, so many think themselves so miserable,
Therefore the air is filled with outcries lamentable,
Of such as do disdaigne the thing that better is,
To entertain the worse, with forfeit of their bliss,
Therefore, we see those men that riches do possess,
Afflicted still with care, and therefore, heaviness
Abandons never those, that, fed with honnor's fill,
Fawn vp-on Potentats, for flitting favor still;
And cause (God wot) they have, to be at quiet never
Since their felicity is so uncertain ever.
Neither are Kings them selves exempted from vexacion
How-euer sovereign sway they bear in any nation,
For now they wish to win, anon fear loss no less,
Yea though for empire they did this wide world possess,
Not one of them, with all, could full contented be,
For how man more attaines, the more attempteth he.
Who (therefore) couets most such soon-past goods uncertain
Shall never enjoy the joy of goods abiding-certain,
But who so seeks to build a true content to last,
On else-what must elsewhere his first foundation cast,
For all things here below are apt to alter ever;
Here Is nothing permanent, and therefore who soever
Trusts thereto, trusts to a broken staff for stay;
For no earths vanity can bless a man for aye.
We must, to make us blessed, our firm assurance found
Else where then in this world, this chaunge-inthraled ground
We must propose our selves that perfect, perrish-les,
That true unfeigned good, that good all danger-les
From th'uniust spoil of thieves, which never, never stands
In need of guard, to guard from soldiors pilling hands.
Now it is with spiritual hands and not with corporal
That we do apprehend these heavenly treasures all
Treasures so precious, that the only hope to haue-them
In full fruition once, with him that frankly gaue-them,
Fills us with every joy, our sorrows choakes and kills,
And makes us feel, amid our most tormenting ills,
A much more calm content, then those that every day
On this frail earth enjoy their hearts wish every way
It Is therefore in the spirit not in the flesh that we
Must seek our sovereign good and chief felicity
The One is not capable of any injury,
Th'other's thrall to the yoke of many a misery
The One endless, ever lasts, the other endures so little
That wellnigh yer't be got it is gone it is so brittle.
For who is he that now in wealth abounds most,
Or he that in the Court Kings favors best may boast,
Or he that is most with robes of dignity bedight,
Or he that swimmes on seas of sensual sweet delight,
But is in perrill still to prove the contrary,
Poor, hated, honnor-les and full of misery.
But one, that skorning all these rich proud pomps and pleasures
About him ever bears like Bias all his treasures,
Even like to him can leave his native country sacked,
Without sustain of loss: and with a mind infract,
Even vanquished bereave the victors victories,
Who, though his land he win, cannot his heart surprise
Let exile, prisonment, and tortures great and small,
With their extremest pains at-once assail him all,
Let him be left alone among his mighty foes,
Poor; frendles, naked, sick, (or if ought worse then those)
He does not only bear all this with patience,
But takes even delight in, such experience:
Regarding all these greefs, which men so much affright,
As babie-fearing buggs, and skar-crowes void of might:
He chooses rather much such excercize as these,
Then mid the flesh delights to rust in idle ease.
But very few there are that thus much will admit,
Nay few or non there are that easily credit it;
The most part taking-part with common-most conceat.
Yer they have heard of this, sustain the the other straight:
Not seeing that themselves shun and refuse as ill
What unto other men for good they offer still
Not one of them will brook his son in sloth to lurk
But moves, and stirrs him up incessantly to work:
Forbids him nothing more then sin-seed idleness:
Nor any pleasure vain permitts him to possess,
(For well he knows, that way to virtue does not lead,
But the therward who walks a path of pain must tread)
If he offend in ought he chastens and reproues him,
In so much sharper sort by how much more he loues-him.
Thus handles man the thing that most he holds dear
Yet thinks it strange himself should so be handled here.
May we not rather think we are beloved of God,
When as we feel the stripes of his iust-gentle rod?
And that, whom here he letts live as they list in pleasure,
Are such as least he loves, and holds not as his treasure?
For so, not of our slaves, but of our sons elect,
By sharp-sweet chastisements the manners we correct.
In very deed God does as does a prudent Sire
Who little cares what may cross his child's desire
But what may most avail unto his betterment
So knowing well that ease would make us negligent,
He excerciseth us, he stirs us up and presses,
And though we murmur much, yet never more he ceases,
He chastens, he afflicts; and those whom most he strikes
Are those whom most he loves, and whom he chiefly likes.
No valiant men of war will murmur or mislike
For being placed to prove the foremost push of of pike,
Nay rather would they there alreddy frunt the foe,
With loss of dearest blood their dauntlesse hearts to show.
If an exploit aproach, or battle-day drawnie,
If ambush must be laid, some stratagem to try;
Or must they meet the foe in eger skirmish fell,
Or for the sleepie host all night keep sentinel:
From grudging at the pains, so far of are they all,
That blessed they coumpt themselves; therefore their General
Imployes them often times, as most courageous;
And them approud, he plants in places dangerous,
But no man makes account of such as shun the charge,
Whose pain is not so little as their shame is large,
All of us in this world resemble soldiors right,
From day break of our birthe even to our dying night,
This life it is a war, wherein the valiantest,
With hottest skirmishes are ever plied and pressed:
Whom our grand Captain most setts-by he setts a-frunt,
The fore-ward, as most fit to bear the cheifest brunt:
Cares, exiles, prisonments, diseases, dollours, losses,
Maimes, tortures, torments, spoils, contempts, dishonors, crosses
Al these are hard exploits, and full of bickerings bold,
Which he commits to those whom he does dearest hold.
But leaves those behind for whom he cares little,
To stretch themselves at ease amid their honors brittle
Their pomps, their dignities, their ioies, their gems, their tresurs
Their dainties, their delights, their pastims, and their pleasurs
Like coward grooms that guard the baggage and the stuff
While others meet the foe and show their valors proof.
But have not these (say some) in these afflictions part?
No; but of punishment, they often feel the smart.
Afflicted those we count, whom chastnings tame, and turn,
The other punished, that at correction spurn.
The first still full of hope, reap profit by their rods,
The later desperate, through spite wax wurse by ods.
Boy-stragglers of a camp, so should be punished then
Being naked forced to fight with troops of armed men,
Who cannot reap nor reach the pleasure, nor the meed
Nor the honor incident for doing such a deed,
To such praise-winning place, brave soldiors gladly run,
Which as a dangerous place these faint-harts sadly shun.
What warrior in the world, that had not rather try
A million of extremes, yea rather even to die,
Then with disgraceful spot to stain his honor bright
In these corporeal wars? Yet in the ghostly fight
Of glory careless all, we shunn all labors pain,
To purchase with reproach a rest-nest idely-vaine:
Virtue is not atchiu'd, by spending of the year
In pleasures soft, sweet shades, down beds and dainty chere,
Continual trauell'tis that makes us there ariue
And so by travel too virtue is kept a live;
For soon all virtue vades without some exercise
But being stird, the more her vigor multiplies.
Besides, what man is he, that feels some member rotten
Whereof he fears to die, but causes straight be gotten,
Some Surgeon that with saw, with cauter, or with knife,
May take that part away to save his threatened life:
And suffers (though with smart) his very flesh and bones
To be both seard, and sawd, and clean cut-of at-once.
But to recure the soul: the soul with sin infected,
All wholesome remedies are hated and rejected.
With the Physician kind the impatient patient fretts,
Nor to come near him once his helpful hand he letts:
We are half putrified, through sins contagious spott,
And without speedy help the rest must wholly rott.
Cut-of the infected part, then are we sound and free,
Else all must perish needs, there is no remedy.
Most happy they, from whom in this frail life, the Lord
(With smart of many pains,) cuts-of the pains abhord
Of th'euer-neuer death, wherein they lie and languish,
That here have had their ease and never tasted anguish.
But many, which as yet the adverse part approve,
Conceive (if not confess) that it does more behooue
By faintles exercise fair virtue to maintain
Then ouerwhelmd with vice, at rest to rust in vain.
But yet the'xtremitie of sufferings does dismay-them,
The force where of they fear would easily ouer-lay them,
They love the exercise, the chastnings likewise like them
But yet they would have God but seld and softly strike-them
Else are they pressed to run, to ruin, with the devils,
They are so sore affeard of falfe-supposed evils:
Most wretched is the man that for the fear of nifles,
All lively breathing hopes of happy goodness stifles,
Of nifles, sir (say they) seem all their bitter crosses
As nothing? nor their pains, nor lamentable losses,
That daily they endure? were not the wretches blessed
If from their heavy load their shoulders were releast?
Who is not happy sure in misery and woe,
No doubt prosperity can never make him so,
No more then he that is sick should find more ease and good
Upon a golden bed, then on a bed of wood.
Man harbors in him self the evil that afflicts-him,
And his own fault it is, if coffeehouse pricks-him:
And all these outward ills are wrongfully accused,
Which flesh and blood does blame; for being rightly used
They all turn to our good: but who so takes offense
Thereby, has by and by his just rough recompense:
For neither in their power nor in their proof the same,
Are evils in effect but in conceit and name.
Which when we lightly weigh, the least of us surmounts them
Nor hurt they any one but him that ouer-counts the^.
Neither ought that indeed for evil to be rated
Which may by accident be unto good translated:
For ill is ever ill, and is contrary ever
Directly unto good, so that their natures never
Can be constraind to brook each other, neither yet
Can the one be ever turned to the other opposite:
But plainly we perceive that thear's no languor such,
But long continuance and custom lighten much.
Familiarizing so the fit that how so frett it
Even in th'extremitie one may almost forget it
What better proof of this, then those poor gallie-slaues
Which (having been before such rogues and idle knaves)
As shunning services to labor wear so loath,
That they would starve and die rather then leave their sloth,
But being vsd a while to tug the painful oar,
Labor that erst they loathd they now desire the more:
Or those that are assaild with burning feuer-fit
Even then when least of all they dread or doubt of it:
Which carefully complain, and cry, and rave, and rage,
Frying in inward flames the which they cannot swage;
Yet if it wax not worse, the daintiest body makes it
In eight days as a use, and as a trifle takes it,
Or those that have sometimes the painful rack endured,
Who without chainge of pain being a while inured,
The pain that did constrain them to bewail and weep,
Seems them so easy then, they almost fall a-sleepe.
All are not evils then, that are surnamed so
Since evil never can his nature mingle, no
Nor turn it into good; whereas we plainly see
On the other side, that these are changed suddenly.
And were they ills indeed, since they so little last
Wear't not a very shame to be so much aghast?
But here again (say they) th'ons nature never takes
The others nature on, but still the stronger makes
His fellow give him place, and only bears sway
Till that return again, drive it again away.
Nay that can never be: for never perfect good
Can by his contrary be bannisht (though withstood)
For good is ever good, and where so ere it go
Evil does ever strive, but with too strong a so.
There is no reason then, these, good, or ill to call,
That alter in this sort, and never rest at all:
Neither to bless or blame them for the good or ill
That ever in her self our soul concealeth still.
For if that from without our bale, or else our bliss
Arrived: ever more withal must follow this,
That always, unto all, self ill, self pain, would bring:
Self good, one self content: but it is a certain thing,
They are not taken for their quality and kind,
But rather as th'affects of men are most inclind.
One, loosing but a crown has lost his patience quight,
Another having lost five hundred in a night,
Is never mou^d a jot, though (having less in store,
Then the'other has by ods) his loss might grieve him more
One being banished does nothing but lament,
Another, as at home, is there as well content.
And one in prison pent is utterly dismaide,
Another, as at home, lives there as well appaid.
Needs must we then confess, that in our selves does rest,
That which vnhappieth us, and that which makes us blessed:
In us indeed the ill, which of our selves does grow:
And in us too the good, which from god's grace does flow
To whom it pleases him: true good that none can owe-yet,
Save those on whom the Lord vouchsafes to bestow-it:
And that the bitter smart of all the pains that wring-vs,
From nothing but our sin, receaueth strength to sting-vs.
Yea surely in our selves abides our misery,
Our Grand-sire Adam left us that for legacy,
When he enthrald him self unto the law of sin,
Wherein his guilty heirs their greef-full birth begin.
The Lord had given to him a Nature and a feature
Perfect indeed and blessed above all other creature;
And of this Earthly world had stablisht him as King
Subiecting to his rule the raines of every thing:
His spirit within it self no selfe-debates did nurse
Having no knowledge yet of better nor of wurse:
His body ever blithe and healthful felt no war,
Of those four qualities that now do ever iar,
Nor any poysonie plant nor any serpent fell,
Nor any noisome beast could hurt him any deal:
He might, without the taste of bitter death attain*
Unto the haven of heaven, where all true Ioies do reign.
And had he not misdone he might have well bequeathed,
The same inheritance to all that ever breathed,
How happy had he bin, if he had never eaten,
Th'unlawfull fatal fruit that double death did threaten,
O that he never had preferred the serpent's flatter
Before the eternal law of all the world's creator.
You shallbe (said the fiend) like supreme deities,
This sweet fruits sugared juice shall open both your eyes
Which now your tirant God envying all your bliss
Blinds with a filmie veil of black obscurities,
Least that you should become his equals in degree
Knowing both good and ill as well as ever he.
Poor Eve beleues him straight, and Man beleeus his wife
And biteth by and by the apple asking-life:
Whereof so soon as he had tasted, he beginns
(But all too-late alas) to see his cursed sins.
His eyes indeed were open, and then he had the skill
To know the difference between the good and ill
Then did he know how good, good was when he had lost-it
And evil too he knew (but ah too deerly cost-it)
Leaving himself (besides the sorrow of his loss)
Nothing but sad despair of succor in his cross.
He found him self fallen down from blisse-full state of peace
Into a civil war where discords never cease:
His soul reuolting soon became his bitter foe
But (as it often befalls that worst do strongest grow)
She is not easde at all by th'inly striving iarres
Which do annoye her more them th'irefull open wars.
Wrath, hatred, envy, fear, sorrow dispare and such:
And passions opposite to these, afflicte as much,
Distracting to an fro the Princess of his life,
In restles, mutinies and neuer-ceasing strife.
Then th'humor-brethren all, hott, cold, and wet, and dry
Fallen out among themselves, augment his misery.
So that by their debate within his flesh there seeded
A harvest of such weeds as never can be weeded.
All creatures that before as subjects did atend him
Now, mong themselves conspire by all means to offend-him
In brief, Immortal borne, now mortal he became,
And bound his soul to bide hells euer-burning flame,
Leaving his woeful heirs even from their birth,s beginning
Heirs of his heavy pain, as of his heinous sinning.
So that in him the Lord condemned all mankind,
To bear the punishment to his foul sin assigned:
And none had ever escaped, had not the God of grace,
(Desiring more to save, then to subvert his race)
Redeemed us by the death of his dear only son,
And chosen us in him before the world begun,
Forgiving us the fault, and with the fault, the fine;
All save this temporal death, of Adams sin the sign.
Now in the horror of those ease-lesse, end-lesse pains,
It may be rightly said that evil ever reigns:
That Is evill's very self, and not this seeming-woe,
Whereof the wanton world complains daily so.
Lived we ten thousand years continually tormented
In all fell tortures strange that ever were invented,
What Is that compared to time, that never shall expire,
Amid the infernal flames, whose least-afflicting fire
Exceeds all the pains, all mortal hearts can think?
Sure all that we endure, till Laethe drops we drink
It Is all but ease to that, or if it be a pain
Is in respect of that a very trifle vain.
But were it a great deal worse, why should we evil name,
That which we rather find a medicine for the same?
Health, wealth, security, honor, and ease do make us
Forget our God, and God for that does soon forsake us:
Whereas afflictions are the ready means to move us
To seek our health in him that does so dearly loue-vs.
It Is true indeed (say some) that benefit they bring-vs,
But yet the smart thereof does so extremely wring-vs,
That th'evill which they feel that do endure the same,
Makes them esteem it just to give it that for name.
Man's nature, certainly (it cannot be denied)
Is thrall to many throws, while here on earth we bide
In body and in soul: the troubled soul sostaines
A thousand passions strong, the body thousand pains,
And that is the wretched state, the which yere-while I said,
Was justly due to us, when Adam disobayd.
But he that is once newborn in Jesus Christ by faith,
Who his assured hope in God sole settled has,
Who does believe that god gives essence unto all,
And all sustaineth still, that nothing does befall
But by his sacred will, and that no strength that striveth
To stop his just decrees, can stand or ever thriueth.
Not only does accept all pains with patience,
The which he takes for due unto his deep offense:
Nor only is content, if such be gods good pleasure,
To feel a thousand fold a much more ample measure,
But even delights therein, and void of any fear,
Expects th'extremitie of all assaults to bear.
Whether almighty god abate their woonted vigor,
Or (that his may not feel their crosses cruel rigor)
Do wholly arm them with new forces for the nonce,
To bear the bitter brunt: or whether both at-once.
And to approve this true; how many daily drink
Of torments bitter cup, that never seem to shrink?
Alas, what sharper smart? what more-afflicting pains?
What worser grief than that, which ceas-leslie sustaines
He that by some mischaunce, or else by martial thunder,
Unhappily has had some maine bone broke in sunder?
What torment feels not the sore-sicke deep-diseased?
One while with cruel fit of burning fever ceased:
Another while assailde with collicke and with stone,
Or with the cure-lesse Gout, whose rigor yields to none.
Or thousand other griefs, whose bitter-vexing strife,
Disturbes continually the quiet of our life?
Yet notwithstanding this, in all this painful anguish,
(Though the most part repine, and plain, and mourn, and languish,
Murmuring against the Lord, with malcontented voice)
Some praise his clemency, and in his rods rejoice.
How many such (dear Saints) have fell tormentors seen,
To die between their hands, through moody tyrants teen?
So little daunted at their martyrdom and slaughter,
That in th'extremitie they have expressed laughter.
How many at the stake, nay, in the very flame,
Have sung with cheerful voice, the almighty's prais-ful name;
Yet were they all compact of Artirs and of veins,
Of sinews, bones, and flesh: and sensible of pains,
(By nature at the least) as much as any other,
For being issued all from one self earthly mother,
What makes them then to find such extreme smart so sweet
What makes them patiently those deadly pangs to meet,
No doubt it is the Lord, who first of nothing made-vs,
Who with his liberal hand of goodness still does lade-vs
Some more, and other less: and never cease space
From making us to feel the favors of his grace.
Accursed are they indeed whom he does all abandon
To do their lust for law, and run their life at randon.
Accursed who never taste the sharp-sweet hand of God;
Accursed, ah, most accurste who never feel his rod.
Such men by nature borne the bond-slaues unto sin,
Through selfe-corruption end, worse then they did begin:
For how thy longer live, the more by their amiss,
They draw them nearer hell and farther of from bliss.
Such men within themselves their euill's spring contain
Their is no outward thing (as falsely they complain)
Cause of their cureles ill: for good is every thing,
And good can, of it self, to no-man evil bring.
Now if they could aright these earthly pleasures prize
According to their wurth, they would not in such wise,
For lack, or loss of those, so vain and transitory
Lament so bitterly, nor be so sadlie-sorrie.
But ouer-louing still these outward things unstable,
To rest in true content, an hour, they are not able,
No not a moment's time, their fear does so assaile-them,
And if their fear fall true, that their Good fortun faile-them,
Then swell their sullen hearts with sorrow till they burst
And then poor desperate souls they deem themselves accursed:
And so indeed they are, but yet they err in this,
In blaming other things, for their own selfe-amisse,
Other indifferent things, that neither make, nor mar,
But to the good, be good; to the evil, evil are.
Is It not great folishnes, for any to complain,
That something is not don, which does him naught co^strain?
Since if he use the same, soule-health it hurts not,
Nor if he do not vse't it helps not a jot.
But needs must we complain, (say some) for we have cause;
Then at your perrill be 't; for that which chiefly draws
You thereto, it is intruth your brutnesse in misdeeming
Things evil, that are good (for sence-contrarie seeming)
And whilst that in the dark of this foul errors mist,
Your drowsy spirits do droop, alas what marvel is it,
If evil follow you, and if injurious still
To others you impute your selfe-ingendered ill?
Happy are they to whom the Lord vouchsafes sight
To see the lovely beams and life-infusing light,
Of his sweet sacred truth; whereby we may perceive
And judge arightly, what to love, and what to leave.
Such men within their souls, their goods have wholly plast
Such goods, as never fire can either burn or wast:
Nor any thief can steal, nor pirate make his pray,
Nor usury consume, nor tirant take away;
Nor times all-gnawing tooth can fret away, nor finish,
Nor any accident of sad mischance deminish.
For it is built on God, a rock that ever stands,
Not on the vanities of these inconstant sands
Which are more mutable then wind and more unstable,
And day by day do make so many miserable.
O to what sweet content, to what high joys aspires,
He that in God alone can limmit his desires!
He that in him alone his hopes can wholly rest,
He that for only end, waits for the wages blessed
Wherewith he promises for ever sans respect
Of their selfe-meriting, to guerdon his elect.
What is it can bereave the wealth of such a man?
What is it that disturb his perfect pleasures can?
What is it can supplant his honnors and degrees?
Since all his treasures, his delights, his dignities
Are all laid up in heaven: where it were all in vain
For all the sons of earth to war with might and maine.
No doubt (will some man say) each christian does aspire
After this bodies death to those deer treasures higher
That are reserud in heaven, whereof the sweet possession,
Fears not the violence of all the worlds oppression:
But whilst that here below this frail flesh-burthen ties him,
But the bare hope he has, which how can it suffice-him
Against the sharp assalts of passions infinite
Whose glad-sad cross conflicts afflict him day and night?
Needs must I grant indeed, that that same perfect joy
We cannot perfitly upon this earth enjoy:
But that that hope alone does not sufficiently,
Bless his life where it lives, for my part I deny.
Some do not fear we see, to spend their stock and store,
To undertake the task of many travails sore:
To hazard limbs and lives in service of some Lord,
Depending often upon his foole-fat-feeding word:
Or waiting else perhaps, without all other hold
Until it please himself his francknes to unfold,
Not reaking all their pain they are so inly pleased,
With hoped benefit whereof they are not seized.
And shall th'assured hope of euer-blisses then
For which we have the word, not of vain mortal men,
That teach their tongues to lie; but of the highest God
The God of truth, truth's self, where truth has still abode:
Shall that (I say) not serve to settle our faint hearts,
Against (I will not say) like dangers and like smarts:
But against these petty greefs that now and then do pain-vs
No more like those then heaven near earth that does sustain-vs?
Ah, shall we then despise all trouble and vexacion,
Supported by a prop of doubtful expectation:
And while for earthly things we can endure this
Shall we not do as much for an immortal bliss?
Indeed not of our selves, for self-ly naught we can,
But God when pleases him does give this strength to man,
Whereby he stands stout: even like a mighty rock
Amid the mounting waves when Eol^ does unlock
Stern Austers stormy gate, making the waters wrestle
And rush with wrathful rage against the sturdie castle
Whilst it, for all the force of their fell fury shown
Is not so much as mooud, and much less overthrown.
So fares such a man: for if from high degree,
He soudainly do slide, to live contemnedly
With the vile vulgar sort, that cannot make him waver,
For well he is assurd that gods high holy favor
Depends not on the pomp, nor vain, proud state and port,
That for the grace of kings adorn the courtly sort.
If he be kept in bands, thrall to the tirannies
And extreme cruel laws of ruthles enemies,
Both void of help and hope, and of all likelihood
Of being ever freed from their hands thirsting-blood;
In spite of them he knows that one day he shall die,
And then he shall enjoy an endless liberty.
If he be forced to fly from his dear country-clime
In exile to expire the remnant of his time,
He does suppose the world to be a country common,
From whence no tirranie till death can banish no man.
If that he must forsake his parents and his kin,
And those whose amity he most delights in,
He knows that where he finds a man, he finds a kins-man
For all mankind is come from one self father sinnes-man.
If being spoild of wealth, and wanton pampering plenty
He find upon his board two dishes skant of twenty,
And to his back one coat to keep the cold away
whereas he had before a new for every day:
He learneth of Saint Paul, who bidds us be content,
With food and furniture to this life competent,
Since nothing (as says Job) into this world we brought
Nor with us when we die can we hence carry ought.
If he be passing poor, and in exceeding lack
Of every needful thing for belly and for back,
He learneth of the Son, that God the Father heedeth,
To give to every one, in time, the thing he needs:
And that the fowls of heaven, and cattle small and great,
Do neither sow nor reap, yet find they what to eat:
Yea that the Lillies fair which grow among the grass
Do neither spin nor work and yet their garments pass
For culler and for cost, for art and ornament,
The glorious Salomon's rich robes of Parliament.
If so, that he be sick, or wounded in the arm,
In body, back, or breast, or such like kind of harm:
If in extremity of angry pain and anguish
Enfeebled still by fitts, he bedridden lie and languish:
If all the miseries that ever martird man
At once on every side afflict him all they can:
The more that he endures, the more his comforts grow,
Since so his wretchedness he sooner commes to know
That from worlds vanities he may himself advance
Which hold al those from heaven, that still delight that dance.
He fears not those at all that with their utmost might,
Having the body slain can do no farther spite:
But only him that with ten thousand deaths can kill,
The soul and body both for ever if he will:
He knows it is their lot that seek to please their God
To be afflicted still with persecutions rod,
So that what ever cross, how ever sharp assaile-him
His constant hart's content and confort cannot faile-him
But he must die (say you), alas can that dismay?
Where is the labourer that (having wrought all day
Amid the burning heat, with wearines oppressed)
Complains that night is come when he shall go to rest.
The Merchant that returns from some far foreign lands,
Escaping dreadful rocks and dangerous shelfs and sands,
When as he sees his ship her home-hauen enter safe,
Will he repine at God, and as offended chafe
For being brought to soon home to his native soil,
Free from all perils sad that threaten saylor's spoil?
He knows, from thousand deaths that this one death does lose him
That in heavens euer-ioyes, he ever may repose-him:
That he must bring his bark into this creek, before
In th'euer lasting land he can set foot a-shoare:
That he can never come to incorruption,
Unless that first his flesh do feel corruption:
So that all rapt with joy, having his help so reddie,
This ship-wracke he escapes, as on a rock most steddie.
But more perhaps then death the kind of death dismaieth,
Which serves him for a bridge that him to heaven co^uaieth.
Whether he end his days by natural disease:
Or in a boisterous storm do perish on the seas:
Or by the bloody hands of armed foes be slain:
Or by mischaunce a stone fall down, and dash his brain:
Or by the murdring ball of newfound earthly thunder
By day or else by nighr his bones be pasht a-sunder
Or burned at a stake; or bitterly tormented,
By cruel slaughter-men, in tortures new-inuented.
Alas, alas, for that, much less then least he cares:
For as a man fallen down into a pit, he fares,
Who if he may be drawn up from the noison place
Where adders, toades, and snakes crawle over feet and face,
Respects not, whether that ye use a silken skaine,
Hemp-rope, or chain of gold, so he get up again:
Even so, so he may come to his desired bliss
The manner and the means to him indifferent is,
As for the differing pain (if any him do torture)
If it be violent, he knows it is the shorter:
But be it never so long, long sure it cannot last
To us, whose Post-like life is all so quickly past.
Now such a man, in whom such firm contents do hyue,
Who can deny to be the happiest man alive?
And who so impudent, that dares now profess,
That this worlds sained sweet (whose vnfainde bitterness
Brings to this very life full many torments fell,
And after dingeth down to th'endles pains of hell.)
Should be preferred before these seeming-sowres, that make us
Taste many true-sweet sweets yer this dead life forsake us.
And after lift us up to that same blessed joy,
That evermore shall last, exempt from all annoy.
So few there will be found (as I suppose) so deeming,
As many which (more feared with these ils falsly-seeming:
Than inlie fallen in love with heauen-ioyes excellence)
Approouing this estate, flye't as the pestilence.
And yet in this estate is found felicity,
(As far forth as it may amid the vanity
Of this frail fading world, where each thing hourly changes,
For never from it self true happiness estranges.
It never does decay, it never does decrease,
In spite of angry war it ever lives in peace.
Maulgre poor want, it has ten thousand kinds of wealth,
Amid infirmities it has continual health.
Invirond round with woe, it does rejoice and sing:
Deprived of dignities, it is greater than a king.
It sits secure and safe, free from hart-pining fears,
For ever with it self it all dear treasures bears.
Not needing any aid of men of arms to watch-them,
Nor fearing fraud, nor force of any foe to catch-them.
Whereas we daily see so many men, whose mind
To transitory trash of world wealth is inclinde,
In their abundance beg, and in their plenty poor,
(For who has had so much, that has not wished more?)
No treasures can suffice the gulf of their desire,
Yea, make them Emperors, yet will they more aspire.
Peace cannot pacify the fell rebellious broyle
That in their troubled soul does ever burn and boil.
For every short content of any false delight,
A thousand bitter throws torment them day and night.
All their estate does stand abroad in hands of strangers,
Therefore the more their wealth, the more their daily dangers
The more their miseries, because the more they need,
Much strength and many men unto their hoords to heed:
Dreading with cause, least craft and cruelty, or either,
Bereave them of their bliss, and treasure both together.
Needs must we then confess that in adversity,
There is more happiness then in prosperity,
Since that the mind of man so soon it self betrays,
Unto the guilefull snares that worldly pleasure lays,
Which make us at the last headlong to hell to run:
All which adversity does make us safely shun.
But here it may be asked, if pleasure, state and store,
(Plunging us in the pit of vices more and more)
Be subject so to make us more and more accursed,
Must we esteem that grief (which sense esteems wurst)
More fit to better us, and bring us unto bliss,
Then those whose smarting sting is not so strong as this?
Sure, since that in our selves our cause original,
Of bliss, and bale we hyde, it matters not at all,
For still the faithful man one and the same remains,
Whether the grief be great or little he sustaines:
Since how so ere it be, he takes occasion thence,
To seek in God alone, his comfort and defense.
But for because our soul, the while she does consort
With this gross fleshly lump, cannot, but in some sort
Suffer as sensible, yea, oftentimes so far,
That her best functions all, less apt and able are
Than else at other times: I do suppose the prooffe
Of one, then other ill, auailes more in behoof:
That this is so, we see, a sick man often to find
Such joyful quietness, and comfort in his mind,
That he esteems himself the best content a-liue:
But yet the sharp disease, which does his health deprive,
Withholdeth in some sort his senses and his wit,
That freely other-where he cannot use them fit.
And so it fares with him, that through resolved well,
Endures the cruel strains of any torture fell.
Now for the bannishd man, the changing of his dwelling
Never disturbes his joy. And he whose wealth excelling
Turns in a trice to want, by whatsoever chance,
His courage never shrinks nor yet his countenance.
So that in their content, all four are all a-like,
A-like rejoicing all in their afflictions eeke:
A-like contemning all world's pompous vanities,
But the two last, have odds in their extremities
In that without impeach, they may apply their mind
To many goodly things, wherein great joy they find.
(I mean when each distress offends a man alone,
Not when he is assailde at once of every one.)
Yet perril's quickly past, danger endures not,
Exile so easy grows that it is soon forgot,
The greatest loss that is we mind not many hours,
For thousand accidents dictract this soul of ours,
Which cannot in such sort the senses still restrain
But that they will go feed on many objects vain
Whereby at unawares she oftentimes surprisd,
Is over reached by those, whose rigor she dispisd:
And so the pleasant taste she does untimely miss,
Wherewith affliction sweet does seazon hear her bliss,
So that, some other state (wherein our soul, less fed
With sundry objects vain, shall be more settled)
May rightly be preferred to these which make her stay,
And stumble oftentimes, unto her own decay,
And therefore I sustain, close prison to be best,
Of all afflictions that may a man molest.
Considering, all defects to other crosses common,
In this are seldom found, and almost, felt of no man.
For Prison is a place where God sequesters men,
Far from the vile prospect of vanities terren,
To make them thence withdraw their hearts and to confess,
That in his grace alone consists their happiness.
It is a learned scoole, where God himself reads clearly
True wisdoms perfect rules, to those he loves deerly.
There, th'understanding, (free, amid the many chains,
That bind the body fast) finds out a thousand means,
To learn another day to be more apt and able
According to our place for uses serviceable,
To proffit publike-weale for evermore we ought,
In seeking selfe-gaine see that common good be sought,
Knowledge is only learnd by long excercitation:
For which, what fitter mean then such a sequestration,
Where each-man vndisturbd, through diligence may grow
According to the gifts that gracious heavens bestow:
One in ability to rule a lawful state,
The virtuous to advance, and vicious to abate:
Another, from the Tomb to fetch Antiquity:
Another to discern true truth from sophistry,
Another by the feats of elder men at Arms,
To fram wise stratagems for woeful wars allarmes,
(For souldiars oftentimes may more experience get
By reading, then they can where camp and camp is met)
And (breeflie to conclud) some, gravely to advise,
Some, bold to execute, as each man's calling lies:
But most of all, to search within the sacred writ,
The secret mysteries to man's salvation fit.
A world of vanities, that do distract us here
During our liberty; in durance, come not near:
The wall that letts our legs from walking out of door
Bounding us round about within a narrow floor,
Does guard us from the gall which Satan spring of spite,
Mingles among the sweet of this vain worlds delight.
If he be happier man that lives free from foes
Then he whom angry troops of enemies enclose:
Much more the prisoner then of his high bliss may boast
For being so far of from such a hugie host
Of hateful foes so fierce in malice and in might,
Himself so fainte and weak, and so unfit to fight:
For he, and we God wot in steed of standing to-it
(How-euer in a vain, we vaunt that we will do-it)
When It comes to the brunt we cannot brook the field
But either fly like hares, or else like cowards yield.
The sundry objects fond, which make us soon forget
Each other chastisement, in this do never let
For turn we where we list and look which way we will
At all times to our sight one thing is offered still,
Whether on pauement, roof, or wall we cast our eye,
Always of our estate an Image we discrie,
And so it also fares with our newes-greedie ear,
One very sound resounds about us every where:
Where ever harken we, we here of naught but foes,
Our keepers commonly are not too kind (God knows)
By the least noise that is continually they tell
In what estate we stand and in what house we dwell.
So that incessantly our hearts are lift on high:
Some times to praise the lord for his benignity,
Who does not punish us after our foul offense,
Though by a thousand sins we daily him incense:
Some times to magnify his admirable might
Which has our feeble hearts with such great force bedight
That we, in steed of greef, or grudging at the pains,
Of sharpest chastisements, whereof the world complains,
Leaving this loathed Earth we mount the highest place
Where through true faith we taste his hunnie-sweeter grace:
Some times to give him thanks for all the wealth exceeding
Which from his liberal hand we have to help our needing:
And to be short, sans cease to meditate on all
The countles benefits that from his goodness fall
Not suffering any hour to pass away for naught
Without exalting him in deed or word or thought.
Yet does the world esteem this, a most hard estate
And him that feels the same, it counts unfortunate,
But I would gladly see some other state wherein
With such commodity, so much content is seen;
Wherein less hinderance and less incomberance lies,
To make men miss the path unto perfections prise
Sure sir (will some man say) you set a good face on-it
One might at length convert, commenting so vpon-it
The cruellst prison house into a mansion fair,
Where 'twere not hard to live content and void of care:
You take your prison for a practiue man of art,
But such as those God knows you find the fewest part:
You feign him to be friend to solitude and quiet
But the most part are prone to revel and to riot:
One must be free from noise that means to studdie well,
Whereof who can be sure in such a servile hell?
Besides he must have books, and paper pen and ink,
All which in prisoners hands are seldom left I think;
So that you do not feign your gaile so good and gainful
As to find out the same is difficulte and painful.
I answer in a word (if any so shall wrangle,)
I do not bound all bliss within so straight an angle:
I say great happiness and hart-reuiuing joy
Follows th'aflicted sort in every sharp anoy:
But that there is no cross that does so much avail,
To make us fit to help our neighbor, as the gaile,
Wherein the God of grace at his good pleasure gives,
Means to effect the same, unto the least that lives.
But be it so, in bands, that nothing learn we can,
It Is to be learnd enough, to be an honest man:
And this is th'onlie schole, wherein the Arch-maister teacheh,
Himself, by secret means, rules that the rudest reaches
Th'aduise of such a one more profit does impart
Then of the wicked sort with all their curious art.
Concerning solitude, although that commonly
Our nature be inclind unto the contrary;
There, the assistant grace of God we chiefly find
Who changing of our place does also change our mind.
For being free from noise and for obtaining tools
To help our knowledge with, as in all other skooles:
God ever cares for those that fear his name for love.
And if that any such, such inconvenience prove
If any money need, or else through ample distance
Be destitute of friends, he getts them for assistance
The favor of their foes, whose hearts he handles so
(Howeuer they intend his childrens overthrow)
That his, of what they need have evermore enough,
According as he knows to be to their behoof.
Now say that we consent (say some) that this is true:
But what if somewhat worse then all this wurst ensue?
What if he be enforced his country to forsake?
What if continual fitts his sickly body shake?
What if he lose at once his wealth and reputation?
Repleat on a uery side with every sharp vexacion?
Can he still keep his joy, and can he still retain
Such means to profit still, for all this greef and pain?
Concerning his content, it is always all a-like,
Whether that every greef particularly strike,
Or whether all at once he feel their utmost anger,
And if he be suprisd with so extreme a languor
That (as I said before) the spirit it enforce
Through suffering of the smart that does afflict the corpse,
To leave his offices, so that he cannot wright
Nor read nor meditate nor study, nor indight.
It is so quickly past, that in comparison,
regarding so great good, it is not to think upon.
For, by a mighty grief, our life is quickly ended,
Or else by remedy it self is soon amended:
And if it be but mean, then is it borne the better
And so unto the soul it is not any letter.
Besides, we must conceive, our spirit (as oppressed
With fainting wearines,) sometimes desires rest,
To gather strength again, during which needful pawse
We are not to be blamd, since need the same does cause:
So that the time that is lost while such sharp pangs do pain
May be supposd a time of taking breath again.
In prison (to conclude) a man at once may try
All manner of extremes of earthly misery:
In which respect perhaps the worse some deem of it,
Being as, tweare the but that all men strive to hit,
But I esteem the same the perfecter for that:
For if one cross alone can make us eleuate
Our groueling earth desires from cogitacions base,
To have recourse to God, and to implore his grace,
Seeking in him alone our perfect joy and bliss:
Much more shall many greefs at once accomplish this.
For many can do more then one (without respect)
And still, the greater cause, the greater the effect.
Indeed (say othersome) these reasons have some reason
But then whence commes it that so many men in prison
With hundred thousand pains, pincht and oppressed sore,
In steed of bettering thear, wax wurser then before,
Instead of sweet content, do still complain and cry,
In steed of learning more, lose former industry?
Though (in appearance great) your sayings seem but just
Yet plain experience (sure) we think is best to trust.
That hidden virtue rare that so great good atchiues,
Lies in the prisoners heart not in his heavy gives,
The good grow better there, the bad becomme the wurse
For by their sin they turn Gods blessing into curse.
And that is the cause the most are malcontent and sad
Since evermore the good are fewer then the bad.
But wherefore does not God to all vouchsafe this grace?
Proud earth-wormes, pawse we there: let us fear before his face,
Admiring humbly all his holy judgments high
Exceeding all too far our weak capacity.
The potters vessel vile, does us our lesson show
Which argues not with him why he has made it so:
Much less may we contend, but rather rest content
With that which God has given. He is omnipotent,
All gracious, and all good, most just, and perfect wise:
On some, he poures a sea of his benignities,
On some, a shallow brook, on other some, a floode.
Giving to some, a small, to some a greater good:
As, from eternity has pleased the eternal Spirit
To love men more or less, without respect of merit.
For my part should I live ten Nestor's years to pass,
Had I a hundred tongues more smooth then Tullye's was,
Had I a voice of steel, and had I brazen sides,
And learning more then all the Helyconian guides;
Yet were I all too-weake to tell the many graces
That in ten thousand sorts, and in ten thousand places,
Ten hundred thousand times he has vouchsafed me
Not for my merrits sake but for his mercy free.
But yet mong all the goods that of his liberal bounty
I have receaud so often, non to compare accoumpt-I
With this close prisonment, wherein he does with-draw-me
Far from the wanton world, and to himself does draw-me
I poasted on a pace to ruin and perdicion
When by this sharp-sweet pil, my cunning kind Physician
Did purge (maugre my will) the poisonie humor fell
Wherewith my sin-sick heart already began to swell.
I looked for nothing less then for these miseries
And pains that I have proved, the world's vain vanities
Had so seduce't my soul, with baits of sugared bane,
That it was death to me from pleasure to be taken:
But, (crossing my request) God for my profit, gave
Me quight the contrary to that which I did crave.
So that, my body barring from a freedom small,
He set my soul at large, which unto sin was thrall.
Wounding with musket shot my feeble arm, he cured
The festring sores of sin, the which my soul endured:
Tripping me from the top of some mean dignity,
Which drew me up to climb the mount of vanity,
He raisde me from the depth of vices darksome cell,
The which incessantly did ding me down to hell:
Easing me (to conclude) of all the grief and care,
wherewith these false delights for ever sauced are.
He made me find and feel amid my most annoyes,
A thousand true contents, and thousand perfect joys.
But some perhaps amazed, will muse what kind of pleasure
Here I can take, and how I pass my time and leisure:
For in foul idleness to spend so large a time,
It cannot be denied to be a grievous crime.
First, in the morning, when the spirit is fresh and fit,
I suck the honney sweet from forth the sacred writ,
Wherein by faith we taste that true celestial bread,
Whence our immortal souls are ever only fed:
Then search I out the sawes of other sage divines,
(The best here to be had) among whose human lines,
Supported by the grace of Gods especial power,
I leave the thorn behind, and pluck the healthsome flower.
Sometimes I do admire, in books of heathen men,
Grave sayings savoring more a sacred Christian pen,
Than many of our age, whose bold unlearned pride,
Thinking to honor God, has errd on every side:
Sometimes, when I observe in every ancient story,
Such virtuous presidents, trim patterns of true glory:
I woefully bewail our wretched wicked days,
where virtue is despisde, and vice has all the praise.
Often I lament to see so many noble wits,
(Neglecting Gods high praise, that best their learning fits)
To sing of naught but lies, and loves and wanton theames,
False sooth-sinne flatteries, and idle Fairie dreams,
Then turning toward those, that filled with holier flame,
For only subject choose th'Eternals sacred name:
These chiefly I admire, whose honorable brows
Disdain the feigned crown of fading Laurel boughs,
Then full-gorg'd with the sweets of such a dainty feast
(Pricked forward with desire to imitate the best)
Often times I exercise this arte-les muse of mine
To sing in holy verse some argument divine.
One while to praise my God for all received good:
An other while to beg, that in his dear sons blood
My black sins he will wash, and that he will not weigh
At his high justice beam, how I have gone a-stray.
Sometimes, these wretched times to pity and deplore
Wherein the wicked ones do flourish more and more,
Sometimes to wail the state of sad distressed Sion
Imploring to her aid the Tribe of Judah's Lion.
If any other theme at any time I take,
Yet never does my verse the settled bounds forsake
That verity prescribes, nor now no more disguise
The ugly face of sin with mask of painted lies.
And though that heertofore, I also in my time
Have writ loves vanities, in wanton idle rhyme:
It Was as a whet-stone that whereon I whet my style,
Yer it wear ablely-apt ought grauer to compile:
Yet I repent thereof: for we must never tend
To bring by evil means a good intent to end.
When as my weary spirits some relaxacion ask,
To recreate the same, I take some other task,
One while upon the Lute, my nimble ioints I plie,
Then on the Virginalls, to whose sweet harmony
Marrying my simple voice in solemn tunes I sing
Some psalm or holy song, unto the heavenly King.
So that the idlest hour of all the time that flies
So fast, is never free from some good exercise.
Wherein I joy as much, as ever I have done,
In the most choice delights found underneath the sun.
But you can never walk nor go to take the air
Nor once look out of door, be weather nere so fair,
But there in solitud you lead your life alone
Bard from the fellowship of almost every one,
Which doubtless at the last must grieve you needs I think.
A man that never thirsts has never need of drink
So though I be bereft these other things you speake-of
I miss nor mind them not, as things I never reake-of.
For I have scoold my heart since my captivity,
To wish for nothing else, but what is granted me
And what is granted me, contents me passing well.
In each condition does some contentment dwell:
But men of differing states have difference in delights,
What pleases common eyes, that irketh princes sights,
What rashelings do delight that sober men despise,
What fools take pleasure in, does but offend the wise,
What prosperous people loath, afflicted folk will love,
And what the free abhor that prisoners will approve.
But all have equally indifferent power to make
Them equally content, that can them rightly take:
For who so presently, himself can rightly bear,
Has neither passed ill, nor future ill to fear:
The One, which is now no more, ought now no more affray-vs
The Other, which is not yet, as little can dismay-vs
For what no essence has, that also has no might,
And that which has power, can do a man no spite.
Besides, since that our life is but a pilgrimage;
Through which we dalie pass to th'heauenly heritage:
Although it seem to thee that these my bands do let-mee
Yet have I to the goal the which my God has set-me
As fast as thou that runst thy self so out of breath
In poasting night and day, by dales and hills and heath.
If thou have open feelds, and I be prisoner
T'importeth me no more, then to the mariner,
Whether he go to sea shipped in some spacious arc
Or else at lesser scope abord some lesser bark.
Nay, here the least is best, since this vast occean wide
Whereon we daily sail a thousand rocks does hide
Against which the greater ships are cast away full often
While small boats, for the most, float over safe aloft.
Then may I well conclude with reason and assurance
That thear's no better state then to be kept in durance,
A sweeter kind of life I never proved then thear:
Nor was I ever touched with lesser grief and care:
If that I care at all it is for others cause
And for the miseries this times corruption draws:
But being well assured that nothing here betideth
Against Gods ordinance and will that all things guides
And knowing him to be good, just and most of might
I gladly yield my self to the order he has pight.
For he it is, that now makes me accept so well
And like of this estate which others hate as hell,
He it is that heretofore vouchsaft me like relief
When as I was oppressed with a more grievous grief:
He it is from whom I hope in time too-come no less
Athough a hundred fold were dubbled my distress.
Yea he it is that makes me profit every day,
And also so content in this estate to stay,
That of my liberty I am not now so feign
To think by liberty a happier life to gain
For I were well content no more from hence to go,
If I might profit most my friends and cuntrie so.
Now here I humbly pray (expecting such an end)
The Lord still toward me his favor to extend,
And that he will vouchsafe still to alott like grace,
To all that for like cause are handled in like case.
FINIS.

