A TREATISE of the Excellency of a Christian man, and how he may be known.
Written in French by Master Peter de La Place, one of the Kings Counsel, and
chief President of his Court of Aides in Paris. WHEREUNTO IS ADJOINED A BRIEF
description of the life and death of the said Author, to the end that every
one may know what he was. Translated into English by L. TOMSON.

MATTHEW. V. Blessed are they which suffer persecution for righteousness sake: for
theirs is the kingdom of heaven.

Imprinted at London by Christopher Barkar, dwelling in (...) Churchyard at the
(...) the Tyg(...)



To the right worshipful Mistres Vrsula Walsingham, grace mercy and peace
from God the Father and from the Lord Jesus CHRIST.
ACcording as your Worships pleasure was, I have perused this book, and as
wind and weather would serve for passage, have brought it out of France into
England: The cause of your liking, can not be misliked of any: and the
judgment of the right honorable my Master, may stand as most grounded in
truth and justice, whereby he sentenced him not only to be of the Religion
of Christ, but also truly a religious Christian. For surely, if I be not
deceived in judgment, who so shall read this book, shall find there was a
Christ in the man, and such a Christ, as made him in deed a Christian, not for
a day or two, not for fair and calm weather only, but from the first
beginning of his entrance into the knowledge of God, to his very last breath, in
most sharp and stormy tempests, as witnesses his happy and blessed
martyrdom, in that most horrible slaughter of the Saints of God, on
Barthelmewes day in Paris that wicked murderesse of Gods people, against whom
their innocent blood cries to God for vengeance against the day of wrath. As
he felt, so he wrote, and his feeling was with such spiritual understanding,
as that we may well see, he was one of them of whom he wrote, and by so well
knowing himself to his everlasting comfort, gave us a way to know our selves
for the joyous assurance of our salvation. The greatest comfort we have, is to
know that we are of the city of God, and who so would honor us the most,
could not better perform it to our liking, then to assure us we are the
children of that heavenly Father, brought into that honor and dignity, by
Christ that died for us, and gave himself for us, and in whom we dwell, and
he in us, if we deceive not our selves. As for the comfort we might reap, by
being made me^, and not beasts, though it be great, and God is therefore
greatly to be magnified, yet considering what God did for us, and what we have
done against him, where he set us by grace, and where we find our selves
through sin and rebellion, we have cause rather to sorrow, then to joy, of
heaviness then of comfort: and in that respect, the veriest varlet and caitif
that goes upon the earth has as much to triumph in, as has the best man of
God, the dearest child of our heavenly Father. For they are me^, as well as we,
made to the image of God as well as we, have as great light in them of natural
reason and understanding, as we, witness the Heathen that never knew God, no
worse sinners in Adam the^ we, but we as bad as they, both of us for our sin
and rebellion against him in that man Adam justly blinded, justly condemned.
This the blind wise Philosopher did not see, and this the obstinate Pelagian
Papist at this day will not acknowledge, and therefore they both lift up their
heels against God, have wicked thoughts, and speak blasphemous words
against heaven, and against their own salvation. And because this prerogative
over other creatures, but equality of and in mankind, had not that in it,
that might in deed comfort the heart of man, but rather cast him down, his
mind and purpose was to lay forth the other to us, which is proper to us, I
say proper to us, that are of the household of faith, of the common wealth of
Israel, citizens of heaven, fellow heirs with Christ, the children of God: and
I say proper, because the Heathen and Barbarians, be they never so wise, the
Pelagians and Papists, be they never so superstitiously devout, have neither
part nor portion in it. And this is the preeminence, not to be called, but to
be a Christian, which whosoever feels in himself with a right feeling of
true understanding, which neither of the two before named has (for the one
fights against the name of Christ, the other can not abide to hear of any
certain persuasion and assurance of the conscience, that it is beloved of God,
and that God is without doubt our Father,) has the greatest preemine^ce that
man can have upon earth, and the greatest joy and comfort that can be felt by
man. All of us at this day, in this part of the world, do joy in this name,
Christian, and it is taken for the greatest dishonor that can be done to man,
to say he is no Christian: And yet sure it is, that every man is not a
Christian, that is called a Christian, every man is not a Christian that is
Christened, not every one that says Lord Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
heaven, no more then every one that was circumcised, was a true Jew, or all
that descended of the race of Abraham, were true children to Abraham. There was
amongst them Ismael, who persecuted his brother, and yet was he circumcised,
there was Esau, whom the Lord hated, and yet was he circumcised: So are there
heretics amongst us, Christened, and yet not Christians, for neither the
cutting of of a piece of skin in them, did make the^ true Israelites, neither
dipping in a litell water, makes these true Christians* both of these stands
in the spirit, not in the letter, in the inward work by grace and that of God,
not in the outward work of man. So that he that has this honorable name, to
be called a Christian, has more cause to tremble then to rejoice, unless he
have a sure testimony both within and without, that he is in deed a
Christian: for the abuse of Gods name can avail man nothing at all, nay it
furthereth and increases his condemnation, as great credit committed to a
servant, and abused by that servant, procures greater displeasure. How we
shall come to the knowledge of this preeminence and excellency, which is in us,
this book shows, and because it is so plainly and shortly set forth, I
will not stand here to make any discourse of it unto your worship, only I
most humbly beseech you to read the book it self, and there shall you find
it so well laid forth, as shall be to your contentment and comfort. I could very
willingly have been content to have entered somewhat into the matter, but I
fear I should have ouerslipped my self, for I must needs confess of my
self, and to the glory of GOD, I speak it, that I can easelier enter into
it, then come forth, so great comfort I receive of the doctrine, which is the
chiefest part of the joy of my salvation. Were it not that I had good
assurance, and feeling of these marks which he sets down, and are in
deed the true marks of our salvation, both in us and to us, that we are
saved, I should despair rather then hope, and bend my self wholly against
God, then ever be subject or submit my self to GOD. And therefore so often as
ever I enter into consideration of the wicked doctrines, which the reprobate
and condemned Church of Antichrist, gives out and teaches, I find none so
detestable as this point, that labors to take away from us all persuasion of
Gods love toward us, and of our most sure and certain redemption by the
blood of Christ. They call it a presumptuous doctrine, a desperate doctrine, a
doctrine that leads man to all kind of dissolutenes, an enemy to godlynes
of life and devotion, a furtherer of all sensuality, all lust, all wickedness
and rebellion against GOD. Though we are taught by the Scripture, that none can
believe but such as are appointed to salvation, and none can receive Christ,
and believe in his name, but they which have this prerogative given them, to be
sons of God: though the Apostle say, Know ye not that the Spirit of God
dwells in you: and again, The Temple of God is holy, which Temple you are:
though Christ him self say, Rejoice that your names are written in the book
of life: and, Of those whom my Father has given me, I will not leese one: yet
cease they not against so manifest trueths of the Spirit of God, and witness of
the Son of God, yea and evident speeches of God him self, to disgorge their
blasphemies tending to the subversion of souls, because they envy at other
men's salvation, not passing, as seems by their doctrine, for their own,
though I judge them not. Is it a presumption for a Christian man to say as
Christ has commanded us and taught us to say, Our Father which art in heaven?
Or may I say, Our father, in doubt, whether he be so or no? No man can call God
his Father, but in faith, and faith is nothing but an undoubted persuasion that
we are beloved of God in Christ, beloved as children, because he gave his Son
for us, because he the righteous, dyed for me the unrighteous, whereby as he
became a sinner, by setting him self in my place, so do I become righteous,
in that that God sets me in his place: And because our condition and state
is such with God, Jesus Christ our Savior willed us in praying, to pray thus,
Our Father. For if this ground go not before, we are liars in so praying, Nay
we blaspheme him in so praying, for he will not be called Father of the
reprobate, no more then he will accept the sacrifice of the wicked, whereof he
says by his Prophet, that it is an abomination to him, for our prayers are
sacrifices, and if they be the prayers of his children, then are they sweet
smelling sacrifices: but if they be the prayers of the wicked and reprobate,
then are they an abomination to the Lord. Do we not every one of us, in the
Confession of our faith, say, I believe in God the Father? what do we lie, when
we say so? Or must we doubt when we say so? Well this is the doctrine of the
enemies of God the Papists, who say, it is presumption for any man to say that
he is saved. Then I say, it is presumption for any man to say, that he is the
child of God: then is it presumption for any man to say, that God is our
Father: then is it presumption for any man to say that he is a Christian: then
is it presumption for any man to say in a good and true faith, I believe in
God. And so by this means shall the whole Catholic Church be condemned for
charging us to say so: then is Christ a lier, and a master of heresies in
teaching us to pray so: then do we all wickedly to call and profess our selves
Christians with such confidence as we do. And seeing their profession and
doctrine is so, that no man can assuredly say that God is his Father, let them
set it down in flattermes, as they mean it, and let the style of the
confession of faith, and the Lords prayer go as their doctrine is, after this
sort, I doubt in God the Father almighty, I doubt in Jesus Christ, I doubt in
the holy Ghost, and If thou which art in heaven be our Father, hallowed be thy
name, and so forth. What a devilish doctrine is this? and yet it is the
doctrine of the church of Rome: what a desperate doctrine is it? and yet it is
the doctrine that we must confess to be true, or else we be heretics, we must
be burned, we must be condemned. Christians I say, must be condemned, because
they say they are Christians, for it is nothing else we say: we say we are the
children of God, that is an heresy, say they, and yet they will grant us to
be Christians. A strange kind of Christian, that has not the Spirit of
Christ, and if we have the Spirit of Christ, are we not Children? The Apostle
teaches us all this: why then what is it else to say, we are Christians, then
to say, we are the children of God? and is there any child of God that is not
faued? Paul says, if sons, then heirs, heirs of the kingdom, yea fellow
heirs with Christ. So then it is no more presumption to say, I am saved, then
to say I am the the child of God: neither any more presumption to say, I am
the child of God, then to say, I am a Christian. Oh but say they, this
doctrine makes men desperate: for if they stand upon those terms once, that
they are saved, they will care no more for good works, they will abandon them
selves to all kind of sin. In deed they say, as they feel, for if they
felt what it were to have this persuasion and ground, they would know, that as
they are freed from sin, so are they to live in righteousness: The true
Christian and child of GOD, is more fearful to sin, because he loves God,
and is beloved of God, then all the wicked have for fear of punishment. He
knows and is persuaded, that as he is dead with Christ, so must he rise
again with Christ in newnes of life, to live after the Spirit, not after the
flesh, and that God has prepared his ways to walk in, which are good
works. If the lives of all men were looked into, it would easily appear,
where were the greatest abundance of sin, whether in the true Christian who
is a witness of the truth of this doctrine, or in the enemy of truth; which
can not abide this doctrine. And why can he not abide this doctrine? because he
can not abide to hear of the adoption of God, how God has adopted and taken
us to be his sons in Christ before the foundation of the world was laid. And
why so? Because they go about to set up their own righteousness, and therefore
will not be subject to the righteousness of god. If we do well, because we are
the children of God, and if we believe, because we were appointed to salvation,
the^ is it not our well doing that makes us to be Gods children: then are we
not appointed to salvation, because we believe: then are al their merits gone,
then is al their fat in the fire. A Heathen, a Pharise, and a Papist, is no
body unless he may merit, unless God may be bound to him, and not he to
God: he will not take the kingdom of heaven of gift, he will have it of duty,
and that is no God a mercy to him. This is the very point of the matter, judge
now which is the presumptuous doctrine, either the heathenish pharisaicall
papistrie, or the truth of the Gospel. But as I said, I can more easily enter
into the matter, then get out of it, the grossenes of their heresy is so
notorious and brutishe, the truth of our doctrine is so plain and rich, that
I can not contain my self, if I should follow my self, I will therefore
surcease and leave your worship to the reading of the work it self, which
shall be sufficient to instruct you in the way of this truth, and arm you
against the assaults of Satan by these his instruments. The Lord by his holy
Spirit work those two effects in you, for this present, so true and
comfortable doctrine: and further lead you into al truth, as he is the God of
truth, that in the day of the Lord Jesus, you may be found to have walked
without stumbling in whatsoever he has thought necessary to reueile unto you
for your salvation. 15. Sept. 1576.

Your worships humbly at commandment L. T.

A brief collection of the chiefest points of the life of Master Peter de la
Place, while he lived Counselor to the French King, and chief President in his
Court of Aids, at Paris: set forth by P. de Farnace.
THough, to judge aright of any work, we have to consider rather what the
thing is in it self, then to stand much upon the author of it, because, as
truth is, the opinions wherewith we are before possessed, whether they be with
or against the persons, stay us from judging syncerely of their doings: yet
notwithstanding it is a commendable custom, not only to set men's names before
their books, but also to set down what men they were, to the end the reader
may be the better prepared to taste of the fruict when he shall once understand
what tree did bear it: for it is to be thought, that the fruict will be like the
tree that bare it. And therefore, seeing this work came to mine hands, I was
so bold to put forth this short, but yet most true discourse of the life and
death of the worthy man that made it: being otherwise thus minded, though this
occasion had not fallen out, that it were an injury to posterity to suffer
diverse things lie buried under silence which befell him in his life time, and
are worthy perpetual memory.

Therefore, to begime at his birth, Master Peter de la Place, an Angoulesmian
borne, was so well trained by in learning, even from a child, that he only of
all his brethren resolved with him self to follow the study of the Laws,
wherein he profited so marvelously, that before he was two and twenty years
old, he made a commentary upon the title of Actions: and about the same time
began to be a common pleader in the Parliament of Paris, where he got himgreat
commendation and praise for excellency of wit and eloquence in pleading, and
especiadly for singular vprightnes of conscience. For which cause also, the
deceased King Francis the great, did him this honor to choose him for his
Aduocat and Autourney in his Court of Aids in Paris. In which office he
behaved him self so well, that no man is able to bereue him of this
commendation, that he kept his hands continually clean from briberie, and
never did any thing against his office, either for unbridled ambition or
covetousness. King Henry the last, having sufficient testimony of his good and
upright bearing of himself, in stead of continuing him in this office, chose
him amongst a number of other to be his President in the said Court of Aides.
And whilst he was in this office, it pleased God to call him to know him,
about the year 1554, after a strange fashion.

About twenty years before, whylest he was a student at Poictiers, it pleased
God to make him see Master John Calvin, passing then that way with the
Archbishop of Tillet, whom he was content to hear speaking honorably of the
knowledge of God in general, but when he spoke of the pure service of God, he
made astaye there, as one very zealous of that religion wherein he had been
carefully brought up. Yet so it was, that even from that day, there remained
some scruple in his conscience, that it might well be, he might be deceived,
and that his mind ran upon oftentimes as he confessed afterward: which was as
you would say, a preparatiue to nourishe this little seed, until it came to
budde forth and spring, at such time as God had appointed it.

After this it fell out on a day, that standing at his door, there came a
certain stranger to him, by a wonderful providence of God, whom he knew not,
but seeing him to be a man of some quality, and one that wanted relief in his
extreme poverty, turned to him very humbly, and made him a long discourse in
excellent Latin upon the cause of his misery. And finding him to be a man well
qualified, caused him to come in even into his study, to feel him the better
to the bottom at his leisure. Then this poor man, as one sent from God, began
to discyfer out frankely unto him all the abuses of the Popish Church, and to
show him the true and only way to serve God. And after he had heard him
patiently, he rewarded him, and prayed him notwithstanding very earnestly to
come no more to him, so afraid he was of the fyers which were prepared against
them which were suspected the lest that might be, for the doctrine of the
Gospel: as in deed this poor stranger, not long after, was tried in the
furnace at Paris.

But after this, Peter de la Place, left not tourning both the Scriptures and
all the old fathers, even to the very scholemen, to find some means if it were
possible, to take away this scruple which troubled his mind day and night. By
this means in shortspace, God touched his heart, and opened his eyes, and
caused him to behold the light of the Gospel, in so much as after ye death of
King Francis the second, he declared him self openly to be of their number
that made profession of the reformed Religion. And about that time put forth a
treatise concerning our Calling, to King Charles the ninth that dead is, and
shortly after put forth an other treatise in printe, touching the right use of
Moral Philosophy, with the doctrine of Christ.

So that when the troubles increased, for his own safety, he departed from
Paris, and withdrewe himself to an house of his in Picardie: where all the
time of the troubles he gave himself wholly to the study of Divinity, as
the only and true Philosophy, (said he) which is able to minister to man
true joy and comfort in his griefs and miseries: and used oftentimes to
exhort his family to the fear of God, and exercised them in prayers. And
some part of his time also he gave to write how matters of Religion and the
common wealth passed, diverse pieces whereof, unawares to him were imprinted,
Anno 1565.

When these wars were ended, in the year 62, he went and presented him self
to the King, to purge him self of many false bruites which certain evil
willers had cast out of him in the war time: at what time, after that his
Majesty was satisfied with his answers for his defense, finding the late
Prince of Conde that dead is, in the Court, he went and did his duty to him:
who, for his part, received him so courteously, that from that instant, he gave
him the charge, and made him ouerseer of all his household affairs, which he
took in so good part, that in all matters that concerned his honor, he spared
neither goods, nor children, nor him self, so careful he was of his service.

Five years after, when the troubles began afreshe, he withdrewe himself
again, from Paris to the Castle of Ve in Valois, which belo^ged to his
nephews, by the right of Mistres Ragonde Luillier his wife, to whom he was at
that inscant, tutor. During the time of these wars, he suffered great per
secutions: but neither the loss of his office, nor the sale of his moveable
goods, nor the seasing upon his immovable, troubled or disquieted him so
much, as the discourtesies did which he received at their hands, of whom he
ought in courtiesie have reaped great hope of help, as of them that were
nearest to him in blood, amongst all which, I can not let pass one unspoken
of, who showed him self very barbarous and discourteous, and is a Cou^seler of
the Court, (how be it I am content to concele his name) and did once not only
know the truth of the Gospel, but that more is, made open profession of it,
but afterward forgot himself so far ye he played as lewd a touch as might
be with the said La Place his kinsman. For whereas he professed the religion,
yea and that after the first troubles, perceiving that God proved his children
somewhat sharply, he revolted by and by, and seeing himself in some danger by
threats cast out against the^ that had been of the religion, to avoid all
suspicion of grief that he might conceive for his reuolte, or of desire to
return to the company of good men, he purposed with himself to commit some
notorious act, as he forthwith performed it in slandering and giving forth the
worst speeches he could, against this Peter De la Place, taking this occasion,
which I will tell you, to make some show of his doing.

Peter de la Place, was tutor to his nephews, which were children to this
Counselers wife, and had, as I said before, withdrawn himself to a certain
castle of theirs. Hereupon this Counseler ceased not by way of sundry
slanderous requests and supplications, to forge and put into the heads of the
Court of parliament a thousand lewd and wicked practices and slanderous
reproaches: in so much as he caused this said La Place, while he was absent and
knew nothing of these matters, not only to be discharged of the office of his
tutorship, to his great reproach, but also gate forth a commission to get him
possession of the said castle, and to arrest the said La Place. Which no doubt
had been executed in so unhappy and trouble some a time, considering what
diligence he caused Tanchou and his archers to make, as if they had gone about
ye taking of some thief and murderer: had not God raised up a friend, who came
a night before and told him of the whole matter. Whereupon though he were in a
continual burning ague, yet he was constrained to save himself in the forest
of Rez, which is hard joining upon the Castle, where he light upon a stranger,
that took him in, whereas this Counseler not only against all right of
kindred, but also contrary to all humanity seized upon his Castle, cast out
the children of the said Place, and spoiled such goods as he had left there:
and beside all this barbarous unkindness, sent Tanchou and his archers to pursue
him. Who by this means was constrained to remain in the forest as a vagabond
a good sort of days together, until at length the Lord of Bouchauane
showed him this courtiesie, to take him very secretly into a little chamber in
his Castle of Coussy, where he was constrained to remain fast shut up,
comforting him self in these his distresses and miseries with the reading of
the holy scriptures, at what time he gave himself to some deeper consideration
of the excellency of a Christian man, and to write this little treatise.

Afterward when it pleased GOD to give his poor Church some breathing time,
he returned home to his house, and though there were some resistance made
against him by one that in the time of the war, had enryched himself with
spoil of his goods, yet he reentred into the office of his Presidentship, and
executed in without any reproach, being honored of all good men, and feared of
the wicked, until this cursed S. Barthlemewes day, ye 24. of August, the last
day of a number of honest men's lives, yea and of the very chief and flowers of
France. And amongst the rest was this man De la Place most cruelly murdered,
in manner as follows.

The 24. day about six of the clock in ye morning, there came to his house
one Captain Michel by name, an harquebusier of Charles the ninth, whom he was
the better content to receive into his house, because he took him to be one
of the Kings Scottishe guard, for many of them loved him very well, and offered
their service to him oftentimes. When this Captain Michel was thus entered into
his house, armed with an harquebouze on his shoulder, and a pistol at his
gyrdel, and a table napkin about his left arm in token he was one of the
murderers, the first words he spoke were these, that the Duke of Guyse had by
the Kings commandment slain the Admiral, and many other noble me^ of the
religion: and because all the rest of the Huguenots, of what quality soever
they were, were appointed to be murdered, he was come to this Gentleman's house
La Place, to deliver him out of this calamity. But yet he would they should
show him all the gold and silver in the house.

Then this Gentleman de la Place, amassed at the proudnes of this man, that
being but one in the house, and amongst ten or twelve persons, he durst use
such words, asked him if he knew where he was, and whether there were a King
or no. To whom this Captain answered with oaths, that seeing it was so, he
should go with him to the King, and so he should know his pleasure. When this
Gentleman la Place heard this, and misdouting that there was some great
sedition in the town, slipped out at a backdoore, thinking to save him self
in some of his neighbors houses. In ye mean season most part of his servants
conveyed them selves away, and this Captain having gotten about a thousand
crowns, as he was departing was requested by Mistres Marets daughter to ye
same Gentleman to condict her and Master Marets her husband, to some
Catholics house, their friend, which he did.

After this, the said la Place, having bin refused at three houses, was
constrained to come home to his own, where he found his wife very desolate,
and tormenting her self very pitifully, both for fear lest this Captain
would have cast her some in law and her danghter into the water, and also for
the present danger she saw her poor husband and all her family in. But
this Gentleman la Place, strengthened with the spirit of God, and with
marvelous constancy rebuked his wife sharply, laying forth before her, how
patiently they had to receive such afflictions at Gods hands: and so when he
had a little discoursed upon the promises that God makes to his children, he
put her in good comfort.

Afterward he commanded his men servants and maid servants that were left to
be called in, and as he used every Sabbath day to make some kind of
exhortation to his family, he gave him self to prayer, and afterward began
to read a Chapter of Job, and Master Caluins sermon upon it, and made a short
discourse upon the justice and mercy of God, who (say^ he) as a good Father
exercises his chosen people with diverse chastisements, to the end they should
not stay themselves upon worldly things. He showed them moreover how
necessary afflictions are for the Christians, and that neither the world, nor
the devil are able to hurt us further, then it stands with Gods good will
and pleasure to suffer them, and therefore we need not fear their power which
reaches no further then to our bodies. And after this, he gave him self to
prayer again, preparing him self and al his family to suffer al kind of
torments, yea and death it self, rather then to do any thing against Gods
glory.

When he had ended his prayer, one comes and tells him that Master Senescay
Prouist of the town house and a number of Archers were at his gates, and
commanded them to open the gates in the Kings name, and said that he was come
to guard la Places person, and to keep his house from spoiling by the
multitude: upon this occasion, this Gentleman la Place commanded the gate to be
opened, and so he came in and told him what slaughter there was made of the
Huguenots throughout all the town, and that by the Kings commandment, adding
these words amongst the rest in Latin, that there should not one be left, that
could piss against a wall. Notwithstanding he had express commandment from
his Majesty to see there were no hurt done to him, but to bring him to the
Louure, because he was desirous to be instructed by him of diverse matters
touching them of the Religion, which he had to deal in, and therefore that he
should make himself ready to come to the King.

This Gentleman la Place answered, that he would think him self happy for
ever, if before he departed out of this world, he might find the means to
give the King an account of all his doings and behavior. But for yt time,
considering what horrible slaughters were committed all the town over, it
would be impossible for him to get to the Louure in safety, without great and
most evident danger of his person, but he might well assurance his Majesty of
his person, if it would please him to leave such a number of Archers in his
house, as he should think meet, until the fury of the people were a little
appeased. Senescay granted him his request, and left him one of his
Lieutenants, called Toute voye, and four of his Archers.

Shortly after that Senescay was departed, the President Charon then Prouist of
ye Merchants of Paris came to the house, and after he had talked a while with
him in secret, departed and left him four of the town Archers beside the
Archers of Senescays company. All the day after and the night following, was
bestowed in stopping up and ramparing the ways into the house, and providing
pebbles and stones up into windows, so that by this great and painful watch
there was some likelihood, that these Archers were placed in the house for the
safety of la Places person, and to preserve his family from that common
misery that other felt, until Senescay came back the next day following about
two of the clock in the after noone and showed him, that he had express and
precise commandment from the King, to bring him, without any further delay.
This Gentleman la Place showed him as before, what danger there was for him in
the town, seeing that the self same morning, there was one of his neighbors
houses sacked. All this notwithstanding Senescay was earnest to ye contrary,
saying that it was a common use amongst ye Huguenots to protest great
humblenes, and say that they are the Kings most obedient servants and subjects,
but when it came to the point to obey the Kings commandment, they showed them
selves very cold, and it seemed by them that they could in no wise brook it.
And as for the danger, he said it was for him to go to the Louure, Senescay
answered him, that he would give him a Captain of Paris, which should be very
well known to all the people, to accompany him. While Senescay was thus talking
with him, a Captain of Paris, called Pesou, and one of the chiefest cutthrotes
came into this Gentleman's la Place his chamber, and offered to conduct him. La
Place refused him very earnestly, saying to Senescay, yt he was one of the
cruellest and wickedest men in all the town, and therefore desired him only,
seeing he could refuse no longer to go to the King yt it would please him to go
with him, whereto Senescay answered that by reason of other business he had to
do, he could not go with him above 50. pase.

Whereupon this Gentleman la Places wife, though she be a Gentlewoman on who^
god has bestowed many graces and blessings, yet notwithstanding the great love
she bare to her husband, caused her to fall down prostrate before the said
Senescay and beseech him to accompany her husband. But with that, this
Gentleman la Place, who never showed any token of an heart cast down, began to
take up his wife, and reprove her, showing her that it is not the arm of man
which we must have recourse unto, but to GOD alone. Afterward turning him self
a side, he espied a cross of paper in his eldest sons cappe, which he had of
weakness set there, thinking to save him self by that means, whereupon he
rebuked him sharply, commanding him to take that mark of sedition out of his
cappe, and laying forth before him, that the true cross which we must bear,
are tribulations and afflictions which GOD sends us, as most certain
pledges and earnest pennyes of that joy and everlasting life which he has
prepared for his children. Then seeing him self earnestly pressed by the said
Senescay, to go to the King, resolving him felfe to dye the death which he
saw prepared for him, took his cloak, embraced his wife, and desired her
above all things to have the honor and fear of God before her eyes, and so
departed with a most cheerful countenance.

Now when he was almost come to the street called la Verrerie, over against
the Cock street, certain murderers that waited for him with their daggers
ready drawn, above three hours, slew him like a silly lamb in the midst
of ten or twelve of Senescays archers which guyded him, and his house was
sacked the space of five or six days together. The body of this Gentleman la
Place, whose soul was received into heaven, was carried into a stable, at the
town house, where his face was covered with dong, and the next day after in
the morning was cast into the river.

Thus this great and excellent martyr of the Lord, whylest he obeyed the Kings
commandment, instead of Justice which he sought, found death by the way,
which was to him a beginning of the true life: and on the contrary side, both
to them, from whom so unjust, against all Gods law and man's law, and so cruel
and barbarous and more then brutishe commandementes, proceeded, and also to the
executers of such iniquities, cruelties, barbarities, and brutishnes, a most
certain beginning and entrance to an horrible judgment that hangs over
their heads, and over their posterity, though it seem long before it come.

Of the excellency of a Christian man, and the way to know him.
MY intent and purpose being to entreat of the woorthines of a Christian man,
The excellency common to al men.
I mean not in any wise to stand to discourse upon the excellency of mankind
wherein we do all communicate, and whereby the state of man surmounteth the
condition of all other creatures: a reason which moved the Philosophers to
recommend unto us so diligently the knowledge of our selves, according to the
old proverb given by Oracle, and framed by them to this purpose to cause us
not only to keep our selves within the bounds of modesty and humblenes, and
to teach us the weakness of our nature, but also to lead us to the
consideration of our noblenes and dignity, beginning by the vewe of the
building and workmanship of this world, as of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon,
and the Stars: and so from them to other creatures and living things of
diverse sorts, setting out Man, as the most excellent piece of work of all,
and the chiefest wrought thing amongst all the creatures, on whom it pleased
God to bestow most plentifully, and to enriche with that, which Heaven and
earth, and all other his creatures had but small portions of, who was therefore
called a Little world, and a miracle amongst all creatures, considering the
workmanship of his body, the iointes, the proportion, the beauty and use of
it with his members, his head above all his other parts, his eyes looking up
to heaven, to behold from whence he came: and again, the quickenes of his
wit, his discourses upon the heavens and the earth, and the secrets of nature,
his memory whereby he comprehends so many things and digesteth them,
compares things passed with things to come: Moreover his reason which as they
imagine is placed as Queen and Mistress in the wit in the highest seat of
understanding to govern the will of man, and to frame all his deliberations by
the compass of wisdom.

The excellency propre to a Christian.
I mean not, I say, in any wise to entreat of this kind of worthiness: but
minding to pass further, I purpose with my self to speak of an other kind
of excellency, which is propre and peculiar to a Christian man, which far
surmounteth without all comparison in all kind of prerogative and preeminence
the former, be it never so highly commended and set out by them which professed
themselves wise men, and were therefore reputed and taken for the wysest
amongst other. Which men notwithstanding or wise Philosophers being carried
away with an ouerweening and blind love of them selves, ouershot them selves
so far, as to say, that Man is able, by reason of such powers as he has in
him, A foolish praise of the powers and virtues that are in man.
and by his own strength, to discern between good and evil, and command
his lusts, and that he has it in him to govern him self, not only for the
framing of this earthly life, but also to lead him to Godwarde, and to the
attaynement of everlasting bliss and joy. Moreover, that as touching Life, he
has it by the gift of God, but as for Living well, he has it of him self,
and the goodness that is in man, man gets it of him self, in so much as no
wise and discrete man, says Cicero, ever gave God any thanks for it,
because, says he, we are commended for our virtue, and we brag and boast our
selves of it: which we could not do, if it were the gift of God, and came not
of our selves: adding moreover, that the opinion of all the world is this, that
as for worldly commodities, we have to crave them a^ Gods hands, but as for
wisdom, every man has to seek it within him self.

Mainteyning and publishing this false opinion, that what soever we do by the
conduct and guide of nature, it can not be but well done, and if man could
follow that rightly, which he has in him of nature, he could never do
amiss. And many other such foolish and vain sayings, which notwithstanding
(a thing more to be sorowed at) they ye make profession to be our instructors
in holy writ, do marueilously embrace: who by suffering them selves to be
carried away more then reason would they should, by this kind of heathenishe
wisdom, are fallen into the self same error, and have ascribed to man I
know not what kind of integrity and vprightnes both in his reason, and will,
in so much that even they amongst them which thought to speak more soberly and
modestly then the rest, as Chrysostom and certain other, have made such a
parting of stakes between God and man, that while they confess on the one
side, that we can do nothing without Gods help, they maintain on the other
side, that unless we bring some thing of our selves, the grace of God can not
help us: for as they say, all the matter lies not in Gods help, but we must
cast in our reckoning also: yea, and that it is in us to begin, and in God to
make an end, holding this for an undoubted truth, that GOD has given man
power to do well and to do evil, both when, and as him lists, and that he
is at his own choice, to take of them, which he will.

This I say, to show, how with all the light of understanding and vprightnes
of reason, A blindness, even in the knowledge of the excellency that is in man.
(whereunto they ascribe the soueraintie of the whole man, making it as it were
a Monarche and Emperor) man is blinded and daseled with the knowledge of the
excellency, which he labors in vain to find in him self by the knowledge
of his powers, and beholding all things that are within him. And so
consequently how much they abuse them selves, which think there is no better
way to move and persuade men to frame their lives accordingly as they ought,
then to put them in remembrance what goodly and precious things they have in
them, for thereby they will be moved to make some account of them selves, and be
more careful to keep them selves in their place and degree, shunning sin,
and following righteousness: seeing that all this can serve to no other purpose,
but to puff him up with vain glory and ouerweening of him self, and cause
him to weary him self in conceyuing a good opinion of him self, which will
not further him the worth of a pin, and then to undertake such things, as he
shall never be able to compass, neither by the reach of reason, nor by
accomplishing in deed what he intended. For the knowledge of a man's self,
according to the rule of truth, The true knowledge of a man's self.
stands properly in this, that man weye with him self the miserable state and
condition whereinto we are fallen through the fall of Adam, to the end that
having a right feeling of it as we ought, all vain glory and presumption may
be beaten down in us, with a deep consideration of the loss of our
vprightnes, and in stead thereof, of a corruption and fall from all goodness,
which is come upon us by reason of the corruption of our nature, Satan having
so fast footing in all the parts of our soul, that every one of us in him self
(as S. Augustine says) is become a Devil, enemy to God, and accursed on all
sides, to the end that being lively touched by this means with the feeling of
our vanity and frowardnes, we may be moved to come out of our selves, as void
and destitute of all goodness, and seek our excellency, worthiness, and
noblenes somewhere else, yea and be moved to sighe, and in sighing to breathe
after it with great desire to recover the same.

Whereby it appears how grossly they were deceived and abused which thought
to find the worthiness of man within man him self, and in that that is of man.
Their error, which have soght man's excellency in that which is of man.
The cause of their error is this, that the secret of their destruction and
fall, which came by our first fathers fault, and wherein they would needs seek
a fair and sound buylding, was not reueyled unto them. Whereby it came to
pass, that through pride which they conceived of them selves for that small
remnant of light that remained of the first beginning which was included in our
nature, (which they call a little portion of the Godhead) they spoke so
boldly and presumptuously of that which they knew not, and commended man for
that which in deed is not in him, and wherefore he is not in any wise to be
commended. And seeing the case stands so, that though man be fallen into a
miserable state through the fall of Adam, and the image of God in him be marred
and miserably deformed, yet he has some sparks left, whereby there remains
in him some dark light and perceyuerance of the excellency of his nature,
that is to say, of that vprightnes wherewith the first man was beautified and
made noble, so that the corruption of sin was not able to do so much, as
utterly to deface the image of GOD in us, but that there remained always some
little trace of it, thereby it came to pass, that men pricked and awakened with
the feeling of the relics of their first dignity and excellency (inwrapped
notwithstanding in darkness, and possessed with a perverse and presumptuous
desire to have somewhat of their own, and remaining within them) were easily
moved to praise and commend the excellency of their nature: which foolish
desire being once presented to the understanding and brain of each man, by the
same deceyuer that would needs persuade our fathers to become like to God,
there is not one of us that has not a root of pride deeply planted within
his heart.

Not that I mean to deny, but that little understanding that man has in him
even of nature for the maintenance of this present life, and that discretion of
good and evil engraued in his heart, yea and that piece of knowledge of God
which he has naturally in him, is not out of doubt excellent, in that it
comes from God: but I say, that all these things are defiled in man, even
as wine that has received infection by the unsavory taste of the vessel,
wherinto it was put, All the excellency of man, as of man, is defiled.
whereby the grace of his savor and goodness is gone, and has gotten beside a
bitter and unwholesome taste. Because, the judgment and discretion which he
has left to discern and make his choice of things, is partly imperfect and
full of confusion, and all the wit he has, becomes vain, as also his
will is tempestuously carried and full of phrensies accordingly as man is wholly
carried away with sin, and to be short, his understanding, and perceyuerance
which he has of GOD is nothing else, but very horrible welspring of errors,
as appears not only by the idolatries and superstitions which he inue^teth,
but also herein, yt whereas the heavens keep their natural motion, and the
waters their accustomed course, the birds make their nestes, and the plants
bring forth fruit each one in his due time, and to be short, no creature
subject to man faulteth in his work, man endued with knowledge, judgment,
discourse and understanding, is he that only erreth, and erreth in such sort,
that in the whole world, there is no fault, no disorder and confusion, but on
his part. So that, to speak truly, there remains not one drop of
vprightnes in his whole nature, so far is he from that excellency, whereof I
mean to speak, by reason of the corruption that is in him, as every man will
freely confess, that can and does rightly consider the heavy sight of his
decaie.

The common nature of man is not capable of the excellency of a Christian.
Wherefore seeing that this our nature, which is common to all men living, is
not capable of that excellency whereof I speak, we must needs say, that that
man of whom I speak, is transformed into an other new and more excellent
nature, whereupon God has bestowed a singular and wonderful virtue, which
far passes and surmounteth all that is in man, as in deed it can not be
found, nor be confessed to proceed from any, but from God, yea from the Lord
and savior Jesus Christ: by whom his good pleasure was to restore al mankind,
toward whom though ye soueraignecreat^r^ and maker of al things shows
sufficiently his fatherly favor diverse and sundry ways, yet notwtsta^ding,
until he show himself to man a restorer in the person of his only begotten
son, their conscience reproves the^ within the^ selves, and makes the^
perceive that by reason of their filthiness they are well worthy to be cast away
as wretched men and caitifs, and cannot be taken and accounted for his work
established in them. In which work is only and truly yt excellency whereof I
mean to speak, which is a work yt far passes ye work of ye first
creation of man, as it will appear more plainly hereafter, of which man when S.
Paul speaks, The wonderful work of God appears in a Christian.
he says yt the efficacy of ye might and power, yt is to say, of ye mighty
power of God is plentifully showed in him, because he sets forth in him,
after a wonderful sort his infinite virtue, according to the unspeakable
goodness, grace, and favor, which he bears to a Christian man.

The wonderful goodness of God which appears in a Christian.
And that it is so, to show it more particularly, our heavenly father not
content that he brought a Christian into the world, of nothing, and that he
made him not an ox or an ass, which he might have done, or a dog, or a
catte, or any other more bite and abject creature, but a man, that is to say,
a singular and perfect piece of workmanship, and that he made the world and
beautified the heavens and the earth with a perfect abundance, variety, and
beauty of all things, to lodge him in it, as it were in a great and sumptuous
palace, well and richely furnished with all things necessary, not content I
say, with all this, and moroeouer, that he had forgotten his unthankful and
detestable infidelity and felony, where he deserved to be cast of, and
deprived for ever of all his blessings: yet notwithstanding it pleased him, of
a certain more then fatherly love, and special favor which he bore him, not
only even from his birth day, and from the first hour that he brought him out
into this world, but even from his mothers womb, yea, and before he was
conceived, yea, and that more is, before the world was made (as he predestined
him to him self from everlasting) to elect and choose him from amongst an
infinite million of men, to mark him and set him apart, to exempt him from the
common state and condition of al other men, that is to say, from everlasting
condemnation and destruction which was prepared for him as well as for every
other man, to reserve him for him self, to adopt, and regenerate him in the
hope of life to an incorruptible inheritance kept in store in heaven, to be
reueiled to his elect at that day when all things shall be restored, and to
show in him the richesse of his glory, as in a vessel of mercy prepared to
salvation.

All the cause of this excellent prerogative and dignity, The cause of the
excellency of a Christian consists in the only goodness of God.
is not as we see to be sought any where else, but in the singular grace and
mercy of God, whom it pleased without any further regard or consideration of
any thing without him self, foreseing the fault and condition of mankind, of
his good pleasure to have mercy upon some, to set them in honor as vessels of
his mercy, and leave the rest in their judgment, giving grace to some which
was not due to them, and rendering to the rest that punishment that was due to
the^, being in his power to give to one part that which they deserved not, so
setting forth his grace: and not to give it to all, thereby showing what al had
deserved without further bestowing like mercy on all: for he made all things,
as Solomon says, for his own sake: yea, the wicked man to the day of his
destruction, according to the decree of ye good pleasure of his will, which
only is the souereine and high rule of justice that judges all the world: his
ways, which are mercy and truth being incomprehensible, as whereby he so
works, that they which obtain mercy at his hands, have nothing but his
mercy to boast of, and they that are left in their condemnation, have nothing
to gainesay the judgment of truth as me^ guilty, nor ought wherewith to
plead against him, in so much as on the one side, to show forth his wrath,
and make his mighty power known, he through great patience and meekenes
bears with the vessels of wrath prepared to destruction, and on the other
side, sets out ye richesse of his glory toward the^ yt he chose by his
grace, whom he prepared to glory.

For so it is, as S. Augustine shows it at large, Of the eternal council of
God, touching man.
where he speaks of ye predestination of God, that when God had resolved with
him self, to buyld the Monarchy of this world and all that is contained in it,
and forsawe, yt the first man should fall wittingly and willingly into death,
being pliable to good and evil, having not that given him to continue and
stand stedily in that state wherein he was placed: yea and that al mortal
creatures should be within the compass of his fall, and subject unto it,
having so appointed it by his incomprehensible counsel and wisdom, which has a
foreknowledge of all things joined with it, as also his mighty power which
governs all things by his hand, and yet notwithstanding minded to have a
little re^nant, even as you would say, an handful of men taken out of such a
great multitude, to serve for ye praise of the glory of his grace, he chose
and set apart from the multitude, one man amongst many, which should be in his
time ordained to be conceived of the seed of David, and should be borne of a
virgin, to wit, Jesus Christ, (finding nothing in all the seed of Adam worthy
his election, and such a prerogative and excellency) in whom also as in the
head, he chose to be members as it were of his body, such as it pleased him
freely of his grace to appoint before hand and receive to life: and by the
self same man, to join them unto him self, and allie them so together that
they should never be severed, having foreseen a great while before that in
Adam, there should come good of evil, and knew most undoubtedly, ye it
belonged to his almighty goodness to turn good into evil, rather then to
suffer that there should be no evil, and so accordingly disposed the life of
men and Angels, as that he would thereby show first what free will was able to
do, and the^ what ye gift of his grace could do, having shut all under sin,
that al might have need of grace.

And therefore as the excellency which I ascribe to a Christian, and proceeds
from this grace appears fully and abundantly in Jesus Christ, The excellency
of a Christian appears fully in Jesus Christ.
so is it powered out upon his members according to the measure of every one, by
which grace man was made a Christian when he first began to believe, as our
savior was made Christ according to the flesh, The excellency of a Christian
proceeds of that fulness which is in Christ.
when he first began to be man. And therefore was he called Christ, and the
other by his means, Christians, as streams flowing from the chief fountain:
for so had the Almighty purposed in him self to gather them unto him, All the
elect are gathered together in Christ.
by the blood of the Cross of Jesus Christ, at the fulness of time appointed,
finding them miserably strayed and scattred amongst the other, and set them in
their right state: which is, to cleave continually to him, being knit and
coupled together with him in a true and perfect unity, by engraffing them into
the body of his son. Who for that cause are called elect or chosen through
the good pleasure of God, to make a difference between them and the other
which were not kept in the said unity, but forsaken by a secret reprobation in
the secret counsel of God.

The cause and matter of the excellency of a Christian is wholly to be referred
to the love and goodness of God by Christ from everlasting.
So that, whether we mean the cause, or the matter it self of the excellency
of a Christian man, so far I am either from seeking or setting the said
excellency of a Christian, in man him self, as the Philosophers do, that I
mean not to ascribe it to any thing in ye world, but to that headspring of all
graces, benefits, and blessings, that is to say, to the everlasting love and
gracious goodness of God by Jesus Christ, in whom God chose his elect before the
foundation of the world, to adopt them according to the purpose of his will,
and made them agreeable in his well-beloved son, who was by him appointed head
over them, which by him and through him, and no otherwise, are restored and
settled in his grace, and made his heirs to enjoy his kingdom, where as
before they were a cursed raze of Adam, and inheriters of hell fire. for the
Father loves none, but in his Son, The vaiting and joining together of a
Christian with Christ
and vouchsafes none his inheritance, unless he first join them to his son
by a secret bond and unity, causing ye virtue of the head to descend into the
members, as the sap of the root of the tree goes into the graffe that is
imped into it, in so much as this spiritual bond and knot belongs not only
to the soul, but also to ye body, and so ye the Christian man is made one with
Jesus Christ, flesh of his flesh, and bones of his bones, yea eue^ so far
forth, ye they bear his name and person before God, and he rather respected in
their persons, then in his own. To be short, eue^ as naturally the only
beholding of the face of man moves us to love him and al his parts, though if
we should view his members apart we might happily find somewhat to mislike us,
and bring us out of taste, so fares it likewise with the Christian, who is a
member of Jesus Christ, being considered in Christ's face and person, which
when God beholds in his elect imprinted as it were in them by repairing of
his image in them, loves and cherishes them, as persons with whom he is well
pleased.

The excellency of a Christian does well ap pear in the fellowship which he
has with Christ.
So that to speak in few words, it is this fellowship which they have with Christ
(whereunto they are called, both by the communion of one self same spirit, and
one self same nature which is both in them and him) wherein the excellency of
a Christian man consists and appears very evidently, in that he is set in
the highest degree of honor being made ye child of God, by Jesus Christ
taking upon him that that was proper to man to be made man as he was, and to
make him fellow with him self in that that was proper to him self, by making
him the son of God. For thence comes this holy brotherhood, which he
teaches us, saying, I go to my father and your father, to my God and your God.
Being not ashamed (as the Apostle says) notwithstanding the great odds that
is betwixt him and us, to abase him self so far as to call us Brethren, eue^
after his resurrection, when he had put of al his infirmity, us, I say, which
are not otherwise worthy to be under his servants. The Christian man far
passes all other me^
Herein therefore ye Christian man appears to be a loft, not only above al
other living creatures by reason of his own nature, as the Philosophers say,
but also above all other men by this preeminence which those Philosophers knew
not at all, whereby he surmounteth the dignity of the first man, taking him in
the greatest perfection he ever had, because the grace of God is far more
settled and sure in the regeneration of the faithful, then it was in the first
state of man, that being greater which we have recovered in Christ Jesus, That
which the Christian recouereth in Christ, is greater then that which he lost in
Adam.
then that which we lost in Adam. For Adam had grace given him to continue in
goodness, if he had would, but to ye Christian it is given to have a will, and
in having a will he overcomes his lusts. So that Adam might if he would, but
he had no will, that he might: and the Christian has both will and might given
him. so that the first liberty was given to Adam, that he might abstain from
sin and not die: but that that is given to the Christian, (the pledges whereof
we have here, and look for the perfection in heaven) stands in this, that he
can neither sin nor die, because the elect are unseparably knit with Jesus
Christ their head, which bond makes them strong and steadfast, to cleave to
God for ever.

To be short, this excellency of a Christian man mounteth so high, that it
surmounteth the excellency of the very Angels, in this respect that the
everlasting Son of God united him self to man's nature, and not the nature of
Angels, minding to perfect and accomplish in it, the wonderful work of our
redemption: and afterward having glorified it with immortality, by his
resurrection, he set it in his heavenly kingdom above all principalities and
heavenly powers in all honor and glory: so that the Christian man being
partaker of the flesh of Christ which is carried up and reigns on high, has
part also of the same kingdom and glory. And though the Angels, as touching
their natural essence, are counted more excellent then man, yet
notwithstanding, because they have no head of their kind and nature, the Son
of God, even according to the flesh, surmounteth them in dignity and noblenes.

The chief excellency of a Christian is to be made like unto God.
To this purpose, S. Peter speaking of Christians, thought it not enough to say,
that they are a chosen generation, an holy race, a peculiar people to set forth
the great virtues of God, and a Royal Priesthode, consecrated to Jesus Christ,
to offer sacrifices, not for the remission of sins (For that office is
thoroughly accomplished by Christ Jesus his only sacrifice, the force whereof
remains for ever) but sacrifices of praise, and thanksgiving, and calling
upon the name of God, which are the calves of our lips, and sacrifices of
benevolence, and imparting our goods with the poor: he thought it not enough,
I say, to give them all these so great and honorable titles, but goes on
further and says, they are made partakers of the divine nature, which is so
excellent a condition, that ye head of man is not able to imagine or wish an
higher. For in deed, what can a man desire more, then to become like to God?
surely the spirit of man is not sufficient and able to comprehend the greatness
of this grace, and how it might be that God should vouchsafe to honor man so
highly, as to make him a God as it were, if we may so say, by making him
partaker of his divine immortality and blessed glory.

The Christian man is made perfect in Christ.
And therefore S. Paul writing to ye Coloss. and speaking to them as to
Christians, says that they were co^pleat in Christ, when he had said a little
before, yt al yt fulness of the godhead dwells bodily in him, showing thereby,
that this perfect essence of ye Godhead which is in Jesus Christ, did avail
the^ in that, that they received thereby their perfection also. And in that
that God is wholly in him, is to the end that when they once possess him, they
might obtain such a perfection in him, as none of us is able to atteine unto
by all the wit and understanding we have. Yea so far forth, that this knot
and bond is such an one, that Jesus Christ who works all in all, vouchsafes
the Christian thus much honor, The wonderful uniting of a Christian with
Christ.
that he cou^teth him self after asort imperfect, if he be not joined with him,
as S. Paul witnesses, saying, that the Church is the filling up of the body
of Christ. And therefore there is no marvel, if the Prophet David ravished
with great admiration of this so wonderful goodness and love of God toward
mankind, and being as it were ravished and besides him self cried and said,
Lord what is man that thou so regardedst him? that is to say, that of thy
gracious goodness thou have made him so excellent a creature? For if he should
consider and seek his first beginning from whence he came, where shall he find
it but in ye dirt and dust of the earth? if he mark ye place of his abode, he
shall find him self scrauling here upon the earth below: if he look to his
end, he shall see that his body shall be meat for worms. And yet
notwithstanding, says he, thou have so highly honored this poor creature
Man, that ye Angels serve him, as if he were a God. for thou have made him a
little inferior to God, and have crowned him with glory and honor, and placed
him ruler over the works of thine hands, and have put all things in
subjection under his feet: As if he would say, what occasion did dirt give
thee, that of it thou should make a creature to thine image and likeness,
whom thou would make Lord and Master of all the world? and put in
subjection under his feet what so ever is under the compass of heaven?
speaking of the man that is restored in Jesus Christ.

For in deed it is he only, and none but he amongst all living things that
is the only Lord of the world, Only the Christian is Lord of the world.
by recovering that interest in Christ, which was before lost in Adam who was
at the beginning made heir and Lord of all Gods blessings, but was afterward
dispossessed of them through his rebestion, and disobedience, so that all his
posterity has no other interest nor title, in the blessings of this world,
then thieves and robbers have, which take away other men's goods, the
Christian only except, to whom of right belongs the use of all things, as
S. Paul says, whether it be the world, or life, or death, or things present,
or things to come, al things, in a word, are his, because they were made for
his profit. All things are profitable to the Christian, yea, even sin it self.
And there is nothing, but God makes it serve, and turns it to his profit,
in so much that by a special dispensation of his providence, he causes that
the very sins them selves which man commits, turn rather to his salvation
then to his hurt, in that that by them he humbles them, and makes them better
taught, The Christian man is from everlasting in the heart of god
and more advised. To be short, this man is a creature yt from everlasting was
in Gods heart through Jesus Christ, The Christian is Gods treasure.
and therefore a thing so rich and precious, yt it may well be called Gods
treasure.

He desendeth to a more particular declaration of the excellency of a
Christian.
But seeing I have begun to dilate this excellency of a Christian man by the
everlasting counsel of GOD, which he determined and appointed within him
self before the world was, according to his gracious goodness fully set forth
in JESUS Christ to al them whom he has coupled together with him. It shall be
good now to come lower, and to treat of the matter, as it were by descent from
heaven to earth, and to show this excellency more particularly in a Christian,
The Christian is a creature whom the world knows not.
beginning at his regeneration and so going on from point to point, to show
how miraculously he is formed, nourished and brought up to ripe age: what
manners he is of, what his life is, and what his conversation, to set him out
after this sort in his colors and marks as he is. For in deed he is a new
creature, whom the world knows not, and an hidden treasure in a vile and
contemptible vessel, hard to know, if he be not well marked out and set forth
with lively colors. And lest in discoursing of it, we fall headlong into the
same error, which the wise fools of the world fall into in their discourses
upon his excellency, it shall not be amiss, if at the entry of the matter, I
warn every man to beware he presume not so much of him self, as to imagine yt
he has ought of his own, Man may bring nothing of his own to make him a
Christian.
as though he had in him self any piece of a cause, mean, or aid to set
forward this work.

Therefore, as I said before, that we have not to seek the cause or ground
work, or matter of this excellency any where else, The excellency of a
Christian proceeds from Gods election, and from nothing that is in man.
but in the mere grace of God according to his everlasting providence: so say I
again, to shut out all worthiness of man, that all the goodness and virtue that
may possibly be found in man, proceeds from the fruict of Gods election: and
therefore to be a Christian, that is to say, the best of all creatures,
proceeds wholly from the gift of our heavenly father, in that that whatsoever
he has given to Christ, comes to Christ, and in that that no one whit of the
world belongs to the Creature, were it not that the grace of god plucketh a
few out of destruction, which otherwise should have perished, the world being
left in that destruction, whereunto it is most justly appointed. And for this
cause Jesus Christ protests, that he prays the Father for them only whom
the Father has given him. For in deed, the grace of God finds no cause in
any man, why he should be good unto him, but man receives all of his mercy,
because it is Gods work only to save his, and for that end and purpose to
make them fit and meet to be partakers of his inheritance. And for a man to
imagine any pretense for man in this case, it were as much as if he should go
about to make him his own maker. And if we do well to give God all the praise
for the direction of this our corruptible life, how may we be so bold to
ascribe that unto our selves, which is without comparison a thousand times
better? to wit, the life that perishes not, but remains for ever, seeing it
is a great deal easier to make us men, then by our own industry and virtue
to be regenerate into a far more excellent nature.

Whereupon S. Paul, to take away all presumptuous opinion of man's brain in
this behalf, says, That it is neither in the willer, nor in the runner, that
is to say, neither in merit, nor worthiness, nor industry; nor will, nor
help, or any means that man can work, but in the only goodness of our Lord
and Master, who does all things according to the counsel of his good will, not
according to our works, but according to yt purpose of his grace, which was
given us by Jesus Christ before the world was. And this ought of a truth
content us and suffice us for all reason that may be brought: for to go about
to search out any other, what were it else, but to open a gappe for rash and
heady fellows to demand in like sort a reason of al his works, why he
bestows his graces more upon some, the^ upon other, as to begin with the
brute beasts, why God made them not reasonable creatures: and why he made not
a woman, a Man: and why he made not the ignorant, weak and poor man, a wise,
strong, and rich man: and as touching the elect them selves, why they are not
the same that their head is, why there is so great odds between them, why
they are so unclean, and he very cleannes it self, and so in sum, why he
bestows not his gifts, as well upon this man, as upon that man.

And yet my meaning is not, yt God has no reason for making such a difference
between his creatures as he has done: but because that reason is hidden within
his secret counsel, I say, it must suffice us for good and all, that his will
was so, and say with S. Augustine, that faithful ignorance is better then rash
knowledge: yea that such ignorance is learned, and the desire to know more, is
a kind of madness. Therefore when we see that some have this honor done them,
that they are made Christians as well as other, though we see no evident cause
why it should be so, we must learn to stand in admiration of the deepenes and
profoundenes of Gods judgment, which we may in no wise dispute of: and
therefore every one of us has to content him self to know, that to be a
Christian, is the workmanship, To be a Christian, is the only work of God.
as S. Paul says, and creature of God, created in Jesus Christ, and that God
has blessed him with all spiritual blessings in heavenly things in him, as he
chose him in him before the foundation of the world, being predestined of God
to adopt him to him self, according to the good pleasure of his will to the
praise of his grace, which he has powered out most plentifully upon him, in
all wisdom and understanding, and to whom he has given to know the secret
of his will, according to his everlasting decree which he purposed in himself,
being moved thereunto by no other means, then of him self.

Of the regeneration of a Christian.
So then to come to the regeneration of a Christian, and to speak of the order
that is holden therein, First of al we may not dream of any such generation as
Pythagoras made, who thought that as soon as yt bodies were dead, the souls
went into other bodies: neither may we dream of any natural generation or
power of man, whereby this man should be made after this sort: for this
generation is not wrought by a corruptible and unclean seed, as the first was
whereof we are all partakers, which can engender nothing but corruption,
nothing can be borne of flesh but flesh, whose end is death and destruction:
but by an other and second generation which is spiritual, made of an holy and
incorruptible seed, which is the word of God preached, whereby they that are
appointed to salvation, are called and begotten to him. For in deed there is
no other difference between Predestination, and Calling, but this, that
predestination is a preparatiue of that, whereof the calling is the effect and
the accomplishment: and yet my meaning is not, that this generation is made by
the virtue of one simple word uttered by the voice of man which sounds only
in the ears, which God uses as his means and instrument to call all men
indifferently to him: (for many are called, says Christ, but few are chosen,
and it were to set a mortal man to much on cockhorse to say that his voice
were so pearcing of it self as to work a regeneration in the soul of man) but
I say, it is by an other inward calling of God, by the means of the outward
which is wrought by man, which inward calling makes it self heard within, by
drawing the heart unto it, which receives the witness of the everlasting grace,
and without which, the voice of man could be but a bare sound that vanishes
away in the air, and a literal preaching and dead without any fruit, the
seed time being of little value, unless the increase be given by virtue of
that life which is reserved only for them which were appointed unto it from
the beginning of ye world, according to the purpose of God, and no purpose of
theirs: to whom only it is given to know the secrets of the kingdom of
heaven, all other men being shut out and left to their own nature, whereby
they are deaf and blind, conceived and borne such of the unclean seed of
their parents, having beside a darkened understanding which can not
co^prehende the mysteries of God: for his word is covered and hidden to them,
so that they can no more perceive the glorious and bright shining light of it,
then blind men ca^ the light of the Sun: for no man can come to Christ,
unless he have a special grace who thought that as soon as ye bodies were
dead, the souls went into other bodies: neither may we dream of any natural
generation or power of man, whereby this man should be made after this sort:
for this generation is not wrought by a corruptible and unclean feed, as the
first was whereof we are all partakers, which can engender nothing but
corruption, nothing can be borne of flesh but flesh, whose end is death and
destruction: but by an other and second generation which is spiritual, made of
an holy and incorruptible seed, which is the word of God preached, whereby
they that are appointed to salvation, are called and begotten to him. For in
deed there is no other difference between Predestination, and Calling, but
this, that predestination is a preparatine of that, whereof the calling is the
effect and the accomplishment: and yet my meaning is not, that this generation
is made by the virtue of one simple word uttered by the voice of man which
sounds only in the ears, which God uses as his means and instrument to
call all men indifferently to him: (for many are called, says Christ, but
few are chosen, and it were to set a mortal man to much on cockhorse to say
that his voice given him from above.

How a man becomes a Christian.
Now as touching the way that our heavenly father takes in framing a Christian
man, this it is, he first determined in him self to make the world and all
things to his glory, and men especially, to show to one sort of them which
are predestinate to salvation, his mercy, and to the other sort, his justice:
And to this effect he appointed for an only and sole Mediator, Jesus Christ
his only begotten Son, of one self same substance with him self, even God
everlasting, to the end that by him being made man, and the two natures united
and joined together in one in him, all corruption of mankind might be purged,
and all righteousness fully accomplished in him for all, as one able enough to
sustain the judgment of God, and worthy enough to appease his wrath by the
offering up of himself, the just dying for the unjust, and to sanctify all
his elect, abolishing their sin in them by the communication of his death,
and quickening them by his resurrection. To be short, he determined with him
self to give them his son, and in him what soever is requisite for their
salvation, as also to give them to him, and so to make them Christians, by
ingraffing them into Christ: which everlasting purpose and decree, he resolved
also to reueile unto them, when they should not think of it, causing him self
to be found, as the Prophet says, of them, which inquired not after him,
and at that time, that they walk after the course and fashion of this world,
even as Satan would have them, and proceeds in it after this sort.

First, to awake them out of the dead stepe of sin wherinto they are fallen,
he pricketh them with the sharpenes of his Law, and laying a number of
examples of his Justice before them, drives them into a fear, not minding to
beat them down into desperation, but to make them turn their faces toward
the Mediator, in whom they may find some place of refuge. And to this end,
he lays before them in conclusion his grace and fatherly goodness by the
preaching of his Gospel, He teaches them, he makes them apt to receive
instruction, assures them of their election, summoneth them to his heavenly
inheritance, stretches out his hand unto them to bring them thither, yea and
draws them unto him, fashioneth the^ new ears, lighteneth their eyes,
changes their stony heart into a fleshy heart, opens their understanding,
renews their senses, disposes and makes them fit to savor and taste his
word, which he sows, and causes it to budde and bring forth fruit in them,
makes them fit for his election. To be short, when he has once formed Christ
in them, he decketh and enricheth them with many gifts and graces, and whereas
they were far of from him, he makes them draw near to him, of strangers he
makes them housebirds, of wolves sheep flocking together under the great
pastor of souls: of natural, fleshly, earthly, and deuelish me^, he makes
them heavenly, spiritual, angellike and divine: and by this means translateth
them from the kingdom of darkness, into the kingdom of light, transporteth
them from death to life, and brings them into his own household. To be short,
having thus ingraffed them into the body of his Son, he joins and allieth
him self to them, he makes him self one with them, makes them his children
and heirs, partakers of his immortality and glory, and all this he works
by the inward virtue of his holy Ghost, and with an other manner of efficacy
then by restoring ye relics of free will, as some popish mates use to speak,
seeing that all the remainder that man has of this free will, serves to
nothing else but to sin willingly, to fly from God, to hate him, and to have
no will to hear him, nor believe in him, nor acknowledge any of his blessings:
and that more is, to think upon nothing but upon sin, and not to have so much
as one good thought.

Which wonderful order S. Bernard considering, cries out and says, Behold
an high and marvelous counsel, which has been published to us. God knows
the^ that are his, and what he knew, he has showed to men: he receives none
to ye knowledge of this mystery and hidden thing, but such as he has
predestined. And adds moreover, The mercy of God from everlasting to
everlasting on them that fear him: from everlasting, because of his
predestination: to everlasting, because of the blessedness which they look for,
the one has no beginning, and the other has no end. S. Augustine also says in
like sort, Is not this a kind of schole, far from the sense of the flesh,
wherein the Father is the scholemaster that teaches us to come to him, and the
Son of God is the word whereby he teaches, and which enters by the ear
even to the heart; where is also the Spirit of the Father and ye Son, who
teaches also jointly with them, and not a part, for the works of the Trinity
are inseparable, so that, if we see nombers come to the Son, it is by him
that makes many to believe in Christ. But where and when every man has heard
and been taught by the Father, we see it not, because this grace is hidden,
secret and heavenly, wrought by ye renewing of ye holy Ghost, powered out
plentifully upon the^.

The excellency of the power of God in the generation of a Christian.
And truly, it is a marvelous generation, which makes man a new creature, not
that he receives an other soul, or an other body in substance, but in
quality, by repayring the Image of God in him, by an inward renewing of the
whole nature, that was corrupted: yea it is a work which sets out unto us
no less virtue and power of God, then that whereby Jesus Christ was raised
from the dead, and placed at the right hand of God his Father. To be short, it
is done by the word, as by the ordinary instrument which makes us partakers
of Christ, and frames the Christian man, so that unless the door of our
hearing be opened by ye preaching of the Gospel, the word can not enter into
the heart, and the preaching is wrought by the voice of man assisted by the
inward virtue of the holy Ghost, which man must be sent by a special grace of
God, to declare unto us, that this special grace is according to his election,
which is according to his everlasting counsel, determined according to the
good pleasure of his will, which only is just and reasonable. And so
consequently both the calling, and other effects that follow, flow from the
everlasting Election, as brooks and streams do from their fountains and
springs.

The beginning of a Christian is from heaven, as is also his Conversion.
Therefore, seeing this man is not begotten either of flesh or blood, as other
are, but of God, it is not for naught that I said before, that he is such a
creature, as the world knows not. For in deed his beginning is not from
hence beneath from the earth, but from above from heaven, as also his chiefest
conversation and abiding place is there where he has God for his Father: and
here the church for his mother, The Father and Mother of a Christian.
but yet in deed heavenly: Mother, because she has her beginning from that
grace, that is above, and moreoner because she is gardien and keeper of the
seed of that life that perishes not, by which seed she conceyueth and
brings forth this man, and when she has brought him forth, she nourceth him
with the seasoned milk of understanding, The nourishment of a Christian.
that being nourished by it, he may grow up to salvation. And afterward she
fostereth him with strong and substantial meat, until he come to a perfect
age, that is, to the attainement of the latter end of faith. Even as the
natural man, conceived of natural seed is nourished with blood in his mothers
womb, and fed afterward with milk when he is once borne, as all creatures
are nourished with yt whereof they are inge^dred, even so the regenerate man,
conceived and begotten of the incorruptible seed of the word of God, is
nourished and fostered by it, receiving the same simply and purely, without any
mixture and hotch poch of any other man's invention with it.

For as there is no food more wholesome the^ the food of the word of God, The
nourishment of the pure word of God is wholesome.
if it be received syncerely as it is, so there is none more noisome and
hurtful, when it is marred with mixture of other things mingled with it, the^
is the false doctrine of men: And therefore God speaking to his Church by the
mouth of his Prophet Esai, says after this forte, My spirit which is in thee,
and my words which I have put into thee, shall never depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy children. And to the end, they may grow up and
profit the better, To make the Christian grow up and profit.
he seals and marketh them with the seal and mark of Baptism, adding
moreover an inward working of his holy Ghost, and afterward gives them for
meat and nourishment the Sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ,
though he be able and sufficient enough to bring them to perfection in one
hour. But it pleases him to have them grow up after that forte by little and
little, under the nourishement of this mother, so that who so is not conceived
in her womb, and brought forth by her, and fostered and nourished by her,
does boast in vain, that GOD is his Father: Bastard children.
For he begets no children, neither fostereth and brings up any, but by
his ministry, so that we may not separate these two things which God has
coupled together, to wit, that ye church is Mother to all them whose Father he
is, and whosoever is not begotten of her, is begotten of an harlot and has an
harlot for his mother, who begets children for the Devil, and to
everlasting death: seeing there is no entrance into ye life that remains for
ever, but only for them whom this mother keeps, and guydeth, and governs:
so that who so is out of her bosom, it is impossible for him to be saved.

And as in ye fleshly generation there is one lawful and an other bastard, so
fares it also in the spiritual generation, there is one lawful and an other
bastard. Two kinds of spiritual generation.
The first is after the spirit, and the second after the flesh, and are hereby
known the one from the other, that the one is conceived and made by the spirit
of truth, of a chaste mother, that is chaste and faithful to her husband JESUS
Christ: and the other, by the spirit of error and lies, of a mother that
plays the harlot with Satan, by breaking her promise made to Christ, and yet
notwithstanding kissing him with a treacherous kiss of Judas: and like an
hypocrite and dissembling harlot as she is, contenteth her self to have but
one half of him: the one being touched with a pure and natural love, will not
have him, unless she may enjoy him wholly, and therefore begets lawefull
children, which are children of light, begotten of the immortal seed, and
beautified with righteousness and holiness, to the end says Saint James, that
they may be the first fruits of his creatures, that is to say, chosen and set
a part from all other men, and sequestered to be an holy offering: the other, on
the contrary side, begets children of darkness to Satan, of a mortal
seed, which are workers of iniquity, whose understanding is corrupt, going on
from naught to worse, as they are led by the spirit of lies, by whom the pure
brightness of true doctrine is stopped up, and the service of God disfigured
with many kinds of superstitions, idolatry and wickedness, and yet under a
color of godlynes, wisdom, and holiness, whereby they draw other into error.

Amongst all the bastard children, the child of perdition is the chiefest.
Amongst all the children thus begotten, the man of sin and child of Satan
is most notorious, in whom the spirit of Satan dwells in all fulness, as he
does also in the^ which have received his mark in their foreheads and hands,
and this man lifts up him self above all that is called God, and above that
thing whatsoever it be, wherein the worship of the Lord stands, which he
transferreth to him self, in so much as he sits in the temple of God, and
makes war against Christ, with power of illusion and deceiueablenes, the
like whereof was never seen, bearing a book in his hand, which is sweet in
the hand, but bitter in the heart, and so much the more deadly to the
consciences of men, by how much it is pleasant to man's sense and reasone, and
gives him occasion to boast of him self. To be short this generation is a
crooked, unfaithful, wicked, and froward generation, and yet notwithstanding,
the number of them is great, they are far mightier and of greater renown
the^ the other, which are but a small flock, vile, abject, and contemptible,
as touching the flesh.

The generation of a Christian fur prounteth the reach of our sense^.
Now then, if the means of this generation of a Christian man, whereby he is
renewed into a new life, and made a new creature, be found to be such that
it surmounteth the capacity of our senses, we may not marvel at it, seeing
that even in this bodily life, we perceive such a virtue, as the reason whereof
our senses are not able to atteine unto. As for example, there is none of us,
but draws the vital spirit of the air, and we al feel the motion of the
air, whereby we both draw in our breath, and breathe out, and yet there is not
one of us that can tell, from whence this moving comes, or whither it goes.
And though every one of us feel in him self the virtue of the air, yet we
know not the beginning and the cause of it. Well then, if in this transitory
life which is gone in a moment, we see a marvelous virtue whereby God works
so mightily in it, that it passes the reach of our senses, how is it
possible to fetch within the compass of our understanding this secret work in
the heavenly life which passes the reach of nature, as though we were not to
believe any more, the^ we are able to perceive by ye vewe of the eye:

The light y^ is given to the Christian can never be wholly extinguished.
But the chiefest point that is to be considered in the excellency of this
generation is this, that even as the word of God is an incorruptible seed of
life, which brings forth fruit like to it self, and such a budde as never
dries up: eue^ so when the Christian man is once made partaker of this light,
it ca^ never be so put forth and choked up in him, but there remains still
some spark always in him, such is the force of the word, when it is once
kindled in the heart of man by the holy Ghost, who bears him witness that he
is the child of God, and causes him to follow his government and conduct
with a stedy heart, and holds him in a stedy and continual obedience of
justice. And therefore GOD says by his Prophet Ezechiel, That he gives them
that are his, a new heart, and promises the^ that they shall walk in his
ordinances, for his holy spirit pursues his grace in them, even to the end.
For though there be sometime some breaches and cracks in their faith, as we
have alteratio^s in us by reason of our frailenes, moved theru^to such violence
as Satan works against us, and though the brightness of our faith be daseled
with the thick and obscure darkness of tentation: yet notwithstanding it
cease not to have always an eye to God: and that more is, though it so fall
out (as we know it befell to David) that the Christian man be for a season so
dead on sleep with such a blockishnes of sum, that there appears not any
one spark of the spirit in him (as David prays for this cause that it may be
restored to him) yet notwithstanding this seed, whereby God regenerateth his
elect, as it is incorruptible dies not, though it be for a season as it were
choked, so that a man would think, that all reverence and fear of God were
clean put out. Yet there is a cole under these ashes, which kindles and
takes fire again, and this root comes to spurt forth, when a man would
have thought it had been clean dead. For the virtue and goodness of God is
such, that it surmounteth our malice, so that, that man may be sure of his
salvation, whom God has once touched with a lively faith, though it were but a
very short while: for he is constrained to say, that that which he believed, is
a truth, seeing it can not be by flesh and blood, but by the light of God,
wherein there is neither lie, nor deceit: and so consequently, that that has
been once found true, shall be ever true.

The work of the regeneration of a Christian is never left us perfect.
For this is certain that God, who began this work of regeneration, will
perfect it in the day of the Lord, and will not leave the work of his hands
imperfect, for his gifts and callings are without repentance, and look what he
has once given, he never calls it back, being faithful and constant in his
deeds, and keeps his truth everlastingly, without any alteration or change,
for it is impossible his word should fail: and it can not be but Gods decree
must remain according to the election, so that whomesoeuer he has once known
and appointed to salvation, that man can never fall from his salvation. The
stedfastnes of his counsel is showed to the heirs of promise that it shall
endure for ever, by two things which can never be changed, to wit, his
word, and his oath, whereby he has confirmed his promises, and it is
impossible he should lie in them. To this purpose, Jesus Christ says, that all that the father has given him, shall come to him, and he will not cast out one
of them that shall come to him. For this is the will of my father, says he,
that I leese not one of them whom my father has given me, but I will raise
them up all in the latter day. And again, My sheep, says he, hear my voice,
and follow me, I know them, and give them everlasting life, and no man shall
take them out of mine hand. So then, seeing he has promised that that man
which has once taken lively root in him, shall never be plucked up, all that
are of the flock of his sheepefolde, are out of danger to be ever cast away,
because the purpose of God which he has decreed upon them is steadfast, and the
sentence of peace is ratified to them, and therefore he takes them apart and
says unto them in this wise: fear not, little flock, seeing it is given to
you to know ye mystery of ye kingdom of heaven: for to whom soever the gift of
believing is given, to the same man is also given ye gift of continuance
according to the virtue of ye holy Ghost which is everlasting, whereby the
Christian man is, renewed and his force remains for ever: for otherwise were
it not continuing for ever, the grace of God, could not be always sure and
stable.

And on the other side, it were to great and doltishe blockishnes and distrust,
to doubt whether the Son of God in his prayers for the Elect, that their
faith might not fail them, were heard or no, seeing he sanctified him self
for them, so that their hope which is as it were a sure anchre for the soul,
extends it self beyond our death: and though the infirmity of the flesh
be great, yet seeing their fast hold hangs not upon their own virtue, but
upon the virtue and strength of God, seeing their salvation is kept under his
secret guard, as under a seal, and authe^ticall signet, they are out of all
danger, written as it were, and inregistred by the Almighty and everlasting
God in the book of life, so that all their sins are not able to stop the
course of Gods election, nor quench or diminishe the lest wise that may be,
the love of God, seeing that even by our very sins he takes occasion to
show us far greater love, he him self being unchangeable, and his decrees
everlasting, so that it is not in man's power to change his decree, nor to make
him go away from that which he has once determined. And in deed, it were
no meet thing for his unchangeable nature, neither might it be truly said of
him, that he lighteneth men to blind them, or buyldeth to pull down, or
planteth to root up.

Hereby now may every man see that the spirit of God, Of the true mark of a
Christian.
is the true mark of a Christian man, whereby he is known from all other, and
is of greater account then all other: not that Spirit whereby all creatures are
sustained and have their moving by a general strength and virtue which is
common to all living creatures, neither that spirit, whereby we have diverse and
sundry gifts bestowed severally upon each of us, but the spirit of adoption
and sanctification, which the Lord gives to none, but to the Christian man,
when he receives him into the number of his children, and separateth him from
all other, and sundreth him from the world, to bring him to the hope of the
everlasting inheritance. This Spirit, is for this cause called the Spirit of
sanctification, whereby the image of God is imprinted in a Christian, and
serves him for an earnest pe^ny of his salvation: and in deed puts him in
possession and a certain enjoying of his adoption, which is given him by a
special grace of God, to bring that to pass by a secret working, which he
determined in his secret counsel to bring to pass in him, by his mighty hand,
showing him self to be a most gracious and loving father by his testimony: a
greater then which, and more certain, we can not desire, because the light and
knoweledge which he gives, is accompanied with such a persuasion and
certainty of spirit, and with so steadfast and assured trust of heart in his
goodness, that it makes our understanding surmount all things, cleanses and
lifts up our hearts to heaven, and causes us to feel a spiritual taste of
heavenly riches. And to be short, causes a new birth in him, and transformeth
him: for this light which is in a Christian man's soul, differs very much
from all other light of knowledge, and from that kind of faith which proceeds
from the persuasion of man. For it is impossible for ma^s wit, to give man such
understanding of knowledge and faith as this is, which is wrought in him by the
mighty working of the spirit of God: and is this in sum, that the Gospel
which has no appearance of wit nor strength, is notwithstanding a wisdom so
high that it surmounteth ye heavens, and is ye mighty power of God to
salvation to every one ye believes to bring him to the kingdom of heaven: for
in deed, what can there be more strange, more foolish, more simple, or more
offensive to reason, then to hear a man say, that God is made and become a
mortal man, that life was subject to death, righteousness covered with a show
of sin, blessing subject to curse, that by this means, men might be ransomed
from death, and made partakers of blessed immortality, to the end they might
obtein life, and yt justice might reign, sin being once abolished: and last
of al to the end yt death it self and malediction might be swalowed up, and
therefore, that we have to enter into glory by ignominy, into felicity by
myseries, and into life by death.

And moreover that this light is far different from all other light of
knowledge and faith which proceadeth from the persuasion of man, it is
nedelesse to allege any other example, the^ the example of that faith, which
is in the most part of them yt bear the name of Christians, and yet have
nothing but ye bare title, and believe in Jesus Christ, because they have been
so learned and taught from father to son, and are so persuaded, because they
see other men yt live with them, believe so: the^ especially whom they take to be
the holiest, the wisest, ye most religious, and persuade them selves yt their
heads can not err: So yt if they had chanced to have been borne in any other
country or religion, they would as easily have been persuaded to it as to that
which now they hold and are persuaded is true, seeing their knowledge is
gotten by reason and discourse of man, not given of God and from above, but
cold, fleshly, weak, and very changeable which has no other end but a
peculiar respect of his own, and nothing less then to be touched with the
glory of God. Neither do they receive Jesus Christ for such an one, as he is
offered of God the father in the Gospel by a lively faith proper to the elect,
but while they profess his name, they spoil him of his glory, virtue, and
dignity, to transfer it to creatures and men's inventions in stead of the
Creator.

The Christian can not be known by the light of ma^s sense
And therefore it follows, that this man which we speak of, ca^ not be
discerned from other by any judgment of man's sense and reason, but by a
spiritual judgment by comparing spiritual things with spiritual things: for
the Christian people are but a small flock, contemptible, scattred here one and
there one in ye thickest of a number that are falsely called the people of God
and Christians, separate from ye common order of me^, and set apart as a
treasure yt God reserueth for himself, hidden and withdrawe^ from ye sight and
knowledge of me^, as a few grains of corn under a great deal of chaf in a
floor: so yt it is not y^ reputation, nobility, greatness, wisdom, devotion or
other apperance that man estemeth (be it never so glorious) which we have to
respect, as S. Paul wills the Corinth. to consider, yt there are but a few
called amongst them, a few wise, a few noble, a few mighty, and of authority
after the flesh: neither have we to respect the title, or outward profession,
ne yet the outward sign of Baptism, as it is written, All they that are of
Israel, are not Israelites, nor all they Abraham's children, which are borne of
Abraham, although they have all one self same mark of Circumcision: but it is
the mark of the Spirit of God, which we must have regard unto, seeing that all
signs and appearances, because they are only without, are unprofitable,
without the holy working of the inward, wherein truly consists the witness,
whereby a Christian man may know him self. The only mark of ye spirit of God,
causes us to know a Christian.
And the first effect of this inward virtue of God, is that which the Scripture
calls Adoption, which is not common to all the world, as Jesus Christ gives
us to understand, saying, That he prays not the father for the world, but for
them, whom the father has given him, as it is said in an other place, That ye
praise of y^ adoption is not of men, but of God, according to his good pleasure
and grace given in Christ, before the foundations of the world were laid. So
yt, even as it is said that Christ dwells in us by the spirit of God, even so
does man know, and is known to be a Christian, by the fellowship of the same
spirit, as by that mark wherewith the heavenly father seals and marketh the
heart of his elect in assurance of their adoption, and whereby he knows the^,
who^ he has quickened from heaven by his most secret virtue, which no sense of
man is able to perceive, being in it self very high and of great majesty, and
in outward appeara^ce vile and beggarly, whereby every Christian man has such a
conformity with Christ, that as the world did not know him, so neither is he
known to the world, for as much as ye world which has received nothing but
the spirit of the world, has no understanding of those things which savor of
ye spirit of God. For, says S. Paul eue^ as no man knows ye things that are
in man, but only ye spirit of man, even so no man knows the things of God,
but the spirit of God.

How a man may know that he is a Christian.
So then, a man can not judge, no not of him self, whether he be a Christian or
no, unless it be by the light of this spirit of God yt is given him, as S.
John witnesses speaking in the person of every Christian, saying after this
sort: Hereby we know yt God dwells in us, even by the holy Ghost whom he has
given us. And this he says upon certain knowledge, and not by gessing,
according to that that S. Paul says, That the same spirit bears record
with our spirit, that we are the children of God, and that it is not by the
spirit of the world, but by the spirit of God, that we know those things
which are given us of God, to wit, our adoption, and hope of everlasting life,
and more, that we are able to say and to say truly, yt they are none of
Christ's which have not this inward witness of the spirit: and again, that they
bear about them a witness and comdemnation against themselves, which doubt
whether they possess Christ and be of his body or no, having no assurance by
certainty of faith, to be out of doubt and upon sure ground both for this
present and for the time to come, and such faith as Jesus Christ assures us,
that all that are his shall have, saying in this wise to his Apostles, the
spirit of truth which ye world can not receive, because it sees him not, ne
knows him, but you know him, for he dwells in you, Faith is not without
assurance of continuance.
and shall be in you. And in deed seeing that continuance is a necessary thing
for salvation, what faith were it if it had not with it assurance and
certainty to continue: Now the truth is so, that whosoever has the gift of
faith to believe, has also the gift of perseverance to continue, considering
that faith is not a persuasion for a day and a thing that suddenly vanishes
away, but a steadfast and well rooted persuasion in the heart to continue all
the life long, as saint Paul boasts boldly in many places of his election,
and persuadeth other to do the like, upon a glory which is not grounded upon
any thing that is in man, but in the goodness of God, saying, That he knows,
whom he believes, and that he is one of them, whom Christ came to save, that
he wayteth for the Croune of glory, and is sure that nothing can separate him
from the love of God in Jesus Christ, as one that was chosen before the
foundation of the world was laid. Which thing fleshly me^ can not do,
because they know not what the spirit of God means, being not regenerate, and
for that cause having so base an heart, so vite, and abject through sin, that
they can not persuade them selves that God loved the^ so well, as to save the^
by ye death of his only and derely beloved son: and that he was so liberal,
as to give them paradise, unless they deserve it by their works and merits,
where as the regenerate have within them such a feeling of the love of God in
Christ, that they see them selves out of doubt most assuredly saved in him, and
can not persuade them selves that Christ, to whom the father has given all
power to judge, can pronounce sentence against those his brethren and members,
for whom he died upon the Cross.

If (...) knows himself to be a Christian by the effects of Gods spirit in
him.
This christian man has a certain knowledge by the effects which the same
spirit of God brings forth in him, that he has this gift of faith, for as soon as he causes him through his virtue and mighty working to feel a peace
and unspeakable rest in his conscience, that appeaseth, contenteth and
satisfies it, he mainteineth him in a spiritual joy, increases the study of
good works in him, inflameth him in ye love of God, makes him delight in his
word, and in the same word to behold the face of God, gracious, loving, and
favorable, with such an assurance of his grace, that he rejoices and
triumphs with a bold and cherefull countenance in ye hope of everlasting
glory, in so much that he is not afraid to present him self before his God,
and call upon him as his father, with perfect assurance to obtain at his
hands what soever is necessary for him: which were impossible for him to do,
if he were not moved and enforced thereunto through some heavenly and divine
working which surmou^teth all the force and strength that is or can be in man.
For from whence might this assurance of the good will of God proceed, and that
the man is cold and altogyther senseless of him self, void of al motion or
bent to pray to him, could be moved to repair unto him with such a confidence,
and yet godly notwithstanding, having grievously offended him, were it not
through his divine and heavenly working? which the Christian man may easily
perceive moreover by this, that it engenders in him a love of Justice, and on
the other side, a hatred of sin, by an alteration of affections, pleasures
and displeasures for other then before, to wit, such as are in all them, whose
eyes the Prince of this world has blinded. And yet notwithstanding truth it
is that he feels a continual combat of the spirit and the flesh in him self,
which hinders him from perfecting his works, but yet so it is, that though
sin dwell in him, yet it does not reign in him. And such are the effects,
whereby the Christian man comes to the experience and feeling of his faith,
and so consequently of his election.

For a Christian man strives not to enter into the Sanctuary of Gods wisdom
to inform him self of Gods predestination, and secret counsel, as some rash
headed and more bold then godly wise will needs intrude and thrust in them
selves most arrogantly in to the secrets of God, finding nothing in the end,
but a mase which they are never able to get out of: for neither is it mere
that the height of the wisdom of God should be subject to the sense of man,
to seek it out even to his euerlastingnes. But the Christian being once come
to the way of faith, and holding him self steadfastly there, is led from step
to step even to the King of heavens chamber, as S. Augustine speaks, there to
behold the treasure of his Election, and yet for all that does not become
thereby negligent and dissolute, but clean contrary, does after that more
diligently apply him self to God, Man is not made negligent by knowing that
he is chosen ^o life.
to be his instrument of righteousness, continuing most reverently to make his
election more steady and sure by good works, which God has prepared for his
Elect to walk in.

But we must understand that this light which is in the children of God,
whereby they have this knowledge in the^ selves that they are Christians, To
know in an other beside him self, whether he be a Christian or no.
reaches to no further assurance then of them selves: for they are not able to
know assuredly of an other man that that they know to be in them selves, by
reason of that hypocrisy that is naturally in the heart of man, wholly
disguysed and seized with a thousand kind of maskings, wherewith he deceyueth
not only other men, but him self also: and moreover because this privilege
of sounding men's hearts, and knowing men within, belongs properly to God
alone, who has reserved to him self the knowledge of his, as he keeps them
close under his seal, as S. Paul says, yea at such time as when they do not
as yet either know him, or them selves. Surely the sight of man is too weak
to enter so far as to judge assuredly whether the seed of the word of God be
rooted deep enough in any man's heart to remain there. And to the end he
should not rashly take so much upon him, God has taken a good order for it,
warning us daily by experience, how far his secret judgments pass our
capacity: for oftentimes we see those men brought into the right way, which
seems to us to be utterly cast away and lost children. As on the other side,
we see a number fall, which seemed to us to stand very fast, being true as S.
Augustine says, That according to the secret and hidden counsel of God, there
are many sheep without the Church, and many wolves within. And in deed there
is in a number such a likelihood and resemblance of a Christian, under a cloak
of hypocrisy, that they seem to have the self same beginning and ground of
faith, which the Christian has, which causes us that we can not judge of them
aright as we should. For moreover and beside that they have the self same name
that the other have, The hypocrisy of the false Christian has great affinity
with the true.
and be likewise in the self same company, make profession of one self same
doctrine, receive ye same Sacraments, they are sometimes touched with some
taste of the word of God, and do reverence it, yea and that so far forth that
they think it great impiety to contemn it and despise it: and have moreover
such a taste of heavenly gifts, as the Apostle him self witnesses in the
Epistle to ye Hebrews, that they seem both to them selves and to other that
see them, to be no less accounted of then the rest of the faithful. And yet
it falls out so in the end, that they show them selves to be nothing less
then Christians, thus deceyuing them selves within them selves, because they
can not thoroughly examine them selves in their hearts, nor make good proof of
them selves whether Christ dwell in them or no, so full of vanity is the heart
of man.

The difference between the true and counterfei^ Christian.
For thus it is, that the seed of the word of God has not life in them to
continue and dwell there without corruption: though it seem to have taken
root in them, yet it is not lively, so that, the taste which they get of the
goodness of God, is but for a while, and yet that too very confused, and very
irresolute: and in like sort, in that that God lighteneth their understandings
and makes them know his grace, it is without ingrauing yt true efficacy in
them, which is imprinted in ye Christians heart, which they never knew, because
they receive not the virtue of the Spirit of GOD in deed, ne have the true
clearenes of faith but only to serve them for greater condemnation, and make
them void of all excuse. And in that that God enters into their hearts, it
is to no other end but that his bounty and truth may be known to them by
the Spirit of understanding, without further communicating with them, the
Spirit of adoption. And this is the matter, why through want of ablenes to
comprehend his unchangeable will, they can not constantly embrace his truth
to have more then a light and sly knowledge of it, nor have an earnest desire
to love God heartily as his children do. Hereof it follows, that a man can no
more know certaynely, It is impossible to know who is a true Christian before
he dye.
whether an other man be a true Christian or no, then he can in a ground sowed
with diverse seeds, know one seed from another, which shall bring forth fruit
and which shall not, yea though it have already put forth, yea and that more is,
though it be al eared. Wherefore even as Solon said to Cresus King of Lydia,
that no man is to be counted happy before his deaths day, because of many
miseries and calamities which may befall him: even so I say, that no one man
can know an other man thoroughly to be a Christian, (which is the greatest
felicity that is) before ye end of his race. And for this end and purpose
Jesus ye son of Sirach warns us to judge of no man before his death,
because, says he, that is the time wherein a man shows what he has bin all
his life long. For some show evident tokens, that they were never other before
God but Christians, though while they lived, they never made any show of it:
other some, that they were never Christians, though they made show of that
profession a great number of years: for witness whereof, let us take Judas on
the one side, and the thief that was hanged with Christ on the other. This is a
point which we must always have recourse unto, that such as God has chosen to
be true Christians, shall be true Christians, what malice and unbelief soever
they be presently given unto: and they also on the other side, of whom he has
foreseen that they shall be wicked and infidels, shall be such be they never so
good and of a true profession at this instant: for he is a Christian always,
which has bin foreknowen and appointed before from the beginning to be a
Christian.

A Christian man may be known by the judgment of charity, and how?
So then it appears that there is great difference between that judgment
which a Christian man may make of him self, and yt judgment which he can
make of an other man, because the certeintie of faith remains shut up within,
and stretches not so far as to be known in other, seeing that the Spirit of
GOD bears all the elect witness of their calling. But as for an other man,
we know not how to judge of him, save only by the outward man, which is
often times very deceyueable. And yet notwithstanding by the judgment of
charity we may account him for a Christian, in whom we find, (so far as the
eye of man is able to reach) the seed of the word not to be fruitless, that
is to say, that ye preaching of the Gospel is not only in word, but in virtue
of the holy Ghost, considering that where we see the signs of Gods election as
we take them, there we have occasion to hope well, and not defraude our
neighbor of a charitable, friendly, and loving judgment. For moreover and
beside that the good nature which ought to be in a Christian, leads us to
hope well of all men. S. Paul writing to the Thessalonians, is so bold as to
assure them, that their election is of God, speaking as it were upon a
certainty of knowledge grounded upon notable signs and marks of the virtue
of the holy Ghost, which he says, he saw in them, by evident effects of
faith, the careful and paynefull charity toward their neighbors, the sure
hope and steadfast continuance in waiting for the manifestation of Jesus
Christ, with patience which surmounteth all wearines both of the length of
time, and of all afflictions of the world whatsoever. The like he does
particularly in Timothies respect, to whom he writes, That he assures him
self that faith and true religion dwells in him, judging so of the certeintie
of the cause which is hidden to all men, by the apparent effects thereof, even
as if it were visible. And so we in like sort, by a charitable judgment, may
judge, or at the least, persuade our selves well of our brethren, in whom we
perceive like fruits and actions of the Spirit of God, to take and account
them for Christians. For as we judge by the outward motions of the body, that
there is a soul in the body: so may we perceive by his works whether the
spirit of God be in man or no, seeing that even as the soul which lives not
idle within man's body, shows it self by that virtue and vigor which it
distributeth to the members, and to each part of the body: even so the Spirit
of God that is in man, is not idle but shows what power it is of, in the man
in whom it is: and shows it self effectually by a conformity with Christ
who lives in him, and gives life to his members which he communicates with
them, and powers out upon them by the virtue of his Spirit, which is, as you
would say, the general soul of all the children of God, not respecting the
substance, but the grace: so that, even as we think that the graffe is well
joined to the substance of the tree which it is graffed into, when we see it
bring forth fruit out of the same tree, by that strength which it receives of
the same root: even so we know that a man is truly ingraffed and made one
body with Christ, when through one self same force of the Spirit, he brings
forth fruit in Christ.

To know a reprobate man.
But as for the knowledge of a reprobate man, it is a thing so secret and hid
to men, that they can never judge of it certainly, unless they have some
extraordinary revelation: for be it that we find never so evil signs and
tokens in any man, what is he that can tell whether God have reserved mercy for
him in store or no, unto the latter end of his life, though he have spent it
wholly in wickedness? Therefore seeing in deed it was not expedient nor mete
for us to have knowledge to discern the one from the other, lest that thereby
we should become to cold in charity toward all, as we owe to all, as
though all men were our brethren in Christ, it is sufficient that this chafe
shall be separate from the corn at the latter day. So then this only
remains, that we know distinctly and particularly, what the operations of ye
holy Ghost in man are, because there is no other way to know a Christian man
outwardly by, but by them.

To know a Christian man by the outward effects of the holy Ghost in him.
And seeing it is so as we have said, that a Christian man, is a man made a new
creature as touching his nature, by a second birth, it is evident, that that
can not be done unless the first nature dye, and this man put of the flesh,
that is to say, his first nature which is corrupt, even that which we bring
with us from our mothers wombes, which is called the old man. For he can not in
any wise be capable of the kingdom of heaven, unless he be destroyed and
brought to naught by the sword of the Spirit, to the end that death may make
a riddance of all the operacions of the flesh, which sin woorketh in him.
For as long as we are Adams children, and nothing else but men, we are such
slaves to sin, that we can do nothing but sin, until we be made new men by
the death of the first man, and have passed by means of the communication of
the death of Christ to the participation of his life. These two points, to
wit, Mortification, and Vivification, Mortification and Sanctification, two of
the chiefest effects of the Spirit of God in a Christian.
which can not be separate the one from the other, are out of doubt ye
chiefest operations of the holy Ghost in a Christian man: so that, even as
Christ dyed to destroy sin, passing by death to everlasting life, in that
flesh which he took of us: eue^ so this man is dead in him self, and renewed
to a better life, accompanied with meet and convenient works for it: and such
as may witness that he is a true member of Christ, by casting down of him
self, of his own wisdom, and reason, and al his affections and passions,
which casting down of him self proceeds from a lively taste and feeling of
the goodness of our heavenly Father, whereby man is known to be Gods child,
and inheritour of al his blessings: for this can not be, but forthwith his
vile, base, carnal and earthely affections vanishe away and become dead in him,
by reason of ye great light of faith, which darkeneth and puts out all the
false light of our corrupt nature.

Wherefore, a Christian man does then in deed show him self to be a right
Christian, when the death of Christ, which has a certain force in it to
expel and cast out the wickedness of our flesh, and his resurrection whereby
there is raised up in us the state and condition of a better nature, show their
fruit in him, as by Baptism we are made partakers of this grace. So that al
knowledge of Jesus Christ, that has not this virtue to follow it, is naked
and bare, and al baptism without it unprofitable and nothing worth: for there
comes no man to Christ, or is received into the grace of Christ, but the
efficacy of his death appears in him, and bears about a show and token of
it in him by mortification of the flesh, and quickening of the spirit, as
having passed out of this first nature, into ye nature of Christ by a
spiritual renewing, which shows it self by framing the course of our life
anew, wherein who so is foremost, shows that he has profited most in the
knowledge of God: And we may not think that the benefit of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ belongs to any other, save only to them which
show forth a new life, and of a right affection of heart, some sooner, some
later, give them selves to holiness and cleannes, wherein stands the band of
the conjunction that is between God and us, and the certain badge and mark of
a Christian man, whereby the children of God, as S. John says, are known from
the children of the devil.

For which cause, Jesus Christ speaking of this sanctification to his Apostles,
Holiness of life is a mark of a Christian.
as of a true mark whereby his are known, said, that it is the wedding
garment, whereby as by the bridegromes cloth and liuerie, those yt are bidden
to the marriage feast are known from other. And the Apostle says to the same
purpose, that without this cleannes no man can see God, nor be joined to him,
to cleave fast to him. And it is impossible for ye spirit of adoption to be in
one, but the spirit of sanctification must also needs be in him: for by it, it
is that ye faithful are called Saints, as sanctified and made holy of God,
consecrated and set apart from profane and common use, and separated from al
earthly filthiness and defyling of the flesh, as the vessels, garments, temples,
and sweet sinelling sacrifices were, which might not be applied to any other
use, but that yt was holy and dedicate to the glory of God. For it is meet yt
they that are lightened with the doctrine of salvation, should show them
selves an other sort of men, then they that walk after ye vanity of their
own brains, being ouercouered with darkness, because they never felt any light
of truth: so that to find an holy man in deed (which is the Christian man)
we need not seek him in an heremitage or desert, An holy man.
or in some close place that is walled about, separate from the conversation
and common life of men, either in garments, meat, ceremonies, or what other
observation soever of corruptible things, and other form of holiness invented
by men, with a kind of wisdom in superstition and humblenes of spirit, and
contempt of the body under a cloak of feigned obedience, pleasant in show to
man's reason: but in the only working of the holy Ghost, which transformeth
souls into that holiness which he has him self, and frames them in such wise
to new thoughts and affections, that we may welsay, they are other then they
were before, as wrought in his knowledge and to his image that made them.

Which thing appears not only within through an inward and spiritual feeling
of a pure conscience cleansed from wicked affections, assisted thereunto with a
fear of God, and faith, and hope, and patience, and invocation: but also
without through a continual exercise of godlynes, void of all superstition,
which might lessen or darken the glory of God, by giving that to other which
is propre to him: as also by peace and joy of conscience, meekenes, goodness,
upright dealing, justice, sobrenes, temperancie, and other fruits of the
Spirit, contrary to the fruits of the flesh, which are, uncleanness,
filthiness, idolatry, sects, heresies, dissolutenes, enimities, seditions,
outrages, murders, theftes, and other such like, which are contrary to
brotherly charity, which Jesus Christ tells us, is an other mark and toke^,
Charity a mark of Christians.
whereby they yt are his are marked and known to be his disciples: not only by
a common love toward al men, as al men are one flesh, and al created and
fashioned to the image of God, but also by a special and mutual love the one
toward the other, so much the more straight and precise, by how much the image
of God shines more clearly in the^, whom he has before regenerate.

And therefore, as by mortifying of him self, the Christian man forgets
himself, and whatsoever is about him, to live in God, referring the parts of
his life to him, as to their only end, without further search of things that
please him self, but such only as please him, and as he well lyketh of for
the advancement of his glory: and so by this way and effect of mortification,
he casts of al consideration of him self, and lays aside all fleshly
affection to give him self wholly to his neighbor, and prefers the profit
of his neighbor, A difference between Charity and the love of our selves.
before any respect of him self: So that this love is an other manner of love,
the^ that natural love which is common to all men, which is nothing else, to
speak truly, but a love of our selves, accordingly as every man is inclined
to have a care of him self, and so to seek his own profit and gain:
neither is there any more agreement between them, then is between fire and
water, for the love of our selves keeps all our senses so well occupied, that
this Christian and brotherly love, is wholly banished. And therefore S. John
says plainly, That all they that have a right feeling of it, know that they
are passed from death to life, and they that have no feeling of it, remain in
death, that is to say, they yt are not regenerat.

And in deed, the bond of perfection consists in love, for love is the mark
and end whereat the Law shoots, and wherein the end of sanctification
stands, as whereby every one of us has to witness to the world, what love we
bear to God, whom we love in our brethren. Considering that this love is so
joined and coupled with the love of God, that it can in no wise be separate
from it, because it proceeds from the love of God. as the effect from the
cause: and in this it is, to be short, wherein stands the right rule of life,
whereby the Christian man frames all his actions and moderateth the right use
of the gifts of God. And therefore whatsoever is not squared by it, is false,
and all virtues be they never so excellent, are without it, nothing else but a
wind that puffs men up with pride and vanity, and a vain painting or
unprofitable sound, that is to say, a thing of nothing, and that more is, a
stinking and abominable thing before God.

And therefore we must not thus think of a Christian man, that he is a man
withdrawn a side from all other men, living in a solitary place, A Christian
man withdraws not him self from doing.
or so dedicate to a contemplatine life, as they call it, as that thereby he is
distract from such actions of conversation, as are behoueable and necessary
for the interteinement of the society of men. Seeing that men are borne one for
an other, to communicate one with an other for the maintenance of the society
of mankind, and not to bereue our neighbors of that duty we owe them, if we
will not be taken for thieves before God. Considering that we were not placed
here in this world, to live solitarily as wild and brute beasts, but to live
amongst company, and to make other men partakers of that which God has
bestowed upon each of us, and there is nothing wherein men are said to follow
God so much in, as in employing them selves charitably one for another, for
the profit of one an other, as in deed that virtue is the best of all, that is
profitable to the most.

The Christian man employeth him self to every trade of life, both private and
public.
Therefore the Christian, is a man that has daily conversation with other men,
that applies him self indifferently to all conditions and trades of life,
whereunto he finds him self rightly called, and therein employeth him self
faithfully to the profit of the society of mankind, whether it be in respect
of a private life and the dealinges thereunto belonging, or in regard of the
common weal, which is to be followed without his own house: So that as a
son he rendereth the duty of obedience and subjection to his father and
mother, and helps them as much as he can: as a servant, he shows him self
serviceable to his master, The private state.
and diligent to please him, as of a free and wylling heart, serving God and
not man: as on the other side, if he be a master, he entreats his servants
gentlye, and is not to rigorous and churlishe toward them, having always an
eye to God, as to the Lord and Master of all: and if he be a Father, he uses
his children lovingly and gentlye as is meet for their persons, trayneth up
and frames their lives in good manners: and last, if he be an husband, he
renders that benevolence, that is due unto his wife, for we may not think,
that this man is of the number of those, which forsake the remedy that God
has established for avoiding of fornication, and will needs upon an headines
overcome the necessity of nature, rashly assuring them selves that God will
help them, which he promises to none but to the^ that walk in his ways, ne
gives the gift of continency at all times to all men. Moreover the order and
frame of an household, is so well perceived in the house of a Christian, that he
him self as Pastoure of his family, instructs it diligently in the fear of
God, and keeps it in good and Godly discipline by continual exercise in
Godliness. So that in his house, you shall find the chaste wife, the shamefaced,
plain, and modest wife, decked without as she is within, no painted nor masked
thing, rendering true obedience to her husband, and having an eye upon her
family, her servants, her children: the master, father, and husband, every
one in his degree employing him self syncerely in his duty and office,
approving his doings as before God.

The public state.
And as for other offices and dealings which are not household matters, and are
without his house, as an inferior and subject, he reuerenceth the higher
powers, and submits him self willingly to them, as to Gods ordinances,
whose mind is by this order, to govern the world and keep the state of
mankind in peace and tranquillity, pays them their tributes and duties,
and submits him self freely and frankely to obey their laws and
commandementes, not only for necessities sake, because he can not resist the^
without danger of being punished for it, but also for conscience sake, bound to
do it by the word of God. He honoreth the Ministers and Pastors of the
Church, as Gods messengers, and shows him self ready and frameable to their
teaching, frequenteth the holy assemblies, and uses all means he can, that
are profitable to nourishe and maintain the service of God. And again, as
superior and placed in higher room above other, he has a care to execute his
charge faithfully, to defend the good, punish ye wicked, as al power and
authority of man, is bound to serve the commodity and profit of the subjects.
If he be a pastor, he ministers the world of God faithfully, and marreth not
the doctrine of salvation, he keeps it in his purity, and instructs the
people both in good doctrine and in good example of life, and usurps no rule
or violent and tyra^nous Lordlines over his fellows nor inferiors, but seeks
the commodity and profit of all them that he has charge of.

Where there is mutual charity, there is also mutual servitude.
So then the condition of all men is this, that they are mutually bound one to
an other, so that none of us may exempt him self from subjection, and
therefore wheresoever there is love of one toward an other, there is also
interchangeable service. The highest Kings and Princes that are, are not exempt
from it, for God has placed them in preeminence to serve, as the members of
the body, what preeminence and prerogative soever the one has over the other,
yet notwithstanding serve one an other, using such powers as God has put in
them, to the profit of the whole body, receiving no other commodity but that
which arises of the profit of the whole, and is powered out upon the whole
body.

The Christian looks always to his calling.
And for this cause, the Christian man has his eyes always bent upon his
vocation, as upon aprinciple and ground whereby to govern him self a right,
necessary in all things to keep the right way, takes heed he do not
ambitiously and rashlye, take upon him many and sondrie charges and offices
together, that he attempt not more then his calling will bear, and medleth not
rashly with those things which do nothing concern him, but contenteth him
self with his present condition, whatsoever it be, whether great or small, rich
or poor, honorable or base, he follows it and continues in it constantly,
and passes not his bounds, nor changes it without just cause. For his
affections are ruled, and he bridleth his natural and inordinate desires which
covet commonly more then man has, measuring his sufficie^cie by the will of
God, which he knows by that that befalls him: and takes all as from him,
and by his providence, whereunto he refers the whole conduct of him self,
and whatsoever concerns him, so that he will do nothing, nor take ought upon
him of his own head, but as a simple tool and instrument submits himself
to the conduct of his master and workman, who is the Lord of all.

The Christian is content with his state.
And therefore in what state soever he find him self, either high or low, rich
or poor, he bears him self always moderatly and as it were, in an even
balance. Having abundance of richesse, honors, and heavenly blessings,
plentifully poured upon his soul, he easily frames him self to bear him
self after one forte in what so ever state may befall him in this present
life, making nothing so great account of earthly and transitory things, The
qualities of a Christian.
as men commonly do very vainly and foolishly. To be short, the Christian
man, is a vessel of honor, sanctified to every good work, and a man that
walks after the spirit, and not after the flesh, and as Jesus Christ says,
that brings forth good things out of the treasure of his heart and spiritual
virtue that is in him: for he is the good tree which is known by his good
fruit it bears. And a man clad with the garment of light, that walks
honestly as at midday in all men's eyes, being a pattern of good works, and a
lamp lightened with the spirit of God, that shines in the darkness of the
world by pureness of life, in whom there is not one piece or portion of his
life, but yeldeth a good and sweet savor of holiness and love to the glory of
God, and profit of his neighbor, whether we mark his talk, which is poudred
with salt, accordingly as the word of God dwells plentifully in him, and
with such a grace, that he is able to draw his hearers by reason of the
commodity and profit that comes by his talk, either to his modest
behavior, being very meek and grave, or to his actions which tend to nothing
but to goodness and honesty before men, laboring by his good conversation to
edify all men to the advancement of their salvation. And all this he does,
because he feels within him self that he is called to so high a degree of
honor as to be the child of God, which moves him with great earnestnes, and
zeal of spirit to do an infinite sort of good works to the glory of God,
and to frame himself to be manered and facioned as becomes so high a state
as he is placed in.

Of ye mark of the cross
And though these marks may seem to be sufficient to know a true Christian
by, yet notwithstanding beside those marks of holiness and charity, there is
the mark of the cross, far more apparent and to be perceived in the sight
of man, to teach us more plainly that the knowing of a Christian man stands
in the mortification of the outward man outwardly, as the former did in the
inward man. And yet both the one and the other proceed out of one head, which
is the fellowship we have with Christ, which can not be separate from the
cross. For this cause the doctrine of the Gospel is called the word of the
Cross, because the world does for the most part, hate it, as the wisdom of
man is wholly contrary to the wisdom of God: the one seeking Gods glory,
the other, the glory of the flesh, which is so much the more enemy to the
first, because the light of yt Gospel discovers the darkness of it, and the
truth of the Gospel makes manifest and brings to light the errors and lies
of the flesh. And because the world can not endure it, and sees that it can
not maintain it self in credit, by ye may of truth and peace, it strives to
do it by the way of lying, cogging, and violence, as it is in deed a lier and
murderer: so that they that are accounted and taken for the wisest, the
discretest, of greatest power and holiness, are sometimes the first that band
them selves against the truth of God, as they that feel them selves most
grieved. And therefore the Jews did more hainously a great deal persecute
Christ then the Gentiles, and amongst them the Pharisees and high Priests more
then the common people: and so at this day, the chiefest among the false
Christians and members of Antichriste, are enemies to Christ, more than other,
so that the saying of saint Paul is found true in all times, That they which
are after the flesh, always persecute the^, that are after the spirit, for
though they do not imprison all, nor banish all, nor confiscate all Christians
goods, nor burn all, or behead all, or hang all, yet at the lest wise, there
are few that escape their scoffs and mockes, their reuiles and tantes, their
gnashing of teeth and shaking their heads at them. for this is a sure saying
and worthy to be received, that all that will live faythfullye in Jesus
Christ, must suffer persecution.

The condition of the Christian is to bear the cross.
So that all the children of God have this condition laid upon the^, to bear
the cross of Christ, as men appointed to it, by the will of the heavenly
Father, who has decreed this with him self to observe this order and means
in governing his children, that he will exercise the^ in this life with diverse
crosses: and for that cause Jesus Christ him self the elder brother was
consecrate by afflictions, and so entered into the preferrement of salvation.
And so must all they that follow him, bear the same liuerie and cognissance
upon them, as he him self showed plain enough, saying to his Apostles, No man
can be said to be his disciple, but he yt takes up his cross and follows
him. And in an other place, That the children of God shall be known from other
by this, yt ye world shall hate the^, as he was hated first. And in deed if we
look upon Abraham the pattern of our faith, which is a sufficient example for
us, Abraham a pattern of ye Christians.
so that we need not allege any other, we may see that the promise of
adoption was no sooner made him, but he was by and by commanded to depart from
his house, and forsake his parents, his own country, and other commodities,
to be a pilgryme and a stranger upon the earth, subject to a perpetual kind
of cross. And surely that man can not have a certain proof within him self,
that he is a Christian, yt is unwilling to be subject to this state and
condition, which the master, and head, and Lord of al, was willingly subject
to, for us all, and who is a lively pattern for us to follow.

Conformity to Christ by ye Cross.
For the free adoption, wherein consists men's salvation, can not be separate
from Gods everlasting decree, which has made all his children subject to bear
the Cross: and because there shall be none inheritour of heaven, which is not
first made like to the only son of God. For as he has ye chiefest and best
place amongst all the children of God, as amongst men, the eldest son bears
the name of the house: so is he appointed to be their pattern, by whom they
must be framed as it were by line and square, to the end they refuse nothing
which he was subject unto: and that in so doing, they may every one in his
place, be joined and coupled together with their head, who is placed in the
highest degree, not only to be above all, but also to hold all the^ that are
coupled together with him under one selfsame mark of brotherhood and honor.
And as kings and princes of this world, have their honors and praises,
wherewith they crown the noble and valiant acts of their soldiers: so this
sovereign King and Prince Jesus Christ honoreth the^ with his marks, whom he
uses in matters of great weight, to ye end they may appear glorious with him
above the rest.

A difference between the cross of the Christians, and ye worldly crosses.
Hereby it appears, how far this mark of ye cross which is proper to ye
Christians differs from yt which al ye world tastes of, seeing the case
stands so, yt there is no man can say, that he is exe^pt from misery,
affliction, and trouble in this life. For where as the other which al me^ taste
of, is a sign of ye curse of God to the wicked, this cross which is
sanctified of God, is a sign of blessing, and wholesome for the^ that bear it,
and therefore they should be deceived yt should think, that they which suffer
in this warfare against sin, should be thought to suffer for sin, as ye
worldlings do in their suffera^ces: considering yt by this cross, God
procures the salvation of his people, God procures our salvation by ye Cross.
using it as an instrument and help fit for the adua^cing of regeneration begun
in them, both to beat down the foolish and vain confidence of the flesh,
and to break in pieces the veil of hypocrisy, which is naturally in it, and
also to bridle his intemperancie. For the whole nature of man is so prone to
boast it self proudly and presumptuously of his virtue and sufficiency, that
it is needful to show him his frailetie, as it were with the finger and
before his eyes, to the end he may be humbled and brought to a more true and
certain knowledge of him self by a lively feeling of his feebleness, and learn
to call for strength from the Lord, as Jonas did, A comparison of man with the
sea
saying, I remembered the Lord when my soul was in anguishe: and David, when I
was in tribulation, I cried to ye Lord: for it fares so with men, as it does
with the sea, which would be infected and stink, if it were not troubled with
ye winds: so would men be naught, if they were not sometimes tossed with
afflictions.

The cross serves for a certainty of our election.
And therefore as ye worldly cross serves the world for a witness of his
condemnation, so this cross being sanctified is an assurance and certainty to
the elect of their election, adoption, and fellowship they have with Christ, the
rest of his afflictions being accomplished in the^, as me^hers and part of
him. For as Christ suffered once in himself, Jesus Christ suffers in his
members.
so suffers he daily in his members, as the head suffers with the parts of
the body. And so his members are made like to him by ye same trial of
obedience, with such a grace, yt moreover and beside they are quit and exempt
from those pains which all men deserve generally for their sins, they are
honorably marked with the marks and badges of his son, for yt the Father
appointed they should be afflicted for his name. And whereas he might by good
reason have made the^ suffer more grievously, yea as shameful thieues,
murderers, robbers, and evil doers, he makes the^ suffer as innocents laying
upon them the person of his son, and causes them to suffer for his sake.

God takes no pleasure in the afflictions of his, but chastises them for
their profit.
And though notwithstanding all this, they be subject to al miseries which al men
taste of indifferently, both good and evil, yea and worse punished then other,
in so much that if a man would compare their afflictions with other men's, a man
would think there were none so bad as they: and that God does (as a man would
say) spare the wicked, in comparison of his rigor which he shows toward his:
yet we may not think yt God takes a pleasure in their torments, and as some
profane men say, that he makes but a sport and pastime of it when he so
afflicts men, having cast of the care and providence of men's affairs. But on
ye contrary side, because God judges ye world a right, so yt no man can
escape his hands without punishment, he moderateth and co^passeth his
judgments in such sort, that he winketh at many lewd turns which the wicked
commit, as though he saw them not, and in the mean season corrects his
children as soon as they make a fault, and the reason is, because he has a
care of them to bring the^ into the right way, purposing to make his providence
especially known in the government of his Church, and so uses his arm
toward it, that by the way he gives us to understand, he has a fatherly
care of us, and provides for the salvation of his Church.

And truly if amongst men there be no father, of sound and right judgment,
but will chastise his children, because without correction, he is not able to
bring them to any good point: how shall God, who is a most gracious and wise
father, forslacke a remedy yt is so necessary? Which notwithstanding he uses
insuch sort, that whereas he punishes and judges the world, and shows him
self a severe and angry judge against the froward, he shows him self
gracious and gentle toward his. For by this means, he means to give al men
some little taste of that which he will show plainly in the latter day, to wit,
that he is the judge of the world, and loves justice in deed, and hates
injustice deadly, both to make the unbelievers so much ye more inexcusable, and
also for the great profit and commodity of the faithful, to whom he
protests, that he does not punish them for any hatred he bears them, but
contrariwyse because he loves them, to amend them by afflictions which are
the fruits of sin, and cause them to run more fervently to his grace,
having once felt in the cross what the anger of God is, so that whereas the
wicked are overwhelmed with the fearful torments which they suffer, ye
Christian by being made partaker of the sanctification of Christ, through the
cross, has an entrance into ye joys of heaven, and everlasting life with him.

And by this way it is, that God will prove every man's faith, The proof of a
Christian by the Cross.
whether it be buylt upon a sure rock or no, whether the seed of ye word be
fallen upon good ground, and whether the doctrine of the Gospel which men
have received, be gold, silver, and precious stones, or whether it be hay and
stubble, which the fire of tribulation consumes and brings to naught. For if
we make so great account of gold which is but a metal, that we will try it in
the fire, to make it please us the better, what marueill is there, if God try
the faith of his children after the same sort, to the end that when we are once
well purged from the dregs and filthe of incredulity which remains in us,
and are purified in the fournace of diverse afflictions, and so melted as it
were a new, our faith may be of like account before him.

And surely it will be as easy to know a Christian from an hypocrite by this
trial of affliction, as it is to know a piece of gold from a piece of brass,
when they come both to the anuile, and to be stricken with the hammer: for
brass will not be handled, but when it comes to the beating, it breaks, and
makes a sharp dinne and irksome: and gold sounds sweetly, and is pliable,
you may stretch it out both in length and breadth in thin and fine leaves as
you list: even so when an hypocrite comes between the anuile and the hammer
of affliction, The Cross discovers the false Christian.
he brasteth with impatience, he murmureth, cries out, and lame^teth in
blasphemies against God: whereas ye Christian praises God, gives him thanks,
and lays out his heart, submitting him self willingly under the lords hand
that strikes him. Again, by this exercise, God exercises the faithful to
contemn this life, The profit of the cross
and stirs them up, to think upon and desire the life to come, by drawing
them away by little and little, from the foolish and immoderat love of this
world, daseled with a vain show of fleshly and transitory things: and
moreover to join them together with his son in y^ fellowship of the cross,
that as he passed through a bottomless pit of miseries to enter into heavenly
glory, so should they also come thither by diverse tribulations, herein
honoring the^ in making them suffer persecution for righteousness sake, that is
to say, for the defense of his truth against the lies of Satan, or to
maintain al just causes, yt they may be in like sort renowned as his son was
here in this world, and through more sufferance of miseries wherein he makes
his gifts and graces appear which he bestowed upon them, be so much the more
confirmed in that fellowship which they have with him, to the end they may be
notorious for his glory, and profit of his Church, which is by this means
obediently governed.

But the chiefest thing that is to be considered in this point, and is in deed
the choysest piece of Excellency that is to be found in a Christian yt
suffers for Christ's sake, The excellency of a Christian man appears under
the cross.
is this, that where al me^ are naturally afraid, and are sad and pensive when
any adversities befall them, murmr against God, curse their life, and fall out
to banning against heaven and earth, detesting their state as miserable, the
Christian very quietly and contentedly bears patiently whatsoever befalls
him, not that he is so void of sense, that he feels no grief, or affliction
were not sharp and irksome to him, and very hard to bear, (for if it were
otherwise, how could he be pacient if he feel nothing) but because the cross
of Christ has this property, that being accompanied with the virtue of ye
holy Ghost, which sweteneth the sharpenes and bitterness of all afflictions, it
engenders peace and meekenes in the heart of the Christian, and also thanks
giving, for a singular benefit received of God, and causes him even in the
mids of the greatest calamities and griefs that may come upon him, to have a
joyful and merry heart, and receine the^ for an especial cause of comfort. So yt
these two affections, which are joy and sadness, great enemies the one to the
other, come and mete so together, that the one is constrained to give place to
the other, as the stronger and having the upper hand: in so much that the joy
of the spirit which is incomprehensible, and as S. Paul says, inexplicable,
in that that it proceeds from a taste of heavenly gifts, does in fine
swalowe up as it were yt Sadness and heaviness. On ye contrary side, they yt
have no taste of those gifts, can not choose but at length be oppressed with
sadness, when adversity assayleth them, for so much as the sweet and loving
yoke of Christ is to heavy a burden for them, because they can not comprehend,
how God our most loving and mercyful Father gives them power to suffer that
which they do suffer, to bring them to his bliss, whereas the Christian
mounteth up on high, and passes the very heavens, and holds him self quiet
and glad for the bliss of the inheritance to come, as though he had it in his
bosom, committing himself for the rest to Gods direction and government, as
in deed it belongs to the Father, who is of right above al fathers. And so
not measuring the punishments after the judgment of the flesh, but giving
honor to God, he acknowledge yt he moderateth his punishments both discretely
and wisely, so that there can be nothing found in them, but very good
moderation, and such measure, that though through weakness of reason he be not
always able to comprehend it, yet he has sufficient to comfort him self, in
that he knows that Gods indgements are most just and righteous.

To be short, eue^ as a man yt passes through a strong flood or stream on
foot, A fit comparison of the Christian passing through the miseries of this
world.
lest he sto^ble and fall down, sets his eye stedily upon the firm land
which he minds to atteine unto, and marketh not the swift course of ye water,
and so goes over safely and is nothing dismayed: so this man passing through
ye raging waves of present troubles, turns away his sight, his thought, and
all apprehension that he might otherwise have of the misery of the^, and
lifting up his eyes to heaven, beholds there with a spiritual regard the
inestimable treasures of ye heavenly inheritance, which he strives to atteine
unto, and by this means easily surmounteth al horror and fear of torments
and griefs which commonly make alterations in men's heads, and casts them
hedlong into desperation. So then he stands surely settled, The glory of a
Christian in the Cross.
and marches on without fear, and not so only but leapeth for joy, and
rejoices in his tribulations, and glories in the cross, which the world
accompteth shameful and infamous, as in a thing which he estemeth most
precious and honorable, and more full of majesty then all the crowns and
scepters, proud pompes and triumphs of all the Kings in ye world which ye
world wondereth at: for he casts his eyes upon Jesus Christ, and beholds in
him the glory of his suffera^ces, whereby he sees him self glorified with him,
and the reproach that comes by him to become nothing. And in deed, who is he
that will account that thing ignominious which is holy, yea and sanctified of
God: Or who would despise that, whereby the children of God are prepared to
glory, which is so far from being diminished in a Christian, through the
contemptible state of this present life, that it is rather augmented: And Moses
for this cause thought the reproaches which he suffered for Christ's sake, greater
richesse, then all the treasures of Egypt.

The cross of Antichrist and of his members has nothing like, it is hard,
The cross of Antichrist.
grievous and shameful to bear. For in yt they seek not to be justified by
Christ, they labor in vain by going about to justify them selves, and show
the^ selves to be enemies to ye cross of Christ, striving to bear ye
mortification of the cross by many foolish inventions, and withdrawing
themselves into desert and enclosed places, unprofitably punishing their bodies
without faith, without Christ, without hope, and without charity.

Thus the Christian man finds combs of honey in the Lions belly, The
excellency of a Christian in affliction.
that is to say, joy, gladness and glory, in the deepest and greatest
miseries that may be, and a quiet state in the gulf of te^pestes, as if he
were in full bliss, and already raised up from death to life, and set in the
heavenly places with Jesus Christ, in whom he possesses even from this instant
everlasting glory and bliss, and obteineth victory against the rage of
Satan, and all the force the world is able to use: for to him it is given, to
tread the Lions under foot, and also the dragons, and al other hurtful power,
because he marches under the enseigne of this valiant captain which will never
lose any one of his, though he employ them and exercise them in continual
combats, giving them this propriety, that who so continues steadfast and
constant in attayning to the glory of his hope, shall in the end obtain a good
and blessed end, whereas the man that is afraid to make head and set him self
courageously against all that exalts it self as enemy against God, is not
able to say that he has a true hope in him.

And though the truth be so, that there is not a weaker creature in the world
then man is, subject to the world, the flesh, and the devil, and al his
lusts, (though he had all the wisdom of the Grecians, and strength of ye
Romans, and virtue of the Philosophers, and righteousness of the Jews in him)
always in fear, care, and horror, and one that ca^ not resist the lest
tentation that may befall him: For he is but a shadow of vanity, yea and
vanity it self: yet notwithstanding being regenerate in Jesus Christ, he is so
strong and mighty, that though he cast of all worldly help and favor, as
David put of his armor when he went to fight against Goliath, he does not
only resist al assaults of the world, flesh, and the devil valiantly, but also
surmounteth all the enemies of God by the virtue of faith, which causes us to
see by her light yt all creatures are but fancies and vain fearebabes, which
have no power, but as pleases God to give them, whom we acknowledge to be our
Father, and one yt has such a singular and fatherly care of us, that he makes
al things serve to our salvation: even so much that this man being transformed
into God by love which suffers al things, can no more be overcome the^ God him
self, being sure in danger, at quiet in torment, in poverty rich, in sickness
whole, quiet in persecution, glorious in ignominy, blessed in misery, alive
in death, and therefore victorious and triumphant over all his enemies: for he
that is borne of God, says S. John, overcomes the world.

Hereby we may gather, how falsely they brag and boast of them selves yt they
are Christians, He that would exempt him self from the cross, abuses the
name of a Christian.
which will needs be exempt from this condition of the Christians, as though it
were possible to lay such hold upon Jesus Christ as we ought, yt we might
embrace him, and let his cross go: and as though we might be members of his
body, and not be partakers of his suffera^ces, which is but a mere and vain
imagination spro^g from hence, that we do not so rightly judge of the benefit
of adoption as we ought to do, but cast away the grace, which sanctifies us to
everlasting life. For ye truth is so, that who so professes him self to be a
christian and is ashamed to follow Christ who goes before him, does nothing
else but cut of him self, as you would say, and disauoweth him self to be any of
Gods children. For the Gospel is never without persecution, neither is there any
way to come to the kingdom of heaven, but by the cross, though a man would
never so much flatter and excuse himself, under a color of weakness, which is
nothing else, to speak as the truth is in deed, but infidelity, and a small
account yt man makes of the holy and sacred name of the Son of God. For
certain it is that faith shall always overcome ye world, but that can not be
done without fight. And he yt for fear to confess Gods name openly, alleges
for him self, that yet notwithstanding God sees his heart, says true,
because he can see nothing in him but infidelity and hypocrisy, having
nothing, to say the truth, to turn him away from Christ, but only because he
appears with his cross, disfigured and contemptible, and subject to ye
reproaches of this world, and calls us to be partakers of his afflictions. So
that this kind of men prefers ye glory of this world, before the glory
and majesty of Christ which is spiritual, and the ease and quietness of this
life before everlasting bliss: playing therein ye part of Esops cock, which
found a rich and precious pearl, and forsook it for a grain of corn, so
vile and abject and base their heart is, void of al noblenes and courage of a
Christian heart, which surmoneth al visible things, as one of the household of
God, yea his child and heir, being assured that there is a better possession
in heaven, then yt which men seek here upon earth. But seeing the world is so
brutishe, and full of malice and ignorance, we need not merueile, if we see the
most part of men draw back and cowardly cast away their weapons, as soon as
they see the standart of the cross set up, as we have seen more examples then
were to be wished: and that of such as at the beginning seemed to be valiant
soldiers, which had never learned to warfare and fight against their enemies
but with a certain hautines of courage, which passes away by and by, and not
to possess their souls in patience. These and such like are the apparent
marks and signs of the holy Ghost in a Christian man, and his true ornaments
and beauty that has put on Jesus Christ, whereby he may be known from other.

Now that we have in this sort spoken of the Excellency of this man, A man is
to be taken for a Christian, though he have not atteyned to a perfection.
by marking and setting him forth in his colors, no man may think that I will
take no man for a Christian, but him yt has these marks so perfectly as
though he were full of the holy Ghost, and renewed with such vprightnes of
life, as though he wanted nothing. For if the case stood so, it were very hard
to find any such amongst men, for there has never bin man yet so perfect. For
when we speak of a Christian man, as of a man yt is truly renewed, and made
spiritual, just and without blame, we may not think yt the work of this
making a new creature, is a work done in a moment, or in a day, The work of
regeneration is not perfited in one day.
yea or perfected all this life long: as we may not also think, yt it is a
work which is wrought equally in all: for it is a work which God furdereth in
process of time by little and little, and as it were by degrees, according to ye
measure that it pleases him to give to each of us, until he have brought it to
perfection.

How a Christian man is said to be spiritual and righteous.
So that the spirit of God which is given to a Christian, does so abolishe the
corruption of the flesh, that there remain notwithstanding even to death
certain relics of the old man, but yet so that ye holy Ghost in ye end
gets ye upper hand: For it can not be, but he is the strongest whersoeuer he
is, and by the efficacy of his moving, he holds men necessarily in stedy and
continual obedience of Justice, as the seed whereby he is regenerate, is
incorruptible. By means whereof, though this man yt is so regenerate, abides
notwithstanding in the flesh, and sin dwells in him: yet according to his
better part, and in respect of the spirit that in the end rules in him, he is
called spiritual, so yt though there be at this present no such perfection in
the world, but there may be some fault found with it, notwithstanding he is
already counted, as it were, inreprehensible, and without blame, who is
regenerate and of a right heart tends to this mark. And I thought good to
add this point, to the end that no man should discourage him self, though he
feel not a perfect regeneration and crucifying of the flesh in him self, and a
full and whole quickening of the spirit, but lay yt before him which I spoke of
before, as it were a pattern whereby he has to form and frame his life,
shooting always at the perfection, as at a mark which he must always leuel
at, considering how small a thing it is and of little account to enter into the
list of the Gospel, unless we labor and strive to come to the end. for the
chiefest wisdom of ye best, is to draw on further, and to go on more and more,
as the calling of a Christian man requires: nay no man ought to think of him
self that he has profited but smally, that can feel in him self some sign
and witness of that fellowship he has with Christ in his death, and resurrection
through new motions of an unfeigned heart, which strives in deed to godliness of
life. Considering that God of his free goodness vouchsaueth yt holy affection
which he him self planteth in the hearts of his servants this honor, that he
takes him for a Christian, which is not so as yet properly: for man can not
come to this happiness in this life to be clean from all sin, and to have a
fulness of faith and pure charity. And in that that a man is taken to be a
Christian, it is by reason of the newnes of life that is begone in him through
the virtue of the holy Ghost, yt by his virtue quickens him, until he be
perfectly renewed: which ca^ not be done before the time that we shall have put
of ye mortality of these our bodies, and therewithal, the filth of sin.

An admonition to every one, that he should well examine himself whether he be
truly a Christian.
And therefore let a man examine his life, and sound his heart to the depth, to
know whether he find the marks of a Christian there or no: and in case he do
find them there, let him be as thankeful to God as if he had received the
greatest benefit in the world, being assured that his name is written in
heaven. And therefore let him with S. John skip for joy, and cry out with
Elizabeth, and enlarge his tongue with Zachary, and magnify the Lord with the
virgin Marie, for that it has pleased him to cast upon him, being but a worm
of ye earth, ye eyes of his great mercy, to make him taste such high things, so
rich and secret to the sense of man, that there is no eye can see them, no
ear can hear them, nor heart and understanding that can comprehend them. And
let that man know, that this secret was given him, to the end he should keep
this so great a benefit unto death, by increasing the same faith, whereby he
was received to be partaker of this benefit: for it is the end of a Christian
man's calling to go on more and more in obedience to Godward, and to strive
without ceasing to draw every day more nere then other to him, regarding on the
one side ye goodness of God on them that continue, and on the other side his
severity on them, which abuse ye treasure and bountifulnes of his grace. And
if on ye other side he can not know in him self yt he is a Christian chosen of
God, let him sobbe and sighe before his face, and pray to him to make him
partaker of his light and heavenly grace, to the end he may be out of doubt.
for he that doubts, has not as yet sufficient light in him, seeing the
efficacy of ye witness of Gods spirit is so clear and certain in his heart in
whom he is, That man is very blind yt can not persuade him self he is a
Christian.
that as touching ye point, there is no doubt. But we may well say that that
man is blind, peruers, and miserable, that can not persuade himself so much of
ye goodness, mighty power and truth of God, as to believe his promises which he
has made, and sworn, and pronounced so solemnly. And therefore let every man
strive with him self to make his election sure through a good conscience, and
sincerity of life answerable to the profession of his faith, and labor by all
means possible, that the world may know in deed that it is not in baine that
he persuadeth himself, he is a Christian.

FINIS.

