THE DECLARAtion of the Lord de la Noue, upon his taking Arms for the just
defense of the Towns of Sedan and Iametz, frontiers of the Realm of France,
and under the protection of his Majesty.

Truly translated (according to the French Copy printed at Verdun) by A. M.

LONDON, Imprinted by John Woolfe, 1589.

THE DECLARATION OF THE LORD DE LA NOVE, Upon his taking Arms for the just
defense of the Towns of Sedan and Iametz, frontiers of the Realm of France,
and under the protection of his Majesty.
THE deuoire of a Gentleman, making profession of virtue, consists (first of
all) in so well ordering and digesting his actions, that himself may receive
in them contentment: Afterward he ought to make such a splendor of them, and
to justify them in such sort, as the well minded may be satisfied, and the
ill disposed raise no suggestion to condemn them. And seeing it is so, that
honor (which is the reward of the fairest works) proceeds from such, who
after they have examined and find them worthy, will approve them: he then
that is desirous to be honored, ought to be very careful that his own
actions (if it be possible) be not blemished with any spot or stain: and
especially such as deal with persons of great and highest quality, herein
stand bound with chiefest regard. Admit they should incur but only the
detection of slander, which is so common in this unhappy age, when we see
that blamed which is most modestly done, and the contrary to pass with
commendation: may not this then serve as a lively touch or feeling, to admonish
such to render a public account, of the principal carriage of their lives?
What I have determined to do at this present, shall be some discourse of mine
own: to the end it may be truly known, what causes have moved me, after
so long rest, and even among the bonds of some particular promises, to take
these Arms for defense of the Towns of Sedan and Iametz, ancient frontiers
of the Realm, against such as have assailed them.

To many it is well known, in what miserable captivity I have been deteyned
the space of five years and a half, by those who have gotten little praise
for such rigor, wherein happily I had longer continued, if they had not
proved the uncertainty of humane affairs: but God is to be bountifully
blessed for this bitter adversity, wherein I have learned that, which the most
sweetest prosperity would have made me misconceiue.

The time being now come of my deliverance, I was taken forth of my dark
habitation, to be brought to the place, where I received the sentence of my
liberty: but with conditions, no less hard then mine imprisonment had been:
notwithstanding I accepted them joyfully, in respect they surceased my long
heaviness. I must say then, that the first cause of this so desired benefit, was
the bounty of God, who now remembered mine affliction. The second, the prisoner
that I took, for whom I was exchaunged, and who was of greater price then I.
And the third, the bond of one hundred thousand crowns made by the King of
Navarre on his goods in Flaunders, for the assurance of my promises, not to
bear Arms against the King of Spain in his countries.

This accomplished, I was delivered, and then I went toward Nancy, to make
proof of satisfiyng certain other points, which are couched within mine
Articles: to understand if my Lord the Duke of Lorraine, (over and beside the
aforenamed surety) would be likewise bo^nd for me to the King of Spain, in
the said sum of one hundred thousand crowns, and if he failed, one Prince of
Allemaigne, or one Canton of the Zwitzers. That I should also de^liuer my
second Son, to be one year as an hostage in his Court. Beside, that the said
Duke, and my Lord the Duke of Guyse, should promise by writing a part, signed
with their hands: that I should not bear Arms against the King of Spain. In
all these bonds these Spaniards bound me, as if they had received occasion of
fear, that so slender a Solidiour as my self, should come soon or late to
hinder the course of their victory: from which thought I was most furthest off,
for my desire stretched no otherwise, than to gohome to my house, there to
repose my self, and give God thanks for saving me from the shadow of death and
the grave.

Being arrived in Lorrayne, I spoke with the said Princes, to know if they
would favor me with this bond: whereto they very liberally co^discended:
provided, that his most Christian Majesty agreed thereto. To him I went, and
could not obtain his consent, except I would promise him, that I would not
enter Arms without his express commandment: this I likewise granted. Soon
after he wrote to my Lord the Duke of Lorrayne, that he might answer for me to
the King of Spain: which he did, under these conditions, that I should be
bound to him in a hundred thousand crowns, with all my goods, as a gage of
his bond, for the satisfaction: afterward, I should promise, not to bear Arms
against him, nor his estate. Like promise I made him also, in case it went not
against my dutiful obeisance, of service and fidelity to the Crown of
France, and to the King my Sovereign Lord. All these matters ended, I
departed from the said Princes, having been very courteously entertained by
the^, and then I went to Geneua, where I made my choice of aboade, during the
time of this miserable war. At the end of two months, my Son, whom I
sent for from the King of Navarre, came to me, and I sent him in hostage to
Nancy, here he was gently entreated while he there remained.

See here successively the pure truth of all my promises and bonds, and the
causes of my liberty discovered in due order. Which I have done, to the end
that many, who are over hasty in censuring the actions of others, either by
humors, ignorance, or bad information: should be better advised, and not to
condemn me without they first had heard me, as I know diverse already have
done, within more than six months: at which time (with all their vigilancie)
they could not reprove me of any speeches, that happily might be thought
worthy reprehension. But these good censurers do not in the mean while
forethinke themselves, how they rashly attempt in causes against their
Sovereign Lord, and likewise against their native country.

In sooth, if I would have shrunk from my words, being pressed thereto by
mine own particular interests, I should have been an handsome subject. As for
the strange Army raised, if I would have gone therein, I could have had no
mean place or authority: seeing that Monsieur de Buillon, and my cheifest
friends, who were employed in the conduct thereof, called me, and would have
deferred more to me, then I could well covet or desire. But I excused my self,
and would not outgo the limits of my promises, because I could not with credit
do it. And many Gentlemen yet living, who were at the preparation of the said
Army, know, that I went so far as Strasbrough, through the instant
entreaties then made to me, by letters from the Lord of Buy, that I should
parle with my Lords the Dukes of Lorraine and Cazimire, chiefly with Monsieur
de Segur, to compound for their passage through Lorrayne, and that all had
agreed (because it was given me) that I should be admitted to this business,
where the one nor the other should be circumuented. But being there arrived,
and not finding the letters of the Princes before named, and contrariwise,
seeing on both sides courage enkindled, and hatred increase, the Armies on
foot, and their swords ready drawn, I thought that the time for me to be
employed was past, and agreement should now be subject to observation:
wherefore I would not wrap my self between these two tempests, least my
reputation should be impeached by fortune. And I did write to my Lord the
Baron of Ausonuille, who was then at Phaltz-bourgh, the cause that then did
withhold me.

Within a while after the said Army being overthrown, more through
themselves then the strength of the contrary part, the remainder driven back
toward the Alps, and Monsieur de Bouillon, who was the chief, ouerwearyed
with so great travail, came to rest himself at Geneua, where an exceeding
fever took hold on him, whereof he dyed ten days after. And being yet in
perfect memory, he disposed himself to make his testament, whereby (among
other things) he ordained, that his chief countries should remain under the
protection and service of the Crown of France, and desired that his Majesty
would maintain them under such conditions, as they had been in former times.
And after he had named Monsieur de Montpensier tutour and governor of
Mademoiselle de Bouillon his sister, whom he left his sole and only heir: he
charged me also with her wardship of her chief countries, with power there to
use and command. Which I accepted, for the desire I had to be employed in
matters profitable to the Realm, and forthwith I went into Allemaigne, to
pass thence to Sedan. But being advertised, that my Lord the Duke of Lorraine
had brought his siege before Iametz, I stayed, and that for two reasons: The
first, because I would not travail alone in danger of so many armed men, and
loose my self against my will. The other, seeing the said Duke had begun this
war contrary to the opinion of many, and of my self likewise: I should be
thought (in respect of what I had promised) scant master of my senses, to go
cast my self down headlong, and so with the council of my Lords the Duke
Cazimire and Deux-ponts, and other my good friends, I embraced the way of
negotiation, rather then that of force.

Being then returned to Geneua, I sent to his Majesty, to advertise him of my
charge, and how my intent stretched to the benefit of his service, hoping he
would not misconceiue of mine enterprise: humbly desiring his highness, to wish
my Lord the Duke of Lorrayne, not to whet his anger upon an innocent ward, and
to forbear to touch Sedan and Iametz, frontiers of his Realm. He wrote to me
again, that he would send the Lord de Rieux, to cause the siege to be raised
from Iametz, and that Monsieur de Montpensier should go with speed to Sedan,
for the better disposing of the affairs there: beside, he thought good that I
should not need to go, because order should be taken by these means. For the
rest, he commended mine intent, and would assure himself of my undoubted
affection to his service, and the general good of my country, whose safety I
would evermore seek by all lawful means.

This letter received, I paused thereon, for the opinion I held, that the
commendation, entreaty, and provision of so great a King, would suffice to
remedy a mischief that pressed so far. But having attended for the space of
three months, and seen that the words of his Majesty were disdained, and
that one of the Towns was now to be defended from a furious assault that the
other likewise would go forth in Arms, against them that made their fields
void and desolate, and that my Lord the Duke of Montpensier could not (for
good considerations) proceed so far as to these places: Seeing likewise (on
the other side) many good Frenchmen, and others of the Religion, not only to
write to me, but to tell me, that in respect of the charge I had taken on me,
I should receive reproach, and be accused to have failed in honor, and
against the fidelity I owe to my Sovereign Lord: if I would not travail with
hand and heart, for the conservation of these oppressed Towns, which were
under the protection of the King, and how I might sufficiently behold, that
against effects of such puissance, it were in vain to bring unnecessary helps,
but rather matter of like consequence. This being undoubtedly true, I should so
acknowledge: yet I imagined, that lawful and reasonable proceedinges, ought to
outgoe such as are governed by violence, especially for mine own particular
regard.

In this sort I prepared my self to go into Allemaigne, where I discoursed
with certain Princes, friends to this Realm: to see by what means they
could warrant, that which it seemed the Frenchmen would loose, and strangers
occupy. They pleaded that this difference arose on small occasion, and could no
way be so boldly decided as by Arms: since that to a County of Monbelliard,
who had received as great an injury, they would deny to make satisfaction. Now
as each one knows, that the Allemaigne iron will not be moved without a
strangers gold, and that the one being not seen to glister abundantly, the
other stands still without motion of stir^ing: This made me resolute to
travail to Sedan, which I performed, passing overthwart Lorrayne and France,
with no small store of dangerous perils, and being there arrived, I
understood the truth of the state of Iametz, (the defenders of which place are
worthy great praise) which rather stood in need of favor, then now to come
to the sharpest terms: yet was I advised to attempt the likeliest and
sweetest course, causing to be proposed to my Lord of Ansonuille, a most
ancient and honorable stay in actions of hostility, for certain months, as
well to win time in woorking on the entraunces, made by Madame of Aramberg,
near kinswoman to Madamoyselle of Bouillon: as also the better to dispose
affections in seeking the means of agreement, rather then to follow these
threatenings of ruin. These conditions would be no less for the assaulters,
then for the people assailed, nor of less honor to either: But they having
examined them, would neither make any account thereof, or answer, happily for
some opinion they hold, in staying on their advantage and hope, rather then
in their consenting: which will be an occasion, to give a long course to the
evils that this little war has engendered, and daily will do. Which to
prevent, Monsieur de la Ferte, who has often come to Sedan about business,
shall be witness, how I have twice said unto him, that my Lord the Duke of
Lorrayne shall gather no great fruit by this war: little gain shall he
get, and that uncertain, but store of charge and travail certain. The Town
of lametz, which yet resists, has cost him four times more then it is
worth: yet should not he set himself against an Orphane Princess, who
demands nothing but peace, whereto she will attain by dilligent search:
otherwise her country must suffer, and in such sort as it were to begin again.
As could I declare unto him by what means, and he should be suffised
therewith, when I speak that which is true, rather as a servant to his deserts
then an enemy, and as one that loves quiet, unwilling to use my Arms against
him. This likewise I willingly allege, to the end it may be known, that I
have attempted all courteous ways not to enter Arms: as well for the good of
both parties, as alfo for mine own contentment. Certainly, I am very desirous,
not to be constrained to draw my sword, which for these eight years has
continued idle, and chiefly against a Prince, to whom I find my self
beholding. Yet (in my judgment) he is brought into these newfou^d conceits, by
the bad and evil disposed council of others, rather then by his own natural
disposition: but I may not go contrary to that which reason wills, who
commands me when question is made of two bonds, to prefer the cause of
nature before that of getting, because it is a matter most honest, and among
these acquisitions, after I have judged of the difference between them, I will
stay my self upon the strongest.

Among all Nations, natural duty has evermore been, and yet is most
commendable, and the first (after God) is that wherewith we regard our
country, which comprehends in it all the other, and binds us so straightly to
her, that it is (as it were) sacrilege, to fail in the due performance thereof;
none of all the other may be equalled with this. As for the fathers and mothers
themselves, who have given life to their children, when the father shall be
employed in the right of his country: they must be constrained to hold him
excused, howsoever devoted in affection he be to them. Much more ought such
do, as hold any one bound only for a good turn or a simple promise: for it
is a necessary consequence, that a greater matter must be preferred before a
less. I have here before declared, that which I promised to my Lord the Duke
of Lorrayne, but yet with an exception, which although it had not been made,
ought evermore to take place, and I think that few people would make doubt
thereof, (albeit we live in such a season, wherein all things are debated and
disguised) that the duty to the Prince, must go before that is due to any
benefactour: who happily may say; Seeing I have been the cause of your
liberty, why will you offend me with Arms, which you promised not to bear
against me? Truly I cannot deny, that my Lord the Duke of Lorrayne has aided
me to defend the same more entiere and happy: but I should not have recovered
the same (which I speak not as ungrateful for his good turn) by the three
means that I have rehearsed, before he bound me to him: not having so small
a thing to promise in prejudice of my present bond, whereto nature, the laws,
and men of virtue, will that I cause it to hold due degree.

I know well it will be objected to me, that the party which I make to sound
so high, ought to enter into consideration, to see what is attempted against
it: which I would with all my heart. But what is this then, to assail Sedan
and Iametz, Towns under the protection, frontiers of the Realm, faithful to
the Crown, peopled with Frenchmen? is not this to touch France it self?
Truly a Roman Ambassador that returned from Hanniball, said most well and
wisely before the Senate, that the Carthaginians in beating of the walls of
Sagunt, a confederate City, battered the walls of Rome. And with as good
right it may be said, when with their Cannons they beat on Iametz, they might
do the like against them of Paris.

I have been patient so long time, that I have just occasion to fear, least I
be reproved of sloth and breach of faith (having a lawful calling for the
defense of the said Towns) if I should longer defer to employ my self in
their safeguard from ruin. King Frauncis the great durst hazard his person and
forces, not to have the dishonor of the loss of Landrecy, a little town that
was not of his Realm, but gotten in the country of another. The like did the
deceassed Duke of Guyze, for the defense of Metz, at the new entrance thereof
into the protection of France. Should I then fail, that am but a most simple
subject, yet retained for those that are incorporate with us, and where there
is not one house, but the Flowers de Luces floorish therein?

I shall be accused as ungrateful toward my benefactour, because I bear
these Arms against him: but it is in such a defense as I may not forsake,
without being convinced of more great ingratitude toward my Country and
King.

You have broken (says one) your promise, which upon so worthy a good turn
you heartily plighted. If things were in like estate as when I promised, I
should be restrained within my bounds: but one has changed them, in doing
that which I have showed, and unlawful beside to be done.

Let us now come unto the second bond, that the Tutour is to procure the best
for his ward, and aid her so far as need shall require. The Ciuilians hold
thus much, that they place this next after the father to his own child: and
will that the officer shall run to the maintenance of his wards right, so
soon as to that belongs to his Prince. This also reason requires: the one
being more destitute of a stay or help, then the other, and this bond
fulfilled, is so much the more of force, in that it is joined next unto that of
nature. So that I am not to be thought worthy of blame, if I have preferred
this before the other unto my Lord the Duke of Lorrayne: namely in this
respect, because it is to defend, and not to assail, the defense being more
just then the offense: seeing also, that this charge was deferred to me,
before my Lord of Lorrayne assailed Madamoyselle de Bouillon.

And that which has fortifyed me in this resolution, is in having examined the
cause of the war, I find that the assaulter has very slender right to do
so: for if it were about any ancient difference, he ought then to show his
titles, and to have them disputed by reason. If he have proceeded on any
iuiurie received by the deceassed Lord of Bouillon: why does he not as much to
the King of Navarre, to the Allemaigns, Zwitzers and Frenchmen, who have all
sacked and burned within the country of Lorraine? It is not reasonable, that
this little estate should satisfy for a common damage.

Ought we not rather imitate that course, that served for the wrongs done to
the County of Mont-belliart, to wit, a freendly composition, which was
proposed for fear of the Allemaigns: who notwithstanding evermore denied help
to this ward, left desolate in sight of every one? In mean while, God will
work for the oppressed, and succor them in time needful.

In fine, it is in vain to flatter, but rather speak the truth: does it not
appear, that this is for the dissipatio^ of the realm, when they make such
shouldering, where the one side is perceived, and the other masqued? What is
this but as the Parisians did, and as the attempt against Bolongne sometime,
and on the Marquisate of Saluce not long since? Is not this rather to run after
a pray, then it can any way seem for the Kings service, when they pill and
poll, and make such outrage? I will avouch that his wisdom is great, and yet
greater is the constraint that one makes of his will, in pressing it to
resolve on a war, wherein depends the ruin of France especially in one that
has a spirit of sweetness and peace. In this case, what ought an honest minded
man, courageous, and a lover of his country do? even to imitate the ancient
Frenchmen, brave heads and Captains, as the Bastard of Orleaunce, the Hire and
Poton, they seeing King Charles the seventh to despair of his affairs, being
assailed with most puissant enemies in the very entrails of his Realm, whom
he quietly suffered, as unable to remedy the same: yet would not these (for
all this) let fall their unconquerable hope, but with a fervent affection would
venture themselves in this immine^t danger, to find some mean to exempt the
same. And as for the apprehension of the present evil, some hold, it may be
that the King enclosed, will give a commandment to his subject, not to aid
his estate now perishing: shall this default be an excuse for the subject? We
owe love, obeisance, subjection and fidelity to our King, who notwithstanding
may die: but we owe so much to our country as cannot dye.

Truly I should be quit of my promise to his Majesty, not to bear Arms
against his service (albeit I must persevere herein, if I be used as an enemy)
seeing the horrible confusions that are in the estate: for all is corrupted,
force rules, the laws are without strength, and even already (by some) our
houses are divided, and our lives prescribed, so that we have no right of the
one or other. As for the royal authority, in what manner is it reuyled,
despited by the people, when butcheries shall be made of the subjects of the
Realm? Solon said, that in a division a good Citizen ought not to stand still,
but to take the better part, in respect of his bond to the commonwealth. But
our country is not only divided, but overthrown; not in peril, but already
lost. And in the midst of so great disorder, is it wisdom to sit with our
arms cross folded, when reason bids us throw them abroad? Shall I attend the
rest of the misfortunes of the Frenchmen, to depend on our wars, having bowed
their knees before the angry conqueror, or before a stranger, to the end that
afterward I may receive what Silla presented to his host at Praeneste? This
cannot be done but once, unworthy is it to do it twice. But when I consider
things to come, in how miserable estate we shall be, if God should call away
our King, (to whom I wish a long life, conioined with a just and peaceable
reign) we should not suffer to rise these factio^s of Burgundy and Orleance,
which now prepare themselves, the one to assail, and the other to defend: even
that will happen which is publicly spoken, and the blind themselves may see,
that this war begun, is rather for the state then any Religion: but from what
evil shall we then escape free, and of what goods shall we not be deprived?

Hatred, discord* spoil, and these Allarmes,
Cruelty, fear, fierce combats, and these Arms,
Shall be our pastimes, etc.
But now to escape these dangerous rocks, let us turn our selves to God, who
sendes these plagues for our incorrigible behavior. Let us weep for our
country, and succor her in this general shipwreck: let us every one help
to save her with our arms, and not with our legs, according as the Roman
said: who forsook Caesar's part being his benefactour, to embrace that of the
common good.

I pray God, that in this general assembly of the Estates, some one will crave
remedy for our insupportable evils: which may be thoroughly helped by ceassing
these Arms, and remain incurable by the continuance.

This is an heretic that speaks (some zealous will say) believe them not,
rather account them blasphemers. My Lords, be not offended at these words,
which may serve you to color the war you would prolong. Truly I am no
heretic, for I will live and die in this excellent and renowned faith of the
Roman Church, a member of the Catholic: even the same that Saint Paul (who
was the first Bishop thereof) instituted, as it appears by his sacred
registers. But shall I tell you who he is that we ought to account an
heretic, in these times wherein we live? It is the man that desires not any
peace or concord in the estate: that wishes the change thereof: that
strengthens himself with the enemies of the Realm: that expects the fall
thereof, because he might gather the pieces; who has equity and holiness in
his mouth, and injustice and hypocrisy in his heart. On the contrary, the true
Catholic is he that pursues peace and unanimity: that suffers patiently
the temporal government established by God over him: that holds in suspicion
those strangers who would procure our ruin: that would have the estate
preserved: and that shows in all his actions how he loves order, justice,
and piety.

For conclusion, I will love my country which has brought me up, I will
reverence my Sovereign Lord, although he would pursue me, I will defend my
liberty, goods, and life, if any would take them from me. I will aid the
French shamefully afflicted, in as much as I may honestly do, I will guard my
ward, as the laws command me, and I will oppose my self against strangers
(whatsoever particular bond they hold of me) who would against all right
possess themselves with the Towns of the Realm, for I am a true Frenchman.
Enough is said, the time requires I should do it, in respect it is followed
truly and justly.

FINIS.

