A BRIEF DISCOVERY OF THE FALSE CHVRCH.

Ezekiel. 16. 44. AS THE MOTHER SVCH THE DAVGHTER IS. 1590.

To the Reader.
IF THE GODLY YOUNG KING IOSCHIIAH, 2 King. 22. 11.
when he heard the book of* GODS law read, and compared the acts of his
forefathers, and the present estate of his kingdom thereunto, rent his clothes
in horror of the wrathful judgments of GOD, in that book denounced etc. If
the Prophet JEREMIAH in his time so sone after IOSIA^ his death, when the
defection began but to break out a fresh, and the whole land to decline from
the ancient ways of the Lord: upon the consideration of GOD his fearful
judgments to ensue, brake out into such deep and extreme lamentations, as he
wished unto himself a cottage in the wilderness, where Ier. 9. 1. 2.
he might remain, never to return to the land, to behold either the
enormities present, or calamities to come, but there continually to lament, and
shed forth abundance of tears, for the wrath and desolation that was to fall
upon yt, vvishing his head a fountain, and his eyes as buckets hereunto etc.
what occasion of sorrow and lamen^ation have all Christian hearts, in whom is
any compassion or love, in these dangerous (if not desperate) days*, where
the whole land (that I say not the whole world) ^ath lien so long, and is so
deeply set in defection, sin and security, where they are so universally
departed from the strait ways of life and peace, and are so far wandered and
straied in their own bywaies which they have sought out unto themselves, as
they have now utterly lost all knowledge of the true way, and have no will to
return: But though they be showed the way, and willed to walk in yt, yet
even the best of them stop their ears, vvink with their eyes, and turn away
the shoulder, least Zach. 7. 11
they should be converted and be healed. Others, and those the chief governors
of the church, and guides of the people, do not only deny CHRIST to reign
over them, or to yield him any fruit or tribute of his viueyeard, but most
bitterly persecute all CHRIST'S servants that are sent to them, to show them,
and call them back to the right way, rejecting CHRIST'S ordinances, as
intolerable in this common wealth. As for the Seers, Prophets and watchmen,
they do not only not blow the trumpet, not give warning, not discover the pit
and the snare, but cover them rather with flowers and green herbs: Yea they
are become as fowlers to allure and draw men into their snares. The best of
them that pretend a kind of reforma^ion, seek not to revive the true
pattern, or to call men to the Testament of CHRIST, from whence they are so
far departed; so much as to renew the old skarres of the old and first
apostacy from the Gospel. In the mean while, deteining the people by their
shifts and cauills under the yoke of Antichrist, corrupting themselves, even in
those (...). 10.
things which they themselves see and acknowledge to be evil and un lawful,
for the reformation whereof, they are earnest suitors unto the parliament. Thus
seduce they and deceive the miserable people and 2 (...). 2. 18 19.
themselves, leading them forward, and deteining them in the wrath of God. What
heart would not melt and break to behold this estate, 2 Timothy 2. 13
the breach whereof is like the sea, and in the best help that is administered at
any hand, but to cure yt with untempered and unseasoned ^am. 2. 13
stuff; the Prophets seeking out vain things, not discovering the ^am. 2. 13,
^4.
iniquity to turn away the captivity, but have looked out burdens, and
cawses of putting away and banishment. what tears? what sorrow can suffice to
deplore and lament this estate? but alas, private sorrow will not help
public calamity. Many mourners Ezekiel. 9. 4 5.
there would seem in these times for TZION, who (good men) can take no rest
for sleeping, ease, and belly cheer: feign they would have all things well,
but they neither refrain from the pollutions, nor cry out against the
abominations of the the times: and therefore, as Phil. 3. 18, 19.
they are not marked on the foreheades by the Angel clothed in linen with the
w^iters ynckhorne: so shall they not be spared by the auenging Angels that
carry the instruments of dissipation in their hands.

But now, whiles no man has courage, or opens his mouth for Isa. 59. 4.
the truth, whi^es no man stands up in the gappe, or offreth himself ^zek.
22. 30.
i^ this service, whiles the auntients keep silence, and fly as chaced hearts
before the enemies, whiles the leaders faint, and lie at the head Lam. 1.
of all the streets, as a bull^k in a snare, and are full of the wrath of Isa.
51. 18, ^0.
the Lord, and of the rebuke of GOD, what safety or hope is in this estate?
Yea what hear^ could endure to behold so many of his natural countriemen,
dear friends, and neer^ kins folk in the flesh, to perish before his eyes,
for want of warning or help. wherefore behold, ^om. 9. 1. 2. 3.
even the zeal of the glory of my God enforced me, as also the tender love
and care of the safety of this my country constrained Mic^h. 3. 8
me to break silence, and to set the trumpet to my mouth, not any longer
enduring the excellency of the one, or the life of the other, thus to be
trodden under foot, and neglected. My self I willingly acknowledge of all other
the most unmeet, and every way unfit unto this work; but let my zeal of the
truth, my love unto you, and the present necessity of the time, excuse me of
presumption or vain glory, though no way cover or excuse any errors or
faults escaped me in this present writing; which I wholly, even in fear and
reue^nce, submit, to the trial and cen^ure of all men, at all times, by the
word of GOD. I desire to have no further credit, then the word of GOD gives
warr^nt, neither yet would I be reproved for speaking the truth of God
plainly and simply, although the same truth have long lain hid and buried,
and be now peradventure generally impugne^ of all men. Only, let neither the
truth of God be prejudiced, nor the charitable Reader offended, by the
vnlear^ednes and simplicity of the writer. Let not the faith of CHRIST be held
in respect of men's persons, but let the Reader rather consider, that GOD is not
always bound, or the truth tied to the Phariseis lips, and to the Rabbis
chair. God his glory is, to reveal at some Man. 11. 25
times unto babes and sucklings, that, which he hides from the wise 1 Cor. ^.
26 etc.
and prudent, yea eue^ by such despised things, to reprove and confound the
wisdom and glory of the world. Let not the Rea^er then fix his eyes upon the
messenger (in whose mortal body he shall find 2 Cor. 4* 10.
nothing, but the marks and dying of our Lord JESUS CHRIST) so much, as upon
the matter, wherein he shall find life and peace unto his own soul: Neither in
the matter let him regard the form, so much as the truth. The style and phrase
(no doubt) must needs seem harsh and unpleasant, being utterly void of al
humane arts and learning (wherewith the whole world is now so deeply
delighted, and 2. Tim. 4.
wholly carried away) nothing else being welcome or acceptable unto their earthly
seses, or ytching humorous ears, which cannot b^ooke wholesome doctrine, or
suffer the words of exhortation. I have not desired to speak in the words
taught by humane wisdom, but in the words taught of the Holy Ghost. From
which, where I have 1 Cor. 2. 1^
swerued (as my unsanctified lips no doubt too often have) or which wherein I
have abused (as fools know not to use a parable aright) I Prou. 26. 7
humbly crave the Christian correction, rather then the pardon of the reader;
for yt ought to go before, and shall be more profitable unto me. Great every
way shall ^he benefit hereof be, both to me and to the whole Church: I being
instructed, shall (through the grace of God) both repent, and learn to amend my
faults; the Church shall reap the fruits of Gods graces much more
plentifully in others; which if I may any way stir up, I shall not judge my
labor wholly lost.

The diffuse and disorderly handling of these points, will also no doubt be
yrksonne unto the Reader, neither in deed take I any pleasure therein: but let
that be partly imputed to the confuse subject (^ou know what BABEL signifies)
but chiefly, to my want of skill, that knew not how to do yt better* I am
content to bear that blame, so others may reap any good by the rest. If some
imperfect sentences, or superfluous repetitions arise in the reading, attribute
those to his weakened memory, that is but a little cherished, as also, to the
inconvenience of the place, through the iniquity of the times: where such was
the rage of the enemy, as he might not keep one sheade by him, whiles he was
writing of an other, having also as evil means to reuise or retract that he
had written: so no wonder though many things escaped, which might with more
diligence have been prevented: Let these also be the writers blame
deservedly, which he for thy good thinks not much to sustain.

But now remains the very Argument and subject of this Book, which of ^l
other will be most disliked, and held most odious and heinous of all sorts of
men, who will never endure to hear the magnificence of the false Church, wherein
they have so long been nouri^hed in so great delight, reproved and cast
down. So thoroughly are they intoxicate with the wine of her abominations,
and all their senses bownd in the fetters of her fornications, that they have
no eyes to see, ears to hear, or hearts to believe the truth: But
especially, the shipmaisters, Act. 19.
the mariners, merchantmen, and all the people that reign, row, and are
carried in this false Church, they will never endure to see fire cast into her,
the^ will never endure to suffer loss of their dainty and precious
mercha^dise; but rather will raise up no small tumultes and stirs against the
servants of God, seeking their blood by all subtle and violent means, as we
read in the scriptures their predecessors have always done, accusing them of
treason, troubling the state, schism, heresy, and what not. But unto all the
power, learning, deceit, rage of the false Church, we oppose that little Book
of Gods word which (as the light) shall reveal her, as the fire consume her,
as an heavy millstone shall press her and all her children, lovers, partakers,
and abettors, down to hell: which Book, we willingly receive, as the judge
of al our controversies, knowing that all men shall one day (and that ere long)
be judged by the same: by this Book who so is found in error or transgression,
let them have sentence accordingly.

Neither let the dreadful, and severe iugments of GOD be less feared or
esteemed, because they are pronounced by a frail and weak man, or that man or
messenger be hardlier entreated, or judged too severe, because he does deliver
the message of his Lord. The Lord assuredly does ratify in heaven, whatsoever
he pronounces here or earth; neither has any servant of GOD power to alter
and change his masters will; they cannot loose that he binds, or lighten his
yoke. Let then that state, people, or person, that finds himself grieved at
any thing here said, first inquire the truth thereof in the word of GOD, and
so give credit and obedience accordingly; for when Amos. 3. 6. 7. 8.
the Lion roreth who should not fear when the Lord has spoken, who should
not prophecy. Let him that hears therefore hear, Ezekiel. 3. vltim
and he that leaves off let him leave off: yet let all know, the Lion roreth
not in the forest, if no pray be present; neither the young Lion out of his
den, if he be not about to take. And when the Lion of the Tribe of IVDA is
once raised up, who shall then find Arguments to plead, or weapons of
defense: yt is a most fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living GOD.
Great is the mercy of GOD that blows the trumpet and gives warning before
he ^ring the evil upon us, yea great is his mercy and patience, that yet
continues to speak, knock, and call, we having so long skorned his
messengers, and despised his words etc. Only now let all men, in whom is any
fear or love of GOD, any care of their own salvation, tremble at the word of
GOD; let them be warned and feare^, le^ them ponder their own ways, and
depart from evil, least the final wrath of God prevent them: Let them
consider, the further they go on i^ error, the further they depart from the
truth, and the harder they shall find yt to return. Let them not be persuaded
to continue in evil, by the authority, wisdom, pretended learning, or
holiness of any, neither by the numbers and multitudes, after they Exo. 23. 2.
have once heard or seen the error of their way: the Lord keep all his from
presumptuous sin. Long has that great millstone of the Lords fearful
judgments been lift up on high, in the eyes of all men, over this
presumptuous confuse BABEL wherein they continue: Revel 18.
long has the Lord called, and commanded all his people to go, yea to flee
out of her. Many they see by Gods mighty hand escaped and delivered, and
marching with the banner of the Gospel displaied before all the inchanters of
Egypt and PHARAOH his troops: Let the rest no longer ^empt GOD, or be held
under the dint and compass 1 Cor. 10. 9
of this dreadful millstone, by any persuasions; but let them save their
souls out of this accursed false Church, with all speed, whiles yet grace and
time is offered, and join themselves unto the faithful servants of CHRIST,
under his conduct and Gospel; that he may lead them out of the house of this
spiritual bondage, into the glori^us liberty of the sons of GOD, unto that
desired TZION R^uel. 14. 1
there together to serve God, and lead their lives in holiness, according to
Gods own will, to the comfort and assurance of their own souls, and the
glory, of his name. Amen.

Let the unjust do unjustly yet, and the filthy do filthilie yet, and let the
just do justice yet, and let the holy be sanctified yet. Behold I come
shortly and my revvard with me, to render unto every one according as his
work shall be. Apoc. 22. 11. 12.

Seeing we have received a most sure word of the Lord our 2 Pet. 1. 19. Deuteronomy. 4
6. Psalm. 119. 105.
GOD, It behooves us to give heed thereunto, as unto a light that shines in
dark places, whiles we travel in the dangerous wilderness of this world. In
which word, the whole wisdom and conncells of GOD for our direction and
instruction in all things, are fully revealed unto us. So that now we are not
to say in Deuteronomy. 30. 11. etc.
our hearts, who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring yt us? or who shall
go over the sea, and bring yt us and cause us to hear yt, that we may obey
yt: For lo, yt is near us, even in our mouth and in our heart, and set before
our eyes for to do yt; the sound of the Gospel having been long since carried
forth through all the Regions of the whole earth: So that no nation ^halbe
excused, which will not serve Isa. 60. 12.
and obey unto the Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST; which being proclaimed
with his own blessed mouth, sealed with his own heart blood, written with the
pen of the holy Ghost, delivered and incommended Hebr. 2. 3, 4.
by his holy Apostles and Prophets unto us and all posterities, Heb. 12. 24. 25.
as his last will and Testament, whereunto nothing may be added, Gal. 3. 15. Deu.
4. 2 and 12. 32. Pro. 30, 6. Revel. 22. 18.
nothing diminished, a^tered, or changed, violate, or wilfully neglected,
according to fleshly wisdom or vvorldly policy, without Deuteronomy. 5. 32.
most heinous transgression, sacrilege, and impiety. For as all degrees of
men, without respect or exception of any person, are Psa. 45. 6. heb. 1. 8
bound unto the same, as unto the Scepter of our sovereign Lord, Ioh. 12. 48.
2 Cor. 5 10. Reu. 22. 18. 19.
JESUS CHRIST, who is King over all, blessed for ever, Amen: so shall all men
in particular be judged by the same, of all things done in Gal. 1. 8. 1 Timothy 3,
15. Deuteronomy. 31* 26.
this mortal life. Neither has any Angel in heaven, any mortal man, no nor
the whole Church, power or prerogative, to alter or neglect the least jot or
title thereof.

But GOD has especially committed these holy oracles to the caref^l custody of
the Church, there to be inuiolably preserved, as in Deuteronomy. 17. 8. etc.
the side of the Arc, purely taught, expounded and delivered, without Mal. 2.
5. Exodus 23. 20, 21. Heb. 12. 28
corrupting, mixing, hiding, obscuring, perverting, wresting, there to be
precisely observed with all reverence and fear, without Deuteronomy. 29. Iosu. 24.
Iud. 3.
any willing or known transgression, or swaruing either to the right 1 Cor. 6.
15. and 10, 16, 17. and 12, 13.
hand or to the left, of the whole Church or any member thereof. And hereunto is
the whole Church, and every particular member Ephesians. 1. 23. and 4. 12
thereof, both jointly and severally bound; both because they have Hebr. 3. 13.
and 10, 24. P^il. 2. 4.
all of them interest in the tree and river of life, all are bound to the
maintenance of the faith which is given, and is common to al Saints, and
because they are all of them the members of CHRIST, and together his body,
and each others members in him. Therefore are they so often by the Apostles
charged and stirred up, to exhort, edify, and admoni^h one an other, to stand
upon the watch-towre of their faith, Romans 16. 17. 2 Io^. 10. 1 Ioh. 4. 1.
to scowte, and observe them diligently which cause divisions and offenses,
contrary to the doctrine which they have learned, to try the 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4.
5.
spirits, to examine the doctrine whether any man teach otherwise, and consent
not unto the wholesome words of our Lord JESUS CHRIST and to the doctrine which
is according to godliness. Math. 6. 22. Luke 11. 34. 35. 1 Pet. 2. 2
Many weighty and grave reasons are added to induce them to be the more
vigilant Io^. 6. Phil. 2. 16.
and (...); the doctrine being likened to the light of the eyes, to the Math.
15. 13. and 16. 12. Gal. 5. 9. Reu^l 8. 11. and 9. 3. 5. 19. and 16. 13. 2 Cor.
11, 13. 1 Cor. 3. Mat. 23.
food, yea to the life of the foul, as also, error and corruption resembled to
da^knes, leaven, poison etc. Moreover, such teachers, to false and deceitful
workme^, blind and unfaithful guides, to grievous and ravening wolves, to
thieues and murderers etc. what counterfeit titles and 2. Tim. 3. 6. etc.
^heepes clothing soever they take and get ynto them: yet the holy Math. 7. 15.
Act. 20 29. Job. 10.
Ghost speaks evidently, and every where warns, that these builders shall
destroy the Temple of God, whose house and work^ we 1. Cor. 3. 27.
are etc. these guides shall seduce and mislead us in the ways of death and
destruction, these thieues and wolves shall spoil and murder us. Now by how
much these goods are spiritual* this death of the soul, by so much are they
more carefully to be avoided, shu^ned, eschewed. Therefore our savior CHRIST
and his Apostles, as they were most vigilant and faithful ministers, and did
both prevent and foresee diverse dangers and great evils to come, so gave they
very earnest and often Mark. 13. Math. ^. 4. ^k. 21.
warnings hereof unto the disciples, unto the Churches, commanding the porter,
yea every servant of the house to watch, to beware and to take heed, showing
them that many false CHRIST'S should arise and many false prophets, showing
great signs and wonders, whereby to deceive (if yt were possible) the very
elect. He fore told them of Antichrists original, increase and exaltation, how
he should be have himself, what hauock he should ke^p in the Church of God: as
also of the general defection, and even of the very beginning thereof. How
(...). 24. 29.
immediately after the tribulation of those days, namely the destruction and
desosatio^ of the earthly and material (...), the Sun shoud be darkened, the
moon should not give her light, the stars should fall from heaven and the
powers of heaven should be shaken, and the beau^ie thereof wrapped up as a
scroule, that the whole world should be drowned in sensuality and security,
as in the days of NOAH, because iniquity shall be increased, and faith scarce
found upon the earth at his coming. So that if those days should not be
shortened, there shoud no flesh be saved. Yet, that al these things must and
should undoubtedly come to pass, he showed yt by the nearer things (namely the
destruction of Jerusalem the temple there etc.) as also confirmed yt by the
truth and stedfastnes of his word, showing how the heaven and earth should
pass away, but his words should not pass away, neither should this
generation pass, until al these things were fulfilled. Of these things the
Prophets spoke before, though more darkly, and as a far off, and by diverse
types as Isa. 14. 13. 14. Na^um. 3. 4. 5, 6, 7. Da^. 9. 27 ^lso Isa. 13. 10.
and ^4, 4. Ezekiel. 32. 7. Joel 2. 31. and 3, 14. 15. But the Apostles gave much
more evident and plain warning of these things, chiefly they that lived
longest, and came nearest to these times. As the Apostle Paul to the Elders of
Ephes' Act. 20. 29. 30. 31. and in all his Epistles ple^tifully; the Apostle
Peter in his 2. Epistle 2. and 3. Chapt. The Apostle Jude, and Ihon in all his
Epistles: but especially in that heavenly Book of the Revelation; vvherin he
most lively describes these things, even from the original, in several
visions, according to the Revel. 4. and 5* chapters.
several times yt should ensue. vvherin he shows the happy estate of the
Church, whiles Gods glorious throne was in the midst of the elders, and whiles
yt was enlightened with the burning lamps of Gods spirit, and that the Book was
received and opened of the Lamb, and whiles CHRIST sat upon the white horse,
his own holy word, and that they remained together in that heavenly order,
vvher in CHRIST Ephesians. 4. 11.
had placed and bestowed every member, and the Apostles those excellent Col.
2. 5.
workme^, had planted and left them, being fitly coupled and joined together
by every joint, for the service and help of the whole, according to the
effectual power that is in the measure of every part; until Satan I say, that
ancient enemy of our happiness, had that great sword given him, vvherwith he
made, and still shall make bloudye war, and raise up grievous persecution against
the woman and her seed without: within vvhiles they slept and were negligent,
sowing his darnel of errors, and tares of discord amongst them, raising up
sects through 1 Cor. 3. 3. etc.
the ambition and vainglory of some, drawing others into schism Gal. 6. 12.
etc.
through pride and hypocrisy, others into heresies, through their Col. 2.
headstrong and unbridled asfectio^s: al into his snare, through the general
default of al, who slacked their duties, and kept not their orderly watch one
over an other, and jointly over the whole, as they were commanded and
prescribed by the Apostles. But as the age that arose Judge. 2.
after Joshua and those Elders of his time, was sone corrupted, and forgate
the ordinances of their GOD, and the great things the Lord had done for their
forefathers: so these sone fell from the Apostolic order, and left their
primitive diligence and care. The people upon a superstitious 2 Cor. 11. 20*
reverence and preposterous estimation unto their teachers and elders, resigned
up al things, even their du^ie, interest, liberty, prerogative into their
hands: suffering them to alter and dispose of all things after their own
lusts, without inquiry or controleme^t. whereupon, the true pattern of
CHRIST'S Testament, so highly, and with so great charge inco^mended by the
Apostles unto the fidelity of the whole Church, was soon neglected and cast
aside, especially by these evil work me^ these governors, who some of the^
affecting the preemine^ce, sought to draw an absolute power into their own 3
Io^. 9.
hands, perverting those offices of more labor and care, into swelling titles
of fle^hly pomp and vvorldly dignity. Thus wrought the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 7.
mystery of iniquity, yea so far were many of them carried with a vain
opinion and ostentation of the excellency of their gifts, as they under holy
pretextes of doing good unto others, sought al^o 2 Cor. 11. 3.
under this cloak a jurisdiction and regencie over other congregat^ons also,
which was easily obtained, the people thr^ugh the just iudgme^tes of GOD being
now so bewitched and blinded with their sweet tongues, that they easily
condiscended. Then were these caled Bishops of such a City, and if they were
cities of rule, to which any territories, towns, or hamletes in the country
belonged, then were they called Bi^hops of such a Diocese etc. and had under
them inferior or country Bishops, as also Deacons, subdeacons. Thus the whole
Church growing remiss and negligent, both people and officers, that heavenly
pattern left by the Apostles was soon violate, and upon new pretenses, more
and more innouate. For hereby was a wide gap opened to al licenciosnes and
disorder, the people growing dissolute, the priests (as they term them)
proud: so that religion, with was erwhile so irksoome to flesh and blood, so
mightily persecuted by Satan and all the princes of the world, grew now so
plausible to all sorts of men, so pleasing to their affections and appetites,
that the great Princes of the world, and all their realms and countries flowed
apace to the Church in this estate, the gates and entry being as ill kept
without, as the watch within. So that upon this increase there were many of
these city Bishops, whereby the pride of some could not heerwith be satisfied,
until they had gotten them a new dignity; namely to be Archbbs. over all the
BBs. in a Province or country. Here were also new Deacons, Archdeacons
erected: Yet was not the ambitious thirst of some thus stanched, but they
aspired yet to a more high degree and preemine^ce; so that there must now be
picked out four principal cities, which must carry 4. Patriarchs. These had
yet higher power the^ the Archbs. and were erected to see to the government and
discipline (as they call yt) of al Churches, in respect, or rather in despite
of those 4 beasts, which had so many eyes and vvings, and ^tood day and night
about the throne of GOD. but they were rather those 4 angels which stood upon
the 4 corners of the earth, holding the 4 winds of the earth, that the winds
should not blow upon the earth neither on the sea, nor on any tree. (...) 7. 1.


But Satan having yet a further reach, ceased not here, but even amongst
those 4 he still co^tended to set up one chief, which variably fell out,
sometimes to one, sometimes to another, until at length the lot rested upon the
Sea of Rome, where the papacy being vpholde^ ^ Thessalonians. 2.
by, and mixed with the Empire, and in the end swallowing yt up, became Revel
13.
the very throne of An^ichrist, where he sits in his exaltatio^, to whom
the key of the bottomless pyt was given; which being by him set vvide open,
the smoke of his cannons, devises, trumperies, Reu. 9. verse. 1 2 3 etc.
and abominations darkened the funne, poisoned the air: the Locustes and
Scorpio^s that came out of this pit, and out of this smoke, the multitudes and
swarms of monks, friars, cannons, vagrant and mendicant preachers, parish
priests etc. so pestered and prisoned every tree, so stung and enuenomed
every conscience, as they could bear no fruit, neither brook any wholesome
doctrine.

Thus Antichrist being now established and fortified in the midst of his
strengths, his council of Cardinals, his Metropolitan and Archbishops Palatine
and Lord BBs. in every country: he now received Revel 13. 2. 5, 6* 7.
the great charter of his prerogative infernal, even the Dragon his power,
throne, and authority. He now boldly opened his mouth against God, blaspheming
the tabernacle of CHRIST, and them that dwell therein: innouating and changing
all things after his own ^ustes, the ministry, government, orders, worship;
thus exalting verse. 15 16 17
himself against all that is called GOD, and sitting in the temple of GOD as
GOD, showing himself that he is GOD, causing all men to worship Revel 17.
his miage, to receive his mark, to buy his *vvares etc. bringing ^orth his
harlot upon the stage of the world, stately mounted upon his beastly power,
pompously araied, and gorgiously decked, and adorned, the more to allure and
intise: whose cup of fornicatio^s was Revel 18. 3
carried far and near, to many nations people and tongues, so that the kings of
the earth committed fornication with her, the inhabitants of the earth were
drunke^ with the wine of her fornications, which she conveyed unto them by the
hands of her merchantmen, who are vvax^n rich with the abundance of her
pleasures.

Yet in all this defectio^, corruption, apostacy, has GOD still reserved Revel.
7. 4. and^.
a seed, a little poor remnant, who have been marked with the Revel 9. 4.
mark of GOD on their foreheades, and have been preserved from the Revel 14.
^ting of these scorpio^s, the plague of these locustes, which have had Revel
12. 7.
^ight in the midst of these hellish fogs, which have not bought nor Revel 15.
Revel 17. 14
sold with the mark of the beast, neither drunk of the whores ^up, neither
have been defiled with her fornications: but have Revel. 14. 4.
^eene the lambs caled, chosen, and faithful soldiers, following the Ierem.
50. and 51.
^amb in white array wheresoever he goes, and leads them from Isa. 13.
faith to faith. These by the light of the word read the harlots mystery
written in her forehead, discover her skirts, and all her ab^ominations, and
by that same light make her known to be that spi^itual Babylon, where Christ's
servants are kept in servitude from the free practice of his word, where the
true temple his Church and ^ll the vessels and instruments thereof are utterly
ruinate, defaced ^rofaned, trodde^ under foot. These also do show by the same
light, ^uen from the ancient prophecies, her, and al her synagogs, to become
^he very habitation of devils, the hold of all foul and wicked spi^ites, and
a cage of every unclean and hateful bird. ZIM and IIM and all ^armful beasts
shall lodge there, the Dragon and the serpent, the Har^ies, scritchowles and
vultures shall there make their nest, and bring up their young ones. And therefore
these shall call all the Lords faithful ^eruantes out from amongst them, least
they be partakers of her sins, ^ receive of her plagues; showing them that her
sins are at the ^ul, come up into the sight of God into heaven, and that God
now re^embreth her iniquities, and is ready to power down his plagues Genesis 6.
upon her, as in the days of Noah and Sodom. Genesis 19.


He only now st^ieth but until his Arc be built, until Lot his household be
come forth, and the number of his elect be fulfilled; which time we may
evidently discern approaches apace: Our figtree has almost budded al our
fignes. Therefore yt is high time for the servants of GOD to look up, and to
lift up their heads, for their redemption draws near. We have al seen this
general defectio^, Luke 21. 28.
eue^ in the manner as yt was foretold to be come to pass: we have also see^e in
the heavens the tabernacle of t^stimonie, eue^ that first and Revel 15. 5. ^.
Apostolic pattern, though we have not as yet been able to enter into the
same, until the vials of Gods w^ath be powered upon the (...) 16.
throne of the Beast, the whore, this Babylon etc. we see all the faithful
witnesses and martyrs of CHRIST in their several ages to have powered out
their vials, some upon the earth, some upon the sea, some upon the fountains,
others upon the sun, upon the throne of the beast, upon their Euphrates etc.
we hear this voice round about us sounding in our ears ^o out of her my
people etc. Save thy self o Syo^ that dwell Revel. 18. 4. 5. Isa. 52. 11.
Za^b. 2. 7.
with the daughter Babel: Fly out of the midst of Babel, deliver every man
his soul, be not destroyed in her inquitie, For this is the time of the Lords
vengeance, he will render I^rem. 51. 6. 45.
v^o her a recompense: and again ^lee out of the ^idst of Babell depart out of
the land Ierem. 50. 8.
of the Chaldeans and ^e ye as the gotes before the flock.

And our savior CHRIST in that foreru^ning sign and type of Judea Mat^. 24.
^6. etc.
and Jerusalem, warns them that are in Judea to flee to the mountains, the^
that are called on the house top, not to come down into their house to fetch
or save any thing they have lost there, they that are in the fields, not to
return back into the City to fetch their clothes, showing the woes that are
upon them, which either are hindered and pressed down with worldly affairs, as
a woman great with child, or are detained and held with the leave either of
their earthly friends how near so ever, or of their own flesh, that they
cannot fly and deliver their souls, that cannot give ear or obey unto the
commandment and voice of GOD whiles he calls them, and so deferr and put off
their coming out, either until the winter of Gods wrathful judgments
circumvent and enclose them, or the saboth of his final Hebr. 3. and ^. Cha^t.
indignation fall and rest upon them, and then there be no space granted them to
fly, or grace to be preserved. Seeing then we have so many prophecies, so many
tipes, so many warnings, so many callings, seeing all our signs are
accomplished, and that Gods final judgments approach and steal upon us: let us
not despise his grace, nor harden our hearts whiles he yet speaks, and yt is
called to day: seeing we are fallen into these last and pertilous times, wherein
Satan uses his last and uttermost sleightes, whereby the whole world shall be
deluded, yea the very elect, if yt were po^sible, drawn away; let us not
suffer our selves to be any longer deceived, with the subtle inchantmentes of
the false prophets and preachers of the times, neither to be deceived with the
vain titles and glorious shows of Church, minis^rie, sacraments* Gospel etc.
whereof the false Church ^ath always boasted and arrogated unto her self, as
well as the true Church, wherewith, as with stales she has allured, and as with
snares detained her Genesis 4. 3. 4. and 17* 23. and 21. 4.
guestes. Cayn (we read) as well as Habel, offered sacrifice: Ismael and Isaac
were both circumcised; Hagar and Sarah were two mothers; Gal. 4. 25. 26.
the two mothers before Solomon pleaded both of them co^fidently 1 King. 3. 16.
for the li^ing child; the harlot as well as wi^dome killed sacrifices, Prou.
7. 13. 14. etc and 9. Chap. 1 King* 12. 28. etc.
^ent out her ministers, invited guestes to her house; Israel in their schism
and defection erected a temple, an altar, a ministry.

It behooves us therefore, whiles yet GOD vouchsafes us time, carefully Lam. 3.
40. etc.
by the light of Gods word, to examine our ways, and to ponder Math. 7. 13.
14.
our estate, whether we be in that broad way that leads to Revel 14. 1.
and 1^* 15.
destruction amongst those multitudes over whom the whore sits and
raineth, or in the straight and narrow way which leads unto euerla^ting
life, with CHRIST'S little fl^k and marked soldiers, whom the lamb leads
and ^uleth: whether we be in that great defection, in that spiritual Babylon
under An^christ and that Beast, or whether we be in the mount S^on, in the
spiritual Jerusalem, where ^he co^mandementes of GOD are k^pt, and the faith
of JESUS.

This being known, al controuerfies shall forthwith cease: For the^ shall we
either be guilty of our own destruction through our wilful obstinacy, or else
^hal we lay hold of eternal life, vvhiles yet yt is offered, by forsaking our
evil ways, and yiedling obedience unto Gods holy word. Neither need we
unto this business to go fetch our light out of men's writings (as sundry of
the chief builders of ^his corrupt age do) or curiously to enquire or dispute
about I wot not what marks of the true Church, which vvhiles some inde^ored
to set down, endless controversies and vain striefe about words has arisen
amongst them, without end or edifying. Therefore let us, for the apeasing and
assurance of our consciences, give heed to the word of God, and by that golden
reed measure our temple, our Revel 11. ^. ^*
altar, and our worshippers: even by these rules whereby the Apostles, those
excellent perfect workme^, planted and built the first churches, comparing the
synagogues of this la^d unto them in the people, the ministry,
administration, order, government etc. This way cannot deceau^ us, for neit^er
can the simplest err therein, neither any pol^uted Isa. 35. ^*
(how subtle and cunning soever) pass by yt unespied, vnre^rooued: For as there
is but one truth, ^o whatsoever is diverse more or less th^n that truth, is
faulty and to be repented.

FIRST THEREFORE, because every building consists of stones, let us examine
of what kind of stones this Church of Eng^and (as they term yt) consists,
and is compact; whether of such elect precious living stones, which are
gathered unto and 1. Pet. 2. 5.
^uilt upon CHRIST JESUS, and in him grow unto an holy and spi^itual Ierem.
5*1. 26, 1 C^ron. 29. 2.
temple unto GOD etc. or of common, Babilonish repro^ate 1 King. 5. 17. and 6. 7
stones, whereof the Lord has sworn, that not one of them 2 Chronicles. 2. 8.
^halbe taken for a corner, or for a foundation in his house. Ezra. 3. 7.
The material temple (which was but a type of this) we ^eade to be built from
the very foundation, of choice, costly, perfect stones, the beams and rafters
of choice Cedars, Algummin trees: No common or Read Leuiticus from the 10 to
the 23. Chap^er.
vile thing was used toward yt, neither might any profane and polluted enter
into yt. But of the incomparable beauty and unutterable excellency of this
spiritual Temple, under the holy ministry and 1 Pet. 1, 10. 11, 12.
happy perfect government of CHRIST, all the prophets have with great delight
spoken and fore told, and with extreme desire inquired, and longed to see the
revelation of these ioies and graces, which they in the spirit foresaw, and
foreshewed unto us, to whom they should be performed. The prophet I saiah,
speaking of the excellency thereof, breaks forth into these words, Behold I
will lay thy stones with the Isai 54. 11. etc.
Carbuncle, and thy foundatio^s with saphirs, and I will make thy vvindowes of
Esmeraldes, Ierem. 31. 34. etc.
and thy gates of shining stones, and al thy borders of precious stones, and
thy children shall be taught of the Lord, and much peace shall be to thy children.
And in an other place, speaking of the excellent glory of this spiritual
temple, he Isai 60. 17, 21. and 35, 8. 10. and 55, 13.
uses these words For brass I will bring gold, for iron I vvil bring
silver, for vvood brass, for stones iron. I will make also thy government of
peace, and thine exactors of righteous^es etc. thy people also shall be all
righteous, they shall possess the land for eue^: the graffe of my planting
shall be the work of mine hands that I may be glorified. And again; For thorns
there shall grow firr trees, for nettles shall grow the myrrh tree, and yt shall be
to the Lord for a name, and for an everlasting sign that shall not be taken
away. All the plants of this orcha^d shall be of the Lords ^mb. 2 4, 6.
planting; they shall all be incense and Aloe trees, pomgranates and fir Cant.
4. 13. etc.
trees, which shall continually bring forth pleasant, new, and fre^h fruit,
Ezekiel. 47, 12.
because they grow by the sides of the river of life, are watered with Revel
22. 1.
the dew of heaven, and refreshed with the winds of gods spirit. ^om. 11.
17. 24.
They come not, nor grow not here, until they be first cut off from 1 Cor. 6.
11. Titus 3. 3. 1 Pet. 4, 3. Romans 6. 4. (...). 3. 10. ^ 7. 19. Luke 13. 6
their corrupt natural stock, where they grew before, and be ingrafted into
^he true ol^ue tree, the true vine: yea and being planted and ingrafted, that
pla^t, that branch that brings not forth good fruit, shall be hewn down,
shall be cut off and cast out etc. Into this mountain Math. 15. 13. Job. 15. 6.
I^r. 2. 21.
enters no venomous or harmfull creature, the cockatrice and aspe, the Lion
and Leopard enter not and lodge not here, until they have left their poison,
their fiercenes etc. so that the sucking child may pla^ upon the hole of the
Aspe, the weaned child pu^ his hand Isai. 11, 6. and ^. and 65. 25.
upon the hole of the Cockatrice, the lamb and the wolf dwell together, the
kid and the Leopard ^at straw together, and a little child shall lead them. There
may none be admitted into the church of CHRIST, but such as enter by public
profession of the tru^ faith: None remain there, but such as bring forth the
fruits of faith. The forerunner M^th. 3. and 10. 7.
Ihon the baptist, first preached repentance to prepare the way, Luke 10. and
13. 3.
and make strait, the pa^hes of the Lord, before he baptized any. The like did
our Savior Christ and his disciples: The Apostles also first Act. 2* 41. 42.
And enerie vv^ere through the vvhol^ history of the act^ of the Apostles.
gathered a people (by preaching) unto the faith: then received and joined them
to the Church, and administered unto them the holy pledges of the faith:
baptism as a seal of their ing^affing into CHRIST, the holy supper as a
symbol of their communion with CHRIST and al his faithful servants.

Thus see we what kind of stones, what manner of people the Lord will have
built and received into his Church. Now yt remains, tha^ we by these rules
examine the stones and people of the Exodus 28. 15. 21.
Church of England; whether they be such chosen precious stones, Revel 21.
Z^ch. 9. 16.
as we see here described, as the high priest carried in his broidered
brestplate; whether they be such a chosen redeemed, faithful, free, holy
people, as are called unto, and walk in the faith of CHRIST JESUS: or they be
rather of the reffuse, common pibble chalk stones, which cannot be used to any
sownd and sure building, even all the profane and wicked of the land, Atheistes,
Papists, Anabaptists and heretics of al sorts, glutto^s, riot^urs,
blasphemers, periures, covetous, extortioners, thieues, whores, witches,
coniurers etc. and who not, that dwells within this Island, or is within the
Queens dominion.

All without exception or respect of person are received into, and nourished in
the bosom of this Church, with the word and sacraments: None are here
refused, none kept out. This Church (as the Mal. 1. 10. Ezekiel. 44. 7. and 16.
25. and 23. 42. 44.
prophet says) opens her knees to every passenger, furnishes a table to
the multitude, and drink offerings to the numbers; she keeps open house to
all comers, bread and wine and welcome: Prou. 9. 17.
Neither is she more dainty of her stolen waters, then of her hid bread, of
her adulterate baptism, then of her Sheshak supper, not denying baptism to
the seed even of whores and witches; she receaueth the^ al into her covenant
(which is not with GOD, but with death and hell) giving them her peace, selling
them her wares etc. This is their communion of saints, their holy fellowship:
thus are they bound and enchained together in open sacrilege, idolatry,
impiety, even al estates, Prince, priests, and people, and (as the Prophet
says) even vvreathed together as in a strong cable of iniquity, and folded
one within an other as thorns in an hedge, or rather vvrapped and plighted
together, as thorns to the fire of Gods wrathful judgments.

For whither we consider the whole estate or any particular part Micah. 7. 3.
Nah. 1. 10.
thereof, we shall find yt wholly corrupt, and deeply s^, as in the days of
GIBBEA; not one sownd part from the crown of the head to the Isa. 1. 16.
sole of the feet, but all full of wounds, swellings, old putrified sores
Lamen. 2. 13.
which cannot be bound up or cured, iniquity having broken in and ouerflowed
the whole land, and every place thereof, even as the raging sea which cannot
be stopped. There is no faith, no mercy, Hose. 4. 1. 2.
no knowledge or fear of God in the land: by swearing, lying, killing,
stealing, whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood: they ^bhor
judgment, and pervert all equity: they turn justice into gall, Micah. 3. 9.
Amo^ 6. 12. Is^. ^9. 14.
and the fruit of righteousness into wormwood: Truth falls in the streets,
and equity cannot enter; the heads judge for ^ewardes; the Micah. ^. 11.
priests teach for hire; the Prophets prophecy for money; the people Hose. 4.
4.
are incorrigible, such as cannot brook nor endure vvholsom 2 Timothy 4. 3. ^ek.
33. 3^. Amo^ 5. 10
doctrine, but get unto them after their own lusts an heap of teachers, which
may prophecy to them of wine and strong drink etc. They al hate and persecute
him that rebukes in the gate, they abhor him that speaks uprightly. They
prosecute with mortal hatred 1 Pe^. 4. 4. 5.
him that runs not to the same excess and sin with them: and he that
refraineth from evil, makes himself a pray, and is spoiled Is^. 59. 15. R^uel
13. 17.
of all men. All the laws of GOD are here broken and rejected, both of the
first and second table, both of the ecclesiastical and civil estate, and of
every particular person in both, both in the worship of GOD, and in civil
justice and conversation: all things being 2 Kings. 22. 11. 12. 13.
innouate in both, according to the lusts and pleasures of men, the law and
word of GOD being quite rejected and cast aside, as may appear, if the estate
either of the Church or commonwealth be examined or tried by the word of GOD.
The particular defaults whereof in their customs, laws, trialls, pleadings,
jurisdiction, orders, decrees etc. are well nigh infinite. And what then are
the enormities that ensue thereof to every estate, degree, and person. This
need no other demonstration, then the general excess, pride, Ezekiel. 16. 49.
superfluity, covetousness, rapine, cruelty, deceit, malice, debate,
inordinate affections, unbridled lusts, dissolutnes, disobedienc^ etc. which
are found most rife, eue^ in all estates and degrees amongst them: Neither has
all kind of sin and wickedness more universally reigned in any nation at any
time, then here at this present in this land; where all are received into the
Church, all made members of CHRIST.

All these sins, and many more abhomina^ions (which a Christian heart
abhors but to think or speak of) are amongst them vvinked a^, tolerated,
excused, covered and cured with the Gospel preached, and their holy
sacraments. All this people, with all these manners, were in one day, with
the blast of Q. Elizabeth's trumpet, of ignorant papists and gross idolaters,
made faithful Christianes, and true professors: upon whom, these hungry
priests, like ravening wolves and greedy foxes flew to divide the pray; some
getting them the roomthes of Archbishops, others caught Bishoprics, others
caught Deanries, arch-Deaconries, fat parsonages, some more, some fewer, as
their estimation and friends were.

They being thus installed, and their mouths stopped with these Isa. ^6. 10.
11.
fat morsels, the world by this time was well amended with them: There was no
need to gather a people to the faith by preaching of the Gospel, neither to
set the holy government of CHRIST over such as were called to the faith; All
was now well enough, ^er the people had received this ministry, after their
Portuise was translated from latin into english, the supremacy, from the Sea
of Rome, to the Sea of Canterbury. And after these Pseudo martyrs and
runneaway professors had tasted the sweetness of ^his roast, and pleasantnes of
these roomths, and were once warm ^n their nestes; then forgate they all their
former peregrination, and deuowred the vows they then made, seking now to
fortify and establish their own, and not CHRIST'S kingdom. And to this and
they invented, obtained, and erected their blasphemous high Commission, in
stead of the Spanish inquisition; where they gate ^ower over all causes and
persons ecclesiastical, to make or abro^ate what laws they list, and to
impose them upon the whole Church, which is the whole land, to molest, cite,
fetch up, examine, ^mprison and fine whom they list, as long as they list, as
much as ^hey list, w^hout controlement or any redress, though their
pro^eedings be expressly contrary, prejudicial, and repugnant unto the Crown
and prerogative royal, unto the great charter and laws of ^he land, as were
not hard to show, if any ear might be given ^herunto.

Thus being enthronized, they show themselves plainly in their colors, both in
establishing most of the Popes cannons, and in adding new as ill of their own,
still re^aine further power to make more at their pleasures: which, howsoever
they cannot, nor dare ^ot justify by the word, yet will they maintain them by
the sword; which sword they now draw forth against CHRIST'S most faith^ull
servants that will no^ bow down nor worship their beastly ^uthoritie, but
stand for the maintenance of the faith, once given unto the sai^tes, and for
the free and sincere practice of CHRIST'S holy Testament: which faith,
Testament, and people of GOD, these accursed Apostataes, with most deadly
hatred and hostility persecute, and seek to suppress by all exquisite
tyranny, closing and mving up the bodies of them in the most noisome places of
the most vile prisons, sometimes ^ot without yrons and blows, in stead of
Arguments and persuasions, railing, blaspheming and slandering both the holy
truth, and the witnesses thereof, with their poisoned heretical lying books,
pamphlets, libells, which the Dragon like a flood casts out of the mouth of
his false Prophets after the Church: yet dare they not once produce them to any
trial or answer, knowing in their bad consciences, that (...). 3. 20.
their ill dealings may not endure the light: and therefore seek Ephesians. 5. 13.
they by all subtle and forceible means to suppress the same, limiting and
prohibiting their priests, not to meddle with the reproof of any thing by
public authority established etc. And such as will not be thus nurt^ed they
enclose up by their sole ^ommandement in close and strait prisons, never
letting them to escape out of their hands, until they be brought out upon the
beer: Thus fulfill they the measure of their predecessors, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15. 16.
shed the blood of the righteous, make open war against CHRIST Math. 23. 32.
etc.
and his G^spel, cast the Son and heir out of his house, and vvil Math. 21.
38. 39.
not susfer him to reign there by his own officers and laws, but take his
inheritance unto them, with his scepter and al his roial rites and prerogatives
into their hands, showing themselves in the temple of GOD as GOD, erected new
laws, new ordin^ces, a new ministry, new worship, new orders and form
of government, as shall be showed hereafter.

Now unto this their apostatical and bloody throne and antichristian Revel 13.
16. 17.
power, and unto all the abominations proceeding from the same, stands all the
land both great and small, rich and poor, priest and people, in most servile
subjection: and therefore in this estate cannot be Gal* 4. 9. 10.
held or numbered among Christ's faithful servants, which are fully Revel. 14.
9. etc.
redeemed by the price of his precious blood, from al these bondages Ioh. 8. 37.
Gal. 5. 1. and Col. ^. 6. 7. 8.
and intanglementes, which they by a show of volun^arie religion, and
counterfeit holiness, would impose upon men's consciences. Neither may such be
held the servants of CHRIST, which stand subject unto his enemy Antichrist,
bear his yoke, receive his ministry, vvares etc. or which contend not for
the maintenance Jude 3. Revel 14. 12.
of the true faith, and for the sincere practice of the Gospel with freedom,
in all patie^t manner unto the death: suffering rather any thing, I^h. 15. 14.
then themselves to be defiled with his abominations. How then should this
people, as they generally stand in the public estate of this land, in this
subjection to Antichrist, in this idolatry, sacriledg, al kind of excess and
sin, even in all degrees without repentance, faith, obedience, knowledge, be
received, held, or esteemed the redeemed, called, faithful, free, obedient,
loving subjects and people of the Lord? or how may CHRIST'S true and faithful
servants have any spiritual communion or fellowship with them in this estate,
without open sacriledg, most heinous impiety, and high profanation of the
holy things of God. For if into the material temple, no profane or polluted
person might enter and osfer, until he had embraced the faith, and been
cleansed from his filthiness; how much more ought this profane, ignorant, unholy,
wicked, disobedient rowte, be kept out of the Church of CHRIST, and from al
intermedling with the holy things of GOD, which in this estate belong not unto
them.

But as these ungodly priests of these times have entered, and do administer
unto this profane people, for the lucre of their goods tithes, wages, hire; so
want not these Balaams sundry devilish shifts and cauils for the maintenance
of their doings, least* by this doctrine their portion should be reproved,
their vantage for divining cease, as also their sin and shame be made
manifest. Amongst an heap of their forged excuses, they set* this for doctrine
in the fore ^ront: THAT where ^ Christian Prince is, which mai^taineth the
Gospel, and Calvin iustit. lib. 4. Sect. 9.
^he whole land or estate not resisting this commandment, reue^enceth the word
and sacraments, there the whole multitude of such ^ land or state, are without
doubt to be esteemed and judged a true Church. This reason they confirm not
with any proofs of the ^cripture, but by Mr. CALVIN'S authority, who gives
these reasons ^herof: because (says he) y^ is certain, the word and
sacraments ^re not without fruit, and that by this means unity is preserved
to ^he universal Church.

Touching the person of the Author alleged, I gladly acknowledge ^im a painful
and profitable instrument, in the things he saw, and ^imes he served in, yet
not without his many errors and ignorances, ^specially touching the planting,
government, and ordering of the Church of CHRIST: And no marvel, for being so
newly escaped out of the smoky furnace of popery, he could not so sodeinly see
or attain unto the perfect beawtie of Sion. But seeing my hope is, GOD has
pardoned all his errors etc. my purpose is not (with these wicked men) to
revive and broach them a fresh, or make them pre^identes, and by them take
boldness to commit the like or worse of^ences, nor yet to discover NOAH his
shame and nakedness. So also concerning matters of faith, would I be loath to
build upon, or be ^ressed by the doctrines and examples of men, the best whereof
we Prou. 19. 27. 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Math. 7. 24. etc.
^ee to be subject to their errors and faults. For as faith only believes, and
rests upon the holy word of God: so are we by the same to examine all the
doctrines and doings of men, yea of the whole Church, and accordingly to
approve or refuse the same.

Touching this doctrine then, that a Christian Prince which publishes and
maintains the Gospel, does forthwith make all that realm (which with open
force resists not his proceedinges) to be held a Church, to whom an holy
ministry and sacraments belong, without further and more particular and
personal trial, examination. confession etc. This doctrine we find by the word
of God to be most false, corrupt, unclean, dangerous and pernicious doctrine,
contrary to the whole course, practice, and laws both of the old and new
Testament; breaking at once al Christian order, corrupting and poisoning al
Christian communion and fellowship, and sacrilegiously profaning the holy
things of God.

First we know that no Prince or mortal man ca^ make any a member 1 Timothy 2. 2.
of the Church: they may by their godly government greatly help and further the
Church, greatly comfort the faithful, and advance Romans 9. 15.
Exodus 33. 19.
the gospel etc. But to choose or refuse, to call or harde^; that the eternal
Romans 8. 39.
and almighty ruler of heaven and earth keeps in his own Iam. 1. 18.
hands, and gives not this power unto any other. This also we know, that
whom the Lord has before al worlds chosen, them 2 Timothy 2. 19.
^e will in his due time and means call by his word, and whom he Heb. 3. 14.
^alleth, them he seals with this seal, to depart from iniquity, to Heb.
12. 25.
believe and lay hold of CHRIST JESUS as their alone savior, to honor and
ob^y him as their anointed King, Priest, and Prophet, to submit themselves unto
him in all things, to be reformed, corrected, governed, and directed by his
most holy word, vowing their faithful obedience unto the same, as yt shall be
revealed unto them. By this faith, confession and profession, every member of
CHRIST from the greatest unto the least, without respect of persons, enters
into, and stands in the Church. In this faith, have all the faithful
congregations in the world, and true members of the same body, fellowship and
communion each with other; and out of this faith have the true servants of
GOD, no fellowship, no communion with any congregation or member, how
flourishing titles or fair shows soever they make here in the flesh.

None (as has been proved) uncircumcised or polluted in flesh, Deuteronomy. 23. 3.
might enter into the temple, or taste of the passover or other sacrifices,
Exodus 12. 48.
how near soever they were in consanguinitie, affinity, or subjection. N^b.
9. 14.
In King DAVID'S time the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites, and Philistims were
brought under obedience and subjection: yet were none of them admitted into the
temple etc. but such as embraced the faith. King HEZEKIAS and JOSIAH, two
famous godly 2 Chronicles. 2. 9. and 30. and 35. Chap.
Kings, after they had rightly reformed the corrupt estate, admitted none to
the passover, but such as purified and sanctified themselves, according to the
law. The like we read of the children of the captivity, after they had,
finished the temple, set the priests in their Ezra. 6. 21.
order, and the Levites in their courses etc. they ke^t the passover together
with all such as had separated themselue^ unto them from the fiilthines of the
heathen of the land, to seek the Lord GOD of Israel. These were godly Kings,
which truly planted religion, and rightly reformed the state, and had every
way as great priuiledg and prerogative, as any Kings before or since; yet had
they not power, neither durst they presume to open the temple doors to the
profane or pulluted, or to admit them unto the passover etc. for this had been
heinous sacriledg and impiety, for which sins the wrath of GOD would have
burnt against them. Neither is the like sin less transgression now, either
in the Prince that commands, the priests that administer, or the people that
receive.

The Prince himself enters by the same door of faith^, into the Job. 10. 7.
Church: and is bownd to the strait observation and obedience of Gods Deuteronomy. 17.
19.
laws in his calling, as well as any other; and is for any transgression Josh.
1. 7. 8.
thereof, liable and subject to the censures and judgments of CHRIST in Psalm.
141. 5.
his Church, which are without partiality or respect of persons. 2 Samuel 12. 7.
Which censures and judgments if the Prince contemn, he contemns 2 Chronicles.
16. 7. and 19. 2. 2 Kings. 20. 17. 2 Chronicles. ^6. 16. etc.
them against his own soul; and is thereupon, by the same power of CHRIST, to
be disfranchized out of the Church, and to be delivered over unto Satan, as
well as any other osfendor. Now though by this sin he loses his right to be
a christian or member of the church: yet loses he not his right to be a King
or magistrate, Math. 22. 21.
and is so to be held and obeid of all faithful Christians, which are his Prou.
8. 15. Eccles. 8. 2. Romans 13. 1.
subjects.

And sure, they little know what belongs either to the entrance into, or
continuance in the Church of GOD, or what belongs to the administration of
the sacraments, or to the holy communion of the saints, which revive or
defend this doctrine: For is not the whole Mark. 13. 34. 37.
Church, but especially the porter or pastor (who ought to know Ioh. 10. 3.
those well that come in, to know his sheep by name) guilty of great
negligence and sacriledg, that receive such into their fellowship, and
administer Ezekiel. 34.
the holy things of God unto the^, of whose faith they have Math. 7. 6.
no more ^timonie and assurance, yea or rather of whose infidelity and Mal. 1.
10.
profanenes they ^aue such apparent proofs? Can the word and sacraments 1
Cor. 10. 17. and 12. 13. 1 Cor. (...). 29.
(which they say cannot be without fruit) either take away or excuse their
sin in delivering unto, or joining with the open unworthy in the sacraments?
or excuse the unworthy receauers from eating or drinking their own damnation?
may the temple of the Lord be thus profaned? the table of the Lord thus
contemned and defiled? or is not the Lord a God of judgment? But yt is
impossible that the word and sacraments should be without fruit. This is true,
yet the Isa. 55. 10. 11.
fruit is of two sorts; for falling upon good ground, yt brings herbs Micah.
5. 7.
and fruit worthy of the dressor, and receaueth blessing of the Lord. On the
other side, if yt fall upon il ground, which ^till brings thorns and briars,
yt delivers yt not from, but rather hastneth yt unto the curse 1 Cor. 3. 6.
and judgments of God. Neither can any labor of man, though Paul Ierem. 2. 22.
plant and Apollos water, any thing preuail^, except God give the increase.
Amos 6. 12.
That which is crooked can no man make straight. No washing, no soap, or nitre,
can cleanse the Leopard from her spots; horses ca^ not run upon the rock;
neither can any man plow there with oxen.

The sownd of the Gospel is to some the sweet savor of life unto 2 Cor. 2. 16.
life, unto others, the savor of death unto death. The gospel preached does not
make all the land, or all that hear yt straight way members of the Church
without seen, faith, and obedience. NOAH preached a 2 Pet. 2. 5.
great while (whiles the Arc was in making) unto the old world, but prevailed
not. The Lord sent to Israel and Judah in their defection 2 Chro. 36. 15. 16.
many Prophets, rising early and sending; yet they gave not ear, but mocked
the messengers of God, despised his word, and misus^ his Prophets. The law and
the Prophetts were daily read in the Synnagogues of the Jews, at such time as
CHRIST came: yet neither they nor their rulers knew or acknowledged him, but
fulfilled them in condemning him: Yea CHRIST himself, that most lively,
powerful, excellent teacher, preached the gospel among them with great virtue
and mi^acles; yet believed they not on him, that the saying of Isa. 53. 1.
the Prophet Isaiah might be fulfilled; Lord who has believed our Isa. 6. 9.
report; or to whom is the arm of the Lord revealed: therefore they could not
believe, because yt is said again; he has blinded their and hardened their
hearts, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with their
hearts, and should be converted and I should heal them: And again in an
other place; And I said I have Isa. 49. 4.
labored in vain, I have spent my strength in vain, and for nothing: but my
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. Then neither this doctrine
follows: that where a Christian Prince maintains the gospel, and the people
by the same authority are compelled to hear the same; that the whole
multitude, without further proof of their Christian obedience, are herevpo^ to
be received into the Church, and made partakers of the bread of the children,
and the holy things of GOD: neither yet this strange opinion which is
generally taught by the learned preachers of these times; that where there is
a preaching minister, there that parish is ^ndoubtedly (how profane and wicked
soever the people be) to be held and accounted ^ true Church of CHRIST: except
these presumptuous shepheardes, these companions have greater virtue and
prerogative then CHRIST himself had, who could not bring this to pass in the
places where he taught: Yea the folly of some, even of the chief Rabbines
amongst them, has yet proceeded further; namely, that WHERE (...) is one
parish that has (as he terms him) a burning lamp viz. a preaching priest
amongst six or seven other parishes having smoking lamps, viz. dumb priests
that cannot preach, there the light of this burning lamp (or star called
wormwood) shall enlighten the other candlestickes also, and give them the
estimation and dignity of true Churches likewise. But my purpose is not here to
entreat of the excellency of these preachers, and how powerfully and purely
they preach the gospel: thereof in due place. It now remains to see, whether
the virtue of the sacraments thus administered unto the whole multitude of a
land or state, can sanctify and make holy, or be available to this people or
no.

It has been above showed to be great sin, shamful negligence, high
contempt, insufferable profanation and sacriledg in the whole Church to admit,
administer unto, or communicate with such: Neither can the holiness of the
sacraments any way excuse, but rather 1 Cor. 11. 29.
greatly augment their sin and judgment, which deliver such holy 1 Cor. 5. 6.
hag. 2. 14
things to such known unworthy receauers which discern not the 1 Cor. 10. 3.
4. 5.
Lords body, neither can the holiness of the sacraments sanctify Romans 4. 11.
the receauers, especially the unworthy receauers; whose filthiness defiles
the sacrament, even as leven the lump. The sacraments confer not so much, as
seal Gods grace unto us, they give not faith to any so much, as confirm the
faith of all the worthy receauers. But where they are thus prostituted and
sacrilegiously profaned, they bring no such joy, they seal no such comfort,
but rather Gods assured wrath for the abuse of his ordinances, the people,
sacraments and all, being hereby unclean and polluted in Gods sight. Neither
preserve they unto the Church hereby her unity and power, but (...). 4* 4. 5.
rather take away al communion, and so corrupt and poison yt, that Ioh. 1. 6*
7. 2 Cor. 13. 8.
now their fellowship is not in the faith, but in sacriledg and sin: And for
the power of the Church, yt is not given them to receive Deu^. 4. 6. and the
whole book.
and admit, but to drive away and keep out the profane and open unworthy, from
the table of the Lord. Number. 5. 2. 3.


THE NEXT shifts these Balaamites have, for the administering CALVIN ius^. lib.
4. Cap. 1. 8 (...)* 13.
unto, the communicating with, and retayning the profane in the bozome of
their Church: are certain Arguments, drawn by Mr. CALVIN from the 13. and of
Matthew, against the Anabaptists, to prove that the Church here on earth shall
never be without sin, and is not to be left for sin etc. comparing the
Church to a corn Math. 13. 24*
field, which being sown with good grain, is by the enimi^s fraud scattered
with tares: of which yt is not cleansed, until the crop be brought into the
barne-floore: and unto a net, in which all Math. 13. 47.
kind of the fi^hes are gathered together, and are not chosen out, until they
be laid out upon the shore etc. and unto a floor, wherein the wheat is so
gathered, that yt lies hidden under the chafe, until by Math. 3. 12.
fan and syue yt be at length laid up in the grainer.

The doctrine which Mr. CALVINE here ind^uoreth to prove, as yt may be
understood, is true: for no doubt while the Church consists of mortal men, so
long is yt subject to sin and ignorance; else had we no need of CHRIST to be
our mediator, ou^ advocate, our high priest, our Prophet, to make our peace, to
intercede for us, to Heh. 12. 24.
offer up our prayers, to instruct us etc. Therefore such as shall for 1 Ioh. 2.
1.
sin leave the communion of the Church, must seek the society Heb. 4. 15.
16.
of Angels, and not of men: Much better should they do, according Deuteronomy. 18. 15.
to the Apostles council, to admonish them that are out of order, to comfort
the feeble minded, to bear with the weak, to be patient 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
toward all men: yea if the sin be public and of the whole Heb. 10. 24. 25.
Church, gravely, in the name of the lord to reprehend and reprove the same,
and lovingly to exhort them to repentance and amendment; rather then
preposterously to leave them, and rashly to forsake the fellowship, as the
manner of some is. And doubtless, if yt be the true ^xod. 23. 21. 22.
spouse of CHRIST, yt will give ear to the voice of the bridegroom, Deuteronomy. 29.
9. Heb. ^ 2. 3.
and not continue obstinate in presumptuous sin; for therefore were Romans 6. 1.
and 10* 31. and 12. 25.
they not received to grace. Faith does not abrogate the law, neither came
CHRIST to take away the law, so much as the curse of the law Lam. 1. 25.
from the Church: And hereunto serves that great base and sea of James. 1. 23.
24.
CHRIST'S blood, which is placed in the Church to purge and wash 1 ^g. 7. 23.
away through faith and repentance those deformities and blots of sin, which
the gla^sse of the law ^heweth: and not upon the priuiledg of CHRIST'S death to
take bouldnes to s^e, or to continue in any known sin, or to neglect or
despise the word, or to think lightly of the l^ast sin, or not with all
possible speed to redress yt rather, and remove yt out of the Church;
whereunto the true church never wants either will or power: Neither ought any
faithful servant of GOD ^o communicate with that assembly, which wa^teth
either will or power to reform and amend any default which is committed amongst
them, after yt is made known unto them; as shall apear in the further handling
of these and other their places, and Arguments, which they have corruptly
sucked from Mr. CALVIN in this discourse; who no doubt has vnsuffe^ably
perverted and wrested these places and other places of scripture, and drawn
very foul and corrupt doctrine from them, touching the estate and order of a
planted Church, and more dangerous and damnable conclusions from the same: as
that yt is lawful for the Church to receive and retain the ignorant profane
multitude, to admini^ter the sacraments unto, and communicate in the same with
them; that the sacrament is not defiled with such open unworthy receauers,
neither the faithful of the Church with this actio^, or their fellowship: also
that we ought to abhor and withdraw from the wicked in common bread and
conversation, but not in the worship of God, and the sacraments etc. that the
people and our sauiou^ CHRIST did communicate with the polluted priests,
corrupted sacrifices and people etc. These and such other fearful and false
doctrines and conclusions, contrary to the whole course of scripture, his
disciples have drawn from him. And in deed his abuse of these and other
plac^s; as the epistles to the Churches of Corinth, Galatia, Asia etc. and his
discourse thereof, seem to import: which that yt may more plainly apeare, let us
come to the more particular consideration of his places, and examine whether
any such doctrines, applications and conclusions may be drawn from them, and
that breefly.

To HIS FIRST place, where he resembles the planted Church to that sown
field, or rather confidently affirms that sown field to be the planted
Church etc. and from thence draws, that seen and known tares shall grow and
remain in the planted Church, until GOD ^oot them out; and thereupon
concludes, that none ought to refrain the communion of the Church for such
offenders, especially, where the word is purely taught, and the sacraments
rightly administered; which he makes his two infallible marks of the Church,
leaving out obedience unto and practice of the word, which he and his
disciples, under the name of Discipline, make an hangby: whereof in due place.

First here against Mr. CALVIN'S writings and his disciples, I oppose the
interpretation of our Savior himself, who opening this parable upon his
dis^iples requests unto our good, says, that he which sowed (...). 13. 24.
the good seed is the Son of man, and the field is the world, and the good
seed are the children of the kingdom, and the tares are the children of that
wicked one, and the enemy that sows them is the devil, and the harvest is
the end of the world, and the reapers are the Angels etc. What interpretation
can be more excellently consonant in every point unto the parable, the^ this?
or what other interpretation can be (...)? is not every part of yt most lively
opened? did no^ GOD at the first make the world, and all things in the ^me,
good? was Genesis ^. 3^.
Genesis 3.
^t not corrupted through the fraud and malice of the devil? has ^ot GOD
still in yt his Church visible and universal, here and there ga^hered and
scattered in the world? has not the devil also, that prince ^f this dark
world, his children and servants, which as tares ouergrow and grieve the
wheat, and cover the face of the whole f^ld? Is not this ^he condition and
estate of the world, and shall be to the end? Now here though GODS children by
the light of his word epsy, and grieve at Luke 9. 54.
^hese wicked tares, so see this world, which is in deed ye Lords field, and
belongs to the good seed, and not unto the evil, thus pestered and ^uergrowne
with the wicked: yet may they not by a rash and inordi^ate zeal be carried
away, either peremptorily to judge and condemn, ^r utterly to extirpate these
tares, as reprobates; both because the lord has reserved this final judgment
and execution unto himself Romans 9. 24. Ierem. 18. 6. Act. 5. 1. 7*
*who knows to what he has predestinate every vessel that he ^ath made,
whether unto honor or to dishonor) and reserueth the Isa. 40. 13. 14.
^easons and oportunities when to call or cut off in his own hands; and Romans
11. 33. 34.
^ath neither committed these things to man, nor need to be cou^celled or
advised in the^ by man. But Christ in this parable rather teaches ^is
disciples patience and sobriety, to be patient toward al men, as their
heavenly Father is patie^t; rather suffering and instructing ye evil 2 Timothy 2.
25*
with meeknes, proving if God at any time will give the^ repentance ^y they may
acknowledge y^ truth, and come to ame^dment out of the ^nare of the devil, of
whom they are taken prisoners to do his will; 1 Timothy 2. 1. Romans (...) 19. Romans
14. 4.
^ather piti^ng in their souls and praying for all me^, the^ judging and
fi^ally condemning any, or calling for fire and vengeance upon them Iam. 4. 12.
etc. This were a preposterous zeal, and greatly against Gods glory 2 Pet.
3. 9. Ezekiel. 18 32. Ezekiel. 33. 11.
*who wills al men to be saved, calls the^ to his Sons marriage ^east, and
therefore causes the gospel to be preached and proclaimed for us) after we
are once entered to shut the door of Gods grace against others. we were not for
this cause received to mercy, but rather to provoke others to taste of Gods
goodness also, and be examples ^ Tim. 1. 16.
^o them that shall in time to come believe unto eternal life. If Paul, Mary
Magdalene and others, nay if we our selves (by whom of al others we know most
evil) had been plucked up by the roots, whiles we grew amongst the rankest
of the weeds and tares in the field of the world, had yt not been much ruth?
had not much good wheat been spilt? but he y chose and called us out of this
dark world, unto Ti^us 3. 3.
the glorious inheritance of the Saints in light, shall show the like Coloss.
1. 13.
mercy unto them also, if they abide not in unbelief. Our savior Christ
whiles he was here emongst us, came not into the world as Romans 11. 23.
the^ to judge or co^de^ne the world, but that the world through him Job. 3.
17. and ^2. 4^
might be saved. Let not us then take that upon us, which belongs not unto us,
neither judge before the time; seeing God has not given to his church to
censure or judge them without, but to attend 1 Corin. 5. 13.
Jude 14* ^5.
upon, and judge them which are within: God judges them that are without.

But now, how may this place of the sown field (without insufferable vvrasting
and falsifying) be understood of, or applied unto the planted Church of Christ?
shall these stinking vveedes and noisome Math. 16. 19. and 18. 17. 18. Psa^. 14
9. Cant. 6. 9.
tares grow there vnweeded out? or has not GOD therefore given unto his Church
and every member thereof, the vveeding hook of his word, and the power of our
Lord JESUS CHRIST, vvherby to censure 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 10 4. 5. 6. Heb. 12. 15
and cut off every obstinate offender, to cast down every high thing that is
exalted against the knowledge of GOD, and to have vengeance ready against all
disobedience and every transgression that arises amongst them. Is not the
whole Church, and every member thereof often and almost every where in the
scriptures commanded and stirred up to keep this vvatch diligently? and for the
neglect and contempt thereof read we not of sundry Churches sharply reproved,
yea utterly cut off? and is yt then likely that our savior CHRIST would here
utterly forbid his Apostles and Disciples, to intermedle with the vveeding out
of these tares out of the Church, his garden? does not this place, thus
understood of the planted Church, utterly subvert and overthrow all
ecclesiastical censures? and condemn the Apostles of presumption for stirring
up the Churches to excommunicate and cast out their obstinate offenders,
inordinate walkers, heretics etc. from amongst them? yea for so sharply
reproouing 1 Cor. 5. 2 Cor. 12 20. 21. Revel 2. and 3.
whole Churches, and threatening to come against them with the judgments of
GOD for their defalts herein? which way can all the learning these men have,
reconcile these places; but that 2 These. 3. 6. 14.
by this their interpretation there must needs be express co^trarietie. But
as they thus pervert this place, so the application of yt, and their collection
from yt, is much more pernicious and vnsusferable, as shall afterward appear.

THE NEXT place that is brought for the receiving and reteining their profane
sinful multitudes in their Church, is the Parable of the draw-net, vvherin
fishes of all sorts are gathered, and not severed until the Lords final
iudgme^tes. This is granted them to be understood ^ Tim. 5. 24.
of the planted Church, where, by the power of the word, all degrees and sorts
of men are gathered, and amongst them diverse false and wicked hypocrites,
which shall continue and remain in the Church, until the Lord pluck off
their visors and pull the^ out, whether by death or by his final judgment.
This is no new thing, this Mat^. 22. 11.
is not denied, this always has been, and always shall be unto the end Re^l
2. 17.
of the world. Many shall enter without the wedding garment, without that
white stone, that inward testimony and assurance, which no man knows save
he that receaueth yt, and GOD gives unto none, but unto his chose^. Many
glorious hypocrites shall there Man. 7. 21.
be, which make a fair show in the flesh, which shall have prophesied, 1 Io^.
2. 19.
cast o^t deui's, and done great works by CHRIST name, which in that day
shall call, and not be heard. But what of all this? may yt ^om hence be
concluded, that the profane multitude, without due ^stimonie and proof of their
faith by public profession etc. may ^e admitted into, or any open wicked
which remains obstinate ^d impenitent may be retained in this Church of
CHRIST? Surely ^is ground will bear no such doctrine, this place no such
con^ruction.

THERE YET remains an other maine place to uphold their con^sed profane
assemblies, drawn from the third chapter of Matthew 12 ^rse; where they liken
the gathered and established Church of CHRIST unto a barneflore, in which the
wheat is so gathered to^eather, that yt lies hidden under the chafe, until
being cleansed ^ith fan and sieve, yt be a^ length laid up in the grainer etc.
yea Mr. ^ALVINE in an other peculiar treatise against the Anabaptists, using
^is place of Matthew, says, THAT the faithful shall be in the planted church of
CHRIST hidden amongst the open wicked and ungodly, as (...) few grains of
wheat lie in a great heap of chafe etc. Then which doctrine nothing can be
devised more unclean and corrupt, ^r more unworthy the Church of CHRIST, as
breaking all the or^inances and laws of GOD at once, and utterly subuerting
and defi^ng all Christian communion etc. which doctrine, as yt is directly
^ontrarie unto the whole course of scriptures, both for the entrance ^to the
Church, and for the order and conversation in the Church; (...) can no place of
scripture be applied to the upholding and confir^ation thereof, without
insufferable falsifying and violent wrasting ^e same.

As for this place Ma^hew 3. 12. yt no more proves this doc^ine, then the
others out of Math. 13. for here Matthew rather recor^eth the conclusion of Ihon
the Baptistes sermon and doctrine, then any way describes the estate of the
established Church of CHRIST, (...) the 11. and 12. verses showing the
incomparable excellency of CHRIST'S person and ministry, in respect of his;
and also in the same ^ewing the diverse effects of Christ's coming unto such
as looked ^or him, who as they were of two sorts, so had they several
suc^esse. The one sort he baptized, the other he consumed with fire, Mal 3. 1.
2. 3^ Is^. 65. 5. Mal. 4. 1. 2.
^he one sort he fanned, fifted, purged, fined, and preserved as wheat and
silver; the other with the same fan and furnace he ^scattered and burnt up as
chafe and dross. The humble poor of the flock, Zach. 11.
^vhich gave ear to the voice in the wilderness, which confessed and Mal. 4. 6.
^epented their sins, and made strait his paths, and received Ihons
^aptisme; those he received, fed and kept etc. but those proud Pha^isies, Isa*
8. 14. 15.
learned Scribes, and carnal Sa^uceis, which thought them^elues Luke 2. 34.
Luke 7. 29. 30*
in a perfect estate, and despised the council of God against ^hemselues, and
would not be baptized of Ihon; those when the ^ESSIAH also came, despised and
contemned him, and therefore he Amos 5. 18. 19. 2^*
^ut them off in one day, yea his day was unto them darkness and not ^ght etc.

But now which way should this foul unclean barn-floore, thus pestered and
ouerspred with chafe, be likened almost (without bla^phemie) unto ye holy
Church of Christ rightly planted, established and governed according to his
holy will and testament? where (as has Ioh. 15. 19. To. 1. 7.
been said) all the people that enter and are received there, are chosen, 1
^et 43. 1 Cor. 1. 2.
redeemed, called out of the world from amongst the heathen, 2. Cor. 6. 17. 18.
Saints by calling, partakers of the same precious faith and glorious 2 ^et.
^. ^.
hope, humble, obedient, loving sheep. And therefore is y^ church likened to a
sheepfold, which is both watched and defended to Numb. 24. 6.
keep out the wild beasts, the wolf and little foxes; unto a garden shut up,
and welspring enclosed; an orchyeard and vineyard walled, Cant. 4. 12. 13. 14.
where all the plants are natural sweet incense trees, pomgranate and al sweet
fruit trees, Myrrh, Aloes, cynnamon, with trees of chief Isa. 35. 8. Io^l 3.
17.
spices. Here enters no Cananite, or profane person, but every Zach. 14.
20. 21.
vessel shall be clean and holy, as bowls before the Altar etc Furthermore 2
Ch^on 4. 16.
eue^ in the material temple there were ash-pannes and besoms, E^od. 38. 3.
to sweep and carry out al dust and filth: And even in every barn-flore the
husbandman has his flayle, his fan, his syue, to tresh his wheat out of the
ear, to purge yt from the chafe, to sever yt from darnel and tares etc. which
labor if he should slack, he should have no use of his wheat, he should have
no clean nor wholesome bread. And how much more shall our heavenly husbandman
purge his ^. Cor. 10. 17.
seed his wheat from such reprobate chafe and giddy darnel, before he receive
them into one loaf, and set them at his heavenly table. They cannot be a new
lump unto him, except they be purged from ^ Cor. 5. 7. 8.
the old leven of maliciousnes and wickedness. The servants of God Ezra. 4. 3.
2 Cor. 6. 14. Nehem. 13. 23. 24.
can neither build the Church, nor join in any spiritual actio^ with the
profane, nor with such counterfeit professors as the Samaritanes, nor with such
bastardy false seed as that of MOAB and of ASHDOD Leuit. 19. 19.
etc. There may be no misseline or seeds of diverse kinds sowe^ Exodus 19. 5. 6.
in the Lords ^ield. The God of heaven and earth requires unto Mal. 2. 15.
himself a holy seed, he will be sanctified of all that draw near unto He^.
12. 28. 29.
him, for even our God is a consuming fire. How then dare any admit Ezekiel. 4 4.
7. and^.
those the Lord shuts out of his Church? or how dare they (...). 23. 28.
mingle and joins such reprobate known chafe, cockle, tares and darnel with
the Lords wheat, wittingly and wittingly, which the Lord with fan and syue
purges, and seuereth, and casts out of his barn-flore, much less receaueth
not into his granarie.

But how far is their ignorant rash^es, or rather presumptuous boldness
proceeded? which not only receive into and retain in their Church and
fellowship these heaps of the wicked and open vnwor^, even all the profane
multitude, and al sorts of people that are found within their territories and
jurisdiction, without respect of person; but even thrust them upon Christ
whether he will or no, and make ^ Cor. 6.
him an high Priest and Prophet unto them, administering unto them and their
seed the holy things of God; as baptism, and the Lords supper: Is not this
to mingle heaven and earth, ligh and dark^? or that higher sacrilege can be
committed? shall these places, thus 1 Pet. 2. 8.
^rasted and falsified, hide and diminish their sins? or rather not agra^ate 2
Pet. 3. 16.
and make manifest their error and wickedness? By what sober con^truction, or
almost common sense, can this place Math. 3. be vnder^tood of the planted and
rightly ordered Church of Christ? or how ^ay such a Church be compared to a
flore, where in a great heap ^f chafe, a few grains of wheat lie hid and
buried? we read in the ^criptures, that the righteous shall shine as stars in
the Church of God (yet I willingly acknowledge that there can in this life be
no wheat so pure, which has not both chafe and branne etc.) but that ^n an
other sense; only I would know of these men that thus grossly ^iken the Church
of God, what difference we may put betwixt the ^orld and their Church? In the
world in deed the children of God ^hal for a season be mingled and remayn
amongst the profane and wicked, until the time of their visitation and calling;
but after they have once given obedience unto the voice of Christ, then forget
they and forsake their old conversation and company, and have no longer
fel^owship with the unfruitful works of darkness: but are renned in
^ighteousnes and holiness and true knowledge, after the image of him that called
them out of darkness into his merueilous light etc.

But to cover and cure all this confusion and disorder, all this sacrilegious
profanatio^ and portsale of the holy things of God, and al other mischeifes
and enormities amongst the^, as also to stop the mouths, and to terrify al
such as find fault with, and reprove these things or depart from amongst
them, where the same are ^ncurable and without redress; these Balaamites,
these crooked disciples of Mr. CALVIN bring from him the examples of the
Churches of Corinth, Galati^ and A^ia, where were open wicked men; as the
incestuous person, drunkardes, gluttons, extortioners wranglers, wrong-doers,
proud and ambitious persons, sectaries heretics etc. as also sundry abuses
and corruptions in doctrine, and in the administration of the sacrament etc.
yet they were by the judgment of the holy Ghost notwithstanding al these
sinners and sins, adjudged the holy churches of God, neither were the
faithful commanded to refrain their communion. Furthermore the Prophets and
our savior CHRIST, at such time as the estate of the Jews temple was wholly
corrupted, forsook not the Temple, but resorted and communicated with the
wicked people, at their feasts and sacrifices; Yea when the pollution and
contagion was general and incurable, both in the people and priests: bec^se
(says their Author) a godly conseience is not hurt by the unworthiness of any,
either minister or people; nor yet their ministry being the ordinance of GOD
(as their ceremonies, sacrifices, and prayer with them etc. the word and
sacraments with us) defiled; but are pure and wholesome unto the upright and
faithful receauers, who may lift up pure hands in a wicked assembly, neither
ought for the wickedness of me^ to ref^se the holy ordinances of GOD; seeing yt
is only CHRIST'S office to purge the ba^e-floore, and sever the tares etc. and
belongs to no private men to examine others, or the whole Church, so much as
for every one 1 Cor. 11. 28. and ^ 1 Cor. 1^. 29.
to examine his own self, and to see yt he be good wheat, least otherwi^e he
eat unto his own judgment. For the bread of the Lord, and the faithful
receauers thereof, are not made worse with the sins of others: It is one thing
in common bread and conversation, to flee the company of wicked men; and an
other thing for hatred of them, to forsake the fellowship of the Church.

These and such other poisoned blasphemous cauils they bring, to justify and
uphold their confused babylonish synagogues and all the abominations they
commit in them. which wind^haken figleaues, although I could in a word pluck
from them, and so lay their filthiness naked; namly by showing that there can be
no comparison betwixt the Church of Christ, and their whorish idolatrous
Church, which has not one part of a true church, not one pin, nail, nor
hook, according to the true pattern, or in due frame, and so could set this
their Author (upon whom they so much rely) most sharply against them; who in
all these treatises is always to be understood of a Church rightly established
and planted according to the Testament of Christ, with such ministers, such
sacraments, as there are appointed etc. the^ which here amongst these his
followers is nothing less, as shall not be hard to show in due place. And
therefore the Arguments, drawn from the Churches of Corinth Galatia etc. eue^
by their Authors own judgment, nothing serve their turn, who are more like to
DAN and BETHEL in the schismatical estate of the kingdom of Israel, remaining
still in that great defection of Antichrist fortold of etc. yet seeing they have
taken the pains to fetch these Arguments from over the sea, and so ernestly
urge them, let us do them the favor even so far as we may with Christian
patience, to give them the hearing.

THEIR FIRST Argument seems to be this. THERE WERE in the Churches of
Corinth, Galatia etc. not only wicked persons, but also sundry errors, abuses
and corruptions in doctrine and administration: yet they were still judged ^he
Churches of God, and the faithful re^rained not their communion, th^rfore we
ought not to leave these their assemblies, though the open wicked and many
other enormities be there committed and suffered.

First (as has been noted) there is no comparison between these holy
Churches of God, which were truly gathered, planted and ordered, and these
their confused idolatrous assemblies. Then here must be observed, that they in
nothing can be compared unto these C^urches, but in sin and error; moreover
that the faults of these Churches, which were but of ignorance and frailty,
cannot be compared to the sins of these vnchristia^ assemblies, which are in
presumption and obstinacy disproued by others, confessed, and yet continued of
themselves. Lastly here must be noted, how corruptly they understand, and
vnsufferably pervert those scriptures, where the apostle reprehendeth these
sins in those churches etc. exhorts the whole church to repentance, and to
redress the things amiss, and that with sundry severe and apostolic
threats, upon their ^eglect or default therein.

But these me^ take these places, where the sins of these churches are thus
sharply reprehended and censured, and would justify thereby, the receiving,
reteining and nourishing all this profane rowt of people in the bosom of their
churches: as ^lso all the abhominatio^, idolatry, open and wilful breach of
Gods laws, setting up their own antichristian divises and pop^sh cannons in
stead thereof etc. and would from hence conclude yt, to be no more lawful for
true Christians to remove out of these assemblies in this estate, then yt was
for the faithful in the churches of Corinth, Galatia etc. to forsake those
churches, before their sins and errors were either reproved or ce^sured. What
more insufferable abuse of scriptnres can there be the^ this, to take those
examples which were written to terrify, admodish, and stir up all Churches and
posterities to eschew, watch against, and r^dresse such sins and
transgressions, to color and cloak al sin and iniquity, yea to take away
from al Christi^ns their liberty, and prower, either to reprove, censure, or
refrain the same.

These churches (say they) were judged and pronounced by the holy ghost, the
churches of God, notwithstandi^g these heinous sins amongst them. Well, what
then? these and al other churches whiles they remain in this life. shall commit
sundry and daily sins of ignorance, frailty etc. therefore they may also
commit presumtuous sin, y^a remain incorrigible and obstinate in their
sins, and yet of us be esteemed and reverenced as the true churches of God:
this they must prove, or else they say nothing: this, these examples of these
churches prove not. For they cannot show that ever they de^pised the Apostles
admonition, or refused to redress the things they were blamed of: which if
they should have done, houw could they be esteemed the church of God, whiles
they reject the word, break the law, despise correction, yea even Gods grace
and mercy offered, by stopping their ears and hardening their heart, refusing
to repent etc. What can the heathen do more? nay wh^t do they so much? for
they sin in their ignorance, these in the presumtion of their heart, and
contempt. And now in this estate, what communion is to be held with them? what
fellowship may the children of God have with such reb^ls, apostataes. Can any
glorious titles or name of a Church, hide or diminish these sins? or how
rather can the name of a Church (without blasphemy unto Christ) be given them
in these sins? how can Christ be said to stand a King and Lord unto them that
break and reject his laws, and set up in stead thereof their own devises and
inve^tions? or how can Christ said a savior unto them that despise his grace
and mercy offered, refuse to repent and turn from their evil ways. They then
not being under Christ's protection, nor in state of grace, while they continue
obstinate in their sin etc. I have often wondered, how any man of sound
indgme^t, could give them the name of a Church? or be so terrisied with this
vain and false title, that they durst not leave the communion of those wicked
assemblies and adulterous Churches, which have broken the covenant, and
forsaken the faith. God plighteth Exodus 19. 5.
not his favor and protection unto us, longer then we vow our obedience,
Leuit. 26.
and keep our faith unto him. At what time the most righteous Deuteronomy. 28.
turns from his righteonsnes and commits iniquity, and Ezekiel. 18. and 33.
Ch^p.
will not be turned therefrom, all his former righteonsnes that he has done
shall not be mentioned, but in his transgression that he has committed, in his
sin that he has finned, in them he shall die. The same Judge, by the same
law, gives the same sentence 2 Pe^. 2. 4. ^. 6.
for the same sins, against a whole Church, nation, world. Neither I^de 14.
15.
is there cause why any of Gods servants should more doubt to censure, judge,
and avoid that Congregation, which rejects Gods word, presumptuously
breaks Gods laws, despises his reproof and mercy, as a wicked assembly,
an adulterous Church; then to censure, judge and avoid any particular member of
the Church, fallen into the like degree and height of sin, to be a withered
unfruitful branch, to be cut off from the vine, to be thrown out of the
vineyard.

But here they deceive themselves and others, with certain infallible marks
of the Church, which they have fantasied unto themselves; namely that where the
word of GOD is sincerely taught, and the sacraments rightly administered, there
undoubtedly is still the true Church of CHRIST; although otherwise there be
never so many mischeifes abounding, all the wicked received and retained etc.
no use of the power of CHRIST among them, either to censure sin, or cast out
obstinate offenders. For this holy power to redress faults, they put aside by
the name of DISCIPLINE. They call yt an accident, or hang-by, and make yt not a
thing of necessity: so that yt may be a Church without yt, though yt be to be
desired etc. The vanity and falsehood of these doctrines partly apeareth, where
I showed that the preaching of the word makes not a Church, except there be by
the same a faithful people gathered unto CHRIST JESUS, ordered and governed by
the rule of his word in all things, so far as shall be revealed unto them etc: so
that I need not here stand to refute the sam^* only I would know of these great
learned men, how yt is possible for the ministers of the Church, either to
preach the word si^cerely, or administer the sacraments rightly, where there
is no regard had to the faithful practice of the word, no care to redress
things amiss, no power to shut out or excommunicathe the unworthy: Or how
they can with all their learning, whiles they stand Pastors or teachers to such
an unbelieving profane people, or unto such wick^d ones as hate Isa. 57. 2^.
to be rebuked and reformed of their sins, preach the word, exercise Ier^. 4.
4.
prayer, deliver the sacraments, bless and dismiss the profane wicked Isa.
48. 22.
people in the peace and favor of God, without most high sacriledg Pro. 24. 24
and 17. 15.
profanation of Gods name, casting the precious body, and blood of CHRIST to
hoggs and dogs, blessing Gods enemies etc. M^th. 7. 6.


But now i^ yt be not possible to exercise any true ministry, to have any
true use of the word and sacraments, to keep any holy Mar. 13. 34 35. 36. 37.
communion or Christian order, without the diligent watch of every member, but
chiefly of the rulers and Elders, to see the word of God 1 These. 5. 14
duly practiced and observed by all in their callings, to admonish all Ephesians.
5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
offenders, to censure all errors and transgressions, to excommunicate the
obstinate impenitent, by the power of our Lord JESUS CHRIST which he has given
unto his true Church unto the worlds end, all which, these men cover and cast
aside in the name of DISCIPLINE, without which watch and power, this practice
cannot be had, without which power and practice, the word of God is made an
idol, the 1 Cor. 4. 2^
sacraments sacrilege unto us, and all things we do, odious and abominable
Titus 1. 6*
unto the Lord: with what common sense (to let pass their deep learning) can
these great preachers say, that the Church of CHRIST may want this watch, care,
power and practice; yea and that the word may be sincerely ta^ght, and the
sacraments duly administered, though there be open transgression, obstinate
offenders still kept and held amongst them. Is yt not as much as if they said
they knew neither what the Church, sacraments, ministry of the word, or
Christian communion meant? For to what purpose is the word or the ministry of
the word, where true practice and obedience is denied? or which way ^an the
true minister of CHRIST administer the sacraments ^o a people in this estate?
or the faithful servants of Christ, partake with such people in such
sacraments, without most heinous sacriledg and impiety.

WE MVST NOT (say they) forsake the Church, nor the ordinance of GOD, for the
sins of any, either minister or people: for a godly conscience is not hurt
with the sins of another, neither the ministry or sacraments therewith
defiled. If they mean h^re by the Church, the assembly and communion of God^s
faithful obedient servants, by Gods ordinance the use of an holy ministry
of the sacraments etc: I grant that the Church, ministry, and ordinances of
CHRIST, are not to be left, or thought the worse of for the sin of men,
though all the world abuse them, though ANTICHRIST have corrupted them never so
much or long. But if they mean (as al their reasoning imports) by the Church
and ordinanc^s of God, such wicked rebellious assemblies, as reject the word of
God, with an high hand break his law, despise admonition, hate to be
reformed, receive and retain the open unworthy, wicked, impenitent to their
sacraments, etc. I then deny these assemblies to be the true Churches of
CHRIST; seeing they have broken the covenant, cast off CHRIST'S yoke etc. As
also I deny their sacraments to be the ordinances of God, seeing to them in
this estate belong not the sacraments and ministry of Christ, but the curse
and judgments of God: And therefore they that leave Heb. 10. 30
them for, and in their sins in this estate, do neither leave the Church 2
Cor. 6. 17, 18.
of God, nor the ordinances of CHRIST, but rather fulful the commandment Re^el
18. 4
of God, and preserve the Church, in saving their souls and bodies from such
wicked and accursed assemblies, from such disobedient rebellious people, and
from all the trumperies and deceites of the false Church etc.

But let us a little examine, what kind of doctrine these men draw from Mr.
CALVINE, and spread abroad in their pulpites, and public writings. They hold
that whatsoever Congregation keeps an outward show of the ministry of the
word and sacraments, cease not to be a Church, neither is to be left for any
sin in manners (as they call yt) whatsoever, though they willingly and
presumptuously neglect and break the laws of God, both in their worship and
conversation, and remain incorrigible and obstinate in these transgressio^s:
Now they teach, that neither for such sins God is so displeased with the
congregation, that he hereupon withdraws his favor from them, or they ^cease
to be held and reverenced of us, as a Church: neither the public actions of
the said congregation, as their prayers, preaching, sacraments etc. neither
the co^municantes with this assembly in these actions, are with and for these
sins, defiled.

For (say they) a godly conscience is not defiled with the sins of an other.

What fleshly libertine has or can breath forth more poisoned doctrines then
these? more contrary to the honor and whole word of God, from which yt at
once takes away al reverence, obedience, and practice. What can be more
popishly alleged for their Church, then to say, that yt can bless these
actions and persons, whom God in his word accurseth: or that the Church may
commit such high sacrilege and presumptuous sin, without the judgment and
punishment due to the same. If God have made one and the same covenant from the
beginning of the world with the whole Church, that he has with every
particular private member thereof, and has given no more liberty to the whole
Church, then to any private man, to break the least of his laws: if God, for
the transgression of his law, impartially judges al, without respect of
persons: if presumptuous sin with obstinacy joined thereunto, breaks the
covenant with God; insomuch as yt both breake^h Gods law, and despises Gods
mercy and grace, and so depriueth them in that estate of any benefit of
CHRIST'S death: If they which in this manner break Gods law and despise his
grace, to be judged of al men, as open wicked etc. If all the actiones of the
wicked be accursed of God, and so much the more accursed and abominable, by
how much they take show of holiness, and profane Gods name and ordinances: If
all they which partake in such actions, prayers, and sacrifices which are an
abomination unto the Lord, be guilty of the altar, and under the same curse;
how should those assemblies, which continue in presumptuous and obstinate
sin, be esteemed the true Churches of CHRIST; or any that administer unto, or
communicate with them in this estate, in prayers, sacraments etc. avoid the
judgment and curse of God, both for ioining unto, and blessing the wicked, and
for so high profanation of his name, and prostituting the holy mysteries of the
^odie and blood of Christ, to such open unworthy receivers? Rightly then and
directly to reason to the point. As many places of scripture as command Gods
faithful servants, with all their forces and vttermostindeuor to observe,
practice, and obey unto Gods holy word and every part thereof, without any
willing neglect or breach of the least commandment, to their knowledge: As many
places as show, that obstinate and presumptuous transgression breaks the
covenant: As many places as command us to seek out and resort unto the true
Church of CHRIST, namely the communion and fellowship of the saints, Gods
faithful obedient servants, there to present our souls and bodies, to be
built and bestowed according to Gods will, there together with the^ to worship
and serve our God etc: As many places as forbid us all false Churches and
assemblies, al spiritual fellowship and communion with the wicked, or to
repair unto, or join with the^ in their prayers and worship etc. So many
places forbid us al spiritual fellowship and communion with al assemblies in
this estate, what fair shows soever they make unto us, or glorious titles
they take unto themselves: so many places evidently prove, that if in this
estate we should communicate with them, we should be guilty of their sins,
and partakers of their plagues. Which doctrines, because they are generally
received of all, denied of none (though omitted and forgotten by many) and
generally taught through the whole scriptures; I need not here stand to make
any more particular proof or demonstration of them. And so these being
granted, all these doctrines of Mr. CALVINE and his Disciples fall to the
ground. Yet that the falsehood of them may somewhat more appear unto all men;
let us draw a little nearer unto them, and consider of their maine proofs, and
fundamental doctrines.

The public actiones (say they) and ministerye of the Church, as prayers,
sacraments etc. neither the godly conscience of any are defiled with the
open sins of others, either of ministers or people etc. For why, such
public actions are the ordinance of God, and cannot be defiled or made
vnavaileable with the sins of men, neither are to be left for such sins:
Therefore the holy Prophets and our Savior CHRIST himself, refrained not the
Temple, at such times as the estate thereof was vholy corrupted, but
communicated with the wicked in their feasts and sacrifices, although the
pollution and contagion was general and incurable, both in the people and
priests: For the rest, every man is to eyamine himself and not othe^s, when
he resorteth to the Church, or receives the communion of the body and blood
of CHRIST: because he eats to his own damnation or salvation, and not to an
other man's etc.

First, if the open sin of the minister or people defile not the prayers and
sacraments by, and to them administered, why has the Lord said, that ^he
sacrifice of the wicked is abomination unto him; that they might as well kill a
man, as a bullock unto him; that they might as well ^rou. 15. 8.
offer a dog or swines blood, as sacrifice or burnt offering? why has the Isa.
1. 13. and 66. 3.
Lord said, that sacrifice without obedience, is not acceptable unto him; that
he will have mercy and not sacrifice etc. Why has the Lord been Iere. 7.
Hos. 6. 6.
always so ielous over his sanctuary, and over them that come near L^uit.
10. 3.
unto him? why has he made so many laws for the place, Altar, sacrifice,
Leuit. 21. and 22. Chap.
priests, people etc. that no priest with any apparent blemish, might offer
the bread of the Lord, that no offering with any blemish might be accepted at
the hands of any, that none with any pollution Leuit. 11. 12 13. 14. 15.
Chap. Numb. 5.
or uncleanness upon him, might touch the tabernacle, that no heathen or profane
person which was not yet come unto the faith, might tread in the courts of
the Lord, or any offering be accepted at their hands? why has the Lord said,
that whatsoever the wick ed offer is unclean, whatsoever the polluted touch is
defiled? whether yt be the couch or seat they sit or lie upon, or vessels they
use, whether yt be holy flesh, wine or oil, yt is defiled etc. Now then,
seeing the Hagg. 2. 13. ^4.
whole scripture is so evident and plentiful in this point: That the open
sin of the Church, defiles all the actions of the Church, makes them and
their offerings abominable unto the Lord: seeing no polluted person may either
administer or offer unto the Lord: seeing no polluted person may either
administer or offer unto the Lord: seeing vvhat^euer they touch, is also defiled
and unclean; how can this doctrine of Mr. CALVINE and his wretched followers,
stand? THAT THE OP^ sins, either of the minister or people* defile not the
public actions, prayers sacraments etc. of that Church, those ministers,
people, sacrifices, they cannot deny to have been the ordinances of God also:
Yet even their holiest things were defiled and polluted, with the sins, and
uncleanness of men.

Now to the other point: WHITHER a godly conscience can take no hurt, neither
need make scruple to communicate with the open wicked priests and people, in
their prayers and sacraments* because they are the ordinances of GOD, which
are not to be left for the sins of men: I have already often denied their
prayer and sacraments in this estate, to be the ordinance of God. My reasons
are; the wicked have nothing to do to take the name of GOD in their mouths,
or to use (...). 50. 16. 17.
that heavenly exercise and blessed benefit of the word and prayer, because
they make no conscience (...) break Gods laws, and remain impenitent and
hardened in their sins: then in this estate belong no sacraments or
ministry unto them, by the ordinance of GOD; who Math. 26.
has as well set down what manner of minister and people shall deliver Mar.
14.
and receive the sacraments, as after what manner the sacraments Luke 22.
shall be delivered. So that where such open wicked, impeni^t, and unworthy
ministers and people do administer or receive the ^ramentes, so contrary unto,
and without regard of CHRIST'S insti^ion, such sacraments can no way be said
the ordinances of CHRIT, ^e blessed pledges of his body and blood etc: but
rather, sure seals of 1 Cor. 11. 29
(...) wrath, even to as many as so sacrilegiously profane his holy ordi^ce, 2
Cor. 13.
and join together in that ungodly and accursed action, until ^y repent. For,
as in the holy symbol of the Lords supper, the 1 Cor. 10. 17
^mmunicantes be made one body with CHRITS, and one another 1 Cor. 12. 13.
^mbers in the same body; so are these bound together as a faggot, the same
judgments and wrath, in as much as they join together the same sin, and
sacriledg, and all become alike guilty, even prin^als (as we speak in the law)
in the action. Ho^ then should any ^re plead himself guiltles, when eue^ the
action they commit and boast (...) is most heinous sacrilege. The matter will
not in this case be shif^d off with saying, an other man's sins cannot
prejudice or defile ^em, seeing they receive with pure conscience etc. For
though this ^ctrine (as yt is here used) be most corrupt and false; yet here is
now (...) need, that they should be charged with others sins, seeing they in
^is action are joined unto, and become a like guilty with the worst, and ^ust
now bear the burden of their own sins.

But is this doctrine so hard and strange to them? that one should be ^lluted
with the known and suffered sins of an other? Let them ^ade in the law,
whether he that touched but the garment of a pol^ed man or woman, much more of
a leprous plaguey etc. was defiled ^erby. If this were but by outward and bodily
touching; how much ^ore is that spiritual leprosy, that GANGREN^, these
running is^es and plaguey sores of sin infectious and deadly contagious,
espe^lly in so near commixture, as that spiritual communion of the ^ule? If
the word of GOD will not prevail, let common sense and ex^rience persuade
this. Yea so spreading is this malady of sin, as ^ing discovered in any one
part of the body, if yt be not with all speed ^red or cut off, yt becomes a
like dangerous to the whole body; ^ey all now, by this their negliglence and
tolleration, becoming a ^e guilty etc. How many stories have we in the
scriptures to con^me his? not only in particular, as betwixt ELY and his sons
(for ^l whose wickedness he was blamed, in that he did not repress ^d
chastise, but only reprove their sins) but more generally. Josh. 7. Numb. 25.
^as not the whole Congregation smitten, for that ACHAN his sin ^y hidden
and unpunished amongst them? was not all the Congrega^on punished for the sin
of some in mount PEOR? was not the like ^ared Josh. 22. Does not the Apostle
say, that a little leaven leaue^th the whole lump? and that their reioicing was
not good whiles Exodus 12.
^ey kept the wicked man amongst them? Does he not prove yt by 1 Cor. 5. 6. 7.
8.
^any reasons? that as by the law, the feast of the Passover was to be kept
with unleavened bread, and that person that ate or reserved leave^, was to be
cut off from the Congregation: so much more ought we to see, that there be no
leavened or infectious person amongst us; that Leutt. 20. 4
no root of bitterness spring up, least many thereby be defiled etc. Does Deuteronomy.
29. 18. 19. 20.
not the Apostle (to take away al controversy) show by this similitude of
leaven, that not only sin, but even the sinner is to be removed, Heb. 12. 15.
both out of the feast (which belongs not unto such, neither is to be Jude.
12.
kept whith such) least Gods wrath for the breach of his law, in keeping the
continual feast of our heav^nly passover Christ Jesus, burn forth against the
whole house, that is, the whole Church; and also that such sin and sinners be
removed out of the Church, least the whole lump be leavened thereby; which we
see how suddenly yt is done: For (as the wise man says) One dead fly causes
the ointmentes of the Eccle. 10. 1.
Apotecarie to stink. Now then, how ca^ these me^ say, that the sins, yea
the many obstinate sins, either of ministers or people, do neither defile the
public actions of the church, neither the conscience of the godly receauers
etc: where (as has been by many reasons proved) the very action they so
incommend, is no less^ then most heinous and impious sacrilege. So then, until
they can prove yt lawful, and no sacrilege, either for that obstinate and open
wicked, to administer and receive the sacraments, and also for the godly to
communicate in such sacraments with them; until they ca prove these
sacraments, thus administered and received, to be blessed of God; until they
can prove that two diverse, yea contrary sorts of people, namly the open
wicked, and the godly, such as despise, and such as fear God, may be admitted
unto, yea united in the sacraments: these doctrinis of theirs cannot stand.
But see into what straites and absurdities they fall, whith go about to
tolerate or plead for the least sin: yea see how the fu^ther they wade and
strive herein, the further they entangle and ensnare themselves, falsifijng and
perverting the scriptures, to the upholding of their erroneous and corrupt
doctrines.

FOR THEIR next shift to couller and hide their sacrilegd, is to hood, wink,
and draw a veil over the eyes of the receaver. A PRIVATE M^N (say they) HAS
not to meddle whith the public actiones and affairs of the Church: which (if
they be amiss) he is patiently to bea^e, and to mourn and groan with love,
until God either amend or correct them, whese office it is to root out the
tares etc: but he is not for the sin of others to forsake the fellowship of
the Church, which God will have kept, by all that shall be partakers of his
kingdom. It suffices that eve^ie private man look to himself, examine himself,
when he eats of that bread, and drinks of that cup; least he eat unto his
own judgment and damnation. Here the Apostle (says their Author) wills
them, not to enter into the examination of other men, neither says that they
shall be judged for other men's faults, or that the t^ble of the Lord is to be
left for the wicked, yea, or that the wicked for some one or few sins are to
be left. In this case Charity is to judge the best, and to think, that in so
great an heap of chafe, there lie many good grains of wheat, yea to
persuade himfelf, that eue^ of those wicked, many do inwardly repent of their
sins, although they have ^ot power to amend their lives: The best man of us
al is subject to many sins; the sins of others cannot take away the virtue
of the ministry, and of the holy mysteries, which are not to be left for the
sin of any; but such wicked rather to be shunned and avoided, in commom
bread and conversation: but the Sacraments are NOT BEcause of them, to be
refused. etc.

This and such like detestable stuff, has Mr CALVINE in his igno^ance, partly
to suppress and confute that damnable sect of the Ana^aptistes; which
fantastically dream unto themselves a Church in this ^ife without spot, and
for every transgression that arises, are ready to ^eaue and forsake the
fellowship of the Church, without due and order^y reproof etc. partly also is
this stuff brought, to defend his own ^ash and disorderly proceedinges at
GENEVA, whiles he at the first dash made no scruple to receive all the whole
state, even all the profane ig^orant people into the bozome of the Church, to
administer the sa^ramentes unto them: which confuse rowt, could not fit with
Christ's ^eauenly government, neither could yt by any means agree unto the^ ^n
this estate; but that monstrous disorders, and heinous enormities daily insued
thereof: whereby this their Church became a just reproach ^o all men* even to
these wicked here^ikes etc. yea, that which is ^orse, and more to be lamented,
yt became a miserable president, and pernicious example, even unto all Europe,
to fall into the like ^ransgression: as the confused estate of all those
regions (where the ^ospel is t^us disorderly taught) declares. In which
sorrowful spec^acle, we may lively behold what the wisdom of the most learned
^s, where they swerue never so little from the heavenly wisdom of God, and what
the most glorious and sure buildinges of man are, when ^hey are not wholly laid
upon that firm rock and foundation of Gods word. We may here also clearly
see, what yt is to receive ^ur Faith by tradition, to fetch the rules of our
actiones from the ^xamples and practice of men, and not from the pure word of
^od: ^or behold how these wretched disciples of CALVIN, three fold more
corrupted and perverted then he (who as yt is to be thought would never have
opened his mouth against so clear truth, being ^rought unto him) oppose with
main force and bitterness these his writings, against the manifest truth of
God; yea and contend more for (...) crooked practice of the^ (as their suting
to parliamentes for this re^ormation) declares, (...) for that holy perfect
pattern of Christ's Testament; to the upright practice whereof, they will at no
hand be ^rought.

But let me return again to these doctrines of Mr. CALVINE, from which (by
reason of these circumstances) I was a little digressed. ^ have already often,
and I hope* sufficiently showed* how corruptly M^. CALVINE thought of the
Church, or rather how ignorant he was thereof, by these his odious simileas and
comparisons. I have showed, that into the Church of CHRIST, al must enter by
the door, and open profession of the true faith, and by the same faith and
obedience stand ther^: how no ^rofane or wicked person may be received or
retained into that fellow^hip. I have showed that the ministry and
sacraments of CHRIST belong not unto this people or Cong^egation, and how such
sacraments and ministry a^e sacrilegious and ungodly, yea pernicious and
damnable to the whole Congregation and all the communicantes, unless they
repent and redress these faults. I have showed touching his marks of the
Church, that whersoeuer the word is soundly taught, there is not by and by a
Church; but only where a faithful people are gathered by the same word unto
CHRIST; submitting themselves in all things to be ordered, ruled and gou^ned
by his word, as yt shall from faith to faith be revealed unto them. Which
people, thus gathered, and leading their lives together, are to be esteemed an
holy Church, and have power both to receive into, and cast out of their
fellowship etc. although they have as yet obtained to have neither a ministry
nor sacraments among them: always pro^ided, that this be not by any default
or negligence in them, they always being ready (as GOD administreth men and
means) to procced unto that holy order, commanded in the word: whereby
apeareth, that the Church upon some occasions, may be without sacraments; and
that they are not a perpetual mark of the Church, (...). 5.
so of necessity, that yt should be no Church, if upon some occasions, yt be
for a season without them. I have also showed, that without this holy power of
CHRIST, to censure and red^esse faults and offenders, there can be no Church,
no ministry, no communion; that the word without practice is an idol; prayers
and sacraments delivered in obstinate sin, are abomination and sacrilege
in Gods sight; and that yt is impossible to have the word sincerely taught, and
the sacraments purely administered, where any open sin or sinner is
maintained, or retained: which must needs be, where the careful watch
against sin, and power to reform defaultes is neglected, or left. I have
showed, that the whole Church has no power to dispense with the breach of the
least commandment, and that such obstinate sin in the whole Church, breaks
the covenant with God, and makes yt cease to be a Church, or to be in Gods
favor, until they repent. I have showed, that al their prayers in this estate
are accursed of God, and also all such as participate with them in the same. I
have showed, that the known and fuffered sin of any one member, is
contagious unto all such as communicate with him in that estate, and makes
them all which communicate in prayers and sacraments with such an obstinate
offender, as guilty in Gods sight, as he himself is. I have showed, Exodus 23.
2.
that no faithful man ought, by any Congregation of men or Angels, ^al. 1. 8.
^e drawn into the least known transg^ession of Gods law etc. Which
doctrines, although they suffice to ^catter and disperse these smoky er^ors of
Mr. CALVINE and his disciples, yet seeing they have so roiled the ^ountaine, and
(as yt were) darkened the sun with these my^es and foggs; ^t shall not be
^misse ^o discuss these points (which remain) a little ^urther; and see what
power eue^ie particular member of the Church ^ath in the Church, and in the
public actions of the Church; and also ^o see wherein, and how long they are to
keep communion; and for what, and when to leave the same.

It is manifest, that all the members of the Church have a like in^erest in
CHRIST, in his word, in the faith; that they altogether make 1 Cor. 12.
one body unto him; that all the affairs of the Church belong to that Romans
12. 6. and^.
body together. All the actions of the Church, as prayers, censures,
sacraments, faith etc. be the actions of them all jointly, and of every one
of them severally; although the body, unto diverse actions, use such members
as yt knows most fit to the same: All the members are jointly bound unto
edification, and unto all other helps or service they may do unto the whole:
All are charged to watch, exhort, admonish, stir up, reprove etc. and hereunto
have the power of our Lord JESUS, Ps^. 149. 6. etc.
the keys of the kingdom of heaven, even the word of the most high; thereby to
bind their rulers in chains, and their nobles in fetters; thereby to cast down
every strong hold and high thing, that is exal^ed against God; thereby to
defend and maintain the faith, and every iode of the Mat. 18. 20
word, to stand fast in their liberty, to try the spirits, to avoid such as
Man. 16. 19.
teach contrary doctrine, and consent not to the wholsome vvo^des of 1 Ihon.
4. ^.
our Lord JESUS, or deny the power and practice thereof, to admonish Romans 16.
17.
the greatest, even ARCHIPPVS, to look to his ministry, and (if n^ed 1 Timothy
6. 3. etc.
be) to plead with their mother etc. yea no further to follow her or an Angel
of light, then they walk with God, and have the word for 2 Timothy 3. 5.
their vvarrant. Our communion must be in the faith, and not in error Col ss.
4. 17
or transgression; we are not to follow a multitude to do evil, but Hos. 2. 1.
in all things to follow faith to the conservation of our souls, and to 1
Ioh. ^. 6. 7.
grow up into him which is our h^ad, CHRIST JESUS: vvhom^, Heb. 10. 3^
vvhiles we hold fast, and whose word, vvhiles we have for the things we
do, or refuse to do, we need not f^are the (...) of any vain men; neither
be amazed at any vain titles of Church, sacraments etc. For this we know,
that there is no Church can excuse us for the breach of Gods law, before that
great Judge. Now then, seeing eueri^ member has interest in the public
ac^ions of the Church, and together shall bear blame for the defaltes of the
same; and seeing all our communion must be in the truth, and that we are not
to be drawn by a^ie into any willinge or known transgression of Gods law;
who can deny, but every particular member has power, yea and ought to
examine the manner of administering the sacraments, as also the estate,
disorder, or transgressions of the whole Church, yea, and not to join in any
known transgression with them, but rather to call them all to repentance etc.
and if he find them obstinate and hardened in their sin, rather to leave
their fellow^hip, then to partake with them in wickedness.

Neither does the place 1 Cor. 11. 28. 29. THAT EVERY one ought to examine
himself etc. hinder either their Christian liberty, or public duty; for
these rules are general, the words are general and alike given to every
member, and unto all the members of the Church, without respect or exception of
any, either Pastor or others. So that by this reason* neither Pastor nor any,
were to look unto the life, conversation, and estate of an other: neither can
these rules or words any way be restrained to one, more then an other; much
less may such corrupt doctrines; and false conclusions be drawn from them:
THAT BECAUSE every man is to examine himself, therefore no man is to look to
an other. Every man eats either to his own salvation or damnation; therefore
the open sins of minister or people, do neither hurt the sacraments there
administered, nor the godly conscience of the receivers. What sense or sequel
is in these reasons? what can be devised more false or foolish? because every
one is to look to his own private estate, therefore no man may meddle with an
other man's, (...) with the public estate. Were he not as foolish that could be
led or carried wi^h these reasons, as they that made them?

But being granted them, what kind of Church? what communion? what duty? what
law or fear of God, would there remain? If the second we^e granted; that the
open, yea the obstinate sins of others, do hurt neither the sacrament, nor
godly receivers; what does yt then skill who they be that administer, or rec^aue
the^, or where they be administered, whether in the popish or turkish
assemblies: A godly man (as they count him) may resort to what idolatrous or
sacrilegious assemblies he will; so he in his heart go to worship God, yt
skilleth not what outward sin there be committed, or he ioineth unto, that
hurts him nothing. What blasphemous hellish doctrines are these? which take
away at once the whole Testament of Christ, and word of God, or tolerate the
open breach of them? which take away all Christian liberty, duty, and
communion. May we join to open sacrilege, and most heinous profanation of
Gods ordinances, and that with the open wicked and impenite^t, and not be
guilty? Call they this to examine our selu^s? or to eat to our own
salvation? they make a fair interpretation of, and collection from these
places.

But might yt not better be comprised within the examination of our selves, to
examine and look how we dischardge both our public and private duties
toward God and our brethren etc. which, how can I think I any way discharge
unto them, that suffer my brethren, even before my face wittingly and
willingly, ^o run headlong into assured destruction, to eat their bane and
damnation, yea and give consent thereunto. O what a cruel and vnme^ciful part
were this? Call they this to ^eepe the unity of the Church? not to break the
fellowship etc. In ^eed they say true; In thus doing in this communion I should
not break ^e fellowship, but even for company go to hell with them. For (as
^e Apostle says) we which are many make one body and one bread, because we
are together partakers of one bread.

But o how much better should we provide both for them and our ^lues, to
examine well, and declare unto them what this action is, and how ^ur savior
CHRIST has not only instituted after what manner yt is to ^e delivered and
received, but also who should deliver and receive yt: and ^o show them, how in
this estate they remaining impenitent and obsti^ate, there belong no
sacraments or blessing unto them, but rather a ^arful looking for of judgment,
seeing they both break GODS laws, ^ despise GODS grace: and therefore the
sacraments seal unto them, and unto as many as either deliver the same unto
them, or participate ^ith them in the same, the assured wrath of God; both for
that they ^lesse and join unto the wicked, and so become guilty of all their
sins together with them: and also commit most heinous sacrilege, in breaking
^he institution of CHRIST, in delivering the sacraments (as they preend) unto
the open unworthy, and ioining together with them therein. I ^ope they are not
so grossly popish, to suppose that the sacrament can ^nctifie the unworthy
receauers, and giuers: that in deed were no small ^iracle, that yt should do
more then CHRIST does (whom yt repre^nteth) especially where the institution
is so wilfully and impiously bro^en, as with them; where yt is delivered to the
open unworthy, who as the Prophet says) defile that holy thing whatsoever they
touch.

But say they, Charity must think and judge the best; yt must think, ^at in
this heap of chafe are many grains of wheat. Well yt does ^ink so; what of
this? can those grains either justify this sacrilege, (...) set a loaf of
filthy chafe upon the Lords holy table, or sanctify the ^icked, this heap
of chafe etc. Surely, well ought charity to border (...) yt self within the
compace of sobriety, and not peremptorily to ^dge or determine of any, who
belong to Gods election, and who be ^probates (which God has kept secret to
himself) unless they see ^ese damnable signs of the sin against the holy
Ghost, upon them: 1 I^on. 5. 1^
et cannot charity judge or pronounce any to be grains of wheat, ^hiles they
lie together hidden and vnseperated from this filthy chafe, ^ese apparent
wicked and wickedness; for charity must be directed and ^dged by faith, and
faith by the word of God.

But charity ought to judge (say they) that even the worst, when the^ ^ome to
that ^able, are inwardly sorry, and secretly repent. But does cha^itie see this
sorrow and repentance? if not, how should yt judge, and per^wade yt self it is
so? yea, and presume thereupon to communicate with hem, and receive them unto
the table of the Lord? Charity had need ^aue a good ground in these high
matters, and not walk by rote, least yt ^estroy both the^ and yt self:
Charity may not break Gods law^s: their ^innes are seen, known^ and
public, their repentance must be answerable, secret repentance suffiseth not
the church for open sin; they must see and witness the repentance, or else
they must proceed without delay to excommunication. Charity for no respect,
can either linger, lighten, or take away Gods judgments. It always, even in
all causes says: RIGHT and true are thy i^dgmentes, King of Saints. The
judgments of the Church and of all the faithful, are the judgments of the
Lord, which must be uprightly (without al ea^thly affection or inclination any
way) executed, least Gods wrath burn likewise against them, as we have
plentiful examples in the scriptures. How then say these blind guides, that the
faithful ought not to meddle with the judging of the wicked in the church? It
is only Gods office to root out the tares. Their final judgment, we with all
humblenes re^it unto the Lord, the Judge of al. Their temporal judgments the
Lord has committed Deu^. 29. 29.
to his Church, and to every member of his Church, who are to pronounce upon
them the judgments that are written, and every Deuteronomy. 17. 7.
member of the Congregation throw upon them the stone of his judgment and
consent. Therefore has the Lord raised up the thrones of DAVID in his Church;
and set his Saints upon seats round about his Throne.

Yet for all this, the beginning and end of their song is: THAT the Church and
table of the Lord, is not to be forsaken and left, because of the wicked. True,
for the wicked are to be chased and driven from thence, where none may enter or
stand, without his seen wedding Math. 22. 12.
garment upon him. But (as I have been often driven to say) they that abandon
these wicked perverted assemblies, which will not be withdraw^n from their
sins, but remain hardened and obstinate, leave not the Church or Table of
God, but preserve the Church and Table of God. They make not the schism which
keep the faith, but ^eb. 10. 39
they that forsake the faith: yea and the faithful, thus separate, ought not
for the sins of these or any, to neglect or intermit these holy exercises of
the Church, but to inde^or to have them in all holy and pure manner, according
unto Christ's ordinance etc.

THE last shift and help they have for receiving the profane and wicked to the
sacraments is: that we ought to detest and abhor their conversation in common
bread, because that is in their power and will; but not for their sakes to
refuse the sacraments, because that is not in their will. What can be more
gross and foolish? know these men what belongs to the communion of Saints?
Is it in our power to refuse Heb. 10. 25
him in conversation, to whom we join in the faith, and in communion* Or may
I abhor and drive him from my table, whom our Savior Christ receaueth and
admits to his table? Am I or my table holier then he or his? What a
pharisaical pride were this? eue^ the same they exercised unto the publicanes:
where is now this charity they erwhile spoke of? Love covers the multitude
of sins and wantes; let not him that ^. ^et. 4. 8.
is strong despise them that are weak, but receive them unto him etc. R^m. 14.
1.
instructing them with meeknes, bearing their burden etc. May they ^en despise
and abhor any that is held a brother, or avoid his company ^fore he be
excommunicate, or have forsaken the faith, and remain ^rdned or impeni^ent
etc. what a preposterous dealing is this, to re^aue the wicked unto the Lords
Table, and to drive them from their ^ne table. This is clean contrary to the
Apostles doctrine, which 1 Cor. 5. 11. 12. 13.
^ace Mr. CALVINE thought to escape and put away with this botche. (...) there
teaches, that i^ any which is called a brother, be a fornica^, or co^uetous,
or a railer etc. such one is both to be purged as leaven (...) of the lamp,
and also e^chued in civil meats: But such profane (...) wicked, which have
not yet embraced the faith, such are to be kept (...) of the Church, and from
the Table of the Lord, though otherwise (...) are not so to abhortheir civil
conversation, seeing we may have so ^any occasions thervnro, whiles we remain
in this world. Whether (...) shall we believe Mr. CALVINE or the Apostle, they
being so di^ctly contrary. For the other point of forsaking the Table of the
^rd, I i^sist in that which is already said, still saying, they ought in ^erie
true Church to be kept from yt, especially upon obstinacy, ^ter admonition.

BUT YET Mr. CALVINE thus gives not over the matter, but indeuoreth to prove
(that the godly may, and ought to communicate with the open wicke^, and yet
shall not be defiled thereby) by the examples of the Prophets, in the corrupt
times before the captivity; and of our savior CHRIST while he lived here, who
in the most corrupt times refrained not the sacrifices, prayers, or public
ministry of the Temple, for the wickedness either of priests or people: but
nauing regard to the unity of the Church, and unto the ordinances of GOD, they
held up pure hands in a wicked assembly.

first I cannot perceive that in all this Mr. CALVINE has proved ^at the
Prophets, or our Savior CHRIST, have at any time joined, ^to, or with any
unlawful or pulluted priests or people, such as by (...) law of God ought not
to administer or offer in y^ Temple: neither (...) to any unlawful prayers or
sacrifices, which ought not to be offered ^ere. And so all these examples are
to no purpose alleged, and make ^thing for him. For we still, by the rules of
CHRIST'S Testament, hold (...) utterly unlawful to receive or retain any
profane or wicked per^n, to administer unto, or communicate with such in the
sacraments. (...) that all, and whosoever so does, most heinously break Gods
law, and (...) all guilty of high sacriledg etc. Into which manif^st wilful
trans^essions, neither the vain titles of the Church, neither the false flag
(...) the gospel and sacraments, ought to draw or allure us.

As for these times under the law (whereof he speaks) the worship (...) God
then consisted in outward legal ceremonies concerning the ^me, place,
priests, people, sacrifices, Altar etc. with prescript laws (...) eu^rie
thing: which outward ordinances, if they diligenrly kept (...) observed, there
was then no cause why such sacrifices should be left* insomuch as they were in
that outward worshipp altogether vnr^proueable. Other faults of manners,
except such as ou^wardly defiled the body, or were contrary to the laws of
the Temple, as bastardy, whordome, idolatry etc. the priests or
ecclesiastical estate then meddled not with. They belonged to the civil
magistrates, whose office yt was then, both to censure and punish such
offenders according to the law. Whiles then the ecclesiastical laws which God
in that estate appointed, were duly observed, there was no cause why the
Prophets or any should refrain that worship: yet were the Prophets (which were
appointed of God to instru^t both the eccsesiastical and civil estate) to
admonish and reprove the civil magistrates, and to cry out against them, and to
denounce Gods judgments against the one and the other, and to show the^, that
neither Temple nor sacrifice, neither fathers nor covenant could excuse or
deliver them from the wrath and curse of God, whiles they continued in these
sins, and deferred to repent.

But now under the gospel, where al things are become new and spiritual, Revel.
21. 5.
where CHRIST has given unto his Church, and unto all his faithful 2 Cor. 5.
17.
servants his power and authority spiritually, to censure al manner of sin
and sinners; he has given them his holy word, and made them all Kings and
Priests thereunto; he has commanded them to watch, and Exodus 19. 6.
diligently to take heed, that no profane or wicked impenitent person 1 Pet. 2.
5.
be admitted unto, or kept in his church: but diligently to watch both without
and within, that the one sort be kept out, the other cast out of his Church.
The legal pollutions, leprosies, ulcers running issues, infections, and
unclean diseases, for which then the people were separated from the Temple and
the Congregation; are now in this Church all manner known sins, obstinatly
held and maintained, which are far more infectious and contagious unto the
souls of the whole Church, then those filthy diseases were unto the body.
Neither is the Lord Heb. 12. 15.
our God less ielous, or will be less offended, for keeping such in his
Church, and admitting them unto his table now, then he was in those days, when
the leprous, plaguey, or polluted were kept in the Congregation, and admitted to
the altar: especially seeing he has now given as great charge, as prescript
laws, both whom, when, and how to cast out, as he did then. So that, as
abominable should our worship and offering now be unto the Lord, and all we in
as great blame: (seeing unto all his servants this charge, this watch, this
power, these laws are given) as they in the former times, for the
transgressions aforesaid.

But now peradventure, these disciples of Mr. CALVINE will from their masters
mouth affirm (for so in deed his words and writings apparently import, else as
we haue^ showed these examples are brought to no purpose) that the Prophets
and our savior Christ, in those most sinful times, where al estates and
persons were thoroughly and wholly corrupt, all the laws of God, both concerning
the Church and commonwealth, the worship of God and ciual conversation boldly
broken by all, without any regard or conscience: that yet in these times the
Prophets and our Savior CHRIT communicated with these priest^s and people in
these sins, and were not defiled with their sins, but held up pure hands
amongst them. Before I show the m^nifest untruth, the pestilent errors and
insufferable blasphemy of these doctrines, I demand of them how they prove,
that the Prophets and our Savior CHRIT communicated in these times with these
priests and people thus defiled and corrupted, thus openly breaking Gods laws
and ordinances, both concerning his worship in the Temple, and the government
of the common wealth. I see no proof alleged, except yt be this: they built not
other Churches, they erected not other Altars where they might have their
several sacrifices. What of all this? They built not other Temples and Altars,
therefore they communicated with the abhominatio^s in the Temple; they had no
private sacrifices, therefore they resorted unto the pollu^ed and corrupt
sacrifices, used at these times in the Temple: Are these their best reasons?
that because they did not one sin, therefore they did ^n other: Can these men
find no mean course? What if the Prophets in these times did neither of both?
shall not the ignorance, falsehood and boldness of these men then apeare, which
thus slander the Prophets, ^alsifie and pervert the scriptures, to maintain
these damnable errors, and wicked dealinge. The first they themselves confess
and allege: the sec^nd (though they bring no one place of scripture to
approve) I thus by evident testimonies, both of the stories and of the
Prophetts them^elues, disprove. In the time of King ACHAS, when the Lords
brazen 2 King. 16*
Altar was removed and set aside, a new Altar, after the form of that at Ezekiel.
44.
Damascus was brought in, and used in the place of the other. The priests that
served thereunto, offered also upon other Altars which were set up by that wicked
King to other Gods etc. Likewise in the time of MANASSES and AMON, when
Altars, groves, and high places were built ^ Chron. 3^
unto Idols, the priests attended them, and other Altars (which the Lord 2 Chronicles. ^6
had forbidden) brought in and set up in the courts of the Lord. In the times
of IEHOACHAS, IEHOIAKIM and ZEDEKYAH, when the Idol of indignation was again
set up in the utter court of the people, in the next court of the Levites were
painted upon the wall the s^ilitude of all creeping and abominable things, as
also all the Idols of the house of Israel, and the 70 antientes burning incense
unto the^: yea where the women woue hangings for the Egiptia^ Gods, and
mourned for TAMMVZ: yea yet nearer the presence of the Lord, in the court of
the priests, even at the very door of Temple of God, they turned their backs
upon God, and with their faces toward the east worshipped the Sun. I would
here demand of the learned^t of these priests, whether they think that in
these times the Prophets communicated with these priests? or how they can
prove yt?

The contrary is to be proved, both by the laws of God, which forbad them to
touch any polluted thing, especially to keep themselves undefiled with the
filthiness of idols etc. and also in the stories of Hezekiah, and Josiah;
Hezekiah in the beginning of his reign, finding all things thus defiled and
corrupted, c^lled such godly Priests and Levites, as h^d in his Fathers time
refrained ^he (...), and left off to administ^r, and exho^teth them to look and
address^ themselves unto their charge which was committed unto them by the
Lord, to sanctify themselves, to purge the Temple, and cast out the
abominations his Father had brought in etc. which we read by the^ to be done,
and the whole house and land purged by solemn sacrifice: And after that, the
feasts which had before been intermitted, were again renewed and orderly kept.
Iofi^h also, after he had purged the Temple, cast out and defaced the idols,
placed and restored the priests and Levites in their due orders, struck and
renewed a covenant with the Lord, summoneth the Priests, Levites, and people
again to the due keeping o^ the feasts commanded in the law. And 2. C^ron.
35. 3. (according to TREMELIVS his translation) he says thus unto them. But he
said unto the Le^ites preparing the holy things of the Lord for all Israel,
set, or put them before the holy Arc, in this house which SOLOMON the son of
DAVID King of Israel has built: It lies no more upon you a burden to be
carried upon your shoulder: now serve I^HOVAH your God and his people Israel. In
which words he calls the Priests, Levites, and people to the law and
institution of God Deuteronomy. 12. 5. etc. (...). 17. 3. etc. that now all their
feasts and sacrifices ought to be brought and kept before the Lord in his
Temple, orderly according to his law, and not as when the Ark might be removed,
to be kept in sundry places, neither yet as in private houses, as in the time
of the corruptios where the Lord bare with them, as if they had been in Egypt
in private houses.

Now for the third time of IOZIAH his successors, let the 9. Chapter of EZEKIEL
be considered: where we findal iudg^d and damned to destruction, which were
defiled with these abominations; and only those m^rked by the Angel with the
writers ynckhorne, and saved, which kept themselves pure from, and cried out
against those abominations: likewise his 16. and 23. Chapters, where the Lord
pleads against them as against an harlot which had forsaken her husband, and
left, yea murdered her children; and therefore that his faithful servants
should judge them not as the Church of God (as the false Prophets then and now
do) but as harlots and as murt herers etc. His whole Prophecy is plentiful in
this Argument, ^hewing all to be defiled and abominable by these sins, and
that the glory of the Lord utterly abandoned both the Temple and the City. All
the Prophets in all their writings abundantly show, that the faithful
refrained in these corrupt times, and infinite reafones might be drawn from
thence, to prou^ the same: but I hope, that which has been already alleged,
suffices in this point. Now I would only know of these learned disputers,
which bring these examples of the Prophets and our Savior Christ, ^hinking
thereby fully to conclude the matter, and to drive the nail to the head:
whether if they should have communicated with these wicked and defiled priests
and people, they should not also have sinned, and been polluted? If they deni^
that yt had been no sin in them, and that they should not thereby be defiled
(as Mr. CALVINE in his wriring^s does) then I ^ring the manifest laws of GOD
against them; where yt is written, that no polluted person might either
administer, or offer in the (...). This then being unlawful for the priests or
people to do, must ^eeds also be unlawful in the Prophetts which were not
ignorant of this law, to suffer or consent unto etc. It is also written in
their law, that whosoever touched any unclean thing or polluted person, was also
defiled thereby: yea what holy thing soever such polluted person touched,
whether flesh or oil, was defiled and abominable. How then can these men say,
the Prophets willingly ioining to such open breach of the laws and ordinances
of the Temple, touching and mingling ^hemselues with such vncle^ne and
unlawful priests, people, and (...), were not both defiled herein, and
transgressed Gods laws?

If they say the Prophets communicated not in any unlawful action, or with any
polluted person, then to what end do they bring and urge their examples, to
draw us to join with them in open and known ^ransgression. If they say they
communicated with the priests that administered in the Temple in these corrupt
times, then could yt not be, but both the priests and they, must ne^des be
defiled with the ido^atry and abominations that there were set up, as above is
showed. Now nothing can be a greater transgression, or mo^e filthy and
con^agious defilement, then to join to idolatry, or idolatours. Neither can
any be a greater allowance of joining unto them, then to make them our mouth or
ministers unto GOD, or together with such, to join in any action concerning
the worship of God. Thus then yt must needs be: that the Prophets (if they
communicated or offered, by, or with such corrupt priests and people)
grievously with them transgressed, and were together with them defiled, neither
could they judge or cry out against the sins of the time, when they
th^mselues were alike guil^ie and partakers with them in these sins. With
what conscience then or f^are of God, can they persuade us to sin, by the
Prophetts examples? May they not as w^ll by the exam^les of the Patriarchs
DAVID etc. persw^de us to inces^, (...), murder? if yt we^e sin in them,
shall yt b^ l^sse i^ us? ar^ these (...) and examples well used or applied by
them?

But how will they now do^, when even that stone which they had set us as a
triumphant monument of their vic^orie, is rouled upon their ^ead, and shall
g^ind them to dust, except they r^tire and repent. For whiles they affirm our
Savior CHRIST to have communicated with ^he wicked polluted pri^stes and
people in feasts and their sacrifices, and that at such a time (says their
Author) as al estat^s were thoroughly cor^upt and desperately incurable; how shall
they in this case clear him of grievous sin and pollution, or themselves
rather of most accursed and insufferable blasphemy? Great corruption there was
no doubt in the ciui^ estate, by reason that the civil gouerme^t was in the
Gentile^ hands, the profane Romans that knew not God; and thereby also great
slacknes and defaultes even amongst the priests and rulers of the Temple, as
apeared by the sects and errors amongst them, by the many tr^ditions brought
in, and ye great and more weighty things of the law, as mercy and judgment,
neglected. Great also was their blindness, hardness of heart and obstinacy,
which not only did not acknowledge, but refused and murdered the Lord of life
himself, that flourishing tree of all righteousness, that innocent, in whom was
found no sin. Yet notwithstanding all this, I cannot find by the hystories of
the Eua^gelistes, but that the outward ordinances of the Temple were
indifferetly well kept and observed, especially about the time of Christ's
birth, when were found diverse godly priests and holy, just men and women, that
administered and offered in the Temple.

To take all doubt and controversy away, the holy Ghost records, that all
things about him, were done according to the law. We read also that his
parents accustomably resorted up to Jerusalem, at the ^uke. 2. 39.
feasts; which, they being godly, would not have done, if they had not been
kept according to the law. So that here was no apparent or lawful cause, to
drive away the godly from the Temple and sacrifices: neither any comparison
betwixt the outward estate of the Temple, and the outward estate of those
Congregations which receive and admit the open wicked and unworthy to the
sacraments, and will not be admonished or redress the same. But to come to our
Savior Christ's person: I read not any where, that he communicated or offered
with the priests and people in the Temple; neither brings Mr. CALVINE, any
proof thereof, save that he went up unto the feasts. But we read not that he
went up to offer or communicate with them according to the law, but rather to
teach and instruct them, and to call them to repentance Ioh. 5. 16. 18.
and amendment of life. We every where read, how sharply he reproved both
priests and people; insomuch as they, even at the beginning Ioh. 7. 8. 9. 10.
11. 12. chapte^s.
of his ministry, sought to kill him; which they would not have done, if he
had consented or communicated with the^. We read not yt either he or his
disciples, no nor John the Baptist received or baptized any, but such as
repented and believed. We see, that neither he nor his disciples kept the
traditions or customs of the Jews, of washing, fasting etc. We see, that he
received such as the Jews had excommunicate, namely the blind man; and after
their obstinacy was apparent, both separated his disciples from them, and
openly every where denounced against them. We read again, that they sought
to kill him, because so many went from them after him. As for his going up to
their feasts, yt is apparent, that yt was not to offer and communicate with
them, so much as to teach the people, there having the fittest opportunity, and
greatest concurse. He went not according to the order of the law, but sometime
at the midfeast, sometime no^ at all. We may see in that discoutse Ioh. 7.
betwixt his kinsfolk and him, ^oth by their speech, and his answer, that his
custom was not to go ^o offer, so much as to teach. When he came there, he
reproved and ^eformed some things amiss, as the tables of the money changers,
and them that sold doves etc. In the great day of their feast of Taberna^les,
he called them from their superstitious drawing water in their ^ell of Siloam,
unto himself, that lively spring of living waters etc. As for their feast of
the Passover, he kept yt not with them, but a part ^y himself with his
disciples, in a private place. To which reasous if we add the continual debate
and hostility betwixt him, the priests, ^hariseis, and their proselites, and
all sorts of ministers and rulers of the Temple, with the manner of their
reasoning, their spurning against him with envy, he confuting their errors,
and convincing their wickedness with power, yea judging and condemning them for
their wickedness, ^bstinacie, cruelty, and contempt of God and his word, as in
the 21. 22. and 23. chapters of Matthew apeare. By all which reasons and
circumstances, and many other that may be drawn out of the Euangelie, I think
we may rather deem, yea conclude, that Christ did not communicate with those
wicked priests and people at their feasts and sacrifices, rather ^hen upon
M^. CALVIN'S bare report, to believe he did. But whether he did, or did not, yt
were blasphemy to think or affirm, that he ever ^oyned unto them in any
actio^, where they brake the least iode of his Fathers law: for then should he
be with them guilty of transgressio^ and sin as is above proved; and then the
monstrous doctrines that would ^nsue hereof, no christian ears can endure to
hear. And sure their sin is not much less, which go about to draw such
poisoned doc^rines and devilish co^clusions from him, to make him an author of
sin, ^ea of most impious sacrilege and profanatio^ of Gods name, and all
manner headstrong wickedness and abhominatio^, which these w^etches would couller
and tolerate, under his name and examples.

Thus having dispatched these foraine cauils, of these our English Romish
priests, not so much for their sakes (to whom by Mr. CALVIN'S own judgment
they apertaine not) as for the truths sake, which ^y such false and smoky
reasons is grievously obscured; yt is now high ^me we look homeward unto the
present matter in hand: namly, by the rules of the word, to examine this their
church of England. Which as we have found to consist of all the profane and
wicked people of the land; all, without any choice or difference, being alike
received and nourished in the bozome of their Church etc. so if we by the rules
of Christ's Testament duly examine this their flanting ministry, whereof their
Church so boasts; I doubt not but that we shall find them as counterfeit,
prodigious, antichristian, and rightly fitting to this monstrous confuse body
of the multitudes, this harlot, their Church sittet^ on. Which ministry to
describe in their coullers, were a fitter Argument for a stage play, to bring
forth these hypocrites out of their dens, and to make them play their parts
in the light; then for any sober and christian discourse who abhor to rave in
their unclean cages and filthy kennels) yet that they may the sodainlyer
apeare of what so^ they are, and we the sooner have done with them: let us first
consider what manner of officers CHRIST has appointed in the Church of God;
then, how th^se ought to enter; then how to administer: and so briefly by these
rules examine the ministry of their Church of England.

The ministry appointed unto the government and service of ye Church Philip.
1. 1.
of CHRIST we find to be of two sorts, Elders and Dea^ons: the Elders, some 1 Timothy 3.
of them, to give attendance unto the public ministry of the word and Ti^us
1. Romans 12. 7 8.
sacraments, as the Pastor and Teacher: the other Elders together with them,
Act. 6. 1.
to give attendance to the public order and government of the Church: Tim. 5.
17.
the Deacons, to attend the gathering and distributing the goods of the Act.
20. 28
Church. Now these Officers are first duly proved, examined, and compared 1
These. 5. 12.
by, and to these rules set down in the Testament of CHRIST, both 1 Cor. 12. 7.
in apparent graces, by the manifestation of the spirit; as also in all
unreprovable 1 T^m. 3.
conversation, witnessed, and well aproued unto that flock, of Act. 6. Act.
which they are chosen to serve and attend. This done with prayer and fasting,
they are chosen and ordenied in the same Congregation, by public consent. They
being thus chosen and ordained by all, are now diligently 1 Cor. 4. 2.
and faithsully to execute their office unto all, not preiudicing the liberty
2 Cor. 10. 8.
of any, ^mbitiously assuming any inordinate authority, or abusing or Act. 20.
neglecting their office, neither holding or executing yt, in regard or in 1
Pet. 5. 2. 3. 4. 2 Cor. 13. 8. Ioh. 9.
respect of person: but uprightly and indifferently performing yt unto all men,
as in the eyes of God, whose word they purely and sin^erely teach, faithfully
and precisely observe, to their uttermost knowledge and ^ Cor. 11. ^.
power. If in any thing they transgress or offend; they are, as well as Phil.
3. 17.
any other members, liable to the censure of the Church: which is, to 1 Timothy 5.
21. etc.
reprove, depose, or excommunicate them, according to the quality of the
sin, and estate of the offenders etc. 1 Timothy 5. 20
Col. 4. 17.


Now to come to the ministry of the Church of England, which is 1 These. 5. 14
so manifold and diverse, as I know not how to begin to describe yt. But Romans
16. 17. 18. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. 5.
let yt first be divided into these 3 sorts: 1. Reigning or Governing. 2
Serving and 3 Collegiate. 1. Of the reigning and governing minifters, are
Archbishops Lord Bishops, Archdeacons, Chancellers, Commissaries, all of the
2 Timothy 3. 5.
high Commission, as likewise such civil Doctors, Proctors, Registers, ^itus 3.
10.
Scribes, Pursuiuantes, Sumners as attend upon their Court^s of faculties,
prerogative, Archies, delegates etc. 2 Of the serving sort, are Parsons,
Vickars, Curates, hireling Lecturers, vagrant and mercenarie Preachers, house
priests, Chaplens, half-Priestes or catechisers, Churchwardens, sidemen,
questmen, pa^ish Clerks. 3 Of the ministry col^egiate, are Lord Bishops,
Deanes Sub-Deanes, Prebendaries, Canons, petie Cha^nons, Gospellers,
Pistellers, Singing me^, Singing boys, Vergiers, Sextines. This division I
suppose, will well near suffice for their officers. But now, how to divide or
distinguish their offices, I know not; I am so unlearned and ignorant of such
great secrets, and high mysteries. Neither yet have I skill to ^arshial the^ in
their degrees of honor, which (I have heard say) they have, both in the common
wealth, and in their schools; as ^eir Primate, their Mettopolitane graces,
their Palatine Lordbishops (...) their Baronny Lordships: al which I ween be
Peers of the realm, (...) estates of the Land. Now there are also certain
Doctors of diui^tie, and Bachelors of divinity, which have many great
privileges and ^ogatiues, of the cappe, the skatlet gown, the hood, the
habbite, the ^pet etc. the ring, the chair: the one of the^, being a Kinghts
fellow, ^e other an Esquires in any ground in England. Also how capable ^ese
are by statute of how many benefices, I cannot tell.

Neither have I the cunning to derive their genealogies and pede^ies, as they
took beginning in the ages succeeding the Apostles, in ^e first 4. or 500.
years: only because I want that deep learning, I must ^ntent my self to go to
that old book of Gods word. There in deed ^emember Revel. 9. that I read of a
Sar that fell from heaven unto the ^rth, which had the key of the bottomless pyt
given unto him; who ^hen he had opened that bottomless pyt, there arose the
smoke of ^e pyt, as the smoke of a great furnace, wherewith the Sun and ^e
air were darkened. Out of which smoke of the said pyt, I read, (...) at al
these monstrous, armed, crowned, poisoned Locustes and Scor^o^ns issued etc.
Now as they took beginning with Antichris^, under ^eir king (...) Apolluon: so
took they increase together with him. ^or when Satan had enthronized him,
given him his high Co^missio^, (...) made him his Lieftena^t general in earth
etc. then these his Peers (...) c^ptaines compassed about and guarded his
throne, and did miracles before the Beast, deceauing with the effectual power
of their errors, ^l such as received the Beasts mark, or worshipped his
image, and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. and.
^ried forth his image far an near, and set yt up in all places where his ^rson
could not be, and compelled al both small and great, rich and poor, (...)
receive the Beasts mark and worship his image: this I read in the 13 ^f the
Reave. Now in the 16. Chapter of the said book, after that y^ vi^s of Gods
wrathful iudgme^tes had been powered out upon the earth, ^o^ the sea, upon the
rivers and fountains of waters, upon the Sun upon ^e Throne of the Beast,
upon their great river Euphrates; I read, that ^ese unclean spirits that came
out of the mouth of that Dragon, and out of the mouth of that Beast, and out of
the mouth of that false ^rophet, which are yc spirits of Devils, working
miracles; should go ^rth unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole world,
to gather ^em unto the battle of that geat day of God almighty: yea and in ^e
17. of the Revelation, that they should cause these kings, those ten ^ornes, to
hate the whore, to make her desolate and naked, to burn ^e whore with fire,
even that fair harlot, of whose cup they ha^ ^runke, and with whom they had
committed fo^ation so many ^eares before? and to give their kingdoms, power,
and authority unto the Beast, until the wo^des of God be accomplished. In the
19. and 20. ^hapters of this said book, I read; that they, together with all
the ^ostes of these kings that thus make war against ye La^b, and beseege ^e
beloved City and the te^tes of the Saints round about, shall be taken cast into
a lake of fire and brymstone, and there to be tormented together with that
Dragon, and that Beast, and that false Prophet, day and night for evermore. And
lo, thus have we brought these fellows home again, even to the place where
we found them. For out of the bottomless pyt they came, and into that fiery
furnace they shall. Let them that list more curiously to search, inquire after
them in their Cen^uaries and A^nalles: yt suffices me to know, that they came
out of the bottomless pyt, that they belong not to CHRIST'S kingdom, that they
are strangers there, and have there neither name, place, nor office. We find in
the Church of CHRIST no mention of these rufflers, they are not members of his
body, they are neither Pastors, Teachers, Elders nor Deacons: but eu^ of late
before our eyes, these felf fame officers, Courts, attendantes, even from
their Primate Archbishop to the parish priest, and so to the Sumner,
administered unto the whore of Rome, and had their original from the
Apostatical seat of ANTICHRIST. How then should they thus suddenly become the
members of CHRIST, yea rulers of his house whether he will or no? who not only
thrust in their parsons by intrusion, but these monstrous offices, Courts, and
Cannons, never read of, neue^ heard of in the Testament and Church of CHRIST.

For there we find no mention of any other Archbishop or Lord Bishop, then
that chief shepherd and Lord of life, CHRIST JESUS; unto whom every knee
ought to bow, and every tongue confess But these blasphemous Beasts, or
rather heads of that Beast, are no^ ashamed to arrogate unto them CHRIST'S
names and titles, which a^e written upon them as names of blasphemy, that the
scripture might Revel 13.
be fulfilled: which titles and honors, they blasphemously would defend, Revel.
17. 3.
with this scripture, which is spoken of the office and person of the ciu^
magistrate: I have said, ye a^e Gods, and ye all are the children of the
most high. Psa. 8^. 6. although our Savior CHRIST has expressly, with his own
mouth said to his Apostles (the^ whom I am sure these are neither greater no^
better). The Kings of the Gentiles reign over them, and they that bear rule
over them a^ Luke 22. 24
called bountiful, but be ye not so: but let the greatest among you, be as the
least, and (...) Io^. 13. 12. etc.
chiefest, as he that serves.

Now when they cannot defend their pride and blasphemy by the word, (which
glass most lively shows, eue^ to their own eyes and co^science^ the
ouglines and heinousnes of their sin) they then run to their la^ shote
anchor, to uphold their tottering states by the Princes donation. Which if yt
were so, were but a weak defense for them, against the wrath and judgment of
God that condemns them, and a mighty sin (and yet no novelty) for the
Kings of the earth to give their crowns unto the Beast etc. But I would here
know of them, whether any Prince may lawfully give that unto the^, or they
receive that, which CHRIST has denied them, yea and carefully avoided in his
own person, leaving them an example etc. and why by the donation of the
Emperor CONSTANTINE, the Popes supremacy may not be as well justified: then ^
would here know, how they ca^ avoid the crime of slandering the ^rince, which
lay this charge upon her: which in deed is due to their ^oly father the Pope,
who when he received of his father the devil his ^thoritie and great power,
magnificently dealt these honorable titles (...) offices to these his natural
sons proceeded from his own mouth (...) throne, many himdred years before
Queen ELISABETH was born.

Now as we find their names and titles blasphemous, so if we look ^el into
their offices, we shall find them no better. Of the ordinary ^tablished
permanent offices, Pastor, Teacher, Elder, which are Act. 20. 2^
(...) ouersee, and administer unto that flock, of which they are orderly 1
Pet. 5. 2.
^osen etc. these are not; who some of them sta^des a Primate or Pope Romans 12.
7. ^
^to the whole land, some other a Metropolitan over half the land, ^e least of
these Anakims over many hundredth steeples, Churches ^s they say) therefore they
have none of these ordinary offices, which ^nly now remain. As for the
extraordinary offices of Apostles, Pro^etes, Ephe. 4. 11.
Evangelists, which God at the first used to the carijng forth ^f his truth,
the gathering together and setting in order of his Saints (...) we find Ithem
(Apostles I mean and Eua^gelistes) altogether ceased, (...) now needles;
insomuch as the foundation is already fully and soundly 1 Cor. 3. 10. 11. etc.
^yde, as also al ordinances and orders which the Church is to receau^,
^pressly set down and manifested in the Testament of Christ; to which 2 Timothy
3. 16 17.
(...) Churches are now, for their direction in all things, wholly r^ferred.

As for Prophets, their office was neither definite nor permanent, Act. 20. 32
^ut by peculier and extraordinary reuelatio^s, according to some espe^al Act.
14. 23.
occasions of the Church; whereof I suppose these men (who are so ^notant of,
and rebellious against the revealed will of God) have fmal ^ccasion to boast.
But if their madness should proceed so far, we leave ^eir discovery and
judgment to the law of God, written Deuteronomy. 13. 1. and. Gal. 1. 1.
^postles I suppose they are not; having neither any immediate cal^ng Act. 1.
24.
from God unto their Apostleship (unless as they in their inscrip^on of their
titles and style do write: JOHN by the permistion of God and ^wer of the
diuill Bishop of such a place) and so as the Apostle says are 2 Cor. 11. 13.
etc.
^alse Apostles, laying not the true foundation, but a new (...), even their
holy father the Popes Cannons, and the deuilish in^unctions Gal. 2. 4. 5. and
6. Chap.
of their blasphemous high Commission: whereupon and wher^y, their Church is
built and ruled in all things. Now to their office 1 Cor. 4. 17.
^f Evangelists, they want their Apostolical sending, also their work Phil.
2. 19. etc. 1 These. 3. 2. 1 Timothy 1 3. Titus 1. 5.
and building declares, that false Evangelists and deceitful workmen ^hey
are, that keep not that true pattern, which the Apostles prac^ised and left to
all the Churches; but according to their own fancies ^et up and pluck down,
what and when yt pleases them, as all their ac^ions 1 T^m. 5. 21.
declare, having no one pynne, nail, or hook according to the 2 Timothy 1. 13.
^rue pattern in CHRIST'S Testament, or in right frame; which if I 2 Timothy 4. 5.
(...) here indeuo^r in particular to declare, yt were to go about to ^mptie
that foul sink, even the bottomless p^t, from whence they ^ame: suffices vt
here to have showed their names, offic^s, authori^ie, not to be of God,
neither to belong to CHRIST'S Church. Therefore we need not be further
inquisitiue, either of their callings or doings, seeing they belong not unto
us, were yt not to call them, or so many of them as belong to Gods election,
unto repentance, to leave the^ accursed trade and offices etc. as also to call
such of the people, as belong to the kingdom of Christ, from their apostatical
and antichristian throne.

What has been said of the names and offices of these magnificen^ Prelates
these great Lords; the same (for avoiding tedious repetition) is to be judged
of all the crew of their associates, assistantes, attendants inferior priests
and officers: of whose names or offices, we find no m^tio^ in Ch^ists
Testament, no use or place in Christ's church. yet because some of them make a
fairer show in the flesh, and under counterfai^ show of holiness deceive the
simple, and lead*, captive many a stule; I will leave for a while these great
peers and mighty estates, with all their colleagues and followers in their
gross wickedness, which is apparent and odious unto all men, in whom is any
sparck of light or grace; and will now address my self to pull of the visardes
of these disguised hypochrites, these ravening wolves which come to us in
sheep clothing, under glorious and swelling titles of Pastors, Teachers,
Preachers and Ministers of the gosp^l, men of great learning, of very holy
life, and of great sinceri^ie, se^kers and ^ighers for reformation, snch as
abhor and cry out against the Bishops and their proceedinges, etc.

These Phariseis, these Sectaries are they, which mislead the people in their
crooked and bye paths os death, and will neither lead the^ nor suffer them to
enter into the peaceable and strait ways of the Lord, bu^ keep them always
learning, and never bring `them to the sight o^ acknowledging of the truth etc.
as when we come to examine their manner of theaching, shall appear. In the
mean while, let us a litl^ go back again (as yt were) that we may the more
orderly proceed, and consider in a word or two, of these Rabbines persons,
education, learning, training, whereby they are made fit to these great offices;
then of the offices themselves, and of their calling and entrance thereunto;
last of al, of their administration, how they behave themselves therein* And
this, but by way of a summarie and most brief recital; ffor if ^ should stand
to lay open their dealing at large, though yt were without either proving or
disprouing (for this in matters so mani^est need not) yt would make in yt self
a most large discourse, and were a subject too great for any m^ns capacity to
handle, to set down the^ monstrous transgre^siones and disorders in
particular, much more in their heinousnes and indignity, which do even fill the
great flyng bok^ of Gods cu^se, the Prophet speaks of. But to give you a
blush of some of them, and to open you a way the better at your further
leisure, by your further and more diligo^t ^earch, to look into their
dealings; I will (God so willing) of many, set you down a few.

FIRST FOR their persons, we find them all generally the seed and ^fspring of
the unbelievers, of men without the faith without the church, of these confuse
idolatrous multitudes above spoken of, and ^s the unchristian education of
these ympes makes manif^st; who, ^uen from their cradles, a^e nourished in all
manner of prophanenes, eathenisme, vain and ungodly sciences and literature
oste^tation, pride, ^ore then monkish (that I say not) Sodomitish idleness,
supersti^o^, idolatry etc. This, their ungodly nurture in their common schools
where they must learn the latin or greek tongue from lasciuius Poets and
heathenish philosophers) shows evidently. With this quor are their pitchers
at the first seasoned: when they have been ^ell nouseled in these, and have
orderly passed to the highest form; ^en are they fit for one of the
Universities, where they being placed (...) some one College (as they term
them) or other, after they have ^eene solemnly Matriculate and sworn upon the
Proctors Book to ^eir mother the Vniuersatie, to co^ceale and keep close her
secrets (...) mysteries, as also to be obedient to her statutes and orders;
the^ are they trained up in Logic, Rhetoric, and Philosophy: which lear ^ings
they draw from Aristotle and Cice^o, and such like. There they ^arne to reason
and speak by art, by Sylogismes and Tropes; which ^tes when they have gotten
(or at the least, spent some appointed time (...) the Universities) then they
commence Bachelors or Masters of ^. Now if they continue still with their
mother, and give their ^inde to the study of divinity (as they call yt) which
is as much to ^y as the rearding of men's writings, such as are best esteemed
of in ^ese times, with those feathers they fly, and with those eyes they see:
which books being taken from them, they are as mute as fishes, as ^ind as
moles.

But when once they are grown skilful in this traditional diuini^e, that they
dare undertake upon some months warning, to speak ^n hour upon some t^xt,
and that they dare trust their memories (...) deliver no worse stuff then they
have read in the commentaries and common places of th^se Authors: then upon a
little practice they row bold to set up their bylles of challenge upon the
schole doors, ^at they purpose to dispute for their degree, and to maintain
^taine hard points of divinity, generally consented unto, and reea^ed of all
men: which questions as also the whole scriptures, ^ust in these their schools
and disputations, be vnsufferably corrup^d, abused, wrested, perverted,
blasphemed according to the luste^ ^f these Philosophical and heathen
disputers; which he^r must ha^le, divide, utter and discuss, according ^o
their vain affected (...) Logic Rhetoric.

Well when they have thus performed their arts, either in Luce or (...), and
that their solemn day of their commencement draw^h nee^e; there some worthy
Chaplen or other, to win the spurs, (...) a Deanery at the least when yt
f^lleth, undertakes to d^fend Non* r^sidencie, or Plurality of be^efices; or
some other, to confirm the faith of the Church of England, undertakes to
defend, THAT the apostolical discipline (as they term yt) or government and
order which is set down in CHRIST'S Test^ment for his Church unto the worlds
end, is no^ perpetual or of necessite; but may be altered according to the
will of Princes, estates etc. and also that CHRIST descended into hell, during
that time his body lay in the grave. These and such like damnable heresies and
blasphemies, are confirmed in the eyes of the whole land, who resort thi^her to
see this stage play, where the fencers fight booty, the persons that shall
dispute being purposely appointed, the time set how long they shall dispute; the
dogs being to be pulled off, either by mass vicechancellor or Mr. PROCTOR, as
the arguments by any thing strong or the disputers distressed. Now here must
also be considered, that al these prizes are played in latin, that the
learning may the more, and their folly the less appear, least even the common
people should hiss them of the stage, if they spoke english. But why do I
thus reveal their mother OSYRIS secrets: some of them will say I am an
unnatural child, an ill bird etc. when I come there mine intertainement shall be
accordingly for this gear. Well I am content here to cease, yt neither being
my purpose, nor to the purpose here, to set down all their magical ceremonial
rites, used and due unto such several degree etc.

To return therefore again to these our commenced divines, who when they have
once gotten this degree upon them, there is now neue^ a benefice in a shire,
but if yt be ready for them, they are fit for yt* There is now no question to
be made before any ordinary in England of their learning. They need not now be
posed by the doctors, by mass chancellor or mass Co^missarie, how many s^nes
Noah had, or whether they can read distinctly the homilies, Injunctions and
service book; all this they could do whiles they were bible clerks and
fellows in the College; every morning next their he^rtes they said over this
gear: Neither shall they be inioined to conne certain chapters of the
Testament without book, their hood and tippet shewe^h they have learning
enough; and together with their mother the universities license to preach,
excuses them of all this stir, which other poor priests do pass, but unto
them yt could not, without the dishonor of the university and shame of their
degree, be offered. They therefore now (if before this time they have not had the
full order of priesthood) easily ob^eine yt without any difficulty. Only they
must now kneel^ down at their holy Father the Bishops fe^t, who solemnly
sitting in a chair, lays his Simoniacal hands upon him, delivers him the
b^ble into his hands, breath^th upon him, and gi^eth, or rather sells him
his unholy ghost, as he shall know by the price of his box and writings, ere
he go. I had like to have forgotten the cheese matter of al (without which yt
could have been no bargain) namely, his so^mne and corporal oath upon the
cover of the bible or service book, to be buxome and obedient to his ordinary
and his substitutes, and to vow his canonical obedience to all ^ch
ecclesiastical orders, injunctions and ^egrees, as either are by public
authority established and set forth, or ^ereafter shall be by the said
authotitie made and set forth: That he shall ^ot preach any seditious or
contentious doctrines, neither any thing ^n reproof of the proceedinges,
orders and iniunctiones, by public ^uthoritie allowed; but shall exhort al men
unto the obedience of the ^ame etc. These things being done, and his
dimissaries paid for, he ^iseth up a full priest in any ground of England, get
him now a benefice ^r a cure where he can.

He is now a priest sufficiently capable of any kind of office, in any Church
or Churches whatsoever, whether to be a Deane or an Arch^eacon of many hundred
Churches, whether to be a parson of one or more parishes, whether to be an hired
preacher commonly called a GE^EVA Doctor, for from thence this new office is
(unwitting to his Grace of Canterbury) stolen into the Church of England,
except peraduen^ure they stand before him but for mungrel curates still. Well if
they will have a personage, they must either now become Chaplains to ^ome
great BAAL or ^her, that has store in his gift, or else make ^riendship, for
love or money, to some inferior BAAI, that is such a Lord of some town or
towne^, or else enter in chaffaire with some ^ther priest, for his roomth. And
somewhat here would be said of these (...) or Lord Patron^, what kind of office
they have in the Church of England, least hereafter I forget, as I do sundry
other things.

It is not needful here, to dispute of these Lord Patrons, when o^ ^ow they
took beginning: whither at the beginning of the defection ^hen the people
first slacted and neglected their duty, and gave up their ^hristia^ liberty,
power, and interest in all the Church affairs, the choice, ^ensuring, and
depofing their officers etc. into the hands of their pres^itry, as is above
declared: or at the flowing in of the deluge of the Gentiles, when the
prouincial Bishops, Archbishops and metropolitanes ^prang up: or when the Pope
was by the general consent of al Princes, made supreme head of the Church, and
the great tributes out of al lands ^aied unto him etc. that then peradventure,
he, to gra^isie these Princes and Lords, of his mere benignity granted unto
them the nomination unto bishoprics and personages etc. But how or when they
sprang up ^t ^killeth not, we finding them as Antichristian as any of the
other. No such office we ever read of, to belong to the Church of Christ,
neither any such Lord there, to take away all the liberty and interest of the
people in the choice of their pastor. CHRITS servants are now no longer
wards, neither are in this manner to be bought and sold, as open and sheep in a
fair or market. But see, when the Lords beau^ful staff of his holy
government and order is broken, how he dissanulleth his covenant with those
people, and deliuer^th them up to the destroiers, to these greedy wolves and
hungry foxes, as a pray. For these Lords Patrons, to whom these aduowsens
belong, are to apoint and present their clerks unto these benefices: who being
admitted and instituted by the Bishop etc. the people have no more power in the
negative, to refuse or depose him (be he never so unable or unworthy) then they
had before in the affirmative, to choose or elect their minister. But these Lord
Patrons, may alien or sell their aduowsons by the law of the land, even as any
other part of their inheritance or possessions: yea be these Patrons never so
infamously and notoriously wicked, gluttons, covetous, profane Atheistes etc.
Yea, if he have 40 of these aduowsons, and those distant many hundred miles,
even to the uttermost bounds of the land: yet is he to all these towns to
present their priests, except he make Lapse, and then falls yt into the
Bishop of that Diocese his hands. Thus must the greatest Doctor and clerk of
them that will have a benefice enter, and be presented thereunto by some of these
Baals or other, unto the Ordinary or Bishop of that Diocese, by whose letters
of institution he is inducted, ringeth his belles etc. pays his first fruits
(after the Jewish, or rather popish manner) h^ p^oxes procurations etc.

Now the parsonage or vicarage to which they enter, is to be townepriest or
Parson, or vickar of a certain parish, to read them their service, according
to the times and manner appointed, to marry, to bury, to christen, to deliver
their other sacrament of their communion, to visit and housel their sick with
the said book and sacrament, to receive their tithes, offringes, mortuaries
etc. Then (if he be so cunning, and as he can intend and afford yt) to preach
them a sermon of an hour long: but that is in his liberty ^ow seldom he will,
except his benefice be a certain of pounds in the Queens book, and then in
deed is he bound to bestow a sermon on his parish four times in the year,
either by himself, or by his learned substitute. By this we may also see these
their parsonages and vicarages to be in name, offic^, and function as
Antichristian and popish, as any of the other: ^o such office or officer
mentioned in the Testament of CHRIST. For the men that possess them, and those
by common estimation even the best, most holy, and learned of them; I have
breefly, but very truly showed, what manner persons they are; noseled even from
their mothers breasts in profanenes, heathenisme, vain philosophy, ungodly
arts; how they are trained up in idolatry, superstition, and most filthy
abominations, perjury, blasphemy, pride, vainglorie, ambition, Phil 3. 18.
etc.
studijng these vain arts, and even diuinitye (which they number among these
arts) for filthy lucre, ostentation, and their bellies sake, making not only
an art, but a stage play and an occupation of religion; with their tr^ditionall
and philosophical glosses, corrupting, ^ Tim. 1. 3. 4.
obscuring, and perverting the pure text with their logical conclusions ^ Tim.
6. 3.
4. ^. 20. 21
and ^hetorical figures; give liberty to their wits in their learning to
deface, strive, and dispute against the holy known truth of God, making and
tossing yt as a tennise ball amongst them, both publikly in the schools and
privately in their Colleges at their problem^s. In which munkish dens thev
lurk and lead their lives, in all manner (...) idleness and pride; not to
speak of those secret sins and abhomi^tio^s, which are commonly committed
amongst these Sodomites, which ^e in such fellowships and fraternities, where
Gods pure religion and ^oly ordinance of matrimony are banished, as amongst
them. The ^rticular abuses of which societes and Colleges, yea even of their
vni^rsite in general, with all that more then heathemish disorder, popish
^hominations, which are there without shame inioined and com^itted, wherwitth
the youth, yea almost all estates, of the land are lea^ned and poisoned, would
in yt self require a long and peculiar treatise, ^t summarily to reckon up and
bring to light.

I hope, by this little which has been said, concerning the educa^n and
training of these our great divines, yt apear^h unto all men that will judge by
the word of God and are endued with the spirit of ^od) what kind of fellowships
these university Colleges are, what and of cages full of unclean birds, of
foul and hateful spirits etc. ^et these learned clerks daube them with their
untempered mortar, ^hiles yet the time serves them, yet is their judgment of
the Lord: ^e word is gone out from his mouth, yt hasteneth apace, and cannot
(...) called back: even the same judgment and end, which are in their ^ght
executed upon their elder brethren and sisters the Templars, the ^onkes, and
knights of their St. Ihon of Jerusalem, the Abbeys Fri^ers Nunneries they had
one and the self same popish orginal with ^ese: they still retain the same
damnable and incurable abuses: ther^re the same, or greater judgments remain
them. Let us see if the (...). of Peter-house be now able to ward this blow:
sure I doubt ELY ^inster will not defend him from the hail of Gods wrath, in
that day. ^e has hitherto taken but half his tale with him, therefore his
recko^ing is behind. It is but an easy point of learning, both to frame and
^nswere other men's, or rather his own Arguments: we in the coun^ie which are
not acquainted with such figures, count such but to skir^ish with their own
shadow, and deem them not the wisest men in a ^ire. But this learned Doctor by
the figure of Omission, in an evil con^ience, took no more of the Argument,
then he was able to deal ^ithall, namely thus much. THE UNIVERSITIES OF OXFORD
AND ^AMBRIDG have a popish original: Therefore Queen ELISABETH ^ught to abolish
them. Let him now take the rest of the Argument* as ^t was made in a marginal
note, in the side of a blasphemous book of ^is, and put yt together thus. THE
UNIVERSITIES of CAMBRIDG and ^XFORD have the same popish and idolatrous
beginning y^ the colleges ^f monks, Freers, Nuns, and those vermin had, and
still retain yc same ^nsufferable and incurable abuses etc. therefore Queen
Elisabeth has, and ^ught by as good right to abolish them, as her progenitor
did the Ab^aies. Thus was yt made before unto him: but of his doctorlie
autho^itie, writi^g with privilege, he tought he might take and leave at his
^leasure; especially, having to do with poor prisoners, which can have no
place given to defend their wrongs, nor to answer unto his lies and slau^ders.
But let him yet upon better advise, make a better answer to this one Argument;
til then, we will not trouble him with more. I (...) upon a better view, he
shall scarce find them so like those ^oorishing vines in the Lords garden, as
unto the vine of (...), and the vi^es of Gomorrahij: their grapes are poisoned
grapes, their clusters bitter clusters: their wine is the poison of Dragons,
and the cruel gall of Aspes. Neither shall he find them so like to the schools
of the Prophets he speaks of, which purely kept and taught the word of God
amongst them, in those corrupt times; as unto the Popes Seminaries, being as
ready upon the least change of the wheather now to serve him, as ever they
were; being not unlike the Turks ^eraglia in Constantinople, in which place
his Iane^saries which are the guard of his person, are first trained and
instituted in the discipline of his war, before they serve him either abroad,
or in his Court. And sure these University kinghtes are the very guard of
Antichrists throne, the strength of his battle, his instruments to carry
forth his wares, to subdue the people unto him and keep them in his obedience,
as bitter enemies of the Church and servants of God, and of all righteousness,
as these Turkish Ianeizaries unto these christened regions, with whom they
have to do.

But yt is time now to return to these our university divines and their
ministry again, being somewhat ouerlong stayed by this frivolous Doctor in
the way. I have already showed their education, learning, degrees, and also in
what manner, and upon what conditions the best of them come by and hold their
priesthood: that is to say, how they first Deuteronomy. 6. 13.
blaspheme Gods holy name, in swearing after that idolatrous manner: Amos 8. 14
how they solemnly and advisedly forswere and abjure the Lord JESUS Zepha. 1.
5.
CHRIST, in swearing their canonical obedience to the Antichristian Math. 5. 34
Revel 13. 16 and 14. 9. etc.
throne of these Bishops, their courts, and cannons: for two so contrary
masters they cannot serve, as CHRIST and Antichrist, neither have communion
with both. And how they now remain the marked soldiers Psa. 94. 20
of the Beast, even in the forehead, having taken his license and seals; 2
Cor. 6. 15.
and how by this their oath and subscription to their romish trumperie and
deuilish diuises, they have resolutely forsworn Gods truth, made Gal. 2. 5.
shipwreck of faith and a good conscience (if any they had before) and how by
taking this license with this limitation, they have emancipate the whole word
of God (as much as in them lies) unto these Bishops or rather the Popes
Cannons. And yet (to make their sin the more odious and inexcusable) these
slaves to sin, are not only sworn unto such decrees as are already made
(although nothing can almost be added to the wickedness and blasphemy of them)
but even have bound themselves by oath to such decrees, as they hereafter shall
make, being by public authority of the land enioined etc. also how they
hereby become the vowed servants and bondmen, the marked ministers and waged
soldiers of Antichrist. I have also showed their ministry to be
Antichristian, adulterate and vagrant, wit^out place, people, chardge, office,
government: and how they must come by yt b^ as unlawful means, eue^ by
symonical co^pactes, open bribery and extortio^, as the ex cessiue price of
their box and writings unto the Bishop and his clerk, their first fruits
(not to speak of other secret bargains how they come by the patrones good will
etc.) declare.

Moreover I have showed, how their office of Parson or Vickar is ^s popish,
strange, antichristian: and how their entrance and induction is ^s popish and
jewish, as the rest: and how the function of, and their behavior in this
office is yet worst of all, most corrupt, blasphemous, and ab^ominable: which
now but by as slight a running over their admini ^tration, will even with
detestation appear unto al me^. Whose infinite and odious sins heerin to set
down in particular, according to their hainousnes, no tongue or pen of any
martal man is able; for that were to momber the hairs of the beast, or to
divide the drops of a ^unning river. If I therefore set down some such
principal and especial heads, from whence these mischeues and their particular
transgressi ^ns flow, as I remember them (who know of many, but a few) leaving
the further search of the r^st, and consideration of these, to the further
labor and judgment of the godly, by the scriptures: as also, the more
particular remorse and repentance of them, to their con^ciences which have
committed, and shall account before the Lord for the same. I hope (I say) by
that time, the delusionis of these Babilonish divines and Egiptian Inchanters,
will apeare unto al me^, save unto the^ that perish; and their madness be made so
manifest, as both they and their Proselites shall be left naked, without one
excuse or figleafe to cover their shame

Now then as the education, training, learning, degrees, ministry manner and
conditions of r^ceauing that office and manner of coming by, and entrance into
the same, have been partly described; so was the ends and function of their
ministry and office, a little touched in a word or two: Namly, how they al
are, by oath and office bound, to read and observe the iniunctio^s etc. to
read their service book at their apoin ted times, places and manner, according
to the same to administer their Sacraments, church women, visit the sick,
bury the dead etc. and only for this ministry they receive the offringes,
tithes, mortuaries and wages of the people. Also yt has been showed, that
preaching is no part of their office or ministry, but only in certain
special cases (where yt benefice is at a certain rate in the QVEENES book)
required, and that not necessarily laid upon the person of such a parson, but
only quarterly inioined at 4. solemn feasts of the year, as at their
Christmas, Easter: etc. and may be performed or supplied by their substitute.

Here also must ^e observed, that a person or Vickar, is not by law nor office
inioined to be resident and give atte^dance in person unto his charge and
flock, but may be absent at his will, and where he will, so he find the parish a
iornay man to read their service, administer their Sacraments etc. yea and as
he comes unto them without the people^ priuitie, will, or consent, so may he
stand^ parson or (^s these* learned preachers would have him ter^ed) a Pastor
unto the^, though he never see his f^ock, nor his flock him. So may he also by
law (as the best of them usually do) upon their own liking or disliking (but
especially upon the offer of a better living) depart from them, chang^ or sell
his office, without the peoples knowledge or priuitie. For as their ministry
is not tied to any office, so is not their office tied to any charge. Are not
these miserable Pastors trow we? or are not the 2. Cor. 11. 20.
people more miserable, that have such sh^pheardes and guides se^ over them,
whom they must (will they nil they) nourish with their goods etc. to the
gathering up whereof, these priests will look well enough, without regard or
respect of persons, whether they be rich or poor, old or young, widow or
fatherles, that is al one to them* they will not spare their due: They take up
al with the angle, they catch yt in their net, and gather yt in their yarne. It
skilleth not to 1. Sam. 2. 12 etc.
them whose yt be, whether the goods of the infidel or of the believer. Ez^.
34. 2. etc.
It skilleth not them whom they spoil, whether the poor* the widow, or the
fatherles, if they fall within the bounds, and precinctes Mic. 3. 2. etc.
of their parish: they regard not by what right, or after what manner they have
yt, whither by Jewish tithes and offringes, or popish Pro. 30. 20
chrismatories and mortuaries. They regard not, so the Princes and (...). 11. 5.
their lord Bishops laws allow them, though Gods laws expressly forbid. That
day of account they put far ^ff, and think to do well enough then: yea they in
the mean while bless themselves in the name of the Lord, though they commit
all this wickedness. Of all that grows or increases within the compass of
their parish, whithe^ corn, wood, grass or ca^tel, the priest will have his
part; yea for who^ soever is borne or dies in his parish, he will have a fee;
and for thi^ gear he stands a priest to the whole parish and all the
inhabitants thereof indifferently. If the d^iul of hell would ^ome and dwell in
his parish, he were a priest for him, and would for his goods administer the
Sacraments etc. unto him also. But here, before I begin to deal^ with their
manner of administration, yt were not amiss, in few words, to show the
damnable filthiness of their maintenance for their ministeri^. Christ having
abrogate the Leuiticall priesthood and law, instituted for the gospel an other
ministry, and for the ministry an other maintenance. He ordained in his
Testament, that the minister of the gospel 1. C^r. 9. 7 etc.
should live of the gospel, the shepherd of the flock he ^eedeth the
husba^dma^ of the vineyard he d^esseth and keeps. Now this flock ^o^sisted
not of gotes, swine, dogs, wolves etc. neither is this shepherd limited, or
sheep constrained to a tenth, or any stinted part or portion; but according to
the present want of the one, and estate of the other, this matter is otherwise
provided; they together releeving him according to his present need; he
together wi^h them, bearing the burden of their present and common poverty,
^uerie one that is taught-in the 2. Cor. 8. 13
lord, ^reely contributing and imp^rting, even of al their goods, to Gal* 6.
^. and 4. 15.
^he competent main^enance of such as instruct them in the word, and have the
oversight of them, not unto riot and excess, but unto 1. Th^s. 5. 1^ 13. 2.
^fficiencie. Which contribution, as yt is a duty of the Saints, so is These.
3. 9.
^t also, in the manner of yt, a free offering of their benevolence, and an Exo.
25. 2.
^oly alms unto the Lord: by which alms and contribution, our Sa^iour 2. Cor.
9. 4.
Christ himself, his Apostles, and all the ministers or officers of Phil. 4. 18.
^he church of Christ, which live or receive any thing of the church, Heb. 13.
16
^ere, and are to be maintained. Within the bounds of which sober Luke. 8. 3.
^ediocritie and christian modesty, whiles these proud Prelates and Ioh. 12. 6.
^reedy priests will not be held, the one sort breaks out into al ex^esse 1.
Cor. 16. 1. 2.
and riot, the other into miserable rapine and extortion, thrus^ng their flesh
hook into every poor bodies kettle, and (as yt were) ^lucking the bread from
them and their childrens mouths, (...) they should be sustained; besides the
heinous unlawfulness of ^he very action yt self, and high sacrilege they commit
therein: which, ^hiles a certain Doctor of theirs has of late la^ored to
approve; the ^icked man has term^d this blessed alms, and holy contribution
^f the Saints (in contempt thereof and of them which are or have ^eene
sustained thereby) the ^lmes (...): yea, to disgrace the truth, and ^o hide the
superfluity, excess pride, and unsatiate couetise of the ^nglish Clergy; he
makes yt a common custom in his slanderous ^a^phlet, to leave out, or take
inn at his pleasure, or mistake, where and that seems good unto him: As here
he has done the 9. Chapt. ^f the ^, Corin^h, for the 9. Chapter of the 1. Corinthians: and so still fights ^ith himself, and confuteth his own idle
fantacies. The one place ^eaketh of the general charity we ought to carry
toward al ^aintes, even ^o them of other Congregations and Countries: the
^ther, of the peculier maintenance of the Minister of Christ, how he ^ught to
be maintained by that flock, to which he administreth, and ^ot by infidels or
wicked persons, to whom his ministry belongs ^ot. Likewise that place
Gallat. 6. verse. 6. where they that are taught in ^he word, are commanded to
impart of al their goods unto them that ^nstruct them in the word: which place
evidently shows, what kind ^f maintenance belongs to the ministers of the
gospel, who ought ^o contribute, in what manner, and how far. Namely al such
faithful ^o whom this ministry belongs, and they not by any rated
pro^ortions, as tenthes, or thyrdes, etc. but even in love, to make him
^artaker of that little or much the Lord sends, according to his pre^ent
wantes and necessary uses, who if he have to food and ^ayment, 1. Tim, 6. ^.
^ught to be therewith content. This place, this Chem^rim would put ^way, with a
maruailing at our folly in quoting yt in the side of ^is former book, against
the stinted tithes and accursed goods and ^ffringes of the profane and
wicked, whereof he and his fellow priests ^re maintained.

Whereby yt is evident, that these priests, which thus are maintained, Num^. 18.
either by these Jewish tithes and offringes, as at the baptism o^ Le^i. 22. 25
children, and purification of women, or by the goods and wages of Ezec. 44. 7.
the profane and wicked, are not the ministers of Christ. For (faith the holy
Ghost) If there be a change of the priesthood, then of necessity Heb. 7. 12.
must there be a change of the law. But these men, both prieste^ and people,
which either pay or receive these tithes and offringe^ etc. still keep these
leuitical laws for the maintenance of the ministry: therefore they not having
made a change of those laws, Act. 15.
belong not to the ministry and kingdom of Christ. For (as I have Gal. 4. 9.
and 5. 2. 3. 4
showed) these are not the laws which Christ has instituted for the
maintenance of the ministry of the Gospel: neither can these lawe^ Col. 2. 20.
now be joined unto, or made to accord with the gosp^ll. For in reteining the
gospel, we ab^ogate the ceremonial law, in re^uing the ceremonial law, or any
part thereof, we revive the Leuitical ministry, and thereby abolish the gospel
and ministry of Christ: yea in retaining and cleaving unto the shadow, we
loose the substance, and so are left and shut up under the law, and are
abolished from Christ, whom we deny to be either come, dead, risen again or
ascended, whiles we still retain the ceremony and shadow. Now it is apparan^,
that tithes and offringes were merely ceremonial, and instituted for the
maintenance of the leuitical ministry, and belong not to the ministry of
Christ, neither have any reservation in the Testament of N^m. 18. 31 28.
Christ, but sundry express places there are against them: and in place
thereof, we have (as has been said) the free contribution of all the faithful,
not limited or stinted, but extending to the communication of all the goods
they have. But these priests and people still retain^ the leuitical decimations
in the same form, to the same ende^ etc. therefore must they needs be under
that dangerous estate obou^ declared: Neither will their Doctors popish
distinction help the matter. Says he: the Church of England reteineth, not
tithes, as any pa^ of the ceremonial law, but as a stipe^d for the ministers.
Why I beseech, him, how did the Jews retain and use the^? was yt not as a
stipe^d likewis^ for their ministers? and may this law, this stipend now, fit
the ministry of Christ? why has Christ then made new? or how is the old law
changed with the old ministry, if the law of tithes be still kep^ Might not
this Doctor as well bring in the cities and subvrbs which were given to the
Levites and priests, for them and their families to dwe^ in, or any other
Leuitical ceremony, by the same excuse? and I doub^ not but they would do so
also, were yt not y^ they have already much more a^ple allowance in the stead
thereof in every City and town of the la^d: where the parso^, (yea some
where, both parso^ and vickar) is endowed with houses and gleab lands besides
their tithes, not to speak^ of the whole lordships and towns, that the
Collegiate priesthood po^sesse: and yet these cormora^tes are never satisfied,
these horsleaches still suck, though blood in abundance run out of their wide
mouths.

And here also by the way^, the unlawfulness of their gleebes would ^e noted;
both in that they have no warrant in ^he Testament of CHRIST, being so fixed
and certain, he having there set down an ^ther kind of maintenance, not
fixed, nor certain, but according to ^he present wantes and occasiones etc: as
also that that tying of land ^n a parish to the ministry there, does
presuppose and necessarily pre^ume of a Church always in that pari^h; where as
the Prophet says; ^hey that were my people yesterday, are risen up on the
other side, as against an enemy etc. How many famous Churches see we remo^ed
and fallen? how many godly Fathers have had wicked children? ^odly ages, wicked
successors? Many other reasons might be brought against these gleabes, for
which these belly priests so cry out: As con^erning their idolatrous
original and abuse, being given to the main^enance of a popish ministry, and
therefore ought rather to be put to ^iuill uses, and not to the maintenance of
the ministry of CHRIST.

But to return to their tithes again: wherein as yet I could never ^ee any
difference betwixt the Jews and them, save that these swine^eardes tithe
piggs, geese etc. and al such unclean beasts and fowls ^or gain, which were
an abomination unto the Jews. But some of them would hide this, by the
Princes commandment. We have in many places showed, that the Prince has no
power to break Gode^ ^awes, or innouate or al^er CHRIST'S Testament. Here I
would know of them, whither the due payment of tithes etc. was not often
commanded by the godly Kings of ^da also: Let them read the stories of
EZECHIAH, IOZIAH, NEHEMIAH etc. let them read the prophecies of JOEL, HAGGAI,
ZACHARY, MALACHIE. Why then* we see the commandment of the Prince makes no
difference between them and the ^ewes herein: the commandment of the Prince
cannot alter the pro^ertie of Gods laws: the commandment of the Prince can be
no war^ant or ^xcuse, for the altering of CHRIST'S Testament. But what excuse
can they now forge for their offringes at the baptism of children, at their
purifying of women? Is not this also manifest Iudaisme? I will not Leuit. 12. 6.
here speak of the superstition of the action, but of the oblation only: what
difference is there betwixt them and the Jews herein? They will say the Jews
offered Pigeons etc. not money. But they must understand, Leui^. 27.
the Jews had a law also of redeeming their sacrifices for money, and so offr^d
money also when the sacrifice could not be had, and in sundry other cases: This
then will be no sufficient difference. I doubt therefore they must be driven to
Doctor ROBERT SOME his catholic and universal destruction abouenamed: They
retain them not as any part of the ceremo^l law, but as the ministers stipend.
Well, let this distinction be authentical, because yt goes with privilege: yet
let a poor Christian ask them this question; where they find in the new
Testament, that Christians may make such offringes, or the minister of CHRIST
live of such offerings? I suppose they will take day to answer^: and I (because
I will not too far ouerchardge them at once) will forbear here to call them to
^ccompt for their mortuaries, or portion which they take of the goods of the
dead, for their oblations at their Easter Sacrament, at the marijng, and at the
burijng of any in their parish. This I think would prove a combersome piece of
work for them to approve and justify by CHRIST'S Testament, to belong to the
maintenance or office of his ministry. And sure, I take no great pleasure to
rave more the^ needs I must, in this their doung; which is so gross, as even
with the reciting yt is refu^ed. So that I hope, by this little which has been
said, concerning their Leuiticall tythinges, their Jewish oblations, their
heathenish and popish customs etc: yt evidently may apeare to all men (in
whom is any light) that neither this their ministry, or these their
ministers, which are thus maintained, are of CHRIST, or belong to his Church.
If this yet be not plain enough, let such as doubt, give ear to their
Administration, which now follows to be examined.

WHICH ADMINISTRATION of theirs, because it is so ample (for the help of my
memory, and that the matter may be the better understood) I will for this time
divide yt into necessary and voluntary. By necessary, I mean that public
administration, whereunto by law, office, and oath they are bound: by
voluntary, I mean their extraordinary pains taking in preaching, reading
lectures on the week days, catechizing families etc. And first (as order
requires) I will deal with the more general, with that of necessity, which law
requires of all priests: whereunto, both they, their Churchwardens and
Sidemen are bound by oath, the one to observe, the other to see yt observed,
and to present the defaltes. And this (because yt is so infi^ite, and extends
so largely, almost to the practice and execution of all the Injunctions and
orders of their Church etc.) I will only (or chiefly at the least) here meddle
with their public administration in their Church, in their worship of God etc.
and that but with some few (I will not say chief) things: for yet the Subject
is too large for my capacity.

Unto this ministration, for their better instruction and direction in all
things, as also that there might be found one uniform orde^ amongst them in
all places, they have one SERVICE BOOK, commonly called THE BOOK of common
prayer: unto this are all the priests of the land sworn, to use yt in manner
and form prescribed. Now in this Book is included the whole form and
substance of their ministry. Here are their prayers made to their hand, and
prescribed what prayers to say in the morning, and likewise what at Euensong:
as also what Psalms, Chapters, pistles and Gospels to read in their due
seasons, what in the winter what in the Summer, what in the Le^t, what in the
Aduent. Here are set down their prayers, chapters etc. for their fastes,
their solemn feasts and Saints days, yea and for every other day of the
year.

^or the Sunday is a governing day, and is written in their Calender ^ith red
letters, and rules all the days of the week, save certain vn^uly days and
their Ea^es, which will not be governed by yt* but cha^enge to themselves a
peculiar worship also: they having their days (...) the same Calender written
with great letters too, and that which mo^e (...), their Eaues written with red
letters. And because they are but stran^ers and come but once in the year,
they look for the more solemn ^tertainment, that the priest should diligently
watch, and the people ^ait for their coming, and make preparation accordingly:
if they come ^n a cluster, or at some solemn and double feast, th^n to
in^ertaine ^e^ with new clothes, clean houses, garnished with green bowghes,
(...) holly and Iuye, with good cheer and much pastime, al work on these (...)
idol days, laid aside. Yea though they come but one alone, and (...) on the
week day, ^et that week is not S^. Sunday, Lord of the As^ndent, yt is a part
of his service to give warning unto the people of ^e others coming, that they
keep his or her Eaue with fasting and ^aier; that upon their day they keep an
holy feast, abstain from la^our etc. Moreover, by this Book are the priests
to administer their ^cramentes, by this Book to Church their women, by this
Book to ^arry, by this Book to visit and housle the sick, by this Book to bury
the ^ead, by this Book to ke^p their Rogation, to ^ay certain Psalms and
^raiers over the corn and grass, certain gospels at cro^sewaies etc. ^his
Book is good at al assaies; yt is the only Book of the world. He (...) can but
orderly and distinctly read this Book, may get a living by (...): It is no
marvel though they be sworn to and by this Book. ^any great things might
be said of this Book, how yt was made by ^ertayne learned Bishops, afterward
godly Martyrs, and how some ^f the Martyrs used part of yt (as the Letany)
the night before (...) suffered etc. Well, who translated yt we will not
contend. For ^e thing yt self, yt is evident to be abstracted out of the Popes
blas^hemous MASSE-BOOK, and how consonant yt is unto the word of ^od, remains
to be examined; and shall, through Gods grace, by the ^iscussing of some
particular points, though not of every singular er^or (for that were an
endless labor) apeare: and so shall neither the mar^yres use commend, nor our
dislike condemn, but Gods word be Judge ^f all.

To let pass therefore what in times past this Book has been, and ^ow yt has
been used, either by the Pope or those Bishops: we find ^t now to be the very
ground work of their faith, Church and mi^isterie, in place to them of the
word of God, as from whence they ^etch all their direction for all things;
yea herein above the word of ^od, in that from hence they fetch not only their
rules whereby to do ^hinges, but eue^ the very things themselves that they do*
as their Lei^ourgies etc. So far is this Book from being subject to the word of
God, as ^t in all things ouerrul^th the word of God, disme^breth, rendeth,
cor^upteth, peruerteth, abuses yt to their stinted M^tte^s and Euensong, to
their days, fastes, feasts etc. yea the word of God may not be taught, bu^
where this book has first been read, and has had the preeminence. This book
in their Churches must have the soueraintie, yt may not be gainsa^ed or
controld, or if yt be, the word of God must give pla^e, that priest called
cor^m nobis, lessoned, and scholed; if he will not be conformable, deprived of
his priestdome: if he be found stout or con^macious, the^ is he cast into
prison to cool him, vn^il his stomach com^ down, that he make suit unto his
Grace or some other L. Bishop hi^ Ordinary, and enter bond to be conformable,
or silent.

Moreover this book, in that yt stands a public prescript continued
Leiturgy (not as yet to come to the particulars or meddle with the blasphemous
contents thereof but to speak generally of yt) as if (...) were the best that
ever was devised by mortal man: yet in this place and use, being brought into
the Church, yea or into any pri^ate house, (...) becomes a detestable idol,
standing for that yt is not in the Church o^ God and consciences of men:
namely, for holy, spiritual, and faithfu^ prayer, yt being nothing less, but
rather abominable and loath some sacrifice in the sight of God, even as a dead
dog. Now under the law, Leu. 1. 2. 3. 4 Chap^.
might neither any corrupt or any unlawful sacrifice, with any seen blemish,
be offered at the Altar, nether any part of any beast (though while yt lived
never so sufficient) being slain before yt be brought unto (...) Altar, yt was
abomination unto the Lord. Every sacrifice must be brought quick and new unto
the Altar, and there be s^ayne every morning and evening: how much more in
this spiritual Temple of God, when 1 Cor. 6. 19.
the offringes are spiritual, and God has made al his servants Kings, and 1
Pet. 2. 5.
priests, to offer up acceptable sacrifices unto him, through (...) Revel. 21.
10
CHRIT, who has thereunto given them his holy spirit into their hearts, Romans
12. 1.
to help their infirmit^es, and ^each them to cry ABBA Father. Ho^ Romans 8. 26.
much more has he which ascended, given graces to those his seruan^ 15. Ephe.
4. 7. 8. etc.
(whom he uses in such high services) to the repairing of the Saint, the
work of the ministry, and the edification of the Church? unto whom God
uses the^, as his mouth: the Church again on the oth^ side, uses them as
their mouth unto the Lord. Shall we think the God has any time left these his
servants so singly furnished and destitute Isa, 2^. 9. etc.
of his grace, that they cannot find words according to their necessities and
faith, to express their wantes and desires, but need thus to be Heb. 5. 13.
taught line unto line, as children new weaned from the breasts, what and when
to say, how much to say, and when to make an end; to say the collect at at the
beginning, that at the end that before, the the other afte^, this in the morning,
that at after noone etc. How like children, or rather like mas king fools are
these great clerks dressed? show they n^ hereby, that either they have no
faith, or el^ are such infantes, as (...) 1 Cor. 3. 2.
have more need to be fed, the^ to divide the portion unto others? Kno^ they
trow we, what pra^er or the spirit of God means? Prayer I take (...) Heb. 4.
16.
be a confident demanding which faith ma^eth tho^ow the holy (...)* ^. Ephe. ^.
1^
according to the will o^ God, for their present wantes, estate etc. How 1. Io^.
2 1.
now? can any read, prescript, stinted Leitou^gie, which was penned many Ep^.
6. 1^.
years or days before, be said a pouring forth of the heart unto the P^il. 4.
6.
Lord? or those faithful requests which are stirred up in them by the The
whol^ book of Psalms
holy Ghost, according to their present wa^tes and estate of their hearts, or
church? unless they can say, that their hearts and church stand in Lament. ^.
40. 41.
^he same estate now, and so still to their lives end shall continue, without
^ither further increase or decrease, change or alteration, as they did Joel. 2.
14.
^hen: yea, that their childers children shall also so continue, to whom Hose.
14. ^
^hey leave and incommend this Leitourgie, unto the worlds end. What Pro. 4.
18. 19.
(...) strange estate is this, that always thus stands at a stay? The way of
^he righteous (Solomon says) shines as, the light, that shines more Luke 11.
23.
and more unto the perfect day: as on the contrary, the way of the ^icked is
as the darkness, they know not wherein they shall fall. Our Savior Christ says,
that if we gather not, we scatter. The Apostle 1. Pet. 2. ^.
(...) wills the newborn babes to desire the sincere milk of the Ep^. 4.
1^.
lord, that they may grow thereby; until they come to the measure of ^he age of
the fulness of Christ says the Apostle Paul. Now then if ^hey and their church
increase not in the measure of knowledge, grace, ^olines, etc. yt is an
infallible sign that they have not the Spirit of God. If they do increase, why
then is not God served with his own ^est gif^s? Is not the judgment of the
Prophet then upon them; which Mal. 1. 14.
^aith Cursed be the deceiuer, which has in his flock a male, yet voweth and
^acrificeth unto the Lord a corrupt thing,

Is this old rotten Leit^urgis their new songs they sing unto the Lord with and
for his graces? May fuch old written rotten stuff be called ^ier, the odours
of the Saints, burnt with that heavenly fire of the ^ltar, the lively graces
of the spirit etc. may reading be said praying? ^ay such apocrypha trumperie be
brought into the church os God, and there be read, reverenced and received, as
the sacred word of God? ^hrust upon men's consciences, yea upon God himself
whether he will o^ no? Is not this presumptuously to undertake to teach the
Spirit of Romans 8. 26. 27.
God? and to take away his office, which (as has been said) instructs ^l
the children of God to pray, ene^ with inward sighs and groans (...), 1. I^.
2. 27.
and gives both words and vttera^ce, yea and (as the Apostle (...) ^th) we
need no other teacher to these things, then that annoin^ing which we have
received, and dw^lleth in us. Is not this (if ^hey will have their written
stuff to be held and used as prayer) to bind ^he holy Ghost to the froth and
leaue^ of their lips, as yt were to the holy lord of God? Is it not utterly to
quench and extinguish the Spirit of God, both in the ministry and people,
whiles they tie both the^ and God ^o their stinted numbered prayers?

Is this the (...) and vnisormitie that ought to be in all Churches? and ^s
amongst al Christ's servants, to make them agree in a stinking (...) diuis^d
apocrypha Leitu^gie, good for nothing but for cush^ and pillowes for the idle
priests, and profane carnal Atheistes to rock them a sleep and keep them in
securitie^, whereby the conscience is no way either touched, edified, or
bettered? Truly I am ashamed to think, much more to write of so gross and
filthy abhominacion, so generally received, even of al estates, of these
parts of the world, who have by a popish custom and tradition received yt one
of, and from an other, without any warrant from the word. For the Apostles* (I
am sure) these master builders, have left no such president in, or
commandment unto the churches, neither given the^ any such power to bring in
or set up any such apocrypha Lyturgie in the church of God. They ^. Tim. 2. 1.
always used spiritual prayers according to their present wantes and
occasions, Heb. 13. 15.
and so taught all churches to pray, always, with all manner of Ephesians. 6. 18.
prayer and supplication in the spirit, and thereby to make known their Phil.
4. 6.
wantes, and show their requests in all things unto God their heavenly 1. C^r.
14. 15.
father: Our Savior Christ also, he taught his disciples, that God is a
Spirit, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth. He has likewise set Ioh. 4.
24.
down most excellent rules, and a most absolute form for all prayers in that
part of scripture Math. 6. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. commonly (but falsely) called the
Lords prayer: wherein he has most notably instructed, directed, and restrained
our ignorant and inordinate desires, to those excellent heads. In which,
whatsoever is needful for us to desire, or lawful for us to pray, is in some
one or other of those branches included: eueri^ one of them being a base and
foundation, whereupon and whereby to frame many millions of several p^ticions,
according to the several wantes and occasions, at such several times as the
Saints have cause to pray. They are all of them, so many euerrunning
fountains, from which Gods servants by the holy Ghost, derive and draw
continually fresh and new graces; and are al together* such an abisme and
unmeasured sea of wisdom, from which al Christ's servants thorough the world,
have always fetched all their knowledge, graces, comfort, and assurance of and
in their prayers (according to the capatitie of the vessel of their faith) some
more, some less, al some* yet have not al of the^ together, much less any one
of them is able in the little dish of his shallow understanding, to comprise the
unmeasurable depth and greatness of this Ocea^ of al wisdom and grace. Whereby
yt is evident, as also by the circumstances and manner of delivering the same by
our Savior CHRIST; by his Apostles, Disciples and Churches spiritual use of
prayer according to their present estate and wantes, that these prescript
words were not given o^ enjoined as a prescript prai^r, so to be used by any,
even the wise^t, much less the simpler, unbroken up, vnexpounded, etc. so much
as a co^pe^dious summarie of all necessary knowledge, and rules for all prayer,
gathered (by the Author of all wisdom) into a brief, for the direction and
instruction of our weakness and ignorance.

Of which ends and uses, whiles some are ignorant, or rather (a^ their gross
idolatry, carnal dulnes, and superstitious presumption shows) are ignorant
either what faithful prayer, or the spirit of God is: whiles they both popishly
abuse this scripture as a principal collect in their public leitourgi^, with
their often and idle repetition thereof, five times in their morrow mass etc.
and also through this abuse they grow further bold to mould a new calfe, a n^w
Lei^ourgie of their own, and set that up also in the church of God, as they
count yt.

Yfyt were granted the^, that this scripture, and sundry psalms, and other
scriptures they alledg out of the prophetts, were commanded and ^nioyned to be
read and used, as, and for the very prayers of the church and ^f the Saints
(then which nothing ca^ be more false or grossly fond to ^onceaue) yet which way
(if this were granted the^) can they hereby ^roue yt lawful for them to bring
in their own apocrypha diuises, and ^et them yp in the church, as and with the
holy canonical word of God? May their s^inking filth be compared or placed with
the heavenly li^ely word of God, without insufferable blasphemy? may the froth
of their lips, and folly of their hearts be thrust upon men's consciences, ^ea
even upon the Spirit of God himself in this man^r? In the church ^f God may
nothing come, or be heard, but the canonical scriptures ^ lively graces of
Gods Spirit, according to the same. But these their ^pocrypha Leitourgies, can
neither be said the word of God, neither ^e lively graces o^ Gods Spirit
according to the same word, s^ing ^ey were made and conceived long before, and
are wholly thus used, without wa^ant, example or commandment in the word of
God; yea are ^ontrary t^l the rules of and sor prayer, to the exercise and use
of Gods spirit, and directly set against all the laws of the first Table, by
worship^ng God in vain, after their own traditions, precepts, and diuises,
Math. 15. 9.
^ not according to his holy Will, and commandment.

Can these men think, that because God commands his lively lord to be read or
sung in the church, and promises a blessing ther^nto, Ezech. 47.
whiles yt is used according to his ordinance, yt never being so Revel. 22. 12
^pened, touched or heard without great fruit, yt being the very tree ^ river
of life, with the abunda^t fruits and flowing graces whereof, the ^hole church
is nourished and watered; that therefore the like comma^^nt or blessing is of
their leau^ned Leitourgies? or because God, (...) the infancy of his church,
prescrib^d certain scriptur^s and psal^es to be read and sung upon their
sabath day, solemn feasts etc. yea ^ at other times of their great
affliction, oppression and calamity, cau^d certain comfortable (...) to be
read in the ass^mblie, sor the ^rengthning of the faithful; both that they
should not be dismayed at (...) greatness and continuance of these troubles, or
think the^ strange, or else ^ppose that God were either off^nded with, or
unmindful of the^, or (...) ^is mercies etc. that therefore now they may upon
such feasts, sabo^s, days, times, troubles, enjoin (that I no more me^tio^
their own ^auened leitourgies) these or any other scriptures by stint and
measure, (...) iniunctio^ and law upon the church of God now? Is the church of
God (...) in wardship and such infa^cie? shut up as under a garriso^? that yt
must ^ue such Tutors and rudimentes? Is not Christ now dead, risen, and Gal. 3.
25.
^ended? and has freed his church from such tutelship? he himself now
becoming their lawgiuer and minister in person, and has now given them his
holy word and Spirit, to administer wisdom unto them, in all freedom to use
the same his word, according to his will and their own occasions, unto his
glory and their comfortes? And what can now be a greater bondage to the
church, injury unto Christ and unto the Spirit of God, then thus to limit, to
stint and circumscribe the church of God, the ministry of Christ and the
spirit of God, by apportioning, rating, and enioyning by way of subjection and
commandment this scripture in this number and quantity for this day, feast,
fast, calamity, etc. where have they any rule for this in the Testament of
Christ? They will say, yt suffices that they have warrant for yt in the old
Testament, where these perscript and limited scriptures at such days, feasts,
times, occasions, were commanded and inioined in the church etc. But I hope
they ca^ put difference, betwixt the estate and laws of the church under
Moses, and now under Christ: and that they will not now reserve, ^eviue, and
apply those laws belonging to the Temple and the ministry thereof, now to the
church and ministry of Christ. But they take not these to be ceremonial
laws, but ^ather moral, which commands scriptures to be read, and prayers
to be made in the church of God; these scriptures which they inioyne, are such:
therefore may so be used. True yt is, the moral law both commanded the name of
God to b^ called upon, and the word of God to be read etc. and this to al ti^s,
estates, persons indifferently, as well to that ministry under the law, as to
this under the gospel; leaving the particular manner and order ther^f, to the
wisdom, direction, and revelation of the holy Ghost from time to time, as
seemed good unto him. Now, yt pleased God to give those rudimentes of the use
of certain scriptures, psalms etc. to the ministry of that church,
commanding such scriptures to be there read upon 1. Chron. 25.
such days, occasiones etc. such psalms to be sung by such Levites of such an
order, of ASAPH HEMAN or IEDVTHVN, to be sung in such a time, with such
musickes, such instruments etc. Al which I am sure they cannot deny to be
inseperably joined and used to those scriptures, in that Temple and ministry,
and were merely ceremonial, now utterly abrogate, with that Temple and
ministry, and no way belong to the ministry or Church of Christ. Those
stinted laws and customs I say I would not be understood of the precious word
of God, whereof every iode and title abides for ever, and is of use and fruit
in the church of God which scriptures and figures are not without their
especial profit in their spiritual sense and understanding: al and each of
which scriptures, are now freely to be used without stint or limitation in the
Church of Christ, as his spirit gives wisdom, grace, and utterance, and not to
be restreined and aportionate by way of prescription and commandment, without
the loss of Christian liberty, of the truth of the Gospel, and the abusing
the word of God unto idolatry, and making yt an Idol.

But here they will say, that the reading of the scriptures and ^inging of
Psalms, is also commanded in the Church of CHRIST. This ^ath been long since
granted, yet no such stinted and limited reading ^ singing thus and thus much
this day, at that time etc. as they inioine. ^ell yet, seeing they are still
commanded, though at our liberty what and ^he^ to read or sing them, many of
them being godly prayers; we may ^et pray by the book and by written prayers.
As this word (prayer) by (...) general constructio^ may be understood, I grant
they may be called ^raiers, in that they contain fit matter, rules and
instructions for prayer, and were to that end by the holy Ghost written: yet
can they not be ^ied our prayers, or my particula^ prayer, because they neither
express ^ur present wantes, according to the present estate of our hearts,
neither can be said the lively graces and work of Gods spirit in us, so much
^s the power of Gods word and Spirit unto us. My meaning is; they ^re not
d^awen or powered out of our hearts, as out of a fountain, bu^ ^ather drawn
out of the fountain of Gods word, and powered into our ^eartes as a vessel:
therefore can not be said our prayer, which must pro^eed from the present estate
of our heart. They are not our words by ^s offered unto God, but Gods word by
him offered unto us, therefore cannot be said our prayers.

But o how hard a thing is yt for carnal men to discern spiritual 1 Cor. 2. 14.
^hinges? They can by no means be made to put difference betwixt the 1 Cor.
12. 4. and 14. 15.
lord of God, and their Apocryph^ Leitourgies (which they falsely vaunt to ^e
according to the word of God) betwixt reading, singing, and praying: (...) the
present lively graces of Gods Spirit in us, and their old ^enned dead
writings: betwixt Gods word to us, instructing us accor^ing to our infirmities
by way of petition, and our words unto God by ^aithfull prayer. And this vale
being laid over their eyes and hearts, ^hese blind guides ^ot only affirm,
but condemn things they know ^ot? the one in setting up their own rotten
Leitourgies, abusing the lord of God to, and in the same etc. the other in
crying out with open ^outh against such as repro^e them, and will not partake
with them ^n their idolatry. Insomuch as Doctor ROBERT SOME confesses very
^illingly and freely, that he was amassed, when he heard us affirm, that ^art
of holy scripture (commonly by them called the Lords prayer and so ^ighly
abused) ought not by Christians to be enjoined or used for, or as ^ prayer,
either publicly or privately. Our reasons are; yt was not to that end
instituted by our Savior CHRIT, so much as to instruct us to ^ray, and direct
and assure us in prayer etc. It was never so used by our ^auiour, his Apostles
and Churches, who ever prayed according to their ^resent wantes, as the Spirit
gave utterance. The like rules (beside their examples and practice) they have
given unto the Churches, no where mentioning nor enioining this or any other
scripture, to be used ^or their prayer. We cannot arrive nor comprehend the
riches and depth of that prayer, without more particular explication and
application. That prayer expresses not our particular wantes, or estate of our
hearts, neither do we understand those general doctrines, by the bare saying
or reading yt over. This scripture is not the grace of Gods spirit in us; It is
not drawn out of the fountain of our hearts. It is not our words to God,
but his unto us: etc. It edifieth not the whole Congregation so that they may
al mind one thing, or say Amen. The^fore, and for all these reasons, yt ought
not and cannot be used of any christian, either publicly or privately, as
their prayer: as by many other reasons shall further apeare in the breef
answer to this said Doctors Arguments.

HIs first Argument is thus from CHRIST'S own mouth. CHRIST COMMAVNDETH
CHRISTIANS to pray thus Our Father etc. Therefore yt is lawful for Christians to
pray so.

Well said: be it so a little while, be yt a commandment in these worde^ Luke 11.
when ye pray say etc. It then being a commandment is of necess^tie to be
wholly said as yt is there s^t down, and cannot be in our choice and will,
whether we will say yt or no; for the commandment is tied to al Math. 5. 19.
the words, and no commandment is in our liberty to do, or leave undone:
I^m. 2. 10.
but they that leave yt undone, break that commandment which commands yt to
be done. Moreover, these words when ye pray are general, and extend to al
times of our prayer, that whenever we pray we must say those words there
prescribed, and whenever we fail ^o to do, we break this commandment. And
thus by this Doctor his reason, have the Apostles and Churches, yea our Savior
CHRIST faulted and broken this commandment, so often as he has failed to use
these words in prayer: which words, we can never find that either he or they
have used at any time in their prayers: but that with other words they have
prayed, we find every where. By this time you have spunne a fair thread, you
have made a goodly reason. But yt is peradventure my ignorance and want of
learning, that thus wrest that I understand not: for your Argument will bear no
such conclusion. Your words I am sure I misaledg not. CHRIST (say you)
commands Christians to pray thus Our Father etc. Therefore they may pray so.
This commandment I trow extends to the ve^e words Our Father etc. else your
Argument makes nothing for you, or against us. And if yt be a commandment,
and have a relation to the words, then I am sure the other conclusions will
follow as well as this. Therefore yt were better for your safety (though not for
your fl^shly credit) to loose this Argument then gain this blasphemy; and that
we consent together in this, that the commandment here stretches not to the
words, but rather to the doctrine and sense. For if yt should at all be
understood of those prescript words, that the reading or saying of them might
be our prayer; then must yt n^edes be granted, that this of al other were the
most perfect prayer; both in that there is included in yt al other prayers,
even whatsoever may lawfully of us be asked, o^ can of God be granted; and also
avoided al battologie, vain repetitions etc. Wherefore, yt being a prayer to be
used, and the best of all prayers, fitting all times, occasions etc. yt must
needs follow of ^ecessitie to be always used, because God is always to be
served with (...) best. Yea yt must needs follow, to be solely and only used,
and none ^ut that, because all other prayer should be but vain babbling, yea
open ^mbition in putting our own insufficient stuff, in the place of this
^lsufficient prayer. For the best of our prayers and actions are vnsuffici^nt,
imperfect, and as a stained cloth. But this (if yt be a prayer) cannot be
^enied, to be sufficient, perfect, and without stain,

THis Doctors second Argument is this. EVERY BRANCH OF THE Lords prayer is a
petition; Therefore every branche is a prayer. For every mean ^coller
knows, that the Argument follows a specie ad genus affirmative. And if
every branch be a prayer, then must the whole (because they concern the
glory of God and our benefit) needs be an excellent prayer. Virtus coniuncta
fortior.

I have before showed how sundry Psalms, this and many other scrip^ures may
be in some sense called prayer or prayers: because the Lord (...) them by
petition manner instructs our weak faith how to pray unto him, how to frame
our requests, our words, how to lay hold of, and ^se his promises etc. Yet I
have further showed, why these scriptures, ^hus barely read or said, cannot be
said our prayers, without further ex^lication, application etc. unto our
present needs and estates. So that ^r. Doctors learned reason follows not:
for except he can prove yt ^ur prayer, he says nothing. Now in that I grant
yt him, by some co^^ruction to be called a prayer, yt is to avoid contention
about words: ^or else they would never leave urging the synonimie, betwixt a
petition and a prayer: which in all tongues signify one thing. Now then Mr.
^octors reason in his own sense, is but thus much. Every branche ^f the Lords
prayer is a prayer; Therefore euerie^ branch of the Lords ^rayer is a prayer.
Need he to have showed his deep learning and hard ^ogicall rules a specie ad
genus affirmative for this stout reason. I would have ^hought he might have
learned to have made as good a reason as this ^t home, and never have travailed
to Cambridg for yt. For if this reason hold, he may prove himself a learned, a
wise, or an honest man, ^r the falsest and absurdest thing of the world. It is
so, therefore yt is so. would here know of his Docterhood, vvhither prayer or
Petition ^e the Genus, and which is the Species, in this his logical reason?
or if he ^et yt alone and trouble not himself now any further with the matter
seeing he has fethered his nest, and has got that he all this while wai^ed for)
I am content: for I am not greatly desirous to learn away this ^is cunning.

To the matter in controversy: I deny that scripture which he calls ^he
Lords prayer, or any one particular branch of yt, properly to be said ^ prayer,
that is, such an exercise or offering, as the Saints (by the ^orke of the
Spirit in them) offer unto God through JESUS CHRIST. neither follows yt,
because every branch contains either a reques^ request of some benefit, or
the deliverance from some evil, that therefore yt is a prayer. For this yt is as
yt is written in the book, though yt be never read; therefore I may by M^. Some
his reason and Logic conclude, that the book also prays, because all these
branches are in the book, and all these branches are such prayers. Neither yet
does the reading of these scriptures make yt a prayer any more, then the
reading of the scripture makes a sermon: there is required a little more work
of the Spirit in both. In the on^ to the explication and application of the
scripture read; in the other to the pouring out and expressing the desire^ and
estate of the heart in faith. For yt suffices not, that al our wantes, or
whatsoever we can ask or stand in need of, are there expressed: what booteth
that me? I can ask or receive no more, then mine own faith extends unto: An
enwrapped faith will not serve or save me* this were to conclude, because i^
the bible is all wisdom and Docto^ Some has the bible: therefore he has al
wisdom. In this scripture i^ all prayer: therefore when I have said or read
this scripture, I have prayed all manner of prayer. What pitiful, blind, yea
popish and pernicious re^sons are these? For (says this Doctor) he is
unlearned that knows not, that all petitions are contained within the
compass of, and may be deduced from the Lords prayer. Therefore when we read
or say the Lords prayer, we pray for the Queen, for the Navy etc. and all
other petitio^s that we need inclusiuely, and that until I can prove that all
petitions are not therein concluded, I gain nothing by this reason, in tha^ I
allege, that neither our particular nor present wantes are therein expressed;
and therefore yt cannot be said our prayer. Does this Docto^ know what either
faith or prayer means? Can any thing be devised more popish or idolatrous
then this? popish, in that he makes praie^ without faith, understanding, or
knowledge of the thing we say? yea gives meed to the very saijng over these
words: Idolatrous, in that h^ puts holiness and virtue in the words
understood. For let me ask of him, which way that can be said a private prayer
where my word^ express not my heart? were yt not rather an idle superstitious
or fond futilitie? and a taking of the Lords name in vain? I would also
understand of him, whether any such public prayer may be used in the
congregation, which is not understood of all? and whither to the simple^ ^ Cor.
14.
sort he might not almost pray in an unknown tongue as well? or ho^ Act. 8. 31.
should they understand this, without some particular explication or
application? Therefore by these infallible reasons we may conclude, the this
scripture neither any other can be used either privately or publikly as our
prayer, without some further work of the Spirit in us.

But he has for this an euasio^, namely that our knowledge is here bu^ in part,
and therefore we may understand in measure, and so have use o^ this as a prayer.
If he mean private prayer, though I in some measu^ may by such a speedy
reading understand somewhat, yet this understanding nothing expresses, so much
as instructs my present hea^ therefore yt cannot be said or used as my prayer*
For every knowledge ^r understanding makes not prayer: neither do we here
reason of ^ecret or inward prayer, but of pronounced prayer. If he mean
pub^ike Math. 24. 45, 46.
prayer, yt is manifest that whole Ioaues unbroken up or vndeui^ed, may not be
set before children; especially in their prayers, which (...) a public actio^
of the whole church, and must be understood of the ^hole church. But be yt
granted him to be understood of all the church: ^et every bra^ch being so
infinite, from whence spring and are derived so ^any infinite petitio^s; how
now in this case shall they al with one heart, Romans 15. 5.
^e mind and one mouth be said to praise God, when their minds (...) thus
discracted, their thoughts dispersed, one about one thing Act. 1. 14. and 2.
46.
(...) other about an other, even so many several, as there are diversity ^f
things in the world, of conceits, and armies of thoughts in men: ^me shall
ask private things whiles others ask public. How ^ould this be avoided,
though all the church were as learned as this 1. Cor. 14. (...)* 6.
^octor mistaketh himself to be. And this we know, that public prai^rs must so
be made, as they may be with ane accord, that all may be ^nderstood, that all
may say Amen.

But (says this Doctor) I then take away the use of this Scripture: ^o; but
the abuse rather. For how should yt* now be used as a prayer, without these
popish errors, gross absurdities, and heinous idolatry? ^herin this popish
Doctor and all the priests of the la^d fall, whiles they ^se yt: some of them
saying yt for all their wantes at once, that they ^ight soon have done, others
five times in a morning next their ^eart for all the week after, or until
wednesday or friday, that they ^aue service again. Other more smooth
hypocrites (yet as gross dolaters) use yt as a close or supply (forsooth) to
their long and prolixe ^raiers conceived before, with this prea^ble. FOR THESE
and al other gra^es necessary, let us say the Lords prayer. What can be more
gross, ^opish, idolatrous, supersticious the^ this? do they not heerby put
ho^nes in the words? why should they else use the^ after they have praie^ ^s
God has given the^ utterance by his Spirit? do they not fall into ^he same
errors, abuses, inconveniences above showed and confuted.

Here I had like to have forgotten one of our Doctors maine rea^ons, which he
brings to shut up the point, and that is this; yt has ^men added in the end;
therefore yt is a prayer. Had yt not been pity ^o have lost this reason? why
your A. b. c. before the catechism of the church of England has both the
sign of the cross and ^ittle, title est Amen* ^et I never heard yt taken for
a prayer. Christ himself is called Amen, ^hal I therefore say that he, or the
whole written word of God which is ^alled Amen also is a prayer? Moreover, I
find yt after Luke without Ame^, ^ea and without For thine is the kingdom, the
power: etc. now would I know of ^ou after which Evangelist I must say yt. And
thus being wearied ^ith your frivolous reasons, and nothing refreshed with your
unsavory ^arren notes, wherewith whiles you would have opened, you have roi^ed
and shut up those heavenly pu^e fountains; neither yet resting in ^our
interpretation of, much less in your collection from this word Amen, I betake
you (when you shall have recovered your senses from the amazement wherinto you
were smitten with this strange Doctrine touchnig prayer) to a further
consideration of the matter; to see if you can bring any better reasons, or
repair these in your third book, against the poor persecuted servants of
Christ whom you untruly accuse, blaspheme and publish for Anabaptists and what
not in these you^ privileged poisoned writings.

I have sufficiently (as I hope) showed the unlawfulness of bringing into, or
reading in the church these stinted numbered prayers, and set service in their
written divised Leitourgies: both because they wan^ warrant in the Testament of
Christ and practice of the Apostles, and are contrary to the same, being
Apochrypha, and not the lively graces of Gods Spirit; being contrary to all the
rules of prayer, yea to the Spirit yt sel^ and christian liberty: not being
drawn from the Spirit of God in us according to the necessities and present
estate of the church, or of our hearts as the Spirit gives utterance; but
rather teaching the Spirit words, and usurping the office thereof in the
consciences of me^: yea setting stintes and laws upon the Spirit and church,
prescribing this, and thus much to be said this day in the morning, at
afternone, thus many collectes or Pater nosters, here a Creed, a T^ deum. etc.
I have showed the supertition idolatry and abhominacion of the best of the^,
how they are bu^ as a dead stinking carrion, and not a lively acceptable
sacrifice unto the Lord, and so abhominacion; will worship, not required at our
hands, and so superstition; brought into and standing in the church of God for
that they are not, namly as rules and laws of the church, as holy prayers and
incense of the Saints, as the lively graces and present work of the Spirit,
and so idolatry. I have showed that those scriptures used in them, do no way
justify the^, no more then they do the masse-booke, or a Coniures magical
incantatio^s, which have also holy psalms and scriptures, and as
unreprovable prai^rs: but rather that they make the^ the more heinous, in
that they so rende, mangle, and pervert the scriptures to such blasphemous
abuses. I have showed that such written stinted stuff, cannot be said the
prai^rs o^ the Saints, neither do any good, either instruct or help the weak^
consciences of any: but are rather the very leaven and poison of their hearts
and souls, the very cradles and cushions of these graceles Priests and
Atheistes, to rock them asleep^ in their sins and security, never touching
the heart or conscience, but teaching them to prate over upon the book or by
rote their certain number of words to the Lord, as though the book were
their heart, utterly quenching the Spirit of God, and all the light that is in
them* They make the^ b^leeue that this prescript prayer is good at this time,
that at an other time; this when they rise or at dinner, the the other when they
go to supper or to sleep; this when they are sick, that is special good to be
read or said at the point and hour of death. Thus abuse they and misleade
men, keep them wholly from the exercise of the Spirit of God in them, from the
searching and pouring out their hearts before the Lord, from the due
confession, sorrow and repentance for ^heyr sins, from the true knowledge or
any use or benefit of that bles^ed benefit, and holy exercise of prayer, and
wholly from receiving any ^crease, blessing, or grace from God; as the present
estate of their church their faith and souls shows evidently, being by their
stinted Lei^ourgie ^co^sidered at the best that they can imagine or speak for
themselves) ^ept at a stay, always in one estate, having neither more nor
less of ^ods grace, but eue^ the self same still. Thus are they never led forth
^ne step toward perfection, until a new Leitourgie be made, where ^hey have
al things prescribed, both what to do and how to do, what (...) say, how
much to say, when to say and when to make an end. Thus iug^le they and mock
with God, and behold how the Lord deludeth and de^ them, withholdeth the early
and latter rain of his blessings from ^e^, and the continual spring and
harvest of his fruitful grac^s, they being ^holy empty and destitute thereof,
deprived of light, tru^ knowledge, ^ea common sense and feeling: their
consciences being seared as with an ^ote iron, their hearts paued and hardened
in their sins, which they ^o^mit ^ue^ with g^eedines, having left the^ no
sight, judgment or power (...) themselves, to discern betwixt good and evil,
nether to look or know that (...) will of God is, for any thing they do or
leave undone. Neither ^aue they power to practice yt, but depend wholly upon
others for all (...) things: to the^ they go to inquire; as they say, so yt is
without any ^oubt: so yt must be done without any co^traditio^. Thus is their
faith, ^at inwrapped faith of the papist^s, to bel^ue as the church (...),
without knowing what y^ church bel^eueth, to believe and do, ^s such a
preacher, such a Rabbine believes and does. O he is a lear^ed, an holy man,
he would not do^ otherwise the^ well for all the world: ^uch a Martyr made this,
and such a man that, yt cannot be but good, say ^od what he will. They see with
other men's eyes, speak with other men's ^outhes, pray and believe with other
men's hearts. Thus do they al by ^rescript custom and tradition, without
regard to ye rules of Gods word: ^hus build they their house and faith upon the
sands: thus are they by their blind guides deluded and led out of ye way: thus
are they cast into ^tter d^knes, and held in ye chains of sin unto judgment,
their hands ^ies, hearts and al their senses and powers being fast bound by
these Egip^ia^ in cha^t^rs and their delusions. And now that we have thus
largely set ^ut the v^lawfulnes and inconuenie^ces of al prescript Lei^ourgies,
that all (...) and pr^tences may be removed out of the way: me thinks yt ^s
now time to return to this Lei^ourgie of ^he church of ENGLAND, and ^o
consider somewhat more particularly of yt: whereby we shall discern that kind of
faith they have, profess, and exercise.

AND HERE IN to deal^ with every particular error thereof, or to med^le with the
patcheries and innumerable trumpe^ies therein, or al their ^rosse sollies, and
more then childish, even apish triflinges, or their fri^olous constitutions and
customs wheru^to they bind and lesson the pa^ish priest to say his matte^s and
eue^song in order, to begin with this confession throughout the year, nay
throughout their life. The^ comes the priests general pardon, thorough the
power that his lord Bishop has committed unto him, and so he proceeds to his
stinted psalms and Lessons, with his certain of Paternosters ever and among,
and of CREEDES, their forged patcherie commonly calcd the Apostles Creed or
SYM^OLE, ATHANASIVS CREED, the NICENE CREED sometimes said in prose sometimes
song in meter on their festiuals: their Epistles, their Gospels, the one to be
read with the priests face toward the weast, the other with his face toward
the east; with their versicles, one to be said by the priest, the other by the
parish clarke or people; with their time^ when to kneel, when to sit, when to
stand, when to cursy at the name of JESUS, when to glory their Lord at the
beginning of their Gospel, or at the end of their psalms with their Collectes
and Anthemes, this in their ordinary iournal, that in their festiuals, this at
morn, that a^ even, etc. With these grosseries and follies yt is not my
purpose to meddle: the work is to great for me; if I should begin I should not
know when to make an end. Only Here by way of question, I would know of them,
where they learned thus to limit and apportion scripture; this Chapter to be
read on this day, that upon their next sunday, this for the first lesson, that
for the second, these on the morning, that at eue^song. I would moreover know
of the^, where they learned to hew out and dismember the scriptures in this
manner; to pluck them from the context with such violence, without al ^ense,
order, or cause; and to make that their Gospel of the day more then any other
Scripture of the new Testament, or then a whole Chapter of one of the
Evangelists, commonly read for their second lesson at their mattens; and to
give more honor to this shred, all the people being bound to stand up upon their
feet, and alowd to glory God, where they take their ease and sit still at the
other, and say never a word unto yt. I would also know of them, how their
pieces of the prophecies became Epistles? and where they learned to make thus
many Pistles and Gospels? I would also know of them, where they learned to
cannonize and read the APOCRYPHA writings (which swarm with insufferable
forgeries, lies and errors) in the church, if not of the MASSE-BOOK? whereof in
deed this their Portuise is a right graffe. In the new Testament I am sure they
find none of these customs, they have no president there thus to distort,
abuse, profane dismember and rend the holy Scriptures, or to thrust them by
stint and limitation to days and times in this childish manner, upon the
church: neither to read nor bring in the erroneous devises of men into the
church, and set yt up as the word of God. Yet are these patches and shreddes
eue^ y^ very bad best parts of their service or worship, and eue^ the
insufferable best use they make of the Scriptures: which they not only thus
rend, disme^ber, apportion, stint and limite, this and thus much on this day in
the morning, in this or that place of their morrow mass. etc. But yet see how
they abuse yt to more accursed idolatry and abhominacio^, as to their idol
feasts both Jewish and popish, their fastes ^f all sorts, their holy days.
All which, because they celebrate and so^mnize in their Church, yt shall not be
amiss a little by the light of the lord to examine what kind of stuff they are.

First therefore I will begin with the Iewi^h feasts they still retain, as
their Easter and Pentecost. Of these solemnities and feasts we read Exodus ^2.
Leu. 23. Numb. 28. Deuteronomy. 26. that they belonged and were inioined to the ^ewes
under the law, were merely ceremonial and ritual, figuring Christ's ^erson and
belonging to the Leuitical ministry, such as appertain not unto, neither are
to be retained in the church or ministry of CHRIST, without the utter loss
of CHRIST, and utter denial of him to be as yet ^ome in the flesh etc. But here
peradventure they will use their Doc^ors foresaid Catholic distinction viz.
that they keep not these feasts and days after the Leuitical manner, neither
unto those ends, but rather ^n the one to celebrate the resurrection of our
Savior CHRIST, in the ^ther the glorious miracle of ye giving the holy Ghost
unto the Apost^es: etc. and this, their service upon these days shows
plainly. Of ^hese ends, uses, and service at and of these feasts and days
(which are a ^reat deal more abominable then those of the Jews) hereafter:
for ^ith al these floorishes cannot I be satisfied concerning the very feasts
and days of Easter and whitsontide, which still retain the same names ^ascha
and Pentecostes, the same times solemnities, cessations, the same so^emne
Sabothes or Sundaies yt the Jews did, keeping their Passover ^n the first
month of the Jews, the first day more solemn then the rest, ^umbring seven
weeks just after the same unto their Pe^tecost, whose first ^day they keep in
like manner. Al these ceremonies the laws and places a^boue alleged, show
evidently to be derived from the^ Jews. We find no ^uch customs, no such
co^mandeme^ts in the new Testament. We there Gal. 4. 9. 10*
^eade, that if we observe or be brought in bondage of such feasts, days Gal.
5. 1. etc*
etc. we turn from Christ, he profits us nothing. But they observe Col. 2.
20*
^hese feasts of E^ster and Pe^tecost as our Savior Christ and his Apostles
did and so have warrant sufficient enough for that they do; Is yt so? Then ^hey
observe their Easter wholly after the Jewish manner for so did our Savior
CHRIST being made under the law. But our Savior CHRIST ^here instituted this
feast to be kept, and that after an other manner, as the ^institution of the
Supper declared, how yt ought to be kept in the ministry of the gospel: I
never found any such thing in the text. Neither did the Apostles (who delivered
as they had received) ever give any such commandment, or tied the celebrating
the Supper to yt feast that 1. Cor. 11. 21* etc*
day as y^ Church of England does: but left the day and time to the liberty of
the Church. If yt be to be kept in yt manner, the^ is yt to be kept in ye night
after supper. If the feast and day still remain, then does the Pasouer still
remain: for both were alike by our Savior observed at that Mat. 26. 26
time: but if the Passover be abrogate, and Christ our Passover be offered 1
Cor. 5. 7. 8*
for us, then is that feast and day also abrogate, and we to keep the feast
even all the days of our life in sincerity and truth: other observation of the
day I never found, in all the practice of the Apostles or Churches.

For the other feast of their Penticost, they have little help from the second
of the Acts: for the Disciples assembling in that private manner, could not be
to keep that public feast of their first fruits, where they were to make
public and ^olemne offringes, according to the law: etc. so much as according
to the commandment of our Savior CHRIT, Act. 1. 4.
to wait for the promise of the Father etc. which not being as yet performed,
they could not keep that day as in co^memoratio^ of the great wonders the Lord
the^ showed, and grace he shed upon them. Now then, if they kept not that day
as any feast, either after the Jewish or this popish manner, how should these
me^ from thence fetch warrant for their feast; for after the Jewish manner they
will at no hand be said to keep yt, and after their manner yt is clear the
Apostles then could not keep yt, because the miracle was not as the^ done,
neither had they as yet those gifts of tongues neither knew they at their
assembling, in what manner, or what the Lord would work that day. For though yt
pleased the Lord upon that day to show these wondrous works: yet did not he
it, that either we should keep a superstitious celebration of that day more
the^ of others after this idola^s manner, or still retain the Jewish feast:
etc. so much as upon that day, in that great and solemn concurse of people, to
give public witness to the Gospel of our Lord ^SVS CHRIST, and furnish up his
witnesses according to his promises. etc.

For I am sure they cannot show either commandment or example in the new
Testament, that this or any such feasts have been kept or are to be kept in
the Churches of Christ. It makes nothing to their purpose that Paul Act* 18.
departed from Ephesus to keep the feast ensuing in Jerusalem: for what he did
(no doubt) he did by revelation of 1 Cor. 9. 20
the Spirit, unto the more easy winning of the Jews, to whom he (for Act*
16. 3.
the time) became and behaved himself as a Jew, and this both by the special
Heb. 8. 13.
revelation of the Spirit, and warrant of the word. For unto the Jews a time
was given of shaking and removing these ceremonies, from which they could not
be so suddenly or easily removed, because Act. 15.
they were given and delivered unto them by God himself, upon the mount Sinai
etc. yet seeing they never were given nor belonged to the Gentiles, the Apostles
at no hand would have them entangled with these ceremonies. Neither did Paul
here inioine the Church at Ephesu^ to keep this feast, but how sharply he has
dealt with those Jews or other false teachers that sought to trouble the
Churches with them, appeare^h in all his Epistles; and how roundly, but for a
little halting herein, he dealt with the Apostle Peter, appears Galat. 2. 14.
And if the Gal. ^. 4. 5.
Apostle then at the first planting of the Churches, when many ^wes were
mingled amongst the Gentiles, would not receive the least ordinance with the
ministry of the Gospel, by way of subjection not for an hour, that the
truth of the Gospel might continue amongst them; what would he now say to
these false Apostles and counterfeit wretches, which not being Jews but
Gentiles by nature, and having (...) these examples and documentes before them;
yet dare without ^y warrant thrust their Jewish and heathenish traditions upon
the ^hurches with a strong hand; which thus mingle the Jewish ceremo^es with
the Gospel: which way should the truth of the Gospel re^aine with them, when
the Apostle says, that but a little of such leaue^ Gal. 5. 9.
^oth leaven the whole lump?

But see, these Phariseis not only retain the day and the feast, but join
(...) the celebration of the one day a principal article of our faith, the
re^rection of Christ from the dead: where have they learned (trow ^e) to make
such a set and especial memorial of Christ's resurrection ^e day above all the
days in the year? But here their answer is rea^, because forfooth CHRIST
rose as that day of the year. Did he so? ^ow shall we know that? their holy
Father the Pope having in a so^mne general council corrected his Calender
says, he rise ten days before, and keeps his feast accordingly. Is yt not
doubtful they come (...) the post, and then all their devotions are lost. But
be yt of their ^de. Be it that Christ rose iu^t as that day; yet would I feign
know the ^ysterie of the matter, why we should more specially remember ^d
celebrate Christ's resurrection that Lords day, then the next ^ordes day, yea
or then any day of the year? or why they should keep ^ch a solemn double
feast tha^ Lords day more then any other: vn^sse peradventure yt be, because
the sun daunceth that day when (...) rises. I could never as yet find in
Christ's Testament any such bet^rnes Romans 14. 5. 6.
of one day then an other, neither that Christ's resurrection was (...) be
celebrate with such a stagelike fle^hly pomp, in superstion and ^olatrie, in
flesly ^ustes, riote and gluttony; that day making holy two ^ther days after
yt, and drawing the whole land both young and old, (...) these days, to
intermit their lawful callings, vvherin they are placed ^f God (upon what
necessity or occasion soever) to give atte^dance to ^eir propery and
Idolatry, so spend the time in idleness, folly, and vani^e. Is this to
celebrate the resurrection of CHRIST from dead works? Colos. 3. 10.
Romans 6. 4.
^ to be renewed in knowledge and holiness, after the image of him that ^reated
them? or is yt not amongst their holy Fathers superogatorie ^orkes, which God
never required or commanded? For I would ^aine ^earne of them, where they can
likewise show any commandment or ^varrant for their solemn WHITE SUNDAY, and
their feast of PENTE^OST, other the^ the Jews double Sabaths and feasts etc.
But I have now ^one with this feast: I would therefore know where in the new
Testa^ent they find any president or commandment, to solemnise the very ^ay
of the Apostles receiving those wonderful gifts of the holy Ghost. that the
Apostles did not then keep that day as a feast or gratulation ^f this matter,
is already showed; because they had not as the^ received ^hese gifts, neither
knew in what manner God would work: that ever after they kept or commanded to
be kept any such set solemn memorial thereof upon any one day more then an
other, I suppos^ cannot ^e showed in the new Testament. Paul they may alledg
Act. 20. 16. made haste out of Asia, to be (if yt were possible) at Jerusalem
at the feast of Pentecost: yet this proves nothing yt the Apostles or
Christians kept the feast and commemoration of the wonderful apparition of the
holy Ghost etc. which until they can show, they must be guilty as forgers and
coiners of a new religion, and so of adding unto, yea abrogating of the
Testament of CHRIST. We doubt not but the Jews a long time kept that and many
other feasts, but they may be no example for us in this matter: nor yet these
with their ancient traditions wherein the papists and they prescribe, from
which forgeries they derive these and many other trumperies, without some
better warrant from the word of God, then as yet they can show. Neither is yt
my purpose here to stand to recite their heathenish manner of keeping those
feasts with idleness, riot and gluttony, with their maygames, morris dance,
and summer Lords etc. I now make have to their popish feasts.

WHICH BECAUSE they are so many, we will keep their own division of them in
Double and Single Feasts. Of their double feasts are their Christmasse day,
with the day of his circumsion and Epiphanie, the Annunciation, and
Puritication of their Lady, called Candlemasse day; their day of all the
Saints together, called Hallowmasse; their Michaelmass^ and all Angels,
besides their Easter and whitsontide whereof we have spoken, also their
Assentio^ day, and Trinity sunday. Now their single feasts and common
Holidaies are the Saints days in order as they come in their beadrolle, and
their common sundaies. Of which sundaies, though they have commandment both in
the law by the fourth co^mandemet, and in the new Testament by the commandment
and practice of the Apostles, to keep in the Church the first day of the week,
an holy convocation unto the Lord, spending that day in prayers, hearing the
word, and other holy exercises; yet seeing they so miserably profane yt to
idolatry, both after the manner of the heathen and Papists, yt becomes an
idol feast no less accursed then the others. After the manner of the heathen
they abuse yt, in dedicating yt unto, and naming yt after the chief idol of the
Pagans, the Son, a creature, and in feasting that day after their manner in
pride, gluttony, riot, idleness, sport, play etc. After the manner of ye papists
they abuse yt, in their stinted, superstitious, idolatrous service, their abuse
of scriptures of prayer at their meeting, which is not to any edifi^ng or
leading forward in the ways of God, their course and direction being set down
both to priests and people before hand, what they shall do, say, pray, how
much in the forenoone at Mattens, how little at afternoon at Euensong etc.
Further, in that they dedicate one special Sunday above all the rest unto the
Holy Trinitye; and yet give less honor unto this Sunday and feast, then to
their white sunday going next before. Their other solemn holy feasts, seeing
they want warrant in the word of God, and have nothing for their foundation and
groundworke, are thereby cast utterly out of the Church of CHRIST, which is not
to be edified upon the sands of men's fancies, neither to worship God after the
devises of their own hearts, but according to (...) prescript rules of his
holy word: and therefore I need spend no time (...) the refutation of them: the
bare recital of these their trifling follies (...) vanities, is enough to
scatter them into the wind: for what warrant, ^ommandement, or proof have
these stage players in the word of ^od, in this manner to solemnize the birth,
circumcision, epiphanie, ^surrection and assention of Christ upon their several
days, with their (...) fastes, worship, and feasts? why do not they celebrate
as well his bap^sme, temptation and victory over Satan in the wilderness, the
cal^ng of the woman of Samaria, the receiving the Syrophoenitian, his fa^ous
miracles, casting out devils, raising the dead, walking upon the (...),
transfiguration upon the mountain, giving the holy Ghost unto ^is Apostles,
with his commission and message etc. These are written (...) the new Testament,
and were done of him as well as the other; for our ^arning and comfort as well as
the other. Why then should not they (...) well have their peculiar days,
fastes, worship, feasts, as the other. ^ut where have they thus learned
Christ? to worship him by startes and stintes, by days and eaues, by such idol
fastes and feasts? Is not Col. 2. 20.
^his to draw the worship of God (which is perpetual and spiritual) Mat. 15. 9.
unto carnal commandementes, worldly ordinances and customs Act. 17. 22.
^gaine, and that after so superstitious and profane a manner? Supersti^ious, in
that it is without commandment or president in the Testament ^f Christ, will
worship not required or accepted at their hands: pro^hane, in that they
celebrate these feasts in all manner gluttony, ex^esse, riot, prodigality,
pride, luxury, vanity, idle games, and heathen ^cortes. Thus they celebrate
the nativity, circumcision, epiphanie and ^esurrection of Christ, with gay
clothes, clean houses, good cheer, ^he viole in the feast to stir up lust in
stead of devotion, eating and drink^ng and rising up to play and dance, after
the manner of Bacchus in his ^eastes, with their Lords of misrule, commonly
called Christmas lords, ^ames, enterludes, nummeries, Sodomitish maskes,
wassal cups, ^ith thowsandes of abominations, which chaste and Christian
hearts and ears abhor to hear or think of. This is the fruit of their
idola^rie and idleness: this they learned of their forefathers in the wilderness.
Whiles Moses was on the mount Ex^d. 32. their priest cast them a calfe of gold,
made of their chief jewels that yt might be of the more estimation. To this
Calfe they made an Altar, the priest devoutly proclaimed a fast to all the*
people on the eaue, a solemn feast and holy day unto the Lord, yea of the Lord
IEHOVA as he said. On the day where the people offered burnt offringes, and
brought peace offringes on the morning; after sat down to eat and drink and
rose up to play. This is the very mould and pattern of these their idol
feasts, fastes, worship etc. In Christ's Testament they never learned to
divide Christ's actions and life into such a stageplay; making one day a
Pageant of his birth, an other of his circumcision, an other of his epi^hanie
resurrection etc. though these were distinct things, and done ^t several times:
yet never read I that they ought (in this manner) upon peculiar days to be
celebrate in the church, more then at any other time or day of the year; or
that they ought to have a set worship with select Psalms, Lessons, Pistles,
Gospels, Collects, Anthemes; or such a devout fast on their eaues, or feast on
their days, with such revels as they keep.

But that their devotions may yet more appear, they worship him even in his
mothers belly, or rather before she was conceived with him, they adore the
words of salutation, eue^ in the Angel Gabrie^ his mouth, and give a solemn
fast, worship, and feast day thereunto, which they call the Annunciatio^ of their
Lady. And least she might be offended, they solemnize also with double feast
her purification, commonly called Candlemasse. And here in this feast I would
know of these deep divines, what yt is they worship and solemnize; whether this
action she did, or the person of their Lady: for needs yt must be the one or
both o^ the^, here being nothing either in or joined with this action besides,
worthy of such special veneratio^ and high sole^nitie. If then y^ b^ the
action of her Purific^ion; that was but a legal ceremony, and not now to be
brought into the Church of Christ. If her person (as yt i^ also like) how the^
will they escape the breach of the first co^ma^deme^^; unless peradventure they
hope through her mediatio^ to be dispe^sed withal, and yt she will speak a good
word unto her Son for the^; and therefore they power out unto her their drink
offringes, and burn incense (...). 44.
to the Queen of heaven.

And that they might not fail at time of need, see, they make all the S^intes,
and Innoce^tes in heaven their frie^des and on their side, celebrating to the
Innocents one day of their solemn Christmas: unto all Saints (because none
should be forgotten, and they are many in number) they keep an especial and
principal feast day, with a devout fast upon the eaue etc. yet least some of
the chief Santes, as ^hon the Baptist, and the twelve Apostles might be
displeased in that they are numbered and passed over with other common Saints,
they severally remember them again in their turn with their peculiar eaues,
days, fastes, fe^stes, and worship. Here is yet also an other Saint, whom I
had like to have ou^rskipped, the Captain of the^ al, St. GEORGE, their
Borrowgh, the patron of the la^d, a worthy warrior, our Ladies knight I wene.
This Saint has here no small intertaineme^t, with his solemn processio^ (and
that by no small states, but eue^ the greatest of the la^d) with his cornets
trumpets, harp, shackbutes, psalte^ies, dulcimer and al instruments of Music
etc. This Saint (besides his noble order of knighthood) has also his famous
peculiar Chaplain Palatine of the order, who is to wear a goldring on his
thomb: and what a fam^us feast they keep unto this Saint, there is none in
Court or Country ca^ be ignorant. Because I ^m no good Heralt, I will not
undertake to blazon his arms, the red Cross in white field that he bears in
banner displaied, nor yet his wo^hy (...): For all those ^ refer you to his
L^gend. And here me thinks before we go any further, we had need enquire
^ome learned Doctors opinion of this gear, lea^t we that be silly and ^ooke no
further then the word of God gives us to see, take yt for ^ost gross
idolatry and abhominatio^, because in all the book of God (...) the beginning
to the ending, we find no such president or co^man^eme^t; and therefore (if yt
please you) because DO. ROBERT SOME has ^ndertake^ the matter, we will hear
his learned judgment of this stuff.

This learned Doctor (who has this wit for the most part with him, ^o take no
more of a matter then he is able to deal with) frames an ^rgument in the name
of an other, thus. The church of England makes me^^io^ of Saints deceased,
viz. Apost. Martyrs etc. in some of their pub^ike prayers: therefore the church
of England does worship Saints ^eceased. His answer is, they are mentioned to
stir us up, not to wor^hip the^, but to tread in the steps of their virtue and
religion; and so con^ludeth the Argument very weak and sylly. But how if this
Argument ^roue his own, what opinion shall we then hold of his Doctorhood? ^ot
to speak of his evil conscience, who (to coullor that the cannot ius^ifie, and
to pass by that he cannot gainesay or disprove) is not ashamed ^sually
throughout his writings, to father the forgeries of his own ^dle head upon
others, thinking (by deprauing the poor professors of ^he truth) to suppress
yt, or (at the least) to get credit and promotion unto himself. But I would
know of his evil conscience (which shall ere ^ong be araigned for all these
things, before him that is greater then ^is conscience) whether he never heard
other reasons from some of the^, ^o prove this their celebratio^ and
co^memoration of Angels and deceas^d ^aintes to be idolatrous, blaspheamous and
abominable, even to the ^hief Authors of this stuff, and that in the presence
of some very ho^orable: namely because they dedicate to these Angels and dead
Saints (...) peculiar Eaue and Day, caling the^ after their names, thereby
impropri^ting and giving that to the creature, which is only due and reserved
in ^he hand and possession of the Creator. 2 because upon their Eaues they
^nioyne and bid in their church (upon their sunday) a public fast and (...) in
th^se Angels and Saints names. 3 because upon their day (which they call an
holy day) they proclaim a solemn feast to be kept, ^ith general cessatio^
from their labors in their trades, as upon ye Lords day by the 4 commandment.
4 and this by a public law (not to men^ion all the fleshly and lewd behavior,
idleness, pride, vanity, excess) ^pely seen and suffered upon these their
feastiuals and holy days. 5 because upon these days they have a peculiar
prescript devised worship ^o each several Saint, that they thus celebrate: not
here to mention their insufferable shredding, dismemb^ing, rending and
perverting of ^criptures, to clowte up this idolatry. These reasons if either
those two ^reat BBs to whom they were propounded, or this Doctor which the^
^eard them had soundly confuted, and justified this their manner of ce^ebrating
and worshipping dead Saints and Angels in their church: then ^ad the
Antichristian tyranny of the one, the rep^ochful blasphemy (...) the other,
some color; which now are odious unto God and man.

But now seeing these Arguments still remain with them unanswered, and that
they are so loath to meddle with them; I would now only learn of this Doctor,
where* he (in all the scripture) has found this idolatrous custom of theirs,
to celebrate the memorial of any one deceased Saint, and that upon one set day
yearly, in this manner: we read not that the Fathers before the flood used yt,
neither yet after ye flood, before the law: yet were they very godly men, of
great virtue, such as instructed their children in the true worship and ways
of God: such as their children honored and reverenced whilst they lived, and
did all filial duties unto them; being dead, decently buried them: but never
after kept any a^nual or set day in their remembrance. The like under the law
we read of Moses, Samuel, David etc. men very famous and renowned for their
virtue and godliness, greatly honored of all whiles they lived, no such matter
done to the^ after they were dead, yet were they presidentes by their virtue,
even unto all ages unto the worlds end. The Apostles also whom they so
especialy above al other Saints prefer and celebrate being dead, yea taken
away as famous martyrs, never in this manner upon one special set day
celebrated their consta^cie in the faith and virtue, as we may see by the
Apostle James and the Martyr (...). Likewise the Apostles Paul and Peter being
ready to suffer for the Gospel, left no such commandeme^tes unto the churches,
that any such prayers and festiuals should be kept to them or their
remembrance, being dead: but rather stirred up and admonished the churches
whiles they lived, and disired the churches prayers for the^ whiles they lived.
So that we seeing no ground for this stuff in the word of God, see not
otherwise, but to hold them for detestable idolatries forgeries and
abominations, for the reasons above recited.

And now, because I have been somewhat longer even in the bare recital of these
trumperies, then I thought; I will pass over the rest of their gross trash (as
their christing their Synagogues and Belles into the names of sundry Saints
both men and women Saints, even all in the Popes Calender: their solemn
visiting their special Saints to^bes and monume^tes, as their St. Edwine his
tomb in St. Paul his church in London by the Mayor very solemnly upon
Candlemasse night kneeling down thereat, and saying a Pater noster. Likewise
the yearly co^memoration of the Founders and benefactors of Colleges in the
universities, with their solemn prayers purposely, as also their other idol
feasts unto St. Michael and al Angels which they adore and celebrate in like
manner, with their eaue, their fast, their holy day, worship, feast. What will
this learned Doctor say to this? is this also to immtate their religion and
virtue? where learned he this immtacio^, this religion, if not in the
massebooke where they fetch the rest? this is deep diuinitye in deed, and far
passing all humane capacity. No marvel though he (to whom such mysteries be
revealed) chaleng to himself to be a Doctor of divinity, advancing himself in
the things he never saw, being rashly puffed up with his fleshly mind. Col.
2. ^8.


And now having taken a view of their solemn and idol fea^es, yt remains
that in a word or two we consider of their hypocritish and pharisaicall (...),
which are in diverse sorts: as their Saints and festival eaues, their embers
or Quatuor tempora, their lent fast, and their ordinary fridaies. Of all which
curiously to inquire, by whom and upon what occasions their fastes were first
instituted or invented, and how they grew into this abuse, would but minister
matter to iangle, and were nothing to the purpose: yt is enough that we find
them vain, full of hypocrisy, superstition, idolatry, without ground, and
from the ^ules of the scriptures. Having showed the feasts to which these e^ue
fastes lead and are a preparation to be heathenish, popish, idolatrous; yt
suffices to prove these fa^tes which have the same beginning, use, and end,
and are of the same conspiracy, to be alike guilty. yet I must say, they have
more color and show of probatilitie, then any of the other: insomuch as in
outward pretense they might seem to humble and prepare the peoples hearts to
the hearing of Gods word, and to withdraw them from worldly encombrances, by
attending both to public and private earnest p^aier etc. But (as is showed)
the very feast and worship to which they lead being so blasphemous and
idolatrous, as also kept and spent in all manner ^ewdnes, ryote, excess
voluptuousnes idleness and sin: this fast must needs be alike superstitious,
abusiue, and abominable. For their Em^ers, they are so grossly popish, as there
can nothing be said for the^; vn^es yt be Doctor Roberts popeholy excuse, which
he makes for the lent ^ast, and all the fasting days and eaues that are kept
in England at once.

This great clearke says, they are inioined, not for religion, but for
^ollicie, vz. y^ maintenance of the nauigatio^, and so refers unto a
Sta^ute, made in that behalf. I perceive now the greatest clerks are not
always the vvisest men. I vvil be judged even by any that never commenced
Doctor, whether this be a sufficient reason or not. The Prince ^y act
commands al these popish fasting days to be kept, therefore al ^hese fasting
days, ^ent and all, are civil actions. The Prince commands ^ll the Bishops
ceremonies, government, injunctions, seruicebook etc ^o be observed, therefore
they are all civil actions, and not to be kept or ^efused as in conscience
toward God, but as in regard of the outward court, by Mr. SOME his reasons.
If he were not better seen in ^he Statute of nonresidencie then in the
Statute of Navigations, well might he ^e his GRACELES Chaple^; but never shall he
be a true Pastor, whilst he ^akes this course. It should seem this popish
Doctor either cannot ^ut difference betwixt the first and second Table: or else
suppo^eth that no lay men (as he terms them) may meddle with the first Table;
else would he never be so gross as to conclude, because the Prince commands
yt, therefore yt is a civil action: yea and an other more blas^heamous
conclusion thereupon; The prince commands yt, therefore yt is no matter of
con^cience, but ought without scruple to be done, for (says this Doctor) he is
a simple Diui^e, that cannot distinguish ^etwixt the external Court and the
Court of conscience. Might he not th^s bring in ^l manner idolatry and humane
traditions, being commanded by the Prince^ and no man ought to refuse the same,
and stand for the maintenance of the faith, because now the action concerns
not the conscience, but the outward obedience to the magistrate. But of that
point hereafter.

First let me show, that public fasting is an action belonging to the Church,
to be used upon ^pecial occasions, as in time of some public calamity, great
transgression etc. with great reverence, preparation of the heart and soul,
prayer, and other holy exercises. That public fastes ^aue always belo^ged to
the Church and been exercised therein, plentifully apeareth in the old and new
Testament as Leuit. 16. 29. and 23. 7. Numb. 29 7. 1 Samuel 7. 6. Ester 4. 16.
17. Ne^em. 9. Ezra. 8. 21. Mat. 9. 15. Act. 13. 2. 3. and 14. 23. Besides these
examples, we have many doctrines and rules set us down in the word, how to
use, and what things to eschew, both in public and private fastes. Isa. 58.
Joel 1. and 2 Chap. Zach. 7. D^n. 9. Math. 6. 16. L^k. 5. 35. Math. 17. 21. 1
Cor. 7. 5. So that he is a very young Christian, and (in my judgment) not
worthy to be a teacher in the Church of God, that takes the public fastes of
the Church to be civil actions, and not to concern the conscience. But let me
yet come nearer unto this Doctor and use more familiar reasons unto him,
wherewith he is better acquainted then with the word of God. Are not al his
fasting days and fasting eaues, as they arise in their Calender, solemnly
bidde^ in their Church by the Priest after his second lesson, on the sunday?
are not the people commanded there, to fast upon such holy tides, to resort to
Church? to pray and hear their divine ser^ice? what thinks he? are these
civil actions?

Well, and now to his lent fast, which he would put away with abstinence from
flesh, and that not for religion, but for maintenance of the Navy etc. I would
first know of Mr. Doctor, whither he finds in his books, that the Lent was
hrst found out for the maintenance* of navigations, and whither yt was brought
and received in England for that purpose. He will say, that although yt has
been popi^hly and superstitiously used heretofore in the Church of England,
yet now yt is used for the mainten^nce of navigations: this is a thing not
denied. So was yt also in the most popish and blind time of all, and that much
more then yt is now; when scarce one in a land dur^t eat flesh without the
Popes especial dispensation. Men could then no more then now ^ate fi^h, except
some went to sea to take yt. But shall I therfo^e say that the fast enjoined
by, and used in the Church, is a civil action? how comes yt to pass then,
that yt is so solemnly observed in holy Church upon the first day thereof,
commonly called Ashwednesday? in stead of the popish shrift, displing, and
ashes, they use an especial communion; vvherin the people are invited to do
their repentance. Bitter curses and execratio^s be read and pronounced against
certain sins, vvherof never a one in the Church is free, or ever yet
repented of them; and there made to acknowledge and confirm their own
dam^ation* by ratifying the curse with their own mouth, saying Amen unto them.
And this as they most grossly bear themselves and the people ^n hand, that in
the primitive Church was used a godly discipline; that ^t the beginning of
Lent, such persons as were notorious sinners were ^ut to open penance, and
punished in this world etc. that their ^oules might be saved in the day of the
Lord etc. This stuff by the ^riest must be read in the pulpet upon their
Ashwednesday. Where find ^hey this in all the new Testament, in the practice of
the primitive ^hurches there? Know they what either the primitive Churches or
^he government of CHRIST means? that thus popishly dream of ^ discipline
upon that day especially, of such a corporal penance of a ^ent etc. where
find they this trumperie in CHRIST'S Testament? But ^is wretch that in his
conscience knew the idolatry, and these gross ^oleries well enough: thought to
hide that he could not defend, by ^ying, the Lent was but abstinence from flesh
at the Princes comman^ement; Let him read the last Collect of their
commination upon ^shwednesday, and see there if they desire not God to be
favorable to his people which turn to him in weeping fasting and praying. Is
this ^ut to abstain from flesh. Let him look their Epistle and Gospel upon
the same day, the one taken out of the Prophet Io^l Chap. 2. verse. ^. Turn you
unto me with all your hearts with fasting weeping and mour^ing and^. the
other out of Math. 6. 16. When ye fast be not s^d etc. Let ^im yet further
pervse his portuise upon the first sunday in Lent: he ^all find their Collect
of the day (as they call yt) to begin thus ^ Lord ^vhich for our sakes did
fast 40. da^es and 40. nights: give us grace to ^se such abstinence, that our
flesh being subdued etc. their, Gospel ^f the same day taken out of Math 4.
shows the history of CHRIST ^ast and temptation etc. Let him yet turn his
port^se, and see if ^e find not there an especial communion for every day in
their (...) week, and upon their good friday a trental of Collectes. ^re all
these but civil actions? but abstinence from flesh, for the ^aintenance of
NAVIGATION? Does the statute by him alleged co^^and these things? or is yt the
priests office to meddle with that sta^te? if all this were, yet could they
not help or hide this gross pope^ and heinous idolatry, which they in these
their blasphemous ^ent fast and^. whereof, because this Doctor was either
ashamed or ^feard to meddle which (being such abominable stuff as can find ^o
defense or excuse) I also will not meddle with the further disco^erie or
refutacion thereof, as taking no pleasure to rave in their filthy ^hannels.

YET remain two points of his deep and pestilent divinity to b^ ^xamined;
the one, whether Princes may set any permanent possitiue ^wes, set days and
times, when, what time of the year, and how long to ^ast? the other whither
the Princes lawful constitutions concerning ^utward things, bind the
conscience. The first ROBERT SOME affir^eth, and thereby ratifieth his Lent
fast, embers, eaue fasts, and friday ^astes. The other he says touches no^
the couscience, making a subtle distinction between the EXTERNAL COURT and the
COURT of CONSCIENCE. To follow him so far as the error and wickedness of these
two positions would lead, would make of yt self too wide a gap in the work we
have in hand. I will therefore handle the first point so far as yt makes to
this present matter; and the second very briefly, by way of digression.

Before I come to his divinity, I would know of this learned Doctor, whither
if the Prince ratify and command the Popes blasphemous decrees and
abominations; vvhither this does either alter the property or quality of
them: or such commandment binds not the conscience* I need not here stand to
show these his popeholy fastes of the Church of England to be idolatrous in the
first inuent^on, and now more abominable in the present use, such stuff as he
will not file his hands with the defense of them; and now whether these be
bettered in that they are commanded by act of parliament etc.

But to come to the matter in hand, whither the Prince or whole Church may
make permane^t laws for ye yearly, m^ncthly, or weekly fastes to be still
observed upon this or that day. I have above showed, that fastes are upon
especial and present occasions, actions, calamities, etc. to be exercised, to
the humbling and preparing the body and soul unto true repentance, prayer and
other holy exercises. This all the practice of the Jews in their Temple
shows: who upon especial occasions as war, plague etc. used fasting. That
these set fastes were not perdurable any longer then upon these present
occasions, we also find. For the fastes that EZRA and NE^EMIAH in^tituted were
not continued from year to year unto the posterity. This very question also
the Lord by his Prophet Zachary fully resolves, in the 7. and 8. Chapters of
his prophecy: where the Jews sending unto the Temple to know whither y^ fast
instituted in the fifth month, for the destruction of their Temple, were still
to be observed, the Temple being again built after their return out of
Babylon; to whom the Prophet (after he had reproved their former sin
obstinacy, and sup^rstitious abuse both of ^asting and all the worship of God,
which were unavailable and did but aggrauate their judgments, so long as they
continued in their sins) showed them that yt was not their fasting from meat,
or eating, that made them more or less acceptable to God, but their faithful
obedience unto his word, and that his kingdom consist^th not in meats and
drinks etc. as also instructing them of the true use and ends of fasting and
prayer; in the end concludes chap. 8. 19. etc. that all their former fastes of
the 4. 5. 7. and 10. month were now to cease, promising unto them in stead
thereof, a continual feast, with his abundant blessings, so long as they
walked faithfully with the Lord, comparing in that Chapter his former plagues,
to their former sins etc. So then we see how ^sting is upon especial and
present occasions to be used, and those or such like occasions ^asing, not to
be continued without end or use: for that were not only to make positive laws,
to bind that which God has left* at liberty: but also to put holiness in the
very action of fasting, without right end or true use.

Further the practice and use of fasting in the church of Christ under the
Gospel, shows, that there can be no permanent laws of the time and day made
thereof. For they (not only upon such present and public occasions of
calamity) are to use yt; but also in some especial and Act. 3. 2.
weighty actions, whereof depends the good or evil estate of that church or
congregation: as upon the choice of the Officers and Elders Act. 14. 23.
of the Church. That peculiar Congregation in such actions, at such ^imes, is
to humble themselves with fasting and prayer: and yet this fast neither to be
enioined to others which have not that occasion of such ^ike action: neither to
be annually, monthly etc. continued of the^ after that action performed.
Therefore we may conclude, that neither the magistrate, nor the whole church may
set positive laws of public ^astes, to be holde^ upon such a day or such a
month from year to year* 1. Cor. 7. 5.
^eing they are upon present urgent and especial occasions to be used. And as
for private fastes, seeing they are wholly put in every Christians li^ertie and
the occasions neither concerning others, nor publicly known of them; there
can much less be any positive laws made to ^ast this or that day of
necessity: what gains then this learned Doc^or, by this evasion. THAT THE
PRINCE commands these yearly, monthly, and weekly fastes; unless yt be to lay
that blame and blasphemy, which before was due unto the Pope their Founder,
now upon the Prince. Do not these priests an high piece of service unto her
Majesty ^eerin? But this profound Divine, has yet one trick in his budget, to
^alue all this matter; and that is, the Prince does not command the^ to fast,
^ut only upon such days to abstaime from flesh. How false this is by their
especial deuotio^s upon such days, the priests solemn bidding ^he^ in open
church etc. has been sully already co^uinced. Moreover, ^ would know of him
(if he can tell me) if the action should be merely ^iuil as he would have yt,
what the church has to do with yt to pu^lish them, to assemble and pray etc.
on those days: Also, why the very ^aues and days in time and number as the
Pope used and left them, are still ^y them so retained and used? were not this
to offend the consciences of ^he faithful? to nourish others in their
foreconceiued superstition and ^dolatrie? Is not this the very cause that
makes so many papists? in that so many popish relikes still remain?

And now further I would know of Mr. Doctor, how he can prove by the law of
God, that the Prince may forbid his subjects to eat ^lesh upon such days and
such times etc. I demand not now any polli^ike reasons, for then he would
smite me down with these two; for ^he sparing the young increase of beasts,
and for the maintenance of the Navy: but my conscience cannot rest upon the^:
I had rather have one ^ule or example out of the word of God, where I can find
no such pre^ident, unless yt be king Saule^: who ind^ed by solemn curse forbad
the ^sraelites to taste food but for one day, and that upon as v^gent occasion
as 1. Sam. 14.
I suppose possibly ca^ be alleged, namly during the battle and prusui^e of
the Philistines: but he was reproved for yt both by the holy Ghost in the mouth
of I^athan when he said. My Father has troubled the land, (...). 29.
see now how mine eyes are made eleere by tasting a title of this honey: and
also by Let from God himself, the matter coming to be tried be^wixt him and
his son, who had made the default, when the Lord answered not by Vrim as he
had couenanted and accustomed: the hypocrite Saul desired the Lord to give the
per^ or upright: and so (...) was (...). 41.
taken, denounced by Gods own judgment innocent and not guilty: and the
wretch left as the author and chief in the trespass, by making that ungodly
law. So then, if yt were not lawful for him upon such a weighty occasion, by
way of law, to restreine the use of Gods creatures for one day; I cannot see
how upon any pollitike cause, such r^straintes may be made throughout, and from
yea^e to year.

My reasons are, first God has created these creatures and not man, and given
to man sovereignty over the^, to use them to food freely; therefore (...). 9. 2.
3.
they which by law restrain the sober and free use of them. 1 both calback the
Lords liberal g^a^t. 2 and deprive the Creator of honor and praise, in and for
the use of them, and 3 make a law of that the Lord has left in liberty. 4
then the Apostle calls such laws as in this manner 1. Tiu^, 4. 3. 4. 5.
command to abstain from meats, the doctrines of devils. ^ to conclude the
Apostle often charge us to stand fast in our liberty, and not to be brought
in bondage of any thing, which is by God put in our 4. Co^. 6. 12.
power. But by such laws, our free use of such creatures is for these times
taken away etc. For which reasons, I am (as yet) in conscience persuaded, y^
the civil magistrate ought not to make permane^t laws of yt the Lord has left
in our liberty, neither by way of law to restrain^ the^ one day, for any civil
or pollitike causes whatsoever. I would not now be understood of ecclesiastical
and religious fastes; we have both laws and ple^tiful examples in the
scriptures, that the Prince and church may proclaine such general fastes, upon
occasions etc. Neither would I here be suspected to go about to diminish or
pluck away y^ high sacred power and authority the Lord has given to the civil
magistrate, as to his Lief^ena^t, over both body, life, and goods: ^o much as
to she^ (...). 3. 1.
that the Princes or Magistrates power is yet by God himself limited Romans 13.
^ccles. 8. 2.
and circum^cribed; for the transgression whereof, they shall (as any other men)
account unto the Lord; in whom they are to command, as we also readily in the
same Lord to obey.

The excess or abuse of these creatures the Magestrate may and ought to punish
and repress because that is sin; and therefore is the law and (...). 71.
sword of God committed unto him: but by a law of his own (whereof is no
warrant in the word of God) to restrain them for these or these times, I
think there he exceeds his commission, though upon never so great color of
policy, and that the action were purged of all this romish superstition and
idolatry, wherewith now yt is refersed. The Prince is to govern, ouersee and
provide for the commonwealth, administering and dispensing, gathering and (...)
the cre^tu ^es and wealth thereof, as a Father and a Steward: yet still with this
I^terim, as the Psa. 82. 6. 7
Steward and servant of God according to their Masters will, as they that Mat.
25. 19.
^ball account.

But here yt may be said, that the Magistrate and not we shall answer for
this sin, if yt be any; that yt is our duty to obey in these outward things
without inquiry or questioning, because y^ reason, charge, nor account of the
Magistrates office is not committed unto us: neither may we thus enquire into
the same, being private me^ with out apparent pre^mptio^ and secret rebellion.
God forbid y^ any of his seruats should be ^tained with either of these faults:
we honor, reverence and obey y office and person of ye Magistrate (I say not
now worship and adore) as God himself. In that we seek to know the Magistrates
duty etc. we do not ^herby either intermedle or intrude into his office:
unless we knew Romans 14. (...) 23.
^ow to obey and how far, how should we obey? what is not of faith is ^inne:
and where should we know either his or our own duty, but in y Hos. 5. 11.
Book of God? whereby both he for commanding and making ungodly de^rees, Mic^.
6. 1^.
and we for obeijng them, shall be judged. Obedience must always ^e in the
Lord. If the Prince dema^d or command my body or goods in ^is service, I am to
yield them both readily w*out further questioning Romans 13. 6.
^f his ententes, ends, or purposes, those belong not unto me: only I M^t. 17.
27.
^m to look to y^ outward thing which I do, yt yt be lawful and (...) by the
word: as y^ Prince comandeth me to make ready my wea^ons to serve in the war, I
may not refuse: but if this war be apparently ^nlawful, as against Gods
servants etc. I may not obey. The Prince 1 Pe^. 2. 13*
^aketh me an officer or under Magistrate; I am in this place to serve 1 Samuel
22. 17.
^im, but not to execute any of his unlawful decrees etc. The Prince ^emandeth
my goods; I am readily and willingly to depart with them ^l unto him, without
inquiry: but if the Prince command me to give ^y goods to such an idol, or
after such a wicked manner, as by way of ^ithes to a minister, or by way of
pension to an antichristian minister, I ^ay not obey, but rather suffer his
indignation, yea death, because now Dan. 3. 18.
^ make my self a tr^passer, in doing that which God forbidd^th, at ye ^rinces
commandment. So in like manner, if the Prince should command ^ll the goods,
victuals or cattle I have, I most willingly would obey; ^nowing y^ for this
he, and not I should account. For I am comanded to ^ay tribute, and not set
the portion how much or when, my self. But if ^he Prince make a law, that no
man shall eat flesh during the Lent, but ^uch as have special license from him;
I say this law is unjust, contrary ^o the bountiful liberality of God, who
has given al men at al times a ^ree use of these creatures to food. It is
cont^arie to the order of Gods ^reation, who has therefore created and ordained
them. It is contrary to Gods honor, who will have prais^ and thanks for the
holy and pure vs^ ^f them. It is contrary to Gods wisdom, who has seen no
such law ^f restraint expedient. It is contrary to the liberty and freedom
God ^ath given us in CHRIST: God having at al times put al his creatures for
our sustenance in our choice and power, eue^ as the green herb of the field.
Therefore I see not why the servants of God should any more by this
commandment be restrained or forbear, then Daniel did for the decree of the
King of Persia for the thirty days inhibitio^, to make suit or petition to
any, save the King only. We need not fear the indignation of man, when God
approves the things we do. Policy must Genesis 1. 28.
take, and not give laws unto religion. The Lord has by his word given Leuit.
^6.
a blessing to all the creatures, that they should increase and multiply Deuteronomy.
28.
by virtue thereof to the use and sustenance of mankind, even of every living
soul that he brings into ye world. Yea before he made man, he provided food
for him. This goodness he still extends to ye good Isa. 28. 18
and bad generally to all. So that to make such pollitike laws for ye
restraint ^oel. ^. 55.
of this the Lords bounty, is not only to distrust ye Lords p^ouidence, and
not to depend thereof for the future time, using the bread of the day with
thanckfulnes in sobriety; but to asc^ibe to our own policy and council yt,
which is due to the Lord of life, the gyuer of increase. Famine and scarcity
are not kept away with humane policy: they are y^ messe^gers and punishments
of God for sin. Yet speak I not here against godly providence, christian
parcimonie, or sober and modest use of God his creatures: all this may be done
without either breach of Gods laws, or restraining that by law, which God has
left at liberty.

Nov comes to be considered that learned problem of Do. SOME, wherein he
thinks himself as safe, as if he had got a castle on his back, trusting more
to the fame and toomb of his M^. CALVINE for the defense thereof, then unto his
own learning or the truth of the matter: namly, THAT THE conscience of man is
not bound by this law, but the outward action: and he is a simple divine that
cannot distinguish between the external court and the court of consciece. For
the Author of this Doctrine, though I cannot assent unto him in this very
point, for such reasons as I shall by and by show: yet is he no Patron or
Master for such scholars as this popish Doctor, yea and other divines of
these our miserable days, who do but seek out shifts and euasions out of his
writings, to cover and defend their shameful transgressions, which they
without conscience or fear of God commit. For by this subtle distinction
(being understood in the best sense) has D.R.S. both animated and confirmed
Princes in their wicked decr^es, by enioyning obedience unto such laws, and
taken away al fear of Gods wrath and judgments from such as obey these laws;
making them believe, that the conscience is not heerby bound, burdened or
charged, but only the outward action etc. and therefore they need to make no
scruple of conscience to obey such hestes.

Well, that I may at once pluck from him Ajax S^ield (this is his own profane
phrase) and set this his Author most sharply against him, who has especially
excepted all laws, which either bind that God has left in our liberty, and
al traditions whatsoever, that are brought into the church: h^ inueigheth most
gravely and worthily against

(...) such laws and traditions, and exempteth all Christians from the
obedience or receiving of such laws or traditions. How will Doctor SOME do now
for his lent? ^vve have showed yt (in the best construction) to be an humane
law, ^estraining and inhibiting the sober and ^oly use of those creatures which
God has put in our liberty. But ^s the truth in deed is, and as their present
practice without all con^radiction declares: yt is (as yt is used with them) a
burdenous idola^rous tradition, a papisticall and romish custom, being used
after that ^uperstitious abominable manner that I have about declared, a
spe^iall and solemn part of their worship, a great and principal action of
their Church; as the solemn bidding and keeping of that, shew^th. How can this
doctor then say, yt concerns not the conscience? ^o not the public actions
of the Church, the worship and service of God, prayer and fasting concern the
conscience? or may such trumperie ^raditions be brought into the Church? or
laid upon the conscience? ^e learneth n^ such doctrine of Mr. CALVINE: who
allows no humane diuises, no Apocrypha traditions to be brought into the
Church of God, how holy, pregnant or necessary soever they may seem to be.

Yet in handling this point, he has unhappily stumbled at I vvote ^ot what
old prescriptions and ancient erroneous customs, of kee^ing a solemn
memorial of the birth, death, and resurrection of CHRIST upon their peculiar
days yearly; as also the feast of Pentecost, when the Apostles received the
holy Ghost etc. He also allows of Ap^crypha Leitourgies, viz. ^set and
stinted form of numbered public prai^rs to be brought into and used in the
Church, and this as yt should ^eeme, because he would not be thought a
Nouatian, or an Author of ^ew Religion etc. But see, how he has thereby both
ensnared himself, and opened a gap for other like trumperie to be brought into
ye church, ^vhich may easily carry both as great show of antiquity and of
godines, as these. He has thereby also given a very pernicious president unto
other ages, as apeareth in the miserable estate of our common ^velth; who are a
great deal more ready to follow him in his errors and ^ransgressions, then to
imitate him in his godly virtues, laborious and ^oly life. Me thinks also,
that Mr. CALVINE in the other part of this ^oint (concerning such laws as
pluck away any part of our Christian ^ibertie, or inhibite and restrain that
which God has put in our power) ^ath greatly departed from himself therein. For
having very truly set down, that yt is heinous presumption in any mortal man
to restrain or make laws of such things as the Lord has left in liberty; he
straightway (least he should offend, or keep back civil magistrates from
^eceauing the Gospel) inuenteth a pollitike distinction, betwixt ye outward or
ciul Court, and the Court of conscience; saying that this outward Court
respects men only, and binds not the conscience of the doer, but the
outward actions only: the other concerns matters belonging unto God, and
therefore binds the conscience. Thus has he both lost and entangled himself,
and utterly overthrown all his former doctrine.

CONSCIENCE HE defines from the second of the (...). ^ to be a certain
feeling or remorse within our selves* according to the knowledge of Gods will,
which does continually present us, and accuse or acquit us before the judgment
seat of God. Although this definition be somewhat of the scantest, as making the
conscience of man extend no further then his present knowledge, which yet we
read in the scriptures Reu. 20. 12.
stretches much further, namly to the whole li^e of man (wherein Math. 16. 27
God as in a book writes aly* things done in this mortal life) which Romans 2.
3. 4. 5. etc.
book he often opens not until the final judgment, but suffers men Ectles.
8. 11. 12. 13.
to run on, and die in their sin without feeling, until then he plucking
away all vailes and lets, set al their sins that ever they have committed
Is^. 57. 11.
in thought, word or deed in order, according to their indignity before them:
whereupon, in horror of conscience, the scripture sets out and describes
their fearful desperate estate unto our capacity, showing* that in that day,
they shall even desire the rocks to fall upon them and (...). 6. 16.
the seas to hide them from the wrath of the Lamb. etc. If our consciences were
only charged but with the sins which we commit against our knowledge, the^
ignorance of Gods law excuses the breach thereof, Romans 2. 12.
then were the ignorant in far most best estate, and had the cleerest ^ These.
1. 8
conscience, then needed we not to pray for pardon for our ignorant Leuit. 5.
17. 18.
sins etc. But because our conscience in this life cannot be touched with,
or accuse us here of more then we know to be sin (for as the Apostle says,
without the law we lived, but when the commandment came sin revived, but we
died) therefore to a^oide further controversy, I rest in this his description,
which me thinks also makes vene fully against himself: for we see how the
knowledge of the law reuiueth ^om. 7.
sin, and makes yt out of measure sinful.

But to come to the point: Mr. CALVINE says that by the civil laws the
conscience is not bound, but the outward action only. If he mean thus, that
the conscience is not subject to the civil Magistrate, but the body only, he
says true. If he mean that the civil Magistrate can but look upon the
outward action in the keeping or breach of his law, he says true. For man, no
not the whole Church can enter into Gods seat, to search and judge the
conscience, the inward affections (...). 17. 9.
of the heart etc. Man can but behold and judge the outward 1. Cor. 3. 11.
actions, according to the law of God; for if they could, then should no
hipocrites creep into, or remain in the Church. The heart and conscience
(until by outward actions yt be revealed) is not only liable unto, but
searched by, and judged of God. And this we see as well in the laws of the
first Table as in the laws of the second. Whiles I resort and vvalket together
with the Church, and worship God to all outward seeming vnreprouablie: though
I be inwardly never so great an hypocrite: until my sin apparently break
out, the Church can no more censure me, then the civil Magistrate can punish
me before I have broken the law. So then we see the secret conscience is as far
out of the reach, censure and judgment of the Church, as yt is out of the
Magistrates hand, until some fault or offense be made.

But if Mr. CALVINE mean (as his words and whole scope int^nd) that the
conscience is not charged with the law of the outward Court, but with the
outward action only, then surely he greatly erred. For this doctrine is most
dangerous and false, as discharging the conscience from the whole second Table,
unto which yt is as much bound, as unto the first. Neither can we keep or
please God in the first, that walk not with a good conscience toward all
men in the second. Our prayers are abominable that are offered with hands full
of blood, Isa. 1. and 7^. Chap. Prou. 15. ^. and 21. 27.
^r with our hearts abounding with lu^tes, or set upon the world. We are
not to offer our offering upon the Altar, until we have sati^fied our iniuried
or offended Brother, and made agreement with our conscience, while we are in
the way: we cannot love God whom Math. 5. 23. etc.
we have not seen, if we love not our Brother etc. Thus we see how God
himself has joined the Tables together, and inioined them upon 1 I^. 4. 20
the consciences of all men; as whereby they shall be judged before him. ^ speak
not now concerning the heavy weight of Gods law, which ^one of our Fathers
were able to bear * or the strait exaction of the ^erimplishment thereof; the
best of us not being able to answer him one of a thousand, from both which the
death of JESUS CHRIST has set us free. Yet has not our Lord JESUS CHRIST
abrogate one title of his Fathers law, neither exempt the consciences of men
from the second Table, and bound them with, and unto the first Table only. If
the transgression of the least of Gods laws be death, and this death extend
both unto the body and soul; who can deliver and exempt our consciences from
a careful and most strict observation of all Gods laws, even with all our
strength and the utmost power God has given us, daily examining our
consciences even to every idle word or ^aine thought, pouring out and unfolding
our hearts before the Lord, ^ndighting, arraigning and judging our own hearts
before him the knower and searcher of them, that so we may have our debt-book
cancelled, and all our sins blotted out through the blood and mediation 1
Cor. 11. 31.
of that immaculate Lamb that takes away the sins of the world.

Moreover, there is no consequent, because the civil Court or outward Romans 13.
5.
action concerns men only, and is done unto them, that therefore 1 Pet. 2. 13.
those laws and actions bind not the conscience. For both we are bidden Act.
24. 14* 15. 16.
to obey the Magistrate for conscience sake, and from the heart; and to behave
our selves toward al men, that we may have the testimony of ^ clear
conscience. It suffices not to do the thing we are commanded, C^l. 3. 22. 23.
24.
but we must do yt cheerfully and with a good heart: we must not only do
that which is good, but do yt well and as we ought to do. The civil Ephesians. 6. 5.
^.
Magistrate in puni^hing an offender, may yet do yt with such affections, as he
may before God murder him: we also in all duties of ^haritie, must do them
with a single heart and eye, for else yt avails ^s not. If we do them
grudgingly, as of constreint, or to be seen or praised of men, or of custom
with others, and not of c^oscience toward God and our neighbor, they profit
us nothing. And this holds a^ well in the first, as in the second Table. Our
religion is vain (though yt be outwardly never so unreprovable) if our heart
stand not sound and upright.

A strange doctrine yt is, to sever the conscience, and the law; the
conscience, and the outward action: they may as well here whiles we live sever
the body and the soul, which though they are distinct things, (...) can they
not be here separate. The body shall rue the thoughts of the soul; the
soul shall rue the sins of the body: the body and soul together make a
man, and the man both body and soul, are liable unto al Gods laws, and shall be
judged for the breach of the least. Has God commanded yt? we must obey and do
his commandment with all our soul, and that with such circumstances and
affections as the Lord requires, be the actio^ never so slight and bodily in
our seeming, yet yt must be done in singlenes of heart as in the eyes and name
of God; yea (says Collos. 3. 17.
the Apostle) as unto God himself, to whom we shall account for all things
done in this mortal flesh. Knowing then this terror of the Lord, yt behooves
us to take heed what we put upon the file of that record against that day, to
examine our own hearts and conscience^ 2 Cor. 5. 10
daily, least they be hardened through the deceitfulnes of sin; to judge our
selves here how we do the will of God in all things, and not to put off
through security, until we be judged of God. And sure if this doctrine were
sincerely and soundly taught, yt would stay the rage of sin, which now
breaks out (as the bakers oven whiles yt is not tended) (...). 7. 4. 6.
both in Magistrates and people. The Magistrate would be well advised what laws
he makes, the people how they obey; knowing, that both shall answer unto the
great Judge: whereas now by this deep learning of Doctor SOME, the conscience
not being bound by the Princes law, but the outward and temporal action only;
the Prince may make what laws he lust for civil policy: the people ought
without all scruple to obey, seeing their laws bind not the eonscience etc. But
if ^e Princes laws be contrary or diverse to the laws of God, then is not our
conscience or body bound by or unto them, then are we not to obey such laws,
but stand for our Christian liberty and the maintenance of the faith in all
patient manner, rather enduring the wrath of man, then procuring the wrath of
God. The vain pretense of civil policy, will neither excuse them nor us
before God the Judge of al, with whom w^ have to do: He will have his laws
statutes and judgments kept and not altered, innouate or neglected, according
to humane wisdom, the state and policies of times and humors of men, which
vary and turn with the wind, making laws to day and abrogating them to
morrow, one Prince after one manner, an other quite contrary. But the statutes
and Deuteronomy. 4. 8. and 7. 11. and ^. 1. and 26. ^6.
judgments of God, which are delivered and expounded unto us by his holy
Prophetts, endure for ever the pure wisdom, the upright i^stice, the true
exposition and faithful execution of his moral law: which laws were not made
for the Jews state only (as Mr CALVINE has taught) but for all mankind,
especially for all y^ Israel of God: from which laws, Psalm. 119. ^. 106. 106.
yt is not lawful in judgment to vary or decline either to the one hand, or to
the other. For what do we thereby, but control the wisdom and Mal. 4. 4.
equity of Gods ways, prefer and think our own more wise and equal, Deu. 4.
6.
^brogate his, and set up our own instead thereof; frame God to ye common Ez^.
18. 25.
wealth, and not the commonwealth to the will of God. Thus by the neglect of Gods
Laws, does the whole world oue^flow with all manner sin, plunged deeply and
unrecoverably into Gods wrath, and eu^n hastneth him unto final judgments and
vengeance. These are the best fruits that are reaped by this Doctors deep
divinity, whiles he seue^eth the conscience from the law, making the law to
bind the outward action, but not the conscience.

BUT SEE NOW through this Doctors Cauils I have been drawn from the present
purpose: which was, to consider what kind of fastes ^re used in this their
Church of England, which as we have hitherto ^hewed to be wholly derived from
their mother Church of Rome, ^n the same idolatrous manner, times and seasons:
so there now remai^eth an other new kind of fast, invented and brought in by
the lear^ed ministry of the land, such as sue and seek for the reform^tion of
^he Church: and this without the license or allowance of their LL. the BB^.
This fast I know not from whence yt was brought, whither from GENEVA or else
where, in despite (yt should seem) of the fastes used by the Jews and in the
primitive Churches. Here the learned priests and preachers lay their heads
together, choose out 3 or 4 ^ro^ amongst them to preach: One of them must play
Sin, an other the Judgments of God, the third Repentance, the fourth the
Gospel. The people are solemnly ^idden from al quarters to this Stageplay who
(at the first invention of ^t) flocked in thick and threefold to behold this
novelty. There ^e that plaieth sin, frames himself cunningly to his
auditory, that ^e offend none of his great Cananites nor rich gluttons, but
especial^y having regard unto his first oath at the taking of his antichristian
ministry, when he forsware Christ and the faith, unto his Lord the (...). and
bound himself not to speak against any thing by public authority
established etc. he has great regard, not to meddle with any of these matters,
least he awake the sleepy dog, and know not how to ^pease him again, or
recover his credit and estimation with him. Wherefore I warrant you, there is no
sin against the first Table in the land, except yt be among such as still
remain Papists, recusantes etc. and such as will customably blaspheme the
name of God, and also such as do not diligently enough countenan^e the
preaching ^riestes (I should say as frequent not their sermons) etc. but
otherwise ^or the state of the Church, there is nothing amiss, but flourishes
maruailously, abounding with such lear^ed Prie^tes, as no Church in ^he world
has the like: yet I must say as I have heard, let the auditorie be such as
will back them, and they will have a fling at the BBs* i^ some eloquent
DELPHICK dark speeches, such as may be retracted, or have a double
construction (as shall more apeare when we come to their manner of preaching)
If they were removed, and they had the discipline of the Apostles in their
parishes, then all were well, there is nothing else vvanting amongst them. And
for this all that mourn in the chine, and sigh in secret for yt, (though
neither Priest nor people know what yt means) yet they must now fast, and
then they have done their duties to ye full; the fault is not in them, but in
God almighty that they have yt not. Such a priest as this is a blazing star, a
parragon of a Country, one of the new found MARTINES SAINTS. And such people
are Puritans or Martinistes praecisians: though both priest and people for all
this glosing and hypocrisy with God and the world, stand still under the BBs.
antichristian yoke, the one administering, the other receiving all their
detestable vvares and marks. But to return again to this their fast; if you
come now to the second Table of the law; o they are severe men, they will make
a conscience to tremble; If there be ever an usurer, or a Drunkard, or an
vvhoremaister, they will so bebayt him, as he will not love a sermon again a
goodwhile. Yet for all this when they meet a broad they are good friends,
especially when they meet at the Sacraments: then they forgive one another
from the bottom of their hearts. Now here must be noted by the way, that
these kind of persons are not indeed the most beneficial to these fasti^g
pharisaicall Preachers, and lightly will not go further then by law he must
needs; which is, to pay him his tithes and offringes etc. But in their
company they delight not, neither will bid them home to their houses or
magnify them: and therefore these men must bear with them, if in the pulpit
(when they are ravished with zeal of the Lord) they have now and the^ a gird
at them to ease their stomachs, especially now for fashion sake. As for all the
rest of their auditorie, there is no such sin amongst them, and therefore they
shall be exhorted to confess all their sins, in thought, word, or deed unto
the Lord, to acknowledge their evil ways, and power out their hearts before
the Lord, to sorrow and mourn, and if they have any voluntary tears, to help
the Priest to weep for that present, though neither their evil ways be showed
them, but (as has been said) most cunningly hid and covered from their eyes,
least they should see and avoid them. Neither in their private conversation,
offices, houses, are their sins by the light and power of the word discovered
unto them, or they called to the practice of their duties, least they indeed
should the^ epsy the deceit of these miserable guides, that have made them
believe they stood in Gods favor all this time, and detesting their perfidy
and hypocrisy, should return unto the Lord. And thus being exhorted to ^ament
and repent their sins they know not, and to return to the Lord; the priest
that plaieth the last part, will heal them all with the Gospel, dismiss them
with the peace and blessing of God, be they never so many, least they should
wound weak consciences etc. Thus is this solemn fast ended. When the PP. have
said their certain, the people dismissed (where I trow for that night is no
talk either by the way as they go home, or at their supper, but how
excelle^tly such a man and such a man did) The priests themselves that took
this pains are bestowed at some of their hosts, or good dames houses; where
at night they recompense their fasting and mourning, with good cheer and ease.
As for the next day (by that time they have slept of the matter) al is quite
forgotten, every man upon hi^ old biace again even as they were wont to be,
they are no changelings: priest and people in the same idolatry, profannes etc.
that before. Thus do these prophets, not only not discover the sin of the
la^d* unto the people by their preachmentes and long pharisaical prayers, but
soder them therein, and strengthen their hands th^rwith, that no man ca^n
depart from iniquity? but dissemble also with God himself, and weary him with
these their abominable prayers, and hypocritish fastes, counterfaiting a great
sorrow and heaviness for their sins, aflicting Isa. 5^.
their souls for a piece of a day, bowing down the head as a Zach. 7.
bulrush etc. not loosing the bands of wickedness, nor taking off the heavy
burdens and letting the oppressed go free, or breaking the heavy yokes, nor
executing judgment, or releeuing the widow and fatherles; but refusing to
hearken, pulling away the shoulder, stopping their ears, making their hearts
as an adamant stone, least they should hear the ^aw and the words which the
Lord of hosts sends ^n his spirit by the ministry of his servants,
resisting the holy Ghost a^ their forefathers have done, persecuting at all
hands and smiting with the fist of wickedness such as speak unto them in the
name of God, for the redress and amendment of their lives.

THVS HAVING seen these solemn fastes, what kind of stuff they are, let us
now a little while turn our eyes to the public Sacraments of this famous
Church of England. Which that they may the sooner appear, let us see in a word
or two, what the ordinance of Christ is concerning the outward administration
thereof. We find in his Testament unto every true Sacrament required. 1. a
lawful minister of the Gospel to deliver them. 2. a faithful people or their
seed to receive them. 3. the outward eleme^tes and form of words which our
Savior Christ has ordained thereunto: As in baptism to baptize them Mat. 28.
(...)
with clean water in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of Mat. 26. 26
the holy Ghost: Unto the supper of the Lord are required the elements Man. 14.
22
of bread and wine: which bread (after thanks giving) is to be broken Luke.
22. 19
and to be delivered with such words of exhortation as are thereunto 1. Cor.
11. 24
prescribed, and the cup to be delivered in like manner. Now where any of these
wants; either a lawful minister of the Gospel to deliver the^, a faithful
people and holy congregation joined together in the faith and order of Christ,
to receive them, or any other form of administration either in the elements
or order, be used, then our Savior Christ in his Testament has inioined to be
used; we may boldly affirm, that such are adulterate and false Sacraments.

And now let us but even as briefly compare these Sacraments of the Church of
England, to these rules. They there have (to begin with) an antichristian
Romish ministry, such as the Pope left them, as is abouesaid; a profane
co^fuse people and their seed, to receive them. For who with them (that is able
to pay for the Chrisme) is not baptized? the seed of heretics, witches,
coniurers etc. who with them is not admitred to their communion of the supper,
that will pay his offertorie? And to come to their form of administration, what
a sort of fond trifling ceremonies are added to their Sacraments? as to their
public baptism: yt must be done in their coniured hallowed Font, with a
special Gospel taken o^t of the 10 Chapter after Mark, the water being well
coniured and hallowed to the mystical washing away of sin etc. special
Gossipes called and chosen which are godfathers and godmothers, which must
publicly there undertake for yt child, that he shall forsake the devil and al
his works, and constantly believe Gods holy word, and obediently keep his
commandementes. Where, after this pretty dialogue, betwixt the parish priest,
the parish clarke, these godfathers and godmothers which answer for the
infant: the priest baptiseth yt in the name of the Father, of the Son, and of
the holy Ghost, and of the holy Cross, and charge these godfathers etc. to
teach the infant the Creed, Lords prayer, ten commandementes.

All which when he can say, and have learned also some of that worthy
Catachisme which is set out for that purpose; then must he be brought to the
Bishop to receive his second Baptism, which they call Bishoping, or
confirmation: whereunto also he must have a new Godfather etc. Then after ^e
has been posed by the Bishop, whither he ca^ say his gear above prescribed,
the child kneeling down, this reverend B^. lays his holy hands upon his
head, and says a certain Collect over him, confirms his former baptism,
and giving him his blessing, dismisseth him.

Yet is there a third and fourth kind of baptism in the Church of England;
namely the hasty baptism done by the midwife: who if she see the child in
peril and like to dye, before yt can be brought to the Church; then is she to
bestir her, and give the child the christendom, least yt never come in heaven:
and this baptism is warranted by their seruice-Boke to be lawful and
sufficient baptism: and the Priest finding yt orderly done by the cunning
midwife, is to publish yt in the Church to be very good and allowable, and to
commend them that so orderly did yt, at that time of necessity.

But if the Priest upon the examination of the matter, find that the midwife
was not cunning in this trade; but for haste or fear forgot or left out some
of her accomplementes: then must he (according to the ^orme prescribed in their
public baptism, proceed with the Godfathers and Godmothers etc. save that
when he comes to dip yt, he must say, N. If thou be not baptized already, I
baptize thee etc. And this may be termed baptism by supposition.

Their other sacrament of the supper also is not free of the like found
trifling and superstitious additions: and is by their SERVICE BOOK divided into
2 sorts: public, of al together in their Synagogue; and private in their
houses, called the communion of the sick. In their public communion, the
Priest (araied in his ministerial vesture) is placed at the north end of the
Table, and there is to read his certain. He is there nurtured, when to turn
to the Table, when to the people, when to stand, when to kneel; what, and
when to say. The people (after they have offered to the priest) are in their
place to kneel down to say and answer the Priest at his turns and times, as
is prescribed in their Massebook: where (after Sr. priest has taken a say,
and begun to the people) he delivers unto them (as they kneel) their maker
after the old popish manner, altering the words and form of institution
delivered by our Savior and his Apostles, saying. THE BODY of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, which was given for thee etc. It were long to set down their preambles
and several Collectes at this their communion, as at their Christ-masse day,
their Easter day, Assention day, vvhite-sunday Trinity sunday, and how the
whole queir, priest and people glory God, with Angels and Archangelles and all
the company of heaven etc. and after they have received the priests blessing,
they are all dismissed with peace.

But now their private communion or housling of the sick, is after a more
cursorie and brief manner; with a short little pistle and gospel, and nothing so
many Pater nosters, Creedes, Collectes, Anthemes, nor such solemn
exhortations, because the sick desires to have yt with him out of the world.
He must provide the implementes and some of his friends (if he may be so much
beholding unto them) to take part with him. But if his disease be such, or
favor not such, as that he cannot get them unto him, the yet may he and the
Priest dispatch the matter together; and yt shall be never the less wholesome to
the sick man. These are the holy sacraments, the Church of England boasts
of: which, how vvelly they agree to the institution of CHRIST, I hope by this
slight repetition of some of their popish trumperies and corruptions,
apeareth. So that yt were but a wearines, either to rip up the rest of their
blasphemous Leiturgie, in discussing y^ manifold errors which abou^d in their
collectes and exhortations, and abuse of scriptures unto the same: or to show
forth their v^reasonable profanation and high sacriledg in these things which
are already showed. Which be so repugnantly con^rarie to the institution of
CHRIST, and every way so popishly gross, as no pretext or excuse can be
forged for them, except yt be the prerogative of the Apostatical Sea of Rome,
which by the high Commission of Satan has power to forge a new ministry,
new sacraments, new laws and cannons, where in deed this ministry of
theirs, these sacr^mentes, worship, orders etc. were minted and stamped.

And so may they draw an argument from thence for them al, thus. They that were
baptized in the Church of Rome, when afterward they came unto the true faith,
were not to be rebaptised. Therefore though this baptism in the church of
Rome, were done by a worse ministry, and in worse manner then theirs, yet is yt
of al men esteemed for a true, and available sacrament: and so if this
baptism be allowable, much more the baptism of the Church of England, which
is done in much purer manner then theirs. Well, seeing comparisons be odious, and
I might be thought partial to speak what I think, and know of the matter: I
remit the full deciding of this controversy unto the 23. Chapter of Ezechiels
prophecy, where you shall see whither Aholah, or Aholibah were the honester
woman. Only, before I come to this stout reason, let me a little turn yt upon
themselves. All that were baptized in the Church of Rome, when they come unto
the true faith are not to be rebaptised, Oenes. 17.
but have reaceaued a true Sacrament: therefore the Church of Rome Exo. 19. 5. 6
and 20. 6.
is the true Church of CHRIST: for the seals of the covenant only belongs to
that Church or people, to whom the covenant belongs: De^t. 4. 7. 8
but the covenant only belongs to the true Church, and to them Deuteronomy. 29. and
30. Chap.
that are in the true faith: therefore now by this reason, are they all in
schism, by dividing themselves from this their holy mother Church Is^. 8. 16.
of Rome. Song. 4. 12.


Doctor ROBERT SOME in his first infamous book against the Anabaptisticall
R^m. 9. 4. and Ephesians. 2. ^2.
recusantes (as he of his charity calls them) proves the sacraments
delivered by the dumb english priests, to be true sacraments, because the
baptism in the Church of Rome is true baptism, for that they baptize, in the
name of the Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. But in certain
marginal notes added to this great clerks book, was this inconvenience among
many other, moved unto his further consideration, how he would then ward the
blow of flat schism: but he of his discretion took further time in his next
book (which in deed, I suppose was written but in some spleen) peradventure in
the mean time upon further advise, the wind may blow in such a quarter, as he
will be ready, (together with his Lords Grace) to go back again, and so
avoid this danger of schism well enough.

Yet I must say, this D. was friendly advised when yt was (though he of his
collerick nature took yt not so, but called him ignorant bold Anabaptisticall
wrangler for his good will) to spare this deep divinity derived from Mr.
CALVINE and other writers of these times, least in deed he opened such a gap to
the papists, as neither the Church of England, nor of GENEVA, nor any that
hold this opinion shall ever be able to shut. For see, if this baptism thus
delivered in the Church of Rome be a true and an available sacrament, then may
yt be a true sa^rament without a lawful minister to* deliver yt, unless they
allow also popi^h prie^tes to be true ministers; then may the seal of the
covenant be given to open idolaters, unless they will also make the papists
true and faithful Christians: then does Gods covenant of peace and love belong
unto this Apostaticall Babilonish harlot, unless they will make the Church of
Rome the spowse of CHRIST. Then has CHRIST many bodies, many spowses, or else
cannot three so diverse Churches, as the Church of Rome, the Church of England,
the Church of Geneua, all or any two (I will not say any one) of them be true
Churches, or else also must CHRIST be divided, and stand an head, an husband to
all these Churches, and so be one in one place, and an other in an other place:
yea then may CHRIST be an husband where his wives rule, and set up and pluck
down, bring in and cast out, what and whom they will without his leave or
will. Infinite other absurdities and blasphemies would then ensue, even all
manner corruptions and abominations would then prove lawful. And let me add
yet this unto the rest: If the baptism of the Church of Rome be a true
sacrament, then have they one true sacrament, and an other false. For I am sure
(or atleast I think) they are not so gross and shameless in the Church of
England, to hold that breaden God, that magical coniuration upon their Altar,
to be a true Sacrament.

Good in substance, bad in form will not salve this sore, for then I may
conclude, that by this sophistry, a lawful minister to deliver, a faithful
people to receive, the simple and pure element and form of administration
which CHRIST has instituted were not necessarily required to a true sacrament
or seal of the covenant, or (as they in their logic term yt) of the
substance of a sacrament, and so may (nay is) al CHRITS Testament utterly
abrogate at once; and then have mortal men power, both to reject the ministry
and laws of CHRIST, and to erect new in stead thereof in the Church. Neither
yet will this cauil (good to the faithful receauer, or unto the receauer after
he has faith) help ye ma^ter: for first we here reason not of the persons
receiving, but of ^the thing received; not of the time to come, but of the time
present: namly, whither this baptism, thus delivered in that place, be a true
sacrament, when and as yt is delivered, or no. And sure if then yt be not good
in that manner, yt cannot afterward be made good by any future faith; neither
yet can in the present time be received of faith: for faith neither allows
nor justifies sin: If the actio^ be evil, a faithful man may neither do yt
nor join in the action with, and to them that do yt. Romans 12. 9.
How then should these false sacraments be said good to the faithful receiver
when the actio^ is evil, and the faithful are utterly forbidden to receive yt;
neither ca^ they receive yt, without most heinous sacrilege. Ag^ine how should
faith rejoice in, or justify a wicked and ungodly actio^? and the^ how should
this sacrilegious sacram^t be available, or seal the blessing of God to faith
to come? when God only blesses his own ordinance, and curses al
transgression thereof: therefore faith is rather to purge yt by bitter tears and
repentance, then to joy in yt and justify yt.

But here then will dangerous conc^usions be drawn against us, if p^pish
baptism be no true sacrament. THEN IS THE Prince and all the ancient peers of
the la^d unbaptized, yea they will conclude against our selves, that we also are
unbaptized; seeing we (for the reasons above said) hold not the sacraments
administered in the Church of England at this present, to be true seals of the
covenant and favor of God: and then ought all upon pain of neglect of the holy
ordinance of God, to seek the seal of the covenant: but this now cannot be
had, because we have now in all Europe no ministry to deliver yt^, ^all the
ministry both of this land, and al these known parts of the world, being
sprung from and ordained by the Church of Rome. For all the protestants when
they forsook the Sea of Rome, yet left not that ministry they then had, but
exercised by virtue of that ministry, without any new ordination etc. But if
we deny the Church of Rome to be a Church, then how should the ministry made
by yt, be a true ministry? and so is all the ministry of this la^d thrown
to the ^arth, both LL. BBs. and parish priests, curates, preachers and all:
Neither (says D. S.) can this ever be recovered. For if the baptism in the
Church of Rome be not a true sacrament, then are all the people unbaptized: If
the people be unbaptized, then can they not choose a minister; because (says
he) they are not as yet by baptism ingraffed into the visible Church, neither
may they (until they be baptized) be admitted to the communion etc.

These reasons (no doubt) are strong and sure, if we find not a better solution
then the CLERK of OXENFORD has as yet made in the behalf of Mr. PENRY. For if
the church of Rome be no true Church, (...) the ministers made therein are no
true ministers: for by his own (and that a true) position; WHERE THERE IS no
Church, there is no calling: but all the ministers of the Church of England
were made either in the Church of Rome, or by virtue of that ministry fetched
from the Church of Rome, and that within the memory, yea within half the age
of a man; therefore we may by his own reason conclude all this ministry, both
BBs. and PPs. to be Romish, antichristian and false: and so the sacraments by
them delivered are no true sacraments. Let him, by all the wit, craft, and
sophistry in his budget avoid this reason.

Again, if the baptism of the Church of Rome were not true baptism, then
were all the people upon the change of that Religion unbaptized; for there was
no other baptism then delivered, but that: and being unbaptized, they have
neither right nor power to choose or execute any ministry, deliver or receive
the other Sacrament, until they have baptism. For none uncircumcised in flesh
might eat the Passover, (...). 12. 48
or offer any manner of gift in the Temple. And thus we see, Le^. ^2* 25.
neither have these ministers of the Church of England, power to deliver
Sacraments (they themselves being both unbaptized and also no true ministers,
as above is manifestly convinced) neither have the people unbaptized, any power
to receive the Sacraments, or means to redress Mat. 28. 19. ^ ^.
these mischiefs, until either a third Eliah or second Ihon Baptist come down
from heaven to restore this defection. YfM^* Penrie provide not better stuff
for his own defense, then his friend of Oxenford has as yet brought; I can
tell him this, that both he and his companions must become Brownistes (as they
to the dishonor of Christ term us) or else this popish Doctor will prevail
against the^: for that most odious and unchristian flattery of her Majesty,
will neither cover nor cure this sore.

It will not suffice to say, that her majesty is persuaded in conscience that
she is baptized, therefore she need no other baptism, though she (as yet) have
received none. Neither will yt help the matter to say, the Bishop or priest
which administreth the communion unto her, knows not so much; therefore she
may still run on in this course unbaptized. Neither will all the colorable and
deceitful Arguments drawn for the assurance of her salvation, help this case;
or do her any good: if she remain and be found in open and wilful, yea
presumptuons transgression and contempt or neglect of Gods ordinance. There is
but one common salvation for all men of all degrees, both Prince and people:
the law of God remains sure forever, and can for no estate or person be
changed. None can be a member of a planted Church, but such as are baptized.
This we see by circu^cisio^ ye common seal to all that were within the
covenant, to the Church and their seed. This was the practice of Christ and his
Apostles, they that were baptized Ast. 2. 3^. 41.
were added and nu^bred to the Church, and not until the^ received into ye
fellowship: how friendly and well affected soever they were unto the Act. 8. 12.
Church. Now then, the state standing thus; that the bapti^me d^livered A^t. 9.
18. and 10. 48.
in the Church of Rome is no baptism, the ministry there given, no
ministry etc: and this so apparently proved after his syllogistical Act. 5.
13*
manner by this Scholar of Oxenford; how can her Majesty any longer be
ignorant, or that Congregation to which she ioineth (if there were any such)
that she and they all are unbaptized? Seeing the matter is published in print,
and spread abroad through al parts of the land, and the glooue cast down with
open challenge to maintain the same against al opponentes: well, and this being
known, with what conscience can either that minister deliue^, or she and that
people receive the Lords supper in this estate^ seeing none unbaptized may
receive yt, but is subject to the same cu^se that the uncircumcised were, which
were admitted to the Passover? how ca^ they (now that they see thsn estate)
commit further sin and sacrilege, and violate the whole order and Testament
of Christ, by plunging themselves into further transgression, and seking no
remedy to avoid this? Baptism he says is not the cause, but the seal of
salvation; and they may be saved which were never baptized. I grant all this,
where yt can by no means to had: but I hope they will not so say, that yt can
not be had with them, and that the matter is not come to that pass from the
most floorishing estate of a Church in Europe, and that so suddenly with
opening but one gap. Then have Mr. Pe^rie and D. S. spunne a fair thread: let
them take heed, for a* few of these Arguments will make as many as have sight,
grace or c^science Brownictes, as this sch^ller blasphemeth them.

But what remedy for this mischief? seeing al now are unbaptized, where shall we
come by baptism? and that must be had, before either entrance or proceeding to
any ministe^ie or Church. It suffices not here to say, that we may be saved
without yt, and that we neither neglect or despise yt: for one ynch can we not
stir in this building and business of the Church, until we be baptized.

Most pestilent and pernicious is that council given unto her majesty: yt
where she has received comfort to her soul, thither she may still resort for
fur^her comfort. Is this the ^est council and help you ca^ afford her? then
(as I^b says) miserable comforters are you al. Is this sound 2 These. 2. 12.
doctrine to say, that where she has received or rather supposed comfort,
thither she may still resort for more? Is this to measure the action Isa 66. 3.
and the comfort by the rules of Gods word? what if the action be unlawful,
^om. 6. 1.
and she take comfort in unrighteousness, may she still continue in sin? may
she not thus justify any wickedness? for what superstitious papist will not say,
that he has taken comfort before his shrines and roodes? yea how many tears
in that co^ceited superstition will they shed before them, for very joy
imagined? shall they for this cause not depart from their idolatry, when yr is
reproved by the word; because they have received comfort?

But me thinks I see the scholars solution of this, his meaning and word^s
both were, of such a sound inward comfort in Christ her Savior built upon his
promises and word, as does thoroughly appease her conscience, and acquiet her
soul. Well then, we are agreed of the point, that there is no ^rue comfort, but
that which is g^ounded upon the promises of God; no comfort or blessing
promised to any actio^, but where yt is done according to the ordinance and will
of God in his word; Go^ only blessing his own ordinance. Now the^ I hope he
can ap^oue this proceeding without baptism unto the supper of the Lord, to be
warrantable and lawful by the word of God: and that where the want of this
baptism is, not only in the receauers but in the ministers, yea where he is no
minister of the Gospel that administreth this Sacrament also; or el^ there is
no comfort to her majesty in this action, which is so ^ Thessalonians. 1. 8
openly repugnant to all the rules of Christ's Testament, which is here most
wittingly and presumptuously broken: and so nothing from thence to be expected,
but a fearful looking for of judgment. I will not here urge either the general
unlawfulness of the whole ministry of E^gla^d, either the stra^genes or
unlawfulness of the office unto which they are called, or of the unlawfulness of
their ordination and entrance, nor of the most abominable administration of
their offices. Neither will I here urge this want of baptism both in people and
minister: nor yet the open breach of Christ's institution, both in the manner and
words thereof in the deliverance of yt: Only I will come to this Scholar in a
plain point that he and I shall agree of, least he escape me through his
learning* and wind him self away by his sophi^trie: for he that so pregna^tly
defends is friend, I suppose will do more for himself, when need shall so
require.

The point then wherein I would be satisfied at his hand is, whether he take the
Lord Archb. of Canterb: his g^ce, or the LL. BB. his brethren to be true
ministers of the Gospel and Church of Christ, or no? if he be Mr PENRIE ^ is
friend, he will say no, and surely I will say Amen unto yt: Phil. 2. 11.
for in the Testament of Christ did I never read of any Lord Bishop but 1. Pe^.
5. 4.
Christ, which is Lord over al, neither of any Archb. but the ArB. of our
souls Christ Jesus; to let pass the unlawfulness of their office, function
etc. Now then I would know whether this L. Archb. may deliver the Sacraments?
and whither he would advise our Sovereign Prince, to receive them at his hand
or no? Sure if she may frequent or take comfort in this Sacrament, then (to let
pass all the other heap of faults, which to lay open would fill a volume) is
the Lord Archb: a true minister, this a true and holy Sacrament, or else he
through flattery persuades his Prince to sacrilege and transgression, in
encouraging her both still to receive this sacrilegious Sacrament in this manner
defiled by these Romish BB*. and Priests, and also to continue and remain
unbaptized: although that she now know and be persuaded through this man's
strong proves; that she as yet has received no baptism.

Either he is to prove that an unbaptized people (eue^ such a people, where
not one of them is baptized, neither can baptism be administered or held
amongst them) may join together, erect a ministry, administer and receive
the other Sacrament etc. or else, yt her Majesty. and this Church of England
has some special immunitie and privilege to proceed without baptism. Sure,
even the two gross Doctors whom he so derideth, will think this strange
stuff: there was never any such Church or proceedings read or heard of, in the
Testament of Christ. And see how the skornful (by the just iudgm^t of God) are
taken and ensnared in their own delusions. For what cou^ D. Iho^ Bridges, or
D. R. S. have devised more corruptly or vnfaith^ully, either toward God or
their Prince and the whole la^d, for iustifijng their op^ and wilful breach of
Christ's Testament; al their popery and abominations, then this? Your Maie^tie
^aith he (though the plain evidence of Gods word be brought into your ears
to the contrary) yet is persuaded in co^sciece, that you in the popish Church
received the true Sacrament of baptism: Therefore upon this persuasion your
majesty need not seek the outward sign, especially seeing (God be thanked)
your Majesty has received the inward grace and assured testimony of your
salvation in your soul: therefore your Majesty now has no need of the outward
Act. 9. 18.
sign; for that were a going back again: yea a putting necessity of
salvation in the outward element, which is nothing without the inward grace; yt
he is able to make so many sillogismes for your Majesty's salvation as you
need not to be bound to the straight keeping of Christ's Testament, neither
fear any danger that may ensue.

For you have done enough already for the assurance of your salvation, in
putting down the latin mass, and thrusting the Pope out of the land, though
we have an english mass and english Popes in stead thereof: you have done
enough in publishing and professing the gospel, 1 Cor. 4. 20
though al free and sincere practice thereof be utterly debarred out of the
land; and could never by any suit be obtained, yt CHRIST might reign in his
own Church by his own ministry and laws: you have done Is^y. 60. 12.
enough in nourishing so many strangers and preserving their lives under your
protection; though here within the land your own natural and true hearted
subjects, and CHRIST'S most faithful servants, be daily famished and made away
in your prisons by these murdering BB^. only because they dare not allow or
join unto such abhominatio^s as they thrust upon the whole land: though they
daily cry in the ears of your Majesty and your honorable Counselors for
some equal trial, either according to ye laws of ye la^d (which is granted
thieues and murderers) or by the word of God: yt if they hau^ made any crime,
or hold any error contrary to the truth of the Gospel, they might be censured
accordingly, or else delivered from ye antichristian tyranny of these BB^.
malitions slanders of these PP. yea though even these strangers also, whose
bodies are here preserved have lo^t the freedoome of their souls, and are
partly by the wretched example of these unfaithful tollerating subscribing
priests brought into the bondage of these BB^. as sundry of them which have
any conscience complain.

What can these men say? stand not* these things thus? else let their own
complaints and supplications to the Parliame^tes, their protestations and new
devised scoffing libells be examined: wherein they complain of these enormities
and their wrongs by the BBs. supposing to themselves that they are those
servants of CHRIST, that are thus oppressed. And how will this gear sort to
the assurance of the Princes salvation? not only to keep out CHRIST, and not to
suffer him to reign Luke 19. 27.
over her, but to set up Antichrist his enemy, and to give her power unto Ioh.
3. 37.
the Beast, not only to keep out the right and free practice of the Gospel,
Revel. 17. 13. ^4.
but to set up in stead thereof all this heap and dounghil of romish trumperies,
and to ratify the Popes Cannons and Courts, not only to exalt CHRIST'S
enemies, but to persecute Christ's servants, and to arm with her sword these
wolves against them. What ^ood or figure will make this gear stand before the
face of Christ, when he shall come to judgment with his mighty Angels in
flaming fire, to render vengeance unto them which do not know God* and which
obey not unto ye gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST. How can they which submit to
these abominations 2 The. 1. 8. 9
which they see and condemn, be held faithful Christians? ^ude 14. 15.
how can they that thus flatter and dissemble with their Prince, and that in
^ek. 33. 6.
such weighty and high matters which concern her so near, be held true
hearted and faithful subjects? how can one mouth blow forth such contra^ieties?
how can one fountain send forth at one place such bit^er and sweet waters? How
can the Prince unto us, and in our eyes, stand ^ Principal vpholder of
Antichrist, and such a principal member of CHRIST at one and the same time? I
doubt all the Logic this scholar has, or all the learning these renowned
priests his abettors (whom he so magnifieth and extolleth) have, can not
reconcile this gear, or cover their perfidous flattery and dissimulation with
God and man: which to all men shall even by themselves appear, if their Theses
or M^ior propositions, which they use against the Church of Rome, and against
these their LL. BB^. be duly examined and indifferently applied to this their
own ministry, administration and practice. And sure yt were a work^ worthy
the labout, to gather and sum their Maxims together, and briefly to draw
their own Arguments against themselves, that so they may be haltered and
judged of their own mouth: and both their hypocrisy and sin appear unto
all men. The Lord of his mercy deliver and preserve here Majesty from such
blind guides as the Bishopp^ are, from such unfaithful guides as these
counterfaites, these false Prophets are.

But what will D. BRIDGES, and D. SOME say now to this gear? when their
greatest enemies (after all this conflicting and skirmishing with them) have
yielded them the whole cause in open field, and made a more strong and
unanswerable Argument against themselves, for the maintenance of the Archbishop
his Grace, and all his graceles proceedings, then they all this while have
done, with all their study and lampe-light. How say they by this? her Majesty
is here councelled, comforted and assured even by these men themselves, to
resort still to that place for the sacrament, where she has found comfort in
receiving yt. But she has found comfort in receiving yt at the L. Archbishop
graces hands, with his rich cope on his shoulders, beraied with all his
po^tifisalibus, the english Masse-book in his hands, yea by your leave with
the round wa^er. I will not here speak of attiring the Chapel and high Altar
that day, and other Court ceremonies, or whether any receive the said sacrament
together with her Majesty or no; or whither these things be left. But sure
thus has her Majesty received yt, and either found comfort therein, or else yt
was not done of faith: but if she found comfort in yt, o how will the
Archbishop the^ rejoice? for the^ by these men's full consent and council, she
is still to resort thither etc. and then need they not be redressed in her
days, and that is the thing he all this while feared, least by the powerful
denouncing of Gods judgments against these sins, Gods grace might work in
her Majesty's heart, to cast down all this idolatry. It is as much as he
desires, that he may remain in his palace at Lambeth still: be his calling,
office, ministry, as repugnant to the word of God, or odious in Gods eyes as
they will, that is no matter.

And see what a subject is here offered unto his learned Doctors to work upon:
for their extrauagant learning will not be satisfied with so little; as his
Lords grace will. But they will r^plie and come upon you for all old
reckoninges, and not suffer you to depart until you have fully ^atisfied. They
will thus reason against you: If yt be a true sac^ment which her Majesty has
all this while received at the hands of these Bishops in this manner etc. where
she has found comfort; then must the L. Archbish. and these L. BB^. needs be
true ministers of the Gospel; for by your own reason where there is a true
sacrament there must needs be a true minister: but here you confess to be the
true sacrament of the ^upper (for her Majesty can take no true comfort in a
false sacrament) therefore this Archbishop these BBs that always here
administer yt, are true ministers of the Gospel of CHRIST. And if they be true
ministers of the Gospel and Church of CHRIST, then ought they not, and cannot
be put away without open violence to the body of CHRIST, for none of his true
members may be either cut off or cast out whiles they abide in his body,
without i^urie to his body, yea such injury as he will suffer at no mortal
man's hands: neither in deed can or will the true Church or true Christians
commit such outrage against him. So then how high is their sin against
CHRIST, Prince and Church, which sue and seek to the Prince and Parliament, to
have these true natural members of Christ's body, these reverend Lord Bishops
cut off and cast away? I speak here concerning their offices, ministry,
jurisdiction and so forth; which these men sue unto the Court and parliament to
have utterly removed: if they be of Christ, then (without the abrogation of his
Testament) how should they be taken away? If he have in his Testament set
down, that he will have in and over his Church L. Archbishops Lord Bishops thus
attendend and waited on, to rule and reign in his absence, to make laws, to
make ministers etc. then what Prince in the world ca^ pluck away these L.
Archbbs. and Lord Bi^hops from the Church, without they likewise cast CHRIST
out of doors: For CHRIST will not be divided nor halfed in this sort. If we will
have him, we must take him with all his members: we cannot take one part of
him, and refuse an other: he will not abide with them that thus dismember him.
What kind of council then do these men give unto the Prince, which thus draw
her into battle against God and his Christ? in aduising her to cast out of the
land the true ministry of Christ? how can the Church of Christ miss these
precious members or stand without them? how can she suffer them to be rent from
her? how can they rather offer this violence to their natural mother, so to
wound and dismember her? yea unto the body of Christ and unto their own
members, if they likewise belong to that body? what outrage? what
unnaturalness? what fury? what madness we^e this? what high impiety against God
and heaven.

Will not here be matter enough for all the pulpets in the land and stationers
shoppes in London? how will they now do with these unmerciful DD. who (now they
have them thus bound and fettered) will lay on load upon them. They will now
have the popish baptism and all ere they let them go, and that thus. Those
Archbish. and L. BBs. and all the rabble of Priests and ministers which flow
from their seat, have no ^ther foundation or warrant for their offices and
ordinatio^, then y^ which they had in the Church of Rome: but these Archb: L.
BB. and PP. in these offices with that calling and ordination they had in the
Church of Rome administer true sacraments here, and so are by them approved
for true ministers; therefore there was a true ministry in the Church of Rome.
This cannot be denied, for that Church which has not a tru^, but altogether a
false ministry in yt, cannot in delivering their own ministry, deliver a
true ministry: but the Church of Rome in delivering their own ministry as
Archbishops, L. Bishops, parish priests and hireling preachers or curates,
Church wardens, side men, parish Clerks etc. ^eliuered a true ministry; else
could neither these offices remain in the Church of Christ or these me^
administer in these offices by virtue of that calling: therefore yt may be
conclud^d, there was a true ministry in the Church of Rome. To alledg that
these men were called to the true faith, will ^ot help this; for we reason not
here of the men nor of their faith, but of their offices and ordination, ^oth
which they found in, and fetched from the Church of Rome: and now they
administer in the same offices and by virtue of the same ordination; therefore
if this ministry of the Church of ENGLAND, be ^rue, there must needs have
been and be a true ministry in y^ Church of Rome, seeing yt is the self fame
in respect of the offices and ordination; neither can any false minister
ordeine a true minister. Well then, having obtained and convinced a true
ministry to be in the Church of Rom^ (for else neither can these Bishops or
their creatures be true ministers, or the sacraments by them or any of them
administered to the Queen and the land, be true sacraments) now let D. BRIDGES
or D. ROBERT alone with you for all the rest, for they will have both the
Church and sacraments of Rome on foot again. The true Church only can
ordeine true ministers; but y^ Church of Rome ordained true ministers, as our
L. Bishops and al their priests and ministry of this land: therefore the
Church of Rome is a true Church. How shall these learned Doctors be answered?
Again: such sacrament^ as are administered in the true Church are always true
sacraments, sealing the favor and blessing of God unto them: therefore the
sacraments, but especially the baptism there delivered (for to that above the
other, these Doctors have an especial liking) is a true sacrament. What a
quandare have you now brought your selves unto? you must either deny all the
ministry of the Church of England, which are not only ordained by these
Bishops, but alike with them derived from the Church of Rome: or else you must
affirm these L. Bishops to be the true mi^isters of the Gosp^ll; I speak in
respect of their office, which then cannot be taken away: and then are all they
seditious persons, disturbers of the peace of the Church, and quiet of the
commonwealth, that seek to disturb or remove these offices, which Christ has
placed and planted in his Church. For if thc parson of or any other learned
minister, that you think best of, whither Doctor or other, be to be held true
ministers, then have they a lawful calling and ordination to a lawful office
etc. If their calling and ordination* be approved, then are the Bishops
justified: for no false or unlawful minister can ordeine a true Minister, as
has been proved.

So then if the BBs. be allowed for true ministers, needs must the Church of
Rome, the ministry and sacraments thereof be ratified by necessary
consequence Vt supra.

No middle course (as you affirm) may here be taken; we must either make ye
tree good or evil, these ministers of the Church of England, true, or false:
if false then deliver they no true sacraments, then is all their
administration, sacraments, sermons accursed, how holy soever, or near the
truth in outward show: then are they the ministers of Satan of Antichrist,
sent of God in his wrath to deceive and destroy such as are ordained to death,
then ought al Christ's true sheep to flee and avoid them: then ought not the
Prince either to punish such as flee and avoid them for that doing, neither
her self to repair to their sermons or sacraments for comfort: then is all
the comfort she there takes but delusion, even the deceit of Satan, to the
destruction of all such as take comfort in unrighteousness, and that which
displeases the Lord: Then are all they seducers which egg and persuade the
Pro. 9. 14. etc.
Queen through their hypocrisy and flattery, unto them: as whereby Math. 7.
15.
they draw her into the wrath of God, and eminent danger, and inevitable Mat.
24. 24
destruction, except she forsake them: and this is the sound council Ioh. 10.
5.
they give her, to betray her soul to these wolves these deceauers. 2 These. 2.
12


So long as she is baptized with the inward baptism of the Spirit, Deu. 28. 36
though she want the outward and never seek yt, it skilleth not. Will not the
two learned Doctors judge this to be flat Anabaptistrie, to separate from and
oppose the inward Spirit against the revealed word of God? as though they that
had that inward grace and earnest of their adoption, need not the outward
sign, and ought not to seek yt: yea that which yet is more deeply set, will
they not and may they not justly say, that you hold and teach the very maine
grounds of all Anabaptistri^ namly, that (so they be moved by the inward
spirit) they may go to any unlawful action, and (so their own heart condemn
them not) they need not fear though the action be evil, and other men condemn
them, for they stand or fall to their own master: else would you never have
given the Prince council (being in your judgment unbaptized) because ^he has
received inward grace (as you say) therefore not to seek the outward seal,
which every member of the established Church must receive. Because she has
this inward grace, therefore she may without doubting present her self to the
Lords Table to receive the holy supper; though she have not been ingraffed or
received into the Church by outward baptism, especially that she will still
persuade her self that she in the popish Church received yt, for t^is is in her
no sinful ignorance, that seeing she has received great comfort often times, in
the communion in that manner by these ministers above said, administered unto
her in this estate? she may still upon the scholar of Oxford his warrant
adventure to fetch more there, be the action never so sacrilegious, execrable,
and repugnant to Gods word. Shall not these gross blind Doctors (who are in
deed ye very sepulcher of all rottennes) yet explode and detest these
Anabaptistical phant^sies? shall Pro^, 25. 24.
not the glorious (...) of Christ, which you would seem to affect and Iere. 1.
17.
plead (though I (...) heard of such scoffing divines to help up Christ's Gal.
1. 10.
kingdom) through this your hateful flattery, hypocrisy and dissembling, 2.
Tim. 4. 3*
suffer great blame and reproach? because in deed you fear the Ier. 23. 17.
faces of men more then you fear God; and dare more bouldly preach Eze^. 13.
18 19.
these and many other apparent lies, then the truth; which are better accepted
of all men in these miserable and corrupt times. To their Philip. 3. 18
appetites and humors you transform and apply Christ, making him a Galat. 6.
12.
Savior to every rich glutton (live as profanely and wickedly as he Zach. 4.
6. 7.
list) for your bellies sake. You seek to bring Christ in by the arm of flesh,
and not by the power of his word and virtue of his Spirit, into Ier. 17. 5.
the hearts and consciences of men: because in deed you dare not publish that
truth you know, and practice yt in a good conscience, enduring cheerfully with
patience what soever may be inflicted upon you for the same by this evil and
sinful generation: whereas now you dare neither believe nor affirm any more of
Gods truth, then either is already publicly received, or else confirmed by some
of your authentike Authors M^ CALVINE, Mr BEZA, D. FVLKE; thus holding and
dissembling the faith of Christ in respect of persons, times, and I wot not
what policies. As though the truth of God were not always in season, always
necessary, always authentike. And therefore God has taken you in your own
policies and subtelties, delivered you into the hands of your ^nemies whom
you so skoffed and skorned: and certainly unless you repent and turn unto him,
he will make you even a reproach unto al men, as unsavory salt, that can neither
season, nor be seasoned with any thing.

And in deed, we poor persecuted Christians, whom you so despise and
blasphemy, baptising us into the name of Brown, as though we had either
derived or hold our faith of him, or any mortal man; or el^ were detected and
convinced of some notorious heresies, thus adding afflictions unto our bands,
whereas your selves dare not affirm nor abide by, that Christ is the Son of
God, if any persecution should arise therefore: we poor persecuted Christians
(I say) are so far from reioicing to see you thus ensnared and foiled, that we
even grieve and blush for shame, that so glorious a cause should be so evil
handled of you. Why, could not the sacred scriptures have given light to the
deciding this doubt and undoing this knot; but that the one side must run to
Mr. CALVINE, and he must be i^star mill: the other to D. FVLKE, ^d he must be
put in the other balance as a counterpoise, and these being directly contrary
the one to the other: the one holding the Church of Rome to be a Church though
corrupted, defaced (with other such ignorant rotten terms that belong not to
a true Church) the baptism there delivered to be a true sacrament, though
there were neither lawful minister, faithful people, nor the institution of
Christ kept in the elements and manner of delivering In which opinion, though
yt be altogether without grownd of the word, or common sense; yet the one he
will rest, because yt best fitteth his popish turn and fleshly appetite, to
cover all the abominations which are derived from the Church of Rome, and still
as holy relike^ kept, reserved, and worshipped in this Church of England. The
other side erecteth D. FVLKE as their patron and gives him a garland in his
grave, because he has utterly denied the Church of Rome in any sort to be
held a true Church: and brought in that famous monument of that pontifical
prelate the dowghtie S. Ihon of Beuerlay, that deprived the ignorant doggbolt
priest (as he terms him) disanulled the Baptism that he had delivered, and
rebaptised the yongman. Now though no one jot of this priest of Beuerlay his
doing be allowable by Gods word (for there it is not found, that either one
man may make or deprive a minister in the Church of God, or that the outward
sign of Baptism thus given ought to be repeated) yet because this very well
fitteth their humors, to disgrace the dumb priests and magnify the preaching
priests, and for some other private respects, therefore forsooth this side will
as peremptorily and with as little truth rest in M* EVLK his judgment: and he
shall want no figures nor flowers, yt Ca^bridg or Oxford ca^ afford to deck his
hearse ^. Cor. 3. 34.
withal. And when think you (if both sides thus confidently betake them to
their captains) shall they be accorded, and meet in the truth when they are
both so wilful and thus far from yt? or how shall the poor people which are led
by these miserable guides, ever come Heb. 13. 8.
to the sight of the truth. Undoubtedly Christ is not thus divided, neither is
the spirit of God thus diverse and contrary; or the word of God yea and nay.
There is but one truth, one way, which neither Ephesians. 4. 4.
of these adverse guides have as yet found, and (as yt should seem) 2. Cor^.
18.
though yt were showed them, they would in this presumption of their hearts
rather run on headlong unto death in this their headstrong course, then by
repentance turn into the ways of life that they might be saved. For besides
the manifold errors of each of these factions, which have been showed in
part:mark (I beseech you) into what present mischief and inevitable dangers, each
course leads all (that hold the, same) unto.

The one side that holds with Docter ROBERT SOME: THAT the baptism delivered
in the Church of Rome was a true Sacrament, not only thereby enclose themselves
in schism, by such violent dividing in ^uch hostile manner from the true
Church, yea and even thereby conclude against the Church of England, that yt is
not a true Church, because there is but one true Church through the world as
there is but one God, one Spirit, one CHRIST. CHRIST cannot stand an head to two
so diverse and contrary bodies, as these two Churches would seem to be. Now
they confessing the Church of Rome to be a true Church, do hereby acknowledge
themselves, both in schism and a false Church. Besides that, they utterly
subvert the whole Testament of CHRIST, by bringing a new ministry and new
manner of administration into the Church etc. The other side, that denijng the
Church of Rome, or any covenant or seals to belong unto her, do also deny
that any outward baptism is there delivered, and do thereby affirm, all the
people that now are in our known parts of the world to be unbaptized, which
received none other then that baptism: and then seeing there is no lawful
minister to baptize this people (for none unbaptized may be a minister or
baptize, neither have an unbaptized people power to elect, or ordeine a
ministry amongst them: Of this can no rule, president or example be showed in
the scriptures, but all to the express contrary, especially since al
extraordinary offices have ceased) and so must all the building of CHRIST'S
Church and the work of the ministry cease, until some second Ihon Baptist
or new Apostles be sent us down from heaven except peradventure they after
their long travel bring us forth some new Evangelist: and sure if they make a
new ministry they must also make a new Gospel and confirm yt with new
miracles. Well thus we see the error and danger of both these ways: neither of
which lead unto life; therefore neither to be followed. We may not follow the
first sort of guides, least they lead us back again to EGYPT SODOM BABYLON
from whence R^uel. 18. 4.
we were escaped, or rather wherein we are by them still detayned. zach. 2. 7.
We may not commit our selves to the other guides least we be not Heb. 1. 6.
led forward toward persection: but deluded with their doublings 2 Timothy 3. 5.
6. 7.
and windinges as in a maze: always going, always learning, yet never the
further on our way or nearer our iournaies end, never taught or brought to the
acknowlegment and right practice of the truth.

What then is to be done in this distress? surely even this; when men are at
their wits ends, to flee unto God for council and direction: Isa. 42. 16.
whose word if we el^uate as our lodestar, we shall no doubt by the light
thereof (Gods gracious Spirit blowing upon the sails of our faith) safely sail
through all these difficulties, even with a straight course to the free and
sincere practice of the Gospel; neither striking against the rocks of popery,
nor falling up on the shelues and quicksandes of Anabaptistrie. For he that is
ascended upon high, has not left 1 Cor. 2. 16.
his house destitute of council and direction ^or all affairs and occasions in
all times and estates whatsoever: but has in his word left most perfect rules
and absolute laws for all things*. So that though he for the judgment of the
world, the trial of his servants and the manifestatio^ of his own power, bring
his servants into Babylon; yet knows 1 Cor. 12. 3.
he how to preserve and deliver his servants, without either iustifijng ^eu.
18. 22. 23.
of Babylon with D.R.S. and his disciples, or re^ming of Babilo^ with these
learned priests of the time and their followers: and having brought Ier. 25.
10.
them forth, to lead them forth to Sion, and to rear up the decayed
tabernacles Amos 9. 11.
of David that were fallen down, without using one stone of Ier. 51. 26.
Babel in the work, for a corner or for a foundation. So then we now being
fallen into, and found in that general defectio^ and apostacy, whereof we were
warned by our Savior Christ, his Prophets, and Apostles: yt remains that we
search the scriptures whether we can there find any presidentes of any such
times, and see whether we can there fetch any better direction, then these
learned men abouesaid have given us in this case.

We read in the time of Ezechiah, that the kingdom of Israe^ had a ^ Chron.
30 1^. 18.
long time remained in schism and apostacy, having forsaken that true Temple
and erected unto themselves new Temples, new Altars, n^w ministry etc.
neither could by any warnings, threats or corrections 2 Chronicles. 35. ^7.
be r^claimed. Yet such of them as left their false worship and returned Ezra
6. 21. 22.
to the true Temple to worship God there, were received and admitted to the
passover, without either gathering, correcting, or repeating the circumcision
they had received in y^ time of this their schism and apostacy. The like we
read to be done in the times of Josiah, of Ezra, and of N^hemiah, when they
had yet longer continued in their schism and idolatry, upon their return
(out of their dispersion and captivity) unto the Lord: And yet no doubt to
those men, in these times, and in this estate, could the circumcision they
there received (shall I speak according to the times and say be no true
sacrament, or rather leave that traditional word which engenders strife rather
then godly edifying and say) be no true seal of the covenant of Gods favor
unto them, being added to their false worship, idolatry, schism, apostacy,
obstinacy, contempt. This I think will be easily granted of all hands: For
Romans 2. 25.
Gods covenant is no longer made or continued with any Church or people, then
they remain in his faith and obedience: yet you sce this circumcision thus
received, not to be reiterate when they came unto the true faith. Whereby we are
evidently taught, both that such baptism as is delivered in the false Church
is no true seal of Gods covenant (commonly called a true sacrament) and yet
also, that such outward washing or baptism, delivered after their
supe^stitious manner in that idolatrous place, ought not unto such to be repeted
as afterward forsake the false Church, and join unto the Church of God. Thus
me thinks this hard difficult knot is (even with a trise) un done; when we
take the true light and right way unto yt. Which whiles these learned Doctors
and diep divines (as they in their style and banner write themselves) have
labored by the light of their own pregna^t wits to unloose, they have the
further encombred themselves, and entangled their miserable followers. For what
cause has D.R. SOME now to contend, that the baptism delivered in the false
Church, should be a true seal of the covenant? or what occasion has Mr.
PENRIES Proctor to deny, that such as there received that baptism, are not
(touching the outward action) baptized? they must here show some sufficient
discrepance betwixt these examples alleged out of the scriptures, and the
estate of the present question; or else with reverence rest in the practice of
the holy Ghost, though neither they nor I be able to arrive to the wisdom
thereof.

As for D. SOME, I see not what he can say: unless he either affirm, y^
circumcision in that apostacy of Israel, to be a true seal of the covenant:
which if he do, then I oppose unto him, not only the through corruption of
their estate, but also the public repudiation and bil of divorce, Hose. 2 and
4 Chap.
which the Lord sent them by his Prophets: or else he must in deed show himself
a worthy champion and prefer his mother Church of Rome, to the defected estate
of Israel; which if he do, then must we send to E^dor to call up Amasiah the
priest of Bethel to debate the matter with him. Amos 7. 10.
And until they meet, I leave upon him the 17 Chapter of the Revelation; where
the holy Ghost (as lively describing yt City and Church of Rome in their
situation and collers as if he had named them) calls the one the Beast, the
other the Harlo^ or great whore in that vision. Now if she Revel. 17.
be an whore (as I must believe God rather then D.S.) then can she not be the
spouse of CHRIST, the true Church. Then for the rest let Bethel and Rome strive
in hell for the preemin^ce: I have naught to do to judge them that are without.

But now Mr. PENRIES advocate D. SOME his adversary (who has chosen the much
more reasonable extreme) peradventure will not be so soon satisfied. It is an
hard matter to persuade sense where faith is wanting. But I for this matter
must hold him still hard to the places of scripture alleged: so that he must
show me some sufficient difference b^twixt these cases, or else yield unto, or
reprove the holy Ghost. If he put difference, yt must be either in the estate
of the place, of the people, or of the things delivered and compared. For the
place, though Israel were part of the promised land, yet that could no way
sanctify the Israelites or better their state, or defend them from the wrath
of God due to their sins. It was also accursed of God, together with and for
them delivered into y^ hands of the heathen, as we read: Neither was yt ever
more holy then Rome, or any place where the Church of God was or is, seeing Gods
blessing is eu^r with his Church; therefore ye place can put no difference. For
the people: as they were sometimes Gods chosen peculiar people, so were sometimes
the people of the Church of Rome also: both of them apostatate, both in
transgression, though (yt may be) not in like depth, yet both of them out of
the favor, and in the wrath of God. It were in vain to plead which of them
were worse; the Ren. 22. (...).
best place out of the Church of God they shall find ill enough. Though I
easily yield Rome or the fairest of her Daughters (though yt be the Church of
England) to be without all comparison worse. For the things delivered and
compared, both circumcision and baptism, were seals annexed to the Lords
covenant, both signs and marks, which all that Genesis ^7
were received into the communion of Gods servants ought to have: Math. 3.
both signifijng, a putting away the shame of Egip^, a cutting and washing away
our original and natural corruption*, our ingraffing into CHRIST'S Josh. 5. 9.
death and resurrection both through and with him, of our dijng unto sin, Romans
6. 5.
and living unto righteousness: as also a very putting on of CHRIST, with
Collos. 2. 11.
the full benefit of his merits and passion, to the perfect redemption of our
souls and bodies, and full appeasing of our consciences from the wrath of God,
the rigor of the law, for all the sins that ever we have committed, as fully
and assuredly as we our selves had fulfilled the law, and satisfied the wrath
and justice of God etc. what then should be the impediment, why the outward
baptism, delivered in the false and apostaticall Church (which I only properly
count y^ false Church) as the outward circumcision delivered in the false and
apostaticall Church should now more be denied, this more then that?

Peradventure yt will here be alleged; that the circumcision there, was much
more lawfully done, and better then this baptism. I will not stand upon yt; yt
being nothing to our purpose: I will not stand upon terms of better and more
lawful, in co^paring the^ one with an other: It suffices me, yt in comparing
them unto, and judging them by the law of God, neither of them are found either
good or lawful. For unlawful yt was to administer circumcision unto open
idolaters, or apostataes, or unto their seed, until they were renewed by faith
and repentance. So is y^ still in baptism; the lawfulnes of circumcision, or
the holiness of ye word of God, does not justify the action or the people,
where the one or the other are abused. As in the false Church circumcision is
good, and the ^os. 4. 15. 17.
word of God is most holy: but to receive circumcision or to hear the word of
God in ye false Church, is to apostatate from CHRITS to join Amos 4. 4. and 5.
5.
to Gods enemies, and to forsake the true church. He cannot have fellowship 1
Cor. 10. ^. 0.
with both at one time: at what time he ioineth to the one he forsakes the
other. Nothing done in ye false Church (be it never so holy in show) is
justified, either by them or to them; but eue^ the calling upon y^ name of God,
the reading scriptures, the administering baptism etc. is turned into sin,
presumption, and profanatio^ of Gods name and ordinance unto them, whiles they
remain in their inquitie. There was nothing Isa. 1. and 66 Chap^.
in the false Church, either in their manner of doing yt, that made this
circumcision received, allowable, or not to be repeted, neither did the faith
subsequent justify the action past of circumcision done to, and in the false
Church. It was the mere mercy of God, yt pardoned and purged the sin to the
faithful and penitent: It was the wisdom of God, (the sin and abuse of the
action thus done and received in ye false church being thus purged) to reserve
his own ordinance, and not to reiterate ye action of circumcision. They that
give a natural cause thereof, as of the impossibility of reiterating
circumcision, and so put difference between circumcision and baptism: the one
being impossible to be done again, the other not so, greatly err in judgment,
and miss the point. For both ^he Apostle in express words shows, and
experience in Chirurgeric confirms 1 Cor. 7. 18.
the same; that circumcision may be gath^red, and so might be terate or defaced
also as baptism, if that had been found needful in the wisdom of the holy
Ghost.

What say I then, do I any way iustisie this outward actio^ of circum^ision as
yt is done in the false Church? nothing less, but condemn yt ^ltogether, as
an hamous profanatio^ of Gods holy ordinance; yet when ^t is purged by sincere
repentance of al ye error therein, and abuse thereof; ^t pleased God in pardoning
the faults to reserve and not to repeat the outward actio^: which because yt
was wrongly done, yet cannot therefore ^e said not done at al. For we may, and
must put difference betwixt a thing not rightly done and a thing to be done, or
not done at al. For the ^rrors and faults of the baptism being purged by
repentance, and done away through the mercy of God; the Lord now beholds the
rest of ^he action, and the thing which in pretense before they seemed to do,
as ^is ordinance and commandment: not from hencforth imputing ye faults ^n
doing yt being now repented, pardoned and done away, either unto y^ action or
them: so that from henceforth they look more carefully to ^he doing (...) holy
actions, according to the prescript will of God, making no willing transgression
therein hereafter, neither presenting or willingly suffering their child^en to
be presented in the false Church unto their baptism, sor then they cannot be
said to have truly repented yt. That were to go back again and wallow them in
their former apo^tasie 2 Pet. 2. 20.
Ezekiel. 18. 26
and sin, and to bring their old sins upon their head.

But now seeing we justify not the action of B^ptisme, as yt is done in the
false Church by an unlawful minister after an unlawful manner, and yet the error
and evil doing thereof being repented and purged away do not (...) the outward
action because yt cannot be said no action etc. Peradventure hereupon may be
collected that such baptism as is delivered by an infid^l, which never had
knowl^dg o^ God in CHRIST, being afterward repented of and sorrowed, that their
body has been guilty of such profanatio^ etc. the outward baptism may in
like manner remain, and not be repeted when they join unto the true Church.
This may at no hand be brought to pass, neither in deed does yt herehence
follow: for easy yt is to put difference betwixt an infidel, which never knew
God in CHRIST; and an Apostata which has had knowledge of, and still outwardly
(though corruptly) pro^esseth God and CHRIST. The one sort know not what the
Church, worship, and sacraments mean: the other (though corrupted in their
knowledge) yet carry a show of Church, worship, sac^amentes, ministry; yea
and has them, though corrupt and adulterate: so there is neither sequel nor
comparison betwixt them. For that which the heathen and infidel should so
prophan^ and deliver, can no way be said any kind of sacrament, either ^ue or
false; because (as is said) they have no kind of show of Church, ministry or
sacraments etc. but the false Church has al these to show, and seeming true
though in deed false.

So is yt easy to put a difference betwixt false and adulterate baptism, and
true baptism; which D.R.S. with all his divinity has not as yet learned to
do: and also betwixt false and adulterate baptism, and no baptism, which
these other learned priests cannot as yet spy out. For else would they never
so grossly both deny the baptism in the Church of Rome to be any baptism,
concluding all the people that received yt altogether without outward baptism:
yet being unbaptized make yt a matter of no necessity to seek outward
baptism, because they (notwithstanding al their writings) still suppose yt to
be true baptism they there received, and so yt is needles that they should
seek or receive the outward baptism; and having the inward baptism of Gods
Spirit in their hearts, they need not seek the outward seal, but proceed
without yt unto the other sacrament. Also they having found comfort in that,
then they are safe enough though me^ and Angels, yea though God himself in his
word say yt is unlawful and insufferable, yea damnable sacriledg, both to them
and the whole Church that administreth or ioineth unto them in this action: Yet
if they have found comfo^t they may notwithstanding all this, boldly resort
thither again where they have been thus banque^ted; yea the parties finding
this comfort in their souls at the receiving the supper, though (as is said)
expressly against Gods word, which warranteth no such comfort unto them in that
actio^, but condemns yt flatly, yea and their estate and sin being showed
them in the word, whereby their conscience is convinced; yet may they by this
great Clerk of OXFORD his opinion, hang up the law of baptism as an old
cancelled record, yea as popish traditions that make nothing to salvation,
whereof they will assure themselves, though they wittingly break Gods laws and
remain in the same transgression.

For (say they) men at the supper are not bidden to examine themselves what was
done to them being infantes, or what they did 90. o^ 50. years ago etc. Is
this a strong reason to disprove the commandment of God touching the receiving
outward baptism, or to come unto the Table and supper of the Lord being
unbaptized? yea to count these commandementes as old worthles concealed
records, popish traditions? etc. or is yt not most high and insufferable
blasphemy rather, against CHRIST and his ordinance? Is this the account they
make of the law of God, or the comfort he takes and continual use he makes
even of that outward baptism as an excellent instruction stay and assurance of
his faith? not that I make baptism the cause of salvation, o^ think that none
can be saved without yt. But God has made yt a most comfortable pledge and
seal of his love and help to our faith, all the time that we live in this
mortal life; even to him most, that has received the greater measure of inward
grace. So far is yt from being at any time to any man a cancelled record, that
yt remains for ever a sacred and iuuiolable law, of special use to them that
have received yt, of necessity to al such as will enter into the established
church of CHRIST: without which they cannot be permitted to enter, much less
admitted to the Table of the Lord. It is no imaginary comfort of ours ca^ take
away, or alter the irrefragable law of God: though we be not bidde^ to examine
what was done to us being infantes, or to particulate every thing we have done
in our life: yet are we to consider our estate before God showed us this
mercy, both of our natural corruption in general, and our particular misery
being the seed of infidels, idolaters, such as were without the covenant, such
as presented and offered us to Satan in the false Church, and we there in that
adulterate baptism, received the pledge of God his assured wrath, and so every
way ye children of death and hell etc. These things ought not to be forgotten,
or as the budget at our back to be cast behind us: but both with grief to be
remembered, yt we vile wretches should so highly have profaned Gods name, with
them of the false Church: and also with joy that God has showed this mercy
unto us, to redeem and deliver us out of these snares of Satan; but
especially to consider when we come to ye supper of 1. Cor. 11. 29.
the Lord, both what ye thing is we do receive, and how, with whom, and in
what manner we ought to receive yt. Now if we be ignorant of the doctrines of
baptism, but much more, if we have not received baptism, how should we be
held worthy receivers of those high mysteries, of ye body and blood of our Lord
Jesus Christ? The watch and rules of the word are ill kept in that Church,
which admits any, much more many into their communion, with out full assurance
of their baptism.

But what kind of Church is that, which consists wholly of a people
unbaptized? for so (by his argument) are al they that were baptized in the
popish churches? And then all the land being such at the first receiving of the
G^spel (as they imagine to themselves) how should an unbaptized people choose
from among themselves able ministers to baptize? Is yt not likely that this
famous scholar knew full little, what belonged either to the Church, ministry,
or sacraments of Christ, that wrote this learned discourse? has not the
Church of England gotten a worthy champio^, that thus learnedly defends her,
and her proceedings? and with one word of his mouth pronounces al such,
Brownists, as deny this their C^rch of England, even the eldest daughter of
the Ezekiel. 16. 44.
Church of Rome together with her mother, to be the true spouse of Christ; and
therefore both reprove by the word of God, and refrain according to the same
word al their abominations, suffering in all patie^t manner whatsoever may be
done or said against us for the same by the hands of these Cainites, and
mouths of these Balaamites, rather the^ defiling our souls with their
abominations. Which, as yt were a wearines for any man but to recite, and
bring to light these hellish mistes and fogs, these secret mysteries of their
ministry and worship which they exercise in their Temples: so is yt an
impossibility for this learned clerk with all his cunning, or the greatest
priest of them, to defend the same, when the light of the word is but once
brought unto them: so suddenly are they thereby discovered, of what sort they
are. Let the^ therefore that thus contend for their whorish Church, approve and
justify hereby the word of God: and the^ surely I will yield them to deserve
the garland of a bishopric, or else let them assure themselves, y^ yt is
neither their tyra^nie, railing or sophistry, can either cover or excuse their
shame from his fiery eyes, with whom they have to do, or lay that blame and
reproach upon others, which they endeavor.

To return therefore again to that, from which we have been somewhat with
drawn by these occurrentes: yt remains that we proceed in the examination of
the public ministration of this famous Church of England. Of their sacraments
we have heard; but they have besides these certain half sacraments or high
mysteries unto which belong set and prescript communions; which to perform and
execute, are no small part of the priests office. Not to speak of their
orders or injunctions which are four times in the year to be solemnly read,
not to repeat their sacrament of Peonance, with their bitter curses and
comminations going before their Lent fast. They have yet the holy sacrament of
marriage, solemnly kept in the holy church (for the most part) upon the Lords
day: and an especial Leito^rgie or communion framed to the same. This action is
to be done by the priest etc. who instructing the parties to be joined in
wedlock wha^ to say, and when to pray etc. teaches the man to wed his wife
with a ring In the name of the Father, the Son, and of (...) ^oly Ghost;
which ring must before by the man be laid upon the service* book, together
with his offering unto the priest and Clarke. The book serves in stead of holy
water to hallow the ring. The ring thus hallowed, serves in stead of an
element to this sacrament, being joined to these words In the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the holy Ghost; especialy, when all the collectes,
special psalm and blessings are said by the priest the married couple devoutly
kneeling in the mean while at the communion table etc. But here will be
answered, that the reformed and better sort of priests, will not marry with the
ring: here must then be noted, that they break their other of their Cannonical
obedience, which they took before the Bishop when they received their
priesthood. Moreover, y^ for their default herein, they are to be censured and
reproved by their Church: namly, their Co^missarie his Court, before whom such
defaultes are to be presented by the Churchwardens and questmen, unless they
also will be forsworn for company. Moreover these reformed and well
conscienced priests, though they reject this ring as an idolatrous relic,
yet dare they not by the word pronounce the unlawfulness thereof, that others
also might leave and detest the same. That would cost blows, the Bishop would
not suffer that: therefore they for the peace of their Church, join to them in
the communion etc. that use this execrable idolatry. But well, let me not
discourage them in well doing, least we take them not often in that fault:
leaft if the Bishop once hear of yt, yt then become but a matter indifferent,
and the^ they for the peace of the Church, and the saving their benefice, and
their skins whole, use yt again for company.

But here in the mean time I would know of ye learnedest of them, where they
find in the old or new Testament, that marriage is an ecclesiastical action,
belonging to the worship of God in his Church, to be done by the minister as
part of his office and function, and that in the Church, but especially upon
the Lords day with such a set Leitourgie of Collectes, exhortations; psalms,
anthemes and blessings framed to the purpose. I hope they found not this in the
4 Chapter of the book of Ruth: yet I doubt not, but both Booz and Ruth were
godly persons, and very lawfully and famously married. They used no priest in
this business, nor yet made yt a matter belonging to the tabernacle or worship
of God. I have always found yt the parents office to provide marriages for
their children, whiles they remain in their charge and government: and that
the parties themselves affianced and betrothed each other in the fear of God,
and the p^esence of such witnesses as were present, and that in their parents
or other private houses, without running to Church to the priest after this
manner. I ever took marriage for an ordinance and action of the second Table,
and see not why they might Mat^. 21. 12 13.
not as well set up the tables of the money changers, or bring in any other
civil business or chaffaire as this into their church. But see what these
Balaamites will not do for gain; both make God a new divised worship, setting
up and bringing in their own diuises, and Burning incense thereunto, and
holding the people in such blindness and superstition, as they believe not
themselves to be rightly married, except yt be done by a priest, after the
prescribed manner, and the in the due seasons also: namely, in the forenoone at
morning prayer, when matte^s is done, next before the communion (as they call
yt) and this not upon any forbidden tides, as in the holy time of lent etc.
when men ought to fast, without an especial license from the sea of
Can^erburie, which Popedom has power both to restrain meats and marriage,
and 1 Timothy 4. 2. 3
ag^ine to permit them upon grave and weighty considerations, to such as will
pay roundly for the same.

THE PRIEST has also in this their portuise, a prescript form of visiting the
sick, with perfect instructions what to say at the first step into the sick
man his house, what when he comes into the sick man's presence, how without
any questioning of his estate, whether he be asleep or awake, alive or dead,
without any words unto the sick person: the priest must down upon his mary
bones, desire God to forgive the sick man his sins, and also to forgive the
sins of his forefathers, with his due number of Lord have mercy upon us,
Christ have ^ercie upon us, his Pater noster with his versicles and response
or aides to this mass for the quick and the dead. Which being ended, he
proceeds to his prescript exhortation; which, because yt is almost a leaf
long, the priest, to make short work, if the party be passing away etc. may
cut off two parts of yt, and say a creed: then exhort him to temember his
debtes, and to make his will, and to give to the poor: which being done, then
by that special authority committed to him by his lord Bishop, to absolve the
sick person of al his sins; and so with a special psalm and his certain of
collectes, to conclude the matter. This is the ordinary Visitatio^ over and
besides that especial housell or Communion of the sick above spoken of.

And here, before we proceed further, me thinks there would be something said
concerning this power of binding and loosing sins, which the priests of the
Church of England, and also of the Church of Rome challenge unto themselves as
incide^t to their office, by virtue of some especial grant and prerogative
made unto them above other Christians. Which unless they together with their
holy Father the Pope, should fetch from the keys given to Pe^er, Math. 16. 19.
or from Job. 20. 23 I never could hear of any evidence they had to show. For
ye first place I think they will not say, that the promise was made to Peter
only; for then yt should be contrary to the second: where the same power is
given to more. Besides that, yt is an usual doctrine in their pulpets, to
confute the Popes false understanding of that place: And for the place of Ihon,
I trow they cannot prove this power there given only to the Apostles, there
being many disciples both men and women in the place. I hope also that they.
are not so gross to suppose this power given to the persons of men (for then
yt must have died and ceased with the Apostles, seeing we read not in all the
Testament of any speciel or personal bequest made by them to any degree of men
one more the^ another, and so they challenge yt by an old worthles title) so
much, as to the truth and power of the word of God; which word being believed
and apprehended by faith, loses us from al our sins through that blood of
Christ our Lord: which word also being rejected or transgressed, binds our
sins unto the judgment seat of Christ, without repentance: which word is
bound and sealed up amongst Christ's disciples. Neither is yt given or committed
unto the ministe^s of the Church only, for then none could have faith but
ministers, none ought to profess, publish or stand for the maintenance of the
faith, but ministers. But we see this power, the word, the faith committed to
the whole Church and every member thereof, all being commanded to watch, to
publish, defend and practice the Gospel to the uttermost of their power, to
admonish reprove one another etc. Now how should this be done, but by the
power of the word? Moreover our Savior Christ in sending forth the 70. gave ye
self same power unto their word, Mat. 15. 15.
that he did unto the 12. to such as received the Gospel, peace with remission
Luke 17. 3.
of sins; to such as received yt not, the shaking off the dust of Leuit. 19.
17.
the feet against them. But yt will peradventure be said, that in as much as the
ministry of the word is chiefly committed unto them, Psa. 149.
therefore the power of binding and loosing also. To this I answer, that 1.
Tim. 3. 15
I have not learned in the word, so to tie the power to the person of the man.
This power is not of man but of God. The least in the Church has as much power
by this word of God to bind the sin ^om. 16. 17
of the Pastor, and upon his repentance to pronounce comfort and peace Coloss.
4. 17
unto him; as he has to remit or bind the sin of the least. So that
monstrous is their presumption, that assume unto themselves not only the power
given unto the whole Church (as shall be showed hereafter) but usurp I wot
not what peculiar power oboue all other, to bind or remit sins: yea to remit
for wage the sins of every profane glutton and wicked Atheist, which will
send for the priest at the hour of death to read his Masse-booke over him etc.

LIKEWISE ALSO, as these Priests visit and houfel their sick by this book; so
do they in like manner bury their dead by the same book. The priest meeting
the corpse at the Church style in white array (his ministering vesture) with a
solemn song, or else reading alowde certain of their fragmentes of scripture,
and so carry the corpse either to the grave, made in their holy cemitery and
hallowed Churchyard, or else (if he be a rich man) carry his body into the
Church: Each where his dirige and trental is read over him after they have taken
off the holy covering cloth, and the linen crosses wherewith the corpse is
dressed, until yt come unto the Churchyard or Church into that holy ground
(least sprights in the mean time should carry yt away) the priest there
pronounces, that almighty God has taken the soul of that their brother or
sister unto him, be he heretic, witch, coniurer, and desiring to meet him
with joy in the resurrection etc. who after he has cast on the first shouel
full of earth in his due time with his due words, committing earth to earth,
ashes to ashes etc. then may they bouldly proceed to cover him, whiles the
priest also proceeds to read over his holy gear, and say his Pater noster
(which fi^teth al assaies) and his other prayers over the Corpse. That being
done, there is for that time no more, but to pay the priest and clarke their
hyre. As for the mortuarie, the priest will come home to the house of the dead
for that well enough.

But now if he be a man of wealth, that he make his grave with the rich in the
Church, he shall then pay accordingly: for that ground is much more precious
and holy then the Churchyard, having been consecrate and al to be sprinkled
with holy water; there he shall be sure to lie dry, his grave being cut east
and west and he so laid, that he may rise with his face into the east.
Likewise if he have been any hearer of sermons in his life time, and have
loved them well; he will be at cost to get some learned priest or other to
preach over him at his bu^al: and that shall be much more wholesome for him then a
paltrie mass.

But if he be of any great degree, or but stepped into the gentry; then he has
accordingly his mourners, yea his heraldes peradventure, carijng his cote amor
and streamers before him with solemn ado and pitching them over his tomb, as
if Duke Hector, or Ajax, or Sr. Lancelot were buried. Then is the corpse
brought in, with singing and many solemn Ezekiel. 32. 2^
circumstances that I know not of, and then is mass preacher su^e of a
mourning gown and a good reward for his pains.

Besides all the superstition and idolatry in their Leitourgie, the popish
ceremonies and heathenish pomp and customs, I would here feign know of our
learned priests, where in all the Bible, they learned to say prayers or preach
over (I will not though I truly might say) for ye dead. As I take yt, they have
neither president nor commandment for yt in the word of God. yet there we read
of sundry christian burials: as of our Savior CHRIST, STEPHEN and others;
where we read neither of Ioh. 19. 38. etc.
dirgies nor sermons over them, though there were Apostles and sundry other
able men to have done yt. And I think yt cannot be denied, if Act. 8. 2.
any had deserved such co^memoration, these did. But as they derived this
stuff from the heathens, whether Persia^s, Athenians, or Romans (I will not
contend) which used these pulpit orations for the dead: so to the heathens I
leave them.

The next question is; where I may find in the book of God, that yt belonged
to the ministers office to bury the dead. It was a pollution (...). 21.
to the Leuiticall priesthood to touch a carcass, or any thing about yt. I
never read in all the practice or epistles of the Apostles, that yt belonged to
any minister of the Church, as by office, to bury the dead.

The next question is, why (of all other places) men must be buried in the
Church or Churchyard? else they have not Christen men's burial; but if they be
not buried there and that by the priest, with his book, then are they buried
like dogs, say the common people. Me thinks those of all other should not be
the conuenientest places: It was a thing never used until popery began; yt is
neither comely, convenient, nor wholesome.

Well, now the last question is concerning these solemn mourners araid in
black, many of them with hoodes, caps, crosses and other knackes: where they
learned thus to bemourne and lament their dead, by I know not how many months?
They will tell me it is lawful to mourn and sorrow for the dead; God bears so
far with our infirmities. True, but yet with this Interim, as Christians, not
as heathens with Deu. 14. 1. 2
a black attire outwardly, by set and stinted seasons, until so many 1 These.
4. 13 etc.
months be past: Christians use not to make such outward show of mourning, and
to have yt so far from the heart, as for the most part the chief mourners, the
wife and the heir have. Neither do Christians use to mourn after such a
superstitious and profane manner, or to have their mourning only in their
garments, as numbers of serving men, re^einers, mourning boys, and poor men
put in mourning weeds, which never got so much by the glutton in all his life
time, which are so far from mourning, as they are glad with all their hearts.
Again how mourn Sr. Priests; either the parish priest that has his mortuarie
and his fee for burijng him, or the preacher that has his mourning liuerie and
his hire also? Could they not (let them speak of their conscience) find in
their hearts to be so set a work every da^ in the week. Besides, who be
more curious and nicely picked to have their mourneries fitted at an hair
breadth, then these mourning women? you shall not have them more choice of any
garment that ever they ware, then (for the most part) they are of this: these
are ^ignes of a very sorrowful heart. To conclude, after al their prayers,
preachment, where (I trow) the priest bestows some figures in his
commendations (though he be with the glutton in the gulf of hell) to make him
by his thetorick a better Christian in his grave then he was ever in his life,
or else he yerneth his money ill. After al is done in Church, then are they all
gathered together to a costly and sumptuous banquet. Is not this jolly
Christian mourning? who would not mourn thus every day in the year.

I will not here cumber our priests with over many questions, least they
answer me none of these. As how they can prove yt now lawful to disbowel and
embalme every rich glutton where his burijng place is hard by, and there is no
cause either to keep or remove him, especially seeing all figures are long since
in CHRIST performed and now ceased.

Neither will I trouble them to show warrant by the word, for the exquisite
sculpture and garnishing of their toombes, with ingrauing their arms and
Atehea^ements, moulding their images and pictures, and to set these up as
monumentes in their Church: which Church must also (upon the day of such
burials) be solemnly arrayed and hanged with black, that even the very
stones may mourn also for company. Is not this Christian mourning think you?
else report me to the Church of England.

All this while we have said nothing of the excellent virtues of the party
deceased, for the priest (I trow) has said enough for him in the pulpet:
though he were the veriest profane atheist, profuse glutton, greedy extortor,
co^tous scraper in all the parish where he dwelt, though he never had any
knowledge, love or fear of God in his life, but lived and died like a wrethched
worldling: yet if he be rich enough, and his friends will be at the cost with
him, he ^hal want none of this funeral furniture to help him to heaven. He shall
for his money want neither priest to pray for him, to preach over him, to
praise him, to tell the people that his soul is assuredly with God, because in
deed ere while upon shrift he forgave him al his sins in the name of the
Father, the son, and of the holy Ghost, and peradu^ture housled him also with
the Sacrament. All this, with mourners enough, both men women and boys shall he
not want for his money in Church of England to be his beads men, and to say a
paternoster for his soul, and desire God to have mercy upon yt, for their
liueries and doles which is had at their death: though in his life time the
poor might go naked or starve, for any help and releife they found of him.
He would not then give, least he might need himself ere he died: yea at his
death he shall want no ringers, that will for money ring a soule-peale on all
the hallowed belles for his soul, and drink a carrowse for yt also. But this
you must note* neither rich nor poor, neither young nor old can get burial
without money in the church of England: no penny no paternoster there: but
please ye priest, and then he will bury his brother and pray for, and over him
whatsoever he be, so far as his book will go. There are all things vaenal and
venial for money. The priest will for money pardon al his offenses, by the
authority committed unto him: he will for money marrye and bury, both which
are become solemn actions of this Church, and especial parts of the worship
of God; as you may perceive by their several Leitourgies and solemnities
appointed to the same.

YET REMAINS also an especial part of the priests trade and again; namely:,
the Purification or (as they call yt) the Churching of women* who, after they
have been safely delivered of childbirth, and have lie^ in, and been shut up
their month of days accomplet: then are they to repair to Church, and to
kneel down in some place ^igh the Communion Table (not to speak how she
comes wympeled and muffeled, accompanied with her wives, and dare not look
upon the sun nor sky, until the priest have put her in possession again of
them) unto whom (thus ^it. 12.
placed in the Church) comes Sr. Priest, straight ways stands by her, and
reads over her a certain Psalm viz. 121. and assures her that the sun
shall not burn her by day, nor the moon by night, says his Pater^oster with
the prescribed versicles and response, with his Collect. And the^ she having
offered her accustomed offringes unto him for his labor God speed her well, she
is a woman on foot again, as holy as ever she was; she may now put off her
vailing kerchife, and look her husband and neighbors in the face again.

Is not this excellent stuff to be brought into and practiced in the Church?
What can be a more apish imitation, or rather a more full reviving of the Jewish
purification then this? both in respect of the occasion, as Childbirth; the
time of her keeping in and separation from the congregation, namly a full
month; the occasion and manner of her coming abroad, veiled, accompanied with
her women neighbors, repairing to the Church, kneeling down to the priest
until he have said his certain over her, and then her oblation unto the priest
for the same. Is not all this absolutely Jewish? though in deed the priests
part savor more of popery. Seeing therefore they will not have yt a Jewish
purificatio^, let yt be a mixed actio^ of Iudaisme and popery. This trumperie
is so gross, as yt deserves no refutation, but a doung forke to c^st yt out.

If they be ashamed of the action, why do they use yt? if she be not defiled
by childbirth, why do they separate her? why do they cleanse her? why may she
not return unto the Church (having recovered strength) before her month be
expired? why may she not come after ^er accustomed manner, and give God thanks
for all his benefits and mercies, together with others? why is she inioined to
come, and ye priest to receive her in this prescript manner? why are the women
held in a superstitious opinion, that this action is necessary? why is yt a
statute and ordinance of their Church? an especial part of their worship? which
who so neglect, either priest or people, are for their such defaults punished
by the Commissarie or Ordinary. To conclude, why should such solemn, yea
public thanks (to take yt at the fairest they can make it) be given openly in
the Church, more for the safe deliverance of these women, being (though a
singular benefit of God) yet a thing natural, ordinary, and common, more then
for sundry other strange and marvelous deliverances from sickness, many
dangers of death, and perilles both by sea and land, showed by the mighty hand
of God toward men and women daily, if there lay not some high mystery and
diepe point of divinity in the matter? why should every private and ordinary
benefit be made a public action and duty of the Church? or why should women
have this prerogative? if yt be but bare thancksgiuing (as they when they are
called to account for this would bear us in hand) why should (if that be so)
the women be more churched upon that occasion, then when they have escaped some
great danger of drowning, burning, sword, enemies, or when they are recovered
of some extreme sickness and disease? yea why should this solemn public
peculiar thanks be more given for the escaping of evil, then for the receiving
many singular great benefits at Gods hand; which they are content (be they as
many as he will) to swallow up in oblivion, and never to trouble him nor
themselves with the matter. Thus whiles they seek to eschew the golph of
Iudaisme and superstition, they run themselves upon y^ shelues of the
Massalia^ heresy.

THVS HAVING summarily run over the public worship of the Church of England
prescribed in their service book, rather by way of discovery then of
discourse: I will now (passing over their superstitious customs in their
several churches, some upon this day some upon that Eaue, according as they
stand affected and deuote to this peculiar Saint or that Angel, for some
special wonders and great miracles showed in these several places, as largly
appears in their lege^d) address my self to speak a little of these their
holy Synagogues or places of assembly, commonly called their parish Church,
whereunto all this rabble of worshippers resort at their appointed seasons to
hear this divine book, together with their learned priests sermons etc.

And in the first beginning I fear me we shall fall into such a controversy, as
cannot easily be decided; namely, whether the Pagans or papists where the
first founders of them? Some of the^ which for their fame deserved to be
chronicled, are recorded to have been deuote unto the Godds of the heathens,
like as the days of their wecke still are, not only into ye names of Saints
and Angels, but into ye names of these heathen Godds which they still
retain, having utterly lost the name and order of their Creator, as the First,
second, third day of the Gene. 1.
week, of the first, second, third, or such a month etc. and are now quite
given away, one day to the sun Soli, another to the Moon, another to
Merckrie, another to Mar^, another to Jupiter* another to Venus* and the last
to Saturn, which they have now so long held by prescription in quiet
possession, as yt is bonbtfull when the right owner shall challenge them, his
plea will not be heard in westminster hall. In like manner I have heard, that
these their temples have been dedicate unto these Gods, who have had their
Flamins and archflamins therein; but upon the conversion of Engl^nd to the faith
of Rome, they were al then new baptized into the names of holy saint^s.

I know here again that our learned Antiq^ries will hardly consent to this:
but then I must desire them to show me, when these their ancient Cathedral
churches were christened into ye saints names they now bear. I suppose they
shall find some of them to have carried the names they at this day do, a great
while. We shall also have much ado with the^ concerning the first faith which
England received, which they will confirm by the notable estate of the church
ye first 500 years after the Apostles. And here shall be brought upon me a whole
cartlode of writers, Councels, Doctors: unto al which I oppose that little book
of Christ's Testament: from which they immediately after the destruction Math.
24. 29.
of Jerusalem, and the decease of the Apostles fell away; changing and
innovating all things daily more and more, until they had Act. 20. 29
2 Thessalonians. 2.
brought yt to this estate: fashioning religion to the fancies and lusts 1.
Io^. 2. 18.
of men, as yt might best allure, retain and please the Princes and multitudes
of the world, as is above in the beginning of this treatise more particularly
showed, and may by these ancient monumentes of their idolatry which still
remain, as by so many arguments be evidently convinced.

These Synagogues are built altogether to the form of the old Temple Exodus 27.
9 etc.
of the Jews, in a long square East and west, with their holy Court 1. King. 6.
walled round about, commonly called the Churchyeard, which is holy ground, and
serves for Christen burial, being altogether exempt for civil use: yet is yt
lawful for the young men and maids to play there together upon their sundaies
and holy days. But who so smites any in that holy ground, by statute is to
have his hand cut off thersore. These Synagogu^s have also their battlementes,
and their porch adioining to the^ Church, not here to speak of the solemn
laying the foundation; where the first stone must be laid by the hands of the
Bishop or his suffragane, with certain magical prayers, and holy water, and
many other idolatrous rites. They have unto yt their foulding d^res and an
especial leuite, the parish clerk to keep the key. They have at the west end
their hallowed belles, which are also baptized, sprinkled etc. They have their
isles, and their body of the Church: they have also their selles to the sides
of the walls, their vestery to keep the priests ministerial garments, where
they are to attire and 1. Chron. 26
dress themselves before they go to their service: they have their Ezekiel. 42.
treasury. All the cathedral o^ mother churches also have their cloisters for
their Deane, prebendaries, canno^s, petty cannons, singing me^ and singing
boys etc. within their precinct and walls to abide and dwell, that they may
keep the watch of the temple, and their hours of Orizons. Again they have in
the body of their Church their hallowed 1. Kings, 7. 23.
font, to keep the holy water wherewith they baptize, al other vessels and
waters to the use of baptism being by express law forbidden. They have also
their holiest of al, or chauncel, which peculiarly belongs to the priest and
quire, which help the priest to say and sing his service. They have their
roodloft as a partition between their holy and holiest of all. The priest
also has a peculiar door into his chancel, through which none might pass but
himself. Now Numb. 19.
this Church thus reared up, is also thoroughly hallowed with their sprinkling
water, and dedicate and baptized into the name of some especial Saint or Angel,
as to the patron and defendor thereof, against al Ezekiel. 41. 17. 18.
enemies, spirits, storms, tempests etc. Yet has yt within also all the holy
army of saints and Angels in their windows and walls, to keep yt. Thus I
think can be no doubt made, but that the very erections of these synagogues
(whether they were by the heathens or papists) were idolatrous.

But here I look to have objected these two reasons against me: the one for
the defense of the original, the other for the present estate of them: namly,
that many of these superstitions I speak of, were inve^ted long after England
received the faith, and therefore the original of these churches could not be so
evil: the other, that now (thanks be to God) they are quite purged of all
these idols in the walls and windows, and used to the pure worship of God;
therefore I do not well so to write of them in this estate.

To the first reason (but that I love not to rave in the apocrypha writings as
they do with the papists, and therefore never bring their controversies to end)
I could show most of these idolatrous shapes and customs, to have been very
ancient, and in deed by all likelihood, eue^ from ye first building of these
synagogues, and therefore yt skilleth not to inquire whether all these
idolatries were invented at the first bringing of their faith into England;
seeing yt is manifest that most of these churches were built many years after.
For (as has been said) they at the first contented themselves with such
temples as they ere while worshipped their idols in: so that they that will
object unto me some few of their temples built in a round form, must both be
sure that they were not built by heathens, and that al these romish relikes of
the Churchyard, porch, hallowed belles, font, images in the walls and windows
etc. were added since the building thereof: And this I suppose will be hard for
them t^ do. The papists can prescribe a long time for their images and many
other things: yet all this if they could do, what were these few unto all
the other so many thowsandes as we see to carry these idolatrous shapes even
from the very foundation, which we know, and with our eyes have seen thus
defiled with idols and odolatrie? so that yt shall be needles for them to
trouble themselves with things farther off, when these things still remain in
this shape before our eyes.

And this also may answer their second allegation, where they alledg them now
to be quite purged of all the former Idols and idolatry wherewith they were
defiled. How then do they still stand in their old idolatrous shapes, with
their ancient appurtinances, with their Courts, cells, isles, chancel, belles
etc. Can these remain, and al idolatrous shapes and relickes be purged from
them? which are so inseperably inherent unto the whole building, as yt can
never be cleansed of this fretting leprosy, until yt be desolate, laid on
heaps, as their younger sisters^, the Abbaies and Monasteries are.

We see how suddenly even in few days they may be replenished and garnished
with all their idols again. We had a late proof thereof in Q. Mary's time,
which is not yet taken out of the common peoples minds; who in doubt of the
like hereafter, partly upon superstition, but generally because they would not
be at the like charge to buy new, have reserved the old relikes still: some of
them standing up in their Church windows, others kept in their chestes and
vesteries; yea sundry of them are still in use: as their belles, font, organes,
copes, surplices, the covering cloth of the altar etc. which way can these be
purged, so long as thy remain in this shape. Their whole Church also, is yt
not still a fit shrine to receive all the rest? what lets that they might
^ot be set up again (if the Idols were in readiness) in one hour? seeing their
very roomths still remain as they left them, and want but a little sweeping: so
that every Saint may know and take his old place again. And as yt stands
with the whole frame of their Church walls, windows, and implementes: so
stands yt in like manner with the whole ministry of this Church, from the
highest bishop to the lo^est priest, curate, preacher, or half priest. They may
all together within the space of one hour, with a little changing of their
copye, serve again in their old roomths which they held in the church of
Rome, to which this ministry of theirs a great deal better fitteth then unto
the Church of CHRIST, which can bear no such adulterate and antichristian
ministry.

Well then you see what good reformation they have made, and how thoroughly they
have purged their Churches of popery and idolatry, and that not only
spiritual idolatry (as in their worship and administration above has been
showed) but eue^ this gro^e material idolatry, which ^leaueth to the whole
frame and every part of those their Churches both within and without, from the
very foundation to the covering stone thereof. So that now they must be driven
either absolutely to justify these their cathedral and parish Churches in this
form, with these appurtenances, furniture and use, by the word of God; or else
we may resolutly by the same word detest them as abominable Idols; such as by
the law of God are deuote to utter destruction, both the altars Exodus 34. 13.
the very places Deu^. 12. 2. and the gold of them Deuteronomy. 7. 25. In such
detestatio^ ought idolatry to be amongst all Gods servants, as their eye
ought not to spare or covet that which the Lord rejects and detesteth. Thus
the godly kings of Judah, Asa, Iehoshaphat, Ezekiah, Ioshiah, 2 Chro^. 17 6
destroyed all the high places, altars, groves, which were erected in Judah 2 Chronicles. 29
and Israel (...) to the law of God. 2 Chronicles. 3.


But here yt will be said peradventure, that these judicial laws were only
made but for the Jews common wealth, and we now under CHRIST are not bound unto
them. Let such men know, that with as little sin and as great reason they may
say, y^ moral laws of God (as we call them) were likewise gi^en only to the
Jews, and that we now under CHRIST are not bound to them. For he that said
thou shall have ^o other Gods before my face, and thou shall not make unto they
self any graven image has likewise said: Thou shall utterly deface and
destroy all these synagogues and places where such idols have been set up and
worshipped. Who sees not that this law has relation unto, and depends upon
the other? and is that temporal judgment which God has set down, and will
have man execute for the breach of the other. And sure he that will alter or
abrogate the one, may by as good warrant alter or abrogate the other. To my
seeming, none could better set down the penalty for transgressing of his law,
then he that gave his law: unless now in this learned age some prove vviser
then God, and set down more just judgments then he. In the rest I hope no man
will take these co^mandementes concerning idolatry to be ceremonial or
temporal, or that CHRIST then has abrogate or taken these away from any,
either Jew or Gentile.

But now (with one consent) they vvil all plead yt lawful, to convert these
idol places and furniture to the service of God: and this they will confirm
with the authority of AUGUSTINE, CALVINE and many other vvriters; as also by
the practice of CONSTANTINVS the Bishop of Alexandria, and all the Churches of
EVROPA at this day: how they from time to time, still have used those Temples
and places to the true worship of God; which the heathen, the heretics, and
papists have before profaned and abused to their idol and false worship.

To these I answer, that they are all but men, but if they were ^o many Though
this Book coul ^ot by the Author be cor ^ected or reuised, yet h^ sig nified
his mind doubtful, nor changed in this (...) Namely, that though these Synagogs
being dedicate to ^dolatry and defiled wit Idols, ought therefore to b plucked
down, yet n^ with such detestation to b utterly destroyed, as these I dols
which had vvorsh^ given unto them, but the the idolatrous shapes bein utterly
abolished, the stu^ of these Synagogs, as th stone, timber, lead, (...) etc
may be converted to ciui^ and honest uses, as the goo creature of God, as mea^
offered to Idols etc.
Angels they could not counteruaile the authority of one of these laws of God
and places of scripture alleged: which show evidently, yt God has such idol
places and al their furniture in such detestation, that he has commanded the
magistrate utterly to race and deface them. So far is yt that God will be
worshipped in them, that he will not have them so much as reserved, least
they defile the land and draw us to idolatry: as by experience they lately
have seen in Q. MARY'S time, and we now with grief behold amongst
themselves. And ^nerly let them make unto their selves what pretenses they can
best devise of this and that holiness or end, God sees their hearts, how they
love the creature more then the Creator; how with the hipocrite SAVL they spare
the fat vvare of AMALEK, the execrable thing, to sacrifice, to worship God
withal. God abhors these things, he will not be worshipped with them:
and therefore they in reserving them, not only condemn God of injustice and
folly (that belike considered not, that these things might be sanctifiedly
used to his worship) but thru^t upon God such abhominatio^s as he detesteth,
and with them they will worship him whether he will or no. But they shall one day
know the price of transgression; and that obedience is better then sacrifice,
and that rebellion is as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression as
wickedness and idolatri^.

But now D. R. to fortify and back these authors, brings also thi^ reason
out of Mr. CALVINE: THAT THE use of many things is pure whose original is
impure. As for example; yt is law^ul to swear, though the beginning and
occasion of oaths was by reason of man's sin, who is apt to lie, to deceive,
or not to credit each others simple word etc. To th^s example, this in a word: ^
see not why I should be of Mr. CALVIN'S mind touching the original of oaths. For
the like he might say of prayer, of the written word of God, yea of CHRIST
himself, the sacraments, and al holy exercises of this life. If man were not i^
sin he need not pray, if he were not wrapped in ignorance* he need not the
word etc. But shall I conclude hereupon, that the original of these holy things
is impure; sure that were unclean doctrine. These things no doubt are before
all beginnings most holy: laid up with God in the bozome of CHRIST from whence
they spring unto us, and are derived by us through the holy Ghost to help our
infirmities, to instruct our ignorance, and to Exodus 22. 11.
confirm and assure our hearts. Yea eue^ amongst our selves an oath for Number.
5. 19.
confirmation is an end of strife, given to our infirmiti^s that cannot see
Heb. 6. 16.
things absent or secret things, as God does. And therefore is his holy name
which sees all things, reverently taken for confirmation, and not as yt is
publikly used in the Church of England. So then an oath has not the original
from man, but from God himself who is the author of ^en. 12. 2. and 15. 18. and
17. 4. and 22. 16. 17.
oaths. Neither is an oath given to the sin of any (for so should the name of
God be highly profaned and abused) but yt ^s given to the infirmities of all;
that of things uncertain, unknown and doubtful unto us, we might rest in
that truth which is confirmed unto us in the name of the most high God etc. we
may very well put difference betwixt our infirmities and our sins: CHRIST
took our infirmities yet without sin;

And now not any longer insisting upon the doctrine of SOME his antecedent, I
deny his Argument at once: That because the use of many things whose original
is impure, may be pure: therefore these idol places and temples may be used to
the worship of God. He sees the laws of God flat to the contrary, which
allows them no use at al either civil or ecclesiastical of such idolatrous
places.

But he proves yt thus. The (...) were gross idolaters; but the Israel^tes
having vanquished them, offered of their ^poiles unto the Lord etc. Numb. 31.
therefore these idol Temples and places and idolatrous trumperie, may be reserved
and used in the worship of God.

I must still deny his Argument. First he has not here proved, that this
gold of the Midianites was either in any idolatrous forms, or had bee^e
dedicate to Idols; and therefore from this place can conclude nothing* It is
easy to put difference betwixt the substance of Idolaters, as gold, silver,
oxen, sheep, cattle: and their Idols, and idol places. The one the captains
of this host of the Israelites offered unto the Lord, for the sin they had
committed in this war in sparing the Midianitish women, eue^ Number. 31. 49 and^.
the jewels of gold, bracelets, chains, rings, ear rings, ornaments of legs
(as the text records) and the Lord accepted them. But these I trow he cannot
call idols or idolatrous jewels, though they were the jewels of idolaters. The
difference is great and easily put betwixt these. The lands, goods, cattle,
of idolaters, we may purchase, inherit, use and enjoy: their idols, even of
the most precious metals, we are to detest and destroy. Yet even here in this
example, they were commanded to purge all that might go through the fire, by
the fire and with the water verse. 23.
of purification; and all other their vtilences which they got in that war, to
be purged with water verse. 21. etc.

But now that second bullock which GEDEON offered, is thought and Judge. 6. 25.
etc.
alleged to have belonged to BAAL, and brought for an insta^ce to prove that
things deuote to idols may be used to the worship of God. To this if yt were
admitted that this bullok had belo^ged to BAAL (which notwithstanding I see not
how vt may be proved by the text) I answer, yt one particular example does not
take away a general law: Again, that GIDEON did nothing but by the express
commandment of God. So yt they which will enforce this example against these
laws, may as well use yt against the law of the altar, of the Place where to
sacrifice, of the Priests which ought to offer them: all which were by
GIDEON much more apparently to our seeming broken, then this law, which in
deed I cannot see that he brake yt at all. Further by his example private me^
might intrude into the magistrates office to destroy idolatrous places etc.
which is unlawful.

Yet Mr. SOME thinking to make the matter more sure brings Corah his censors
for proof: because of the^ were made plates for a covering for the altar. But
see how the further he goes, the more he still mistaketh ye matter. For these
censors of Cora^h and his company, were never offered to any idols, or used to
any idolatry; but are by the testimony of the holy Ghost pronounced holy
Numb. 16. 37. and therefore nothing fit his turn.

Many other divine reasons he has to prove this matter, yt ye churches which
idolaters bui^t, the lands which they gave unto y^ maintenanc^ of their popish
ministry, as arch-BBs. L. BB. parish priests, parsons, vickars etc. and also
to the collegiate priests, as Deaues, Prebends, Cannons, singing men etc.
ought now to be converted to the maintenance of these persons and collegiate
priests their successors: and (as I hear) he has gotten himself into one of
these colleges, and has for his good service unto BAAL and against CHRIST,
obtained IVDAS his roomth (I mean not concerning his Apostles but his deacons
office) to carry the bag, and rob the poor.

Well howsoever that matter stands with him, I am sure this his reason of
^loraes legacy unto the theater of Rome to maintain stage plays, where
wicked and filthy persons might meet, deserves no such recopence. Flora
(says he) was an harlot in Rome and very welthy: she gave very much for the
erection and continuance of a yearly spectacle in Rome. By reason of gross
inconveniences, that absurd show was abolished. But ^loraes legacy was
converted to the use and benefit of that commonwealth.

And what of all this M^. SOME? Therefore may such things as have been
dedicate by idolatours, unto their idol service and the maintenance of their
idol ministry, be now converted to the worship of God, and to the maintenance
of the ministry of CHRIST? It is already showed that God will not be
worshipped with such idolatrous stuff: and above in the handling the tithes
and gl^abes of the church of England, that CHRIST has in his Testament set
down an other kind of maintenance for the ministry of the Gospel then such
popish legacies. But what sequel is in this? Fl^raes legacy was converted
to a better use, therefore things offered by idolaters to idolatry may now be
converted to the worship of God etc. you see there is a bar in the way; the
express laws of God to the contrary. Sure yt is doubtful these profane
fables and frivolous reasons would cost you a laughing at, if you lighted into
some of these new pleasant Divines handling: save that in deed this subject is
as a red whote iron, that would burn their fingers; and therefore they will
either let yt alone, or with you help to quench yt.

But now let me come to that doctorly distinction of yours, wherewith you most
learnedly decide, and iudicially conclude ye whole point. These founders (say
you) these idolaters erred not i^ ge^ere but in specie. Not in the general, in
that they gave lands to Colleges for Gods service; but in the particular they
erred, in that they gave yt to the celebration of the mass, which they took
to be Gods service.

How shall poor simple Christians that know not this diepe learning, arrive to
this high divinity, to make one and the self same action good and evil by
logic. We know not through this diuiuitie of yours, whether we should approve
or condemn this actio^ of giving lands to these colleges, to se^ue God after
the popish manner. For if we co^dempne yt as a maintenance of idolatry, then
straight he tells us that yt was given to the service of God i^ genere.
whereby what he should mean I cannot conjecture, except he mean either in name
and outward pretense, or else peradventure in inward intent, that they gave of a
good mind to advance Gods worship, though the present worship to which they
gave yt was idolatrous and ungodly.

To the first sense; I find that al idolators have always made profession of
the worship of God. So AARON when he had made the Calfe, proclaimed saying: to
morrow shall be the holy day of the Lord: so the harlot said she had peace
ossrings: the false Church makes (...) to worship CHRIST, to preach the
Gospel etc. therefore the pretense of cul^us Dei cannot justify their action
either in Ge^ere or in Specie. We are taught by the Apostle 1 Cor. 10. 20. that
whatsoever ye idolaters offer, they offer unto devils and not unto God. This
doctrine Moses taught before him Leuit. 17. 7. where having restrained all
offringes, to be brought to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
unto the priest etc. concludes on this manner And they shall no more offer
their offerings unto devils, after whom they have gone a whoring. etc. showing
there, that all sacrifices offered else where, then in the place appointed of God,
by any other the^ by Gods lawful ministers, were an abhominatio^ to the Lord,
not offered to God but to devils. This also apeareth Deu^. 32. 15. 16. 17. etc.
2. Chron. 11. 15. whereupon we may conclude, that no outward pretense can
justify an evil action, or make yt good in Geuere: as for inward intentes,
they can no way justify outward transgression* for then who should be found or
judged culpable?

But in the particular he grants they erred; in that they took the popish
mass for Gods service, and gave their lands for the maintenance and the
celebratio^ thereof. It is well yet yt this is found an error (though yt be a
very faint term for such high sacrilege) Let us then see in a word what
kind of error yt is, that the actio^ may thereby be discerned and judged. Is not
this mass a most blasphemous and execrable Idol, in that yt is affirmed to be
the very body and flesh of Christ, and so is adored? Is yt not an open and
utter denijng of both the natures of Christ? his humanity, in that they make
that his body to be in many thowsa^d places at one instant, in that they make
yt now patible, ma^ducable, to be digested and cast out etc. his deity, in that
they pluck him from the right hand of majesty, and now cast him into most
filthy places by degestio^, in that they offer him up again, conjure and
sacrifice him again, and separate his deity from his humanity, both from his
glory: and is this with D Some but an error, and that in Sp^cie? I can tell
him, a little of this leaue^, will make sour the whole lump. And if he himself
were not so^what tainted with this, he would never for shame of the world call
this cultus Dei, or say that they which gave their lands to this purpose, gave
them to the worship of God, and erred not in Genere.

But yet a word or two for the further explanation of this doctors deep
divinity. Be yt they gave their lands ad missae celebrationem to the
celebration of the mass, and to these colleges to that end were they Revel.
9. 3.
given: which necessarily presupposes (if we had no other proof) that Ezekiel. 8.
16.
they were such sacrificing priests as used to say mass, a college of these
Sodomites, those Locustes. Now then they erred in somewhat more, then in giving
to that false worship, in that they gave to the maintenance of these idle
bellies, these caterpillars, such an ungodly societe and fraternity. And now,
seeing the same colleges and dens remain and consist of the same wicked idle
priests and their associates, in the same manner that they the^ did, only the
latin mass removed (and that in what manner, apeareth by that which has
been above said concerning their service book) how now can these colleges be
said reformed, or these grauntes lawful? when the parties to whom such
grauntes are made, are by all laws, both Gods and man's, incapable of them, yea
not to live or be suffered in a Christian commonwealth. And the Prince has as
good right to abolish these, as her auncestor has their brethren the Monks
and Freeres, and to assume their lands into her hands, and employ them unto
the benefit of the commonwealth: but utterly in like manner to dissolve these
idle colleges and to desolate these idol synagogues, that (as yt is said by the
prophet) the ravens and owls may make their nestes there, as they do in the
other. ^ay. 34.


But here peradventure yt will be interiected, that these synagogues may be
purged, or (as our learned priests say) reformed, and so still used to the
worship of God; seeing al things are now made clean unto us through the word
of God and prai^r.

Unto this I say: that idols cannot be cleansed with the blood of Christ, Act.
15. 20.
neither by his word which utterly condemns the^, as often has been Leuit.
14. etc.
said. Again the idolatrous shape so cleaves to every stone, as yt by no
means ca^ be severed from them whiles there is a stone left standing upon a
stone. So that neither they can be used to the worship of God, nor we have any
civil use of the^, seeing they are execiable and deuote to destruction: so that
they that use such execrable and unclean things, cannot be clean, but must
needs be defiled with the filthiness of these idols. And heerin either the
ignorance or wretchedness of these priests appears, which thus plead for Baal
and his Temples, under color of reformation: which you see appears to be no
other thing, then to seek to repair and da^be that muddy wall (which the Lord
so often commands to be utterly destroyed) for their belly, that their
portion may be made fat thereby.

But yt may be here objected, yt an Idol is nothing, and yt the worship of God
is now spiritual and free in all places. Though the Idol in respect of the
inventors be said to be nothing, because of the vanity of the invention of
man; yet in respect of the things offered and abused to the same, the Apostle
teaches that such things are offr^d to devils, 1. Cor. 10. 19. 20.
and that they which have any fellowship in these actions, have fellowship with
devils. Now further, the spiritual worship of God does not take away the
co^ma^dements against gross idolatry* neither the freedom which Christ has
given to worship him in all places, does give leave to reserve these execrable
idols, or to worship him in such places: For by that reason, we might as well
go to the false Church to ye popish synagogues, or turkish asse^blies: but yt
we know in a Christian to be an utter apostacce from God: God will not be
worshipped in such places. Well yet though they may not be used to ye worship
of God, yet why may they not be convert^d to civil uses, as well as the land
and dwelling houses of these priests; seeing yt is lawful for us to buy, or to
eat flesh offered to idols.

It were reason enough for me to alledg and rest in the word and wisdom of
God, which has comanded these idol synagagues and places which have been
erected and used to idolatry and false worship, to be utterly rased and
destroyed. Yet reserved he the goods and lands of the idolators to civil uses
etc. So me thinks there may be great reason rendered, and difference put betwixt
such creatures as are given to idolators to civil uses (I say not here civil
ends) for albeit the end of the giver be to the maintenance of idolatry, yet
the Donees cannot so use them, but only to civil uses; as houses to dwell in,
lands to til etc. And those creatures which are wholly separate from all civil
use and consecrate to idolatry, as these idol synagogues and al their
implements and furniture. The one we see though they have been defiled with
idolatry as in respect of the end and owners; yet those abuses taken away, the
things remain clean and of free use; the other are both accursed by Gods own
mouth, deuote to destruction etc. and therefore can neither be cleansed nor
rese^ued. The Lord will not have any part of the damned thing Deuteronomy. 13. 17.
cleave unto our hand, neither to reserve the gold and silver thereof, least
Deuteronomy. 7. 25. 26*
we be ensnared therewith; for yt is an abomination before the Lord, neither
may we bring abomination unto our house, lest we be accursed like unto yt: but
we are commanded utterly to abhor yt, and count yt most abominable, for yt is
accursed. Now then, if the most precious metals be forbidden; the baser, as
iron, lead, stone much more, and that with such vehemency both with threats
and promises; how great is their danger and sin both priests and people,
which spare that which God commands to be destroyed, which covet that which
God accurseth? what then in the end shall this Doctor get by his Dean^ie? the^e
BBs. and priests by their promotions and fat living? If God be true of his
word, there is a fearful reckoning remains Psalm. 11. 6.
them; and not only them, but the whole land which is defiled with, and
susfreth such abominations.

But here policy mak^th an other pollitike doubt: how these collegiate
priests and parsons should do for liuinges, and the people for places to
assemble in, if these lands should be taken away, if the idolatrous temples
should be pulled down. As to the first part such unchristian colleges as these
dens of thieues and idle bellies are, ought to be dissolved; they deposed
from their priesthood, and turned to some more honest trade of living in the
common wealth: and so is this doubt soon at an end; when their antichristian
ministry cease and ungodly frater^ities are dissolved, then there need not
any longer lan^es for the maintenance of such abbay lubbers, and of such
locustes.

As for the true ministry of CHRIST, they look for no such lordly and settled
provision, they depend upon the providence and blessing of God, upon that flock
unto which they administer. They are content in the greatest plenty with
sufficiency to necessary food and raime^t for them and their families, as
wives, and children. And of this also they are neither their own caruers nor
judges, but yt is administered unto them from time to time by the Church to
which they serve and attend, as need requires, and their present ability
affords; which most willingly make their ministers partakers with them even
of all their goods, according to their need, and the others power.

Now for places to assemble in: they have little love to the Gospel which
build themselves such stately seeled houses, and allow not to the people of God
a house to assemble and worship God in. There were synagogues built in Judea
and Israel after the high places were destroyed. Great were our blame, if we
should suffer the idolaters so far to exceed and condemn us, which have built
such magnifice^t and sumptuous aedifices to their idols; and we not afford a
poor simple house to the Lord JESUS CHRIST, who now requires not such
sumptuous Temples, his true Temple being the souls and bodies of his chosen.
But I doubt, this worldly policy which has so long borne the sway and ruled
religion, vvil never in this world yield her self prostrate as an humble
handmaid, to take laws at God, and suffer him to order and govern all things
by his word: I doubt in this last age of the world, there are too many false
Prophets abroad, which are gone forth unto the Kings of R^uel 16. 13. ^4.
the earth, rather to draw the^ into battle against CHRIST and his Saints,
the^ to bring CHRIST so generally and absolutely into their kingdoms.

Yet now if I be asked who ought to abolish this idolatry, to destroy these
synagogues, to dissolve these fraternities, and to depose these antichristian
priests: To that I answer, the Prince, or state; and that yt belongs not to
any private men: For we see they were s^t up and remained in Israel and Judah,
until God raised up godly Princes to pluck them down and destroy them: yea yt
were an intrusio^ into the magistrates office and seat, for any private man so
far to intermeddle.

But hence then yt will peradventure be collected; that seeing the Prince
suffers them, and yt is not in any private man's power to redress these
mischeifes, therefore private men ought likewise to frequent the same idol
places and priests (though with grief of heart) until God incline the Prince
to remove these abuses.

I am loath in this place to meddle with ye priests allegatio^s, for their
perfidy and idolatry; which use this reason with some more colors and faces
among many other thereunto. Mine answer here is, that this Argument follows
not: It is one thing to abolish public evils, and an other to abstain from
public evils: only the Magistrate may pull down the public monuments of
idolatry; yet every private Christian ^xod. 20. 3.
both may, and upon pain of damnation ought to refaine from ^zek. 9. 4.
public idolatry, or from any thing which is evil in Gods ^ies, though Hos. 4.
15.
yt be allowed and commanded by all the Princes of the world. The godly 1 Ioh.
5. 21.
Jews and Israelites, though they could not pull down the idolatrous ^euel.
14. 4.
places, yet refrayned them; as is above d^clared*

So that King ASA his example, which is brought by the Priests to color and
tolerate their idolatry, will not help this matter, or serve their turn.
King ASA (say they) though he plucked down all the Altars built unto strange
Gods etc. yet suffered y^ high places which were built to the God of heaven, to
stand; and was commended of the holy Ghost to have had his heart upright etc.
Therefore the Prince may suffer these synagogues which were likewise-built to ye
true God (though otherwise abused to idolatry) and the people frequent them,
the idolatry being removed.

I hope they will not say, that king ASA either did well or was commended for
leaving those high places standing, which were expressly forbidden by the law in
many places, and afterward pulled down by his some IEHOSAPHAT. Neither yet can
they prove that either ASA, or 2 Chronicles. 17. 6.
any godly Jew repaired unto them, or offered there sacrifices there, for that
had been expressly against the law of God. So that yt nothing makes Deuteronomy. 16.
21. 22.
either for the suffering of these idol synagogues, much less for ye
wor^hipping in the same; which can no way be purged of idolatry and
superstition wherewith they are now ^raught and highly placed in the Read. Isa.
27. 9.
peoples minds, until they be plucked down and defaced before their Isa. 30.
22.
eyes. yet even in these abominable sties are not the best sort and the most
learned of the preachers ashamed to execute their ministry, and to call the
people unto them to the open breach of Gods laws, the feeding and nouri^hing
the profane and ignorant people in their old* foreconceaued superstitious
opinion they hold of them; thinking neither the sermons nor sacraments any
where else so holy, as they are in these hallowed dedicate Churches and
Chapels: and to the no small offense, and wounding the hearts of all that have
any knowledge of God amongst them, which can no where else come by their sermons
and ministry, but in these forbidden idolatrous accursed places.

AND NOW THE public worship of the Church of England Pro^* 7. 16*
being thus far discovered; me thinks yt due time, and most fit Revel 2. 22.
to examine the public preaching of the Gospel in the said Church: seeing y^
therewith, as with a goodly embroidered couerlet and fine sheets of Egypt they
cover Iesabels bed, and hide al their fornications: seeing therewith, Hoze. 9. 8*
as with a sweet whistle they allure, as with a charm they retain Habak. 1.
1^* 16.
their auditory: seingtherwith, as with an angle they take up al, and catch yt
in their net, and gather yt in their yarne, whereof they rejoice and are glad;
therefore they sacrifice unto their nets and burn incense unto their yarne,
because by them their portion is made fat, and their meare plenteous. But these
counterfeit ornaments being brought to the trial of Gods word, they will
straight apeare but whorish skarfes to co^er her shame and filthiness; and not
those goodly broidred couerings, wherewith Isa. 47. 3.
the true tabernacle is adorned. These stales being disclosed, I hope they
Ezekiel. 16. 3^*
shall in vain bait their hooks and spread their nets for the birds that
N^b. 3. 5. 6.
are on wing, and through the mercy of God epsy their grinnes: so that from
henceforth these Babilonish marchantme^ shall be dri^en to wail Revel: (...).
(...).
and lament, because no man buyeth their ware any more. And Iere. 2^*
sure, if the Prophet Jeremy in his time were so vehemently affected with*
grief, that his bowels within him swelled, his bones shook, and his heart for
sorrow and fear eue^ brake, to behold the sins of ye Prophets which drew all the land into transgression, and held them in the wrath of God etc. What would
he, or what ought we in these our days to do? who find not only all the marks
of false Prophets which are recorded in the scriptures upon them, but even
Satan's uttermost deceites and effectual 2 Cor. 11. 13. 14. ^5.
delusions amongst them, suborning and transforming them, as Mark. 13. 22
if they were ministers of righteousness, taking unto them the names and 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10. 2 Pet. 2.
titles of CHRIST'S ministers, preachers of the Gospel, seekers of reformation
etc. whereby he deceaueth the world, draws them into most 2* Pet. 3.
heinous sins and high profanation of Gods name, which can no other way be
reformed or purged, but by the utter dissolution of the whole ^rame, when this
whole world shall be consumed with fire, unto ye which day yt hastneth and is
reserved. And sure even hereby we may assuredly know, that we are fallen into
the last times, inasmuch as in this clear light of the Gospel (whereby the
whore of Babylon is not only descried, but consumed and burnt as yt were by
fire) yet these deceitful workmen not only build their own timber and stubble
devises, but most highly profane that heavenly frame and gracious government
of CHRIST, in seeking to bring yt in, and to plant yt over and amongst their
co^fuse profane multitudes, in these their Babilonish parish assemblies. Yet
no doubt, yt God that revealed and showed in the heaven openly, the Temple of
the tabernacle of testimony, will gather in, build, and preserve his elect in
the same, eue^ as he did Noah and his family in the Arc in the day of the
flood.

BUT TO Return to our present purpose, which is to show after what manner these
ministers of the Church of England preach the Gospel. Here must be remembered
after what order they stand priests, how they entered, what they vowed by oath
at their entrance, what kind of office they are entered unto; likewise unto what
manner of people, and how they execute these their offices; not here to speak
of their manner of coming by them. Yt has been above declared, how all the
ministry of the Church of England is derived from and held of these
antichristian BBs. by the tenure of homage and fealty at the least, if not of
Villenage. So yt such of them as acknowledge the BBs. to be antichristian, do
together with the same sword and blow cut off al ye ministry springing and
proceeding from their apostatical chair, there is no fence or ward to save
them. It has been declared likewise, how at the receiving this ministry,
they solemnly upon their knees (by oath) vowed their canonical obedience to
these BBs and their substitutes their orders and decrees; and this not only to
the observation of the things that are or shall be by these their Lords and
Superintendent^ commanded them, but likewise by the same to be disciplined,
censured and chasticed for any thing offensive unto them, which in their
ministry they shall do or say, whither by Mulct, Suspension, deposition, or
prison. Furthermore, from them they fetch their license to preach, with their
laws of stint, limitation, and praescription, when to preach, what to preach,
where and how long to preach; but especially by public doctrine not to speak
against any thing by public authority inioined, or by the same authority
hereafter to be enjoined; as also, to exhort their parishioners unto the due
obedience and observation of such injunctions.

And that this be faithfully performed, their Lords the BBs. have not only the
oaths of the priests, to observe etc. and of the Churchwardens and sidemen, to
present the defaltes thereof; but their several deputies and officers, as
Archdeacons, Chancelors, Commissaries, to keep their courts and scenes to see
these things observed and punish ye offending; to which substitutes and courts
they are al attendant and accomptable.

Their ordinary offices which they execute are parsons or vickars, not here
to speak of the collegiate priest^s, who may and do exercise all the offices of
their Church in their own person: for one man may be a person or pastor a
Doctor and a Deane or Deacon; take D.R.S. for example.

As for such as term themselves ministers or preachers, they are but
mercenarie men to help an other in his office, as the no^ residents, plurified
parsons, or dumb ministers: they have a rouing ministry, without either
certain office or place. As for their name of teacher, which they cou^terfait
and usurp unto themselves to hide their wretchedness, and to purchase
estimation with the people: yt is known their Church of England, nor yet her
mother of ROME has no such office, other then their popish university
Doctors, who have yt as an addition of honor, and not of office; which name
you see they hold together with and far above their office of a Parson. But
even these rouing ministers and mercenarie preachers, fetch their ministry
and license to preach from the chair of their Lord Bishop, upon the same
conditions and covenant that the other, yea and execute their charges when they
are hired, after ye same manner, both in saing their ^eruice enjoined the^ etc.
and in making their appara^ce and account at y^ scenes and courts abo^e said.

If some of them here take exception unto this, and alledg particular
instances to the contrary, who neither read the service book nor yet come at
the BBs. courts; let these men be more nearly observed, and you shall find
these but mere delusions and iugglings to bleare the eyes of the simple. For
mark these men, and I warrant you this book must go before or after their
sermon* and be read either by some reading priest, or else by the roaring bulls
of their cathedral Church: for there is no Church or public Chapel in
England, but is bound unto this book, and these well conscienced how learned
soever, make no scruple to second this book with their sermons by 30* years
together (if they have been priests so long) and stand ministers to this
people in this idolatry, idolatrous places, sodomitish and monkish colleges
etc. Is not this all one as if themselves used or read the book and sung
withthem for company, seeing they both join with them in prayer, stand a
minister unto them in these places and estate: yea and (by their leaves) the
wisest of them do both administer and receive the sacraments after the order
of this book, together with these people etc.

And in that they make not continual appearance unto their Scenes and courts; yt
is by some peculiar privilege granted by the a^ch-Bish. unto some great man or
other, or else by some especial prerogative from the Prince: both with this
intendement always, that they do nothing contrary or preiudi^iall unto the
public course and proceedinges of the land; for if they do, there is no
privilege or prerogative can defend them from their arch L. Bishop: his
letters missi^e and messengers will soon be with them, they must answer ye
matter before his Highness, and that with due homage and submission, or else they
know the price of yt etc. And is not this all one in effect as if they made
their monthly Revel 13. 17
appearance unto their ordinaries substitutes, when we see they have the Re^el
14. 9.
open mark of the Beast in their license, priuiledg etc. and must preach after
the same prescriptio^ that other priests do etc. And when we see they do their
homage in open court unto the archbeast upon his summons? Revel 13. 13. 14. and
16. 13.
may I not then justly conclude, that all the Priests of England have a false
and antichristian ministry upon them, exerc^se yt in idolatry Re^el 19. 20
and unto idolators, have the marks of, and stand in subjection unto the
beast, preach by his license and limitatio^ etc. and so join as the false
Prophet unto his throne: And who now can say, that these me^ preach the Gospel
truly and sincerely, whiles they remain in this antichristian ministry,
idolatry, confusion, subjection?

But that this their preaching may more manifestly appear unto all men, let
the indifferent readers but consider with themselves of the truth of these
matters, whiles I but by way of a brief repetition discover some of their
deceites, shifts, and errors. First therefore I must desire them duly to
consider of these former circumstances, as of their ministry and manner of
receiving the same; of their office and manner of coming by yt, and of their
administering in the same: and unto these to join that which should have been
first remembered, their academicall education and school learning whereof they
so boast, and whereby they are made fit for the high work of the ministry and
government of the Church; yea that most high office of Gods Dispensor or
Steward. These being duly considered, and compared unto the rules in CHRIST'S
Testament, concerning the ministry and ministers of the Gospel: see if they
find them not pere^ptory lets, why in this estate they cannot preach the
Gospel of CHRIST sincerely, which they have not as yet truly Math. 6. 24
known or embraced. Yea let them examine them nearly by this light, Romans ^0.
^4.
^oh. 8. 42. 43. 44.
and see if they find them not those noi^ome egiptia^* botches and grievous
plague sores, which by the just judgment of God are fallen upon the Revel 16. 2.
men that have the mark of the Beast, and upon them which worship his image,
and are never found upon any of the children of God, much less upon the
ministers of CHRIST.

Next let them consider, whether these learned and best reformed preachers (for
unto them still as the most pernicious deceauers I bend my speech, y^ other
being so gross as of themselves they fall to the ground) whether these learned
preachers (I say) do not make merchandise 2 Pe^. 2. 1^. ^ude. 11.
of the word, and open portsale of the Gospel, offering their cu nning, and
selling their tongues like the orators and lawyers of the co mmo^ 1 Thessalonians. 2. ^
wealth, setting a price of the Gospel and compounding for their bellies Phil.
^. 18. 19.
before hand with the gluttons and profane people to whom they Micah. 3. 5. 11.
administer: always ready upon the hearing of a better bargain to remove, as
we have above said of their parsonages, deanries, bishoprics, Ezekiel. 13. 19
and al* other ecclesiastical livings of their Church of England, until they
arrive unto the archbishopric of Canterbury, to be Primate and Metropolitan
of all England. That only office is as their pole star, fixed, and immovable,
unto and by which they direct all their course: And now I leave to your
judgment whether any such Bal^ites and Sinioniaks can truly and sincerely
preach the Gospel.

But all this they will hide and salve with these two allegations: that the
workman is worthy of his hire: and that if they should not thus co^pound, the
people are so vircharitable and covetous, as they should want maintenance for
food, raiment, and books.

To the former yt has already in a peculiar discourse been showed, that the
ministers of the Gospel should neither be maintained with Jewish tithes, nor
Balaams wages, much less bargain and bartre in this manner, and be their own
caruers.

To the other, if the people want that charity as not to administer C^l. 6. ^.
unto such of their earthly things which trea^ out ye corn, yea grind, 1 Cor.
9. 9. 11.
prepare, and divide unto them their food and portion, and administer unto them
spiritual and heavenly things, then are they utterly unworthy Romans 15. 2^
Luke 3. 10. 11.
of the Gospel, then belongs not the Gospel unto them. Then why do they
administer the Gospel and stand heardes to these 1. Ioh. 3. 17.
gadarenes? why cast they their pearls before such swine? why do Mat. 7. 6.
they sell the Gospel and stand ministers, yea prostitute ye body and blood of
Christ for wage, to such open unworthy as have neither faith nor charity?

As for their apparel, yt is either too nice and curious, or else too affec^ed
Zach. 13. 4.
and framed as the rough garment to deceive. Math. 23. 5


For their diet, they are so far from suffering these necessities and
di^tresses, 1 Cor. 4. 1.
that famine, hunger, cold and nakedness, that labor and painfulnes 2 Cor. 6. 4
etc. which the Apostle sustained; as they are rather of those I^d. 12.
feasters the Apostle Jude speaks of, which feed themselves without all fear*

Yea these ^ycophants, these trencher priests will most cunningly Mica. 2. 11.
insinuate into some great or noble ma^s house, where they are sure to be well
fed, and safe from all storms: even the meanest of them will never be without
their good hosts and dames where they may lay their knife aboard, and fill their
belly of the best. Infinite are their ar^es both I^dg. 17. and 18. chap
to get and retain such friends; never were there in any ^ge such priests for
the welthie sort; but as for the poor, these pharise is will have no Ezekiel. 34.
meddling with them further, then whiles they bring their offringes or Mica. 3.
pay their tithes. Sure they will be to have Christ a cook unto them: as for
having him to be their King, ye shall be but by way of inscription in a piece
of paper, or in the pulpit some time: yet even there meddle they as little with*
Christ's offices as may be.

Now for their books (where in deed lies all their learning and cunning,
without which they are as blind as moles, as mute as fishes) yt is no marvel
though they call for them, for therein consiseth ^all their glory: he that can
most learnedly fetch out his sermon ^fro^ ^the^, and preach their notes in
manner of discourse, he is the only man, he hitteth the point aright, though
the text be never touched or broken up. Neither is yt a small matter that will
^urnish one of these learned preachers of books: they will not stick to bestow
more wealth in their study, then many a godly christian and good house keeper
has to maintain his family, and to relieve his neighbors with.

But they edify and build up the Church heerby, which is much more precious
then earthly sustenance. I believe yt well: for upon such sandy foundations is
both their own faith and their whole ^th. 7. 26
Church built, and not upon the sure rock of Christ's Testament: what good and
sound stuff they pick from thence, partly may appear by the discussing of
sundry errors, which eue^ the chief and very best of a^ their writers have
held; partly shall more appear, when we come to Prou. 8. 8.
the examination of their pulpe^ doctrines. Only in this place I set Eze^. 47.
12
down my simple judgment, that yt were much better for the whole ^eu. 22. 2.
Church and themselves also; that for prophecy and doctrine they la^d aside
all authors, and betake them wholly of all hands to the book of God. So should
that book be more soundly understood and opened, every word and leaf of the
tree of life have his due virtue: so should they see with their own eyes and
not with other men's, (...). 8. 8.
speak with their own tongues: etc. so should they and their whole Eze. 47.
12*
auditorie have greater assurance for the things they do or leave undone,
Revel 22. 2.
so should there be many fewer of these blind guides, these traditional
preachers. ^ct. 4. ^9. 20.


Furthermore here is to be observed, how these priests or preachers, Act. 5. 19.
not only take their license to preach at their lords these antichristia Reu.
13. 12. 13. 14.
Bishops hands, and again at their pleasure are deposed and scilenced and
submit their doctrine to their censure, the Gospel to their limitation Reu.
17. 4.
and prescrip^io^, preaching nothing that may breed either ye BBs dislike or
their own unquiet etc: but with their sermons deck up and adorn ezekiel. ^3. 10.
^1.
the whore, heal the wound of the beast, curse, reproach and slander Christ's
most faithful servants, bless Christ's enemies eue^ all the profane ^er. 6.
14. 20.
of the land: Finally they therewith dawbe up all the sin of the land, and
join the Gospel to all the abomination of the time? Hos. 5. 10. 11.


The former part of these has been often showed, and need neither proof nor
repetition; their b^e with their paper license, their o^he Mi^. 6. 26.
o^ canonical obedience, their public injunctions etc. declare.

The other part, their present administration and the lamentable estate Ier. 6.
28. 29. 30.
of the whole land, being through their deceit so deeply set and strongly held
in apostacy, transgression and ignorance, manifests Hos. 4. 1. 2.
without further proof. Let the gross idolatry, miserable servitude Hos. 7.
4. 10.
to the antichristian yoke of these Bishops, the more then Babilonish Ezekiel. 16.
49.
confusion, the Sodomitish pride and excess, the open pe^uerting of judgment
and justice, the through corruption of all estates, the deluge and Hos. 9. 9.
height of sin never heard nor read of the like in any nation or time Amos. 6.
going before, show what Kind of Gospel they preach, or rather how they
preach the Gospel. There is no man so sinful and wretched that will come and
hear their cunning in the pulpit, whom they se^d not away with the peace and
blessing of God. There is no people within Ezekiel. 14. 4. 7. 10.
the compace of the whole land that will fee and feed them well, to whom they
will not at the first sight administer, deliver them the sacraments Ezekiel. 22.
25. 26.
etc: yea, be he never so notoriously wicked, impenitent, unworthy, unto and
with whom they will not communicate. Yea let Ezekiel. 13. 1^
him be welthie, and one that will entertain and countenance the preacher,
Micah. 3. 11.
receive him unto house, and resort to his sermons, what life may Ier. 23. 17.
not this man lead, even before Mr. Preacher his face. What gluttony, Ier. 8.
11. 12. etc.
riot excess, idleness, profannes, pride, what cruelty, oppression, wrong,
covetousness, pleasure, vanity, delight, eue^ al ye apples and ripe authu^ne
fruits their souls can lust after or desire, may they not gather with Revel.
18. 14.
full hand by Mr. Preachers permissio^: yea so they be rich and of authority
Hos. 4. 8. 9. 10.
or noble, then will he help to reach him down the boughs, and prepare them to
his appetite, which way soever his humor stand.

For they are cunning physicians, and will very soon epsy the co^stitution
and inclination of their patientes; which being found, then physic, diet and
al shall be prepared accordingly, which way soever his appetite chiefly tends,
that shall not be crossed I warrant you, but finely fed and nourished. If he be
ambitious, discontented with his present estate, still aspiring, and climing to
fu^ther honor, that is imputed to his virtuous and honorable mind, which no
mean thing can content or suffice; what soever office or many offices he thus
attaineth, they a^ al in him the redward of virtue, ye especial favor and
blessing of God toward him, wherewith God does most highly honor, esteem and
advance him before al other men. Let him execute these offices as Isa. 59. 14.
negligently, nay as unjustly and corruptly, with as great extortio^, wrong,
Mic^h. 3. 3. 12.
violence as apparently as may be, perverting yea selling justice, so that
judgment is turned into gall, and the fruit of righteousness into Am^s. 5. 7*
wormwood; all this gear belongs not to Mr. Preacher to intermedle Hos. 10.
4.
with matters too high for them. If they should reprove these things, yt were
the next way to bring him in dislike with the Gospel and to bring in popery
again; and so should the preachers want countenance: so far are they from
reproving him by name, or their Church from calling these great states to
account for these or any other particular sin, that so they might either be
turned from their Leuit. 19. 17
evil ways by r^pentance, or else receive that public reproof and Leuit. 5. 1.
ecclesiastical censure that belongs to the same, according to the
commandment Ier. 1. 17. 18
and power of our Lord Jesus Christ for the humbling of his Ezekiel. 3.
flesh. Ezekiel. 33. 3.


But sure I ween this case is a Demurrur in the Church of England, ye^
utterly denied to be lawful or sufferable, that the magistrate should be
excommunicate: they therefore in stead hereof, receive them in this estate to
their sermons, prayers, and sacraments, in hope of secret repentance, as they
say: for what though they have used yt al their life and give no outward figne
of amendment, yet repentance may come in the twinkling of an eye.

Well now if these noble or rich men be given to riote and gluttony, ^zek. 13.
18.
with all manner of delicate fare, pampering up the slesh etc. that in 1 Thessalonians. 2. 1. ^. 3. 4. 5. 6.
them is but good houskeeping: if they and their retinew exceed in monstrous
and vain apparel, yt is but raiment fit to their degree, age, or Is^ 3.
sex: If they keep and nourish troops of idle seruingmen and followers, this
still belongs to their degree: if they and their whole household spend al
their life time in fleshly and vain sportes and gaming, so that numbers of men
have no other trade, and be wholly employed to the keeping of hawks and dogs
to serve the lust of these me^: all this is covered Math. 12. 34. 35. 36. 37.
under christian recreation and pastime, and is tolerable enough so he will
hear a sermon, and call his family to a lecture; yea the priest will not then
stick to stay and look on, until the games at tables or set ^ph. 5. 3. 4. 5. 6.
at cards be done; yea or at some odd time, to make their exercise gi^e place
to an interlude. As for their common table talk, they Col. 3. 5. 6.
may there be as profane as Esau, and use there what merrimentes, Ephesians. 4. 29.
scoffs, jesting and vain speech they list; al is in the way of mirth, good
Isa. 5. 8.
fellowship, wrapped up in the cloth, and sanctified with Mr. Preachers Ier. 6.
13.
short grace. As for most insatiable and greedy covetousness in 1. Cor. 6. 10
purchasing and ioining not field unto field, but town unto town, Col. 3. 5.
until they be Lords of a whole country, that is but good hu^bandrie, wise
foresight, and allowable providence for them and their posterity.

Be the sin never so odious and apparent, if yt be in a man of au^horitie,
these prophets these preachers dare not reprove yt, for that were both to
transgress their commission, and forfait their letters pattentes. If these
sins be found upon any of their patrons proselites or hearers, then for love
they must wink at them, and not find faul^* especially if they be any of these
inherent or inbred sins which Heb. 12. ^
cleave close to the soul, and cannot without great strift and dislike unto 1.
Pet. 4. 2.
the flesh, be left. With these sins these Predicantes will not meddle* Ro^.
12. 2
as if they be given to pride, to exhort them to lowlines and humblenes, to
cast away these ornaments which nourish that sin and vvherin Call. 5. 19.
the flesh delights, and to get unto them the jewels of godly knowledge ^
(...). 1. 4. ^ ^.
and Christian virtues to deck and garnish their souls therewith: if they be
given to riot, fleshly lusts* and vanities, spending their time therein, to
council them to redeem the time whiles yt is called to day, to subdue the
flesh and bring yt into obedience and mortify the lusts thereof, showing them*
the end of such pleasures and delights to be bitterness and death etc. If they
be given to covetous hoording up treasures, purchasing lands, building
sumptuous houses and garnishing them etc. Prou. 1^. 4.
to show them that the covetous shall not enter into the kingdom of Luke 12.
17.
God, that these uncertain riches can neither help them, nor establish 1 Timothy
6. 17. 18. 19.
their posterity, no not in this world, God having so many means to take
their wealth from them and them from their wealth in the twinkling Luke. 16. 9.
10.
of an eye, much less make them the more acceptable unto God: showing them
that they are but the Lords stewards and bayliues of Ia^es. 5. 1.
them, and shall account unto him for the use of every farthing: and Mat. 25.
14* etc.
therefore yt behooves them to be careful that they bestow them according to
their Mr. his will, otherwise the mispe^ce or miskeeping of them shall fret their
soul, and rise up in judgment against them: yea eue^ in this life they shall be
but snares to them and their posterity, to bring and hale them to more sure
damnation etc. Fie these were too sour and unpleasant Luke 22. 34 35.
doctrines, especially when they come to be put in practice in all Psalm. 69.
(...)
these duties of the second Table; I doubt me much, that if they should but
once sincerely and faithfully deal with any one text, the saying would be so
hard as they should loose numbers of their disciples, if not the whole
multitude of their hearers: and I doubt me, not be half so welcome to their
gl^ttons houses as they are at this day.

But now for such sins as either these chief of their auditorie are not
apparently infected with, or else ca^ ^ndure to be weaned of (for this you must
always note, to their appetite must the whole feast be prepared) for such
sins let their preachers alone, they will rowze and handle them to the quick.
As if they whom they seek to please be rath^r given to prodigality,
profusion, inordinate wasting in excess, pride, vanity: o so they will then
be bait the covetous scraping drudges out of the Church: And so of the
contrary, where the chief of their auditory are more parcimonious and
covetous; the^ will they as much c^y out of wast, excess, riot in apparel, diet
etc. the^ may not a great ruff look into the Church, least they will do
penance that were yt.

Generally else, where they light on gentle and tractable souls, which in deed
bear a love to the truth and unto such as most sincerely teach yt: here will
they first by their utmost art seek to bring themselves into credit and
estimation: for here will they take bouldnes to speak (though colourably and
but in faint and doubtful terms) against many corruptions in their Church, as
the dumb mini^trye, Cross in baptis^e, versing and canting their psalms and
anthems from one to an other as ten^isballs, against the organs, cappe, tippet,
surplesse and such like: They will also put on such an outside of gravity and a
good conscience, they will rebuke swearing, and before such as these dislike of
vain apparel* peradventure also of idle gaming, exhort to diligent hearing of
the word preached, making the poor souls believe that even by this outward
hearing they are in a straight course and ready way to salvation, though they
neither practice that little truth they hear, neither understand the word, or
be able to know thereby when they do well or 2 Timothy 3. 6. 7
evil: yet into such a superstitious fear are they brought, and such a ^al. 6.
4.
Hub. 5. 12.
conceit and opinion of these men's sincerity, great knowledge and good
conscience, that they even depend on their mouths, believe all true that they
say, without question or trial thereof by the word of God, neither dare they
believe the express scriptures when they are brought to reprove their doings:
In such reverence and estimation have they these good men. Whose counterfeit and
corrupt dealing as you have somewhat heard yt in the second Table; so if you now
but turn your eye a little to the first Table, you shall see they deal much
worse in the worship and service of God.

For stand not they ministers to all this abominable stuff that has been
above recited? It is the very proper ministration belonging and inioined to
their ministry, unto which by office and oath they stand bound, and not unto
preaching of the word of God; for that is a thing voluntary, supererogatorie:
but this is a thing of necessity, by law, by oath, by presentment, by
visitation inioined and seen to be observed, yt must always go before, and
take the preeminence of the word of God. And if the word of God happen to
follow yt (by your leave) yt may not be so bold as controwle yt, for if yt
do, I know who goes out of doors. And mark the precisest* and best of your
preachers well, you shall see they will meddle with yt as little as may be: Or
if they do at any time, yt shall be but rather to prune or lop some water
boughs that are superfluous, of a tender care to preserve and pollish yt, and
not to lay the axe to the root and bulk off the tree. For I tell you if yt
fall, down goes ministry, sacraments, Church and altogether: and o what a
fall would that be. It stands them upon therefore to take heed how they deal
with this gear, least they open such a gap as they be never able to shut with
all the learning they want. No marvel therefore, 2 Cor. 2. 17. and 4. 1. 2. 3.
though they deal daintily in ambiguous and doubtful terms with such
counterfeit stuff; for if they should bring yt either to the touchstone Ephesians.
5. 13.
or to the light, yt would at the first blush bewray yt self. In the mean time
what good preaching is this of theirs, that have had the Gospel thus long
amongst them daily taught and preached, and have not in 32 years space as yet
discovered this abominable odious idolatry, most gross and stinking popery.
Must you not needs now condemn these your preachers, either of ignorance or
perfidy? of ignorance Mat. 5. 13. 14.
if they know or see not these abominations: yet you see they dare adventure
both to practice and administer this stuff unto others, Romans 2. ^7. 18. 19.
20. 21. 22. 23. 24.
yea to reproach, slander, and revile all such as of conscience unto God refuse
to partake with them, and receive at their hands this trumperie.

Now then if they be thus blind as they cannot discern these things how dare
you any longer follow or use the^ for guides? If the blind lead Math. 15. 14
the blind shall not both fall into the ditch? but if they say they see, how
heinous then is their sin, how great their perfidy and treachery unto 2 Cor.
6. 14
God and man? unto God, both in that they thus presumptuously of set 15. Ioh.
8. 12
purpose with most high contempt, violate his laws and tread under 1 Ioh. 1.
5. 6.
foot his Testament, and also abuse his most sacred word in joining yt Izek.
13. 11.
to such abhominatio^s; yea not only not discover and cast out these idolatries
and filthy doung therewith, but in stead thereof daube and soder up Iere. 23. 9.
all the ryftes and leakes therewith. It is most certain that the word of 2
Cor. 10. 4. 5. 6.
God in the mouths of all his true ministers and servants, is as fire and an
hammer: as fire, to consume all stubble and trash; as an hammer, to break in
sunder whatsoever opposes yt self against the truth of Gods word. It is
manifest therefore, that they preach their own devises, and not the word of God
sincerely: for the Ark of God and DAGON cannot stand up together, such light
and such darkness cannot be mixed. Again, if they had stood in the council of
the Lord and had declared his word unto his people, they should have turned
them from their evil ways, and from the wickedness of their inventions. But
they have fortified and sodered the people therewith in all these sins and
abominations, giving them their peace, and blessing, and pardon every day
they come to Church, so that none can depart from iniquity: Therefore the
greater is their treason to God and man, in drawing the^ into the high
transgression of Gods laws, and in keeping them in the wrath of God.

Now who is so desperate, as knowing the perfidy and treachery of these
miserable guides both toward God and man, that would hazard and commit his
soul and body to the conduct of such blind and deceitful guydes, as either
cannot or will not lead them right? who (...). 33*
would commit the City to such blind watch me^, as either cannot discern 1
Cor. 14. 8^.
the enemy; or unto such treacherous watchmen, as will not blow the trumpet and
give warning unto all men to be in a readiness; but on the contrary are in
compact with the enemy, hane betrayed the whole Church into their hands,
yielded unto them absolute authority, taken their laws, their peace, their
mark, and stand now the sworn waged ma^ked sould^ors of Antichrist, guarding
his very throne and person, setting up and burning ince^se to his image,
gylding the harlot the Revel. 13. 13* 14. Reu. 17. 4. and 18. ^2* 13. Ezekiel. 16.
16. 17. 18. 19. Prau. ^. 14. 15.
false Church, and araying her with all the titles and ornaments, eue^ the
gold, silver, precious stones, pearls, fine linen, purple, scarlet etc. that
belong to the true tabernacle: In her do they offer the meat, flower, wine,
oil, honey that God has given: In her burn they their frankincense and
sweetest perfumes: In her they prepare a feast and furnish a Table to the
multitudes.

These are her chamberlaines her tapsters, that stand at the door of her
house, of every high place in the land, and inuit and toule in their guests,
which flow in unto them at the sownd of their bell. These call and allure such
as pass by their way and go right on their way, to take a bay^e at their i^ne,
promising their peace offerings, wisdom and great cheer, and very great and
good company of the noble, the rich, the learned; who will all be ready upon
the first blush of fair weather, as soon as ever yt holds up over head and
these storms and clouds are blown Eccle. 11. 4.
away, to go with them on that iournay whether they are travailing, for Prou.
15. 19 and 22. 5.
thither also are they bent; and as soon as ever God shall incline the Princes
heart, then they will al forsake Antichrist and go unto CHRIST. Prou. 23. 13.
In the mean time they have all with one consent determined* not to guide
forward one step.

Also these that go before them in the way, and will not stay for this good
company; ^uch they say mar all their course, and hinder the Amos 5. 10
discipline they seek. And therefore they assay by all means to turn Isa. 59.
15.
them out of their way: which if yt will not be, then they denounce and Exodus
14. 5.
proclaim them as most bitter enemies Brownestes, Schismatikes, proud and
ignorant persons, disobedient to Magistrates; whom they in their pulpets stir
up, to send out their horsemen and chariors after them, to bring them by force
back again into EGYPT, and to hold their bodies in moist noisome, vile and
straight prisons, except they will come to these fowlers, unto their high
places.

For these good men would not have CHRIST brought in in y^ base Math. 2. 2. 3.
etc.
manner by faith and repentance, leaving all such things as are contrari^ to
his will, and seeking to do the things that he has commanded Math. 18. 3.
whosoever say nay to yt, and whatsoever yt cost, whether imprisonment, Mat.
10. 37. 38. 39.
confiscation or death, bearing his cross in all patient, meek and humble
manner, with cheerfulnes and joy. Fie, this is al too base, they Luke 17. 20
would bring him in with sownd of trumpet by an army and strength, Isa. 42. 2.
by act of parliament, by consent of all estates of the realm, Prince, Nobles,
Zacb. 9. 9.
Priests and people, and that into these famous synagogues and high Math. 21.
9. ^5.
places, gorgeously decked for his majesty; and not in this abject manner to
run to him into upper chambers, hooles in woods, prisons etc. and that a few
poor d^spised unlearned wretches, and that not with the Magistrates leave and
good will etc.

Thus see you how far these guides are from leading you forward in ^eb. 611.
the straight ways of the Lord, that with this their preaching they keep you
and bring you backward: you see how far these watchmen are from ^sa. 56. 10. 11.
ringing the alarm, and sounding the trumpet against the enemy, against any
sin in any person, against Antichrist. As you see, they promise peace and
blessing to the most wicked, and dare not give warning of or denounce against
any si^n either in the state (I mean common wealth) or Church or any great
person in the same, be the sin neu^r so heinous against the first or second
Table; but rather dawbe up all these abominations and all the land in their
sin, keeping and houlding them ^herin bownd as in chains and fetters, unto
the Lords fearful judgment: yea by these their sermons, keeping all the people
in ignorance, unfurnished of their christian armor and weapons: Neither in
deed need they any; for you see in the happy realm of England, there are no
enemies, ex^ept Satan draw me^ to the^t, or murder, or treason. If they can
keep themselves from these faults, or keep them secret, why then al is well,
there are no other faults or enemies, Satan has no instruments and dare not
stir in this estate under a Christian Prince, where there is such preaching of
the Gospel etc. you see how these your learned preachers your good men, have
not with all their sermons and preaching withdrawn one soul all this while
from the false Church, or the abominable idolatries therein? but on the
contrary, administer in the false Church, dawbing her up and retaining al
their auditorie in her, hindering and drawing back by their uttermost arts and
endeavors, all that seek to walk in the straight and peaceable ways of the
Lord. These, with the infinite enormities that ensue heerof, were enough to
dis^ouer unto you what manner of ministers these are, and ministry they
exercise, and how they prcach the Gospel.

But yet I must ad this unto ye rest; how with all this their preaching, 1.
Pe^. 2. 2.
they have not all this while given any increase to ye body, not leading Heb.
6. 1.
their hearers one step toward perf^ction: but as they stood 30 years Is^.
48. 17.
ago, in the self same estate are they still, in the same confusion,
idolatry, disorder in their synagogues, as appears by their present estate.
And as for other knowledge of God or his word they have none touching the second
table, as ye innumerable multitudes of their suits, wrongs, complaints, in all
their courts of plea declare, which never were so fraught, not even under the
most gross popery, as they are under this light of their Gospel, all these
being members of their Church. Neither is it possible that such idolaters as
both priests and people are, should have any sound knowledge or judgment of
Gods word and truth: for they that know not God aright, how should they know
his word aright. Now the Apostle teaches us, and our common Isa. 41. 18. 19.
20.
sense confirms, that yt is unsound milk that gives no increase to the
body in 30 years space, we have to suspect such milk to be unwholesome I trow:
neither would any of us (in whom is any wit or love) put out our children to
such nourses, much less their souls.

But they use to stop the mouths of their auditorie that should so say or
enter into such discourse with them, that if they have not gotten knowledge and
profited in sanctification by their preaching, then are they all without faith,
and so in a woeful case, in no estate of salvation, bidding them prove and
examine themselves, if Christ be not in them then are they reprobates. etc.

This argument so terrifieth the poor souls consciences that neither 2. Cor.
13. 5.
have knowledge to examine their ways by Gods word whether they lead unto life
or unto death, neither have ever seen or been taught any better course then
that they are in; to which if you add that general verbal knowledge of Christ,
and some f^w other doctrin^s touching faith and manners, somewhat more pure then
the doctrine of the papists, vvherin they have found comfort, yea and finding
their consciences pricked and convinced of some sins they have (...) in their
sermons, have endeavored through the grace of God to leave them, and at*length
gorte^ victory over them etc. This knowledge, comfor^, remorse, so works with
these poor souls, that they hold the ministers of these things in such
veneration, as they are ready with the people of Lystra to sacrifice unto them:
not knowing in deed the effectual working of Satan's delusions, with what show
of 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. 10.
light and truth, with what power, signs, and lying wonders he shall deceive
such as have not received ^he love of the truth. They know not that the false
Church shall have her religion and worship also, her ministers and preachers of
the Gospel of Christ etc. and yt these ministers shall transform themselves as
though they were ministers of righteousness, Mark. 13. 5. 6. 21. 22. 23
and shall deceive many with their false Christ's and Gospels that they preach
in these latter days, vvherof our Savior Christ and his Apostles have warned
us, why the false Church could not have these things without some general
knowledge, which general knowledge shall reprove such things as are contrary
to the same: and yt being spiritual, yt shall also have spiritual effects, as
to move joy or sorrow. This the preaching in the popish Church also effects,
who has taught your preachers this argument, and has as good right to use yt
toward them, as they unto you or unto us. But can this knowledge which you get
by them, justify your ways, your Church, ministry, worship? etc. if not,
seeing they are so directly against ye word of God, what booteth this knowledge
to eternal life: Balaam with all the false prophets had, and the devils have
this faith and knowledge in as great ^ames. 2. 19
measure as the learned of these ministers; yet the one is damned, the others
tremble.

As for the comfort received by their preaching, yt having no promise of
blessing in the word of God (your Church and whole ministry being accursed)
is rather a fearful sign of the effectual working of their delusions, the^
any reason whereby you may assure your s^lues, or justify the^ in their ungodly
proceedings, whom the word of God in all their works condemns. Look not to
gather grapes of thorns or figs of thistles, or any good fruits of such evil
trees as are not of our heavenly fathers planting, and therefore shall be plucked
up by the roots. You see they have stood teaching you day unto day, line upon
line line upon line, here a little and there a little, yet have never brought
Isa. 28. 13.
you to a clear sight and acknowledging of the truth. You see they lead Prou.
2. 15. etc.
you in the crooked paths of death, they teach and stand ministers in the
false Church, of whose ministry in this estate is no comfort but assured
destruction to be looked for, they being sent of God in his wrath to deceive
the children of death, the reprobate. You see they are like those inchanters
that resisted Moses, who do all their miracles both in Egypt and Babylon etc.
to deteine the people in Egip^ and Babylon. They have all gone out of the way,
they have been made altogether unprofitable, there is none that does good no
not one, their throat is an open sepulcher, they have used their tongues to
deceit, the poison of aspes is under their lips; whose mouth is full of cursing
and bitterness their feet are swift to shed blood, destruction and calamitye is
in their ways, and the way of peace they have not known, the fear of God is
not before their eyes. How then should they profit this people or guide them
right, when they themselves know not the right way.

But here they will straight be upon me with this question: where I had my
faith and understanding of the right course, if not from them and their
preaching? there being no other means left in the land to beget faith, then
their ordinary preaching in this ministry, this church which we now forsake.
The vanity of this argument I have even now showed, and how thereby much
rather the Church and ministry of Rome with all the abominations therein
might be justified, seeing they were much more catholic and universal then
these. But to their question I answer; that God never leaves himself without
faithful and true witnesses, which abhor iniquity, teach and practice the
truth so far as yt is revealed unto them; which no doubt instruct many Dan.
12. 3^
and turn them from their evil ways. Further we have the holy Reu. 5. 6. 7^
word of God, and the Lamb has obtained to open the seals thereof, Ioh. 14.
26.
who has given us his Spirit to guide us into all truth, and bring all things
to our remembrance that he has taught us. God is not tied to Math. 11. (...)
the lips of these phariseis: yea his glory is to hide these things from
John. 3. 8^
the proud and prudent, and to reveal them to babes and sucklings. The wind
blows where yt lists etc. Faith is the only gift of God, who never wants
means to publish his truth, and to save his elect. These popish priests that
stand ministers after a false and counterfeit order, even after the order of
Antichrist not of CHRIST and the order of his Testament, that stand ministers
of idolatry unto idolaters, that hate to be reformed or reproved, have naught
to do to take God holy word in their mouths: But if they were as true and
famous ministers Gal. 1. 8.
as ever spoke upon the earth, yet, if they should exercise such a 2 Io^. 10.
ministry as they do in those places, after that idolatrous and corrupt Phil.
3. 17.
manner, to all the profane and wicked: If they had all the gifts of al 1 Cor.
11. 3^
Exodus 23. 2.
men and Angels; yet were they to be holden accursed, to be left, and Heb. 10.
3^
not to be received to house etc. we are to follow the Apostles no further then
they walk with CHRIST, no nor the whole church any further, then they observe
the rules of the word: we are not to err or be drawn into transgression with
a multitude or by the mighty. They break the communion that break the faith,
they break the faith which transgress the word. But if these men should know
the right course (which in deed I cannot believe, because the scripture
speaks evidently, that God will blind their eyes and bow down their backs
etc.) O how high then were their sins which forsake the ways of life, and
have in the presumption of their own heart sought Ioh. 9. 4^. and 15. 22.
out unto themselves bye ways, and lead the people astray? with how many
stripes are they worthy to be beaten?

Thus you see how this Gospel they te^ch you is taught in a strang^ and false
ministry in the false Church; is joined to the throne of the beast of
antichrist; is joined unto all the abhominatio^ and abominable of the land; is
taught by prescription, limitation and stint according to the Bishops
injunctions, decrees and traditions; unto which yt is, together with the whole
church both ministers and people, in bondage. You see how yt has neither light
nor power in yt to discover and cast out these most gross and damnable
idolatries, how yt utterly wants practice in this false Church, where (say
CHRIST what he will) all must be after the pleasure of Antichrist. You see how
thereby the body has not been edified or led forth any one step toward
perfection, but rather (as by Satan's most strong delusio^s) have been held
thereby in this egiptian bondage and babilonish confusion under Antichrist. You
see the ministers of these wares, of what liuerie they are; how they are the
marked waged servants of Antichrist, the merchantmen of the who^e to carry
abroad her abominable wares.

Now remains, that I discover unto you some of the gall, wherewith Isa. 19.
14. 15.
their honey is mixed; some of the leaven, wherewith your milk is poisoned; that
you may see how the Lord in judgment has mingled amongst them the Spirit of
error, and given them up to the Spirit of pride and fornication, and caused
them to err in all their ways, and made night unto them for a vision, and
darkness for a divination; how the sun is Micah. 3. 6. Isa. 59. 8 10.
gone down over your Prophets, and the day made dark over them.

Now that this may the sooner be brought to pass, let me very briefly show
you: first what manner of CHRIST they teach you; then some few of the chief
heads of the infinite errors they teach. And this the rather, because they say
they hold the foundation, and that there is nothing wanting amongst them but
matters of less moment and of no necessity, making some doctrines and some
part of CHRIST'S Testament fundamental and substantial, others accidental and
such as may be altered and violate without any prejudice or danger to the
soul: Yea such may the transgressions and errors be, as though they be
obstinatly continued in, and openly taught after they be reproved and convinced
by the word of God, yea and the parties die in that estate without repentance
of these transgressions or errors; yet may they hold the foundation, and be
undoubtedly saved. Of this mind were and still continue five of the very
principal and best esteemed ministers of England, both for learning and
conscience: although there were alleged against the same these express
scriptures Numb. 15. 30. 31. where yt is written that That soul that does any
thing with an outstretched or high hand, whether he be borne in the land or a
stranger, the same blaspheme^h the Lord: therefore that person shall be cut off
from amongst his people, because he has despised the word of the Lord and made
his commandment of none effect, that person shall be utterly cut off, his
iniquit^e shall be upon him. Exodus 23. 21. 1 Samuel 15. 22. 23. Ezekiel. 18. 26.
where the Prophet concludes, that when a righteous man turns away from his
righteousness and commits iniquity, and dies therein, he shall die for his
iniquity that he has done. Likewise also our Savior CHRIST Math. 5. 1^. 19.
teaches, that one jot or title of his word shall not pass, and that
whosoever shall break one of the least of his commandments and teach me^ so,
shall be called least in the kingdom of heaven. And the Apostle ^ames 2. 10.
teaches, that whosoever shall keep the whole law yet fails in one, becomes
guilty of all. And how plentiful is the Apostle Paul in this point; that whosoever
teaches otherwise, and yeildeth not to the wholesome words of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, such are of corrupt
minds, destitute of truth etc. to be separated 1 Timothy 6. 3. 4. 5. to be
avoided Romans 16. 17. to be rejected Titus 3. 10. As for offenses and
transgressions of the word, we have a perpetual rule Math. 18. 17. 2 These. 3.
14 If he transgress he is to be admonished, reproved, Phil. 3. 15.
censured: If he err of ignorance, he is to be instructed with Romans 14.
meeknes, until God re^eale the truth also unto him. But if he not only err,
but affirm and teach his error, whereby others are or may be infected; yt is
time to look to that GANGRENE, least yt fret further; yt 2 Timothy 2. 17.
is time to purge out such leaue^, least yt make sour the whole lump. Gal. 5.
9.


But to hold as these men do, and as they are driven to do when they plead
for their whorish Church and antichristian ministry, is not only to go
expressly contrary to the whole scope of scriptures; to infringe and violate
all Gods laws and covenant; to hold (as in deed they teach) CHRIST a Savior
without repentance; to make some part of the scripture more holy, more
authentical, more true then other: in sum, to submit the holy scriptures and
Testament of CHRIST to the will and lust of man; to ratify or abrogate them at
his pleasure; to make this part of substance, that of form, this fundamental,
that accidental, this necessary to salvation, that needles etc. But if the
whole scripture 2 Timothy 3. 16.
was given by inspiratio^ of God, and is profitable to teach, to convince,
Prou. 30. 5.
to correct, to instruct in righteousness: If yt be the groundworke Psalm. 19. 8.
and 12. 6.
and foundation of the Church, of our faith: if yt be the law and rule of our
life, the light of our eyes etc: if e^erie word of God be holy, pure, Psalm.
119. ^ntire
perpetual; then is this di^p learning of theirs devilish and blasphemous;
that thus to couller and cover their wickedness, make some part Ephe. 2. 2^
of Gods word fundamental, substancial, necessary, other accidental,
superficial, needles; especially where yt shows, reproves, and condemns
their doings; yea which make some sins openly and manifestly convinced, yet
ohstinatly continued and persisted in, without any repentance in this life, for
all this, not to be mortal or deadly, as the papists say and hold. Yet
nevertheless will these men be said to hold the foundation to salvation,
notwithstanding that they disfranchise and reject a great part of CHRIST
Testament, and hold yt not as fundamental and necessary, and make neither
conscience nor care to transgress the same, and to bring in other laws into
the Church in stead thereof: yea upon that part which they would seem to
retain, they build all this stubble, trumperie, and abominations which have
been recited from the beginning of this treatise. To conclude, though they
remain presumptuously obstinate in all these horrible transgression^, if by
any this their shameless ass^rtion (namely that they hold the foundation to
salvation) be with never so plain proof of scripture denied, and they lovingly
admonished and exhorted; against such they when their viperous tongues, and
power out all the venom of their railings, reproaches, slanders, and most
shameless lies (whereof their own festered consciences accuse them) in their
pulpyts and privy meetings, machinating and devising against them as against
open professed enemies, and all because they reprove them of their counterfeit
walking, which they cannot nor dare not in any Christian and peaceable manner
enterprise by the word of God to approve and justify.

But as you have heard how they generally use and esteem y^ word of God, so
let me briefly show you what kind of CHRIST they preach you. Generally and
verbally they hold and confess him in both his natures very God and very
man, to the word of their redemtio^ and salvation as the papists also do,
though somewhat diversely, stumbling and contending rather about words then
about any material difference when they are pressed. For CHRIST they will
consesse their only redeemer, and fully and sufficiently to have wrought their
salvation, though by and by stumbling at the phrase of some scriptures, they
will join unto him their own beggerie works and merits etc. Both of them
generally and verbally confess CHRIST in his 3 offices viz. to be their only
King, Priest, and Prophet: but when yt comes to the practice and obedience,
then they both with one consent send an embaslage after him saying, that we will
not have this man to reign ou^r us; Cause the holy one of Israel to cease from
us, let us break his bands and cast his cords from us; this is the heir,
come let us kill him, and let us take his inheritance etc.

I know our english priests will have many fine floorishes to hide this
treachery: as that they acknowledge him their only Priest and Mediator, to have
with that one oblation of his own precious body once offered, fully satisfied
the justice and appeased the wrath of his Father. Yea they acknowledge him to be
the very first fruits, and sanctifier of the whole heap, clothing all his
with his righteousness, and that he is entered into the heavens into the v^rie
throne of God, and there offreth up the prayers and makes intercession for all
them. Likewise, that he is heir and King over al both me^ and Ang^ls, that he
has in this his (or rather our flesh) vanquished al our enemies, Satan, sin,
death and hell, and triumphed over them in that his cross; that he is ascended
up on high and sits at the right hand of God, from whence he shall come to
judge the quick and ye dead. And for his proph^cie, yt he is the end of al
prophecies to whom they were directed, the fulness and fountain of al wisdom
whom we ought to hear; and how by that his heavenly word he begets us to
life everlasting etc.

These and many other comfortable and true doctrines they can and do deliver
touching the offices of CHRIST; but all these you must understand, and I pray
you observe well (for so shall you clearly epsy their error and deceit) are
still but what CHRIST has done in his own person for Psalm. 45.
his elect: here is not one word spoken what he does in his elect: how Isa. 9.
7.
he teaches, sanctifies and rules them by the scepter of his word, how Isa.
33. 22.
he is a King, Priest, and Prophet here on earth, and exercises the offices
Deuteronomy. 18.
here in his Church amongst his servants the Saints: how he is their Hebr.
entire
pastor, their teacher, their King; how he feeds and reigns in SION, Exodus
19. 6.
yea and makes all his children kings, priests, and prophets. Re^. 1. 6.


Kings, in yt he has given them his word into their hearts and mouths, whereby
as with a sharp two edged sword they cut off sin, and fight against Heb. 4. 12.
al errors; whereby they reign over their own affections, subdue yt flesh, 1
Cor. 10. 4 5. 6.
cast down every imagination that is exalted against the knowledge of God, and
bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ; whereby they
impartially censure, judge and cast out al manner of sin as yt Math. 18. 17
arises and apeareth amongst them, binding their rulers in chains and Psalm.
149.
their nobles in fetters of iron, executing upon them the judgments that Isa.
54. 17.
are written; yea thereby condemning every weapon and tongue that shall arise in
judgment against the truth: This is the heritage of the Lords servants, this
honor shall be to al his Saints. Priests he makes them, 1 Pet. 2. 5.
in yt he annointeth them with his own holy spirit, whereby they both Romans 12.
^.
offer up their prayers and praises through him unto God, and their own Psalm.
141. 2.
bodies and souls as living sacrifices unto him daily; which is their
reasonable serving of God. Prophets he makes them, in that he reuealeth his
truth unto them, and commands them to witness yt and spread yt forth in all
places to his glory.

One word of these heavenly effects in and amongst them of their duty, Luke
19. 27.
obedience, love, and faithfulness they owe and ought again on their Isa. 60.
12.
parts to perform unto him, they all this while show not; and how without Psalm.
2.
this there is no comfort or benefit to be expected or received by Revel 19. 15
Christ; without this faith, love, and obedience, none can have him a King unto
the^ to rule and defend them, none can have him a Prophet to teach and
instruct them, none ca^ have him a priest to sanctify and bless them, none
can have him a Savior. But al they that either acknowledge not the Lord Jesus
Christ, or obey not unto his eternal Gospel, but withhold 2 These. 1. 8. 9.
the truth in unrighteousness, shall be punished with everlasting perdition from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power, when he shall come
to be glorified in his saints, and to be made marvelous in all them that
believe. But alas, how is yt possible y^ they should know or see this beauty
of ye King in Sion, whiles they remain in Babylon? how is yt possible that
they should teach this submission and obedience unto Christ Jesus, when they
themselves remain the bondseruants and sworn soldiers of Antichrist in such
manner as has been rehearsed.

How then in this estate should they stand the faithful ministers of 2 Cor. 6.
25.
Christ, or preach him sincerely? Can there be any accord betwixt Christ Mal.
1. 6.
and Antichrist? can they both reign together in one Church? or these Isa. 1.
2. 3. 4
men stand ministers unto both at one time. If Christ be their King ezekiel. 34. 14
where is then his honor, where is his obedience? CHRIST reigns Zach. 11. 7.
over none but his own servants, and them he rules by the scepte^ of his
holy word: but here with them his scepter is wrested ou^ of his hand, and a
Scepter of reed given him, the canons of the pope, the Bishops injunctions, and
decrees of the high commission, by which your Church is wholly o^erruled, unto
which your king Christ Exodus 23. 21
himself whiles he is amongst you must be subject, or else there is no place
Ioh. 14. 21.
for him. CHRIST gives laws unto his servants, and orders al things 1 Cor.
^. 16.
in his Church according to his own will: but you give laws to your Ioh. 17.
8.
CHRIST and set strange ordinances over his Church; yea you have not Mat. 18. 20
any one thing there either in order or administration, according to his Ioh.
8. 32. 36. Romans 8. 15. 1 Cor. 5.
Testament. Again, CHRIST has given full power and liberty to all and every
one of his servants, to put in p^actise whatsoever he commands, Math. 18.
as also to reform, to reprove, censure and cast out whatsoever is Ioh. 20.
found to be contrary and repugnant unto his word, though all the powers in the
earth or in hell withstand yt. But the CHRIST these men preach 1 Cor. 4. 20
you, is utterly without power to put any thing of his own will in practice, 2 Timothy 3. 5.
but is sold as a bondslaue to these antichristian Bishops and preachers, his
enemies. He cannot by virtue of his own word and authority redress any
thing, be yt never so heinous or enormous: neither can he establish or bring in
any thing that is wanting, be yt never so necessary and important, without
humble suit and attendance unto the high Court of parliament, or upon the high
Court of commission. If they reject his suit, though yt be by 30 ye^es
together, and that in these two reasonable requests; that they would remove
their heinous and blasphemous idolatries from before his face, and give him
leave to rule them by his own offic^rs and laws: yet must this poor CHRIST
with all his servants, even the whole Church still surcease the practice of the
Gospel, and continue under these abominations; yea (if he anger his Lords the
Bishops much) he shall be whipped with scorpions, with new rods; and this by the
universal consent of all his learned preachers in the la^d, who are at a full
point and have set yt down as a resolute decree, not to stir a foot forward
until they have the princes power and the consent of parliament. Then they will
bring him in with horsemen and charets, with belles and bonefires. How like you
this your worthy King? trow you that ever PILATE araied him worse when they
clad him in purple, put a scepter of a r^d in his hand, a crown of thorns
upon his head, bowed the knee before him and hailed him a King, yea wrytt him
one in three languages Hebrew, Greek and (...): or the chief priests and
phariseis, when they b^indfolded him, buff^d and scourged him, spatt in his
face and blasphemed him? or the people that with one consent demanded him unto
the death, preferred the seditious murderer BARRABAS before him, haled him to
the cross, despighted and reviled him upon the cross. A King he is without
power, a King without laws, a King without officers, a King without subjects,
yea a slave he is made to every slave. He has strange officers, strange
laws that he is not acquainted with set over him and imposed upon him whether
he will or ^o, which not only rule his heritage but ouerrule him after their
own lusts. He is fashoned to the commonwealth, and not the common wealth unto
him: and in the Church he is but an idol king an idol Christ, and has not
there so much honor given him, as the players do unto their kings upon the
stage.

And as for the priestly office he should execute amongst the^, therein they
abuse him yet worse: for a new ministry they erect in stead of his: parsons
or mercenarie rouing preachers, in stead of Pastors and faithful Teachers. As
for the other rabble that serve in stead of Elders with their multitudes of
attendants, as also their other inferior new found officers, would fill a
book but to describe the^ and their offices. Thus make they him a minister
after an other order the^ that which he has set down in his Testament, then
that whereunto he was anointed of his Father, and that with an oath, and that
for ever. They impose also upon him a new ministration and strange worship more
displeasing unto God then Nadabs fire, the^ Vzzahs altar, even all that
idolatrous book of that common service, which he must (will he nil he)
administer in manner and form abouesaid. Thus make they him a minifter Psalm.
110. 4
of al their idolatries and abomination; by him they offer up unto Heb. 7.
God all this their will worship, popery and superstition: Moreover they Gal.
3. 15.
make him a mediator of an other Testament then that of his own, Heb. 9. 17.
binding him to this english mass book and to all the injunctions of the BBs.
the high commission and convocatio^ house. Finally they make him a priest, a
mediator, a savior to all the profane atheistes, idolators, miscreantes and
wicked persons, coniurers, witches, heretics and who not; al being received
into the bozome of their Church, whom^ they bless in his name with his peace,
to whom for money they sell and deliver their sacraments: and thus by all these
ways they most impiously deny, and sacrilegiously defile y^ holy priesthood of
Christ. What kind of prophecy he exercises amongst them, may appear by that
which is already said. They make him tak^ upon him the ministry of
Antichrist, even that the Pope left in the Land: they will not suffer nor
receive his ministry. which he has in his Testament appointed for his Church.
They set laws not only over him in this ministry they apoint him, but also
over the Gospel yt self, both by aportionating how much of his word shall be
read, in what oder and time etc. And this order being through the year and
permanent, they thereby abrogate no small part of the Bible, and take yt clean
away from the Church, in that by their law they apoint what shall be read for
ever, casting the rest quite out of the Church, allowing yt no time or place to
be publicly read. They bring in also in stead thereof diverse apocrypha Deuteronomy. 4.
2. and. 12. 32.
writings, and read them in their Church in the place of canonical Prou. 30. 6
scriptures. They read also as part of their public ministry Reave. 22. 18
of their Church not only their abominable service book, but the blasphemous
injunctions of their Bishops, and are not ashamed to preach and publicly to
expound in the Church their fond Apocripha Cat^chismes. To conclude they
mussell and bridle up their Christ's mouth by public law and power, forbidding
him to teach any thing contrary unto, or to find fault with any thing by
public authority established or to be established, swearing him daily to
execute their iniunctio^s; thus ioining the Gospel to all the idolatry,
abhominatio^, blasphemy, and as you see, to all the sin, iniquity and
mischief of the land, whereby they make Christ a false prophet, an idolater, a
blasphemer, and guilty yea a ringleader to all this ill.

Thus you see what kind of Christ they teach you, without power, holiness,
truth: what kind of Gospel without freedom, without practice, without light.
You see how they subject Church, Gospel and Christ to the apostaticall chair
of Antichrist, making Christ both a minister to al their abominations, and to
justify and daw be them up with the Gospel. Infinite were the labor to
reckon up all the forgeries they build upon this foundation, this Christ, this
Gospel; or to show how these wretches munge, corrupt, pervert, wrast, falsify
and abuse ye scripturs, how they roile, yea poison the pure fountains; or to
recite the sundry (...). 34. ^8. 19.
errors they heerby fall into. For whiles they thus blasphemously 2. Cor. 2. 17
^ 4. 2.
deny in deed and practice the whole anointing of Christ, namely his three
offices, his kingdom, priesthood, and prophecy; standing Gal. 1. 7.
the sworn waged marked servants of that adversary that Antichrist 2. Pet. 3.
16
that beast, these Bishops, deriuing their forged false ministry from Ioh. 5.
23.
them, prophecijng by their license and limitation etc: thereby they fla^ly 2.
Pet. 2. 1.
deny the kingdom, Priesthood, and prophecy of Christ: for two Mat. 6. 24.
contrary Masters they cannot obey, they cannot be subject both to Deuteronomy. 18.
2^.
Christ and Antichrist: two diverse and contrary ministeries they cannot
execute, the ministry of Christ and the ministry of Antichrist at the same
time, neither ca^ they prophecy in bot^ their names etc.

Many are their forged cauillations which they invent unto themselves to hide
this their perfidy, all which (as not recking them wor^hie the reciting) I
leave to be refuted by their own practice, comp^red to the word of God: as I
might also unto their own alligations and excuses, God having so divided their
tongues, and made them so contrary one unto an other, as yt is an impossible
thing to find two of the^ of one mind; yea or any one of them con^tant in that
he affirms. So are these accustomed to do all things without ground or
assurance, following the traditions, writings and examples of others, never
looking how consonant they be unto Gods word. This makes them thus ignorant
and blind in all the laws and ordinances of Christ, touching the true
gathering building and governing the Church of Christ, that they know not the
doctrines eue^ of the beginnings of Christ, of repentance from dead works,
faith toward God, of baptism and laying on of hands: This makes them not
to know so much, as the stones whereof Christ's Church must be built, nor the
true foundation whereupon to build them, as you may see by that which has been
said concerning their outward estate and practice; much less know they the
true form and fashion of the house, and least of all the true administration
and ordinances thereof; as apeareth evidently by their receiving of, and
administering unto this monstrous confuse body of their profane rowtes of
people; by their exercising this their false and antichristian ministry, and
that after such an idolatrous blasphemous symoniacal manner; as also by
receiving Antichrists yoke, traditions, ordinances; Gal, 3. 15.
whereby (as has been showed) they deny Christ in the flesh, by denijng Gal.
2. 5.
his offices his anointing: they deny his ministry, his ordinances, his
whole Testament, by receiving an other ministry, other laws then such as he
there has prescribed: Or else they must affirm, that earthly me^ may admit
into and make members of the Church whom they please and will; that they also
may alter, add to, detract, yea abrogate and disanul what part of Christ's
Testament they lift; that they may erect a new ministry, a new form of
administration of sacraments, of worship, of government: Of al which severally
to entreat and set down their particular errors and enormities, no pen of man
suffices. I refer heerin the reader partly to that which here is already
written concerning their ministry, ordination* ministration, sa^raments,
worship etc. but chiefly to his own^ more near view and diligent search of
their doings by the light of Gods word.

They hold also, that the true Church of Christ may be built and established
without the outward offices and government he has prescribed in his Testament:
yea that in stead of them, yt may receive a false and adulterate ministry, be
governed by other Officers and laws then he has appointed in his word. They
hold that yt may be a true Church, though both ministry, ministration and
government be thus wholly corrupted and forged, and though yt have never entered
or smitten covenant with Christ, but still and ever have remained in subjection
unto Antichrist in one false shape or other; whose yoke (they hold) ought not
to be cast off, to redress any sin or abuse among them, or put in practice any
more of CHRIST'S Testament, then is by public authority permitted; yea in this
confusion, idolatry, subjection, though neither the people be called unto nor
joined in the faith, though neither ministry, ministration nor any thing be
aright according to the word amongst them, though their Church abound with all
manner of sin, abomination and abominable persons, though they have neither
power to separate the most unclean, to censure or cast out any offender or
off^nce, to redress any thing be yt never so odious, hateful, and apparently
ill, nor yet have liberty to put in practice any of Christ's heavenly
ordinances: notwithstanding all this they hold yt with maine force and outcries
to be a true established church of Christ, though there be never a true stone
nor any one pin or nail o^ the true tabernacle aright amongst them, as their
adulterate ministry, office, election, ordination, administration worship,
sacraments, pr^iers, fasting, abuse of the word read, abuse of the word
preached (which they corrupt, roile, distort, pervert, wrast, leaven, falsify,
poison, abuse, profane, abrogate, exclude at their wills) d^clare. Of all which
what unsound opinions they hold, their present practice compared to the word of
God, manifests: yea they will still be the true Church and ministers of CHRIST,
though they reject his word, remain obstinate in their sin, defend, plead
for, and justify the same, persecute, blaspheme, and mu^ther CHRIST'S servants
that speak unto them in the name of CHRIST and exhort them to amendment. Thus
you may see into what hardness and blindness of heart and extreme utter darkness
the Lord has cast these your Seers because they have loved darkness more then
light, neither have trembled at his word, but walked in the presumption of
their own heart, committing arrogancy in their wrath. O how great is that
darkness, when the very light of your Church is such darkness, as yt is but that
very smoke of the bottomle^ pit, when yt is duly examined. For as you have
heard al their worship, ministry, prayers, sacraments, fastes, to be but
counterfeit and abomination: so yet of all other you may perceive this their
preaching of the Gospel, to be most detestable and pe^nitious, eue^ the
strongest snare and delusion of Satan, whereby he allureth deceaueth and holds
captive the miserable world in the chains of transgression, error, idolatry,
abomination and impenitencie, unto judgment.

This preaching of theirs as yt is exercised in a false ministry a false
Church, as yt proceeds from the chair of Antichrist; so is yt wholly subject
thereunto, both the person and doctrine of the preacher. Their person either to
be still approved and licenciate, or else silenced, suspended, deprived: their
doctrine to be allowed or condemned as pleases their Lords Ordinaries (in
whose pontifical breasts and hands stands the whole doctrine of the church of
England) what they shall receive, what they shall reject; what they shall say,
what they shall leave vnsaied etc. The word of God, Church, ministry,
preaching and al, are wholly in the hands of these lawles^e Lords, to
abrogate, establish, bring in, ^al. 1. 8.
cast out, depose, suspend without controlement or account. A greater ^ Cor. 3.
13.
power then ever was given unto or exercised by any of CHRIST'S Apostles, ^ Cor*
11. 1.
who always submitted their doctrine, practice, persons, unto the Act. 5. 17.
11
trial and censure of the word, and that by any Christian. They never ^ Cor.
11. 23
exercised domio^ over the faith of any, or laid any other burden upon the
Church, the^ what they either read in the word of God, or acknowledged to be
the will of God. But here in the Church of Engl^d yt is held a small thing to
have a strange ministerye, worship, laws, orders, government imposed upon
them; to have a great part of Gods word quite banish^d the Church, the rest
that is allowed them but by shredds and patches at ^tarts and braydes; to have
their preaching by stint prescription, limitation; to have the whole doctrine
subject not to the will of God but to the will of these their Ordinarie^, who
(they may be sure) will allow no more and none otherwise, then shall agree to
their apostatical throne. The ministers of this Church may not preach, the
people believe, much less practice any more of the word of God, the^ what is
confirmed by these their Ordinaries.

The poor parish o^ congregation where these priests serve, may not meddle or
have to do with the election, administration or deposing of these their
ministers: for why, they are lay me^ and have no skill, neither ought to
intermeddle with ecclesiastical affairs, or with the word of God. Be their
minister never so blind, insufficient or vile a wretch, detected of never so
horrible sins, yet may not they remove him: their only help is to complain
to their Lord Ordinary; in the mean while they must join to the wret^h in
prayers, in sacraments, yea still and for ever, if yt pleas^ not their said
Lord to give ear to their complaint. Let their minister preach never such
damnable or heretical doctrine, wrest, pervert, corrupt, falsify the
scriptures never so violently and heinously, all the Church (no though there be
all the priests in a country as at a Scene) has no authority, nay is by
express law forbidden to reprove this doctrine presently or publicly, or yet
to forbid him to deal with the scriptures; their remedy is still to complain
to their Ordinary, and until yt please him to take order therein, the whole
congregation is still bound to frequent his heretical sermons and ministry:
yea all the priests of the land both pontifical and reformistes agree in this
point and conclude, that the lay people (as they term them) ought not to
intermedle either with ye deposing their minister, or reproof of hi^ doctrine.

The one sort (as you have heard) sends them to their Lords these Bishops,
the other refers them over for these and many other cases under hand, to a
prouincial or classical Synod or permanent council of priests etc. Amongst
whom all these affairs must be debated: and after they are agreed upon the
point, then their decrees to be brought forth, solemnly published and
pronounced to the people, who must attend upon, awayte and receive these
Oracles as most holy and canonical. They have no remedy if they also be
contrary to the truth, but to appeal to a council, in the mean while still
joining to such a wretch, such an heretic, and that in the high profanatio^ of
Gods holy name, word and ordinances. But my purpose is not in this place either
to refute the popish prelacie of the one sort, or the deuilish forgerie of the
other (hoping to find a more fit place for both) so much as to show, that
every Christian congregation has power in themselves, and of duty ought
presently and publikly to censure any false or unsound doctrine that is
publikly delivered or maintained amongst them, if yt be known and discerned
unto them; yea any one member in the Church has this power, whatsoever he be
Pastor or Prophet that utters yt: as also to show how far this their pulpet
preaching differs from that heavenly blessed exercise of expounding
scriptures or prophecy in the Church of CHRIST.

The first me thinks already very fully proved in all these places where our
Savior CHRIST has given unto his Church and to every Mat. 18. 1^. 18.
particular congregation thereof himself, his word, his power, with express
charge to put in practice whatsoever he has commanded them: 1 Cor. 5. 4.
and threatened his wrath and displeasure against that whole congregation 2
These. 3. 6. 14.
which neglects or breaks any of his commandments, or suffers any seen
transgression, or error, or incorrigible impenitent offender: Zach. 5. 9.
Also where he commanded all men to inform that Church Mark. 13. 34
whereof they are members, of fuch transgressions, offenses, enormities as arise
amongst them. This he in vain had commanded, and they in ^aine should do this,
except he had given both absolute authority and express charge unto the Church
to redress and take order in the same. In as many places al^o as he has
commanded the whole church and every Romans 16. 17.
member thereof to watch, to scowte and observe their teachers, to 1 Job. 4. 1.
try the Spirits, to mark the^ diligently which cause division and offenses 2 Timothy 6. 3. 5
contrary to the doctrine which they have learned; to separate them 2 Ioh. 9.
10.
from ^uch as teach after an other manner, or consent not unto the 2 Timothy 3. 1.
whol^ome words of our Lord JESUS CHRIST and to the doctrine which 2. 3. 4. 5.
is according unto godliness; to hold the^ accursed that pe^uert the Gospel of
CHRIST, or preach any thing besides that has been taught by CHRIST and his
Apostles; to reject an heretic after one and the second Tit. 3. 10.
admonitio^to; have in a readiness due vengeance against al disobedience 2 Cor.
10. 4. 5. 6.
etc. In all these and sundry other places most evidently apeareth, that CHRIST
has given full power, absolute authority, and express commandment (...). 6.
9.
unto his Church, eue^ to every particular congregation, to cen^ure both the
persons and doctrines of their ministers, and of every member of their said
co^gregations. He sends them not here ^o these popish ^ Heb. 12. 22 etc.
ordinaries, neither yet to a prouincial Synod or a Classis of priests: there
are other uses of Synods or councels, as shall in due place be declared. 2 Pet.
1. 1.
They can neither ad to, nor diminish from the power of the Reu. 2. 26.
Church, or execute and alter any part of the Churches duty. Josh. 7. 12. 25.
^osh. 22. 18. 1 Cor. 5 6. 1 Cor. 12. 25. 27.


Moreover, since every member has like interest in CHRIST, in his word the
public doctrine and ministration of the Church, and shall all be held g^iltie
and punished for the public transgressions and abuses of the Church; seeing
^uerie member is bound to the edification, service and utility of the body;
seeing every member of the Church is commanded Mar. 13. 3^ 37. ^ ^ob. 4.
to watch, to try the Spirits, to contend for the maintenance of the faith
once indifferently given to all saints, to avoid false teachers 1. Mark. 13.
5. 6. 2^. 23.
false Prophets etc. seeing they are commanded not to follow the multitude Math.
7. 15.
or mighty, in evil; seeing they are commanded to reprove their ^hil. 3. 2.
brother plainly, to bind their sins by the word, even their Princes Leuit.
19. 17
in those chains and nobles in those fetters, to say to ARCHIPPVS look Exodus
23. 2.
to thy ministry that thou have received in the Lord that thou fulfill Luke
17. 3.
yt; yea though an Apostle or an Angel from heaven should ^each either Psalm.
145.
other doctrine or after an other manner, then is in CHRIST'S Testament Col. 4. 17
prescribed, to hold and pronounce him accursed. To conclude Gal. 1. 8.
the point; seeing the prayers, sacraments, sermons of such wicked pro^. 15. 8. ^
or heretical ministers are sacriledg and abhomiuation in Gods sight, 1 Cor.
10. 17. 18. 20.
and that all which communicate, join to, hear or suffer such ministers are
alike guilty of this sin and sacriledg: who can doubt, but that every
Christian has power and authority in due time and place (not disturbing
CHRIST'S holy order in his Church) publicly to reprove any public
^ransgression of any member of the Church, or of the whole Church; as also to
di^couer and refute any error escaped or Jude 3. 10,
delivered in public doctrine: yet this (as is said) in due time and order,
giving leave and place unto the Elders and Prophets of the said Congregation
first: who if they neglect or ouerpasse such public transgression or error,
then may any one of the congregation, or any Chri^tian who^oeuer; yea he ought
to reprove such transgression and error, unless he will be guilty of betraying
the faith of CHRIST, of the destruction of the whole congregation, knowing the
danger of such leaven, the sodennes of the wrath of God for such things.

Here will be grossly objected, that the common people are ignorant, not able
to judge betwixt truth and error, disordered, variable, easy to be divided and
led into sects; and therefore they are not to intermedle with the iudgmen^ and
reproof of faults and errors escaped in the ministry, or with the censuring
their persons.

That their people are blind, ignorant, seditious, headstrong, I readily grant;
neither ca^ yt be otherwise, having such blind guides and co^rupt teachers as
all they are. I grant also, that neither the people nor they ought in thi^
estate to meddle with the word of God, or take his blessed name in their mouth,
without most high and insufferable profa^ation of the same. But for the people
of CHRIST, they are all enlightened Math. 6. 2^*
with that bright morning star, that son of righteousness. 1 Cor. 6. 11.
The eye of their faith is single, and the whole body is light. They a^e Col.
^. (...). 13*
an humble, meek, obedient people, they will hear and follow the true Romans 12.
9. 10. etc.
shepherd, but a stranger they will not hear. They rejoice and love e^nestly
Gal. 4. 18.
in the truth, and ^a by no means be drawn to do any thing against 2 Cor. 13.
8.
the truth. And therefore has God amongst them bownd up the testimony Isa* 8.
16.
and sealed up the law: To them he has committed the charge 1 Timothy 3. 15.
and keeping of his holy oracles; to them and every one of them he romans 8. 9.
(...)*
has given his holy sanctifi^ng Spirit, to open unto them and to lead Ioh. 16.
13.
them into al truth: to the^ he has given his Son to be there King, Priest 1
Ioh. 2. 27.
and Prophet, who has made them unto him Kings and Priests. But if Revel 1. 6.
they were so blind and ignorant as these men would make them, how could they
then discern truth from error, how could they approve truth, or refute error
and transgression.

Happily for all this here will be said, that the common fort of CHRIST^
servants either have not this knowledge, or have yt but in small measure; and
therefore are unfit to deal in the^e high matters, and can not do yt orderly
and soberly.

To this I answer, that they are to reprove no more then their assured Romans
12. 3.
knowledge leads them unto. If they transgress the limits either 1 These. 5.
14.
of their knowledge in reproving that which deserves no reproof, or 2 These. 3.
14
break the established order of the Church by rashness, intemperance etc. then
are they for so doing subject to reproof and censure for abusing their
liberty, for breaking order: the Churches of God have no 1 Cor. 11. 16.
custom to be contentious. But if they should be debarred of this 1 Cor. 14. 33
power, liberty and duty because they are not so learned as the priests, and
have not been at the university etc. by that popish reason were the word of
God to be shut up from al lay men (as they call them) that no man might read or
speak thereof in his house or family, because they have not knowledge to
understand yt and open yt after their school manner, the word of God being such
an abysme of wisdom and of so great dignity and reverence, and that in all
places alike. And should they not by this reason also shut yt up from
themselves, and from al men in 1 Cor. 13. 9.
this life? for he that knows most knows here but in part, yea and of 1
Cor. 8. 2.
that part he knows nothing as he ought to know. Phil. 3. 13.


But they are to understand that God has not given us his word that yt should
be perfected or receive grace from us, but yt yt should bring 1 Cor. 4. 7.
grace unto us, build up and accomplish our faith, and nourish us unto eternal
life; that yt should be milk to the weak and inexpert, strong meat to them
of riper age. According to this word who so speaks not, yt is because their
is no light in them. By this word what so is reproved or affirmed, the baseness
or ignorance of the speaker is not to be regarded: ^ames. 2. 1.
it no way diminishes any thing from the dignity and truth of the word; to
which (as the only object) the Church is to cast their eye. As for these
learned divines of our age, I refer them unto, or rather oppose unto them the
wisdom and word of God, who you see has given unto al his servants this
liberty and power; yea rather has laid upon them this charge and duty, to
reprove and censure any error or transgression which is committed by the whole
Church or any member of the Church contrary to the word of God, by the same
word.

But yet are not our learned Reformists satissied: for ^oe, they fetch a reason
somewhat more subtly (though altogether as far from the truth as the other)
from 1 Cor. 14. 32. where yt is said The Spirits of the Prophets ar^ subject to
the Prophets, therefore conclude they, that the people are not to reprove,
judge, or ce^sure the doctrine of the minister, but only an assembly of
ministers, a school of Prophets as they call yt.

Before I show their gross mistaking and perverting this place of scripture, I
dismiss their Argument by denying the consequent thereof. That because the
Spirit of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; yt is, such as have the
gift of utterance and expounding scriptures ought principally and especially to
judge of that exercise, and to speak in that exercise as in way of prophecy:
Therefore the whole Church besides nor any member thereof ought not to reprove,
and censure such errors as have escaped the Prophets and are revealed unto
them. And for this I insist in the former reasons and express places of
scripture alleged. Very hard yt were, that yt heavenly and most blessed
exercise of prophecy which was instituted of God for the singular comfort and
general inlightning of the whole Church, should through the pride and Gal. 5. 9.
arrogancy of a few, be turned to the utter subversion of the faith of 2. Tim.
2. 17
the whole Church, and the desolation thereof. For what part can T^. 1. 10.
there be pure, where the doctrine is not sound? or what can be more Ioh. 4. 42.
miserable then to see with others men's eyes, to believe with other Gal. 6. 4.
men's hearts, yea to be brought into that slavery and subjection, that they
must receive and believe whatsoever the prophets or ministers speak and agree
upon, be yt never so dissonant and repugnant to the word of God. This were
right after the manner of the Atheists of these days, to hire into their
parish a learned preacher, though all the rest of the parish be never so blind,
profane, wretched, yet where this burning lamp is, they are all in happy
state and safe enough; because they have the Gospel preached amongst them,
they are a famous Ioh. 5. 39. and 10. 37. 38. and. 18. 20. 21.
Church. But our Savior Christ and his Apostles submitted their ministry and
doctrine to the trial, censure and judgment of al, by the scriptures; yea and
most commended and reioiced in these hearers that were most diligent to examine
and try their doctrine. And I would Act. 17. 11.
feign know what injury yt were unto any, if the Church still retained 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21.
that liberty, not disturbing the holy order thereof. But these priests, they
will not only not submit their persons and doctrine to the censure 2. Cor. 1.
13.
of the Church where they administer (for they must have a jury of clerks a
Classis of Priests to go upon them) but they bind their poor Church to their
lips, and build yt upon themselves, and with their blazing light strike al ye
r est of their hearers and followers sta^ke blind.

Now let me return to this place of the Corinths which they so falsely
interpret, miserably misuse, and most perniciously pervert. The prophets they
give out to be understood of such ministers only, as have the gift of preaching
(as they call yt) holding yt lawful for none else to speak of the scriptures by
way of interpretation and prophecy, especially to expound them in the Church
or Congregation. This exercise spoken of here by the Apostle, they say is
vnders^ood of such prophetical ministers only, is instituted only for such,
and belongs only unto such. The place of such exercise, they term a school
or college of prophets.

Heerupon they abuse this heavenly glorious exercise, in that they shut yt up
amongst a few of them, shut out the people from yt utterly, making yt like
OSYRIS mysteries: Besides that they here amongst themselves vnsufferably
corrupt all the scriptures they entreat of, by their Rhetorical figures,
deuisions, demonstrations, humane and traditional writings, wherein all their
university learning consists. This place they most pernitiously pervert, in
that from hence they derive their Prophetical Conuenticles and Classical
Synods, assuming heerby into their own hands the key of al knowledge, and
shutting up the scripturs, yea all Gods graces, eue^ the holy Ghost yt self
amongst themselves in these their schools of prophets: as also into their
Classes of select priests the sc^pter of Christ and absolute government of al
churches, to whom yt is left but to receive and execute the reverent decrees
of this famous Classes of priests.

And now let this ^cripture whereupon they build all this stuff be duly ^. Cor.
14.
searched and pondered, and you shall find yt in all these things direct and
flat against them. First that the prophets there spoken of by the Ver. 1. 12.
13.
Apostle, that are to speak in and judge of this exercise were not only
ministers, is gathered by the whole scope of the chapter, where every brother
is incited to emulate spiritual gifts, the rather that they might prophecy and
help to edify the Church; this gift by many reasons being preferred to all
other gifts, and proved far most excellent both in yt self and to others etc.
Moreover in this exercise of prophecy which was instituted for the instruction
and comfort of all, the Apostle says that Three Prophe^s may speak in due
order, one after an other at one time, and Ver. 29.
ye others are to judge etc. Three ministers I am sure in any one church there
cannot be that by office are to atte^d unto the ministratio^ of the Romans 12. 7.
8.
word. The pastor and the Teacher are the only offices that I now know
appointed to the ministry of the word; and therefore even by this place, more
besides the ministers of the Church may speak in the way, yea in this public
exercise of prophecy. Neither ought this to seem strange in the ears of any
that know what belongs to the exercise Luke 10.
of prophecy or order of the Church: It is no other thing the^ Christ Act. 8.
4. and. 11. 20.
has instituted and the Apostles every where taught, and that by most
sensible reasons. For as the body consists of many members, and all the
members have not one office etc: so the members of the Church Romans 12. 6.
being diverse and having received diverse gifts, are (according unto the 1 Pet.
4. 10
grace that is given to every one) to serve the Church, or rather ye Lord with
the same, as good disposers of the manifold grace of God. If they have the gift
of prophecy, then are they to exercise yt according to the proportion of
faith, speaking as the words of God always, keeping themselves within the
bound of sobriety and truth: who so does otherwise is subject to censure and
reproof. We see the practice heerof not only in Corinth but in Antiochia and
Rome, and no doubt by the same rule in other churches. In Anti^chia we read of
su^drie prophets and teachers, Barnabas, Symeo^, Lucius, Mana^en, Paul. Act.
13. 1. and 15. 32. of Judas and Silas, that exhorted and taught in that Church.
That there were sundry also that taught in Rome, appears Philip. 1. 14. 15,
and^.

Neither has this been strange even under the law: we see God Deuteronomy. 13. 2.
and 18. 20. etc.
chose his prophets of al tribes, whose doctrine was to be tried by Gods word.
Their prophecies of future things, by the event: we see our Savior Christ his
Apostles and disciples did the like throughout all the cities and synagogues of
the Jews.

If unto this yt be answered that our savior Christ was Lord of the law and of
the Temple, and so might do his pleasure (for the proph^ts Apostles and
disciples what they did was also by the commandment of God) and so none of
these examples to be made presidentes unto us without the like warrant. I
grant well, neither would I ground upon these examples if either they were
contrary to any law of God, or that there were not express warrant in the
Testament of Christ and in ye other scriptures, that such as have the gift of
prophecy may and ought to exercise their gift in the Church of Christ. To that
end I brought these examples, to show that yt was a thing usual amongst the
Jews and not contrary to any law, as Doctor SOME and almost all the priests
of the land very ignorantly and falsely give out. For neither can they prove
that yt was unlawful for any besides the priests to read or expound the
scriptures, or use exhort^tion and prayer in the Temple and public Synagogues
of the Jews, neither yet that yt only belongs to the ministers of the Church
under the Gospel, unless we will take their bare affirmation for proof.

But as under the law I have alleged many examples to the contrary, 1.
Kings. 8*
2. Chro^. 34. and. 35. Chap.
so might I bring more. Solomon prayed, (...) exhorted in ye Temple. If they
think to euade by saijng they were prophets, and did yt by especial warrant; I
doubt they cannot prove Josiah a prophet. Again I would ask them, whither
this especial warrant were private and known only to themselves, or public
and known to the people and state also? Public they cannot show yt, for then
would they never have resisted the message and slain the prophets etc. If yt
were only private and known to the prophets only, then what was this to the
state or people? the priests would never have suffered them in this manner to
have usurped their office. Again our Savior Christ (if yt had been contrary
to the law) would never have done yt, or caused his disciples to do yt; who
were no where reprehe^ded for teaching, but for their doctrine only, as
apeareth by the examination of our Savior CHRIST before the high priests:
neither were any of his disciples troubled for teaching in any of the cities
and synagogs where he sent them.

After his death also, when the Apostles accustomably taught and Act. 4. and.
5. Chap.
prayed in the temple, being brought before the council, they were not
reproved (though they were ig^orant and ba^e men of occupation in their eyes)
because they taught and prayed publikly, but because they taught the
righteousness and glory of that Christ whom they had so unjustly murdered and
put to death; and were not forbidden simply not to teach, but not to teach in
his name. So you see yt was not Christ's warrant that stood the^ in any stead
for the allowa^ce of this actio^ either before magistrates or people who knew
or acknowledged not Christ but abhorred him and put him to death. If yt had
been contrary to the law for any but priests publicly to teach, pray etc.
both our savior Christ and his disciples should have heard of yt no doubt at
the hands of these carping cauilling phariseis, and of those malicious
murtherous priests. But we see the Apostles were every wh^re permitted to
teach through all the synagogs of the Jews, inso much as the rulers of the
synagogue at (...) sent unto Paul and Barnabas, willing them if they had Act.
13. 15.
any exhortation for the people, to say. This they would neither have permitted
nor done, if yt had been contrary to their law. By (...) warrant these rulers
did yt not; for, (...) his name sake they persecuted and afterward stoned him.
Let this perilous paradoxe then at length be gained Tha^ others which have the
gift of prophecy besides the ministers, may publikly (...) or exhort in the
Church.

Now remain^th to be showed, that this exercise of prophecy belongs to the
whole Church, and ought not to be shut up in this manner amongst the priests
only, the people being shut out either to speak or hear. This the Apostle in
this* 14 Chapter plentifully proves by many reasons, and plainly a^oweth in
direct words. Reasons may be drawn from the very exercise of proph^cie yt
self, which is nothing else now with the Church, then an expounding and
interpretation of scriptures. This light I am sure they will grant ought not to
be hid under a bed or bushel; neither to be shut up amongst a few, as these
Anab^ptistical preachers use in their co^uenticles at this exercise. There are
no ear secrets Man. 10. 27. Ne^em. 8. 8*
or hidden mysteries which are to be kept close, but are to be p^oclaimed and
published upon the house top.

The ends also of this exercise of prop^ecie show, that yt belongs to the
whole Church, and none of them ought to be shut out. The ^er. 3. 5. 31 24
ends are the edification, exhortation, and comfort of the whole body. what a
pride and insolency, yea cruelty is yt in these men, that would assume unto
themselves only this bountiful grace of God, and debar (...) from the same,
and that the very Church, to whom yt belongs and for whom yt was
instituted; when the Lord allows eue^ strangers and unbelievers to come unto
yt, lifting up the Son of man thereby (...)* 11. 10. (...). 8. 13. (...). 3.
14.
as a standard to other nations. What enemies the^ are these men unto the
glory of God and contrary unto all men, that would take from them this most
blessed means of their salvation.

The Apostle also in express words declares, that this exercise belongs to
the whole Church. V^r. 23. 24. If (says he) when the whole Church is come
together unto the same, and all speak tongues, there come in also they that
are ignorant or unbelievers, will they not say that ye are mad? but if al
prophecy and there come in an infidel or idiote, he is convinced of all, he is
judged of all etc. The 26. Ver* also: what is then brethren? when ye come
together every one of you has a psalm ^ath doctrine etc. Likewise Ver. 31.
For you may all by one every one of you prophecy, that all may learn and all
may be comforted. What can be more manifest and direct then these places, that
this exercise of prophecy belongs to the whole Church, and that every
faithful man ^ath here freedom and power both ^o be present and to speak also
as ^eed ^equireth, and God reuealeth unto him.

Are not also all the carnal reasons of these phariseis taken away, which alledg
the ignorance of the most part, or confusion, if al might be suffered to speak.
To the one, no man is to speak but as the words of God, according to the
proportion of faith within the bounds of sobriety and truth; his words must
be to edification, else he faulteth and is judged for them. For the confusion
that might hereupon arise if all should have power to speak: It is not here
said that every one which has power 1 Cor. 10. 23* Gal. 5. 13. 1 Pe^. 2. 16.
V. 40. V. 33.
should at al times use this power: that which is lawful is not always
expedient: Christians are to use their liberty to the edification, and not the
confusion of the Church; for God is not the author of disorder but of peace, as
in all the Churches of the Saints. They then that thus pre^mptuously either
innouate or abuse this blessed ordinance of CHRIST, find fault with and
control the commandments of God, and charge God with confusion, who is the
author of this exercise, order, liberty.

But D. SOME has by the priuiledg of the Church of England published yt
utterly unlawful for any that is not a minister, to deal with the
interpretation of scriptures, what gifts soever God has given him thereunto;
and says, these absurdities would ensue thereof: that wo^ may then also preach
in the Church* that those men that thus speak in way of prophecy usurp the
ministers office with Corath, offer vzziahs incense, and may also by this
means enter into the Council chamber, and intrude into the civil magistrates
office; for to give council also is every Christians duty etc.

What can be more blasphemously and reprochfullie repugnant to the word and
order of CHRIST, who you see is the author of this exercise in this manner, and
has for ever left yt as a commandment unto al churches: For (says the
Apostle verse. 37.) If any man seem to be a Prophet or spiritual, let him
acknowledge what I write unto you, because they are the commandments of God
etc. But if any man be ignorant, let him b^ ignorant: Therefore my brethren
covet ye to prophecy, and to speak with tongues forbid not: Let al things be
done comely, and according to order.

For D. SOMES first absurdity; women are expressly forbidden to speak by way
or in the exercise of this proph^ in the Church verse. 34. 35. So then this is
but a reproach of his own absurd brain, to bring the truth into slander.

That such as speak in this exercise of prophecy do not any way usurp the
ministers office, has been largly showed by the discour^ of this whole
Chapter. Neither has* he brought any piece of a reason to prove, that only
ministers ought to speak of the scriptures in ^he Church.

For his third impi^us and odious calumniation; that such as presume to speak
in the Church not being ministers, may as well intrude into the Council chamber
and magistrates (...); yt is in yt felf so false, foolish and absurd, as yt
deser^eth none answer. It is but the venom of his serp^ ^ongue, the Add^
poison that is under his lips, wher^y he seeks to draw the truth of CHRIST
and the professors thereof into hatred. He might as well say, that because CHRIST
has made us all Kings and Priests unto him, therefore we will here usurp the
civil magistrates and ecclesiastical ministers office. These are but the
malicious collections and vain conclusions of his idle head and graceles
heart, thus to blaspheme the holy ordinances of CHRIST, to call yt
Anabaptistical, the deprauing of the holy scriptures, abusing of the auditors,
disturbing both of Church and commonwealth, calling such Christian assemblies
as practice this commandment (...) conuenticles, although he never in his life
was present at any of their exercises, nor is able to charge any one of them
with any one (...) error, as they by his own mouth are able to charge him and
all this antichristian ministry of England, which exercise a ministry
without a lawful calling thereunto by virtue of their inward calling, which is
their learning and sufficiency; as though CHRIST did not know the end, use and
measure of the gifts he has given them. In the Church of CHRIST there are none
suffered to speak by way of prophecy, but such as have the gift of prophecy:
and to forbid such to ^peake, were to stop up the conductes and springs of the
Church, or rather of Gods graces, whereby the Church should be watered and
refreshed: so far is this exercise from d^prauing the scriptures or abusing the
auditorie. The rest of his vituperie he has laid upon CHRIST the author of
this exercise*, and to him shall answer for the same at that day of reckoning
and account.

If none but Ministers may speak publikly in the Church by way of prophecy,
how should the people have trial of the gifts of any? how should any ministers
in this general apostaci^ and departure, be r^stored? yea how should there
ever be any other then now are? For if the people may not hear their gifts,
how should they judge them? ^f they may not utter their gifts, how should the
people hear them? Here I shall by both sorts of our priests, as well
Pontifical as (...) be answered; that the law is not so general, but that
there are exceptions unto the same. The Pontifical will alledg; That their
mother the University, their father the Bishop, have authority to give
license to preach in any Church whersoeuer they become before they be either
full ministers, or have any office as the engli^h Deacon or half priests, the
cathedral Prebends, the common Curates or rouing Preachers: Amongst which you
must note a double mystery. Some of them are full ministers without either
certain change, place, or office. Others have a certain, yea a pastors charge
and office, and yet are not full ministers: of which sect are the Prebendes and
civil Doctors, who may have parsonages, and yet be no ministers.

The Reformists they will likewise answer me; that their mother the University
she has power to give lea^e to preach universally through all Churches, and
also the Select Cl^ssis: yea peradventure this school of Prophets as^embled,
have power to admit some one pick^d man to their mysteries which is no priest,
and to give him leave to speak amongst them; yet hereof I doubt, and therefore
will not stand; and thus may the people by both sides have trial of their gifts.

Great reason that they which ma^e the law should also make and take ^xceptions
at their pleasure. But well, what booteth this trial that they allow the people,
when neither of them give the people liberty to judge or reprove their doctrine?
when both sides, both* Bishops and this new Classis take upon them to make
ministers without the people, without any charge, place, or office certain?
But let this matter rest: I would know of both or any of them, what this their
mother they so much boast of is? and where she had this high authority above
other women?

H^ they will with one voice answer, that the Universities are the seminaries
of religion, of the ministry of the land; the schools and colleges of
learning, wherein the sons of the Prophets are trained up, as they were in
Naiot^, in Beth^l, Jericho, Jerusalem and Cori^th.

If the ^ree be known by the fruit, the Cockatri^e by the poisoned eggs, the
Viper by the spawne, the nest by the birds; then let the religion and priests
of the land show what kind of seminaries and colleges these Universities are.
If these be the b^st fiuite and famousest men (that are instructed in nothing
but to corrupt and cavil against the truth) then let them take heed, for the
axe is laid to the root of the tree etc. If also these your vniue^sities be
compared to these cities whither these faithful me^ repaired (because of these
famous Prophets) to be instructed in the laws of God, we shall find the^ more
like to the Sodomitical colleges and fellowships of the idolatrous monks and
Friars, brethren of a birth, eue^ by both parents; then unto the holy
assemblies of the Prophets. And this will appear if we compare them either in
the persons assembled, or in the manner and ends of their education and
trayning.

What the sons of the Prophets were, is already showed; namly godly men that
rep^ired to the cities where these famous Prophets were most resident, to be
instructed in the law of God. But the persons that resort to these universities
are the children of all the profane in the land, that repair thither to be
instructed in heathen and vain arts, whereby they may get their living; or if
they study divinity (as they call yt) they make an occupation of yt: It is
but for their belly, for worldly promotion, and not for the glory of God, as
the greedy ^eeking after their ecclesiastical livings by the one sort, the
selling o^ their cunning and letting forth their tongues to hire of the other
^ort, declares.

These holy companies of prophets mentioned in the scriptures, were trained up
in the law of God, lived orderly in the fear of God together with their wives
and families. But these university colleges are a misseline row^e of very
young men for the most part and boys together* leading their lives in
idolatry, confusion, disorder; spending their lives in vanity, folly,
idleness, living neither in the fear of God, nor in any well established order
of his Church, neither in any lawful calling in the common wealth. They are
forbidden in these societies to live in holy wedlock: If he be married, he may
not there enter: if he being entered marye, he may not there tarry. An endless
discourse y^ were but to recite their several idolatrous profane vsages,
mysteries, oaths, vows, ceremonies; all which evidently show from whence they
had their original; namely from Antichrists chair, to which they have ever
served, and still in all places do serve, fighting stowtly under his banner
against the faith and Church of CHRIST, supplijng him continually with fresh
soldiers to carry abroad his merchandise, and set abroch the deceits of Satan.

Neither are they more like unto the Churches of CHRIST, then unto Revel 18. 2.
^ Ioh. 1. 7. 2 Cor. 6. 14
the schools of the Prophets: the Church of CHRIST is no cage of such unclean
and hateful birds, of their fry and offspring: the churches of CHRIST have no
such colleges, societies, fellowships; ye Churches of CHRIST have no such
heathenish and idolatrous customs, exercises, vsages, oaths, vows,
ceremonies; they have no such profane arts, 1 Timothy 1. 4. and 4. 7. and 6. 3.
4. 5. 20. 21. ^ Tim. 3. Tit. 1. 1 Pet. 5. 2. Act. 20 ^ Cor. 4. 2. Math. 23. 7.
Act. 14. 23.
vain education and literature; they have no such degrees and ostentatio^ of
learning, neither are there found either Bachelors or Doctors of divinity:
Their Pastors and Teachers are chosen for their knowledge, gravity, godliness of
life: they have no such fastuous and blasphemous titles, but are called to a
labor and a charge; for the faithful performance whereof, they rather desire
to be commended, then to be thus greeted in the market place. As they are by
the Church wherein they serve, called to this office; so are they orderly and
reverently ordained by and in the same Congregation, with fasting and prayer
etc. and not araied in scarlet with the habit, hood, tippet, cornerd cap, with
their maces and beadels proclaiming before them, and such a train of the popes
clerks young and old following them through the streets till they march to
the place where they play their prises: Neither are they in this manner dubbed
Doctors by the delivering a book unto them, sworn upon a book to their
fathers fidelity and their mothers mysteries, adopted their son by a ring
and a kiss, or enthronized in a chair with many other ceremonies and made
Doctors of divinity, Doctors Act. 20. 28 ^ (...). 5. 2.
in name and title only, without any certain office or Church wherein and
whereunto to administer.

For this title of divinity, I know not how to give yt unto any mortal
(...). 2. 9.
man without blasphemy, CHRIST only excepted, in whom the fulness of the
Godhead dwells bodily. The english of Christian religion and profession of
the Gospel and faith of CHRIST, I can well away Revel 13. 1. Revel 17. 3.
with and dig^st: but this english romish abstract of divinity, I am assured
came from the same forge that their title of the supreme head of the Church
did, and cannot with all the glozes, scholions, and learned interpretations
they can devise, be made other then most high blasphemy against the sacred
person of Christ, who is the only universal Doctor of al his disciples, and of
al true religion. And evil may Math. 23. 8* 10.
D. S. either defend or pattern his Doctorhood by St. Paul, who in the same
verse by him alleged 1 Timothy 2. 7. shows a lawful calling, a lawful and
certain office, and also a sincere and faithful administration thereof. But now
as St Paul's Apostolic office is ceased, the Church being established and
delivered to other certain offices: so if Paul's Apostolic room or Doctorship
(as he caleth yt) were void, I suppose D. SOME not the fittest man in the
world for yt: although (if yt be as I hear) he ca^ be no l^sse the^ an apostle
by his offices, he being a Pastor, if not a double or plurified non resident
Pastor of many churches; a Doctor you see by priuiledg and style, and a Deacon
I mean also at Ely* And what was or could any Apostle be more; Yet seeing al
these are but forged stuff, and that he has neither any true office in the
Church, neither any true calling thereunto etc. we can take him but for a false
Apostle at the best, if he sit not in an Apostataes chair, that I say not an
Apostataes gown some where else; and so leave him e^ther to repentance, or to
follow his predecessor to his appointed place.

But by following this bird over far, I had almost been trained from the nest.
I was showing what little affinity there is betwixt the churches of Christ and
these universities, these Colleges of clerks, these schools of Prophets. In
the Churches of Christ the names and offices of Chancellor, vice* Chan^elor,
Commiss^ry, Proctors, Taskers, Bedels, Prouosts, Masters of Colleges, vice
Masters, Boweers, Deanes, Fellows, etc. are all strange and unheard of; as
also their several statutes, customs, ceremonies, their manner of degree^ and
disputing for their degrees and order of teaching, which were no small labor
but to reckon up.

All which as they are strange to the Church of Christ, who find not in all
Gods word any of these offices, degrees, statutes, orders, customs,
ceremonies, vows etc. neither any such universities, colleges, societies of
scholars: so (seeing they have no ground in the word of God, no fellowship or
communion with the Church) I see not why they should have any more tolleration
then their elder brethren the monks, who eueri^ way had as great show of
holiness and color of vtility to the Church as they, or t^ese other cath^drall
coll^giate dens have, yea and might both as soon and as well have been
purged of their Mass and latin service, as these are: so that the same end
that is befallen the one remains the other. The lord is not pleased with any
voluntary religion. That building that has not the word of God for the
fou^datio^, though yt be dawbed with never so great cunning Ezekiel. 13. 11. etc,
and learning, and vndershored with never so great policy and power, though
yt be built as high as B^bel, yet shall yt assuredly fall, Math. 7. 26 1. Ioh.
1. 7. Ephesians. 4. 13. 14. 15. 16. Ephesians. 5. 8. 9 10. 11. 12.
and the greater shall be the fall thereof. As there is no building without the
word of God for the foundation; so is there no fellowship or communion out of
the Church of God. And therefore no such confused colleges, no such idolatrous
assemblies as are not gathered unto Christ but unto Antichrist, as live not in
that Christian order and fellowship which Christ has appointed to all his
servants in his Church, but lead their lives in antichristian disorder in
Babilonish, if not Sodomitish confusion; no such heathen schools wherein youth
is not trained up in the fear, knowledge, and order of CHRIT, but in vain Ephesians.
6. 4. (...). 22. 6.
arts, superstition, idolatry, disorder etc. have any foundation in the word
of God, any fellowship with or allowance in the Church of God.

But here will the university Knights draw me within the compass of these two
absurdities: First that I condemn all good arts and literature; then, that I
quite drive them out of the world by taking away the schools of the same,
wherein youth might be trained and brought up.

Nothing less, I with my whole heart allow of any art or science that is
consona^t to the word of God, and to the doctrine which is according to
godliness: only the curious and heathen arts, profane and vain babblings and
oppositions of science falsely so caled which they profess and wherewith they
poison and co^upt all the youth of the la^d, I abhor, because God condemns.

As for schools to teach the tongues or any laudable or necessary art, I wish
them in abundance; yt if yt were possible not only the youth, but even the
whole church might be trained therein: I with my whole heart wish, that all the
Lords people were Prophets: such an enemy am I to true knowledge and learning,
that I would not have yt any longer kept secret in a mystery, but even
proclaimed upon the house top in every City and in every street: yet still and
ever with this caution, that these schools both be in an established church (I
mean in such places where the Saints live together in the faith, order,
obedience and communion of CHRIST) and not in such monkish, idolatrous,
confused, idle, profane colleges and fellowships as theirs are: Likewise that
the tongues or sciences be here taught in an holy, sanctified, reverend, grave
manner, and not in such an unsanctified vain manner as they use: So shall the
earth be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters that cover the sea: for
in the Church of Christ are al his springs enclosed, which by this means
should run at every conduct, and water the whole land abundantly, whereas
now they lie in miserable darkness, wholly ouergrowen with brambles and briers.

And surely I even with marvel wonder, how these men can be so blinded, to
compare these wicked idolatrous societies to the asse^blies of the proph^ts, or
unto the Church of Christ, when you see they have nothing common with them or
like unto them, either in the people assembled, doctrine taught, manner of
teaching and learning, or order of life; when they utterly want warrant in the
word of God for such kind of Colleges, societies and schools, these having
been derived either from the heathens, Egiptians, Greeks, Persians that had
their peculiar colleges and schools to their peculiar sects, or else have
is^ued out of the smoke of Antichrists inventions out of the bottomless pit.
They always have been and still are the very hyues and nurseries of these
armed poisoned Locusts and venomous Scorpions, I mean either that false
ministry of Antichrist, even all the governing and teaching priests as
Cardinals, Arch-bish. Bish. Suffragan^s, Archdeacons, Chan^lors, Com^issaries,
Civil Doctors, Advocates, Proct^rs, (...) rouing Ministers and Preachers,
parish Priests etc. or those cou^terfait religious hypocrites, monks, Friars,
Nuns, Clerks, or (as we now of late call them) scholars. Al which have in
innumerable multitudes from time to time and at all times swarmed and issued
out of these hyues into the face of the whole earth, corrupting and destroijng
eueri^ green thing, poisoning the pure fountains of Gods word with their
accursed gloz^s, d^epe learning, subtle and figurative interpretations,
darkning the son and infecting the air therewith; as also with the
blasphemous traditions of their king (...) that Angel of the bottomless pyt.
They have always most pestilently fought under this their captain against the
Lamb his Gospel and Church, plentifully furnishing and continually supplijng
all the offices and roomths belonging to that huge Midianitish host of
Antichrist: the leaders, captains, and officers whereof, are and ever have
been wholly taken out of these Ser^liaes, even from the Pope^ person to the
lowest Priest.

How they are reformed by having this english portesse their service book in
stead of their old masse-booke, may partly by that which is above written
concerning the same, appear: but more manifestly, by taking a view of some of
the blasphemous idolatrous customs which still remain in practice with them
in the same manner as they did under the Pope: all or any of which yt is not
here my purpose any further to describe. It suffices me to have showed them
to be confused, idolatrous, unchristian, unlawful assemblies and societies; so
far from being to be compared unto, or justified by the assemblies of the
Prophets or that heavenly exercise of proph^cie now in the Church of CHRIST,
as they are not to be suffered in a Christian commonwealth. And therefore he ^re
again once more I conclude; that both these ungodly assemblies, as also the
cathedral dens and colleges, ought by as good right to be abolished, as
their other brethren and sisters of a birth the monasteries and nunries are,
seeing they all want foundation in the word, had one and the same hellish
original, had and these still retain the same blasphemous incurable abus^s,
which can by no way be reformed but by their utter dissolution.

Thus have we through the mercy of God by the light of his word taken a
slight vie^ of the nestes of these unclean birds, and have thereby seen both
what manner of schools, and what kind of Prophets these are: we have seen how
evil this 14 of the Corinthians fitteth either these university and cathedral
Colleges, or these new devised Co^uenticles of p^opheticall priests: we have
scene how wickedly they corrupt, pervert, abuse that scripture and holy
exercise. Now yt remains but in a line or two, compare their public
preaching in their Synagogues to this heavenly exercise of prophecy instituted
in the churches of Christ.

First these parish priests or hired preachers al of them preach under their
ordinaries license stint and limitation, as has been showed. The^ they are
prescribed their time when to begin. They have a prescript place like a tubbe
called their pulpyt, for ye most part able to receive no more then one person,
except yt be a suggestor or prompter, as in some special places: Neither do
they ordinarily speak any more the^ one, and he for the most part disputes to
the howerglasse, which being run his sermocination must be at an end. Preach
this priest never so unsound corrupt or heretical doctrine, there is no present
or public controulement or retractation to be had. Handle he the scripture
never so insufficiently or vnsauorilye, pervert, mistake, or falsify he yt
never so grievously, there is no amends or supply of others to be looked for,
none else being suffered to speak. The Church has no power either to approve
or reprove any doctrine delivered the^, be yt never so consonant to, or
dissonant from the word of God.

Here would not be forgotten also the sweet psalmodical harmony of the
Vultures, Crows, Gleades, Owls, Ge^se; of the Leopards, Bears, Wolves, Dogs,
Foxes, Swine, Goats (pardon me for thus ye holy Ghost terms and likeneth the
proph^ne co^fuse multitudes assembled in the false Church) All these together
with one accord sympathy and harmony sing some pleasant ballade, or else unto
DAVID'S melodious Harp some psalm in ^ime (I say not rithme now or meetre) well
concinnate to the ear (though never a whit to the sens^, purpose or true use
of the psalm) before the sermon, to stir up the spirit of their worthy priest
or preacher: Who being thus ^apt or ravished with this harmony, goes to his
gear in form aboue^aid, where his mouth distilles, and his lips drop down
such old parables, such premeditate and well studied and chosen sentences, as
shall displease no party, unless he be of too suspicious a nature; or
howsoever I warrant you he has his learned privileged author, and that at his
fingers ends for his discharge. Thus have you briefly seen the usual order of
your public prophecy. If you compare yt now to the rules and orders set down
by the Apostle for that blessed exercise unto al churches in that 1. Cor. 14.
ver. 26. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33: then may you judge of your selves what is right or
amiss, and ease me of further trouble to rave in this filthy doung, and to
bring this counterfeit stuff in particular to the trial. Great were the
labor and far exceeding my slender capacity, especially my decayed memory,
but even summarily to recount all the principal and special heads of their
falfe doctrines and false practice, from whence flow infinite errors and
enormities, even as the innumerable drops of a fountain* yea but to prosecute
and go forward in this disordered mane^ to search out and ^me up those which
yet are wanting. All which I rather leave to the more diligent and fruitful
inuestigatio^ of such as God has endued with a greater i^dgment and more
clear sight, confessing my self both wearied and ouercharged with the greatness
of the work. For whiles I have endeavored but to give you as yt were a blush of
their cou^terfait and antichristian ministry, and to show the error of their
educatio^, election, ordin^tion and administration throughout, of the
blasphemous and idolatrous worship they use, of their sacrilegious and
adulterate sacraments, their prostituting and selling them the Gospel
themselves, of their profanation of prayer, the name and word of God both read
and preached, abrogating and excluding part, mankeling, dismembring,
distorting, perverting the rest to their idol feasts, sacraments, marijng,
burijng, visiting, churching, charming the fields: how they preach the word by
stint, limitation, subjection both of themselves and their doctrine to their
antichristian ordinaries, whose apostati^al throne they uphold and dawbe
therewith, as also gild and adorn the whore the false Church, ioining yt to all
the abomination and sin of the land, hiding, stealing, concealing, obscuring,
wrasting, munging, corrupting, leauening, selling the Gospel; as also their
abusing, counterfaiting, perverting the holy exercise of prophecy. Al which
when I had but lightly touched and discovered according to my purpose, hoping
that so I might have made an end of this odious and yrksome argument, these
things being so manifest and heinous in themselves that I need not stand either
to prove or disprove them, or to show the indignity, danger and enormities
that ensue thereof: Even then lo is the whole word of God, the Law and the
Gospel presented unto me, most wretchedly corrupted, abused, violate, and
trodden under foot by them, by your preachers I say, even your learned best
Good men that you so esteem of: I still speak and would be understood of the
general and public errors and transgressions of this Church, which if I
should go about to particulate, I could not hope to live until I had made an
end.

And that you may not think I speak by the figure hyperboie, as they use: I
earnestly bes^ech any one in whom^ is any spark of light, grace, conscience,
love or fear of God, to consider and examine by the word of God, or rather to
lament and deplore with me the through corruption and universal transgression
of al Gods laws both in the Church and common wealth, as the present estate of
each does show. The one I hope this present treatise shall somewhat reveal and
discover: the other shall be as manifest, if by this light with a single eye you
but pervse ye public laws, judgments, pleas, trials, customs, orders,
trades, estates, degrees (still I speak generally of the whole body which has
not from the crown of the head to the sole of the feet one sownd part, but
all is full of wounds, swellings, ulcers, corruption) so that he that fears
God cannot in this common wealth keep a good conscience, and live amongst them,
whether he buy, sell, lend, borrow, hire, work for hire, give, take, sue or be
s^ed* The Laws, Courts, Judges, Iuries, Advocates, generally all estate^ from
the highest to the lowest are so thoroughly corrupt.

Not to speak here of the particula^ sins, the height, quality and
universality of them, which were infinite; let the idolatrous and blasphemous
worship, yea the idolatrous and blasphemous oaths, publikly admitted, given,
required and received of all persons in all causes, so contrary to the law of
God in the manner, and all the circumstances show how soundly the first Table of
the law is taught in the Church of England: Not to speak of the common and
usual swearing, forswearing, blaspheming, cursing for every trif^e and cause,
yea without any cause, used through the whole land without controlement,
rebuke, censure, punishment. Let the general prophannesse, excess in
gluttony, in apparel; let the idleness, wantonness, vanity, with the idolatry
above spoken of and used upon the Lords day show, how well the fourth
commandment is taught and observed in the Church of England. Let the common
riot and headstrong disobedien^e and contempt of all the children and servants,
even of all the youth of the land, the due punishment whereof is here neither
spoken of, nor executed; let their profane, vain, idle educatio^ show, how well
the 5 Commandment is taught and observed in the Church of England. Let the
continual open iarres, fraies, murder, bloodshed in every corner of the land
without either censu^e or punishment, yea the usual pardons that they give for
the same show, how well the sixth Commandment is taught in the Church of
England: Not here to speak of the common contentions, wrangles, iarres,
suits, wrongs; of the wrath, heartburning, malice, envy, cursed speaking,
reuiling, nicknaming, reproching, blaspheming, that are rife amongst them: Let
the general uncleanness, whoredom, adultery, which never abounded more in
SODOM (so that almost there is not one amongst them that has his wife chaste
or their bed private) Let their manner of punishing and purging this sin show,
how well they teach and keep this commandment: Not here to speak of their
exquisite arts and curiosity in setting out their beauty to the view, their
prodigious shapes, whorish atyres, dissolute and immodest behauiours, entising
and alluring words wherewith they provoke unto lust, all which in this Church
are made no sins but matters of comlines, courtesy, love etc. And that your
grauest and best conscienced preachers think not themselves in this case
without blame, let them examine their corrupt consciences, how many of their
chief hearers and deuou^ proselites they know both men and women, that know
such crimes each by other, and yet for filthy lucre or fleshly respects
continue together. Let the public open general thefts, violence, robberies,
wrongs, and either their permission, or their corrupt and unlawful punishing
the ^ame show, how the eight commandment is tought. Not here to speak of the
privy and more secret, nay truly of the open falshode, deceit, coue^ in all
trades, offices* callings, estates, degrees, persons. What should I ^tand to
prosecute the rest. Let the general deceit, swearing, forswearing, backbiting,
slaundering; the insatiate coveting, lusting etc. show ^ow well they teach and
observe the other laws. And as they deal with the laws and judgments, so
handle they in like manner the ^rophets, which are the faithful expounders of
the laws: al which to demonstrate in particular, were an endless and
vnacheuable labor.

And if these general corruptions, errors, transgressio^s be so infinite, what
is to be thought of their particular personal errors which they in their
public doctrine and daily ministry sparse abroad, even as that flood of
bitter wate^s which the Dragon casts forth of his mouth and the miserable
people of the earth swallow up, partly through their general blindness, partly
through their servile subjection, which have not the power or liberty
publicly to control or censure any error, be yt never so blasphemous.
Whereupon is come about, that every one takes boldness to utter in their
pulpyts what him lists (so he speak not against any thing by public
authority established) he may handle the word of God after his own fancy,
and abownd in his own sense. Whereupon arise such an innumerable heap of
errors, so m^nie diverse, variable, inconstant and contrary opinions amongst
them, that (as the ignorant papists say) yt is impossible to find two of them
in one mind and judgment, yea in any two Churches of the land to hear the same
doctrines taught, because in deed they preach either their own dreams and
fantasies, or else their lucubrations out of humane writings, who are almost of
as diverse and sundry opinions as themselves. Yet if any of these authors be
with the BB^. priuiledg, then are they authentic, irrefragable, called by both
sides the faith of the Church of England, and not to be impugned or gainsayed
without the censure of most high presumption. Thus has God in his just
judgment divided the tongues and confounded the language of these Babiloni^h
builders, that they almost agree not in or upon any thing; one preaching one
thing, an other the quite contrary; one building after this sort, another
after that; one calling for this law, this thing, an other for that. Thus is
their kingdom divided, their estate confused, and their house shall shortly be
left unto them desolate.

Many and innumerable excuses, shifts, cauils, they daily knit, wea^e and forge
to cover their detestable dealings, and hide their ways from the Lord, both by
perverting the scriptures thereunto, and diuerting them by their sophistry and
putting them away, be they never so directly against them: with all which their
poisoned diuises yt is not my purpose nor yet in my power here to meddle, they
being already so infinite, and their forge daily going to frame new. Only this
from the mouth of the Lord I warn al men of. They are but Cockatrice eggs
Isa. (...).
that they disclose and hatch, but spiders webbes that they weaue: their eggs
are full of deadly poison, he that eats of them dies, he that is but
sprinkled with them or treads upon them, is as if he were stung with a Viper
or Scorpion: their webbes shall not be for cloth, neither shall they cover
themselves with their deeds: their works are the works of iniquity, and the
work of violence in their hands etc. The work and the workmen shall be consumed
together. The* wall and the dawbers shall both fall and be overthrown in the
storm of the Lords wrath: all Ezekiel. 13. Amos 9.
their turning of diuises, though they build as high as heaven and dig as deep
as hell, shall not cover them from the eyes or defend them from the hand of the
Lord; but rather as the Prophet says in an other place, they shall pull al
down upon their heads by the same means whereby they thought to uphold yt. For
(says he) this iniquity shall be unto them as a breach that falls, as a
swelling in an high wall whose breaking comes suddenly in a moment; the
sentence is gone out from the Lord, yt ^asteneth to be performed: BABYLON shall
fall and be utterly destroyed Isa. 47.
together with all their substance, people, pleasures: evil comes upon her,
and she shall not know the morning thereof: destruction shall fall upon her
suddenly ere she be aware: the multitude of her divines and inchanters shall
neither deliver her from, nor discover unto her these evils; but they shall be as
stubble, and the fire shall burn them together with her.

This is the end of all their cunning and learning; which you see they employ
not to publish and proclaim the Lords truth, so much as to suppress and
darken the same; hoping thereby to hide their own counterfeit dealing, which
the Lord will have no longer covered, but reuealeth their wickedness unto all
men, that those which have any fear or love of God, or care of their own
salvation, might save their souls from (...). ^ 4.
their murtherous mouths, and follow the deceitful miserable guides no further
in the crooked mooueable p^thes of their inventions, no^ stay any longer in the
steps of that flock, but to come forth from Prou. 5. ^ong. ^. 6. 7.
amongst them unto that true shepherd of ISRAEL which so graciously seeks
and calls them that he may bring them to Zion that City of joy, that
mountain of holiness, that heavenly inclozed paradise where he feeds and
waters his kiddes with the fruits and water of that ^ree and that river of
life; which so far passes that earthly garden or park where ADAM was first
plac^d, as that excelled the wilderness of Kadesh, or as the heaven passes the
earth, or in deed as the true substance the shadow and type. Which grace that
you may find and apprehend as yt is the chief end of this my present writing,
so is yt my continual pra^er unto the Lord; herein resting and being assured of
this, that all CHRIST'S sheep will hear his voice, but a false Propher or a
stranger they will not hear or follow.

Such are al these your ministers and preachers apparently proved unto you to
be, by all the marks which God in his word has set down^ to know them by.
False Prophets they are, in that they persuade unto 1 ^rror 2 transgressio^ 3
idolatry 4 apostacy Deuteronomy. 13. 2. False Prophets they are, in that they
prophecy unto this sinful land in this corrupt estate pe^ce and prosperity.
l^r. 28. 8. False Prophe^s they are, in that cover all the ^inne of the land
with the name of the Lord, of the church, Gospel, Sacraments etc. Ier. 7. 4.
and 18. 18. Micah. 2. 7. False Prophets they are, in that they dawbe the muddy
wall of this corrupt and apostaticall estate, with their untempered sermons
Ezekiel. 13. 10. etc. False Prophets they are, in that they prophecy in the name
of so many Baalims, Baal Bishop, Baal Patron and those Baalims to whom they
stand chaplens. Ier. 23. 13. False Prophets they are, in that they prophecy
for hire, and sell their cuning Ezekiel. 13. 4. 19 Mi^h. 2. 11. and 3. 11. Math.
10. 8. False Prophets they are, in that they handle not the word of God
sincerely and faithfully, but join yt to all the wickedness of the la^d etc.
Ier. 23. 28. 29. 1 These. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. Ezekiel. 34. 18. False Prophets they are
in that they blow not ye trumpet, but yield unto the enemy and are scilenced
at their commandment Ezekiel. 33. 6. Isa. 56. 10. Ier. 1. 17. False Prophets they
are, in y^ they are me^ pleasers, vailers, pillow sowers Ezekiel. 13. 18. ^al. 1.
10. False Prophets they are, in y^ with their sweet to^gu^s they allure,
deceive, nourish and hold all the profane people in idolatry and sin Ier.
23. 17. 31* 32. Strangers they are from the common wealth of (...), in that they
are not gathered to CHRIST their head, but stand members of the fa^se Church
under Antichrist. Ephesians. 2. 12. Mat. 12. 30. Strangers they are, in that they
execute a strange office, unheard of in the Church or Testament of CHRIST. Romans
12. 7. 8. Strangers in that they are not called of God unto their office, but
entered and ascended an other way Ioh. 10. 1. ^ c. Heb. 5. 4. Nu. 16. 5. 40.
Stragers they are, in that they ex^rcise a counterfeit, antichristian, rouing,
idolatrous ministry in the fal^ Church Deuteronomy. 32. 17. 2 Chronicles. 11. 15. Amos. 5.
26. Jude. Strangers, in that they have their original f^o^ the apostatical
chair of Antichrist which they still guard and vphould, figh^g under his flag
against CHRIST his Gospel and the faith^ull witnesses thereof. R^u* 9. 3. 12.
Reu. 13. 13. 14. and 16. 1^. Blind false guides and seducers they are, in that
they lead the people in the wa^es of darkness and death, promising them liberty,
reformation etc. when they themselves stand bonds^ruants of corruption.
Prouer^. 2. 13. etc. Math. 15. 14. Hebr. 6. 1. 2 Pet* 2. 19. 2 Timothy 3. 6. 7.
False builders and dece^tfull work men, in that they neither gather unto nor
build upon the true foundation, CHRIST and his word; but gather unto and build
upon (...) and his traditions, and so destroy thesoules of all that are built in
this their Church. 2 Corint. 1^. 13. ^ Cori^t. 3. 9. etc. Ephesians. 2. 20. 21. 22.
They are powered out in the error of Bala^m for wage, in that they sell their
divinity to Gods enemies Jude. 11. The way of Caine they follow in that they
murder the faithful by daily reproaches vitupe^ie and slanders. Iud* 11. ^
Ioh. 3. 12.

The truth of the^e things you may read and see in the scriptures: the proof of
al these you may see in their standing, doctrines, practice, duly compared unto
and truly examined by the rules of Gods word. Now yt r^maineth that you be
warned and obey the calling of God, and disterminate your selves from amongst
them, least you despise the grace of God against you^ own souls, and he give
you up to their delusions.

Let such as take offen^e at my sharp manner of writing against these their
esteemed learned preachers before they condemn my spirit (...) yt, whether
these judgments be the Lords or no. Then let them examine impartially whither
these men be not under the same, in such ^aner as I have said. As for me, what
am I that I should alter, or what is man that he should control^ the Lords
iudgment^s in loosing that which he binds, or holding in veneration that
which he has in detestation, or to give titles unto any in their sin: that
were to call CHRIST execrable, yea to make my self guilty of the same sin and
judgment which the Lord now commands me to denounce against them. Of the
affection and intent of my heart, I make the searcher of al hearts Judge, even
whether I desire not their salvation as mine own. They that judge the medecin
too sharp, and me an austere and unskillful physician, should do well for the
first to examine the ingredients by that heavenly herbal, and the whole
confection together by the practice of that great physician and his disciples.
For the ingredients I have prefixed under every branche and leaf, the bough
and root where I gathered them. For the composition and confection, I have
desired to follow our Savior CHRIST in his conferences, where he reproved the
priests, Scribes and Phariseis of his time whiles he lived here amongst them
in the flesh, desiring you to pervse the 21. 22. 23. chap. of Man. comparing
them to the other Evangelists and unto zach. 11. I have also followed the
Prophets and Apostles, who always dealt most sharply with the false Prophets
and false Teachers of their times, how great estimation or show of learning
soever they carried, and have le^t unto us perpetual doctrines to do the like,
both to watch, discover and avoid false Prophets which shall arise within the
Church; as also to bayte the wolf from the fould, and not to suffer him to
enter, much less to teach or exercise any office there, come he never so
disguised in sheep clothing, wrapped in Samuels mantel, or in a rough hayrie
garment to deceive. If their examples for their incomparable preeminence be not
allowed me to follow, yet their doctrines cannot be so taken from the least of
Christ's servants: For a p^rticular instance I insi^t among many other
scriptures upon Zacar. 13. 2. 3. Verses: where they may see an express warrant
for this my manner of dealing with these manner of me^, as also the ^oueraigne
virtue and effect of this sharp medecin* old corrupt sores must not be cured
with skinning plasters or sweet ointme^ts: If I should obey their ambitious
appetite therein, I should destroy both the^ and my self: their seared
consciences must be wounded, their rough garment and counterfeit ministry
which they for gain and vainglorie so corruptly execute, must be plucked from
them, they showed the height of their sin and the wrath of God due unto the
same for the high prof^nation of his holy name and word, and the misleading and
murdering so many souls etc. that so they may (if they belong to Gods
election and to CHRIST'S kingdom) be humbled for their sins, and betake them
to some more godly trade of living, until CHRIST think them worthy, and call
them to the work of his ministry. This grace and effect with my whole heart
I wish them; beseeching the^ in the mean while not to fix their eyes upon my
baseness and ignorance which bring the message, so much as upon their own
miserable estate and the message that God vouchsafes even by me to send them,
least they be offended at my baseness and folly (which is euetie way greater
then they ^a^ imagine or I utter) and so in the pride of their own wisdom and
presumption of their own hearts in disdayning me, they stumble at the words of
God, and despise his grace against their own souls. The baseness of CHRIST'S
choice has ever been no small offense to the learned Pha^seis and their
proselites, that he should begin his glorious ministry and kingdom in GALILE,
and that amongst a sort of the most despised simple artificers, leaving and
rejecting the great learned Phariseis, Scribes and Priests, who where the
greatest enemies and persecutors of him and his Gospel etc. The scripture also
speaks evidently that in these latter days, when the viall^ of Gods
judgments shall be powered upon the false Church, that the most part of the men
that have received the mark of the Beast and worshipped his image shall not
repent of their works, but break out into noisome and grievous sores and
botches and shallbe so tormented with hea^e, that their tongues shall be smitten
with venomous bli^ters, that they shall blaspheme the God of heaven for their
pain and sores etc. The truth of this prophecy, and terror of these
judgments, I behold (with grief) executed even upon the cheifest and
learnedest of your ministry, stricken with such blindness as they grope their
way in the noone light, and reele like drunken men in their paths: they are
hardened with ambition and couetise as they can find no grace, nor place to
repentance: yea (that I even tr^mble to think of) possessed which such madness,
as they that sometimes to our seeming sought reformation and the kingdom of
CHRIST JESUS, are now become of al others the most pernicious en^mies thereof,
daily stud^jng for new ca^illes and shifts to hide their wretchedness, and to
keep back and misleade the people, yea to weaken and discourage the hearts and
hands of such as in the love, fear, and truth of God have begi^ne to build
the Lords Temple; despising, accusing, slandering, reproching them worse then
ever the Amonites and Samarita^es did the Jews; yea even blaspheming the truth
of the Lord, when they see they can by no means prevail against yt. For all
which their impious deeds and hard sayings, they shall shortly give account to
him that is coming with thowsands of his saints.

THVS HAVING discored unto you the true estate of the people, ministry,
worship and ministration of the church of England: yt remains now that we
take a little view of the (...) government and ordinances of this their Church:
which though they may partly appear by that which is already written
concerning other points, yet if they be brought a little nearer the light, and
compared to these orders and ordinances that our Savior CHRIST has set down
in his last will and Testament, and incommended to his Church for ever; then
shall they most e^idetly and easily be discerned of all men; no labor, learning
or power can then any longer justify, couller, or uphold them.

Great has been their craft* and manifold their devises to cover their
antichristian practices, and to uphold this their ruinous and tirannous
kingdom (I had need express my me^ning to be of their false ecclesiastical
regiment, the kingdom of the Beast, least they be my interpretors and draw me
within dager of treason, so like are they unto their predecessors the Priests
and Phariseis, so apt (as the Prophet says) to lay a snare for him that
rebukes in the gate, and to condemn him as guilty for the word etc.) First
they sought to darken the true light, by terming this heavenly government of
CHRIST and holy ord^rs and ordinances of his Testament The outward discipline
used in the primitive Churches, especially in the time of Lent etc. then to
keep the Magistrates and the people utterly from all sight and knowledge
hereof, both by inhibiting all their priests to preach thereof, and not suffering
any such places of scripture as make express mention thereof to be so much as
read in their Church, as ^om. 12. 1 Cor. 15. and 12. 2 Cor. 2. Ephesians. 4. 2 These.
3. 1 Timothy 3 and 5. Ti^. ^. much less to be sincerely expounded and made known
unto the Church, yt they can at no hand away with scilencing, suspending,
emprizoning such of their forsworn priests as meddle with such matters. Yea
the wretches persuade the magistrates, that yt would breed an innovation, if
not a subversion of the whole state, hinder the course of the common law, cut
off the civil, quite extinguish the cannon law, that yt would raise continual
schisms, contentions, and vnapeaseable troubles and tumultes; that yt would
innouate and alter the regiment of the common wealth, and draw yt to an
Aristocra^ie or Democrati^ etc.

These things these unclean deuilish spirits that are come and speak out of
the mouth of the Dragon, blow into the civil magistrates (...), and breath into
their hear^es, who being a great deal more pollitike then religious (the Lord
knows with what truth and sorrow of hear^ I speak yt) are not able to
discern this most impious and high blasphemy against God and his CHRIST, from
sacred verity; but because yt is* plausible to the flesh, rightly agrees to
the present corrupt estate both of Church and common wealth, and in nothing
disturbeth the strong man tha^ holds the^ al in peace, they readily i^brace
yt, publish and maintain their deuilish decrees, give their power unto the
Beast, whereby he warreth against CHRIST his Gospel and saints. And thus are
they drawn by them into the great day of God almighty even against CHRIST and
them that are of his side, whom they daily persecute and murder in their
prisons; and therefore shall be slain with that sharp sword of him that rid^th
upon the white horse; they shall in the just judgment of God* ^e made a pray
eue^ a quarry and a feast to these unclean spirits, to these greedy ravenous
fowls, which (as that scripture says) shall feed and (...) their ravenous
appetites upon them, yea these unclean spirits shall draw them together with
the Beast and the false Prophet into battle against CHRIST and against his
army of saints.

These blasphemous wretches (not to darke^ only bu^ to reproach the truth yet
further) proceed and give out, that the heavenly order and ordinances which
Christ has appointed in his Testament ye government of his Church (which they
call discipline) are but accidental, and no essential mark of ye established
Church, but that yt may be a Church planted without them, yea that the true
Church of Christ may take an other order of government, other ordinances then
Christ has appointed in his Testament; that this order of Christ's government is
neither permanent, perpetual, nor necessary, but that yt is in a Christian
magistrates power to keep out Christ's government, and to erect and establish an
other after their wills.

These hellish and blasphemous doctrines do all the Priests and Preachers of
the la^d give out and publish, else could they not either esteem the Church of
England in this estate as yt receaueth Antichrists yoke this popish hierarchy
in the true Church of Christ, neither would they exercise any ministry in
this Church in this estate, or sue unto and stay for the Prince and parliament
to bring themselves vuder Christ's sa^red government.

But the Pontificals proceed yet further to open their mouths unto more
accursed blasphemy, which would make a Christian heart to rend his clothes, to
hear that Christ's blessed order wherein the Apostles* planted and establis^ed
the first churches, is not only not necessary, but intolerable now under a
christian Prince, as bringing not only al these public perturbations and
mischiefs unto the commonwealth which are above recited, and they have
suggested unto the magistrates; but also innumerable other inco^uenie^ces which
would proceed if the people should have election of their own ministry and
Church offic^rs; if the affairs of the church should be directed by a council
or company of Elders; if the doubts of the churches should be decided by an
assembly of other churches (which they call a Synod and a Council) if faults
should be censured by excommunication etc. Thus is Antichri^t exalted and
opens his mouth against God and al his ordinances. Thus are the tongues of
the false Prophets fe^ on fire of hell.

Many other impossibilities are there brought by ye Potificals against ye
Reformicts, why this their course which they seek to bring in by parliament
ought not and cannot be admitted in this land. Al which because they neither
concern nor hinder the truth, but rather through the mercy of God stop and
make head to the new divised forgeries of these Reformistes, I w^llingly pass
over in s^ilence, leaving the divided kingdom to t^ie out the matter amongst
themselves.

Yet now before I proceed further, let me in a word or two give yo^ warning of
the other sort of enemies of Christ's kingdom, y^ Phariseis of these times, I
mean these your great learned Preachers your Good meu that sigh and groan for
reformation, but their hands with the fluggard deny to work. These
counterfaites would raise up a second erro^ even as a second Beast, by so much
more dang^rous by how much y^ has more show of the truth. These men instead of
this gross antichristian government which is now manifest and odious unto all
men, would bring in a new adulterate forged government in show, or ^ther in
despite of Christ's blessed government, which they in y^ pride, rashness,
ignorance and sensuality of their fleshly hearts most miserably innouate,
corrupt and pervert, both 1 in the very thing they seek, 2 in their manner of
seeking yt, 3 in the people over whom they would set yt, 4 and in their manner
of exercising yt.

The thing yt self they innovate and corrupt, in that they add new devises of
their own; as their Pasto^al (...) their Sacraments, their set continued
Synods, their sele^t Cl^sses of ministers, their settled supreme council.

Their false manner of seeking yt is manifest, in that they seek to bring
Christ in by the arm of flesh, by suting and supplicating to his vassals and
servants (if so be they will have them or can imagine them Christians, that
have not or will not suffer Christ to reign over them by his own laws and
ordinances) or if they judge them not Christians, then they seek, suit unto,
and stay upon his enemies until they will suffer and allow Christ to re^gne over
his Church according to his own will and Testament. This is not; Ki^e the son
least he be angry, and ye perish in the way: Repent for the kingdom of God is
at hand; and if they refuse and speak evil of the way, to shake of the dust of
the feet against them: this is not to bring Christ in by the power of his own
word and spirit as yt has wrought in their hearts true r^pentance and
conversion, by showing them the error and danger of their ways, and by calling
them unto the right practice of the Gospel. Nay in stead of this, these men
will not only continue suting to such despisers where God calls them away; but
stay the whole land in their idolatry from receiving Christ, until these men
will permit them: yea they vvil so sweeten the matter and so allay yt to their
fleshly appetites, as ^rist shall be framed unto the commonwealth and not the
commonwealth unto Christ: they shall still retain and exercise this their
ungodly devilish power to give laws unto Christ and his Church, and to receive
or permit no more of his laws then stands with their good liking, so they
will but receive this their new divised plattforme, and put down the Bishops.

They also make no other choice, neither seek further argument^ of faith and
repentance in the people over whom they would set this their pretended
government. These men still would have the whole land to be the Church, and
every parrish therein a particular Congregation of the same. These men would
have all redressed by virtue of one parliament one day, and not by virtue of
the word preached: which, as yt has with them no power to effect any thing, so
expect they not any fruits thereof, but take in all the commonwealth, even all the Queens subjects into this their Church under CHRIST'S government and
protection, for so would they bear them in hand, that such this reformation
which they seek, is.

Their false manner of exercising this their pretended discipline, may (...)
app^re by the weak and fearful practice of some of their forward men; who
that they might make a fair show amongst their rude ignorant parishners, in
stead of CHRIST'S government set up their counterfeit Discipline in and over all
the parish, making the popish Chur^hwardens and perjured Questmen Elders: And
for Mr. Parson himself, he takes unto him the instrument of that foolish
shepeheard, his pastoral staff or wooden dagger of suspension, wherewith he
keeps such a floorishing, as the flies ca^ have no rest; yea by your leave,
if any poor man in the parish offend him, he may peradventure go without his
bread and wine for that day.

Their permanent Synods and councels also which they would erect (not here to
speak of there new duch Class^ for therein is a secret) should only consist of
Priests or Ministers as they term them; people of the Churches be shut out,
and neither be made acquainted with the matters debated there, neither have
free voice in those Synods and Councels, but must receive and obey without
contradiction whatsoever those learned Priests shall decree. These Synods and
Councels shall have absolute power over all Churches, doctrines and ministers,
to erect, ratify or abrogate, to excommunicate or depose at their pleasures:
Their decrees are most holy without controulement, unless yt be by the Prince
or the high Court of Parliament: Not ^eere to speak of their solemn orders
observed in these councils and Synodes, as their choice by suffrage amongst
themselves of their Archisynagogo^, or Rector Chorj, their president (as they
call him) propownder or moderator of their council; about which their
predecessors have had no small stir, until their holy Father the Pope put an
end to the strife by getting the chair.

This stusfe they would bring in again under color of reformation, ^hese and
many more their leauened corrupt writings of discipline, and their
supplications unto the Parliament, d^clare: With what pernicious forgeries,
what kind of sacrilegious profanation of Gods holy ordinances, shall more
plainly appear^ when we have s^t down the truth of CHRIST'S institution, which
is the only arch-type and true pattern of all true builders and buildings;
which who so at any hand transgresses, either in matter or manner (as they
speak) is to be reproved as an evil workman, and his work to burn, seem yt
to have never so great an^iquitie, holiness and v^ilitie in pretense. The
ancient ways of the Lord are the only true ways; whatsoever is second or
diverse, is new and false. This I say, because both these factions of our
pontifical and reforming Priests have sought rather to the broken pitts and
dry cisternes of men's inventions for their direction and groundworke, then
unto the pur^ fountain of Gods word.

The first sort most gro^ly draw al their water from that most (...) drayne
and poisoned sink of the papistical corrup^ion, as is to be seen by their
whole ministry, worship, ministration, government etc. because yt in all
points accords ^o their antichristian prelacie, idola^rie, pride etc. and
only bent agrees to the corrupt estate of this realm, which has so long
been made drunk with the whores cup, that they can now taste or brook no
other liquor.

The other sort, they fetch their reformation from the primitive defectio^,
when the ministry began to usurp and grow into unlawful superiority and
jurisdiction; when they began to decline from the true pattern of CHRIST'S
Testament, and grew bold to innouate: as to set up a new and antichristian
ministry, as their Prouincials, Bishops, Archbishops, Archdeacons,
Metropolitanes, Patriarchs, to take the whole regiment of the Church into their
hands, to gather councils of Bishops, to make new decrees etc. All which
proceedings, as I find them defected from the rules of CHRIST'S Testament, so
far dare I boldly pronownce them (their proceedings I mean leaving their
persons to the Lords judgment) wicked and ungodly, not looking unto or
respecting the learning or holiness of the men, how ancient and how many
soever. From these ancient defections have these learned reforming Priests
drawn their platform of reformation, as best suting to the estimation of
their persons, the admiration of their learning and holiness, and not greatly
opposite to the sinful estate of the land, especially as they in their
wisdoms would use the matter; who (I dare undertake for them good men) would
not molest or offend any of wealth or authority, live as they list; neither
need they be so afraid of the thunderbolt of ex^munication, they will I warrant
you proceed to yt with a leaden heel, especially against such men.

And for the r^st which seems so strange in their ears, as their Pas^ors and
Elders for their Parson and Questmen, their Synodes in stead of their
Commissaries courts, their high councels in stead of the high commission; let
them never be afraid, for by that time they are acqu^inted with the new names,
they shall not find the jurisdiction half so strange as yt seems: It will be
troublesome to none but to their Lords the BB. their courts and attendants, and
the dombe ministers; in deed their cake is dough if this gear this sweeping
new reformation come in.

As for these new officers these Elders, they shall be but of the welthiest
honest simple men of the parish, that shall sit for ciphers dombe by their
Pastor and meddle with nothing, neither poor souls shall they know more then
they say. As for the ordering of all things, yt shall be in the Pastors hands
only, especially in some chief men who shall be these presidents and rulers of
Synodes and councels, and so the people be kept as far from the knowledge and
performance of their duties as ever they were: for so long have the Priests
(for so still I call all false and antichristian ministers) usurped and
detained the sole regiment of the Church in their hands, as yt will be a very
hard matter for the people ever to recover their liberty ag^ine.

You see how the one side (the Pontificals I mean) prescribe in their qui^
possession and reject al claim the people can make, refuting them by M^hiauels
considerations and (...) his Politikes in stead of the new Tes^ame^t, alleging
I wore not how many pollitike inco^uenie^ces in way of Bar.

The other sect (or faction rather) these Reformi^s, howsoever for fashion sake
they give the people a little liberty to sweeten their mouths, and make the^
believe that they should choose their own ministers (for further right in the
censuring their ministers, or in the ordering the affairs of their churches
they allow not, as has been said) yet even in this pretended choice do they
coozen and beguile the^ also, leaving them nothing but the smoky windy title of
election only; inioyning them to choose some university clarke, one of these
college birds of their own brood, or else comes a Synod in the neck of them,
and ^dnihilats the election whatsoeue^ ^t be.

They have also a trick to stop yt before yt come so far; namely in the
ordinatio^, which must (forsooth) needs be done by other Pri^sts: for the
Church that chooses him has no power to ordeyne him: And this makes the
mother Church of Geneu^ and the Duch classes (I dare not say the secret
classes in England) to make ministers for us in England.

And these ministers when they are come over, are received and esteemed as
Angels in hell, and shine as bright stars in these smoky Egyptian fornaces,
wherein the miserable people of the land are kept in most hard servitude, daily
new taskes laid upon them by this spiritual (...) Antichrist: so far are these
new guides (whom they trust) from leading them freely with the Lords banner
of the Gospel displaied before them, as you see they would be glad of any of
Pharaohs conditions, their suite at the best intendement and uttermost course
being but to worship God in Egypt, and to have these tyrannous taske-maisters
their Lord Bishops and their attendants taken from them. Most willing they are
with all their people to remain in spiritual bondage to the civil magistrate (I
would not here be misunderstood of that lawful bodily obedience which al
Christians owe in all lawful things unto the civil magistrate.

But these unclean spirits are gone out unto the Kings of ye earth to gather
them into battle against God and his Christ, to make them not only to cast
Christ's bands from them, but to tie him in their b^ndes; keeping away upon
their regal authority what part of Christ's laws they list from the Church,
and laying what laws of their own they list upon the Church. Alas what a
dangerous and fearful abuse of their authority is this? they are not made
Kings to reign over Christ or to giu^ him laws, but to honor and worship
the son, to cast down their Scepters at his feet, not to disturb or hinder
his saints from the free and sincere practice of his Testament, but to
encourage them and go before them therein, as king David did, dancing and
recoicing Psalm. 2. Psalm. 10^. 14. 15.
before the Arc. Princes are equally bound to the keeping of all Gods laws
as the meanest or any other, and shall for the brea^h thereof not escape the
judgment of that Lion of the tribe of Iud^, wh^ will Deuteronomy. 32. 4^.
tread upon Princes (as the prophet says) as clay when he treads the great
winepresse without the city. This is the portion of all the Lords Revel. 14.
enemies, to this banquet do these false Prophets with their perfidie and
^latterie bring them, that they cannot endure to be reproved of God himself by
his word, to which they can at no hand endure to be made subject. Therefore they
hate and persecute him that rebukerh in Am^s, 5. 10
the gate, they abhor him that speaks uprightly, and rule all things after
their own lusts.

And sure, eue^ this incorrigible pride and wickedness of Princes and
magistrates which would by no means be brought to the obedience of the Gospel,
first drove the Anabaptists into their deuili h conceits of the^, that no
Prince or magistrate could be saved; afterward, that their veri^ office and
function are utterly unlawful in the kingdom of Christ: which wicked heresies
as they have no ground in y^ word of God (the (...). 13.
civil magistracy being the blessed ordinance of God for the defense of
Christ's Gospel and Saints, and therefore al humble obedience thereunto 1. Pet.
2. 13. Tit. 3. 1.
comanded as unto the Lord himself, and this both by our Savior Christ^ own
example, and the continual exhortations and co^ma^deme^ts of his Apostles in all
their epistles unto the churches) so ca^ these Anab^ptistical heresies no way
be better refuted and taken out of the hearts of al me^ at once, the^ by the
humble submissio^ of Princes and magistrates unto the Revel. 21. 24.
Throne and Sc^pter of Christ, the^ by bringing their glory and honor unto ye
church according to the comfortable prophecies of the scriptures. Isa. 60. 3.
10. 11. Isa. 65. 25.
O what ^ comfort were this to Christ's poor la^bes, to ^ee the Lio^ so humbled
as to eat hay together with the^ in the mountain of the Lord, and not to live
of ye rauine and spoil of y^ poor sheep, so as they dare not come aneere
the^ for their fiercenes. What a joy were yt to see Gods ordinances thus
united, to see Moses and Aaron brethren, and this in the glorious spiritual
Temple of God, where Christ shall be Hhimmanuel, God with us, rule, guide, feed,
and sanctify us every one in their callings. O what a heavenly communion
should this be, what a beauty*, what a joy to the whole earth.

But o how far are we from this comfort, our magistrates from this happiness,
^euel. 16. 13 14.
whiles they give their ear to the serpent speaking out of the mouth of the
false prophet, that blasphemeth Christ and his ordinances, (...). ^7. 17 Heb.
10. 29 2 Thessalonians. 2. Reave. 13. Dan. 7. Re^. 14. 12.
and accuses his saints unto the^; whiles they give their power unto the Beast
yt tra^pleth Christ's Testamet under their feet, and cou^teth y^ blood thereof
as a common thing; y^ sets up the image of his own devises and causes al
me^ of al degrees to worship the same: and al such as in fear and faith unto
God refuse so to do, those in all hostile manner they confiscate, persecute,
imprison, enclose, make away, without ani^ equal hearing of their cause, or
once bringing yt to light. This, their blasphemous writings and sermons, ye
public worship and estate of their church, their prisons generally through
London and the land, declare. They have published in their writings That the
orders and ordinances which Christ has in^is Testament left unto ^is Church,
were but temporary whiles ^he Church ^as under heathen tyrants; and that where
the Gospel is embraced by a Christian Prince, they are not onli^ (...) but
inconvenient, yea intolerable, as bringing the utter subuersio^ of the land,
(...) up tumul^, and (...) and withdrawing the people from obedience unto their
magi^ and a number of such like execrable mandible blasphemies. Read that most
blasphemous Pare^thesis of T. C. esteemed the Bishop of Winchester, beginning
at ye73 page unto y^ 84 of yt his Book which he writ against the Libeller
MARTIN MARPRELATE. The wickedness and falsehood of whose deuilish calumniations
y^ they may eue^ suddenly appear, I will adresse my self to prove unto him by
the undoubted evidence of Gods word y^strange Proposition which he so
co^fidently co^de^neth, and in way of reprochful challenge to al Christ's
servants propou^deth: namely, That there ought throughout al^ges and estates
of y^ world in all places, to be one and y^ same form of outward government in all true churches of Christ unto the worlds end. Scilicet: tha^ Apostolic
priminue pattern lef^ unto (...) in Christ's new Testament and none other. And
this through the assistance of Gods spirit by direct scriptures, without any
wrasting or perverting the same. Which being done, by that time (I hope) the
innocence of such as seek this Christian order and communion in sincerity,
as also the blasphemy of them that deprave the order and accuse the seekers
thereof, shall be evident to al men. I am not ignorant in what a sophistical
Saducaical manner this horned Bishop has propounded his questions, quite from
the state of the controversy and drift of his reproaches subseque^t. The deceit
and error whereof may be more fitly laid open after this difficult proposition
(which he and his associates with such tyranny impugn) is proved.

God we read when he first erected his tabernacle amongst the Isra^, set down
in the mountain the perfect pattern of al things eue^ to the least
instrument, hook, or tape used therein; as also the whole Ex^. 25* 40.
composition and use of every thing belonging thereunto, with all the
ordinances thereof. He left nothing to the will or discretion of Moses Heb. 8. 5.
Heb. 3. 1. Chro. 2^. 11. and ^.
whose commendation was, that he was found faithful in all his house as a
servant for a testimony of things to be spoken. The like we read of David
in the distribution of the orders and functions of the Priests and Levites: Of
Solomon and Zerubabel in the building the material Temple. We see (I say) how
perfectly the Lord set down ye matter and form, the number assize, place,
order and use of every thing belonging to his Tabernacle and Temple. We see
what absolute laws he set down for every thing there to be done; how i^lous
he was over his sanctuary, and what severe iudgm^ntes he showed upon them that
transgressed the least of his ordinances; as the examples of Nadab, Abihu,
Corath, Ely and his sons, vzza and sundry others, the deportation of both
the kingdoms with the destruction of the Temple, and at length the utter
desolation thereof, show. And may we suppose that God is less careful,
provident, absolute ielous over this his glorious Temple which consists of
the bodies and souls of his dear (...) Saints for the structure,
instruments, form, order and ordinances of this which abides for ever, the^
he was of that other which consisted but of stone and wood* which was to
abide but a time and was but a type and shadow of this? If we so think, let
the new Testament of our Savior CHRIST convince us; wherein is left unto us a
most lively and express pattern for all things, with the fit mould wherein
every thing ought to be formed and cast, most perfect and direct laws and
ordinances for the number, place, order, use and direction of al things
belonging unto CHRIST'S Church. Can any imagine unto themselves that God is
less loving unto, delighted in, or ielous over this Temple whereof his own
only dear son is builder, minister, and head, then he was over that base
earthen Temple (for so in respect of the incomparable glory of this I may call
yt) whereof MOSES was the builder etc. Can any imagine the ministry, orders
and ordinances of CHRIST'S Church delivered by the son himself, ratified and
confirmed by the voice of God from heaven, by many miracles and wonders on
earth, of less congruence, necessity or account, then those of that Temple
delivered by Angels? or that God has given now greater power or priuiledg to
any mortal creature, Prince, or minister in this church to neglect, alter,
violate or innouate any of Christ's laws, or bring in and set up any of their
own in this Church, then he did then to MOSES, DAVID, SOLOMON in that Temple.
If these laws be of greater force, estimation, perpetuity, both in regard of
the dignity and preeminence of Christ the minister of the things administered,
and of the place, I mean the spiritual Temple; yet if the word spoken by
Angels was sure, and* every transgression and disobedience received just
recompense of reward; If that word might at no hand either in the building,
reformation or administration, even in the least and vilest things (as the
ashes of the Altar which had their appointed place i^struments and ministers) be
neglected, broken or innouate by no mortal man of what estate or degree
soever, upon what occasion or pollitike respect soever, without some warrant
from Gods own mouth that gave the Law: how shall they escape, or where shall
they stand, that not only neglect and violate, but despise, reproach, and
innouate the whole established order and ordinances that Christ has set down
in his Testament for this his church? Shall not this be to make God more loving,
gracious, provident, careful, ielous over that material Temple, that shadow,
the^ he is now over this his Church the substance, and to prefer the shadow to
the substance, that Temple to this Church? Should not this be to prefer the
person and Testament of MOSES, to the person and Testament of Christ, inasmuch
as they make the one to be delivered and confirmed with a great deal more
authority, majesty, power then the other? were yt not to make MOSES more
absolute and faithful in his house, then Christ in his Church, inasmuch as
MOSES left a perfect Tabernacle and Testament, and did see and gave charge that
all the ordinances thereof should be most precisely kept and observed? But Christ
belike has left an imperfect Church and Testament, in as much as he has not
taken full order for the ministry, government, orders, and ordinances thereof:
yea though he have in his Testament set down orders and laws for all these
things, yet they are not so authentike *or irrefragable as those of Moses,
Princes and States may according to their policies receive, reject or innouate
these etc. Were not this to prefer the ministry of Leuy and those outward
ordinances and beggarly rudiments in dignity, to the sacred ministry and
ordinances of Christ, inasmuch as they are made more holy, congruent,
necessary and inviolable then Christ's? But the holy Ghost throughout the
whole epistle to the Hebrews handeling this very subject, conuinceth,
instructs, and exhorts the Jews to leave al superstitious foreconceaued
opinions of their Temple, ministry, and ordinances, and wholly with reverence
to embrace and behave themselves in the Church, ministry and ordinances of
Christ. Hereunto he persuades by the incomparable excellency, glory,
pr^eminence, perpe^uitie of Christ's person, Church, ministry, Testament,
which can never be shaken or removed, compared unto the weakness, baseness,
impotencie and vanity of MOSES person, that Temple, ministry and Testament
which were temporary, caduke, to be abolished and to give place unto these
which they but prefigured whereunto they led and served, this being the
beginning and the end of their erection. Many most grave exhortations and
weighty charges does the holy Ghost there give unto us concerning the
reverence, fear, faithful, holy, obedient, diligent, orderly and constant
walking and behavior that we ought to show in the Church of Christ unto his
word and Testame^^, drawing Arguments both from the unspeakable glory,
majesty, excellency, beawtie, joy of Christ's church, a^ also from the terror
and severity of God who is the judge and beholder of this church against all
inordinate walkers and contumatious offenders therein. From every word almost
of which epistle may an argument be drawn, to prove the inviolable excellency
and perpetual necessity of Christ's orders and ordinances left in his Testament
for the building, direction, and government of his Church.

It will* not here help them to say that the ministry and government of
Christ are eternal in respect of the covenant and end, in that they lead to
the kingdom of heaven, or in respect of the perpetuity of the doctrine of the
Gospel, or in respect of the inward rule and work his holy Spirit has in our
hearts, and is not understood of the perpetuity and necessity of that
outward order of government and administration left and practiced by Christ's
Apostles. These ignorant cauils will not help them. For this self same
covenant of life everlasting touching the end had the Jews and all the
faithful that ever were. They were all ^aued through faith in Christ seen and
apprehended by the eye of faith, though not yet exhibited in the flesh unto
them. The difference of the covenant the^ was not in the e^d to which yt
tended, so much as in the present Church, ministry, things administered,
orders, ordinances, worship, worshippers etc. the covenant being made to these
outward ritual figures and ceremonies, but until the substance should be
Ihewed, and Christ's heavenly Church and ministry erected, to which then the
Jews and al men were called, to which now the covenant is only made.

As for the truth and perpetuity of the doctrines and of the gospel, they were
the same from the beginning that they are now: Christ was before all beginnings
that wisdom and word of God; Christ was the fulfilling of all the Prophets who
foreshewed of him. But if they mean by doctrine and Gospel that heavenly
ministry, sacraments, exercises, and communion of the Church which are
peculiar unto the Gospel according to the rules prescribed in Christ's
Testament, then is the question granted me; without the due obseruati^n of
which rules, they can have no true ministry, sacraments, exercises,
communion, Gospel, as I shall straight way show.

Now as for this inward government and sanctification they speak of, where
Christ reigns in their hearts by the power of his Spirit etc. I say that the
Spirit of God may not and cannot be severed from the word of God. They that
openly and willingly break the least of Gods laws, boast of a false gift when
they speak of their inward sanctification. Christ does not reign in the heart
of any that will not submit all their outward actions to be ruled by him also.
Christ will have the whole man both body and soul to serve him: he parts
not with Antichrist or Beliall. This is one of the Anabaptistical errors,
whereby the reforming prea^ers defend their popish ministry. They say they
have Christ^ inward calling to the ministry, in that they have gifts,
learning and fitnes; therefore though they want his outward calling (which they
say is not of the substance of the ministry) yea though they have a false
antichristian outward calling, yet are they to be esteemed as the minister^ of
CHRIST. Might they not as tollerably, yea with less offense both to God and
man, usurp the magistrates chair without a calling (inasmuch as yt is of no
such excellency or worthiness as the heavenly ministry of CHRIST) because
they have wisdom and fitnes etc.

But to return again to our purpose. This inward government and
sanctification of the Spirit had the faithful Jews before Christ came in our
flesh, and before they were called to the Church and ministry of Christ:
Therefore either these are no answers, or else the whole scope of that epistle
to the Hebrews is vaine^, for all these things the Jews enjoyed before: they
had the same covenant of salvation, the same perpetual true doctrines and
Gospel, the same inward government and sanc^ification of the Spirit that we
have: Only because they wanted the heavenly practice and ministry of the
Gospel, the heavenly orders, exercises, and communion of the Church of Christ,
they were called from those ritual types and figurative shadows whereby in
their infancy and ^onage they were trained and shut up, unto the open sight
and clear beholding of the glory of the Lord with open face, all vailes being
taken away, and unto the free and orderly practice of the same Gospel
according C^l. 3. and 4 (...). 2 Cor. ^.
to Christ's new Testament, al trumperie traditions being abolished.

With what extreme desire have all the Prophets longed after, and great
delight written of the excellent beawtie, heavenly government, inviolable
order of this Church? How often has David in his Psalms remembered the same?
with what admiration has he expressed the absolute perfect structure of that
compact city? as Solomon also lively described the beawtie, pretiousnes and
iuncture of al her parts. How plentifully have the Prophets Isaiah, Ezekiel,
zachariah and others even with an open eye described the whole form of the
building of this Church? as also all of them given evident testimonies of the
perpetuity of the government and ordinances thereof. How often does David exhort
the Saint^ to celebrate y^ excellency and perpetuity of Christ's government
and throne? by how many testimonies does he extol and prove the same, as is
every where found in the psalms; sundry whereof, the author to the Hebrews,
as also the other Apostles in their sermons and writings have used, both to
prove the excellency, necessity and eternity of, and to draw me^ unto this
heavenly government of CHRIST in his Church.

The prophet Isai^h in the 33 of his prophecy v^rs. 20. etc. wills the ^ewes
in all their calamities to behold Sio^ that city of their assemblies* to cause
their eyes look upon Jerusalem that quiet fould, that tent that shall never be
disseuered, of whose pins or stakes not one may be taken away, neither shall
any of the coards thereof be broken; but there the mighty JEHOVAH shall be unto
us in place of floods and of broad rivers wherein shall pass no naui^ with
oars, neither shall any great ship pass^ through yt, for JEHOVAH is our
revenger, JEHOVAH is our Lawgiuer, JEHOVAH is our King, he shall save us. What
can be said more plainly ^or the inviolable perpetuity both of the order and
form of building, and also for the government, administration and ordinances
of CHRIST'S Church? Of al which as God himself is the author, so you see he
voweth to be the defendor and revenger against all the power of tyrants o^ any
mortal man whosoever.

Likewise the prophet Da^iel in his 7 chapter after he had been showed the
calamity, tyranny and oppression done unto the Saints by the 4 beasts, but
especially by that presumptuous horn that lively figure and foretreader of
Antichrist, whose mouth spoke presumptuous words against the most high, and
consumed the ^aints of the most high, that thought he might change the times
and the law into whose hands they were for a season delivered etc. After these
visions Da^iel was showed how this presumptuous horn was consumed and
destroyed with y^ fiery stream that proceeded from the ancient of days, and
how this unlawful dominion was taken from the other beasts and given to him
that came from heaven, and having finished the full redemption of his ^aints,
and being ascended up again and set at the right hand of his Father, there was
given unto him dominion and glory and a kingdom* that all people nations and
tongues should serve him; whose dominion is a perpetual dominion that passes
not away, and his kingdom is ^euer corrupted Ver. 14. Also Ver* 27. What ca^
be more di^ect for the perpetuity of the government and ordinances that Christ
has left and appointed in his new Testament for his church? which whosoever
presumes to* again^ or violate, much more to innouate or change, shall he not
be under the same sin damnation and curse with this presumptuous blasphemous
horn.

The Prophet zachariah also in the eleventh of his prophecy shows, that all
CHRIST'S ^heep are governed and kept under our chief shepeheards pastoral
staves Beawtie and Bands. All other are out of his protection, delivered up in
his wrath to be guided by the instruments of foolish and idol shepherds, whose
right arm shall be without strength and whithered up, their right eye shall be
utterly darkened, there shall be no light in them. Both these shepherds and
their flocks, even all such as are misled by and with them are given up of the
Lord to utter destruction because they cast the Lords coards from them and
would not be bound in his bands, their soul abhorred the Lord they would not
have him to reign over them, therefore his soul abhorred them he gave them up
to their own lusts and ensnared them in their own policies. For all the
wisdom of all flesh without the Lord is madness, their most exquisite plattes
of government which they can devise unto themselves, are but the instruments of
foolish sheepheards to their own perdition and of as many as are governed by
them.

These things are so manifest in that Chapter, the true shepherd, government,
and sheep, as also the false shephearde, government, and sheep with the diverse
ends of both being there described, the one in ye person of our Savior and
his disciples, the other in the Priests, rulers, phariseis and people of the
Jews, with their very manner of rejecting and betrai^ng him so lively set
down; as none can cavil at the^e things or mistake them ^o grossly again, as
one of these foolish shepheardes D. SOME has done, taking his chapter to be
understood of the estate of the Jews in zecheri^hs time, the 1^. and 13. verse
of (...) person and wages. Who if he had but compared this chapter in yt self,
much more to the discourse of the Prophet precedent and subsequent, but
especially to the evident event and perimplishing in and by our Savior Christ
Math. 21. 23. 24 26. Chapters, he would never have justified tithes by the 12
and 13 verses of of this eleventh Chapter of zechariah. If any doubt of the
interpretation of these two staves (...) and Bands, let him consider the
allegory how shepherds use their staves and hooks; or rather let him weigh
the 7 ver. where he shall find that Christ with these staves fed, governed, and
defended those sheep his Father gave him, as also verse 14 the interpretation
and end of the staff B^ndes, how there can be no true communion where they are
not knit together in the faith, order, government and love of Christ. But if he
compare this prophecy to the event and fulfilling thereof by our Savior Christ
and his Apostles that called al men from the shadows and figures of the Temple
unto the kingdom and Church of Christ; he shall manifestly see, that this
sense in all things accords, and no other can be made to agree to the words
and Argument of this Prophet in this Chapter.

Note^ might plentifully be drawn and many weighty Arguments framed from
these allegories, as also from the e^ymologie of these words to show the
excellency, amenitie, pleasantnes, comlines, congruence, utility, necessity,
perpetuity of CHRIST'S pastoral government of his Church; and how disorderly
and unnatural a thing yt were for the sheep to disobey, especially to
control and teach their shepherd. But I hope the judgments denounced in that
chapter for such faults, and the plain demonstration of the danger, error,
folly, horror of all other governments and instruments* whatsoever, may suffice
to satisfy the godly in this point, and to restrain them from such
presumption and rebellion, either to reject or to innouate or alter CHRIST'S
holy government, order and ordinances. As for the vnperswaded and disobedient,
I leave them to their account when they shall see him whom they have perced
through come with clouds: and in the mean while will address my self to
prove by sundry express places of the new Testament, y^ the ordinances the
Apostles left for the building, administration and government of the Church,
are the commandments of God, perpetual, inviolable, to be observed, and not to
be willingly neglected or changed unto the worlds end.

Our Savior CHRIST having fini^hed whatsoever was needful here upon earth to
be ^one in his person either for the work of our redemption, or for the
removing and abolishing all the legal shadow^s and ceremonial worship, or for
the ratifijng his Gospel* the gathering, pla^ting and establishing his Church*
having chosen, appointed, and perfectly instructed his Apostles of all things
belonging thereunto: In the 28 chap. according unto Matthew Verse. 1^. 19. 20. he
used this speech unto them And jesus coming spoke unto them saying, all
authority in heaven and in earth is given unto me; Go therefore teach ye all the
nations, baptising them into the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the holy Spirit, teaching them to keep all things whatsoever I have commanded
you And lo I am with you all days until the consummation of the world Amen.
Omitting the sundry necessary circumstances and manifold profitable doctrines
that might from this scripture be observed and drawn to hold me to the present
purpose, we here may see not only the Apostles personal power and authority,
but the warrant and dignity of all things they taught or did in this brief of
their commission and ministry, which we here see to be derived from and
founded upon our Savior CHRIST'S sacred person and sovereign power. We here
see whom they were to teach, whom to baptize, how to baptize, how and what to
^each the baptized, and how to leave such as they had thus taught, gathered,
and instructed. In sum, we here ^ee the very manner and order of winning,
receiving, gathering, ordering, instructing, building up and establishing the
Church of CHRIST. We here see all the orders and ordinances which the Apostles
practiced in, and left unto the Churches by our Sauiou^ own mo^th pronounced
to be his Commandments, and those per^etuall, such as he will have to continue
and be observed of all his servants unto the worlds end. We see them no^ only
commanded unto his Apostles that they should practice and teach them in their
time, or in time of per^ecution; but he charge his Apostles to teach all
churches all Christians to keep and observe them at all times until the
consummation and end of the world; giving unto al his servants and churches
the same power to practice and observe all these his comandementes, that he
gave unto his Apostles: plighting upon such their faith and obedience his
presence and protection unto them, in these words And lo I am with you all
days until the consummation of the world; sealing the truth both of these his
commandemetes and ordinances and also of this his covenant and protection unto
all ages with this his authentike seal, with this word of all truth, Amen. So
that me thinks all the blasphemous reproaches and cauils of al sorts of
enemies unto the sacred inviolable government and order of our Savior CHRIST
delivered and practiced by his Apostles in his churches, are utterly by this
one place of scripture (if so be there were no more to the same effect) taken
out of the way: both they that deny the continance or necessity heerof in all
ages and places, and they that would make these Apostolic ordinances but
matters of form, not matters of faith or of substance (as they speak) they
being here confirmed and commanded by that Lord of all truth of all power in
heaven and in earth.

Peradventure that old Saducee that ^hus sophisticallie has propounded these
questions in that 74 leaf of his answer unto MARTIN, will stu^ble (as he
ordinarily does at the word of God) at these words [al things whatsoever I
have commanded you] collecting, that because the Apostles had not as yet
received the exp^esse rules and commandments for all the things they afterward
taught and practiced, that therefore this commandment cannot be understood or
applied to such things as they afterward taught, and so nothing or little
serves to the outward form of government and order of the Church.

Although yt were not hard from this very place necessarily to confirm the
intendement and commandment of all the ordinances and rules which the Apostles
after taught and prescribed unto the churches even by that which is here
expressed concerning the ministry, baptism etc. which here are commanded al
churches to be observed in that manner as the Apostles taught them? which
ministers, sacraments and ministry could not in and by these churches be had
or practiced without the observation of these rules and ordinances, as the
election, probation of such ministers by the flocks where they are to
administer etc. which were not all that time set down by the holy Ghost or
practiced by the Apostles as yet. Although I could also show that our Savior
Christ had already instructed his Apostles that he had chosen and set a part
to that work, of all things belonging to his kingdom Act. 1. 2. and had given
the^ his holy spirit in abunda^t measure to this their ministry which should
teach them al things and b^ing al things to their remembrance ( Ioh. 20. 22.)
which he had told the^; Yet mine Ioh. 20. 22*
awnswere here is yt if our savior Christ in these words ( Al whatsoever ^
have commanded you) had respect only unto such precepts as he had then at that
time given the^, and not unto al other things which he should afterward reveal
unto the^ by his holy spirit also; yt were both contrary to their commission
and charge they delivered, which (as is said) was that they should win,
gather together, build, order, instruct and establish his Church according to
the rules and commandments of his will and Testament, which could not at al be
done by the^ if al these laws and rules were not alike confirmed of, and
comanded by him: as also if these words Al whatsoever ^ have commanded etc.
should so be restrained, yt were to make the other holy laws and ordinances
which he afterward showed to his Apostles, and they by the same spirit both
showed and recorded unto the churches of Christ, of less value and authority
then those former; to make some part of holy scripture more true holy and
authentical the^ other: yea yt were utterly to abrogate and disfra^chize these
latter scriptures. Furthermore I suppose yt were a hard matter for any man to
dis^sse and set down what things Christ had at that time taught these
Apostles, and what he had as yet co^cealed. So that this cauil can no way put
off this most direct and express place, let me therefore proceed to others.

The Apostle Paul. 1. Tim. 5. 21. charge Timothy before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ and the elect Angels, that he k^epe these things without
prejudice, doing nothing according to inclination etc. Also Chap. 6. ver. 13.
he uses these words unto him ^ command thee before God that ^uickneth al
things and Christ jesus that testified before Pontius Pilate that good
confession, to keep the commandment without spot unrebukable vnt^l the
appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ, which in due time that blessed and only
mighty, that King of Kings and Lord of Lords shall show etc. Likewise 1 Cor.
14. 37. he has these words If any man seem to be a prophet or spiritua^ let
him acknowledge the things I write unto you because they are the co^ma^deme^tes
of God: but if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant. With what greater
authority or weight of words could the Apostle either confirm or inco^mend
unto the Church in all ages these cannons and ordinances which he in these
epistles has set down for the building, order, government of all churches, of
all the officers people and actions of the same to be religiously and inviolably
kept as the co^mandeme^ts of that great dreadful God, as the laws of that our
Lord and King until his appearing in glory. Who can any longer doubt (that
vvil either rest in the manifest testimonies of the holy Ghost, give credit
to the resolute affirmations, and ear to the vehement charges of the Apostle,
or that will duly expend either the general scope of these epistles, or duly
weigh the manifold rules in particular and the manner of delivering them) that
these cannons and ordinances are the absolute laws and holy commandments of
CHRIST for the building and government of his Church, so necessary,
inviolable, perpetual, as without which or with any other his Church can
neither be built nor kept. Are not all these p^rticular rules for the several
offi^es, persons, qualities, for their manner of election, probation,
ordination, administration, etc. set down in way of commandment and law with
as great authority, credit and reverence as any other part of Christ's
Testament or Gods word? So that the Apostles whole ministry may with as much
right or reason be called into doubt or question, as these ca^nons and
ordinances which the Apostle every where confirms with the same authoriti^
that he does all his writings 2 Cor. 1. 13. 1 Cor. 11. ^. 2. 2 Th^s. 2. 15.
Colo^s. 2. 5. and sundry other places which were long to recite. Moreover how
carefully and by how many reasons have the Apostles incommended these orders
and statutes unto the whole Church and unto the chief workmen and builders
therein? what perfect laws has he set down in those his epistles unto
Ti^othie and Titus those two excellent workmen his trained and exercised
children, whom he therefore calls his natural and right begotten sonns, and
especially commends them unto the Churches, as to the Corinthians epistle 1.
Chap. 4. verse. 17. For this caus^ ^aue I sent unto you Timotheus which is my
beloved son and faithful in the Lord, who will put you in remembrance of my
ways which in CHRIST as I teach every where in every Church: And unto the
Philippians chap. 2. 22. but ye know the proof of him because as a son unto
his father he has served with me unto the Gospel. yet notwithstanding all this
their promptnes and experience, we see what careful charges the Apostles laid
upon them, most precisely and exactly to observe all these rules in all their
actions of ye Church and toward al me^; that they keep that express pattern
of wholesome words that they had heard of him in the faith and love that is in
CHRIST JESUS, calling these rules the express pattern or engraue^ form or
delineation of all things belonging unto or to be done in the Church, charging
them of their fidelity and love both unto CHRIST JESUS and unto those whom
they are to build, to keep and always to have this true pattern and form
before their eyes in all things they do, commending yt for the soundnes and
wholsomes thereof both to the builder^ and the builded thereby.

For yt being the true pattern, form, mould for every thing, every part,
every member, whereunto they ought to be compared, fashioned and cast, neither
can the parts have any right shape, neither the whole any true form, if they
be not framed and built according to this pattern; and then how should the
building either stand or agree unto yt self? much less please the Lord and
owner of the house when he sees yt thus spoiled and destroyed. Therefore yt
behooves both the builders, and every one that is built, to consider
diligently after what manner and order he builds, and is built.

For this cause the Apostle Paul 1 Cor. 3. having showed how soundly the
Apostles as wi^e Master builders had laid the foundation, exhorts all that
are to succeed and build upon that foundation, to look well how they build
upon yt; for this foundation will bear nothing but gold, silver, precious
stones, they may not build in this house their hay, timber, stubble. Every
man's work here shall be made manifest, the day shall declare yt because yt
shall be revealed in the fire, which shall try every man's work of what sort yt
is: If upon this trial by this light yt be fownd answerable to that heavenly
pattern of CHRIST'S Testament* yt then abides to the praise and comfort of the
workman. But wherein any of these builders shall in any part of their work,
whether in matter or manner (as they v^e to speak to couller their
transgressions) even in the least thing be fownd to have swerued from the true
pattern, by this light; if then upon such discovery made unto them they suffer
not these their works to burn, acknowledging, forsaking, and repenting their
such errors and transgressions, and withdrawing others from the like, they shall
not only destroy themselves by this their presumptuous sin, but al such as
after this discovery and reproof made, remain with them and join unto them in
this their presumptuous sin. For (says the Apostle) these m^ corrupt or
destroy the Temple of God which is holy, which Temple ye are, and the Spirit
of God dwells in you: If any man corrupt or destroy the Temple of God, him
shall God destroy etc.

We see with what weighty, grave and plentiful reasons, exhortatio^s and
proves the Apostle affirms and confirms these things by every verse of
that chapter, yea almost by every word of the verse (which carry a several
consideration and especial force in themselves) but especially from the 8
verse unto the end. He there sets down the persons of the Apostles as a
perpetual example unto all builders unto the worlds end: The practice of the
Apostles as the true only foundation, the e^resse pattern for all buildings,
yea for every thing in every true building unto the worlds end. Which
foundation and pattern he deriueth not from and confirms not by the
authority of man, but by the authority of CHRIST, showing that yt is not in
man's power either to la^ any other foundation, or alter this that is laid;
calling yt but one and the same in all places, even as CHRIST is one and the
same, and calling every part of the word they delivered fundamental as part of
the very foundation of this building, and makes not (with the learned
Pharisees and school Divines of our age) some part of CHRIST'S Testament
fundamental and substantial, other parts thereof accidental, formal, not
necessary, not of substance or es^ence, who thus with the deep learning of
Satan abrogate what part of CHRIST'S Testament they please, build their own
stubble diuises, destroy the work of God together with their own souls and
y^ souls of as many as are built or led by the^. And therefore the Apostles
h^ere calls al builders and buildings to this one only foundation of CHRIST'S
word and Testament, charging them to make yt of all their actions whatsoever
the only rule and foundation; and not as these false builders of the Church of
England do, who rejecting the true pattern of CHRIST'S Testament in all things
they do or go about, yet vainly boast that they hold the foundation, preach
and practice the Gospel of Christ sincerly etc. although (as is said) they
reject what part of Christ's Te^tament they list as not fundamental,
substantial, (...), abrogate the whole pattern of the Apostles practice, and
mowld and lay unto themselves a new pattern a new foundation, making not only
new rules, laws, orders for the government and whole administration of the
Church, but a new ministry, new officers, new actions which are not read or
heard of in the Testament of Christ; yt never as ^et being agreed amongst them
what part of Christ's Testament they allow and hold for the foundation and for
the Gospel. But in deed to say as yt is, the foundation and gospel of their
Church is not yet laid to either side; for though they all at this present
generally embrace the Popes canons and decrees o^ the high commission as the
foundation, certain allowed writings and privileged books for the Gospel
of their Church; yet keep the Prelates in their hand to coin and forge new
laws new doctrines, what and when they please, as also the Reformists they sue
to Prince and parliament yt they might be allowed to make and bring in yet
other new laws and doctrines as far from the true pattern as these, as (when
they are compared thereunto) will app^are. But the Apostle here as he teaches
but one foundation, so teaches he yt the groundworke both of the whole church
and of every part thereof and actio^ therein, calling al builders hereunto,
charging them to take yt for the foundation of all their doings, without which
whatsoever they do or enterprise seem yt never so necessary or expedient in
their eyes, yet is yt but as an house without a foundation, which not being
laid upon the rock but upon the sands of men's wisdom, wante^h a groundworke,
and therefore cannot stand.

He wills them therefore to be sure of this foundation before they build, yea
and to look care^ully how they build upon yt, because their work shall be
manifested, declared, tried, revealed in the day in the fire. This day shall
manifest and declare all their whole building both within and without, the
whole form and order thereof: Al things when they are reproved of this light
are manifest, for yt is the light that makes all things manifest. This fire
not only tries and reuealeth al counterfeit stuff, but burns and consumes
the same: their wood, hay, stubble cannot be unrevealed in this day, or
unconsumed in this fire. To which wood, hay, stubble, he likeneth all the
devises and pollecies of man's wit, how prudent or pregnant soever they seem:
and therefore upon the diverse ends of such buildings and builders, he exhorts
by the reward and eternity of the one unto the faithful and careful keeping
the true pattern; by the terror and loss of the other he dehorteth from all
negligent, but especially al wilful and presumptuous transgression of the
same, showing Gods impartial examination and judgment of every man's work:
which by how much yt is so dear unto the Lord, so precious in his sight; by so
much yt behooves all men to be the more careful thereof, whose transgressions
therein shall be the more heinous.

This work he calls the Temple of God, which Temple we have above showed in
the type to be built in every thing according to the pattern showed in the
mount. How much more then ought yt in the true substance to be built in every
thing according to the heavenly perfect pattern of Christ's Testament, wherein
we have the whole mind and will of CHRIST as the Apostle says in the last
words of the second chapter of this epistle? Now the Apostle here says this
Temple of the Lord is holy; but even in the figure might no strange or poll^ed
thing enter, yt was an abomination unto the Lord, how much more in this
excellent spiritual house ought no fleshly devises of our own (which are wholly
corrupt and altogether defiled) to be brought; but the wisest devises of men
being set in the place of the wisdom of God or brought into his Temple, are
not only foolish, idle, vain, but abomination to the Lord, such as corrupt,
destroy and deface the Temple of God, because the devises of man cannot be
joined with the thoughts of God: God needs not the advice or council of man.
The wisdom of man is always to rest in the wisdom of God; wherein he
proceeds further, yt is turned to folly and rebellion, and made a snare unto
themselves. Now then (seeing the Church of Christ is the Temple of God, and the
Temple of God is holy, and is corrupted and destroyed when man presumes therein
to be wise above that he ought, or has warrant to be wise) the Apostle from
all these places and every word thereof uses reasons and exhortations to exhort
all men that enter into this Temple to observe their feet^, that they be more
near to hear the^ to offer the sacrifice of fools: for the Lord is more
delighted with obedience then sacrifice; he will be sanctified in all that come
near unto him, and will be served in this ^is Temple with reverence and fear,
for even the Lord our God is a consuming fire.

But our learned Priests treading in the steps of their predecessors the
false Prophets, are so far from being moved with reverence and fear because of
the Lords holy Temple, that they from hence draw arguments to justify their
transgressions, and embolden themselves therein by the titles of the Church and
Temple of God. Say they the Churches of Corinth, Gallati^, Asia had sundry
faults, yet are they pronounced by the Apostle the Churches of CHRIST:
therefore much more they that teach not circumcision, deny not the resurrection
etc. Though these arguments be largely answered in an other place, yet here
would be observed (besides the po^son that they gather from these examples to
tolerate and commit sin thereby) how little they understand the estate of these
Churches, chardging the whole Church with the errors of some few, whom the
Apostles the^e confuted. But if some of these were the errors of the whole
Church (as we doubt not but the Church may, does, and shall whiles yt is in this
life err) yet if yt shall persist in error after yt shall be by the word of
God convinced and reproved, then we may say with the Apostles here; that such
corrupt and destroy the Temple of God, even so many souls as are by them and
together with them thus misled, whereof this building consists.

Therefore the Apostle here (as in sundry other places) admonishes the whole
Church and every member thereof carefully to look to their builders and guides,
that they lead them in the right ways of the Lord, and build them according to
the true pattern of CHRIST'S Testament, to follow them no further then they
follow CHRIST and have his word for their warrant: from which when they swe^ue
or transgress, and being admonished will not return, then is the whole Church
to excommunicate such a Pastor, leader, builder whosoever, and to sepe^ate him
or as many as cleave unto him or follow him in this estate. The argument the
Apostle uses is of no less weight then the salvation of their own souls,
which otherwise should be destroyed and corrupted by them. He wills them
neither to be led away with ye show of wisdom, utility, policy, holiness, nor
any pretenses wherewith they shall cover their error, neither with the
estimation of their persons, authority, wisdom, learning, virtue etc. For if
they teach otherwise and come not to the wholesome words of our Lord JESUS
CHRIST, and to the doctrine which is according to godliness, they are puffed up
knowing nothing. As for their person and office, they are not to rule over, so
much as to build up our faith, for by faith we stand: they are not Lords over
the heritage, but servants of the Church; for Paul, and Apollo, and Cephas are
ours, and we Christ's, and Christ Gods.

But see, whiles I thought but to have touched the general argument of this
Chapter, to prove that the Church of Chri^ ought to be built in all things
according to the will of Chrift as he has set down in his Testament (otherwise
yt ca^ neither be said his house, nor ye builders thereof or builded therein his
faithful servants) See how before I wist or would, I am drawn into
particulars as into a whirlepoole and bottomless gulf of knowledge, whiles I
thought but to have drawn but a little water at the brinke in the shallow
vessel of my understanding and crazed memory: which though they be no way able
to break up these unmeasured depthes* or orderly to deliver but that little God
gives me to see in them; yet I doubt not but many infallible Arguments may
from this Chapter be drawn without any violence or wresting to prove the
necessity and perpetuity of that form and order of building and governing
Christ's Church, which he by his Apostles has set down in his Testament. Now
let me proceed to confirm this Proposition by other reasons drawn from other
places of scripture.

As yt has been showed that there can be no true building without that only
true foundation and express pattern of the Apostles practice in Christ's
Testament, that all other foundations, forms, buildings, builders are
deceitful and false, and will not abide the fiery trial or stand in Gods sight;
so if we consider the manner how the holy Ghost instructs us in other places
vz. 1 Cor. 12. Ep^es. Romans 12. we shall there see the co^gruence, necessity,
perpetuity of the order and government which Christ has in his Testament
prescribed. We there read this his Church compared to an ^umane body, which
consisting of diue^s members, must of n^cessitie have them duly placed and knit
together in their ^ight order and srame: We read there that as God creates,
fashioneth, places and knitteth together the memb^rs of this our earthly b^die
without taking counsel of one or another; so in like wisdom and power he
creates, prepares, orders, disposes, co^mingleth, co^tempereth all the
members of this his heavenly body according to the rules of his T^stament by
the manifestation of the spirit in every one. But now ^uen common sense
teaches how far the wisest man upon earth is from being able to make unto man's
body the least m^mber thereof even but one hair white or black, much less to
knit the members together by iointes and sinews in their due place and
function: How the^ can dust and a^hes imagine to make unto the spiritual body
of Chri^ new strange members and knit them as stra^gely together by new iointes
and synewes. We read in the^e chapters, that the ministers and officers
appointed by our Savior Christ in his Testament, are the principal members of
this public body of the Church; his ordinances and laws there set down, the
iointes and sinews whereby the members are fitly knit unto the whole body,
even as the curtains of the tabernacle by their strings and hooks.

But now as no mortal man can make, fashion, dispose or knit together these
humane members of a natural body, so much less can he make any other
members serve in the places of the true natural members, or by any means
place, faste^, and knit these as by ioints and sinews unto and in a man's
body. What use should a man have of an eye of glass, a nose of wax, an hand
of brass, a foot of wood? what congruence, coherence, proportion, sympathy,
feeling, compassion should these have with the other members? what learning or
art can knit these by iointes, sinews, veins artures? or draw one and the
same ^kin over them as a covering, or fasten yt unto them as unto or together
with the true and natural members? If man's wisdom cannot (...) this in a
frai^e humane body of earth and clay, what possibility the^ is there to bring
this to pass in the spiritual body of Christ? what communion what commixture
can there be betwixt heaven and earth, betwixt light and darkness, betwixt
spiritual and carnal things? how the^ is yt possible to knit or make agree the
earthly dark carnal divised members and laws of man, to the heavenly
lightsome spiritual body of Christ? Yea albeit this could be supposed to be
brought to pass (then which nothing ca^ be more fond the^ to imagine, more
wicked then to attempt) what kind of strange and monstrous body should ^hey
now make unto Christ, by knytting unto him strange members, such as belong not
to his body? If an humane body should have growing unto yt any other then
the true members that belong unto a man, were not ^uch a creature to be held a
monster and not a man. As for example; if yt had many heads in stead of one,
if yt Revel. 1^*
should have feet like a Bear, a mouth as a Lion, the rest like a Leopard
etc. who (that had any sight or sense) could take and esteem this for the
natural body of a man? muchlesse for the comely beawtiful amiable body of
Christ or of his Bride: were not this to be liker unto the body of Antichrist
that Beast, of that whore that monster? what then i^ the presumption, reb
ellion and furi^ of those Prelates that dare enterprise not only to cast away
the true and natural members, but in the place of them to plant these
adulterate monstrous members, and that (as they would make themselves and
others believe) in the body and Church of Christ. Again what an astonishment
and madness has invaded and possessed these learned reforming Priests, that
confess the want of al Christ's true members (I mean such officers as he has
ordained for the building and governing his Church) that complain likewise of
the unlawfulness and antichristianitie of these members which now grow upon this
body and govern the same; and yet discern not themselves to be of these
monstrous antichristian members, even the ministry and mouth of that Beast^,
having the same orginal, shape and form with them, being all come out of one
smokie forge etc: yea and for all this mistake that beastly body of the
harlot their Church that bears, grows unto, and consists of these
members, for that heavenly body that true spowse and established Church of
Christ; as though Christ's body Christ's Church could grow unto and consist of
these false members, or be said built and established without the true members.
What strange paradoxes are these, yet are they even the forwardest positions
they can be drawn unto.

But we are taught in these scriptures, that Christ's body consists not,
neither can his Church be built with such strange Antichristian members, or
with any other then those which he has there prescribed for the gathering the
Saints into one, for the work of the ministry and for the edification of the
body of Christ etc. From which Scriptures infinity reasons (if we would enter
into particulets) might be drawn to prove the necessity, congruence and
perpetuity of these officers and ordinances there prescribed to the
ministry, government and service of his Church. But that were to handle the
whole platform and o^der of Christ's Testament, the excellency and perfection
whereof but slightly to describe, as yt far exceeds my slender capacity, so
not being to this present purpose, I have only endeavored to use such general
reasons as might prove this general Proposition That the government and
ordinanc^s that Christ in his Testament has set down and appointed unto his
Church are necessare, only fi^ and perpetual, and that the true Church of
Christ can or may no more receive any other office^s, government and
ordinances, then the body of a man can receive other members, the members an
other order or temperature, then that which God has assigned. Which I hope by
these places is so manifest, as I need stand no longer to enforce the
necessity and only fit congrue^ce thereof unto the body and members of the
church; by showing either the comelines, beauty, features of the Chucch when
yt is thus furnished of these true members, and the members thus placed, built
together, ordered and used. The necessity of these, let common sense and
experience in the bas^ pattern of our own natural body show, how ill we
could either admit any other then those members that God has appointed
thereunto, or spare any of those members^, or have them kept from their true
use and peculiar function, or placed in any other order or place, or knit
togethe^ with any other iointes, sinews or vain^s then God has disposed for
them. But the heavenly spiritual beauty, order, congruence and use of these
members thus commixt and contempered, ^et the 4* 6. and 7 chapter of Solomon's
song declare: From all which together ^ every member apart, the use,
administration, and benefit thereof; as also from the disorder, infinite
inconveniences and mischeises that would ensue of the rejecting of this or
receiving any other order, government, administration, might infinite and
several arguments be drawn to prove the absolute necessity of the one, the
v^ter inhibition and unfitness of any other.

But here now fitly comes a certain obi^ction of the aforesaid D. R. S. ^o
be answered: Says he If that outward form of discipline were of the essence
of the Church; then where that form of discipline either was or is not, there
was and is no Church, which is a gross^ absurdity: My reasons are, Samaria had
not that form of discipline, but yt was a famous Church Acts 8. Antiochi^ had
not that form of discipline, yet yt was a floorishing Church: The greatest
part of reformed Churches in Christendom have not that form of discipline,
yet they are accounted holy Churches of all but of the Papists and (...).

What his Doctorhood means by these disguised terms of the discipline and
essence of the Church I understand no^, and therefore will leave them where I
^ind them, eschewing (according to the Apostles rule) such profane inanitie of
words and oppositions of science falsely so called, which some pro^essing, have
erred about the faith. But if he by these reasons suppose to have impugned the
necessity and perpetuity of CHRIST'S holy government and order wherinto the
Apostles built all Churches, and which they left unto all Churches; I shall then
brief^ly show how far he fails of that purpose, and reasons quite to a new
and diverse question, and therefore can thereby conclude nothing against this: For
our qu^stion here is not, whither the Church may not sometime upon some
necessities b^ without this order or some part thereof for a season, but whither
the Church may receive any other form of government in stead of this. So that
if he had proved that the Churches of Samaria and Antiochia had received any
other form of government and order then this Apostolic; then had he in deed
said somewhat (although a particular instance or two may not take away or draw
us from a general law and perpetual rule. But he trifling about the name of a
Church, quite forsaking the question, would inser from the ambiguitie of the
word, that because a Church upon some necessitie^ may for a season be without
this (...) ord^r and government* therefore they may reject this an^ take an
other according to the policies of the time and place. How diversely the church
is read in the scriptures (not here to stand of the etymology of the word
ecclesia) me thinks this great divine should not be ignorant: how som^times yt
is read for all the Saints in heaven and in earth; sometimes for all the Saints
dispersed or gathered here in the whole world; som^times for a company of
faithful people joined together in the (...) and co^^union of the faith,
indeuoring to proceed into the order of CHRIST, and in the same faithfully to
walk together: But commonly yt is taken for a company of such faithful thus
entered covenant, established and walking in due order according to the rules
of Gods word; of which kind of Church we all this while reason. For their
church of England is not now vnestablished as Samaria and Antiochia were at
these times he speaks of, but yt is established into an order ministry and
government, though according to the Popes cannons and not according to the
Testament of CHRIST. So that he might as well have reaso^ed from any of the
other readings of a Church, and gained as much; scilzt: that because all the
Saints in heaven are called a Church, yet they have not Pastors, Teachers etc.
therefore the Church of CHRIST may be established without these: as also all the
dispersed Saints are called a Church yet have not this order and government;
therefore etc. Samaria and Antiochi^ at their first calling to the faith had not
this established order and government, yet were held famous and floorishing
Churches; therefore the Church may be established into an other form of order
and government then that of CHRIST'S Testament: this if he conclude not, he
gains nothing; this if he conclude, I deny his Argument. It follows not
because the Church is not always thus established, therefore yt ought not to be
thus established.

The Churches of Samaria and Antiochia neither can be showed to have received
any other order or government, or to have neglected this; but the contrary
apeareth of Sam^ria Act. 9. 31. where Luke records, that the churches
throughout al ^udea, Galile and Samaria had peace, being built and proceeding
in the fear of the Lord, and were replenished with the comfort of the holy
Ghost. What thinks D. S. now? was not Samaria built and established in this
order? unless he can show that the Apostles built the Churches in any other
order; and then from this place may he also conclude, that the Churches in
Judea and Galile were not thus built, this scripture not secretly showing that
^oth they were all built alike, and that there was but one order of building
amongst the Apostles in these words being edified or built. Me thinks this
place also shows some letts that sometime may hinder the Churches from this
holy order; namely, the tyranny of wicked magistrates who persecute the Church
in such sort as they cannot safely meet and assemble to make choice of
ministers, or to exercise ^nie ministry. But we see the churches here upon
the first means neglected not either to attain vnt^ or exercise this order
(and that without staijng for the Magistrates p^sion) and were in so doing
replenished with the comfort of the holy Ghost. Neither yet appears h^ere the
certain time when Sa^aria was thus built. It is not unlike that yt was
established into this order, even Acts. 8. (that he speaks of) when they
received the gifts of the holy Ghost at Peter and John's being there, who yt is
to be judged likewise, rather helped to bestow those gifts in order to the
edifijng of the whole, then left them (having fit gifts for these offices) in
disorder, which had been great sin both in the Apostles and in the Church of
Sa^aria.

The like also is to be thought of the Church at Antiochia Act. 11. they being
called to the faith were a long time instructed by the Apostles Barnabas and
Paul* God so blessed their labors as that Church grew famous, and many
Prophets resorted thither from Jerusalem* May we then by D. SOMES bare
affirmation without any proof affirm that this Church being so long and
excellently instructed by these famous men, having so greatly profited in the
faith and knowledge of Christ above many other Churches which had this or^er,
that they yet should thus long be kept from yt more the^ any other Church,
being more fit then many, yea the^ any other Church at that time, save
Jerusalem: This were not only contrary to the practice of Paul and Barnabas in all other churches, but contrary to the rules of Christ's Testament. But if we
would stand upon the point, yt were not hard to prove that Antiochia was then
established into order: we see they there administered unto the necessities of
other Churches, and sent Paul and Barnabas upon this their business, which they
having fulfilled returned back again to Antiochia; from whence by the whole
Church they were at the commandment of the holy Ghost sent out with imposition
of hands. Afterward when they had planted and established many Churches in
Asia into this order, they returned thither again and there remained a long
time until they were again sent to Jerusalem about the question of
Circumcision; which being debated, they with other famous men returned and
abode in the Church of Antiochia, preaching and teaching the Gospel with great
joy, comfort, and blessing. Yet in none of these places we find mentioned that
after Act. 11. they were established into this order; but we see that there and
in all these places they executed the duties, and had the full power of a
church established. Therefore except we will make the practice of the holy Ghost
contrary unto yt sel^, we are not to doubt but this An^iochia also was
established in this order. Does not D. SOME then vnsufferably both falsify and
pervert these scriptures, in affirming that these churches had not that
established order amongst them, concluding from their example that the
Christian order and government of Christ's Testament is neither necessary nor
perpetual.

But to conclude and shut up the point at once, he brings the greatest pa rt
of the reformed Churches of* Christendom which have not this christian order
and government (which he terms form of discipline) yet are accounted holy
Churches of al but Papists, and Anab^ptists. Does he not here very learnedly
prove the question by the question: if his church be of God, let him approve yt
by Gods word, otherwise though he should fetch the Popes broad seal also
(from whom he borrows this argument) yt would not serve his turn. With the
estate of other Churches I am not acquainted, and therefore will not meddle: but
how well this holy church of England is reformed, you parley may perceive by
that which is above said; and more evidently may, if you measure yt by the
rules of CHRIST'S Testament, according unto which yt has no one thing in due
order or frame: So that why either Papists or Anabaptists should deny yt, I
cannot see; yt being an unclean hold or prison of every unclean bird, of
every foul and hateful Spirit, except yt be as that kingdom divided in yt
self, because yt consists of such iarring and disagreeing spirits. Neither
can I see how any (that knows or will be instructed what a true established
Church of CHRIST is) can any longer mistake that adulterous Church of England
that sits upon all the confuse people as upon many waters, that is liker
unto Zennacheribs tumultuous camp, then unto the well ordered and established
Church of CHRIST, which has nothing common with CHRIST'S Church but the ve^ie
name only. For the true Church of CHRIST, we find upon her all the marks of
that harlot and of that Beast, whose members, image, yoke she carries, and has
cast off Christ^ yoke from her neck, despising his word, persecuting and
murdering his servants. Wherefore until she bring us either better Arguments or
better fruits, we are so far from honoring her with the title of a Church, as
we are not abashed to render unto her as she has rendered unto us; and to
double unto her double, according to her works; and in that cup wher^n she
has mixed, to mingle to her ye double. So far are we from giving that
authority unto her in this presumptuous sin, as to draw an argument from, or
be induced to think by her example, that because she casts off CHRIST'S yoke
and bears Antichrists, therefore the holy order and ordinances of CHRIST for
the building, ministry, and government of his Church is not perpetual,
necessary, or always expedient.

I grant that the true Church of Christ may sometimes upon some necessities be
without this holy order for a season, as in the first gathering of the Saints,
especially now when we are not to expect any such miraculous or extraordinary
giving of Gods Spirit as was in the primitive times, when we cannot suddenly
either be made fit for these high offices, or have such perfect knowledge and
probation each of others gifts and conversation as is required thereunto. Also
in time of persecution when the Church cannot peaceably meet either to choose or
exercise any ministry, or that their chief and principal members be held
from them in prisons, or at such time as the chief Elders are taken away either
by death or otherwise fall away. In these and such like times the Church may
for a season upon necessity so enforcing be without this established order:
but this is neither willingly to neglect yt, nor presumptuously to reject yt.
Heerehence yt follows not that this holy order is not always necessary,
because yt is not nor cannot be always executed: So they might conclude all
Gods laws not always necessary, perpetual, or expedient, because they are
not or cannot be always practiced by us. Should our infirmity, sin o^
default take away the stabilitie or truth of Gods ordinances? This would as well
follow of this their reason, as the other: that because the Church of CHRIST
may at sometimes be without this established order of CHRIST and yet be held
the true Church, therefore that prescribed order of CHRIST is not perpetual,
always necessary, or convenient: thus laijng the default upon CHRIST'S sacred
ordinances, as though they were notalwaies holy necessary and convenient,
which in deed is due to us an^ our infirmity and inhabilitie to receive or
exercise such a gracious blessed ministry, or to walk in this heavenly order.

Nothing is more sure then this, the true Church can be established into no
other order, yt can receive none other officers or laws then are in CHRIST'S
Testament prescribed. This has been already manifestly proved and yet further
might be, by as many places of scriptures as either the true or false Church is
spoken of, the true of false ministry, the true or false ministration; as
either CHRIST'S kingdom or any of his offices are spoken of, or Antichrists
presumption and forgerie: as yt has been proved by the true pattern of the
house whereby every part thereof ought to be ^ramed and put together according to
the will of the Lord of the house, otherwise the house will never hang together
or be to the owners liking or the builders praise. Likewise yt has by the
necessity, congruence, coherence of the true and natural parts and members of
the body been proved, how that no other can be added, without making yt a
monstrous body; neither the true members be otherwise knit together, placed,
disposed, used, without the destruction of the whole body: and this much more
of that spiritual house and body of CHRIST'S Church; which being so perfect,
precious, comely, excellent, cannot admit to be shaped, fashioned, framed,
disposed after the fa^sies of earthly men, who the best of them that ever was
(always excepting the head of the Church) in his best consideration, was but a
member of the Church. Neither was there ever power given to any of them,
whether Prince or Prophet whosoever or authority to alter, neglect, or bring
in an^e pin or hook (eue^ the least thing) or so much as the place thereof in
the Tabernacle, Temple, or Church of God.

How often does the Church in the song of Solomon say My belo^ed is mi^ and I
am his; and how often does she charge all her friends to stay without, and not to
stir up her well-beloved until he please? how often does she vow to keep her
self wholly unto him? how often does he again repeat the amiablenes, comlines,
beawty, congruence, fea^ures, fr^itefulnes, plea^antnes of all her parts even
from top to toe? how greatly he is delighted in her, and how the Kings of the
earth should be tied in her ra^ters etc. Does not he say that Solomon and
earthly Princes may put or let out their vineyeards (not being able themselves
to till and dress them) to be dressed and trimmed to their servants, reserving
to themselves a rent etc. But his vineyard is always before him, he is able to
til, dress, and keep yt every whit himself, he neither lets yt out to
hire, nor suffers any to part or possess the fruit thereof with him.

How many Arguments then might be drawn either from the perfection, divine
order etc. of the parts of the Church, from the faith, love, chastity*
obedience unto CHRIST as to her husband Lord King? Likewise how many from his
absolute power, authority, possession over her wholly by the right of an
husband Lord King. How many reasons might be drawn from the absolutnes and
wisdom of his laws, the graciousnes and peace of his heavenly government and
order (which cannot be willingly infringed or broken without rebellion; nor
changed and altered without presumptuous treason) to prove the perpetuity,
necessity, and fit congrue^ce of those officers and ordinances that he (...)
his Testament has prescribed for the building, ministry, and government of
his Church and of every member thereof, whither Prince or minister over whom
CHRIST reigns by equal right, and even the ^ame jurisdiction that he does
over the least. There is no exception or acceptance Isa. 60. 12. Ioh. 3. 36.
Luke 19. 27*
of persons with God: That nation and that kingdom that will not ser^e him
shall perish, and those nations shall be utterly destroyed: He that obeieth not
the Son shall not see life, but the wrath of God abides upon him: Those that
will not have him to reign over them he judges and destroieth as enemies.
CHRIST reigns by his own officers, which yt is lawful at no hand for his
true subjects either to disobey, alter* or reject. Subjects and servants are
not to give, but to take laws at their King and Lord: God has made his Son
Lord and h^ire of al things, and has given him a name above every name, that
Phil. 2. 1^. etc.
at the name of JESUS every knee should bow both of h^auenly things and earthly
things and things under the earth, and every tongue should confess that JESUS
CHRIST is the Lord unto the glory of God his Father, because all men should
honor the Son as they honor the Father. He that honors not the Son
honors not the Father that Io^. 5. 23.
sent him.

O how great then is their wickedness, how pernicious their council, who (for
filthy lucre sake) persuade Princes that they are not only not subject
themselves in person to the laws and spiritual censures of Christ in his
Church; but that they are not bownd to admit that order of government
prescribed in his Testament (which they shuffle off with the term of outward
discipline) in their lands? May not, yea do not Princes by this means
bouldly break all Gods laws, and disanull any of them at their pleasures?
break that they may follow their own hearts lusts, fulfilling the inordinate
appetites thereof, wallowing and glutting themselves in all fleshly pleasure,
vanity, and exce^e, committing what wickedness they will without admonition,
censure or reproof (I would here still be understood of the ecclesiastical
spiritual censures by the word) May they not yet proceed further and disanul
which of Gods laws they list, either in commonwealth or Church? In the commonwealth, when they both abrogate all Gods judicial laws and cut them off at one
blow, as made and belonging to the commonwealth of the Jews only (as though
God had no regard of the conversation of other Christians his servants also)
or else had left some other peculiar laws for the manners of the Gentiles, or
had left them in greater liberty to be and to make laws and customs unto
themselves. Heervpon yt comes to pass, that so many wicked ungodly laws
and customs are decreed; that the whole order and course of judgment and
justice is constuprate and perverted, that so many capital mischeifes as God
punished by death, as blaspheming the name of God, open idolatry, disobedience
to parents, are not by law punished at al; incest, adultery either passed over
or punished by some lighter trifling chasticement; wilful murder often
pardoned; theft (if yt be above 13 pe^ce) punished by death: yea this sin is
punished not only in the person of the thief (who that wise King said if he
should steal seven times, may yet live and satisfy with his body or goods)
but in the persons of al such as this their unjust law judges any way
accessarie; which extends so far, as many honest me^ may for this trifle for
buynig or receiving part of these stolen goods, be also put to death and
forfait all the lands and goods they have; whereby their wives, children, and
families are punished also and utterly undone. And thus by this their policy
are many thieves made for one; not to speak of all this guiltles blood that is
upon the head of the magistrate, Judge, officers, Jury, and the whole land by
this means* what should ^ stand to particulate their infinite transgressio^s
of Gods laws eue^ in their civil estate, which is in much worse case then
many heathen nations which never knew God or his Christ. All this arises of
this immunitie from the order, government, and censure of Christ in his Church,
and from the inordinate authority the apostaticall church gives unto Princes
and magistrates, and they assume unto themselves: so that the saying of the
prophet concerning the proud Kings of Babel is now rightly verified in them.
Thou did say with thy heart, I wll ascend into heaven above the star^ of GOD
almighty, I will exalt my throne and will sit in the mountain of the
congregation in the sides of the north, I will ascend above the height of the
clouds, I will make my self equal unto the most high.

For see, whiles they take power to reject that holy government, order,
officers, laws that Christ our King has ordained and appointed to his Church,
they stretch their hand also and presume further, to e^ect a new government,
new orders, laws, officers, ministry, ministratio^ etc. And what is this but
both to reprove Christ's laws, and to reject his yoke from them, and also to
take Christ's offices, throne and S^epter from him, whom the Lord has set upon
the throne of David to order and stabli^h yt with judgment and justice, and
l^id the key of government upon his shoulder, that what he opens no man
should ^hut, and wh^t he shuts no man should open.

How great the^ is their pride and presumption yt are so far ^ro^ obeijng and
seeing Chri^s laws executed, as they utterly abrogate them and t^ke them out of
the way, and set up their own idol diuis^s in the stead of the^? So far are
they from taking laws at him as their King and Lord, as they give laws of him
as King and Lord. Is not this to deny, nay to put an end to his ministry and
kingdom? to his ministry, by taking away yt which he established, and
bringing in a new into the church; to his kingdom, by abrogating his laws,
offices, ordinances, and by bringing in and establishing their own: In so much
as through ye odious fl^tery of these their priests, some of them have suffered
themselves to be called the supreme head of (...) Church in earth, as though
Christ's Church had one head in earth and an other in heaven, or that Christ
were not the head of his Church here in earth also. But the wretched Priests
would excuse this i^audible blasphemy with this interpretation (which yet they
express not) 1. under Christ, as though Christ's Church might have two heads,
an upper and an under head one above an other: were not this to make her a
monster like their Church, which has m^nie heads, and upon them written names
of blasphemy, as supreme head of the Church primate Bishop, metropolitan
Bishop, Lord Archbishops grace, Lord Bish. and Archdeacon etc. Al which heads,
but especially that their supreme head of the church, may (they say) make laws
for the church, And all this execrable blasphemy they hide under the title and
office of the civil magistrate, who in deed is Gods blessed ordinance.

Neither will these lymmes of ye Devil be satisfied with any humble
acknowledgme^t of ye civil power, or with any christian submissio^ unto the
^ame; but will extort by oath an allowance and subscriptio^ unto this their
ungodly power, blasphemous titles, antichristian decrees and proceedings etc.
It will not suffice to confess that God has made the civil magistrate the
keeper of the book of the law, to see both ye tables thereof observed by all
persons both in the Church and common wealth, and so has power over both church
and common wealth; but they must have this indefinite p^oposition granted them
That a Prince has power to make laws for the Church. By which word making is
implied, or rather (as ye general estate both of church and commonwealth show)
expressed plainly that they mean that ye Prince may devise and make new laws
for the Church such as are notheard of in that book of God. By laws they
mean any traditions, ordinances, customs etc. which are not prescribed in
CHRIST'S Testament; otherwise why should they use these words or v^ge that power
of making laws. A godly Prince is bound ^o Gods law, made the keeper thereof,
not the controler; the servant not the Lord. God has in that book made most
perfect and necessary laws both for Church and common wealth: he requires of
the King and magistrate to see these laws executed, and not to make new. He
that mak^th any new laws takes unto him the office of God, who is the only
law maker: al men of what estate soever ar^ but Gods creatures, s^ua^tes, and
subjects to his law. Moses, ^oshua, Samuel, Dau^d, (...). made no new laws,
but reu^ued and executed the old laws which God had made. These exampl^s that
miserable man and high tra^tor to God and his Prince ROBERT SOME cites to
prove y^ P^nces may make lawe^ for the church and co^^on wealth, t^erby
ind^uoring to (...) and hold her Man. and the honorable Magistrates of this
land in this presumptuous breach of al Gods l^wes in this church and common
wealth, by causing the^ to rati^ie and publish ye ungodly decrees which that
blasphemous high Commission has made or shall hereafter make, under this
pretext, that Christian Princes have power to make laws for the Church*

Which Commission and al their proceedings, because they ca^ no way be
justified by the law of God and Testime^t of Christ, but are directly contrary
unto the same (as shall straight way be proved) therefore y^ old lymme of
Antichrist, that crowned horn of the Beast that T. C. breaths out of the
mouth of the dragon most h^llish blasphemy against Christ's (...) and the^ that
dwell in the heaven, accusing Christ's blessed order and manner of government, of
sedition, tumults, disobedience unto the civil estate, as giving the raines to
the p^oples unbridled and inordinate appetites which can not be rest^eined,
subuerting al magis^racie and the whole order of the commonwealth.

Had that beast any religion that thus blesphemed Christ's ordinance? have not
the heathen at al times thus reproched and accused the word of God and Gospel
of Christ? Yet what is more free of these crimes, then this order they so
accuse, whereof Christ himself is the author and preserver. Is yt not the
f^llowship and communion? and have such sins any f^llowship with him? Before
any can enter or be received unto this f^llowship, he must be renewed by
repentance, denijng all his fleshly conversation concerning the time p^st: he
must be begotten by that immortal seed: he must b^ borne again of water and
the Spirit, and ^ter as a newborn babe and as a child wained from the br^sts:
he must leave al his venom and fiercenes, and become as a meek lamb obedient
unto his sh^pheardes. At what time any is found disobedient and headstrong or
incorrigible, he forthwith loos^th his place in this communion and fellowship,
he is separate and cast out.

As for their ord^r of their assembly, yt is not ^multious or con^ntious, but
r^ther an heavenly school of all order, sobrie^ie and modest^e, which the
A^gels with great delight b^hold, every one there knowing his calling, place
and bounds, which he without pres^t b^ame may not break; as fr^e, but not
having that liberty as a cloak of wick^dnes, but as the s^ruantes of God;
whose law is here purelie and sincerely taught, eu^ry (...) and degree
instructed how they ough^ ^o walk and behave th^mselues toward God and men
in all manner conversation: Nothing more or more often inculcate, the^ to yield
due honor, obedience, submission unto all magistrates, parents, superiors,
and that not for fashion sake or ignorantly, but as of knowledge, faith and
conscience toward God. Hereunto, as also unto al other duties they are
continually instructed, exhorted; whosoever transgresses is admonished,
censured, and (without present repentance and amendment) duly cast out of this
fellowship and communion, where no inordinate walking or contumacious persons
are suffered.

Who then but that old Satan or some son of his, could thus accuse the
lambs the babes these little ones of Christ of rebellion, sedition, tumult etc?
what mouth else could reproach and blaspheme that heavenly gracious blessed
order of Christ in his Church of subuerting common welths, destroijng civil
magistracy and government? without which holy ordinance and magistracy as
there can be no Church, no assembly, no execution of law, no callings, no
trades, no order, no safety amongst men; so without this instruction,
government and holy order of the Church ca^ no estate no magistracy be
blessed of God, because without this they can neither know nor execute their
duties, neither walk holily or lawfully in their callings, or do any thing
that may please God. Who then but these unclean spirits that speak out of the
mouth of that Dragon, and out of the mouth of that Beast, and out of the mouth
of that false prophet, could in this manner disioine those that God has so
ne^rlie joined? widowing and spoiling the Church of that comfort and assistance
she should have of the civil magistrate, depriving the civil magistrates of
that instruction and joy they should have in the Church.

As we have above alleged, that nation or commonwealth, Prince, magistrate,
estate, degree, person whosoever that submits not to ou^ Lord Jesus Christ
to be wholly governed by his word both body and soul in all things whatsoever
without any exception, reservation, or polli^ike respect; that nation, Prince,
magistrate, person, soul shall be utterly destroyed amongst Christ's enemies.
So Christ may not neither will be fashioned or framed to any commonwealth,
policy o^ pleasure of any Prince: he is Lord of Lords and King of Kings; all the kingdoms of this world are his, and he shall reign for evermore: those that
are no^ under his Scepter of grace, those he will rule with a red of iron,
those shall be broken as a potters vessels. So far then is this heavenly and
blessed government of Christ in his Church by his word (to which every soul
that will be saved must be subject) from being the overthrow of any commonwealth or lawful estate thereof, that you see yt is the only foundation of the
one, and stablishment of the other, a perfect rule for both, to which all
laws, policies, states, degrees, persons in all actions must be framed and
subject. To which whatsoever is contrary or transgressing, whither commonwealth, common, cannon, o^ civil laws, their Judges, pleaders, courts, must
either be reformed or consumed thereby. No titles, policies, pleas, or
prerogatives can excuse them from or before that Judge who vpholdeth,
governs, and judges all things by that his word, and with the same ^ifteth
and fanneth out whatsoever is found contrary to his will. To which government
and trial of his word because they will not submit their persons and
proceedings, therefore with one consent all the estates and degrees of the land,
Prince, priests and people hate him, and send by their elders an embassage
after him, that they will not have him to reign over them, accusing his
government of innovation, dangerous to their state, pernicious to the whole
land etc. Thus take they boldness to break his ba^ds and cast his yoke from
them, to transgress his laws, change his ordinances, and to break the
everlasting covenant even that Testament purchased for them and sealed unto
them with that precious blood of the giver: Therefore hangs the wrath of God
over them, the day of his vengeance hasteneth, fear and a pit and a snare are
upon them: He that flies from the noise of the fear shall fall into the p^t,
and he that comes out of the pit shall be taken in the snare, for the windows
from on high are open, and the foundations of the earth do shake: The earth is
utterly broken, the earth is quite burst in sunder, the earth is moved
exceedingly, the earth shall reele too and froe like a drunken man and shall be
removed like a tent, and the defection thereof shall be heavy upon yt, so that yt
shall fall and rise no more because the land is defiled under the inhabitants
thereof; for they transgress the laws, they change the ordinances, and break
the everlasting covenant.

THERE Remains yet an other question of this old captious Sadducie, wherein
he requires to have noted unto him some particular Churches either in the
Apostles time or since, wherein y^ whole government of the Church was practiced
only by Doctors, Pastors, Elders and Deacons and none other, and that in an
equality without superiority in one above an other.

To satisfy his demands in this cauilling question (which evidently apeareth
to be made rather for a snare then any godly edifijng) I hold neither lawful
nor expedient, until he have acknowledged and yielded unto the former: namely;
unto the necessity and perpetuity of that order of government and
administration which CHRIST in his Testament has prescribed, which he has
miserably violated, rejected and blasphemed. That in this estate to show him
the treasures and ordinances of this spiritual Temple is utterly forbidden and
unlawful, appears Ezekiel. 43. 10. 11. in these words Thou Son of man show
unto the house of Israel this (...) when they shall be ashamed of their
wickedness, that they may measure the pattern; when (I say) they shall be ashamed
of all they have done, make known unto them the form of the house, and the
constitution thereof, the goings out thereof, and the coming in thereof, and the
whole form thereof, and all the statu^es thereof, and all the figures thereof,
and all the laws thereof, and describe them before their eyes, that they may
keep the whole fa^hion thereof, and all the ordinances thereof, and do them.
Therefore until he have repented and forsaken his antichristian ministry,
unlawful Lordship and jurisdiction, I hold it not lawful whilst he re^aineth
in and will not come out o^ Babel to reason or iangle with him concerning the
heavenly and most holy ordinances of Sion which he does but blaspheme and
reproach with his ungodly mouth that is op^ned to all impiety. That yt is not
expedient until he have yielded unto the former question to answer this, is
manifest. For to what purpo^e were yt to reason with him how these officers of
Christ^ Church ought to administer and govern, when he utterly denies that in
the Church of England such offices and jurisdiction were tolerable: So that yt
could no way edify him, but rather minister matter of cauil unto his
blasphemous mouth, who seeks nothing else in this captious (yet with all most
ignorant and fond) vain question. We ought not to cast our pearls before
swine, or to expose the Lords holy truth to reproach. This is my answer to him
conc^rning his second question.

Yet to remove these stumbling blocks out of the way of others, and to rid
them out of the snar^s which this Spider has wouen; I will through Gods grace
briefly show them the errors and folly of this cauilling question, chiefly in
these 3 points thereof. First in that he requires some particular Churches by
name, wherein this whole government of the Church was practiced etc. 2 when yt
was practiced by Doctors, Elders Pastors, Deaco^s only and none other 3 where
these practiced yt in an equality without superiority in one above an other.
In the first point he stumbleth and cauilleth at this, because in deed no
church that ever was or shall be upon earth has or can fully execute this
government of CHRIST (but have been and shall be subi^ct to many def^lts, many
transgressions) taking here the government of CHRIST for his whole revealed
will in his word and Testament; to the faithful observation of every title
whereof the Church is by covenant bound (where by the way must be noted, that
this carping Pharisey knows in his corrupt and festered conscience what
CHRIST'S true gou^rnment is, which he so mainly impugneth, namely that righteous
Scepter of his holy word) which in deed because none of the primitive Church^s
that the Apostl^s planted and governed could ever fully keep, but have been
subject to many faltes and reproves; therefore this man would conclude this
government of CHRIST to be an unnecessary and impossible thing, which God
neither would command nor we ca^ perform. Wherein his wick^dnes and impiety
yet proceeds a degree ^urther then that of the ^ollerating Pri^sts; who would
excuse and defend their most heinous transgressio^s by ye sins and d^faltes
of other Church^s; this man thereby would utterly abrogate and disanull the
whole law of God, and Testament of Christ, by which the Church ought to be
governed, unto the faithful practice and observation whereof the whole church
is bownd. Can the infirmity and sin ^f any mortal creatur^s ta^e away the truth
and st^bilitie of Gods laws, of Christ's Testament? might he not as well
conclu^e, no Church or member of the Church has at any time put in practice al
Gods laws, and to sa^ (as yt is) are not able to keep any one of them,
t^erfore the laws of God are not p^rmanent, necessary, nor now commanded
because no Church can keep them all: such reasons are not worthy the refuting.

The second part of his question, where he demands to know where this
government of CHRIST was practiced by Doctors, Pastors, Elders and Deacons only
and none other, is so full o^ vanity and folly as yt deserves none answer.
For my part, I never read nor heard of any such Church: I ever thought that
every member of the Church without exception or exemption of any one person,
had been all alike bound to the obedience of Gods word, the practice of
CHRIST'S government, to be instructed and ruled by him in all things, every one
walking within the bounds of his calling: I never thought that the practice of
Christ's government belonged only to these officers; I rather thought yt had
been their duty and office to have s^ene this government faithfully and
orderly practiced by all the members of the Church. Why we ^ee Christ's
ecclesiastical government is not only tied to the public actions of the whole
congregation; but extend^th to every action of every Christian, whereof CHRIST
is the beholder and Judge* yea and for every known transgression and
disobedience has due vengeance ready, whither by reproof or excommunication: I
ever thought that the execution of Christ's government and judgments had
belonged to the whole body of the Church which assigns the public ordering
thereof, as the ministry etc. to the proper and fit members, each one in their
due functions; not hereby resigning up her power and authority and government
wholly into their hands, but still reserving the right in the whol^ body
together; and in every member apart. So that if these officers or any of them
transgress, the church reserueth power to every member freely (according to
the quality of the offense and the rules of the word) to admonish and reprove,
the whole to censure and exco^munica^e such officers so offending. Which
officers in execut^o^ of their office and funct^o^, do rather reserve this
liberty and power to the whole Church and every member thereof in due order,
the^ any way diminish or plu^k away the same from the least. It were a
disorderly part and against nature for any member to arrogate the power of the
whole body unto yt self: Such presumption was not heard of in the church of
CHRIST until Antichrist sprung up, neither will yt be removed until he be
aboli^hed. Elders are appointed to see the government and order of CHRIST
observed* not to take yt al into their hands. One other gross error and
ignorance in this branch is to be obseru^d, that is, he numbreth the D^acons
amongst the governing officers of the Church* this he never le^rned in Christ's
Testament; well may yt be the practice of the Church of Rome and England where
are such jolly archdeacons and ruffling Deanes. The Deacons office in the
Church is, to gather and distribute, not to govern.

The third point in this cauilling question is, to know where these officers
above said practiced that government in an equality without superiority in
one above an other. It has been even now showed how this government belongs
and is committed to the whole body, how their office consists to teach the
Church how to practice yt and to see yt observed by all in due order, and not
ambitiously to assume yt wholly into their own hands. For the rest, though
there be a communion in the Church, yet there is no equality. The Church
knows how to give honor and reverence unto their Elders, especially to them
yt labor in the word and doctrine. The Church of CHRIST is taught to obey and
submit unto their leaders, to acknowledge them that labor amongst them and that
are set over them in the Lord, and to admonish them, and to hold those in
superabundant love for their work sake: The Elders also amongst themselves
know how to give honor one unto another by going before; yet all this without
prejudice to themselves that give, or detrime^t to him that receaueth yt,
without the loss of the least jot of their own liberty, or puffing him up,
or setting him in any unlawful authority. They give yt to his labor,
diligence, virtue and desert; which ceassing, they straight withdraw their
praise, and in the stead thereof use exhortation, admonition, yea (if need be)
censure. All the parts of man's body are not alike esteemed and used; we have
much more care and tenderness over the eyes then of the hands or feet, yet may
not the eye heerby refuse to do service and attend to the hand or foot in all
their business and affairs, neither may yt disturb the least member of the
body in their peculiar office and function, or intrude into their place. The
eye guides and directs the hand, showing how yt ought to do the work: the
hand again washes, wipeth, and does all loving help yt may unto the eye.
Both eye and hand and every other part of the body are distinct members, yet
so knit and joined together in the body, as they do their due service unto the
eye, and each unto other in the whole, not confounding the order of nature, nor
disturbing each other in the work. The Church has like care to see that
inviolable order and temper of the members in CHRIST'S body duly preserved:
the honor they gi^e to one member is not the dishonor of another, or hinderance
of the whole body. The Church neither does neither may give immoderate honor
either in fastuous swelling titles of vanity, or any inordinate authority to
any member; that would rather puff up the flesh then cheer up the spirit.
All the gifts God has given any member, are to the service of the whole body:
he that will be greatest must be as the least, he must wash the feet and not
have his feet kissed of the least: all superiority is here comprised within
the bounds of Christian order and modesty. Humility goes before and is the
compagnion of honor: honor is not here conferred to lift up the hear^s of the
greatest above the least, but rather for their counsel, care, love, service
unto al; yt is willingly given unto such by all: Ambition and vainglorie are
here carfully avoided both by the g^ers and receauers: who so seeks the
primacie with Diotrephes is here ^uggillate and laid open, resisted 3 Ioh. 9.
and rebuked of al, as that Antichrist that Lucifer: ye greatest Elder of the
Church, the Pastor, is but a servant and steward of the house, not Tit. 1. 7. 1
Pet. 5. 3.
Lord of the heritage; but a member, not Lord of the body; to be honored for
his excellent place in the body and gifts of God; to be reverenced for his
fa^thfulnes, labor, and diligence. Yet this must ever be remembered, his honor
consists in his service, his service belongs unto al; so that the least
member of the body has like interest in him, as he in the least member: the
l^st member has like liberty and f^eedome with him in Christ, though not like
gifts or function of Christ.

AND NOW this strange and troublesome Proposition is thus proved That Christ's
Church can be established into no other order, or governed by any other
officers or ordinances then Christ in his Testam^t has prescribed, and that
these great impediments and difficulties are also removed out of the way; me
thinckes yt time, and here a fit occasion offered, to go in hand with the
examination of the present established government of the Church of England. And
here to begin with the Antichristian authority of the chief rulers (namely
the Bishops) which they would bear away and hide v^der this word Superiority:
of their lineage, petigree, original you have above heard, as also of their
strange manner of offices and consecration; and somewhat also of their power
generally, and from whence they derived yt: but let us now a little further
consider thereof.

First they take upon them each one of them to sit upon (as they call yt) or to
govern many hundred churches, others of the^ many thowsands; one of them as
Pope, or Primate over al: they make and depose ministers by their absolute
authority; they make and disanul laws: they ratify or rei^ct what
scriptures they list; they confirm or refuse what doctrines they list; they
make what kind of worship, ministration they list; they change, innovate,
coin, alter, bring in, cast out what and whom they list, without check or
controulement. The truth of al these need no other proof then their present
estate; the warrant of any of these I am sure cannot be showed in Christ's
Testament: therefore I doubt not at one word to call them all devilish and
Antichristian. To confute the^ severally were a labor both needles and
troblesome, they being of themselves so apparantlie odious; yet this briefly
in a word.

One man cannot stand a Bishop unto diverse churches at one time, no more then
one eye can be a 1 member, and 2 do the function at one time to diverse bodies,
3 in diverse places; no more then one candle can be put in two or mo diverse
candlesticks, 2 in diverse howses, 3 and show light unto them al at one time.
Thus are Bishops in their office, place, ministry, called members, yea the
eye of the body, lights, and the Math. 5. 14. Revel. 2. 1*
candle of the house: the Church yt self also c^lled the body, the
candlestick in the scriptures. No one shepherd can attend, watch, feed,
ouersee two or more flocks at one time in diverse places: no watc^ man Ezekiel.
34. Act. 20.
can keep watch in diverse Cities at one time. Bishops are called shepheardes,
watchmen; the Church, a flock, a city in the scriptures. Be^ides, CHRIST has
established an other quite contrary order; not one watchman or shepherd over
many churches, but many watchmen over one Church; and yet has given power
and commanded every member to watch, and al little enough. Mo^eouer yt is
CHRIST'S only office now to walk in the midst of the 7 golden Ca^dlesticks, he
holds the 7 stars in his own right hand, he is the Archbishop and visiter
of all Churches ^euel. 1.
and shepheardes: CHRIST is the head over the universal and every particular
body of his Church; he has given this office to no mortal man in earth; they
are al but members of some one body, though diverse in function and dig^itie,
as the eye, hand, foot etc. yet al but members of the body to which they
serve: every member being circumscribed within the limits of their place,
office, function. One member cannot place, displace or cut off an other, this
ought to be done by the whole body, as in the name and power of their head
CHRIST: unto every one 2. Cor. 5.
of which congregations CHRIST has given this his power, to be executed
according to the rules of his word: CHRIST is the Bridegroom, he only has the
Bride: but the friends of the Bridegroom they I^h. 3. 29.
stand and hear and rejoice exceedingly for the Bridegromes voice. ^eue. 5.
CHRIST is that slain living La^be that has obtained to take yt sealed
written Book out of the right hand of him that sits on the throne, and to
open the same. All Elders, Angels, and the whole host in heaven and in earth
fall down on their faces and give glory to the Lamb* Lames. 4, ^2
CHRIST is the only Lawgiuer unto his Church, and has given mos^ heavenly
perfect laws in his Testament unto his Church, and has sealed his Testament
with that his blood, so that nothing may be added unto, or taken there from. He
never gave to any mortal man power to make new laws, but has commanded all
men faithfully to keep those laws which he has made, within the limits of
their calling. It is only the office of the holy Ghost to teach the S^ints to
pray, to give ^om. 8. 26, 27. 1. Ioh. 2. ^7.
words according to the will of God, to fill their mouths with new ^onges,
which they, as sweet odors and incense day and night offer up unto God through
CHRIST.

What then and how great is the sin of these presumptuous shepheardes, these
blasphemous antichristian Bishops that climb up and intrude into the place,
office, and room of CHRIST? that take his spowse from him, and al his
ministers, officers, orders and ordinances from her: that alter, abrogate,
bring in, cast out what and whom they ^st etc. that take the office of the
holy Ghost upon them, and not only set up in the Church of God their moulten
egiptian calfe, cast ^n ye old mould of the mass book (save a little new
annuled and engraven with a few of their own diuises) b^t thrust this filthv
idol upon men's con^ciences as their prayers, yea upon God himself, as all the
service and worship they will allow him in his Church. See whither these be not
the undoubted marks of Antichrist that adversary? search the prophecies and
the scriptures whether this be not that very abomination of desolatio^? lift
up your eyes, to the destruction, hauo^k and wast these adversaries have made
in the sanctuary, how they roar in the midst of the congregation, and have
there set up their ba^ners and signs, and lift Psalm. 74.
up their axes upon all the Lords plants, and broken down with their malles
all the beawtiful sieling and carved work, have cast the Lords sanctuary into
the fire, have raced yt to the ground, and have profaned the dwelling place of
his name: they are resolved in their hearts to do violence, and to destroy
them altogether, and have brought in all maof filthy abominable things into
the sanctuary. When they find these things in this estate, then let him that
reads consider; let them that be in the city, and will save their souls,
flee into the mountain.

There belongs no reformation to this estate, even that reformation which
these counter fait preachers pretend, is altogether as ill. You see what in
ordinate antichristian power they still retain in the priests hands: in all
their parishes, the pa^son or minister (as they call him) must rule all and be
above the whole ^ocke, who may controwle him or withstand him in nothing,
either in doctrine, or practice, be yt never so ill. They must complain to the
Synod, classes, or council of pri^ts: which synodes, classes, councels, must
consist wholly of ministers, ^e people shut out, and those have absolute power
over al churches, persons, matters, causes, to debate, define, determine,
decree, ratify, di^anull what they list, by permission of the high Court of
Parliament, which has supreme power over the Church and all councels and
causes thereof, vt supra: otherwise, until by this court these decrees be taken
away, all churches are burdened and must stand subject unto them.

But let us now return to the execution of this monstrous antichristian power
of the BB^. This extends even to all the whole practice, worship, ministry,
orders, ordinances, injunctions, decrees, laws of their Church already made,
and hereafter to be made, and therefore are infinite, and pass any man or
creature whatsoeuers setting down in particular. A great labor yt were to
reckon up all their consti^utions and ca^nons which they have fetched from I
wot not what old councels, or rather from their holy Father the Pope, or the
heap of their civil laws and customs which they have received from their
mo^er of Rome; al which are pleaded, judged, sold by these Lords Bishops,
their cha^c^llors, ^eanes; civil Doctors, Proctors, aduccates, pleaders
brawlers, archdeaco^s, co^missaries in their Courts of faculties Ar^s,
prerog^tiue* delegates, and in their commissaries court (not here to spoke of
ye well head, yt ever running spring of al mischief, their Spanish i^quisitio^
or english high co^missio^, yt deserves especial mention by yt ^lf. These
laws they take for ye foundation of their church in stead o^ Christ's new
Testament: these courts give the whole direction unto, and execute all the
censures of and for this Church, whether yt be excommunication, s^spension or
mulct, Mr. Archdeacon and mass Commissary bea^e no small sway. It were long
and hand to relate the diverse orders, process and manners of pleading that
belong to these courts, that is no small secret, yt is no easy occupation,
many a man's living depends thereon: yt is no small calling to be but a
pursuyua^t or cursetor of these courts: (I say not so of the parators and
sumners that belong to the co^missaries court:) here are all things plead^ble
and vendible for money, but without money here is no man will open his mouth,
be the cause never so just. For money you may here have expedition or delay of
judgment, with ^undry shifts and euasions which I want skill to utter. For
money you may have privileges, dispensations, lice^ces, to eat fle^h, or to
marry at forbidden times, as in the holy time of Lent etc. privately in the
night, in some secret place, suddenly without consent of parents, yea without
banes as king, and by what Priest you will; also to have many benefices, and in
sundry other cases, whereof these courts exercise jurisdiction, as of
precontractes, adulteries, testaments, and sundry other that I know not of. All
which and whatsoever, an ancient Bishop of this land has undertaken to defend
by Christ's new Testament: wherefore until we see his profes I dare not give
sentence against them, or pronounce them antichristian. His proof is drawn
from 1 Timothy 5. 19. Against a priest or elder receive no accusation under 2 or 3
witnesses. Here (says he) is an accuser, here is a person accused, here are
witnesses examined, here is a judgment and deciding of the matter; therefore
here is an exercise of a jurisdiction and a manner of a court. To make yt yet
more sure, he takes away an obiecton that lay in his way; namely, that yt was
not Timothy his court only, but jointly exercised with the residue of the
Elders that had the government. This (he says) cannot be, because the words
are direct^d to Timothy only.

It is pity MARTIN his press was gone before this reason had an answer, so
should he not have lost his due shame for the same. But was there ever l^le
portion of scripture so violently wrested, distorted, perverted, and that by an
old Bishop? I am deceived if he fetched not this reason from the school of
Sorbon: for either my memory fails me, or I have read their citatio^s also by
sumners pursyuants etc. proved by Genesis 3. 9. Adam where art thou? Well to the
point: I cannot rest either in his tra^slatio^ or interpretation of this verse,
they are both corrupt and popishly fals^: The text is Against an Elder receive
not accusation except in 2 or 3 witnesses. ^ cannot here allow the word
Priest, nor spare the words exceptin: his interpretation is most gross and
false, contrary to the whole scope and phrase both of that chapter and the
whole epistle, prejudicial to the perp^tuity and true practice of the
commandment. For if this law were directed to Timothy only, and that the
other Elders and the Church were shut out in the examination and censuring of
such faults; then how could the Church or any member thereof now have any use
of this commandment? I never heard of any special bequest Timothy made to
these Lord Bishops above all other, neither can I see from hence, why they
should usurp this jurisdiction over their superiors; namely over the parish
Priests and parsons that stad for Pastors, these Bishops (if they have any
office) being put Elders. So the^ by this rule the Parson should keep court
over the Bishops, and not the Bishop over so many Parsons. But to say the
truth, this reason would much better fit the Pope, in whom this supreme
jurisdiction over al Churches and Elders should in one person be bestowed, as
by his sai^ng yt was in Timothy, rather then unto so many Bishops, who all
cannot have that sole peculiar authority which belonged unto Timothy alone,
from which so many worthy Bishops were then shut out.

But why should this commandment belong more to Timothy alone, th^n all the
other commandments in this chapter (that I say not in this epistle) which was
wholly written and directed to Timothy; there was bare shift when this was made
the only reason: and now further, why should this commandment more the^ all the
rest of this chapter, of the manner of rebuking elder men, and elder women,
honoring widows etc. be tied more to Timothies person and office, yea or to
the persons and office of elders? may none reprove an Elder, but a Lord
Bishop? or (as the reformists would have yt) but a synod or council of
Priests? It is plentifully above proved, that the whole Church has power to
observe, reprove, censure their greatest Teachers and Elders, or why should
this rule of hearing and receiving ill reports so solely belong to Timothy, or
to other Elders, more then the contrary commandment going next before, of the
honor care and love due to Elders. I hope they can be content to be honored,
provided for, and loved of the whole flock, especially for their desert and
virtue; surely so must they be contented to be reproved and censured of all,
when by evil life they deserve yt.

This commandment in deed wills all Christians to be careful what reports
and tales they hear or (...) of their Elders, and that they be sure they have
good and lawful proof in two or three witnesses etc: other christians had
ears, mouths, and hearts which had need to be governed as well as Timothy. I
grant well that publicly in the Church the ^rial and censuring of Elders
ought ch^efly to be done by the Elders of that Church, but this neither
preiudicing the liberty of any, even the least, freely to object or speak
what he knows to be blamed, either in the Elder accus^d, or in the public
action by the other Elders that try and examine; much less to the secluding
and shutting out the whole Church, with these wicked Priests, eue^ both these
factions Pon^ifical and Reform^ts, who both of them would assume the whole
government of the Church into their own hands, at the least utterly debar the
congregation, where these things are amiss, to intermeddle. The Church must
receive what they amongst themselves: have decreed, whither in their brawling
courts, whither in their Se^ct classes.

The public censuring of any member, whither Elder or other, is an action of
the whole Church: whereunto (if yt use the most fit members or officers) should
such officers and members hereupon arrogate the whole action, interest and
power to themselves, secluding the whole body the Church, whose officers and
members they are? As when ^he body uses the eye, ye mouth, the feet, to see,
sp^ake, go, is not the whole body of consent with these actions, and said to
see, to speak, to go, although to these particular actions yt vs^th these
particular members? what a dismembring of the body, and rending of the Church
would these ambitious Priests make? who the one would withdraw all public
actions of the Church into their popish (Courts, the other into their
conuenticles and synodes of Priests.

As for reproof by admonition, any member of the Church has free power also
to reprove the greatest Elder of the Church, according to the quallitie of his
offense: if his offense be private, privately; if public, publicly: Yea he is
bound by the law of God so to do, and not to suffer sin in him; yet this
within the bounds of modesty and order; as if there be others present more fit
to do yt, to give them time and place, but if they neglect yt, or do yt
amiss, then to use his power, yea to do his duty.

Now the^ seeing the whole Church has this power to censure faults in their
hands, and that yt properly belongs unto them (as we shall have many
occasions hereafter to show) and that these Elders are but ministers and
servants of the Church, substituted to this and other functions. Seeing also
every one, eue^ the least member in the Church, has interest, power and
freedom in and over this or any actio^ of the Church, to approve or orderly to
reprove any action or person of the Church, and that publikly if need so
require; how ca^ any from this place draw* that the reproof of Elders only
belongs to Elders; or how could this popish prelate collect, that this power
was only given to Timot^y, when Timothy and the Apostles themselves were
subject to the reproof of the least, where these transgressed from the word
and will of God: how could he from hence derive his absolute power over all
Churches and Priests, when no such thing is here by this commandment given to
Timothy? how could this old dreamer from hence derive, or hereby defend these
romish brawling bawdy courts, with all their popish ca^nons, customs,
pleadings, pleaders, even all that swarm of vermin that live and attend upon
the same courts? I hope if we granted him his own most false interpretation;
that Timothy had sole power, and by virtue of this commandment exercised
absolute jurisdiction over the whole Church and the other Elders; that yet he
did yt not after this antichristian ungodly manner as he and his brethren
Bishops do, by such mercenarie romish Doctors, pleaders, proctors etc. which
are to couller and plead the most vile hateful causes which a christians ear
abhors to hear of, or by such wicked blasphemous customs, oaths,
purgations etc. These I suppose he can not prove to be used in Timothies
court, neither can he derive any of this doung from that holy commandment of
God; for the^ ^ight every christian keep such a court over and against BBs.
etc. seeing they may reprove and rebuke the greatest Bishop in the Church, that
transgresses against the word of God. No let him look into the 9. chapter of
the Revelation, and there he shall see his own and al these poisoned armed
locusts original to have come out of the smoke of the bottomless pyt etc.
Further to discuss the popery, wickedness, and folly of this reason, or the
vnlawfullnes of these antichristian courts, were labor needles: they being so
gross of themselves, *as by the first bringing the heavenly light unto them,
they are discovered thereby, and chased away as the darkness of the night by the
sun rising, the gross vapors by the wind. They have no foundation of the
word, and therefore must needs fall: the word of God will bear no such rotten
stubble and filthy doung, therefore I leave *this reason to remain to his
perpetual shame, and the shame of all the brood and household of Anak: who if
they could be drawn but to any peaceable opening the book of God, but with y^
least christian (I would not now be understood of any learned Priest of the
opposite faction, who having derived all their ministry and ministration from
them, and exercising the same under them, ca^ never prevail against their
fathers, as in all their conflicts has been seen, because in deed they take
not the whole cause and right groundworke* therefore they cannot further the
Gospel, or bring glory to God: But if the least Christian whom both factions
so depise and perfecute, might have but free and orderly trial with either or
both sides and factions, I doubt not but God would give such blessing and power
to his word which he would put in their mouths, as their counterfeit and
wicked dealings should be discovered: yea albeit both sides hate the light and
flee this christian peaceable trial (whereby they plainly bewray of what Spirit
they are) though they dig as deep as hell to hide their devises, yet God will
disclose them, and that even by their own pens and tongues, rather then he
will want instruments.

An other fleshly reason he brings from the lawfulnes of these courts, and yt
is from the Princes authority, A christian Prince that allows the free course
of the Gospel commands them: therefore every godly subject ought to obey the^.

The Gospel cannot have free course, whiles these antichristian courts,
Bishops, ministry stand: if the Gospel had free course, they should all be
abolished: But is this a Bishoply or Christian reason? a godly Prince
commands them* therefore they ought to be obeyed? why have Princes authority
to command what they list? or if they do, ought christians to obey any ungodly
decree? I had thought that both they ought to command and we to obey in the
Lord always: but especially may Princes bring in any new ordinances at their
pleasure into the Church of CHRIST? what *can the Pope say more for his
sackfull of traditions? make you this unlawful in the person of the Pope that
makes some more show of learning, knowledge, and religion, and has his learned
council of cardinals about him, and yet make yt lawful in a christian Prince
to innouate or abrogate the Testament of CHRIST in this manner? to bring in or
keep out of the Church what ordinances they list? you show your self a
faithful watchman and Bishop over the Church and unto your Princes soul, yt
suffer such rule to be kept in the Church without blowing the trumpet of Gods
word against yt, that suffer your Prince thus to run into, and remain in the
wrath of God vnadmonished, unreproved. You learned this of no true Prophets, no
faithful Bishops; let yt remain then upon you for an undoubted mark of a
false Prophet, a Balaamite, a wolf, a murderer of souls. And as for your
authority, know (seeing yt has no better ground in the world of God) yt shall
all fall to the ground: all the Princes of the world or powers of hell shall not
be able to uphold yt; Babylon shall fall and all her ^eu. 18. 17.
pomp shall vanish, though her princes and shipmasters or bishops, and all her
mariners, ministers, and marchandmen howl and wayle therefore: for the God that
condemns her is a strong Lord: as for the King of Egypt he is a man and not
God almighty, and their horses ^a. 31. ^.
flesh, but not Spirit: wherefore when JEHOVAH shall stretch forth his hand, the
helper shall fall and the helped shall fall, and all these shall fail together.

Let us now proceed to the censures of the church of England, which wholly
consist in the Bishops hand, who executes them by himself or his Commissarie:
they are not exercised for obstinacy joined to sin or error, but lightly (if
not altogether) for contempt of their courts, either in not appearing at, or
obeijng their commandments and decrees; or else for some transgressions against
their idol service book, in speaking against yt or against their ordinary or
his stubstitute M^. Commissarie, or the parish priest or such like; or else for
not observing their idol holy days; or not receiving with their parson; or
not having their children baptized etc. For these and such like they shall be
conuented and very severely punished either by mulct or excommunication or
imprisonment: there are no other sins amongst the people that deserve
excommunication, they have other punishments for sin besides excommunication,
as to fine them and punish them by the purse. Neither in deed know I many sins
that they use to enquire after, except yt be adultery and fornication; there
are no more sins worthy of ecclesiastical censure: But these they punish very
sore; for if he will not pay for the shooijng Mr. Commis^aries mare, he may
peradventure do his penance before all the Sodomites in the parrish in a white
sheet, whiles Mr. Parson is reading his service book to them, or else his
sermon. But if he speak a word in Mr. Co^missarie his ear, and will stand upon
his purgatio^, then must he get as bad brothels as himself to swear by Mr.
Co^missaries book, that they think in their corrupt conscience that he is
clear. This done, and cost of the court discharged, then (have he been never
such a whoremaister all his life time, or been never so manifestly or often
detected or taken in this crime) yet is there no credit to be given to any
proof* in respect of the oaths of these his so domiticall companions that
clear him by oaths: and this is called his purgation. I am ashamed and abhor,
but to think in my heart of that proof of adultery they require, or else all
complaint or suite is unavailable. Thus do these holy fathers the Bishops
make adultery either a laughing, or else a pecuniarie matter; purging and
expiating yt by perjury or ^korne.

They have also a censure of suspensio^, and this is diversely used; sometimes
toward their Priests and Preachers, by the Bishops; sometimes by these Priests
toward their parishioners. It is used toward the Priests when they break
their orders enjoined them and whereunto they are sworn, or are contumacious to
their Ordinary or his substitut^s or Commissarie etc, when they refuse to
wear such garments as are enjoined the^, or to read their service orderly,
or to administer the sacraments after any other manner, or refuse to bury
the dead, and to Church women with the book, or if they preach any doctrine
against any thing by public authority enioined; then for such faults is his
Ordinary to suspend him from preaching or ministering for a season, until he
be-brought into order, or become confo^mable, or else to deprive him and disanul
his orders and ministry. The Priests, they execute this suspension against
open offenders, such as are not in love and charity with their neighbors, and
by virtue hereof keep them from the sacrament of the supper, unless they get
Mr. Chancellor or Mr. Commissaries commandment unto the Priest to receive the^.
Yet in the mean while they are admitted to their public prayers etc.

To the first kind of Sus^ension all the Priests generally (except yt he some
od man in the la^d) submit, and yet such a one ioineth unto these other Priests
as brethren, though he hold the Bishops and their power antichristian, and they
submit both their ministry and the Gospel unto the Bishops power and censure.
To the second kind in the hand of the Priests they al wholly consent, in so much
as some of the chief masters of this faction in their books of church
discipline, have set yt down for a cannon and rule, to suspend some such from
the sac^ame^ts, who have committed some public sin and persisteth obstinatlie
in the same, after public reproof, whom notwithstanding they still hold as a
member and a brother with them, and join unto in their common prayers,
exercise of the word, and other mutual duties as contribution for the poor.

First this suspension of theirs must needs be held the instrument and ^oole
of that foolish shepherd, because yt is not found nor heard of in all the
practice or writings of the Apostles, neither in all the Testament of Christ,
where yet a perfect government and direction for the Church is s^t down. The^
if yt be a ce^sure of the Church, yt is a public censure, because we see they
are openly kept back from participation of the public communion. If yt be a
public censure, yt must be for sin publikelie known: but Christ and his
Apostles have set down unto the Church one only other course to be taken for
public sinn^s, namely, when he refuses to hear the voice of the Church, or
rather Mat. 18. 17.
of Christ in his Church, to proceed forthwith to exco^municatio^. Therefore in
this case of open obstinacy in public sin, if suspensio^ be used, yt not
only takes the place of excommunication, but keeps away yt only true
course which Christ has instituted; and therefore is a mere ^orgerie and an
idolatrous divise, and has no place in the church of Christ.

If a^ie here object, that excommunication being the extremest and most
severe ce^sure of the Church, and an utter cutting off, therefore yt ought to be
proceeded unto with great pity, patience, and long suffering, trijng al means
before we cut off a member: In regard whereof they in their wisdom and pity
think yt expedient, first to try and use this censure of suspension before
they proceed to cast him quite out, proouing if this may draw him to repentance.

My answer is, that we cannot be more wise, patient, loving, te^de^lie kind,
then our God is, or then God will have us to be* If we seek to exceed or go
beyond these rules and bounds that he has set us down, we are vainlie pu^fed
up in our fleshly mind, our wisdom is turned to folly, our pity into
cruelty* our love into hatred, our patience into transgression, whereby we
destroy both our selves, and such as we seek to save. God looks for
obedience rather then sacrifice at ou^ hands: he needs no direction or
instruction from us: ou^ wisdom is to rest in the wisdom of God, to be wise,
patient, and loving as he will have us wise, patient; and loving. If, or when he
commands to smite, yt is not in ma^s power to sp^re or stay, so should we
pull the wrath of God upon our own heads also: we break no love whiles we
execute Gods laws uprightly: as yt is sin to prevent, so is yt to foreslowe
the Lords judgments. Excommunication is not man's, but Gods judgments, though
God have committed yt unto the church as to his ministers. God has set down
the whole process and due time and manner of sentence thereof: he has left
nothing therein to the discretion of the Church, whereby to make al men the more
to stand in awe and t^e^ble at so dreadful a sentence of so terrible a Judge.
When the sin is come to that ripenes prescribed, then is excommunication due,
and to be pronounced: but when public sin is orderly and publikly reproved,
and yet still the party offending remains impenitent, and will not confess
and forsake his sin, but despising the exhortation and censure of the Church,
he harden his heart in his sin; then is sin at that prescribed ripenes
apparently: Therefore* then the Church cannot, neither has in their power to
protract or defer the sentence of excommunication any longer upon any hope or
further trial, because they have already had that trial which God allows.
They therefore should now sin grievously against the justice and majesty of
God, they should draw themselves into Gods wrath, harde^ ye heart and destroy
the soul of the other, yea ^ue^ open a gap and wide door unto the whole
church to sin, who seeing such foreslacking of judgment, would take boldness,
upon hope to find repentance time enough. They that give any further time upon
pity, or any other fleshly reason, condemn the Lord of cruelty and rashness,
who gives no further time, after public reproof and exhortation despised. So
that to yt ^eaden ^ule of proceeding to excommnnication with a leaden heel
when the sin is thus ripe, I oppose this golden rule, to remove sin out of
the church with the wings of a Storke, and the wind under their wings: yet
Zach. 5.
first that the Epha be lifted up betwixt the earth* and the heaven, that the
sin be publikly seen, publicly censured.

Now for this same new found ce^sure of suspension which they (these
Reformists) would bring in and exercise in stead of excommunication or (as they
pr^tend) as a preparatiue to excommunication, whereby they may first be shut out
from the holiest of all, out of the chancel, where the Priest by sole
authority reigns, and so by degrees proceed to excommunication, to shut him
out of the church also, if he repent not; what does this their wisdom and
pi^ie, but comdemne the Lord of folly and cruelty, or rather show forth their
own presumption and folly yt thus forsake and condemn the ways of the Lord
as unequal, by bringing in and following their own ways, as more equal.

How can these forgers th^se coyners of religion seem and sue to cast out the
heap of humane traditions, as contrary, and such as cannot be joined unto, or
with the Testament of Christ, and yet bring in these forgeries of their own?
for so I may justly call them from whencesoeuer they have derived them, if not
from the book of God. But least I be noted of prejudice, to find fault with
the thing I know not, and to condemn before I have convinced; let us in a word
or two see, how thi^ timber of these accords to the rest of the building, and
upon what socket or foundation yt stands.

This suspension we find to be a public separation and putting away of some
open offender and unworthy receauer from the Table of y^ Lord by the Pastor
before excommunication, he yet being held a member of their Church,
communicating with the^ in prayers, co^tributio^ etc. Here I must not be
understood of the younger sort which are not as yet admitted to the Table of the
Lord, the seed of the faithful of the^ called Cate^umenoi; but of such as have
been partakers thereof, and are under the censures of the Church. Let us now
see how lawful yt is for the whole Church, but especially for any one member,
as of his own sole authority, to shut out such members from the Table of the
Lord, before, or otherwise then by excommunication. That this may be done, let
us see wh^t the Table of the Lord is.

The Apostle thus defines yt: The cup of blessing which we blefs^, is yt not
the communion of the blood of CHRIST? the bread which we break, is yt not the
communion of the body of CHRIST? because we many are one bread, one body,
for all participate of one bread. Here we see this Table or Sup^ of the Lord, a
lively and most comfortable s^mbole of our communion with CHRIST, as also each
with other in Christ; excellently showing unto us the means and mauer of our
redemption, to stir us up unto thankfulness, to rejoice in our God and praise
his name therefore, to the general strengthening of all our faithes, and to the
mutual binding us together in all holy duties and love etc. Here we see the
Table of the Lord to be public, free, open and alike common to all Saints, each
one having a like interest, necessity, use, comfort thereof, the least as well
and as much as the greatest, CHRIST having alike died and paid one and the same
ransom for them all, that they all might have a like interest in him, feed and
feast through one and the same Spirit, faith, hope, joy in him. Which interest,
power, joy etc. no mo^tall man, not the whole Church, much less any member
thereof, no nor hell gates shall be able to pluck from the least member of
CHRIST, whiles he remains and abides in the body. A most unnatural part
were yt in the mother to pluck away the breast from the child, whereby yt should
be nourished* but though ye mother might do this and murder her own child
without blame; yet the whole Church cannot drive away or keep out the least of
these members from any public action of the Church, much les^e separate them
from this heavenly comfort, free public communion, whiles they remain members
of CHRIST, and are not cut off from his body.

Further, seeing this Table is called The communion of the body and blood of
Christ, as also the communion of the whole church, who can keep back any such
member as still remains in the body of CHRIST, in his Church, without
depriving him of this communion of CHRIST and of the Church, and so of life:
for except they ^ate the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood, they
can have no life in them. But these men keep them from the body and blood of
CHRIST, from the communion of CHRIST and of the Church, therefore also from life
yt self; and so in seeming to correct him lightly, they kill him out right, for
more then this can they not do by this orderly excommunication which they hold
so rigoious.

Such as shall cauil at these words Except ye shall eat the flesh of the Son
of man etc. saijng that I popishly abuse the place, let them cauil: though I
acknowledge that many thowsands that never attained ye symbol of the supper,
yet do feed of that body and blood of CHRIST by faith unto eternal life; yet
this I say, that such as by censure are put back from the Table of the Lord*
are cut from the communion of CHRIST and of his Church, and so from life: For
if he have not communion with Christ and his Church, he can have no life: he
cannot be both thus s^perate from their communion, and have yt together. They
that pluck away the seal, cancel the deed; but they pluck away the seal of
the covenant, in that for his sin they debar him from this comfortable
communion, which is yet more then the seal, in that yt brings such present
effect and comfort; Therefore they (as far as man can do) cut him from Christ
and his covenant, by this their idol suspension.

Now then having thus shut him out of their communion, how should they hold him
in ythauing? thus cut him off from Christ, and the bands that should bind him
to Christ and to the Saints, how can they hold him a member of Christ, a Saint,
or admit him as a brother amongst them in their prayers, ministry,
contribution? This is very strange divinity, to shut him out, and yet to hold
him in; to cut him o^f from the body, and yet to hold him of the body: this may
by logic be proved, but yt never can be proved by Christ's Testament.

Yet is there an other as strange a mystery in the matter, which I never
learned in Christ's Testament: and that is ho^ a member that is publikly
co^uicted of, and remains obstinate in open sin, should be shut out from the
Table of ye Lord, and yet be received and admitted as a member, unto the other
ministe^ie of the Church; as to prayers, contribution etc. belike the other
ministry and prayers of the Church are not so holy as this supper, yt such an
offender is held unworthy to communicate in, and therefore is shut out from the
one; but he is worthy enough for, and therefore is admitted unto the other: this
is a strange censure, a strange case as ever I heard of. I had thought yt after
the sin grew once public, being known and dealt with by the Church, if then
such offenders remain obstinate, they had been forthwith to be cut off, and
cast out as dead withered branches, and not to be thus half shut out and half
kept in, half cut off and half remain, separate from the supper, admitted to
the ministry of the word and prayers. This is to make him half a brother and
half no brother, half a christian and half no christian.

But yet further, seeing this suspension is a public censure of the Church for
public sin, a separation from public exercises and actions etc. how chance yt
is thus put in one ma^s power, who by his absolute authority may keep back any
one of the ^locke from the Table of the Lord, without the commandment, yea the
^riuitie of the whole church; yet this me thinks is the stra^gest of al, and
never heard of in ye church and Testament of Christ. Christ has given and
committed his power to censure fault^s and persons, as also the interest,
possession, and government of all officers and actions to the whole Church (I
mean to every such particular congregation) and not unto one particular
special man above the rest or more then the rest. Every particular member of
the Church has like interest in the public actions and ministry of the
Church, like power to censure the offenses of the whole Church o^ the greatest
minister thereof, in due order and time (as has already in this treatise been
often and plentifully proved) and therefore cannot in this manner be kept back
by any one man, as of his sole authority any more then they may keep back that
man whatsoever he be. I ^peake not this to raise contention betwixt these where
there ought to be love and reverence, so much as to note out the popish pride
of these pharisaicall Reformers, that take upon them to be Lords over the
Church and this feast: whereof, if they were as good as they would be taken to
be, they were but servants and guests at the best. The Church yt self can
neither receive nor cast out a member as of themselves: they do yt by the
power and commandment of Christ; they must see faith and profession thereof,
before they receive; they must see sin and obstinacy before they cut off:
until these be seen, the whole Church nor all the men of the world have not
power to receive or put by any one; if they do, the actio^ is void, and the
judgment and wrath of God rests upon them for that sin, until they repent
thereof. Likewise also when this profession of faith, or this obstinacy in sin
is found in any, then cannot the whole Church or all the men of the world keep
out or keep in such, without incurring the judgment and wrath abouesaid. How
great then is the sin and judgment of these popish Priests, that not only pluck
away the power of the Church from them, but even the power and office of Christ
from him, and assume yt into their own hands? who thus dare innouate and
abrogate Christ's Testament, reject his wholesome excommunication as too rough,
bring in their deadly suspe^sion in place thereof, and with that idol tool of
that foolish shepherd, smite and keep out whom yt pleases them, and as long
as they list? Zach. 11. 15.


Their old popish reason yt they bring from the power of the keys, has been
above refuted in ye discovery of their absolutio^, and proue^ to be tied
neither to the person or office of any man, more the^ to every faithful member
and servant of Christ, by the power of Gods word etc.

Yet have I also sometimes read in some of their books of Church discipline
(as they term yt) some other reasons for yt; namely, from ye law of
separation for uncleanness: such as were defiled by ye dead, by creeping and
unclean things, by issues etc. were to absta^e from the Tabernacle for a
season, yea the Priest also upon suspicion of leprie or other foul disease
might seclude such a one for certain days, as we read in the books of the
law plentifully; from whence they derive both this power of the Pastor, and the
censure of suspension. I have there read also (or else my memory greatly
fails me) drawn from Mat. 5. 23. 24. verses because he that had iniuried or
offended his brother was taught by our Savior Christ first to make
satisfaction and be reconciled, the^ to offer his gift etc. that therefore such
as had done wrong unto* or were not in charity with their neighbors, are by
the Priests to be kept from the Altar, whereupon they enchanted and offered their
breaden God, and now they popishly apply to the communion table, and from hence
draw their suspe^sion. But because I have not their books with me, and would
be loath any way to injury them or charge them falsely, I will briefly show the
insufficiency of these reasons, and so proceed, ^asting to an end.

From those Leuitical laws whereby the Priests secluded such as they suspected
of unclean diseases, until proof were made one way or other, may no
conclusion be drawn, that therefore the Pastor now may suspend such as he
suspecteth, or rather knows to be infected with incurable deadly and
^bstinate sin, from the communion board etc. In the Leuiticall tabernacle ye
priest^ did nothing without prescript laws, there was nothing left to his
discretion, he had his certain signs set him down whereupon to seclude,
whervp on to pronounce clean, as also whereupon to pronounce unclean. But now
under the Gospel where that priesthood and those laws are quite taken away,
we have now no such commandments of suspecting or suspending. The causes here
of separation are not bodily but spiritual, not diseases of the body, but
diseases of the soul, sin: which sin when yt publicly appears, and
obstinacy be added to the same, when yt is publikly vewed and censured; then
has the Church a prescript law and commandemen^ to excommunicate and to cast
out; not the Pastor to suspend such an unclean person* therefore betwixt these
suspensions (as they call them) that under the law, and this under their
gospel, is no proportion or comparison; that being done according to Gods
prescript laws, this altogether without warrant of the word, except
peradventure they do yt by warrant of these leuiticall laws, or else ^ see no
cause they should thus bring them for the maine proof of this their
suspension; which if they do, the^ are they leuitical Priests also, for none
else might meddle with the administration of those laws; then are they also
under the shadow, under the law, not under Christ, grace, the Gospel. The
laws of the Leuiticall ministry cannot be exercised by the ministry of the
the gospel, neither any of them now received, without ye loss of Christ. A
dangerous thing yt is thus violently to wrest and misapply these Leuitical
laws, figures, ceremonies, or to build upon the same such stubble wooden
diuises as they do, as their tithes, offerings, purifications, feasts,
suspension (not to speak of their ministerial vestures, holy cemitory
synagogues, with all the Jews impleme^ts thereof, whereby they innouate or
rather abrogate the Testament of CHRIST, coin and forge a new ministry, a
new worship, a new Gospel; for the Gospel of Christ only accords to his
own ministry, and the ministry of Christ to his own Gospel: the Gospel
of Christ may neither be added unto, nor diminished from the legal ceremonies
and figures, whiles they are soberly understood and rightly applied, give a
good light and gracious* instruction: but when they are thus rashly allegorized
according to the fantasies of men, and boldly applied to maintain their
diuises, the^ become they unto them a stone to stumble at.

The other reason from Ma^h. 5. 23. 24. is altogether as false, and yet rather
more corrupt. Our Savior there teaches, that God requires mercy and not
sacrifice; sacrifice with bloody hands or an evil heart is* abomination unto
God: He therefore there exhorts, that they first make clean their hands from
oppression, and make peace with their neighbor, then purge their heart and
make peace with God by sacrifice according to the laws Leui^. 6. 5. Number. 5. 7.
8. this doctrine still remains and belongs to every Christian, even to the
Pastor himself* The Lord abhors all hypocrisy, he looks not to Caines
sacrifice neither is pleased with Balaams Altar: he will have all that approach
unto him, to draw near with a true heart, their hearts being sprinkled from an
evil conscience, and washed in our body with pure water etc. But what of all
this? what place is here found to suspension* o^ what power is here gi^en to
the Pastor to separate from the communion table in this manner? v^les (as the
papists do) they take themselves for sacrificing Priests, their communion
table for the altar: this their priestly power derived from these Leuiticall
laws is above answered. I would here know of these allegorisers what the alt^r
in the law signified, and what our Savior CHRIST here meant by the altar, if
not the whole worship of God, and with what sense they can thus popishly
understand yt of and apply yt to their communion table only, shutting them
from that, admitting them to their prayers and other exercise. Here me thinks
their answer is ready; because the sacrifice of CHRIST'S body is there
remembered and resembled. It is well; and will they shut such from the communion
of the sacrifice of CHRIST'S body, whose prayers (...) will offer up upon that
golden altar? might the Priests under the law receive and burn the odours upon
the incense ^ltar, whose sacrifices they refused at the brazen altar for burnt
offerings? whosoever for uncleanness etc. was separate, was separate from the
whole tabernacle and all the ministry and exercises thereof. How then can these
blind and fooli^h (...). 22. 3.
Pharisees thus half Christ, to make him a minister, an advocate, an altar for
the prayers of such to whom he is no sacrifice, no minister at the brazen
altar, whom he drives from his table from his communion, and will neither
give his body unto them, nor suffer them to be knit with his members unto yt.
What manner of iuggling, what kind of fast and loose is this? what shall we
think of the e^tate of these men that are thus suspended? they being half
driven from CHRIST, half received unto Christ, half cast out of the Church,
half admitted in. What is this estate like unto, if not to the popish
purgatory? these men being neither wholly Christ's, nor wholly Satan's: And surely
seeing they will with the papists from hence take this popish Priestly power unto
themselves, as also this fond tool of suspension, I see not why they should
dissent from them in the third, namely in the purgatory.

By this time I hope you perceive what kind of stuff this their ce^sure of
suspension is, which both the sorts of these Priests generally allow of and
receive. You see how evil yt accords to the heavenly frame of CHRIST'S
Testament and Church: you may also by this which has generally been said
touching the most reformed use of yt in the hands of these supposed Pastors
(that should be) judge what kind of ^oole and weapon yt is in the hands of these
popish Prelates the BB^. you may see by the exercise of yt upon any private
member, what an odious and intolerable thing yt were to be e^ercised upon the
Pastor or other ministers of the Church, especially at the pleasure and lust of
one man: now let us proceed to their excommunication.

This is executed by one man or his Commissary in their courts (as has been
said) never for any sin or error (for such matters they either let pass, or
punish by the temporal sword, by fines, imprisonment, or penance etc.) But
their excommunication is altogether exercised for contumacie: as for not
obeijng their summons, or for not satisfijng the judgment of their cou^ts,
namely for not paying these ravenous voultures, these officers the^r fees, or
not paying the mulcts that are inflicted upon the^ in their Courts etc. And as
yt most commonly arises but about these money matters, so is yt in effect but
a money matter yt self: you shall find Mr. Commissarie if he see yt coming no
unreasonable man, he had as leeue take your money himself as an other should,
for this he knows yt shall be dispensed with for money, either in his court or
some where else. The form of this excommunication I cannot set down, but I
ween yt be in manner of a writ in latin, as also the Absolutio^ thereof
proclaimed in ye name of the Bishop or archbishop after the order of their
mother Church of Rome: these their spider webbes of their ecclesiastical laws
and jurisdiction exte^d not but unto the smaller and common flies, the
magistrates and greater personages are wholly exempt from them.

The other sect of these Priests, the counterfeit Reformists, they also would
exclude the Church from this and al other ecclesiastical ce^sures, assuming
the^ wholly into their own hands, either into the Priests hands with his silly
presbitery or eldership, which he ouerruleth at his pleasure in every
particular congregation, or else into their synodes and councels, which have
power over al churches and every member and actio^ the^of, to excommunicate and
absolve, to make and depose, to ordeine and abrogate, without the p^iuitie and
consent of the Churches, other the^ of their Preachers or Priests. Thus both
sides subvert the liberty of the Church, and pervert the ordinance of Christ,
the one sort by corrupting, the other by utterly rejecting the impartial use
of true exco^municatio^ by every Christian congregation according to the rules
of Chri^s Testament, as intolerable and a mischief to this commonwealth.

We have above larglie proved, the necessity, stabilitie, perpetuity of that
order and government which Chri^ in his Testament has set down for the
building and direction of his Church. By many places of scripture and reasons
we have showed, how that order and government only best accords and fitteth
to the Church of Christ, in all places and times whatsoever: and how the Church
can neither receive other orders and laws, or change these which Christ has
given, without cas^ing off CHRIST'S yoke, and disan^lling his Testament; CHRIST'S
Testament and Church being for ever in all places one and the same. We have
also (...) places of this present writing showed, how CHRIST has given unto
his Church his spiritual power and authority, with the sharp two edged sword
that proceeds out of his mouth, to cut off all transgr^ssion and error, as
also all trespassers and heretics that remain obstinate and impenitent in
their sin; and has given them straight commandment vigilantly and
vnpa^tially to use the same sword and power unto the worlds end. The
necessity of which power, though yt were not confirmed by so many direct and
express places of scripture; yet might yt to a^ men appear, in that without
the same they ca^ neither receive CHRIST, who is never severed from his power;
neither can they keep sound any communion, when they have not the power to
^ast* out and separate the plaguey and leprous from amongst them.

Moreover, we have showed how this power of excommunication election,
ordination etc. is not committed into the hands of one particular person, as
the Pope and his natural children our Lord B^hops now use yt; nor yet into the
hands of the eldership only, or of the Pastors of many particular congregations
(as the reforming* preachers would have yt) so much as yt is given and
committed to the whole Church, even to every particular congregation, and to
every member thereof alike: To which holy spiritual power of CHRIST, every
member of the Church and servant of Christ must be subject alike, without
exception or exemption of person. How contrary then unto God and prejudicial
unto his Church, is the blasphemy and pride of those me^, which thus
presump^uously open their mouths against heaven and all the ordinances of God,
pronouncing this spiritual and heavenly censure of exco^municatio^ duly
executed by the church according to the will and commandment of Christ (as the
only means for the preservation of the whole Church and of the parties so
excommunicate) to be intolerable in a christian realm, prejudicial to
Princes and Magistrates; yea that popi^hly assume this sword of CHRIST, this
power of his Church into their own hands, and therewith of their own sole
authority smite some, exempt others as they lust themselves: whose monstrous
and enormous abuse of this heavenly ordinance, cannot by the pen or mouth of
any be so lively discribed, as yt is with great letters to the view of all men
ingraued and exposed in the daily practice of their Commissaries courts, the
court of high commission etc. But that all the pretextes of this their odious
blasphemy and pride may at once be plucked from them, let me in a word or two
by express scriptures show what true excommunication is, by whom, upon whom,
and how yt is to be executed.

We read 1 Cor. 5. Titus 3. 10. 1 Timothy 1. 20. Excommunication to be an utter
disfranchizing, and public cu^ting off of all convinced obstinate offenders
from all interest in CHRIST and all communion with his Church, in the open
congregation. We read in the said 1 Cor. 5. as also Math. 18. 17. Math. 28.
20. Romans 16. ^7. 2 Thessalonians. 3* 6. 14. the power and execution of this censure of
excommunication to be committed to the whole Church, else why should the
Apostle charge and blame the whole Church for y^ neglect thereof, and command
the whole Church to execute yt? why should our Savior CHRIST command his
disciples to admonish their br^thte^ when they offend, and if they repent not,
to complain unto the church. He sends them not here unto the Pastor* to
complain unto him, nor unto the Bishop, high commission, Presbutry, Synod or
Council to complain unto them for redress; neither yet comitteth he here or
in any other place of scripture this action unto them, or commands them as by
virtue of their office to do yt. But (as may evidently appear in these and
sundry other places of scripture) both this public casting out and receiving
in of any member, is committed and belongs unto the whole Church and every
member thereof jointly together, and is not especially or solely committed to
any one or any some of them any more then unto all the rest. We see also the
Pastor, and all the teachers and other members of the Church subject unto this
censure* yea and the church where these members make such offense, is to
proceed against them, to avoid them, to excommunicate them. Read for further
proof of this Gal 1. 8. 9. 2 Ioh. 9. and^. 1 Timothy 6. 3. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 17. and.
3. 5. Coloss. 4. 17. Phillip. 3. 2. 17. 18. 19. So that although ye church
perform this action by the Pastor, as a member most fi^ th^r unto; yet neither
the Pastor gayneth, nor the Church loses any right or interest in this
action heerby, because we see evidently the church has power to do this
action without a Pastor, yea against their Pastor,

The manner of thi^ excommunication, we in the said 5 of ye 1 Corinthians find to be
done in the public congregation where the whole church is assembled, and not
in any courts or Bishops howses; in the name and power of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and not in the name and power of a Lord Bishop or arch Bishop, in the
usual tongue of that congregation as yt may best edify, and not in the roman
tongue after their popish manner in form of a writ. This ce^sure is not done
before ye fault be publicly known, either in the first committing of yt, or
else by process for contemning admonition, neither before the party offending
be duly convinced, admonished and exhorted: But when the sin thus appears and
becomes public, the sinner is thus convinced, admonished, exhorted, and
still continues obstinate and impenitent; the^ is the Church without delay or
pa^tialitie to proceed, by the power of our Lord jesus Christ with one consent
to cast o^t such a one, and deliver him unto Satan for the humbling of the
flesh, yt the spirit might be saved in the day of the Lord; yea to avoid from
themselves both the contagion and judgments following his sin.

Now then seeing this censure of excommunication is an especial part of the
judgment, power, and Scepter of Christ; seeing Christ has committed yt unto his
Church, even unto every Christian congregation* whether yt be established in
order, or yt be indeuoring into o^der, as a most necessary means to preserve
and keep them in the v^itie of the faith and godliness, without which power and
the due execution thereof yt is impossible to k^epe a^e communion; how great is
their sin against Christ and his Church, that thus presumptuously wrast the
sword out of Christ's hand, and take yt into their own furious hands, that
thus utterly deprive the Church of all use of yt, save that they smite and
wound the poor lambs and servants of CHRIST with yt, or rather with that
great sword given unto their father the devil to shed innocent blood.

But especially what injury do they unto their Princes and magistrates, that
thus deprive and exempt the^ from the heavenly government of Christ (if so be
this their ecclesiastical discipline and Church government be the true
government of Christ (as they vaunt and give out) do they not heerby manifest,
yt either Princes and magistrates are not the servants and subjects of Christ,
or else yt themselves have ye great charte^ of Antichrist as well as their sire
the Pope, to dispense with the breach of Gods laws, and to assoile Princes and
magistrates from the obedience and reverence of Christ? Or else peradventure
with their deep learning they are able to prove. THAT CHRISTIAN PRINCES AND
MAGISTATES, EITHER CANNOT SIN in such manner to deserve excommunication, or else
are not liable to the same judgments of God, as other Christians are for the
like transgressions; or else that Christ has not made one and the same co^enant
with all me^, but has appointed one way for Princes and magistrates to be saved,
an other way for inferior Christians of lower callings. But if the covenant and
law of God be one and the same unto al men* if al men ought to be alike liable
to the law of God, and subject to the sacred person and Scepter of Christ; if
rebellion be as the sin of witchcraft, and transgression as idolatry; if
Christ be an upright and impartial Judge; if Topheth be prepared of old, if
yt be prepared eue^ for the King deep and large etc. Then most dangerous and
damnable is the perfidie and f^atterie of these prophets that not only
pronounce peace unto wicked magistrates in their sin, but exempt Christian
magistrates from subjection and obedience unto the Scepter and government of
Christ in his Church, whereby they draw the^ into battle against Christ. For if
they be not under his Scepter of grace, then are they under his yro^ ^od,
wherewith he will bruise them to sheardes. If they be his subjects, then does he
reign over them, and that by his own laws: but if they will not have him to
reign over them, then comes he against the^ and judges them as his enemies.
This is the good service these men do unto their magistrates, to bring them
into the wrath of the Lion of the tribe of Judah: this is the care these good
shephardes have of the souls of their Prince and magistrates, to suffer them to
run on in their sin without coercion or reproof; yea to deprive them of the
only means and cure that God in his mercy and wisdom has provided for all
his servants in that estate.

But these pollitike divines make Princes believe that yt is no small injury
and derogation to their persons and office to be subject to the reproof and
censute of Christ in his Church. Excommunication of magistrates (say they) was
an instrument to bring y^ necks of Emperors and Princes under the Popes
girdle, the only mean whereby he became so dreadful to al men, and got to
himself so great authority: therefore our english Pope and L. Bishops, though
they still retain in their hands this popish thunderbolt of excommunication;
yet so warily do they use yt, as they will not affray Princes or great
personages therewith.

Alas, and cannot these learned Bishops in all this light and free passage of
the Gospel they bost of, as yet discern or put difference betwixt Christ's most
lawful sacred spiritual power, and the Popes usurped devilish carnal powers?
should not magistrates be subject to the first, because they ought not to
endure or suffer the second? Has not God spoken from heaven; This is my
beloved Son, hear him? and again; Therefore God has highly exalted him and
given him a name above every name, that in the name of JESUS every knee should
bow etc and every tongue confess, that JESUS is the Lord? and speaking unto
the Son, he says Thy throne O God to the world of worlds, the Scepter of
thy kingdom is a rod of righteousness: and in an other place I have anointed
my King upon Zion mine holy mountain etc. Give he^d therefore ye Kings, be ye
disciplined ye Judges of the earth, serve the Lord in fear, rejoice in
trembling: kiss the Son least that he be angire, and ye perish in the way.
It were long to recite the express scriptures which every where show, that all
Kings and Magistrates ought to be subject to the Scepter and censure of CHRIST
in his Church, to bring their glory and honor thither, and cast down their
crowns before him, of whom they receive and hold their crowns, even by
homage tenure, from whom they derive al their power, and therefore with all their
power ought to serve him, unto whom they shall account. All the godly Kings of
whom we read in the scriptures, have been bownd and subject unto the laws of
God and censures of the Church, in their calling, as any other. How earnestly
did DAVID beseech the Lord, that he would seek out his servant, when he erreth,
as a sheep? that the righteous might smite him, for that shall be a benefit;
that they might reprove him, for that shall be as a chief ointment. As Kings
enter into the Church, and are made members of CHRIST by profession and true
practice of the faith; so when they fall and depart from the same faith, and
will* not be reduced by admonition and reproof, they are no longer to be held
of the faith of the Church, but are as any other, to receive the judgment and
censure of CHRIST, to be cut off and cast out as withered branches; and this as
the only remedy of their salvation for the humbling of their flesh etc* If
Kings be subject to the instruction and admonition of the Church ^s David, Asa,
I^oshaphat, Ezekiah etc. were; why should they not also with Vzziah (when the
running vlcer^ of fretting and incurable sin appear upon them) be cut off
from the how^e of the Lord, and separate from the communion of the Saints as he
was, least they defile more, and make the whole offerings and company
abominable unto the Lord. If in that material Temple, where the worship
consisted in external ceremonies, no degrees of persons were exempted from the
observation of the laws, the King himself might not enter with his uncleanness
upon him, but as you see was cast out according to the law? how much more in
this spiritual house of CHRIST, ought they to be subject to the laws and
judgments of CHRIST, as well, yea and rather more then any other.

To this they object, because the King is the chief and supreme governor here
in earth over all persons and causes as well of the Church as of the common
wealth, unto whom every soul must be subject: therefore cannot the whole
Church, much lesfe any member thereof (all being his subjects) censure, judge, or
excommunicate the Prince, the placing, punishing, and deposing of whom, only
belongs unto God, by whom Kings r^igne.

O how great is the blindness of these Phariseis, that cannot put difference
between the spiritual judgments of CHRIST in his Church, and the temporal or
rather corporal judgments of the magistrate in the common wealth? but most
grossly and wickedly oppose the one against the other? Might they not as well
reason, and upon the same grounds conclude, that the Prince is no member of the
Church, neither yt the Church has any communion with him, because he is
supreme governor of the Church, and all the Church are his subjects? yea do
they not as much, when they give unto Princes such blasphemous titles, popi^h
prerogatives and dispensatio^s, as SVPREME HEAD OF THE CHVRCH, to make laws
for the Church concerning the worship, ministry, ministration and whole
government of the Church, and those such as are not read of in the book of
God, and to be exempt from the jurisdiction and ce^sure of Christ in his
church? Now which way in this estate can they make the Prince a subject of
Christ or member of his Church, when both in titles, power, and pregatiue they
exa^t Princes into the chair of Christ, or (to say as yt is) rather into the
chair of Antichrist. But to come to this pollitike impediment and intolerable
inconvenience that would ensue, if Princes should be subject to the
exco^m^nication of ye church, then say they he should be subject to the Church,
and so subject to his subjects. I deny the sequel of their Argument: for this
censure is not the censure of the Church, so much as of CHRIST in his Church:
so that though CHRIST use the ministry of his Church, the Church the
ministry of some most fit memb^r unto this action, yet is y^ still the
censure and judgment of CHRIST, unto which every servant of CHRIST and member
of the Church must be subject. So that they might as well reason, that the
Prince is subject to the Church etc. because he must be subject to the Gospel;
which is also the ministry of the Church. The least member of the Church is
not subject to the church, neither to follow yt further then yt follows
CHRIST. But whiles some, without all fear of God have endeavored to draw, and
others not doubted to yield that honor which is due unto God* unto the persons
of men; herehence has all this exaltation of Antichrist and pride of the
prelac^e arisen; yea these impious collections and blasphemous conclusions
against Christ's holy ordinances ensued: to such a measure and height is this
sin now grown, that they not only cast off Christ's yoke them selves, but
assoile Princes of their allegiance unto him; yea proclaim this most peaceable
and spiritual censure of CHRIST, to be sed^ious, intolle^able, contrary unto
the magistracy etc.

Then which assertion what can be more heathen and barbarous? Is yt not to set
their state expressly against Christ? yea Christ against God? cannot these
carnal men consider, that Christ himself whiles he was here on earth, as also
his Apostles, were subject in all lawful things unto the civil magistrate, and
taught the churches so to be unto the worlds end? yet both CHRIST and his
Apostles gave perpetual and often commandments for the diligent and upright
use of this spiritual censure unto the wo^lds end. Are they so Anabaptisticall
to think, yt there never were or should be magistrates of the Church? or
think they that these laws were made for the church, before the magistrates
were called to the faith? were not Nicodemus, Joseph of Aramathia, Sergius
Paulus, Cornelius* Dionisius, Erastus etc. magistrates, and called to the
faith? yet in their tune was the use of excommunication inioined, and
practiced. No where can they show in all the Testament of CHRIST any exception
or immunity of any one person from this spiritual censure and government of
CHRIST, which is no way contrary unto the temporal estate and civil degree of
the Prince or magistrate.

Who though they be excommunicate, yet still retain their civil estate and
dignity wherein God has placed them, and still are reverenced and obeyed of the
whole church, as such magistrates whom God has set over them: only members of
the Church they cannot be held, whiles they presumptuously tra^sgresse, or
obstinately disobey CHRIST'S voice. It is not in the power of the Church to
receive or cast out any member, before they see faith or transgression*
accordingly* nor yet has the Church power to keep in any member, longer then
he keeps the faith and walks orderly. So then until they can prove that
there can be no magistrates but such as are of the church, or that this
ecclesiastical excommunication is a depriving and deposing of the civil
magistracy, they do but reproach the truth, and seduce the magistrate. As these
spiritual judgments extend not unto, so the Church that pronounces and
executes the same, no way medleth with the office or person of the Prince, or
magistrate. They are taught not to lay violent hands upon the Lords anointed*
but to be obedient unto the death. It always has been the custom of the
Pope and his offspring, to encroch both upon Churches and Princes, to assume
this antichristian power over both into their hands, to bind and to loose, to
curse and assoile whom they list. Neither can I see the sin of these
Antichristian BBs. these ympes of the Pope to be less in discharging Princes
from this holy censure of CHRIST, the^ their Sires was in tyrannizing and
oppressing them therewith: neither yet how these men can beat down the
tyrannous usurped power of the Pope, when they ass^me into their own hands,
and execute the self same power over the whole Church and all the ordinances
thereof without account or (...), as has been plentifully showed in all this
discovery, and yet more shall appear, if we now take a little view of their
Commission, which is the very abisme and golph from whence spring and flow all
these innumerable enormities, into every pa^ of this whole land their Church.

THIS INDEFINITE monstrous Commission I (having never seen their letters
pattents or any copy thereof) cannot othervise describe, then by certain
appa^ant circumst^nces: as the men of whom yt consists, and that have the
chief rule thereof; the persons and causes over which this Commission is set,
and has jurisdiction; and the manner of using their said power.

The Commissioners are certain ecclesiastical and civil persons; as first
the Primate of England [the Arch-b: of Canterburie] then I suppose the
Metropolitan of York, with certain other Bishops, as London, Winchester,
etc. certain Deanes, Archdeacons and Chancelors, with sundry especial civil
Doctors etc. The civil persons of this Commission are now of late days some
few of her Maties honorable Council, the two chief Judges: certain
Courtiers; as the two Masters of her Majesty's requests; certain chosen
Aldermen, and the Recorder of London; certain other officers about the City;
as the Li^ftenant of the Tower, the post-Mr. and sundry other that I know not,
not hee^e to recite that rabble of advocates, proctors, scribes, pursuyua^ts,
attending thereupon.

These thus joined in this high great Commission, have (or at the least
exercise) by virtue thereof absolute power and jurisdiction over the whole
Church of England and every particular congregation of the same, and over eu^ry
minister and member of the same, even over all the Q. Subjects. They also
exercise final jurisdiction and absolute power over all causes ecclesiastical
whatsoever, to handle and determine, to visit, enquire and punish, to make new
laws, orders, decrees, and to inioine the same as authentike upon all
Churches, as, and before the holy oracles of God. They have power also to
assume any cause or plea out of any other of their inferior spiritual Courts
(as they call them) into their own hands, to ratify or disanul any thing
there done. They have power also to erect and to authorize new little high
Commissions in any City of the land, where yt pleases them: only with this
exc^ption; that they always acknowledge the supreme power of their parent at
Lambeth. Yet further this great high Commission has absolute power over
sundry (and what not) civil causes, insomuch as they fear not to meddle with
matters belonging to the Q. crown or pre^ogatiue roial, or to any of her
Courts of plea whatsoever: yea they have not doubted to intercept caus^s
belonging unto, and depending in the high Court of parliament, if Mr. PENRY in
his app^ale say true. They have power to cite, summon or convent by their
pursuyuants and cursitors, what person of the land eith^r man or woman at any
time when they please: they have power to command all the Q. officers, as
Majors of Cities, Sherifs etc. to serve and attend, watch and ride, by day or
by night upon their business whatsoever: also to apprehend, to incarcerate, or
to deliver out of prison, what person or persons, how innocent or flagitious
soever, upon their bar warrant, without further enquire or delay: yea they
have power to fetch up any of these officers before the^ from their charge in
her Majesty's services, and there also to ymprison them, if they so think
good. They have power to authorize these rakehel ^obbers their pursuyuants, to
herry, molest or attach any of the Q. ^aithful subiectts they list, to break
open and ^ansack their houses by day or by night, to spoil and carry away what
and whom they please without controulement, their warrants being made
indefinite, without any certain perscription or limitation.

Well, and being thus furnished with this power, they come together at Revel. 9.
7. 9.
their Session as charrets armed to the batt^l, a great tail of officers and
court of a^tendants being assembled, the appearance whereof exceeds I suppose
that of the Vaticane at Rome, no prayer used before, neither the book of God
opened in this their ecclesiastical council. The parties conu^nted are to
attend, being called to appear before them: before whom being come, what
affairs soever they have, whither of a whole Church, or of many
congregations, what office or degree soever they be of, they must there stand
their head^s discou^red before them, no place given them with or by these
Commissioners. If they be to propou^d, speak, or complain of any thing, they
mu^t do yt by the officers of this Court, their Advocates, Proctors,
R^gisters, Scribes seou^dum modum and formam, and that to no small charge by
that time all these voultures have their fees: otherwise the^ by these they may
not plead in this Court: the judgments of this Court they must receive without
contradictio^ or gaynsaijng; there is no appeal, no help^, no m^anes to
reu^rse the same, be they never so vni^st. Any others that are blamed and
accused unto this Court, have not he^re pl^ce to answer unto such things as
shall be obi^cted against them by their accusers, b^ing brought face to face, or
to defend themselves according to equity: but here they shall hardly know
their accusers, or accusations at any time, until they have taken an oath to
answer truly unto such things as shall be demanded of the^ in that Court; whereby
they are driven to accuse themselves, and so minister matter abundantly unto
their adversaries. The oath that is here administered is, that laying their
hand or; finge^s upon a book, they swear by God and by the contents of the
book, to answer truly unto such things as shall be demanded of them, and so
kissing the book their oath is accepted, and no further leisure given to
consider what they answer unto their demandes. But if any make conscience, or
deny to receive this idolatrous wicked oath (which though yt be proved unto
them to be n^uer so unlawful, and contrary to the commandment of God. Deuteronomy.
6. 13. and De^t. ^0. 20. to be never so superstitious in devising and adding,
yea in inioyning ceremonies where God in these laws has made none, but
commanded to swear without any ceremonies by the name of God only; though yt
be proved to be never so idolatrous, in joining any thing unto or with God, in
swearing by any thing besides or with God; though the fearful curse of God be
showed to be denou^ced against such mane^ of swearing and swearers, by the
Lords prophets in these words, They that swear in the sin of S^maria, and that
say, thy God O Dan lives and the way of Beerschebah lives, eue^ they shall fall
and never ^ise up again; and in an other place, that the Lord will cut off all that swear by JEHOVAH as they swear by (...): be this oath proved never so
vnnecesfarie, the cause not requiring any such trial; be yt proved never so
unnatural, yt being to accuse themselves, and y^ unto their adversaries) yet
will these graceles Bishops enforce this oath; first by way of persuasion, by
Abraham's and Iaacobs examples, who caused the one his se^ua^t, ye other his
son to swear, putting their hand under their theigh etc. and by the Angels
lifting up his hand unto heaven to swear. If unto the first they be answered,
that Abraham and Iaacob joined not this ceremony unto the oath, so much as to
exact the fidelity and performance of the oath, seijng God himself swear unto
Abraham without this ceremony Gen, 15 and 17; as also Ishaac swear, and Iaacob
swear without this ceremony Genesis 26. 31. and Genesis 31. 53; so that there ca^ be
no law drawn or example made of Abraham and Iaacob heerin, especially seeing
this was before the law was given: but now we ^aue an absolute law given of God
for the form of oaths, from which law we ought not to swerue. If unto the
second, namely the Angels lifting up the hand unto heaven whiles he swear yt be
likewise answered; yt no law ca^ be enforced from hence, or any new ceremony
enjoined in swearing, nothing being done here contrary to the law of God,
neither any example given to break or alter y^ law given of God, seeing now
both al superstitious ceremonies and idolatrous oaths are forbidden us, by our
Savior Christ and his Apostles: Math. 5. 34. 3. 5 Mat. 23. Gal. 4. 9. Col. 2.
20. Their next reason is drawn from the Princes priuiledg; yt the Prince has
power to make laws of indifferent things, and is therein to be obeyed: this
manner of oath is showed to be no indifferent thing, but altogether unlawful and
prohibited for the reasons above alleged. ^. Cor. 6. 12
But if yt were a thing indifferent (as they suppose) so to swear or not so to
swear, yet were yt not lawful for any mortal man to bind that by way of law,
which God has left in our liberty; much less to bring in new ceremonies or
diuises into the worship of God: for so might all the Popes traditions be
brought in and justified. When these reasons will not serve to persuade o^
assure the conscience, the^ these holy fathers, these tender hearted christian
BBs. are driven to their last argument whereby they uphold their antichristian
throne, Viz. the civil power and authority which is committed into their
murtherous hands.

Then are they forthwith committed unto close prison, there to remain until
they either yield, or die; and this without respect of age, sex, or degree,
especially if they be conve^ted for refusing or speaking against the BBs.
Popelike authority, antichristian decrees, idolatrous injunctions etc: such*
with mortal hatred they persecute, much more ^hen they do the most heinous
malefactors and traitorous Papists: such they openly publish to be sectaries,
scismatikes, heretics, Anabaptists, disobedient to magistrates, seditious,
conventiclers etc. and al because they will not bear Antichrists yoke, nor
carry the Beasts mark, nor bow down unto and worship his image. Such
therefore they hunt and pursue a^rode by their spia^s and pursyuants, and having
caught the^, use with all e^quisite tyranny, never suffering the^ to depart out
of their hands, until they either deny ye faith, or be fetched from the^ by the
Lords peremptory messenger, Death. Long yt were to relate their fine spanish
arts to molest these constant witnesses and faithful servants of Christ when
they get them in their prisons, by shutting them up long close, by causing them
to be produced and indicted at the general sessions upon the statute of
recusansy, having made some of the Iudg^s on their part; although this statute
was made for Christ's and her Maties. ^nemies, the Papists, recusants of all
christian verity. When upon this statute they have gotten them indicted, and
upon the execution thereof cast into prisons; yet he^re their malice cease
not, but although they be the Q. prisoners in her execution, yet will they
(contrary to all law) assume them back again into their hands, and by their
sole authority without any cause alleged, commit them perpetual close
prisoners, thereby to shorten their lives, and to cut off all means either of
their own maintenance from them, or whereby they might any way satisfy the
Que^ne. Thus play they with poor Christians as the catte does with the mo^se,
boldly committing them unto and taking them from the seculer powers at their
own pleasure; abusing the Queens laws and most faithful subi^ctes at their
own lust, without check or controulement, they being subject and liable to no
law. To such a height is this strange Romish spanish Court now grown, under
color of ^eforming ^cclesiasticall abus^s, that yt usurps absolute power
over al law^s, caus^s, persons, (...); yea and becomes the very fountain or
synke rather, from whence flow al errors, abuses, and disorders into the whole
la^d, yt being the very bane and poison both of the church and commonwealth,
that ^uer going forge of Satan, wherein he daily mint^th al his antichr^stian
new devises and decrees for this monstrous harlot the false Church, that Senate
wherein all their affairs are cons^lted, that Council wherein all their decrees
are concluded, a Synod wherein all causes are debated, a school wherein al
questions are disputed, a fair wherein all their wares are sold. This
monstrous Court takes utterly away the power and stops the course of Gods
word, of his Church, and of the godly laws of the land: prejudicial yt is to
the prerogative of the Prince, to the jurisdiction of her ^oyall Courts* to the
liberty of her free subjects, and to the great Cha^r of England, as their
practice evidently shows. How contrary yt is unto God, and unto all the rules
of his word, even by this summarie recital and insufficient description of
their doings, at the first reading may appear to al men that will bring them to
the light. So barbarous is their power, so odious their proceedings, as no
apology ca^ be made for them, unless by the same they will also justify the
authority of the Pope, and proceedings of the spanish inquisition; both which
yet heerin they exceed, in that this Court has power to make laws and
o^dina^ces for all churches without their consent, which the Pope cannot do: as
also, in that this Court has power and jurisdiction over many, and almost al
civil causes, which the spanish inquisition has not.

Let not my words be wrasted or misconstrued to the reproach of these honorable
personages, and such civil magistrates as are of this Commission; whose civil
offices and persons we from our hearts unfeignedly honor and reverence: yet can
the authority of their personages no way justify the unlawfulness of this
Commission, or hide the ungodliness of the BBs. proceedings therein; with whose
crafty practices we suppose they are not made acquainted, being tised into this
Commission by the sub^ilty of the BBs. (who suppose to fortify their
anti^hristian power and popish regiment, by the authority and countenance of
the these honorable and reverend men) whom they persuade that they shall do
much good herein: before whom they bring none, but the most heinous and foul
causes, as incest, plurality of wives, papistry etc. never suffering them to
look into the secrets and mysteries of their kingdom, or to hear the just
complaints of the Q. oppressed subjects by their tyranny. These (as is above
said) they will not suffer so much as to expose their griefs utter their
wrongs, or to plead and defend their own cause before these c^uil magistrates,
no not in this their own court, where the Archbishop is in his exaltation,
and their chief adversaries are Judges; so fearful are they least the light
should break forth, and all their packing and wickedness be bew^aied. But he
that discloseth all secrets, will (I doubt not) shortly reveal all their
doings, and make them as odious as they are now honorable. At which time, such
as now join to them and uphold them, shall stand far off for fear of their
torments, when the wrath of God shall be reveled from heaven against all the
impiety and injustice of these men that withhold the truth in unrighteousness:
For sure, if the Prince and Magistrates but knew the unlawfulness of this
Commission, ^ither in the persons, power, or practice thereof, they would ^oone
withdraw their power from the beast, and would not in this manner uphold or
(...) unto the throne of Antichrist, that forgeth wrong bes^des law.

The ecclesiastical persons of this Commission we have by express^ scriptures
showed, neither to be true ministers of the Gospel, neithe^ true members of
the Church of Christ. Both which though they were, yet could they not receive
or exercise such antichristian power and inordinate authority over all, or any
one congregation of Christ; much less in the estate they stand. For the ciuiil
magistrates that are of this Commission, though they may as members together
with those congregations whereunto they are joined, jointly with the whole
Church exercise such spiritual power to censure faltes, discuss matters, and
determine of such affairs as belong unto and arise in their congregations etc.
yet can they not (as by virtue of their civil office) exercise these spiritual
censures and power, which Christ has given and belongs unto the whole
Church* much less assume into their own hands, and pluck from the whole
Church this power which Christ has given them. So then all the persons of this
Commission, both ecclesiastical and civil, are ^tterly incapable of this
inordina^e power and jurisdiction; which being so mon^trous and heinou^ over al
churches, al (...) causes, persons and doctrines; to ratify, or di^anul, erect
or pull down, bring in, or cast out of the Church, handle and hold plea of
many civil causes also, and that after so blasphemous and unchristian a manner,
by administering and enforcing their idolatrous book oath, by prohibiting
so much as to speak for themselves or in their own causes, by inflicting
penalties and fines, by incarcerating whom and for what they list, and there
deteining them as close and as long as they list, and that without bail,
mainprise, or trial: which monstrous confused power, belongs rather unto, and
is more fit for yt Antichrist, that Beast; and unto the false church, then unto
any member of CHRIST, or of his church. God has pur difference (though no
disagreement) betwixt the church, and the common wealth, betwixt the ministers
jurisdiction, and censures of each of them; having set unto each sort their due
bounds, officers and limits which they ought not after this manner to
transgress or confound, making I know not what co^mixture of persons, offices,
causes in this monstrous Commission, where the civil magistrate is made a Judge
and minister of ecclesiastical causes; their church ministers, of civil and
commonwealth matters, and al under pretext of the commission of ye Prince: who
because he has power over all causes and persons both of the Church and common
wealth; ^herfore these me^ suppose that he may make what new laws, decrees and
orders for both Church and commonwealth that he list, and change the ordinances
and decrees of God at his pleasure, especially if he be a christian Prince; for
then he is no way bownd to the laws of God or limits of his calling.

But against such deuilish doctrines we have often in this treatise proved,
that though the Prince be placed of God in the most high authority both over ye
church and common wealth here upon earth, yet he is but ^he servant of God,
circumscribed with laws, as one that shall render an ^ccompt, and be judged
before the Lord of all his doings, as any other. Though the Prince have the
book of God ^o^mitted unto him, with charge to see yt duly executed by every
one in his calling, yet has he ^t to keep and observe, and not to break or
change. We have also proved all the laws of God to be most holy, inviolable,
and al sufficient both for the church and common wealth, and the perfect
instruction of every officer and member of the same in their several duties and
callings: so that nothing is now left unto a^ mortal man, of what high dignity
and calling soever, but to fulfill and execute the will of God in his word, in
their places and callings: which word being now perfected in ye heavenly
ministry of Christ, nothing may be added to, or taken from the same, without
most high sacriledg and impiety, and the utter abrogating of CHRIST'S Testament:
no new devise (how holy or necessary ^oeuer to our earthly seeming) is now to
be brought in, or required at our hands, our obedience being more acceptable
unto God then our sacrifice. Which way ^en can this strange monstrous
Commission, never read nor heard of in the new Testament of Christ, or whole
word of God, so unlawful in the persons yt are ye Commisioners, in the power
and authority they exercise, and in all their proceedings; so pernicious to y^
whole church, so dir^ctly contrary to y^ word of God, and to y^ utter
subuersio^ and taking out of the way y^ whole Testament and ordinances of
Christ; how may this co^missio^ (I say) be set over y^ whole church, or be
justified by ye Princes authority?

But to prove yt this ecclesiastical high Commission is no antichristian
ungodly or new divise, Mr. SOME has taken some pains, and bestowed upon us a
few reasons, such as they are. Says he, this Commission is derived from our
gracious sovereign Q. ELISABETH, to whom the Antichrist 1
of Rome is a professed enemy, and is directed to honorable reverend and wise
men of the clergy and temporalty* therefore yt is not antichristian. Again
sundry branches of this Commission are godly, as to 2
preserve Gods religion whole and sound from popery, Anabaptistry etc. to meet
with and suppress notable disorders, as incests, polygamies, oppression of the
ministers etc. and to give defense and countenance to the good: therefore this
Commission is very godly. Thirdly, high Commissions 3
were directed from Iehos haphat King of Judah, and from Artaxerx^ King of
Persia; therefore the high Commission of England is no new devise 2. Chron. 19.
Ezra. 7.

By the first reason it should seem that Mr. SOME supposes that there is no
Antichrist but the Pope of Rome; neither any thing to be Antichristian, which
comes not from him: otherwise ^here will be little sequel of this reason; that
because the Q Majesty directs this commission to honorable and reverend men
of the clergy and temporalty, therefore the high Commission is not
antichristian or unlawful. Might not by this reason King David's Commission or
letters mandatory unto Ioa^, for the murdering of Vriah be accounted good,
because king David was a most godly Prince, if so be that the goodness of any
mortal man might make that which is evil good, or justify any unlawful
action. We here reason not of the goodness of any men's persons^, so much as of
the unlawfulness of this Commission, which by so many reasons being proved such,
can neither be justified by the Princes authority that dir^cteth yt, nor by the
goodness of any to whom yt is *directed, but remains altogether unlawful for
the one to grant, for the other to accept. Yet for the persons of these
Commisioners, we have showed the civil personages and magistrates to be
utterly incapable of any ecclesiastical functio^s, whiles they retain these
civil offices, much more of such unlawful and ungodly authority and
jurisdiction over so many churches, as they execute in this Commission. As for
the honorable reverend clergy this Doctor speaks of, if we had said nothing
concerning their office and ministry before, yet this his popish tea^me of
clergy (whereby he segregateth the ministry from the rest of the church, or
else only would have them to be the Lords heritage) sufficiently bewraieth from
what forge they al came, and plainly shows them to have come from their holy
father the Pope, begotten and borne upon their mother of Rome, such a Lordly
Clergy or clearal Prelacy not being before heard of, or r^ad in the Te^tame^t
of Christ: and so by this reason the high Commission is like to prove
antichristian, this honorable reverend clergy which bear all the rule in this
Commission, being so immediately derived, and directly descended from that
Antichrist of Rome. And as for this popish distinction, betwixt the clergy and
the laitye; I refer him to read with due consideration Act. 26. 18. and 1 Pet.
5. 3.

There is as little sequel of his second reason; that because this Commission
has some good branches, as to purge Gods religion of popery, anabaptistry, to
punish and to suppress notable disorders, as incests, polygamies, oppression
of ministers: therefore this whole high Commission is good and godly. Might not
the most ungodly councels yt ever were, be thus defended and justified? because
they decreed not some, but many good things? Might not any sect or heresy be
thus also defended and justified? because they hold and teach many good things?
yet judge we such ecclesiastical councels and assemblies antichristian, which
have no warrant from the word of God, where the holy ghost is not both the
author and ruler. Therefore until this high Commission be approved either by
president or rule, we must still hold yt antichristian and unlawful. And now
touching these fair pretexts wherewith this sepulcher of all rottennes is
gilded, this deep grave is covered, as with flowers and green grass; let
even these fairest shewe^ thereof be examined and proved by that which has been
said touching their seruice-booke, and ministry, what a pure worship and holy
ministry this Commission preserves and maintains. Let the co^monnes of
ince^ts, polygamies, adulteries, for^ication and al uncleanness yt abou^deth in
the land, show the great good yt this commission does in the land: yea let
their profane and ungodly order that they take for the suppressing and
punishing these crimes, show what a holy counsel this is. The Lord commands
odious and unnatural incests and al adulteries to be puni^hed with death: the
high Commission punishes the most hateful incests and poligamies by prisons
or by the purse. As for such incest as is not in marriage and other adulteries
they are but peccadilia, punished by doing penance in a white sheet, or else by
some less mulct without impri^onme^t. Moreover, this commission punishes ye
most high and execrable idolatries by prisons and forfaiturs, making yt a
pecuniary matter, contrary to the law of God Deuteronomy. 1^* and Deuteronomy. 7.

Now let us come to Mr. SOMES 3 argument, where by scripture he does approve
this high Commission to be no new diui^e. King Iehoshaphat and king Ar^axerxes
directed high Co^missions. Iehoshaph^t (says Mr. SOME) in these words. In
Ierushalem did Iehoshaphat s^t of the Levites and of the Priests and of the
chief of the families of Israel, for the judgment and cause of the Lord. And
they returned to Ierushalem, and he charged them saying etc.

How ignorantly, if not corruptly D. S. has inuerted this text, both in the
words and distinctions, may appear to any that will compare yt to the orginal.
He has inuerted the words thus, in that he says [for the judgment and cause
of the Lord] where the text is [for the judgment of y^ Lord, and y^* plea, or
strife] Lemischphat Jehovah velarib. He has inuerted the di^tinctions in these
words And they retur^ed to (...), and ^e (...) them sa^ng. In which (...) he
has put a periode, where the t^xt is continued in the verse without
distinction, and has made a little (...), where should be an hebrew periode;
beginning the verse where he should not, re^ding part of the ^ verse, and
giving yt to the ninth: whereby he has dism^mbred and confounded the text (as
shall by and by appear) by misplacing this word JEHOVAH, and putting yt after
both the judgment and the plea, he has given or rather taken occasion to
think, that this was but one entire commission, consisting of ecclesiastical
and civil persons ioi^d together, and yt this commission had authority to
handle and decide both ecclesiastical and civil causes; whereas in deed ^he
word JEHOVAH is joined to the word [ Mis^] of purpose to put difference betwixt
the ecclesiastical and political judgments, which are expressed in the 10
verse; the 11 verse also showing the distinction both of these judgments and
Judges: for ecclesiastical matters sending to the people Amariah the high
Priest to the Temple and to the ministers thereof, the Priests and Levites: for
pollitike and civil causes, sending the people to Zebadia, and to those heads
of ye families mentioned in ye ^ verse, here called Schi^ rulers or Judges:
which verse he also has most corruptly delivered, both by misplacing the
words of the text, and conueijng in words of his own, especially in these
words [and the Levites shall be officers before you] where the words lie in the
text thus [ and Judges Leui^s before you.] whereby he craftily would collect,
that ye Levites executed civil functions, and so our Bishops and Priests may
be Lords Judges, Iustic^s of peace, and hold jurisdiction of civil causes; and
this rabble of romish ciuilians, advocates, proctors etc. might be officers in
the stead of Levites. Further, his rash inuerting the hebrew distinctions in
the latter end of the ^ and beginning of the 9 verse, he has so royled and
confounded ye t^xt, as no man can understand who they were that returned to
Ierushal^m (or rather as the text is when they should return to Ierushal^)
whither these judges Commisioners (as Mr. SMOE calls them) or the other
Judges and people of the land, that in cases of doubt should return to
Ierushale^, according to the law and commandment of God. Deuteronomy. 17. 8. 9. to
enquire at the priests or at ye chief Judge etc. But D. S. having thus troubled
and roil^d the pure fountain with his f^te, would now give us this muddy water
to drink: that this co^mi^ion (as he terms yt) at Ieru^alem was s^t over all
the Cities, Judges etc. of the whole land, and that these commisioners were
they that returned to Ierushal^m. By which scripture thus delivered and
understood, he would shape and erect this his Lords Grace high Commission. But
let us now eue^ a little compare them together, and see what likeness there is
betwixt (...) proceedings in Ierushalem, and theirs in this high commission.

Iehoshaphat set Judges in the land through all the strong cities; he set
(...). 5.
in Ierushalem of the heads of the families of Israel, appointing amongst them
one chief Judge for all civil affairs, and the Kings business, as the Kings
(...). He commanded also, and caused the Priests to remain in their due course
at Ierushalem, to study and teach the law of God diligently: and to see this
duly done of them, he set the high Priest over them, to be the chief in all
matters of the Lord. What of all this? what new thing is here done, or besides
law Exodus 18. Number. 1^. Deuteronomy. 1. That the Prince al^o is charged, and of duty
ought to see the ministers of the church to do their duty and teach the law
of God diligently and sincerely, we read Deuteronomy. 17. 1 Chronicles. 28. 2 Chronicles. 29.
and 30. and 35. This did Ieho^ and no other thing. Now in that he placed yt at
Jerusalem, yt was according to the commandment of God, who had chosen that
place to put his name there, that the law might proceed out of Zion, and al
people flow thither to worship God, and hear his word. But in all this Ie^ has
neither commixt, nor confounded the civil and ecclesiastical offices in one
commission; neither erected any new ecclesiastical ordinance, besides those
which God in his word had prescribed; or perverted or diuerted any ordinance
that God has instituted. But in this high Commission of the church of England
is an open co^mixture and confusion of civil and ecclesiastical offices and
causes; a new divised ordinance with new officers, new proceedings, and a
strange course not heard or read of in the whole word of God. Yea by this
Commission they pervert and turn away the whole practice of all the ordinances
of Christ in his Church

Neither will that great commission which Artaxerxes gave unto He^ the Priest,
any whit more either couller or warrant this monstrous high Commission of
theirs, granted unto their chief Priest and Archbishop: which Commission, if
yt should have reached over far; yet had yt rather been to be imputed unto ye
ignorance of the heathen King that knew not the laws of God, then to have
been alleged or urged as an example for us to follow in the same evil,
especially now vrder Christ's most perfect absolute Testament and ministry in
his church. But what was this commission of Artaxerxes that D. SOME so
enforces? Artaxerxes granted unto Hezra leave by commission to carry up with
him unto Jerusalem al such of Israel and Judah, as were willing to go, together
with all such vessels, instruments, gold, silver, or free gifts, as should be
given unto the service of God by the^ in Babilo^: as also that being come to
Iernshalem, he should set Judges and arbiters, that might both diligently teach
and see the laws of God duly executed. What is in this Commission found
contrary to the law of God; or what did Hezra by this commission contrary to
the law of God? Yt will here be said, that Hezra being a Priest, had civil and
ecclesiastical power committed unto him, and by virtue of this commission
exercised both civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction etc. we see manifestly in
the 23 and 25 verses that the kings commission had relation wholly to the law of
God, that Hezra being a man prompt therein, should see al things done in the
Temple at Jerusalem and in the kingdom of Judah and Israel, according to the
law of God; yet here is no commission given him to execute both civil and
^cclesiastical offices in his own person, neither read we, or may we
(without sin) imagine that ever he did so; for that had been an heinous breach
of all Gods laws, an insufferable confusion of al Gods ordinances; who as he
has in his word always put difference and distinction betwixt the civil and
ecclesiastical estates, so has he unto each several office, appointed several
ministers to atte^d. Monstrous therefore and most ungodly is that commission,
where both these estates and offices are mingled and confounded in one.
Antichristian and beastlike is that person, that sits as chief of this
Commission, and exercises both civil and ecclesiastical jurisdiction, by the
commandment of any mortal creature, yt being so directly repugnant to the
laws of God, and the Testament of Christ, so pernicious to the Church of
Christ, utterly perverting and diuerting all the ordinances thereof, and
subuerting the whole liberty, powers, censures, and duties of the whole
Church, and of every member and minister thereof. Evil the^ may this mixed
co^fuse ecclesiastical high Commission be compared unto, or approved, by this
godly co^missio^ of Artaxerxes; or this popish supremacy, inordinate power,
and civil jurisdiction of this high Archpriest or Bishop, by y^ person of
Hezra: who most painfully and sincerely taught ye law of God, most precisely
practiced ye same within the bounds of his calling, most modestly and
faithfully behaved himself in all things, as the scripture bears record.

The 26 verse, where the disobedient and the offenders are commanded to have
due judgment and execution according unto the law of God, and quality of their
offense, ca^ by no common reason, much less by any Christian judgment be said
to be commanded to be executed by Ezra his person. The Priests office (as we
have said) was to teach the law, and to exhort al persons to the obedience of
the same; but their office was not to erercise civil jurisdiction, or to
execute civil iudgme^tes: these were to be performed by civil magistrates.
Neither may these judgments of death, eradication, mulct of goods, of bands,
by this commandment of Artaxerxes (who no doubt used such words in this
commission as agreed to the laws and judgments of Persi^, rather then of
knowledge in Gods law) be made either ecclesiastical censures, or any way be
executed in any Christian pollitike regiment, otherwise the^ they are found to
accord with the laws and judgments of God prescribed in his word. But this new
divised high ecclesiastical Commission does not only ce^sure and punish al
faults of their churches, by these judgments and penalties, but does inflict
the^ in what measure and manner they lust upon al persons, for all cawses
whatsoever; whether cawses of religion, as open idolatry, popish mass etc. or
contempt of their injunctions and decrees, in not resorting to their worship
and sacraments, or administering them after any other manner, the^ they have
prescribed etc. whither for civil offenses, be they never so heinous and
abominable, as most odious incests, adulteries, polygamies etc. Al these by
this commission are punished by the purse and by the prison; for the law of God
for idolatours and adulterers were al to sharp: therefore this holy council
(guided belike by some better and wiser spirit) have found out this more
mitigate course, repressing these sins. But if any upon faith and conscience
toward God, refrain their idolatrous devises, there can for such be found out
no kind of hostility, confiscation, perpetual close imprisonment, sufficient
for their faults.

Thus no way can this high Commission of the church of England, be justified by
these examples of (...) and Artaxer^es, neither has yt any more defense in the
new Testament, where is no mention of any such council or Court set over all
churches and over every meber, minister, cause, affair and ce^sure thereof to
impose, depose, determine, judge, censure, punish at their pleasure whom and
what they lust, without co^tradiction or controlement. We read in the practice
of the Apostles, of a synod or council of ^undry churches for the deciding of
controversies and doubts, where certain chosen Elders of the churches are
thereunto assembled, together with such faithful of any church as will be
present, without shutting out of any of them: neither are these Elders here
gathered in any such stagelike or pontisicall manner, as these our Prelates are
in this Commission; but in this christian council or assembly each one has free
liberty and place to relate or debate his own cause, without interruption or
prejudice: neither is any thing here decre^d by the will of any man, but only
by the will of God, and that upon evident demonstration of the word; otherwise,
no credit or obedience given to any thing they set down or determine. During
ye time of which counsel, and at any time after, without any prejudice, any
christian has freedom and liberty, in due time and place, not disturbing the
peaceable order of Christian assemblies, to speak according to the word of
God, either in approbatio^ or reproof of any thing to be done, or done in yt
council. Which council or synod, as yt has not power to erect or bring in any
new decrees or ordinances into the church, besides those which are prescribed
in ye book of God (which are alsufficie^t for all times and occasions unto the
worlds end) so has not this council any power or authority over any church, or
any member of the church, to censure, excommunicate, erect or depose any. This
council or assembly is only ordained for the help and quiet of churches, to
discuss questions and to decide doubts, as they fall out and arise; that so
all churches in all places might walk by one rule in the unity of the spirit.
This counsel is not permanent, or always settled in one place, but to be used
by any Churches at any time or place upon due occasions. Neither is this
council so subsisting of the presbitery, ortied to the persons of any, that the
least member of Christ is thereby shut out, not suffered to hear or to speak,
or any way prejudiced: neither is any Church by this council either deprived
of their high power and authority, which Christ has given to every several
congregation alike, or forestalled from the due execution thereof toward any
member of their congregation, or cause that arises amongst the^. But (as is
said) this council is only a broth^rly and peaceable meeting of sundry
churches, for the better and more as^ured deciding and discussing of doubts
and questions that arise, leaving the whole practice and due execution of al
things, to every particular congregation, in that order and manner that Christ
has prescribed in his Testament.

These occasions, rules, and proceedings of Synodes, councels, or meetings of
diverse Churche^, we find left unto us in that holy pattern Act. 15. where
though the chief builders y^ Apostles themselves were, yet even there were al
things handled with this order, modesty, sobriety, freedom etc.

But now if we compare their high ecclesiastical Commission unto this holy
council and meeting, how unlike in all their orders, proceedings and actions
shall yt be found? Their Commission being made a continual settled permanent
Court, having strange Judges, advocates, officers, iuri^diction, pleas,
process etc. usurping and exercising supreme power and absolute authority over
al churche^, ministers, persons, laws, doctrines, to ratify or disanull, to
establish or reject, to erect or depose whom and what they lust, executing all the censures and offices of the Church, changing, bringing in and setting up
what they please, shutting out the sentence of all Churches and Christians,
allowing them neither interest, election, voice or presence in this their
council, thrusting their decrees and constitutions as most holy upon all
Churches and the consciences of all men with an high and strong hand, to be
received without contradiction or question, adiuring, exam^ning, suspending,
deposing, fining, emprisoning, persecuting with all hostility all such as
receive not their constitutions, and submit not unto their power. Now let any
christian judge, whether this Commission be not more like unto the high court
of the Beast, then unto an holy peaceable orderly assembly of christians, met
in the fear of God, and guided by his Spirit to enquire and search out Gods
will, and humbly to rest in the same.

The civil magistrates power or presence can no way i^stifie this Commission,
or their proceedings, being found so directly contrary to the Testament of
CHRIST, unto which yt is now lawful for no man or Angel to superordeine,
alter, or pluck away any thing, without hainou^ sacrilege. This monstrous
co^mixture then of these distinct powers in one court or person, together with
this confuse practice, barbarous hauock and tyranny they make and exercise over
Gods heritage and Christ^ poor servants, do evidently denote, and, as by the
very steps, trase out unto all men, the person, throne, and power of that
Antichrist, that adversary, that beast, accordingly as they are described and
foreshewed unto us in the scriptures. Math. 24. 15. 2 Thessalonians. 2. how Antichrist
should presume into the very place and office of CHRIST, showing himself in the
Church of God as God, by changing the laws and Testament of CHRIST, and by
bringing in new ordinances, new ministry, worship etc. Revel. 13. and Reu. 17.
12. 13. 14. 17. how Antichrist being thus exalted, the Dragon should give him
his power, his throne, and his great authority; as also the Kings of the earth;
yea such Kings as had before burnt the whore with fire, should give unto the
Beast their power and authority, wherewith he should fight with the Lamb, and
make wa^ with the Saints opening his mouth unto blasphemy against God, and his
tabernacle, and them that d^ell therein, setting up his blasphemous image in all
pl^ces etc.

Now as we have by the light of Gods word, in this little yt has been s^ied,
evidently found and seen these Bi^hops, their courts and government to be
wholly antichristian, and utterly unlawful, but especially this their high
court of Co^missio^, to be most blasphemous, ye very throne of the Beast,
utterly co^mingling co^founding and subuerting al Gods ord^nances, all estates,
and offices both of Church and common wealth, the whole liberty of Christians,
the power and duties of the church: so likewise if we by the same rules, but as
lightly examine and measure the secret classes, the ordinary set Synodes, and
councels of ministers (as they term them selves) which these Reformists now
privily bring in, and would openly set up; they shall no doubt be found as new,
strange, and antichristian, as prejudicial to the liberty of the Saints, and to
the power, right, and duties of the whole Church, and as contrary to the
Gospel of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, as these other, what show soever of former
antiquity, or of present necessity they may pretend. And this, if they be
compared in the persons assembled, and causes for which they are assembled, and
which they handle in the se^ continued times and place of their meeting, in
their order and manner of proceeding and judgment in t^eir decrees and power,
unto that perfect pattern of all christian councelles Act. 15. will forthwith
appear.

The persons assembled in these councels are only ministers, al other
Christians being shut out, and allowed neither place, voice, or consent among
them. The causes for which they are assembled, and which they handle, not being
doubts or questions which arise in the Churches, but all the affairs, offices,
and duties of the Church, and that without making the Churches privy wherefore
they assemble, or what they will t^ere handle. The time and place of these
councels, they (without the will and priuity of the Churches) make settled,
continual* permanent; not leaving to the Church either the liberty when and
where to keep these councels, or whom to use in these councels. The order and
manner of their proceeding and judgment, is, first to choose and erect amongst
the^ a Prolocutor, Moderator, or Judge, to govern and order this action, who
and when they shall speak, and when they shall cease etc. where the matters
being debated, the greater part prevails and carri^th the judgment. Their
decrees are per^mptory, irreuocable, most holy, inviolable, to be received and
embraced of all Churches without contradiction or scruple, no power left to any
Church to examine, refuse, or reuerse the same, be they found neu^r so contrary
to Gods word, but only either by the same council, or by act of Parliament: in
the mean while they all must practice and obey these decrees. The power of
these councels is over all Churches, persons, causes, doctrines, to give the
right hand of fellowship (as they term yt) or to send the bill of divorce, to
ratify or rei^ct, whom and what they will.

This council also executes all the censures and duties of the church; as to
make or depose ministers, to censure, excommunicate etc. To conclude, as all
these councels have and exercise power and jurisdiction over the church, so are
they in authority one above an other: as the Synod above the Classes, the
Council above the Synod, to confirm, abrogate, or disanul whatsoever
constitutions or actions the other ha^h made. Yea (as some report) upon the
e^ormities and abuse^ yt did arise in these councils and assemblies of Bishops,
were devised and erected these new strange orders and degrees of Bishops,
Archbishops, Patriarchs, Popes, and all their substitutes and courts. From
which strange councels, offices, ministry, courts, have flowed forth and
daily spring, all these strange popish ^ntichristian orders, decrees,
innumerable diuises and traditions, daily innouations, continual changes in
the worship of God, all the proceedings of the Church and of the whole
Testament of CHRIST; whiles men re^t not in the wisdom and councels of God,
but presume to be wise above that they ought to be wise, some attributing unto
their Clergy (as they call them) others to the Prince, others to the Church
more then enough, none yiedling unto CHRIST that which is his due: namely, to
suffer him to govern his whole Church by such officers and laws as he has in
his Testament prescribed; but rather in the presumption of their own hearts
they will set over him and his Church such laws and officers, or at the least
assign unto him such laws and offi^ers, as they think best to accord, and
judge most meet for their policy: as though CHRIST could be a minister or
mediator of any other Testament, the^ of his own; or that any mortal men may
alter, change, neglect or re^ect CHRIS^S Testament, without his fearful wrath
and heavy indignation for the same.

Wherefore, seeing the whole church and all the proceedings thereof must be built
upon CHRIST'S Testament; seeing every ^oule and every action shall be judged by
CHRIST'S Testament; seeing nothing is pleasing unto God, or will stand before the
face of CHRIST, that is found disagreeing to CHRIST'S Testament; seeing also eue^
by this little search and superficial view we have taken of the present estate,
and pretended reformation of this their church of England, all things appear
to be out of frame, still in the old corruption, and (at the best) but
enclining to the primitive and ancient defections from CHRIST'S Testament,
nothing being aright or according to the will of God amongst them: seeing we
find all those scriptures that have foreshewed of An^ichrist and his
proceedings, lively fulfilled amongst them, all the marks of that painted
deccitful harlot, the false and malignant Church, to be fownde upon them; as
also all the vials of Gods wrathful judgments to be powered forth upon them,
and al their doings. Finally, seeing God vouch^afeth both to discover, and to
call al men forth out of Babylon, by proclaiming of his glorious Gospel, and
yet offr^th more grace before he let fall the heavy millstone of his final
indignation upon them al to grind them to dust, and to press them to the
bottom of hell, b^ing ready to receive all that come forth unto him, to
esteem, guide, and defend them as his dear children: It behooves al such, in
whom in any care of their own salvation, any fear of God, or love of that
appearing of our Lord JESUS CHRIST, to Revel. 18.
preserve their souls and bodies pure from the idolatry and abominations of
the false Church, to save themselves from this wicked and perverse generation,
by coming out from amongst them, and fleeing out Act. 2. 40. 2 Cor. 6. 17.
zach. 2. 7. Revel. 14.
of Babel, and by gathering themselves unto the Lamb in mount Sion, there
amongst and together with his chosen called faithful servants under his banner
and conduct to fight in all patient and constant manner that good fight of
faith, holding forth the word of life against all the works and powers of
darkness, not abhorring the cross of CHRIST, or loving in his service their
lives unto the death, but being always ready to do or suffer according to the
will of God, following the Lamb wheresoever he goes: that so he may lead them
in the ways of life and peace, and at length bring them to the full fruition
of that endless happiness which he has prepared for all his in his Fathers
kingdom, there to rest with him in perfect joy for ever and ever.

Which grace that they may find, as I have not spared my poor endeavor (though
thereby I have exposed my self to present peril and open reproach, by the violent
hands and virulent tongues of these malignant adversaries) to blow the trumpet,
awake^ and admonish all, that yet some might be saved: so shall not cease,
whiles yet God preserves me alive amongst them, eue^ ^n my continual prayers,
incessantly to beseech the Lord to show this mercy unto his chosen; who
because they are only known unto himself, I shall not cease to hope and wish
that eue^ the greatest enemies might be of this number: that whereas now they
stand the waged marked servants of Antichrist, they might by unfeigned
repenrance, wash away those stigmatical skarres, be mustered and enrolled in
the Lambs Book of life, having his Fathers name written in their foreheads: to
whom be praise in the Church by CHRIST JESUS through^ut all generations for
ever Amen.

But the found^tion of GOD stands firm, having this seal: the Lord knows
who are his* and let every one, naming the name of GOD d^part from iniquity. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
If thou be wise, thou sha^t be wise for thy self; but if thou scorn, the
alone shall suffer. Prou. 9. 12.
By the Lords most unworthy servant and witness i^ ^andes. HENRY BARROWE.

FINIS.
The Printer to the Reader.
I must acknowledge very many faults escaped in the printing of this Book,
and therefore do crave the Readers patience, and the Authors pardon, having
given the one (no doubt) some cause of offense, and done the other (I fear) a
greater wrong: but hopinge that both will rest satisfied, and that the Reader
shall reap the proffit of this fruitful discourse, I bid them farevvell.


