EIRENARCHA: or of The Office of the Justices of Peace, in two Books:
Gathered. 1579. and now reuised, and first published, in the. 24. year of the
peaceable reign of our gracious Queen ELIZABETH:

By WILLIAM LAMBARD of Lincolnes Inn Gent.

Hae tibi arts erunt, pacique imponere morem.

AT LONDON: Imprinted by Ra: Newbery, and H. Bynneman, by the ass. of Ri. Tot.
and Chr. Bar.

ANNO.DOM. 1581.



TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, SIR Thomas Bromley, Knight, Lord Chauncelour of
England.
AFTER such time as it liked you (Right honorable) to command my name to be
put into the Commission of the Peace for Kent, I thought it my part, as well for
saving you (my special good L. and favorer) blameless in the Choice, as also
for mine own Information and discharge in the Service it self, to look
diligently into that portion of our Law which concerns the office of the
Peace, wherewith I had before that time very little or none acquaintance. And
therefore, in greedy appetite, I began first with M. Fitzherbertes treatise
of the Iusticers of Peace: then went I to an other ancient book, of the same
Argument, but of an Author unknowen to me, and thirdly I came to M. Marrowes
reading. All which when I had perused, I seemed to my self to have taken same
such taste of the thing that I sought, as did rather incense than satisfy my
thirste and desire.

Wherefore, seeking after a full meal, and calling to minds that it was truly
said, Gratius ex ipso font bibuntur aquae,


I betook me to the old and new books of the Common Laws, and to the
volumes of the Acts and Statutes and (mistrusting the slipp^rnesse of mine
own ms^^e^ie) I did vapon a second reading plot the master with my pen, and
made (as it were) a Module thereof in a small book, wherein I brought
together stuff of ^^h kind, sorted in beap^^ (...) l^^ed veadie to be
wrought and framed.

Howbeit, I did not then purpose, te have waded any deeper in this foorde, as
fearing that the water was higher than my head, and thinking it sufficient for
mine own pri^^^^ use, (...) have some serviceable furniture ready at hand,
though otherwise neither much orderly digested nor painfully penned.

But, when as (through daily occasion to use that book abroad) I had emparted
it with other men, I was persuaded by sundry godly, wife, and not vntegrned
gentlemen, my friends, that the more part of the Justices of the Peace, at
this day had need of some help in writing for their better conduict in that
office, and that it might increase the knowledge of many of them, and
consequntly do a common good, to have the book made common by Impression.

Then again, I took the book into my bands, and ripping (stitche by
stitche) my former doing, I enlarged the work gra^^ing unto it more breathe and
roo^^ of speech: I planted Precedentes here and there in it: I gave it some
light of Order and Method: and added withal some delight of history and
Record: Finally, framing it altogether to commune conceit and practice, I
provided (as I might) both for profit and pleasure and fraught and laded it
with the bact ware of counsel and advice that I had of mine own, or could
borrowe of my friends, determining so to send it from the Cape of good Hope,
and to adventure it to the Seas and winds of the Judgments and reaportes of
other men.

The same now (my singular good L.) though neither aunswearable to your
worthiness, nor to mine own wish, I am bold to present unto you, being there
unto carried by these respects.

First, trusting that you, which do go before them all (in the perfect
knowledge of our Law) that have gone before you in that honorable place which
you now hold, will accoding to the Rule of Law (in your own hands) rectify
the Commission of the Peace, and some other crookedness, whereof this book
shall bring complaint before you.

Secondly, assuring my self, that if you shall not condemn or Cancel it, but
shall allow it, and seal (as it were) the Writ De pace for it, then both I
shall find the better comfort and defense, and the books it self shall have
the more cur^^ous entertainment and freer passage with other men.

Lastly, wishing that it may remain a perpetual Monument of the Sacrifice of
mine own thankfulness for those your rare and long continued favors, from
time to time (even undeservedly) bestowed and cast upon me.

Vouchsafe therefore I pray you (my very good L.) this slender gift, as the
hand and from the heart of him, who (if he had equal mixture of might, to his
mind) would give you that which should be proportionable to the setting forth
of your Honor, and the acquitall of his own duty and deuation toward you.

The Lord of Lords, bless (you for his Christ's sake) with the spirit of
godly and courageous wisdom, and make you a long and happy Counsailour of
this Estate, to the furtherence of his holy Gospel, the weal of the English
nation, the true service of the Queens Majesty, and your own Honorable and
long lasting memory, Amen.

From Lincolnes Inn, this 27. day of Ianurrie. 1581. Your H. most humble, and
ready to be commanded in the Lord, WILLIAM LAMBARD

A Table of the Contents.
The Contents of the Chapiters in the first Book.
The Proheme. Page 1 CAP. 1. What Justices of the Peace be: and why called
Justices. 3 2 Of the signification of the word, Peace. 4 3 Of such as had the
Conservation of the Peace at the commune law. 11 4 Of the first ordayning of
the Wardens and Justices of the Peace by Statute law. 20 5 By whose authority,
and by what means Justices of the Peace be appointed, and of what fortes they
be. page 26 6 What manner of men the Commissioners of the Peace ought to be.
32 7 How many Commissioners of the Peace there ought to be in each County.
36 8 The form of the Commission of the Peace. 39 9 Certain observations,
concerning the matter and form of the Commission of the Peace. 46 10 Of the
two oaths ministered to the Justices of the Peace. 57 11 Of the power absolute
and limited, that the Justices of the Peace have. 63 12 Of the Jurisdiction and
Coertion, belonging to the Justices of Peace. 65 13 That Justices of the Peace
be Judges of Record. 69 14 How long time the authority of the Commissioners
of the Peace is to endure, and by what means it may be suspended, or
determined. 74 15 That all the authority of the Justices of the Peace it
exercised either out of the Sessions, or at (or by reason of) the Sessions of
the Peace. 80 16 Of Suertie of the Peace, and the Good abearing, and of sundry
things incident unto the same, and what one Justice of Peace out of the
Sessions may do therein. 82 17 Of the Breach of the Peace without a Multitude,
against the person, and how it may be stayed or punished by one Justice of
Peace out of the Sessions page 132 18 Of the Breach of the Peace without a
Multitude, or with a Multitude by forcible entry into lands, or tenementes,
and what one Justice of Peace out of the Sessions may do therein. 145 19 Of
other breaches of the Peace with a multitude, as by Riot, Rout, or unlawful
assembly etc. And what one Justice of Peace out of the Sessions may do
therein. 172 20 What other things one Justice of the Peace alone, may do out
of the Sessions, by virtue of Statutes mentioned in the Commission. 184 21 What
other things one Justice of the Peace may do, out of the Sessions, by the
power of other Statutes not mentioned in the Commission. 190 22 What things any
two Justices of the Peace may do out of the Sessions. 227 23 What things some
two Justices of the Peace may do out of the Sessions. 246 24 What things,
three, or more, Justices of the Peace may do out of the Sessions. 273 25 Of the
Reward, and punishment of Justices of the Peace for things done, not done, or
missdone, out of the Sessions of the Peace. 276 The Epilogue. 281

The Contents of the Chapiters in the second Book.
The Proheme. 283 1 The description of the Sessions of the Peace. 284 2 Who
shall appoint the Sessions of the Peace and how, and where. 289 3 What persons
ought to appear at the Sessions: And therein of the G^^stos Ro^^lor^, the
Records of the Sessions, and the Clerk of the Peace, and how the Iuro^^s
ought to be qualified and ordered. 294 4 Of the Articles that are to be given
in charge at the Sessions of the Peace. 310 5 Of the Enditements and
Presentmentes given by the Iuro^^rs: and of the matter and form, and receiving
and rejecting and rejecting of them. 383 6 Of the Presentiments and Informations
of Officers, and other men. 403 7 Of the Impedimentes of proceeding upon
Enditements before Justices of Peace. 409 8 Of the Process upon Enditements
and Informations. page 415 9 Of hearing upon Confession. 426 10 Of hearing by
Diserection. 428 11 Of hearing or Trial upon Examination. 431 12 Of Trial or
hearing by Cer^ifieas. 434 13 Of hearing or Trial by Trauerses. 436 14 Of
Trial upon Araignment, and therewithal of Felot^es. 449 15 Of Judgment. 453
16 Of the Process for the Fine of the Queen, and of the assessing thereof:
and of Estreating for the Queen. page 458 17 Of the Executorie Process, and
execution for the parties that sue, or for other persons. 469 18 Of Certifying
Records of the Sessions of the Peace to other Courts, or Officers. 472 19 Of
the General of Quarter Sessions of the Peace. 477 20 Of the Special Sessions
of the Peace. 500 21 Of the Rewards and Punishments due to Justices of the
Peace in respect of their Sessions. 503 The Epilogue. 518

The end of the Table.
EIRENARCHA: Or, of the Office of the Justices of Peace.
THE PROHEME.
TO write of the Office and Duty of Justices of the Peace, after M. Marrowe
(whose learned Reading in that behalf made the xviii year of King Henry the
seventh, is in many hands to be seen) and after Justice Fitzherbert (who
published an excellent treatise thereof, which is yet every where be had) may
at the first seem no less unadvisedly done, than if a man should bring
Owls to Athens (as the Proverb is,) or sticks into a growing Wood or Copise.
Howbeit, if it be considered, that since their time, this Office is charged
with many Statutes, which were not made when their wrytings were penned: and
if it be weighed also, that sundry things in them had the^ the the force of
law, which now at this day they have lost by alteration of like authority: It
cannot be thought altogether in vain, to confer their writings with the
Book cases, and Statutes that have arisen of latter times, and out of them all
to collect some discourse, that may serve for the present age wherein we now
live, and somewhat further the good endeavor of such as be not trained up in
the study of the laws. In which doing, as I mean to rob no man of his
right, but to yield to each one the due praise of his own, fearing, least (as
the Poet said) Moueat Cornicula risum,
Furtiuis nudata coloribus:
So if I my self shall be found here and there to dissent in opinion from other
men, I desire heartily that my good meaning be not evil interpreted, that my
allegations and reasons be weighed indifferently, and that the respect of my
person bring no prejudice to the thing in question.

What Justices of the Peace be: and why called Justices.
CHAP. I.
IVSTICES of the Peace, A definition (or description) of Justices of the Peace.
be Judge of Judges of Record, appointed by the Queen to be Justices within
certain limits, for the Conservation of the Peace and for the execution of
sundry things comprehended in their Commision, and in diverse laws committed
unto them.

These, and many other Judicial officers in our law, be called Justices (per
metonymiam subieti) because they do (or should do) law and Justices. For in
many old Histories, Why they be called Justices.
the Chief Justices of England, is termed, Capitalis Iustitia, and Prima (post
Regem) in Anglia, Iustitia: and the Original Writtes that are in M. Glanuils
Book (which was written under the reign of king Henry the second) have this
form, quod sit coram me, vel Iustitijs meis: And this (no doubt) was done of
special purpose, and to the end, that the mention of their name should put
them in mind of their office, and should continually (as it were) solicit
them to administer Justice, for whole sake they were appointed. But in the
days of King Henry the third, M. Bracton (who reduced the body of our law into
Latin, and therein imitated the Method of the Civil Lawyers) changed the
word Iustitijs, into Iustitiarijs, (how Latin like, let them judge that can
skill) and sets down the Writtes accordingly, coram Iustitiarijs nostris.
Since which time, not only all our Writtes that command appearance before the
Justices at Westminster, do use the word Iustitiariss but all Commissions of
Sewers, of the Peace, of Oyer and Terminer, and such like, do observe the same
form also.

And of this it comes, that M. Fitzherbert (in his treatise of the Justices
of Peace) calls them Iusticers (contractly, for Iusticiars) and not Justices,
as we commonly (and not altogether improperly) do name them.

Of the signification of the word Peace.
CHAP. II.
Peace, has many significations.
OF the Latin word Pax, the Normans framed their Paix, and we out of the that,
our peace: which name has sundry significations in the holy Scripture: For
there is an inward, and an outward Peace. And this inward Peace, is either
good, or evil: First then, there is pax apud Deum, that is to say, our
reconciliation made with God the father, by the death of Christ his son, who
is pax nostra, and has appeased the wrath of God for our sins, Our of this
proceeds an other inward Peace, named ye Peace of Conscience, for that our
Conscience is (by faith in Christ) at Peace, both with God, and it self. The
evil inward Peace, is the same where of our Savior Christ spoke, saying,
pacem do vobis, non quemadmodum mundus dat: And this Peace, the Kingly Prophet
David calls pacem peccatorum, because it is no better than carnal security.

The outward peace, has respect to other men, and that is of two sorts also:
the one is opposed (or set) against all manner of striving and contention,
whether it be in countenance, gesture, word, or work: of the which S. Paul
spoke to the Romans in these words: Si fieri potest, quantum in vobis est, cum
^mnibus hominibus pacem habetote: And in the same meaning, the Latin men say,
pace tua, by your leave, or favor, without your offense, or displeasure. The
other is only an abstinence from actual force and offer of violence, and is
rather contrary to arma, pralium, and bellum, (which can not be without force,
or arms) than it is lis, pugna, or certamen, which (as Laurence Valla
confesses) may be nudus verbis, and citra arma. And hereof also our Savior
Christ spoke, when he said, Non veni vt mitterem pacem, sed gladium.

The law of our Realm Peace in our Law
likewise, uses the word Peace diversely, but yet so, as it is altogether
occupied about these outward Peaces. For, as Cicero said of frauds, aliter
leges, aliter Philosophi, tollunt astutias: leges quatenus manutenere res
possunt, Philosophi quatenus ratione and intelligentia: even so may I truly
affirm, that (in the matter of Peace) the law of God (which only is the true
Philosophy) respects the mind and conscience, although the laws of men do
look but to the body, hands, and weapons.

Sometimes therefore, the word Peace is taken for Proctection, or defense: as
where M. Bracton calls the Writtes of Protection, Breuta de pace: Sometimes
(as it seems to me) it is taken for Rightes, Privileges, and Liberties, as
in the oath of the Queen at her Coronation, she swears, Seruare Ecclesiae
Dei, Cleri, and Populi, pacem ex integro the meaning whereof is, (as I suppose)
that she will maintain each degree and estate of her Subjects, as well
Ecclesiastical as Temporal, (for populus comprehends all the Laity)
according to their several customs, Laws, and Privileges. And sometimes it
is taken for a withholding (or abstinence) from that injurious force and
violence, whereof I spoke before. Peace, for Justices of the Peace.
And this is it that is most commonly understood by the word Peace, in our
law: and for the maintenance hereof chiefly, were these Wardens and Justices
of the Peace first made and appointed.

For Justices of the Peace were not ordained (as some have thought) to the end
to reduce the people, either to an universal unanimity (or agreement)of
minds, which is in deed a thing rather to be wished for, than to be hoped
after: Neither is it any part of their office, to forbid lawful suites and
controversies (which nevertheless be disagreements of minds:) But to
suppress injurious force and violence, moved against the person, his goods,
or possessions.

And yt this may appear to be the mind or ye king, which first created these
Wardens, or Justices of the Peace (I mean King Edward the third) let me show
you the Writ that he in the first year of his reign, and not many weeks
before the Parliamente in which the Gardens of the Peace, (which afterward
obtained the name of Justices of the Peace) were first ordained, did send to
the Shirifes of each Shire in England, bearing this form: Edwardus Dei gratia
Rex Anglia, Dominus Hybermae, Dux Acquitaniae, Vicecomiti Kanciae salutem. Tho.
Wal^ugham in ^ist. page 107
Quia dominus Edwardus, nuper Rex Angliae, pater noster, de communi assensu
Praelatorum, Comitum, Baronum, and aliorum Magnatum, necnon Comunitatum totius
regns praedicti, spontanea volantate se aneouit a regimine dictiregni, volens
and co^cedens quod nos (taquam ipsius Primogenitus, and Haeres ipsious) regni
gubernationem and regimen assumamus: Nosque ipsius patris beneplacito in hac
part de consilio and auisamento Praelatorum, Comitum, and Baronum praedictorum
annuentes, gubernacula suseepimus dicti regni, and Magnatum recepimus, vt est
moris: Desiderantes igitur pacem nostram proquiete and tranquillitate populi
nostri inuiolabiliter obseruavi, Tibi praecipimus, quod statim visis
praesentibus per totam Balliuam tuam pacem nostram facias public proclamari,
vniuersis and singulis ex part nostra inhibendo, sub poena and membrorum, ne
quis dictam paecem nostram infringere seu violare praesumat, sed quilibet
actiones and quaerelas absque violentia quacunque prosequatur, secundum leges
and consuetudines regni nostri: Nos enim parati sumus, and se^per crimus,
o^nibus and singulis co^queretibus, ta^ diuitius quam pauperius in Curijs
nostris plenam iustitia^ exhibere. Test meipso, Caledas Februarij, die
dominica, in vigilia purificat. etc.

This Writ I have the rather set down at large, because it contains a fair
show of a foul deed, I mean, his attaining to the crown, by the deprivation
of his father. But (for the present purpose) by this Writ it is manifestly
declared, that the Peace which he meant, was not an uniting of minds, but a
restraining of hands, which is (in a manner) al one with that which Tullie
writes in his Oration Pro Sestio, where he sets Vis and Ius one against the
other: and it agrees well with that description of Vis, which M. Bracton
makes (lib. 4. ca 4.) saying: Vis est, quotiens quis (quod sibideberi putat)
non per Iudicem reposcit: Est autem interdum armata, interdum inermis.
According to which meaning also, the old Statute of Westminister the first (
ca. 1.) said: Let the peace of the la^d be maintained in all points, and common
right be done to all, as well poor as rich. Thereuppon likewise says the
Statute (1. R. 2. ca. 2.) Let the peace be well and surely kept, that the
Kings subjects may safely go, come, and abide, according to the law of the
Realm, and that Justice and right be indifferently ministered to every Subject.

Finally, the Statutes of 2. R. 2 ca. 41. H. 4. ca. 1 and 7. H. 4. ca. 1. Do
all (in plain speech) couple the maintenance of the Peace, with the pursuing
of suits, as things that may right well stand together. And therefore, I
conclude, that this furious gesture, and beastly force of body, or hands (and
not every contention, suite, and disagreement of minds) is the proper subject
and matter, about which the Office of the Justices of the Peace is to be
exercised.

Nowbeit I write not this, as though I would not have a Justice of the Peace to
occupy himself also in pacifying the suites and controversies, that do arise
amongst his neighbors: Yea rather I with him, to be as well (...), as (...), a
Compounder, as a Commissioner of the Peace: and I think him so much the meeter
to stepps in betwirt those that be at varia^ce, as (by reason of his learning,
wisdom, authority, and wealth) he is like to prevail more, by his mediation
and entreaty, than another man. Justices of the Peace, be meet to pacific
suites.
But, as it is not al one, speak of his proper office in Law, and of his
common duty in Charity: so I thought good to sever and distinguish them.

Of such as had the Conservation of the Peace, at the common Law.
CHAP. III.
As the common law has, even from the beginning, continued a special care
for the peace: So did it not want meet Officers (before that these Wardeins
or Justices of the Peace were made) to whose charge it did commit the
maintenance of the same: And for as much as it will give no small light to the
understanding of the office of the present Justices of Peace, to have that
ancient authority unfolded, upon the which this latter power is (as it were
upon a Stock) set and engraffed, I will speak some what thereof, before I
begin with the other.

At the Commune law therefore, and before ye time of King Edward the third,
there were sundry persons, that had interest in the keeping of the Peace.
Conseruators.
Of these, some had that charge as incident to other Offices that they did
bear, and so included within the the same, that they were nevertheless called
by the names of their other Offices on lie: Some others had it simply as of it
self, and were therefore named Custodes pacis, Wardeins or Conseruators of the
Peace.

By other of^ces.
Again of there that had charge over the Peace by the dignity of their
Offices, some had that power over all the Kealme, some others had it within
certain limits only:and both these sorts after a diverse manner of dispensatio^
as in particularitie it that appear.

The Queens Maies^e then is, by her Office and dignity royal, the principal
Conseruator of the Peace within her Dominions, and may give authority to
others, to see the Peace kept, and to punish such as shall break the same. But a
Duke, Earl, or Baron, be no Conseruators of the Peace, because those be no
titles of Office, but of dignity only, says Mar.

The Lord Chauncelour or Lord Keeper of the great Seal, the L. Steward of
England, the L. Marshall and Conestable of England, and every Justice of the
Kings Bench, have (closed in their offices) a credit for conservation of the
peace over all the Realm, and may awarde Precepts, and take Recognisances for
the Peace. Mar. and Fitz. And by good opinion, The L. Treasorer of England may
well be added to the number of these.

The M of the Rolls also by the opinion of M. Mar is a general Conseruatour
of the Peace by his office. But he makes Process and takes Recognisances
thereupon, not as incident to his office, but by prescription.

The Justices of the Common place, and Barrons of the Escheaquer, be
Conseruatours within special places only, that is to say within the
precinates of their several Courts: So also the Justices of Assizes may
awarde a man to prison that breaks the peace, in their presence, and they may
come maunde the keeping of the peace under a peine, and that weapons be taken
from the Jurors or Witnesses, that appear before the^, if any complainte be
thereupon made:But as they be meerlie Justices of Assise, they ca^ neither
take Suertie of the peace, nor award any Process for it. Mar.

The Justices of Jail delivery, may take suertie for the Peace of a prisoner
before them, that was committed for not finding suertie of the Peace, Mar.

The Coroners (siath Britton. Fo. 3.)' be principal Conseruatours of the peace
within their Counties: And every Shirife is a Conseruatour of the Peace,
within his Cou^tie as Judge Fineux affirmed 12. H. 7.17, and and after him M.
Fitzh. in Not. bren. Fo. 81. where he says that the Shirife may (upon request
made, and without any Writ sent unto him) command a man to find such
Suertie of the Peace by Recognisance.

The Steward of the Marshalsey, may take Suertie of the Peace, by
Recognisance also within the Vierge, by prescription: and the Conestable
Marshall of the Queens house, may see to the Conservation of the peace within
the same house, Mar.

The Steward of the Shirifes Turn, the Steward in a Lecte, or the Steward in
a Court of Pipowders, can not grant Suertie of ye peace, unless it be by
Prescription: But every of them, may commit him to ward, that shall make an
affraie in their presence, whilst they be in execution of their offices, and
that is more than the Steward and Suitors in a Court Baron can do. Mar. and the
first two of them, may also take presentiments of offenses against the Peace.

To be short, every Constable, Peticonstable, Tithingman, and Borowhead, be
Co^seruatours of the Peace by their offices, within ye limits of their
Hundreds, Towns, Tithings, and Boroughes. 12. H. 7. 17. Fineux. And by the
same reason, our Borsholder in Kent, and their Thirdborow in Warwickeshire, be
Conseruatours also within they^ Boroughes. For Borowhead, Borsholder, and
Tithingman, be three several names of one selfsame thing, and do signify,
The chief man of the free pledges within that Borow, or Tithing. And where
each third Borowe only has a Constable, there the officers of the other two
Borowes, be called Thirdeborowes.

These Conestables were ordained (as it appears 3. H. 4.9. and 10. E. 4.and
Fitzh. Fo. 172.) to keep the peace, and to repress forlons, and might take
suertie of ye Peace (by obligation) if they found any man making an affraie, or
otherwise to commit him to prison till he should find such Suertie. I have
read also that a Constable, might at the common law, have bayled a suspecte
of felony by Obligation, because he was a Co^seruator of the Peace: and that
both he and the Shirife lost this authority by the Statutes (3. H 7. ca. 3.
and 1.and2. Phill. and Mar. ca. 13) Which in giving that power to Justices of
the Peace, do (in the opinion of some men) take it from the Shirife and
Constable: reported by Dalison Justice.

Hitherto then, Simple Conseruatours.
of such as had, and yet have the charge of the Peace conveyed under their
other Offices. Now as touching those that had the simple Office of Wardeins (or
Conseruatours) of the Peace, it is to be understood, that they also were of
two diverse sorts: that is to say, either Ordinary, or Extraordinary: and
the Ordinary Conseruators, were either by Prescription, Election, or Tenure.
Ordinary Conseruators, Ordinary.


A man may prescribe (says M. Marowe) that he and his ancestors, or he and
they whose estate he has in the Manor of Dale, have been Conseruatours within
the Hundred of Sale, either all the year, or only at one certain time of the
year: And as he may prescribe in the power it self, so also may he in ye
manner of the exercise of ye same, as that they have used to take the Suertie of
Peace by obligation, pledge, or Caution, and so also in ye manner of the
Process therefore, as to Distreigne, and to sell the distress, Mar.

But all this is to be doubted of, because that in the opinion Of Brian and
Pigot (21. E. 4. 67. and 22. E. 4. 35.) the Mayor of Dale cannot prescribe to
be a Conseruatour, or to command Suertie of the Peace, and to commit to
prison for an affraie in his presence, until such suertie be found.

Furthermore, even as the shirifes, were auntientlie chosen, and as the
Coroners yet be: So also certain persons were wont to be elected
Conseruatours of the Peace, in the full County before the Shirife and of this
kind I my self have seen certain Records (in Rotul: patent. de Anno. 5. E.
1.) running in this course. By Election.


First, a Writ to the Shirife of Norfolk, commanding him to choose in his
full Cou^tie, unum hom^nem de probioribus and potentio^^bus Comitatus s^^, in
custodem pacis.

Then an other Writ directed, Balliuis and fidelibus of the same County,
giving unto the^ notice of the former Writ, to the end (as it seems) that
the Bailies should warn the men of the County and that they should appear at
the County Court, to make the Election.

And lastly, to the Conseruatour elected, this Writ following: Edwardus dei
gratia Rex Angliae, Dominus Hyberniae, and dux Aquitaniae, dilecto and fideli
suo, Iohannt le Bretun Salutem Cu^vicecomes noster Norfolc et co^munitas
eiusdem comitatus elegerit vos in Custodem pacis nostrae, ibidem: vobis
mandamus, quod ad hoc diligenter intendatis, prout idem vicecomes vobis
scirifaciet exparte nostra, donec aliud inde praeceperimus. In cu^us rei etc.
Datum per manum venerabilis patris. F. Bathon and Wellen. Episcopi, Cancellarij
nostri, apud Cest. secundo die September. Annoregni nostri quinto.

Touching the conservation of ye Peace by Tenure of Land: M. Marrow puts
this case: If the King grant unto a man, lands to hold of him by Kinghtes
service, and to be a Conseruatour of the Peace in a County, he is a
Conseruatour by Tenure: agreably whereunto says an Inquisition, found at
Chester (An. 4. E. 2.) after the death of one Vrianus de Sancto Petro (inter
alia) thus: By Tenure.
Touching the...

Quod idem Vrianus tenuit de Domino Rege in capite in dominico suo vt de feodo
die quo obyt, Medietatem Seriantiae pacis, per seruitium inueniendi, december
serutentes pacis ad Custodiam pacis in Cestr: pro qua quide^ custodia
antecessores sui percipere solebant. xxx. ^. per annum ad scaccarium Cestr: pro
Mantellis dictorum december seruientum. etc.

These sorts, and some others (which M. Marrow recites, and which I, wanting
Records to warrant them, do omit) I call Ordinary Conseruatours of the
Peace, because their authority was then Ordinary, always one, and the same
well enough known: Extraordinary conseruatours.
But the Extraordinary Conseruatour, as he was endowed with an higher power,
so was he not ordinarily appointed, but in the times of great troubles only,
much like as the Lieutenaunts of shires are now in our days.

And he had ye charge to defend the coasts and Country, both from foreign
and inward enemies, and might command the Shirife and all the Shire, to aid
and assiste him, as it may well appear by this Patent (remaining of Record in
the Tower, Rotul. Patent. de An. 49. H. 3.) made by that king, or rather in his
name, by Simon the Earl of Leicester, whose prisoner he then was.

Rex Iohanni de Plesset, salutem: Cum nuper de consilio Magnatum qui sunt de
consilio nostro, constunerimus vos custodem pacis nostrae in comitatu Northumb.
ac vos tam landabiliter and circumspecte in officio illo gesseritis, quod
probitatem ac diligentiam vestram merito duximus recommendandam, and adhuc
necesse sit (sicut intelleximus) quod ad tuitionem partium illarum and
conseruationem pacis nostrae, eidem officio intendatis: vobis (de consilio
Magnatum praedictorum) mandamies, firmiter iniungentes, quatenus omnem
diligentiam (quam poteritis) adhibeatis ad pacem nostram conseruandam in
partibus praedictis, in forma qua vobis alias iniu^ximus. Ma^dauimus enim Vic:
nostro Northumb. quod (quotiens opus fuerit) and a vobis fuerit requisitus, cum
toto posse sui commit: vobis ad hoc assistat. Nolumus autem, quod praetextu
huius ma^dati nostri, de aliquibus (quae ad officium vic: pertinent) vos
intromittatis, quo minus vic: de exitibus eiusdem commit. nobis plene respondere
valeat ad Scaccarium nostrum. Test Rege, apud Westmonast. xj. die February,
Anno Regni sui quadragesimo nono.

And sundry the like Patents were at the same time also made: as to Iobn de la
Hay, to be Conseruatour of Kent, and of the Sea coasts there: to Ralph Baslet
of Drav^on, to be Conseruatour of Staffordshire, and so to others for other
Counties.

Of the first ordaining of the Wardeins and Justices of the Peace, by Statute
Law.
CAP. IIII.
After such time as Queen Isabell, contending with her husband King Edward
the second, was returned over ye Seas into England, accompanied with her Son
Prince Edward (called afterward the third King of that name) and with Sir
Roger Mortymer and such others of the English Nobility, as had for ye
indignation of the King, fled over the Seas unto her. She soon after got
into her hands the person of the old King, partly by the assistaunce of the
Hen^lders, that the brought with her, and partly by the aid of such other her
friends, as the found ready here, and immediatelye caused him by forced
patience to surrender his Crown to the young Prince. And then also, for as
much as it was (not without cause) feared, that some attempt would be made to
rescue the imprisoned King, order was taken, that he should be canueyed
(secretly, and by night watches) from house to house, and from Castle to
Castle, to the end that his favorers should be ignorant what was become of
him. Yea, and then withal, it was ordained by Parliament, in the life time of
that deposed King, and in the vary first entry of his sons reign (1. E. 3.
ca. 15) That in every Shire of the Realm, good man and lawful (which were no
maintainers of evil. nor Barrettours, in the Country) should be assigned, to
keep the peace: which was as much as to say, that in every Shire, the King
himself should place special eyes and watches over the common people, that
should be both willing and wise to forsee, and be also enabled with meet
authority, to repress all intention of vproare and force, and that even in
the first seed thereof, and before that it should grow up to any offer of
danger. So that, for this cause (as I think) the election of the simple
Conseruatours or Wardeins of the Peace, was first taken from the people, and
translated to the assignement of the King.

And whether their authority and power were then also with this alteration
any thing increased, or no, I will not affirm: But I find (3. E. 3. Titul.
Coron. Fitzh. 360.) that an Enditement of murder was found before one Wardein
of the Peace only, and that he thereupon wrote his letter (or precept) to the
Shirife, to apprehende the person endited, who took and brought him before the
Justices in Eire, and that they also thereupon proceeded to the arraignemente
and trial of him: And the Statute (4. E. 3. ca. 2.) takes order that such as
should be endited, or taken by the Wardeins of the Peace, should not be bayled
by the Shirife, or other Ministers, unless they were Mainpernable by the Law.

Howsoever that were, the same King used (as I think) for the first 33. years
of his reign, to make his assignements and commissions to the Wardeins of the
Peace, not always severally into each Shire, but sometimes jointly to
sundry persons over sundry Shires: for so I find a Commission 2. E. 3. part 2.
patent. in dorso, made to William Roos and three others his companions, to be
Wardeins of the Peace, not only in Lincolneshire, but also in three or four of
the other Counties thereunto next adioining. Co^missio^s, or assignements, for
the Peace.


And this might be warranted after 18. E. 3 (as I suppose) out of the
Construction of the word County used Plurally in the Statute. 18. E. 3. Stat.
2. ca. 2. contrary to the meaning of the former laws (made 1. E. 3. ca. 15.
and 4. E. 3. ca. 2.) where the same word is read (Every County) in the
Singular number. But the Parliament (34. E. 3. ca. 1) restored the proper sense
of those laws, saying: In euer^e County of England, there shall be assigned
for the safe keeping of the Peace, one Lord, and with him, three or four of the
mightiest men in that County. And afterward, speaking of Felonies, etc. it
adds, They shall have power to hear and determine (at the Kings suite) al
manner of the felonies or trespasses, done in the same County.

Hereof it comes to pass, that ever s^thence each Cou^tie has her proper
Commisioners for the Peace, and that Counties have not been conjoined in
Commission, as they were sometimes before. Hereunto also may yt be referred,
which M. Fitzh. (Fol. 171.) has, saying, That before the Statues which
ordined Justices of the Peace, the King used to make Conseruatours of the Peace
by his commission, in those Counties and places, where he thought best, to
keep his Peace.

But now, at what time these Wardeins of the Peace, were first named (and
might truly be termed) Justices of the Peace, it is not so cuident, that I
dare determine upon it, for on the one side I know, that M. Marrow, takes it
clear, that they were made Justices by the Statute 18. E. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 2.
and on the other side I see, that they were not named Justices in any Statute
(that I have found) within 17. years after: and it is true to this very Day
their own Commission gives them not any such Title. There is a show (I
confess) in that Statute (18. E. 3) that they sshoulde be Justices, because of
the power to hear and determine felonies which is mentioned there. The First
name of Justices of the Peace.
But if it be well weighed, it will appear by the Statute it self, that the
Wardeins of the pear were to have one Commission by themseluse for the keeping
of the Peace, and that they and others (only at times needful) were to have
an other Commission to hear and determine Felonies: So that, as they were
meerlye Commissioners for the Peace, they had none authority to determine
felonies, and consequently could not (in regard thereof) be then worthilye
called Justices: and it is plain (in mine opinion) that the general power of
determining felonies, was first given unto ye Wardeins of the Peace (as to
themselves) by the Statute 34. E. 3. ca. 1. After which time it is uerie true
that were were commonly reputed and called Justices: for within one year after
yt time there is a Commission, which I have sseene ( in dor so patentium part
2) that speaks thus, Assignauimus etiam vos, and tres vestrum, Iustictarios
nostros etc. and the Statute (36. E. 3. ca. 12.) taking order for ye Quarter
Sessions to be holden as well by them, as by the commisioners for Laborers,
called both the sorts of them, by the name of Justices.

I might here disclose, home, and by what degrees, the authority of these
Justices of the Peace, was from time to time enlarged: But I will reserve that
until I shall come to the form of their Commission, where I shall find, both
fitter occasion, and more proper place for it.

By whose authority, and by what means, Justices of the peace be appointed:
and of what sorts they be.
CHAP. V.
FRom the king (who is the head of Justice) ought to flow all aucoritie to the
inferior and subalterne Iusrices. And upon this reason, it seems that the
said Statutes (18. E. 3. ca. 2 and 34. E. 3 ca. 1.) did ordain, that the
Wardeins of the Peace in each County should be assigned by the kings
Commission, that it might thereby appear that they received their whole
authority and power, as it were by his own hand and delivery. Howbeit
afterward, partly through such as had Iurategalia, within their Counties
Palatine, and did thereby make Justices of the Peace in their own names, and
partly by the means of sudrie Abbats and Religious persons, who (laboring by
all policy to increase their jurisdictions, and to shoale out themselves from
the ordinary government) had obtained graunts from the King of ye Realm, yt
they the^ selves might make Iusticiarious suos ad pacem coseruandam within
their own liberties, this prerogative of making Iusstices was in many places
afterward severed from the Crown, to no small detrimente of the royal estate
of the same. And therefore, although by the opinion of Judge Fineux in the
Abbat of S. Albans case (20. H. 7. 8.) such a grant was of no value in law,
because it was of a Prerogative inseparably annered to the Crown, yet King
Henry the eight thought it fit (by a general resumption in Parliament of all
such liberties) to restore unto the Crown her ancient right in this behalf.
And therevppon (27. H. 8. ca. 24.) it was decrieed, that no person whatsoever,
should have any power to make Justices of the Peace, but that they should be
made by letters patents under the Kings great seal, in the name and by the
authority of the King and his heirs, Kings of the Realm, in all Shires,
Counties Palatine, and other places within his dominions. So that now again,
al Justices of the Peace at this day (except the Archbishop of Yoke, and the
Bishops of Durham, and El^e, and their temporal Chauncelours for the time
being, which are severally by that very Parliament auctorised to be Justices
of the Peace, within the liberty of Hexam, ye Byshopricke of Durham, and the
I Will of Elte: and except the Justices of Peace, within the County Palatine of
Lancaster which also are by provision in the same Statute to be made vuder the
Kings usual seal of the same Duc^^e) be ordained by the mean of the great
Seal, and ministry of the L. Chauncelour, that has the charge of the same,
but yet so, that some of them be made by Letters Patents upon special suit to
the Queen, and by her bill assigned, and other some by Commission of Common
Cource that rests in the dispensation of the L. Chauncelour. Two sorts of
Justices of the peace.


They of the first sort, be of some called Indiciall Justices and Justices of
themselves, for that the Queen can not discharge them at her will and
pleasure, but they are to continue, and to enjoy Inrisdiction so far forth as
their Patent of grant does enable them. Mar. By grant.
And therefore, if the Queen do grant unto a^ma^ to be a Justice of the Peace
during his life within a certain precinct, without any further words: he
shall continue such a Justice during his life, and shall have all that power
that a Wardein or Conseruatour of the Peace had, and perhaps such power also as
is given so a Justice of the Peace by express words in any Statute: but the
shall not have all that power which is ordinarily given so the Commissioners of
the Peace by their Commission. Mar The Majors, and other head officers of
many Cities and corporate Towns, be Justices of this kind at this day, by
grauntes of the Queen, and her progenitors.

Those other Justices of the Peace, which derive their power from the
Commission, be called Commissioners of the Peace, and do differ from the other
in this point specially, that they be Justices during only the Queens life,
and in her life during only her own will and pleasure, as you shall hereafter
see at large, By Commission.


These (as I said) be now at this day appointed by discretion of the Lord
Chau^celour but whether the King himself did at the first nominate them (as
he did those which were made by Grant) or else did leave the choice of them
to the Lord Chauncelour alone, or to him and others, it has some show of
question. Commisioners of the Peace, appointed by the Lord Chauncelor.


It is true that in the Parliament hold at Canterburte 12. R. 2. ca. 2. (which
happened shortly after that Michael de la pole had been removed from that
place, and after the troublesome Parliamente of the eleauenth year of that
kings reign) It was enacted that the Chauncelour, Treasorer, and keeper of the
privy Scale, the Steward of the kings house, the kings Chamberlain, the
Clerk of the Rolls (now called Master of the Rolls) the Justices of both
Benches, the Barons of the Escheaquer, and others that should be called to the
naming of the Justices of the Peace, Shirifes, Eschactors, Customers,
Controllers, and other officers, should be sworn to do the same faithfully,
and without affection: But, whether the meaning of that Statute were, that they
all should be continually present together at the nomination of all such
officers, and whether that Statute were made but for that busy time only, it
may well be doubted. For again upon fault found (as it should seem) that
the Commissioners of the Peace were made of persons insufficient, and dwelling
in foreign Cou^ties, it was enacted (2. H. 5. Parl. 2. ca. 1.) that from
thencefoorth they should be assigned by the advice of the Chauncelor and of the
kings Counsel, which words may be taken to sound as though they had been
named before, by the Lord Chauncelor alone: yet may they indifferentlye be
extended, either so adioine the advice of the kings counsel to the
Chauncelour, or the advice of them both unto the king him self.

This is out of al dout, that 18. H. 6. ca. II. did take order, that upon
knowledge given to the Chauncelour of England, by any appointed to be a Justice
of Peace, that he had not lands to the value of twenty pound by years, the
Chauncelor himself should put an other sufficient in his place. And for want
of sfficient men having lands of that value, learned in the Law, and good
governance, that the Chauncelour of England, for the time being, should have
power, by his discreation to put into the Commission other discrete persons
learned in the Law, though they had not lands to that value. And albeit this
credit were here given unto him in these particular cases only, yet it may
well be thought, that he had been before, and should be afterward, trusted
with the choice of all the Commissioners of the Peace generally, where of
there is great presumption also, even upon the Statute. 3. E. 6. ca. 1. that
mentions, that the nomination of the Custos Rotulorum (being a very special
Justice of the Peace) had of long time before belonged to the Office of the
Chauncelour, till upon some occasion it was take from him by the Statute of 37.
H. 8 ca. 1. and therefore was then restored to him again.

What manner of men the Commissoners of the Peace ought to be.
CHAP. VI.
IN the choice of the Wardeins and Justices of the Peace, the Statute laws
have respect to the manners and ability (or liuelihoode) of them all, and to
the skill and learning of such as are specially selected, and therefore named
of the Quorum. For, Gardens of the Peace ought to be good men and lawful, no
maintainers of evil, nor Barretours in the Country, or (as some Books have
it) no mainetainers of evil Barretours in the Country. 1. E. 3. ca. 15. Men
of the best reputation (Meultz vailantz) most substantial (or of most
valor) shall be assigned keepers of of the Peace. 18. E. 3. ca. 2. and. 17. R.
2. ca. 9. In every County for safegarde of the Peace shall be assigned one
Lord, and with him three or four of the (Mieultes vanees) most valiant men of
the County, together with some Sages of the laws. 34. E. 3. ca. 1.

And after some troubles in the time of K. Richard. 2. it was enacted that none
shall be made Justice of the Peace for any gift, brocage, favor, or affection:
nor any which sueth by himself or any other, privily or openly, to be a
Justice of the Peace, shall be admitted to that office, 12. R. 2. ca. 2. And
of some special policy the also enacted, ca. 10 of the same parliamet, that no
Steward of any Lord should be assigned in the Commission of the Peace. 12. R.
2. ca. 10. Yet in ye Parliament of the next year (ca. 7.) it was ordered, that
(notwithstanding that clause of the former Statute) Justices of the Peace
should then be made of new in all places, of the most sufficient Knights,
Esquires, and men of law.

Again, Justices of the Peace (especially those of the Quorum) from
hencefoorthe shall be made of the most sufficient persons dwelling in the
County (without taking any others dwelling in foreign Counties) except the
Lords, Justices of both Benches, Justices of Assise, the chief Baron, the
chief Stewards of the duchy of Lancaster, the Seriants, and the kings
Attorney. 2. H. 5. Parl. 2. ca. 1.

Lastly, for that contrary to these former Statutes, men of small substance
had crept into the Commission, whose poverty made them both covetous and
contemptible, a new law was published to this effect following:

None shall be assigned Justice of the Peace, if he have not lands or
tenementes to the value of twenty pounds by the year: And if any be otherwise
appointed, he shall within a month after notice of the Commission (and under
the pain of twenty pounds, and to be put out of the Commission) give
knowledge of his not having such lands or tenements, to the Lord Chauncelour,
who shall put an other person sufficient in his place. And the like pain is,
if he sit, or make warrant, or any precepte, by force of the Commission. But
this, extends not to Cities, Boroughes, or Towns that be Cou^ties of
themselves, or that have Justices of Peace (dwelling in them) by Commission or
grant of the king: Nor to such Counties where there be not men sufficient
(having lands or tenements to the value aforesaid) learned in the law, and of
good governance: naunce: for then other discrete persons learned in the Law,
may by the Lord Chauncelour be put in the Commission 18. H. 6. ca. 11.

Now although this portion of twenty pounds a year, be not at this day in
account aunswerable to the charge and countenance fit for a Justice of the
Peace, yet who knows not, that at the making of this Law, it was far
otherwise: And I do not doubt, but as the rate of all things is greatly risen
since that time, so is there also good care taken, that none he now placed in
ye Commission, whose liuinges be not increased according to the same proportion.

And thus, our Parliaments (entending to make the Justice of peace an able
Judge) do require that he come furnished with three of the principal
ornaments of a Judge, that is to say, with Justice, Wisdom, and Fortitude,
for to that sum the words, Good, Learned, Valiant, do well amounte. And above
all, that he love and fear God aright, without which he can not be ^^ounted
Good at all.

How many Commisioners of the Peace there ought to be in each County.
CAP. VII.
THE number of the Wardeins of ye peace, was not limited, until that the
Statute (18. E. 3. ca. 2.) ordenined, that there should be two or three in each
County: And because it was found, within a few years experience, that this
number suffised not for the governance of the Country, therefore by an Act
(made 34. E. 3. ca. 1.) it was further provided, that in every Shire, one
Lord, and with him three (or four) of the Best in the County, and some
learned in the Laws, should be assigned for keeping of the Peace, and to
restrain offenders.

In execution of which Statute, there was (amongst many other) one Commission
for Kent, awared (35. E. 3.) to Robert Herle, John Cobham, Roger Northwood,
Ralph Ireningham, Thomas Lodelowe, Robert bert Vintar, John Barry, and Thomas
Hartrege.

But, as it falls out many times, that evil examples do follow of good
laws: So here it came to pass, that whilst the Parliament provided an
increase of Officers, to restrain offenders, ambition so multiplied the number
of those Justices, that it was after ward high time to make a contrary law
to diminish them, And therefore, by the Statutes (12. R. 2. ca. 10. and 14. R.
2. ca. II.) it was prohibited, that there should not be any more than sire
Justices of the Peace in any Commission, besides the two Justices of Assise,
and certain Lords that were assigned in the Parliament itself. And for the
better restrainte of the increase of them in time to come, it was also then
further enacted, that no Assotiation should be made to the Justices of Peace,
after their first Commission. 12. R. 2. Ca. 10. Which law although it be not
abrogated till this day, yet it was long since cluded, by making of new
Commissions, that had more new Justices thrust in to them.

And truly it seems to me, that (together with the like ambitious desire of
bearing rule in some) the growing number of the Statute laws committed from
time to time to the charge of the Justices of ye Peace, has been the cause
that they also are now again increased to the ouerflowing of each Shire at
this day. Very many Justices of Peace at this day.


For, if Hussy the chief Justice (1. H. 7. 3) thought that it was enough to
load all the Justices of the Peace of those days, with the execution, only
of the Statutes of Winchester, and Westminster, for Robberies and Felonies, the
Statute of Forcible entries, the Statutes of Laborers, Vagaboundes, Liueries,
Maintenance, Embracerie, and Shirifes: Then how many Justices(think you) many
now suffice (without breaking their backs)to bear so many, not loades, but
Stacks of Statutes, that have since that time been laid upon them: To
dispute, whether it be better to have many, or few Justices of the Peace, in
each Shire, (if all put in were able for the place) is a noble question, and
worthy of a higher consideration, and therefore it becomes not me to enter
into it. Justices of Peace be ouerladen with Statutes.


The form of the Commission of the Peace.
CHAP. VIII.
For as much as all the authority and power of the Commissioners of the Peace,
flows out of their Commission, and the Statutes (as it were out of two
Principal springs or fountains) it is now time to unfold the Commission it
self, and to see what is contained in it. Two fountains of the power of
Justices of the Peace.


ELizabetha, Deigratia, Angliae, Franciae, and Hiberniae Reginae, fidei
defensor etc. Praedilecto and fideli, Edmundo Cantuar. The salu^^tion.
Archiepiscopo etc. Necnon praedilectis Thomae Bromley militi, domino
Ca^cellario, Willihelmo domino Burghley, Thesauriario etc. salute. SCIATIS,
quod assignauim'vos, coniu^ctim et diuisim, adpacem nostra^, ac ad Statuta and
ordinationes apud Winton. Northampton, and Westmonasterium, pro oonseruatio^e
pacis ciusdem, Necnon ad ordinationes ibid^ and apud Cantabrigiam de
venatoribuu, operarys, artificibus, seruitoribus, hostellarys, mendicantius and
vegabundis, and alys hominius mendica^tius qui se nominant Travailing men. Et
similiter ad Statuta and ordinationes apud Westmonast. anno regni Henrici
quarti nuper Regis Angliae defuncti, primo and secundo, de liberatis signorum
societatis, militibus, armigeris, seu valectis, and alys liberatis pannorum
minime dandis, nec eis liberatis aliqualiter vtendis: Ac ad quoddam aliud
Statutum Henrici quinti nuper Regis etc. in Parliamento apud Westmonasterium
etc. De controfactura, lotura, tonsura, and al^a falsitura, monetae terrae
nostrae similiter editum, iuxta vim, formam, and effectum eoru^dem,
custodiendum, and custodiri faciendum: Ac ad omnia alia ordinationes and
Statuta, pro bonopacis nostrae, ac quieto regimine and gubernatione populi
nostri edita, in omnibus and singulis suis articulis, in Comitatu nostro
Kanciae, tam infra libertates, quam extra (per quosreiveritas melius sciri
potent) iuxta vim, formam, and effectum coru^dem, custodienda, and custodiri
facienda: Et ad omnes illos, quos (co^traformam ordinationum and Statutorum
praedictorum delinquentes inueneritis) castigandos, and puniendos, prout
(secundum formam ordinationu^ and Statutorum praedictorum) fuerit faciendum: Et
ad omnes illos, qui aliquibus de populo nostro (de corporibus suis, vel de
incendio domorum sua rum) minas fecerint, ad sufficientem securitaetem de pace
and bono gestu suo erganos and populu^ nostrum inueniendam, coram vobis venire,
and si huinsinodi securitatem inuenire recusauerint, tunc eos in prisonis
nostris, quousque eiusmodi securitate inuencrint, saluos custodiri faciendum.

Assignauimus etiam vos: and quoscunque vestru^, Iusticiarios nostros, ad
inquirendum per Sacramentum proborum and legalium hominum de comitatu praedicto
(per quosrei veritas melius sciri poterit)de omnimodis felonys,
transgressionibus, forstallarys, regratays, and extortionibus in comitatu
praedicto per quoscunque and qualitercunque. factis sieve perpetratis, and quae
ex nunc ibidem fieri vel attemptari contigerit: Et etiam de omnibus illis, qui
in conuenticulis contra pacem nostram, and in perturbationem populi nostri, seu
vi armata ierunt, vel equitaueru^t, seu ex modo irevel equitare presumpserint:
Et etiam de bys qui ad gentem nostram Mayhemandam, velinterficiendam in insidys
iacuerunt, seu ex modo iacere presumpserint. Et etiam de omnibus illis, qui
capitys, and alys liberatis de vnica secta, per confoederatione and pro
manutenentiae, contra prohibitionem ac formam ordinationum and Statutorum
praedictorum inde ante haec tempora factorum, vsifuerint, and alys huiusmodi
liberatis imposterum vtentibus. Et etiam de hostellarys, and alys, qui in abusu
mensurarum and ponderum, ac in venditione victualium, ac etiam de quibuscunque,
operarys, mendicantibus, artificibus, seruitoribus, hostellarys, and
vagabundis, ac alys qui contra formam ordinationum and Statutorum praedictorum
(pro communi vtilitate regni nostri Angliae, and populi nostri eiusdem, de
huiusmodivenatoribus, operarys, artificibus, seruiteribus, hostellarys,
mendicantibus and vagabundis, ac alys inde factoru^)deliquerint, vel
attemtauerint in comitatu praedicto, seu extunc delinquere, vel attemptare
praesumpserint. 2. Clause
Ac etiam de quibuscunque vicecomitibus, maioribus, Balliuis, Senescallis,
Constakularys, ac custodibus Gaolorum qui (in executione officiorum suorum,
erga huiusmodi artifices, seruitores, laboratores, mendicantes, and vagabundos,
acalios praedictorum, iuxta formam or dinationum and Statutorum pradictorum,
faciendorum) indebite se habuerint, and ex nunc indebite se habere
praesumpserint, aut tepidi, remissi, vel negligentes fuerint, aut ex nunc
tepidos, remissos, vel negligentes fore contigerit: Et de omnibus and singulis
suis Articulis and circumstantys, ac alys praemissis] (contra formam,
ordinationum and Statutorum praedictorum, per quoscunque and qualitercunque
factis, sieve perpetratis, and qua ex nunc ibidem fier^ vel attemptari
contigerit) qualitercunque concernentibus plentius veritatem. Et ad
indictamenta quaecunque (tam coram vobis, seu aliquibus vestrum, aut alys nuper
custodibus pacis and Iusticearys domini Edwardi quarti, and Edwardi quinti
super Reg: Anglia, ac R. 3. nuper (de facto, and non de iure) Regis Anglias,
Necnon domini Henrici nuper Regis Angl. 7. Henrici octaui, Edwardi sexti, and
Maria etc. ad huiusmodi felonias, transgressions, and malefacta in commit at a
praedicto aisdienda and terminanda assignatis, virtute diuersarum literarum
corundem, Edwardi, Edwardi, Richardi, Henrici, Henrici, Edwardi, Maria, vobis
aut alys factarum, facta and nondum terminatae, qua^ coram vobis and sotys
vestris nu^c custodibus pacis nostre, and Iusticiarys nostris huiusmodi virtute
literarum nostrarum facta and nondum termenata) Inspicienda, ac ad procedendu^
inde, as processus (versus omnes alios, quos coram vobis seu aliquibus vestrum
indictari contigerit, quovsque capiantur, reddantur, sew vtlagentur)faciendos
and continuandos.

Assignauimus etiam vos.79.78.77.andC. quatuor, tres, and duos vestrum (quorum
aliquem vestrum, vos, A. B. C. D. etc. vnum esse volumus) Iusticiarios nostros,
ad felonias praedictas, acea omnia and singula quae per huiusmodi Hostellarios
and alios, qui in abusu mensurarum and ponderum, ac in venditione victualium,
and omnia alia quae per huiusmodi operarios, artifices, seruitores,
laboratores, mendicantes, and vagabundos, qui contra formam ordinationum and
Statutorum praedictorum, seu in eneruationem coru^dem, in aliquopraesumpta, vel
attemptata fuerint, vel attemptari contigerint: 3. Clause
Ac extortiones and regratarias praedictas, tam ad secta^ nostram, quam aliorum
quorumcunque (coram vobis, pronobis, aut pro seipsis) conqueri, aut persequi
volentium, audiendam and terminandum: Necnon transgressiones, and forstallarias
praedictas, ac omnia alia (superius non declarata) ad determinanda ad sectam
nostram tantum: Et omnia alia (quae virtute ordinationum and Statutorum
praedictorum per custodes pacis nostrae and Iusticiarios nostros huiusmodi
discuti and terminari debent)audienda and terminanda: Et ad eosdem operarios,
artifices, and seruitores, per fines, redemptiones, and amerciamenta, ac alio
modo, pro delictis suis, prout (ante ordinationem de punitione corporali
huiusmodi operarys, artificibus, and seruitoribus, pro delictis suis exhibenda)
factum fieri consueuit: Nec non eosdem vicecomites, maiores, Balliuos,
Seneschallos, constabularios, ac custodes Gaolarum, venatores, vitellarios,
Hostellari^s, mendicantes, and vagabundos, super his (quae contra formam
ordinationum and Statutorum praedictorum attemptata fuerint, vel attemptari
contigerint) castigandos and puniendos, secundum legem and consuetudinem
praedictas, ac formam ordinationu^ Statutoru^ praedictorum.

Prouiso semper, quod si casus difficultatis super determinatione extortionum
hu^smodi coram vobis venire contigerit, ^^nc ad Iudicium inde reddendum (nisi
in praesentia vnius Iusticiarioru^ nostrorum, de vno vel de altero Banco, aut
Iusticiariorum nostrorum ad Assis as in comitatu praedicto capiendas
assignatorum) coram vobis minime procedatur. The charge to the Justices.
Et ideo vobis, et cuilibet vestru^ mandamus, quod circa custodiam pacis
ordinationum, and Statutorum praedictoru^, diligenter intendatis, Et ad certos
dies and loca (quos vos, seu aliqui vestrum, ad hoc prouideritis) diligenter
super praemissa faciatis inquisitiones. Et praemissa omnia and singula audiatis
and terminetis, ac ea faciatis and expleatis in forma praedicta, facturi inde
quod ad iustitiam pertinet secundum legem and consuetudinem regni nostri
Angliae: Saluis nobis amerciametis, and alys, ad nos inde spectantius.

Mandauimus enim vicecomiti nostro Kanciae, quod ad certos dies and loca (quos
vos, seu aliqui vestrum, ei scire faciatis) venire faciat coram vobis, seu
aliquibus vestrum, tot and tales probos and legales homines de Balliua sua, tam
infra libertates, quam extra, per quos rei veritas in praemissis melius sciri
poterit, and inquiri. To the Shirife.


Et vos prarfati Thom Wotton, ad dies and locae praedicta, breuia, praeceptae,
processus, and indictamenta praedicta, coram vobis and dictis socys vestris,
venire faciatis, and ea inspiciatis, and debito fine terminetis, sicut
praedictum est. In cuius rei testimonium etc. Datum. 6. die Aug. Anno
regninostri.21. To the Custos Rotulourn.


Certain observations, concerning the matter and form of the Commission of
the Peace.
CAP. IX.
Master Fitzherberte, in his treatise of Justices of te Peace, (Fo. 11. b.)
seems to be of the opinion, that this form of Commission was devised, when
Justices Of the peace were first ordained: But (saving the reverence due to so
learned a Judge) I suspect that the matter is mistaken by him. For, besides
that the Commission it self does rehearse certain Statutes made in the times
of King Henry the fourth, and of King Henry the fifth (many years after that
Justices of the peace were created) It is the agreeing opinion of all the
Justices (2 R. 3.9.) ye Justices of the peace had no power at ye first but only
ad Conseruanda^ pace^ Regis, and that afterward when they had power given the^
over Felons, it was not enough for them to say (in their Certificate of an
Enditemente of Felony) that it was found, Coram Iusticiarijs Domini Regis, ad
pacem in comitatu praedicto conseruandam, but that they must add withal,
Necnon ad diuersas felontas etc. and that otherwise their Certificat was of no
value. And as it is evident, that (34 E. 3 ca. 1.) was the first Statute that
gave to them that power to hear and determine felonies and trespasses: So
there is a Precedent to be seen (35 E. 3. in dorso patent. part. 2.) whereby
it appears that the form of their Commission was then enlarged accordingly.
Alterations from time to time, of the Commission of the Peace.


After that time also, it is apparaunte, that sundry things were by express
commandment of diverse Statutes put into their Commission, of which sort
be these, the Statute (36. E. 3. ca. 12.) by which there ought to be mention
in the Commission, of the times of holding the Sessions of the Peace, although
the same were afterward pretermitted, because 2. H. 5. ca. 4. did alter those
times in apointing of others: the Act (42. E. 3. ca. 6.) by which, authority
over Laborers was given unto them, and willed to be put into their
Commission: The Statute (5. H. 4. ca 3.) whereby it was commanded, that
mention of Winchester, (concerning watch) should be added so their Commission:
and the Statute (3. H. 5. ca. 7.) which took order that Justices of Peace
should have power by the Kings Commission to enquire of the counterfaiting and
other falsifying of money.

Besides all which, it is very probable and likely, that the mention of
Weightes and Measures, of Vagaboundes of Liueries, and of some other things,
was first put into the Commission, after the making of these Statutes (34. E.
3. ca. 5. and.6. 7. R. 2. ca. 5:17. R. 2. ca. 4:2. H. 4. ca. 21.) and some
others, which did first give power to the Wardeins and Justices of the Peace,
to deal with those and some other matters. So far of is it, that this
Commission has from the beginning retained one constant tenor and form.

Yea, as I am verelie persuaded, that the form of this Commission has veried
with the time, and received sundry accessions: so I trust hereafter to make it
plain, that it were convenient to reform it now also for diverse imperfections
that do yet remain in it: even as in our memory, the Statute of Lollards,
which was thrust into the Commission by 2. H. 5. ca. 7 and was (in Master
Fitz. own days) usually read in it, is now upon just reason, as a thing
sauouring of the pumpe (the Pope I would say) thrown clean out of the book.

But first, let me break it (as it is) into parts, and leave with you a few
notes upon the same.

The whole substance of this Commission, The parts of the Commission.
is comprehended within these few terms: 1 The Salutation of the Prince, 2
The power of the Justices: and 3 The Charge from the Prince, to
them, and others.

The Salutation of the Prince expresses the names of the Justices, 1. The
Salutation.
and has nothing else in it that needs light.

Then follows the Power of the Justices, 2. The power of the Justices.
which is comprehended in three clauses, whereof the first begins thus:

Sciatis quod assignauimus vos, contunctim, and diuisim, ad pacem etc.
custodienda, and custodiri facienda:

The second begins in these words: Assignauimus etiam vos, and quoscunque
vestrum, Iusticiarios nostros: ad inquirendum etc.

The last begins likewise: Assignauimus etiam vos, and duos vestrum, quorum
etc. vnum essevolumus, ad felonias etc. audienda and terminanda.

The first Clause (or Assignauimus) gives power to all, to many, or any one of
them, First clause, or Assignauimus.
(for so Master Fitzherb. understands the words, coniunctim and diuisim) to
keep, and cause to be kept, the Peace, and especially to keep these Statutes
made for the maintenance of the same, that is to say, first the Statute of
Winchester, 13 E. 1. The the Statute of Northampton. 2. E. 3. ca. 3. And the
Statute of Westminster. 5. E. 3 ca. 14. which does concern the Peace, and
not (as Master Fitzh. will have it) the Statutes of Westminster, the first
second, or third, which as they have almost nothing concerning the matter of
Peace, (that of W. 1. ca. 9. only excepted) so to go from the Statute of
Northa^pton to them, were to ascend, contrary to the course of the Commission,
which descends by degrees of age and time, from elder to latter laws and
Statutes: and for my Warrant herein, I vouche the Record (20. E. 3 in dorso
patent. part. 2. membrana. 7.) where in a Commission of the Peace to Adam of
Scarborowe, and others, they are charged to put in execution the Statutes, of
Winchester, Northampton. and Westminster, made the fifth year of that King.
After this, the Statute of Cambridge, which word in deed (as Master Fitzh.
thinks) is mistaken for Canterbury, and was made there. 12. R. 2. ca.
7.8.and.10 concerning Artuficers, Laborers, Servants, and Vagaboundes:for of
Hunters it has no word, whatsoever the Commission say of Venatoribus, which
should be Viatoribus as I think:the Statute (1. H. 4. ca. 7:and 2. H. 4. ca.
21) of Liueries and Badges: and the Statute (3. H. 5. ca. 6.and.7.) of
Counterfayting, Clipping, and Washing money.

The same Clause also gives them power to keep, and cause to be kept, al
other Statutes, made, pro bono pacis, and quieto regimine populi: by which
words, the Commission means (as I think) all Statutes for Armor, for that
tends to the keeping of the Peace, as the Statute of Winchester it self
confesses: All Statutes for arresting of Robbers, Murderers, Felons,
Royotters, and Suspected Persons; which are every where said to be against
the Peace: All Statutes concerning the duties of Shirifes, Bailifes,
Conestables etc. without which the Peace can not be kept, as the Statute of
Northampton (2. E. 3 ca. 4.) plainly affirms:and al Statutes made for the
repressing or punishment of Force, Violence, and Fighting.

This first Clause (or Assignauimus) is closed up with a declaration of the
mean, by which they shall cause the Peace and these Statutes to be kept:that
is to say, by chastising the offenders, either according to the orders of the
said Statutes, or by taking suertie of them for their keeping of the Peace, or
for their good abearing, or by imprisonment until they will be so bound.

But here, before I conclude this Clause, I must admonith the reader, that
these statutes of Laboure^s, Servants, Artificers, and Vagaboundes, be repealed
by new Acts of our time provided in that behalf, and that therefore they are
vainly rehearsed in the Commission at this day. Imperfections in the
Commission.
It seems also that the Statute. (3. H. 5. ca. 6.) for the washing, clipping,
and fyling of money, ought to have no place in the Commission of the Peace at
this day:for, those special Treasons be repealed by the general words of 1.
Mariae, and although the same offenses be made Treason again by 5. Eliza. ca.
11. yet that new Statute gives no power therein to the Justices of the Peace.
But yet, as concerning the counterfayting of false money, the Justices of Peace
have still in mine opinion power, to enquire by virtue of that Statute (3. H.
5. ca. 7.) and by this Commission, because that that Treason was declared by
the Statute. 25. E. 3. and therefore it is not now repealed by 1. Mariae, as
the others were.

And these (as also yt mistaking of Ca^bridge, for Caterburie and the inserting
of yt words (per quos rei veritas etc.) in this first clause without any sense,
and the still calling of the that be the Commissioners, custodes pacis according
to the old name, omitting through the whole course of the Co^missio^, to give
unto the once the name of Justices of the Peace, although in all Statutes
since 36. E. 3. they be so called) be some of the imperfections that I meant,
when I thought it meet to have the Commission reformed.

Neither may I well ouerpasse, that by these words (Et ad omnes illos quos
contra formam Statutorum proedictoru^ etc. delinquentes inueneritis, pun
iendos, prout secundum formam Statutorum proedictorum fueru faciendu^. etc.) in
this first Assignauimus, greater power seems to be given by the letter of the
Commission, than is meant by the Author of the Commission: for, by these words,
it seems that one Justice of the Peace may punish the Treason of
counterfaiting, which I think is more tha^ is thought meet to be put into
his ha^vs. And in the commissions next following the Statute it self of 3. H.
5. even for that reason was placed in the last Assignauimus of those
Commissions.

The second Clause (or Assignauimus) first enableth all, or any two, of these
Justices (for so M. Fitzh. takes the words, Vos, and quoscunque vestrum) to
enquire of al Felonies, and Trespasses, and of all offenses done against those
Statutes, that are contained within the same clause: and to enquire of all
Shirifes, and other inferior Officers, that be remiss in the execution of the
said laws and statutes committed to their charge. 2. Clause or Assignaui^^s.


Then it authorizeth them, or any two of them, to proceed, and to make
process upon al ancient and present Enditements. until the parties shall
either be take, or shall yield themselves, or be outlawed for their contumacie.
Here also, yt form of this Commission desires help, in that there is reference
made to those Statutes of Artificers, Laborers, and Vagabou^ds which be
repealed as I told you. And also metio^ made of Inditemets take to long ago, to
make any process out upon them at this day.

But for as much as it auailed little to the correction of offenders, to have
their faults brought to light by Inquiry, unless Judgment and Execution had
been also give and done upon the same with some convenient speed, therefore
the third Clause (or Assignauimus) in the Commission was added, which gives
power to the Justices of the Peace, or to two of them (whereof the one must be
one of the select number of them, now commonly called of the Quorum, because
the Co^missio^ in making yt choice begins with that word) to hear and
determine all the offenses comprehended within the same, and to chastise the
offenders according to the laws and customs of the Realm and according to the
Statutes in that behalf made and ordained. But yet so, that if any question
(or difficulty) do arise concerning Extortions, the they should not proceed
to Judgment thereupon, without the advice of one of the Justices, of the one
Bench, or of the other or (who be their Commune Oracle for answer in Law) of
the Justices of Ass^s^. By the equity of which Prouisoe, M. Fitzh. (Fo. 7.)
thinks, that they are likewise restrained in all cases of doubt whatsoever:
howbeit he grants, that if they do proceed of the selves, their Judgment
stands good, until it be reuersed by Error. 3. Clause, or Assignaui^^s.
Decision of difficulties, or questions, arising before Justices of the peace.
These of the Quorum, were wont not without just cause to be chosen, specially
for their learning in the laws of the Realm, and therefore there is no
separation metioned, til the Commission come to give the power to hear and
determine, in which part that kind of learning is most requisite and
serviceable. And this was the reason yt led the makers of ye Statuts. 18. E. 3.
ca. 2.34. E. 3. ca. 1. and13. R. 2. ca. 7 to cause it to be expressly enacted,
yt some learned in ye laws should be put into the Commission: and all Statutes,
that desire the presence of one of the Quorum, do secretly signify such a
learned man. But here again the Commission (chorda quae semper oberrat eadem)
does make much relation to the said Statutes that are not now at all.

The power given to these Justices has appeared. 3. The charge to them, the
Shirife, and Custos Rotulorum.
Now let us see the charge give to them and others. They therefore and every of
them be charged to be diligently intendant about the execution of the
premises, by these words, Et ideo vobis etc. but how negligentlie many of
them perform it, I am afraid it is too manifest, whylest ambitiouslie
seeking the name and power to rule, they take small care of doing their duetiful
service that belongs thereunto. In this clause is contained a saving unto the
prince of all amercements and other things that shall grow due unto her by
reason of their proceedings thereupon: of which I will speak somewhat
hereafter in place conuement.

The Shirife is said to have been charged aforehand to be attendant in the
Return of Iuries before them, in these words, Mandauimus enim Vicecomiti, etc.
And the Custos Rotulorum (for it is meant of him, although he be not so there
called) is charged to bring the Records and Process of the Peace, and in due
sort to consider and direct the same, by these words: Et vos praefatae Thom.
Wootton, etc. Of whose office and authority somewhat shall be said also in
particular in the second Book of this treatise.

Of the two Oaths ministered to the Justices of the Peace.
CHAP. X.
SVch as occupy Judicial places, ought to take heed what they do, knowing
(as Iehosaphat said) that they exercise not the judgments of Men only, but
of God himself, whose power, as they do participate: The causes why Justices
be sworn.
So he also is present on the Bench with them. And therefore, it has been
always the policy of Christian laws, to appoint meet forms of Religious
attestations (or Oaths) for such Officers to take: meaning thereby, not only
to set God continually before their eyes (whom by such Oath, they take to
witness of their promise, and call for reuege of their falsehood:) but also to
threate them (as it were) with temporal pains provided against corrupt
dealings, and withal, to strengthen their minds, and arm their courages,
against the force of human affections, which otherwise might allure and
draw them out of the way.

Upon this ground, the Statute (13. R. 2. Stat. 1. ca. 7.) which willed, that
Justices of the Peace should be made of new in all the Counties of England, did
there withal take order, that they should be sworn, to keep and put in
execution, all the Statues touching their office: which albeit that it be the
first Oath that I find to have been ministered to Justices of the Peace, yet I
think they were not unsworn before, nor at any time after, as may be collected
upon the books 21. E. 4.67. and 12. E. 4.18 and I believe also, that that
manner of Oath was devised but for that time only, and continued not long in
that form, as being of it self very general, and hard to be observed. And
that (happily) was the cause, that it appears to be changed to that form,
which M. Fitzh. in his Book has left us, and which (with the alteration of a
few words only) is yet at this day put in use.

For, upon the renewing of the Commission of the Peace (which now a days
happens as often as any person is newly brought into the same) there comes
of course a Writ of Dedimus potestatem, directed out of the Chauncerie to some
ancient Justice of the Peace, to take the Oath of him whose name is newly
inserted, and to certify the same into that Court at such day as the Writ
commands. This Writ is at this day accompanied with two Scedules, whereof
the one contains the Oath of the Office of a Justice of the Peace, in his
form:

Ye shall swear, that as Justice of the peace in the County of Kent, in all
Articles in the Queens Commission to you directed. ye shall do egall right to
the poor, and to the rich, after your cunning, wit, and power, and after the
laws and customs of the Realm, and Statutes thereof made: And ye shall not
be counsel with any quarrel hanging before you: And that ye hold your
Sessions after the form of Statutes thereof made: And the issues, fines, and
amercements, that shall happen to be made, and al forfaitures which shall fall
before you, ye shall cause to be entered without any co^cealement or
embeaseling, and truly send them to the Queens Escheaquer. Surcease, in the
printed Book.
Ye shall not Let for gift, or other cause, but well and truly ye shall do your
office of Justice of the Peace in that behalf, and that you take nothing for
your Office of Justice of the Peace to be done, but of the Queen, and fees
accustomed, and costs limited by the Statute: and ye shall not direct nor
cause to be direted, any warrante (by you to be made) to the parties, but
ye shall direct them to the Bayliffes of the said County, or other the
Queens officers or ministers, or other indifferent persons, to do execution
thereof: So help you God, and by the contents of this Book. And his Saints,
in the Printed Book.


The variance between this and that elder form stands (as you may see by
the Margent) in three points: whereof, twain be of no weight at all, but the
third did need amendment. For, right godly and well did those 32. persons (that
were put in trust to pen Ecclesiastical laws) purpose to make this law,
amongst others:

Legitimun autem iuramentum, is verbis, and nullis alys, suscipi volumus: Ita
me Deus, per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum adiu^et.

This Oath of the Office consists of sire Articles, which (for memories sake)
I have seen expressed in these 6. Verses following: Do equal right to rich and
poor, as wit and law extends:
Give none advise in any cause, that you before depends:
your sessions hold, as statutes bid: The forfeites that befall,
See entered well, and then estreate them to the Cheaquer all:
Receive no fee, but that is give by Queen, good use, or right:
Ne send precept to party self, but to indifferent wight. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6



The other Scedule comprehends that form of Oath, which (after the second
abolishment of the usurped authority of the Romish Pharao, by the joyous
entry of our gracious Queen Elizabeth) was in the first Parliament of her
reign (ca. 1) appointed for Justices of Peace (amongst others) to take,
before that they should exercise the office: and it has these words:

I William Lambarde, do utterly testify, and decleare in my conscience, that
the Queens Highness is the only superame Governor of this Realm, and of
all other her Highness Dominions and Countries, as well in all spiritual and
ecclesiastical things (or cause) as temporal, and that no foreign Prince,
Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has, or ought to have, any
iurisdictionm, power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority,
ecclesiastical or spiritual, within this realm: The Oath of Supremacy.
And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake al foreign jurisdiction,
powers, superiorities, and authorities, and do promise, that from henceforth
I shall bear faith and true alleageaunce to the Queens Highness, her heirs
and lawful successors, and (to my power) shall assist and defend all
jurisdiction, privilege, pre-eminence, and authority granted or belonging to
the Queens Highness, her heirs and successors, and united and annexed to the
Imperial Crown of the Realm: So help me God, etc.

There has been care taken, once, or twice (in our memory) to exact this
latter Oath of all the Justices of Peace throughout ye Realm, where of some
good has ensued: But yet many a Justice there is, that by indirect practice
never took, neither this, nor the former, whereof what harms do, and may
grow, I leave to wiser and higher men to be considered.

Of the power absolute, and limited, that the Justices of the Peace have.
CHAP. XI.
THe power of the Justice of Peace, is in some cases Limited, and (in other
some cases) Absolute: Discretion.
By which latter word, I do not mean absolute Simply, but after a Manner: For,
they may neither hang a man for a grievous Trespass, nor fine him for a Felony:
and therefore this absolute authority is to our Law better known by the name
of Discretion, because the Justice of Peace may exercise sometimes Legis
actionem and sometimes Iudicis officium, or (which is all one) Iudicium and
Decretum, as the case shall offer, and the law suffer him.

It is a good Counsel (which Aristotle gives in his Rhetorikes ad Theodectem
that in the making of laws, Quoad eius fieri possit, quam plurima legibus
ipsis definiantur, quam paucissimavero Iudicis arbitrio relinquantur: and the
Commission of the Peace (following that advise) does leave little (or nothing)
to the discreation of the Justices of the Peace, but binds them fast with
the chains of the Laws, customs, ordinances, and Statutes. Howbeit, our
latter laws of Parliament, although they also endeavor (for the most part) to
hold the same course, yet forasmuch as every considerable circumstance can
not be foreseen at the time of the making of the Law, they do many times
leave to be supplied by the discretion of the Executioner of the Law, that
thing which was not conveniently comprehended before hand, by the wisdom of
the maker of ye Law. And therefore, although Discretion be necessary in ye
execution of every law (be it never so certainly set forth, and bounded in it
self) yet (in the mouth and language of our Law) that only and properly is
said to be done by Discretion, which is not specially limited with all the
circumstances, but is indifferently referred to the consideration of the
Justice that is put in trust with it.

And truly it is to be wished, that Justices of the Peace would not by color
of this reference to their Discretion in some few cases arrogate unto
themselves authority to use their discretion, and to play (as it were) the
Chauncelours, in every cause that comes before them. For no way better shall
the Discretion of a Justice of the Peace appear, tha^ if he (remembering that
he is Lex loquens) do contain himself within the lists of law, and (being
soberly wise) do not use his own Discretion, but only where both the law
permits, and the present case requires it. Right well said Cicero: Est
sapientis Iudicis cogttare, tantum sibi esse permissum, quantum sit commissum
ac creditum.

Of the Jurisdiction, and Coertion, belonging to the Justices of Peace.
CHAP. XII.
AS Justice can not be administered without both a Declaration of the Law, and
an Execution of the same: So, to the end that our Justices of the Peace may be
able to deliver Justice, they are accomplished with double power, the one of
Jurisdiction, and the other of Coertion, the which other men do call
Vocationem and Praehensionem, that is to say, Authority, not only to convent
the persons, but also (after the cause heard and adjudged) to constrain them
to obey their order and decree.

This Jurisdiction of theirs is exercised, for the most part (if not
althogither) about those causes which be in a manner the same that the Civil
Lawyers do call, Iudicia publica, partly, because the Prince (who represents
the head of the common wealth) has interest in the most of them, as well as
that private person which is immediately offended, and partly, because they are
not commonly tried by such Action as other Civil and Private causes are, but
rather by Criminal and Public Accusation, Information, or Presentment.
Iurisdictio.


And herein the Justice of the Peace is by the one half superior to the
ancient Conseruatour of the Peace, who had only Coertion in a few cases, and
no Jurisdiction in any case that I remember.

But if the authority of these Justices should cease, when the fault is told,
heard, and adjudged, then should they be no better than half Justices: and
therefore the Law has also Cohertion, Execution, (or punishment) (as I said)
into their hands, least otherwise their judgments should be deluded for want
of power to bring the to effect.

This Punishment then, is an orderly execution of a lawful judgment, laid
upon an offendour, by the minister of the Law: and it is done for four
causes: first, for the amendment of the offender. Cohertior, or punishment,
for what causes it is appointed.
Secondly, for examples sake, that others may thereby be kept from offeding.
Thirdly for the maintenance of the authority and credit of the person that
is offended: and these three reasons be common to all such punishments. Seneca
rehearses the fourth final cause, that is to say, that (wicked men being take
away) the good may live in better security: and this pertains not to all,
but to Capital punishments only, as every man may at the first hearing
understand.

The Romans used specially, eight sorts of chastisements, known to them by
these names, Damnum, Vincula, Verbera, Talio, Ignominia, Exilium, Seruitus,
Mors, that is, loss of goods, imprisonment, stripes, retaliation, reproach,
banishment, servitude, and death: All which our law (before the Conquest) was
wont to inflict, albeit that now, Servitude, Retaliation, and Banishment, be
out of use.

The punishments that be commonly put in execution at this day, and wherewith
the Justices of the Peace have to do, may be dinided into Corporal and
Pecuniarie. The sorts of punishment.


Corporal punishment, is either Capital, or not Capital. Corporal.
Capital (or deadly) punishment, is done sundry ways, as by hanging,
burning, boiling, or pressing: not Capital, is of diverse sorts also, as
cutting off the hand or ear, burning (or marking) the hand or face, boaring
through the ear, whipping, imprisoning, stocking, setting on the Pillory, or
Cucking stool, which in old time was called the Tumbrell. Of this kind of
punishment, our old law (making precious estimation of the lives of men) had
more sorts than we now have, as pulling out the tongue for false rumors,
cutting off the nose for adultery, taking away the privy parts for
counterfaiting of money, etc.

Under the name of Pecuniarie punishment, I comprehend al Issues, Fines, a
merc^aments. and Forfetures of offices, goods, or lands. Pecuniarie.


And if the Justices of Peace may by virtue of their Commission deal with
such Conspiratours, as do confederate together, to cause any person unjustly
to be indicted of Felome, where of after ward he is acquitted as some do think
they may, the is there a special punishment in that case appointed by law,
which in 24. E. 3.73. is termed Vilanous, and may be well called Infamous,
because the judgment in such case shall he like unto the ancient judgment
in Attaint, as it is said 4. H. 5. Fitzh. I^famous.
Judgment 220. and is in 27. lib. Ass. P. 59. set down to be, that their
oaths shall not be of any credit after, nor lawful for them in person to
approach the Queens courts, and that their lands and goods be seized into the
Queens hands, their trees rooted up, and they imprisoned, etc. And at this day
ye punishment appointed for Perjury (having somewhat more in it than Corporal or
Pecuniarie pain) stretching to the discrediting of the testimony of the
offender for ever after, may be partaker of this name.

That Justices of the Peace, be Judges of Record.
CAP. XIII.
IT makes not a little, both for maintenance of the Peace, and for the credit
of the Justices thereof, that they are numbered amongst the Judges of Record.
for, on the one side evil doers will be afraid, when they shall see Memorialles
of their wickedness before their eyes, and on the other side, the proceedings
of those Justices shall be so much the more reverenced and set by, as it shall
appear that their endeavors are countenaunced with the favor of authority.
And therefore let us see what is meant by the word Record.

The Latin men use Recordor, when they will signify, to keep in mind, or to
remember, in which sense the Poet said, Sirite audita recordor:
Record what it is.


And after the same sense also does our Law use it. For, Records be nothing
else but Memorialles, or Monuments of things done before Judges that have
credit in that behalf. And therefore, where King E. I. does in the beginning
of the Book (called Britton) set forth the Judges of his Courts, he says of
some, that they shall have authority of Record, and of others, that they shall
bear Record, all which do mean but one thing, namely, that they shall be
trusted in the report of causes happening before the: and we yet say in common
speech, Such a man shall bear record of a thing, when we intend to say, that
he remembers it, and can bear witness of it. So that in the use of the word
there is (in manner) no difference, and therefore let us examine the matter.

One man may affirm a thing, and another may deny it, but if a Record once
say the word, no man shall be received to Auerre (or speak) against it. For
(says M. Bracton Fol. 156. writing of a special case where the Shirife in his
County has Record) If men should be admitted to deny the enrolled acts of
the Court, then would there never be any end of controversies. And therefore,
to avoid all contention that may arise, whilst one says one thing, and one
other says an other thing, the Law reposeth if self wholly and solely in the
report of the Judge: and hereof it comes, that he can not make any Substitute
or Deputy in his office (as M. Bracton and Britton both, do affirm) seeing
that he may not put over the confidence that is put in him.

This Record or Testimony, is first contained within the breast of the Judge
(as our Law speaks) and afterward committed to ye Rolls, which are therefore
figuratively called Records also. For you may see 7. H. 6.28. in Hildebrands
case, 19. H. 6.9. and elsewhere, that during all the time of that Term, in
which any thing passes before the Justices at Westminister, the Record thereof
is in Scrinio pectoris, in their own hearts, or breasts, so yt they may at
their own pleasure correct or amend it: But that after the Term ended, it is
only in their Rolls, over ye which they have no co^trolment. The Rolls be
Records.
And this agrees right well with that which Britton F. 01.3. affirms, saying
in the Kings person thus: And albeit that we have granted to our Justices to
bear Record of the pleas pleded before the, yet by this we will not that their
record shall be any wara^t in their own wrong, nor that they may raze or amed
their Roll, nor make Record against their enrolment.

Thus much generally of al Judges of Record. Now touching our Justice of ye
Peace, it is ye opinion of the Court (9 E. 43 and 14. H. 8.16.) and of diverse
other Books in our law, that every one of them by himself is a Judge of
Record. For (as you have heard) he is made by the great Scale a matter of
Record, and has Judicial power given unto him, even by the first
Assignauimus. of ye Commission. He has also a Scale of his Office, by the
opinion of Brudnell. 14. H. 8.16. and if he make any Warrant, although it be
beyond his authority, yet it is not disputable by a Conestable, or other
inferior Minister, but must be obeyed. And he may take a Recognisance for the
Peace, as appears 7. H. 4.34 and common experience tells it, which none ca^
do, but a Judge of Record, because the acknowledging of ye sum, is to remain
as a matter of Record. Yea by good opinion 2. H. 7.1. A Supersedeas of the
Peace made by one Justice of Peace, under his seal, being brought into the
Sessions, is a sufficient Record to prove that there is a Recognisance of
Peace taken by the same Justice, and warrant enough to call the party bound
thereuppon, and if he make default to Record the same. Moreover his Record or
testimony is made in some case of greater force and value than an Enditement
by the oath of twelve men, for his Record (as shall appear hereafter in place
convenient) shall conclude the party so, that he shall not be admitted to
Trauerse or gainsay it by 21. H. 6.5. F^zh. Fol. 18.6 and upon the statute 15.
R. 2. ca. 2.11. H. 7. ca. 15. and 33. H. 8. c. 6.

Great cause has the Justice of Peace therefore, to take ^iligente heed,
that he abuse not this credit, either to ye oppressing of any subject, by
making an untrue Record, or to the defrauding of the Prince, by suppressing
any true Record. Much more reason is there to hold, that two Justices of
peace, or more sirting in the execution of their authority in open Sessions
must needs be taken to be Judges of Record.

How long time the authority of the Commissioners of the Peace is to endure:
and by what means it may be suspended, or determined.
CHAP. XIIII.
WE have already touched, that the power of the Commissioners of the Peace, is
not perpetual, but now the place serves to handel it at full. The
Commissioners of the Peace, are to continue during only the pleasure of the
Prince, by whose pleasure they were at the first appointed: and therefore, by
the determination of that pleasure, their authority ceasseth also. Besides the
which, there are other means to determine their Actoritie, as namely the
Accession of an other office, the Presence of a higher power, and in some
special case the want of Adiournement of their Commission.

The pleasure of the Prince may be determined either by express word, or by
implication, or by death. By express word.


The Queens Majesty therefore, may discharge the Commissioners of the Peace
by her express Writ, under the great Seal. L. 5. E. 4.32. If she send a
Super sedeas to all the Commissioners of the Peace, that will suspende all their
authority. But yet so, as it may be revived by a Procedendo, and therefore it
does not utterly determine their authority, as may be gathered by 12. lib.
Ass Pl. 21.

Again, when the Queens Majesty makes other Commissioners of the same kind
within the same Limits, it is implied thereby, that the former Commissioners
shall have no longer power, although there be never a word spoken of the
discharge of the for the repugna^cie. By implycation of a new Commission.
3. Mar. Regi. Brook. Tit. Commssion. 24. But yet if there be Justice of the
Peace by Commission in a whole County, and afterward the Queen makes another
man Justice of the Peace, in one Town of the said County, only Chocke was
of opinion. General and proper Justices.
10. E. 4.7. that the power of the first Commissioners continued still in that
Town, because that is not altogether contrariant. And Judge Fineux held so
also (20. H. 7.8.) that if the Queen make a proper Justice of the Peace within
a special Liberty, yet may the general Justices of the Peace of ye Shire
meddle there also, unless there be words of Prohibition in the Patent as, quod
nulli alij Iusticiarij nostri se intromitta^t etc. If the ancient Commission of
the Peace were to four persons, and afterward the Queen should make one man a
full Justice of ye peace through yt same limit, during his life, then should
the hands of the fours Commissioners be closed, says Marrow.

And a new Commission pro hac vice ta^tum will determine the old: So also, a
new Co^missio^ to hear and determine Felonies, determines the old Commission
of the Peace concerning Felonies, but not concerning the Peace: And a new
Commission of the Peace, ad inquirendum tantum, is a determination of the old
Commission, ad audiendum and terminandum, by Mar.

But it is plain by ye preamble of ye statute 2. and. 3. Phil. and Mar. ca. 18
yt the law was take, yt if a Commission of ye Peace was first granted to
certain wtin a town, and after another Commission had bin granted to other
within the whole shire, that this had been a Supersedeas to the Commisioners
within the said town.

Nowbeit this determination of the old Commission (that we speak of) grows
not immediately by the making of a new Commission but either after ye reading
or proclayming of the new Commission at the Session of the Peace, or at the
full County, or else by holding of some Session by virtue of the new
Commission (in all which cases the old Commissioners must take notice of the new
Commission) or else after the giving of notice of the new Commission unto the
old Commissioners: for otherwise all the mean acts of the old Commissioners
be good in Law. Mar.and. 21. H. 6. 29. and. 34 lib. Assi. Pl. 28.

And for as much as some Cities and Corporate towns found the^ selves grieved
with ye Law standing, as has bin remebred, it was specially ordained by the
said Statute (2. and 3. Phi.and. Mar. ca. 18.) yt a Commission of the Peace and
Jail delivery made to a City or corporate town (not being a County by it
self) should not be determined by the making of such an other Commission after
to any of the Shire, Lath, Rape or Wapentake, in the which, that City or town
stands.

Finally, it is to be noted, yt in all cases where an ancient Commission of the
peace is determined by a new, yet no Process, or Suite (hanging before ye old
Commissioners) shall be discontinued thereby by the Statute. 11. H. 6. ca. 6
and. I. E. 6. ca. 7.

By ye death or demise of ye Prince also dies the power of all the
Commissioners of the Peace made by him: for he makes the Iusticiarios suos, so
that he being once dead, or having given over his Crown, they are no more his
Justices, and the Justices of the next Prince they shall not be, unless he will
make them his. 4. E. 4.44. and. 1. E. 5.1. By death.


If sseacute;emeth, that some took the Law to be, that if a Justice of the
Peace were created a Duke, Marquess, Earl, Vicount, or Baron, or elected an
Archbishop, or Bishop, or made a Knight, or Justice of any of the two Benches,
or Serieant at the law, that then his Office of the Peace was determined
thereby, because it could not be thought, that (his name being changed) he
should remain the same person: Accession of a new office or calling.
And so if he were made Shirife, that his Iusticeship ceased also, because (as
Marrow faith) he could not be both a Justice and an Officer to direct and
serve, his own Precepts: and so likewise was it thought of him, if he were
made a Coroner, but not so if he were made an Vndershirife. And therefore, for
the declaration of the Law in the most of these cases, it was enaded (1. E. 6.
ca. 7.) that if a Justice of the Peace were made Duke, Marquess, Earl.
Vicount, Baron, Archbishop, Bishop, Justice of ye one Benche or other, Knight,
Serieant at the Law, or Shirife, ye yet he should be Justice of ye Peace still:
But that act was afterward upon good reason controlled in part, and a new
law made (I. Mar. Parl. I. ca. 8.) by which it was ordered, that no man
should exercise the office of a Justice of the Peace, during only the time
that he is Shirife of the same County, wherein he is also Justice of the peace.

Furthermore, if the Justices in Eire (being of a higher power than Justices of
the Peace) do (after proclamation there of first made) come into any County
and sit there by virtue of their auctorities, then cease the authority of
the Commissioners of the Peace by Mar. By the presence of a higher power.
And he thinks so likewise if the kings bench bpo^ proclamation thereof made,
should remove into any County. But ask of this, for if it should be so, then
it may be some question also what is wrought by the coming of the Justices of
the Nis^prius into the Country, who do ordinarily bring Commission of Oyer,
and Determiner, and of Jail delivery with them.

Lastly, it Justices of the Peace, that have a Commission has vice tantum, do
sit by virtue of their Commission, and do not Adiourne the same, it seems
that their Commission is determined thereby, Brokke. Tit. Commission. 11. By
want of adjournement.


That all the autctoritie of the Justices of the Peace is exercised, eiy there
out of the Sessons, or at, (or by reason of) the Sessions, of the Peace. etc.
CAP. XV.
HItherto I have dilated that which lies in ye first part of the Definition of
the Justices of peace, I have withal given you a Theoricque (or Insight, its it
were) of their whole Office, in the wing what it is, when it began, how it is
endowed, by what means it is maintained, and after what fort it may be
determined. A sum of that which in said.


But now, for as much as all the power of the Justices of the Peace is directed
to that end which is disclosed in the latter part of the same Definition,
namelye, For the conservation of the Peace, and for the execution of their
Commission and of the Statutes committed to their charge, it is meet, that I
enter into the Practicque of their Ofsice and duty, and show you from point
to point how the fame is to be done and administered.

And for ye more lightsome proceeding herein, I will set swrth the power of the
Justices of the Peace by a Distribution though not Essential yet such as may
suffice to conueigh my whole meaning.

Whether therefore, the Justices of the Peace, do (by virtue of the
Commission, or Statutes) enquire, or Hear and Determine by the may of
I^^sdietion or else doc keep (or cause to be kept) the Peace or doc punish
and execute, by way of Coertion. And whether the same also be done, by their
Regular power, or Absolute authority: It is always pradised and done, either
out of the Sessions of the Peace, or else at (or by reason of) the Sessions of
the Peace. A partition of that which follows in both these books.


And that which is done out of the Sessions is either such as one Justice alone
may doc, or else it requires the help I presence of other Justices with him.
And therefore first of that which one Justice alone may do out of the
Sessions. The sum of that which is hereafter conteinedin this f^^st book.


Of Suertie of the Peace, and the Good Abearing: and ofsundrie things incident
unto the lame. And what one Justice of Peace out of the Ses sions may do therein.
CHAP. XVI.
FDr as much as the Conservation of the Peace stands, partlye in providing
that it be not broken, and partlye in punishing such as have already biolated
and broke it: and for that any one Justice of the Peace is susticiently armed
with audoritie (out of the Sessopms) to prevent the breach of the Pear, both
by taking Suertie for the keeping of it, and for the good behavior also of
offenders, I think good, first to shem what Suertie of the Peace is: then to
open how it may be commanded: after that to declare, how the same
commandment shall be executed I brought to effect: fourthly, to disclose what
shall become of the Suerty when it is taken: and lastly, to describe the Suerty
of the good behavior or good Abearing, I to confer the handling thereof with
that of the Peace. The parts of this Chapter.


The ancient Normans had a manner of Suertie of the Pear, which they named
Treues (the same that we call Truce) I which they bsed to give after this order.
He of whom it was demanded, did (in open Court) take hun by the hand, that
demanded it, I did withal solemnly swear, that neither he, nor any of his,
should do him harm. But or Bouernours, knowing that evil men be more
restrained by los se of goods, than by conscience of an oath, have dsed to take
sure bonds, and that to the Prince, for the security of such as be in fear.
And therefore, I will at this day call Suertie of y peace, An acknowledging of a
bond tothe Prince, taken by a Judge of Record, for the keeping of the Peace.
What suerty of the Peace, is.
And it is called Suertie of is the word Securitas, because the party that was
in sear, is thereby the more quiet and secure.

This Suertie may a Justice of the Peace command, either as a Minister when
he is willed to do it by a higher authority: or as a Judge when he does it of
his own power derived from his Commission He does it as a minister, when the
writ of Supplicauit, (which in old time was called breue de minis as
appears by ye Register) directed out of ye Chauncerie is delivered into his
hands: for then he only is to direct his Precept to come pel the party upon
that writ to find Suertie for the Peace. Suertie of Peace taken upon a
Sutplicauit by a Justice of the Peace Minister.
21. H. 7.20. Fineux.

The form of which Precept (or warrant) may be thus, in English:
GEORGE MVLTON, one of the Justices of the Peace of out Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty within the County of Kent, To the Shirife of the said Shire,
the Conestables of the hundred of Wroteham, the Borsholder of the Town of
Ightham, and to al and singular the Queens Majesty's Bailies, and other
ministers, as well within liberties as without, in the said Cou^tie, and to
every of them greeting. Know ye that I have received the commandment of our
said Sovereign Lady in these words ( reciting the whole Writ of
Supplicauit, which is not always of one form, because it is sometimes directed
to all the Justices of the Peace, sometimes to them and the Shirife, and
sometimes to one Justice alone) or reciting only the effect of the
Supplicautt, thus:

Know ye, that I have received the commandment of our said Sovereign
Lady, to compel. A. B. of Ightham, in the said County yeoman, to find
sufficient suerty for her Majesty's Peace by him to be kept toward C. D. of
the ssayde Town of Ightham Tailor. And therefore on the behalf of our said
sovereign Lady, I command and charge you jointly and severally, that
immediately upon the receipte here of you cause the said A. B. to come before
me, at Ightham aforesaid, to find sufficient suerty and mainprise for the
Peace to be kept, toward our fayde Sovereign Lady, and al her liege people,
and specially toward the said C. D. And if he the said AB. shall refuse thus
to do, that then you him safely convey, or causc to be safely conveyed, to the
next Jail of her Majesty in the said County, there to remain until that he
shall willingly do the same. So that he may be before the Justices of the
Peace of our said soueraign Lady within the said Coa^ty at the next general
Sessio^s of the Peace to be holdon at M. there to aunsweare to our said
Sovereign Lady for his contempt in this behalf. And see that you certific
your doing in the premises, to the said Justices at the said Sessions, bringing
this thither this Precept with you Yeoue at Ightham aforesaid, under my Seal
the fourth day of Augustein the 33. Year.etc.

Suertie of the Peace, taken by a Justice of the Peace 23
A Justice of the Peace may also by bertue of his Office and as he is a Judge,
commands this Suertie to be found, and that either of his own motion and
disreation, or else at the request and prayer of an other.

For he may cause a Commune Barrettour, Ryotter one that makes an Affray, or
other person to him Suspected, to find Sucrtie of the Peace ^ E. 4.3. Curia
And if he see men contending in hot words, and threatening the one to
hurt (or kill) the other, he may of Disereation and ought of Duty (as I
think) to command them to find Suerty of the Peace, and thereby provide for
their mutual fafetie. By his own discreation.
For as he is put in trust with the care of the Peace: so ought he both to
employ his wit, and to use his authority, to preunt the Breach of the
ssame. And if a man that was bound to keep the Peace, have broken his bound,
the Justice of Peace ought of Discreation to bind him of nelne. 21 E. 4. 40.
and Marrow.

And his authority is so little to be controlled in this matter, that,
Master Marrow is of the opinion, that if a Justice of the Peace shoud procure
one man to demand Suerty of the Peace against an other, and he hum self
should grant a Warrant for it, by which the party is arrested, yet no
Action would lie against that Justice for so doing: because he might have
granted it without any demand made: and then it shall not be said but
that he saw cause to provoke the party to ask it and himself to grant it.

I doc on on the other fide remember, that a Justice of the Peace, was put
out of the Commission of the Peace by order in the Star Chamber, for that
Peace offered unto him by one that was commanded (by an other Justice of the
Peace in the same Share) to find Suertie of the Peace, to whom (as the ^artie
alleged) he durst^ not go to offer it, for fear that he would execute upon
him the malice that he bare against him.

In commanding this Suertye, at the suite of an other, or of his own
discreation, sundry things are wisely to be considered, first, for whom, and
against whom, then for what cause and how it ought to be required or commanded,
and lastly by what means it shall be enjoined. Suertie, at the request of an
other.


The wife, if the be thretned to be killed, or to be outragiously chastised, by
her husband, may with g^d reason demand the Peace against him. For whom, and
against whom, ^^cr^^e of the Peace lies.
Fitz. Not. Br. Fo. 80. and. 239. And I do not doubt but a Justice map in such
a case co^maunder it upon his own discreation.

The husband also may demand the Peace against his own wife in such a
case: and any man may demand it against the wife of an other. Mar.

A man attainted of Treason. Or Felony, or conuicte of Heresy, or Abiured, a
Dumb man, or an Infant, (though within 14 years of age) or a Villain against
his Lord, may demand and ought to have, Suertie of the Peace, Mar. And I do
not find any strong reason why the Lord against his dillaine, or an other man
against a dumb man or against an infant above the age of 14 years, ought not
upon good cause to have it, though the two last can not well be bound
themselves. But a mad man shall not have Suertie of the Peace, at his own
request ( as Master Marrow thought) because he has no discretion to ask it:
and therefore (if there be rause) he ought to be provided for by the
discreation of the Justice, as I think.

A man attainted in a Praemunire, or that is an A^ren borne, and no Denizein,
ought not to have this Suertie at his desire, as M. Marrow takes it: But
perhaps he would have changed his opinion, in the case of Praemunire, if he
had lived at this time, upon the Statute ^. Elrzab ^ ^ for, such a man may not
now be killed, as though he were out of the protection of the (...): And as
touching the A^^e^, some think there ought to be a difference between such an
A^ren, as is of the En^^^^ of the Qu^^^ and him that is of her Amity: for the
Statutes ( Mag. Cart. ca. 30.9. E. 3 ca. I 4. E.^ S^^^. ca ^. and sundry
others) do all use that difference in Merchant strangers, and do provide,
that such of the as be not Enrmies, of the Realm, may both safely come into the
Realm, and farry here, and go hence, at their pleasures.

But the case may well be doubted of, because the Commission it self seems to
authorize the Justice of Peace, no further tha^ to provide for the Dueenes
people, of which number no A^^en seems to be. But may any Ahen may not be
bound to the Peace, I do not for.

Furthermore, one Justice of the Peace, (faith ^^. Mar. ow) may grant this
Suert^e to any man, against one of his fellow Justices. But, as M. Marrcw
requires a Discretion in a (...) of the Peace, when Suertie is craved of him
against a Shirife, Coroner, Escheator, or such other Officer, (whom he witheth
not to be bound to keep the Peace versus cunctum populum, but only toward
him that prays it, least otherwise it should argue the to be unworthie of such
Offices:) so much more he ought to use good discreation, in granting it
against his fellow Justice, least otherwise he both bring the Office in
contempt, and himself to reproof by it. But I doubt not, but that one Justice
of Peace (if he will) may pray surety of the Peace at the hands of his fellow
Justice against an other person, and the recognisance may then be according to
the common form, with an and praecipue versus, etc.

Neitherto of those, for whom, and against whom the Justice of Peace may grant
this Surety when it shall be required, which will suffice to give light what to
do in like cases. Surety of the Peace against a Lord
But some others there be perhaps with whom he may not well meddle. As if any man
have cause to require ye peace against a Lord, he for so small a cause is not
to be arrested (as I take it) by warrant from a Justice, nor yet by a
Supplicauit out of the Chauncerie.) But the Lord Chauncelor may in such case
grant to the party a Subpoena against that Lord for it, as it seems by 35.
H 6. Fitz. Tit. Subpoena. 20. For such an opinion the law has had of the
peaceable disposition of Noble men, that it has been thought enough, to take
one of their promises upon Ho no^ that he would not break the Peace against a
man. If we may believe the report of M. Brook T^^. Contempts. 6. to be true.

The cause for which this Surety of the peace may be required or commanded,
appears in the first Assig^^^^ of the Commission of the Peace, in these
words, Et ad omnes ^lios qui aliquibus de populo nostro, (de cor poribus suis
vel de incendio domorum suaru^) minas fecerint, ad sufficient securitate de
pace etc. inueniendam, etc. which M Fitz. so. 8. construeth thus. For what
causes Surety of the Peace may be required.
He that is the thretned, that he shall be hurt in his body, or that his house
or goods shall be brent, may demand Surety of the peace for his safeguard in
that behalf. But (faith the court 17. E. 4. 4) if a man will demand the Peace,
because he is in fear that an other man will take and imprison him, it ought
not to be granted: and one yields the reason to be, because he may have a
Writ de homine replegiando, or an Action of false imprisomnent, and may
thereby recover the damages of his imprisonment.

The same reason might be made against the demand of the Peace, where a man is
threatened with Battery, and yet it is clear, that in such a case the Surety
of Peace ought not to be denied him: and truly to threaten imprisonment, is
within the words Minas de corporibus, no less than Battery it self, and like
harm may happen by hard imprisonment, and cruel beating. It shall be good
therefore to enquire of this matter.

The Peace being thus for good cause required, it is the common manner to
cracte an Dathe of the party, whereby the Justice may be the better informed
and induced to think, that the party does not ask it for malicious veration
of an other, but of very fear, and for the needful safety of himself and
his. How Surety of the peace is to be required By Oathe.
And M. Fitzh. (in his Not. Bre. Fol. 79) labors to show, that the Justices
of the Peace ought not (without such an Dathe) to grant this Surety of the
Peace at any man's suit. Forasmuch as not only the Judges of the Kings Bench do
yet take an oath in such cases, but the ancient course of the Law was such in
the Chauncerie it self also, although it be now adays otherwise used there.
And that a Justice in this case may the better Judges of this Fear, let him
hearken what M. Bracton Fol. 16. says: Me^us est (says he) praesentis, vel
futuripericuli causa mentis trepidatio, talis enim debet esse metus, qui in se
contineat mortis periculum, vel corporis cruciatum. And therefore, if a Justice
of the Peace, do pereceiue, that the peace is demanded against such a person,
as for his impotencie is not like to break the Peace, he may safely deny it,
says M. Marrow: But, Satius est peccare in alteram partem as I suppose, leaft
(if he be stain that demanded it) the Justice be worthily blamed, for that
he provided not for his life and safety. And besides, the common form of the
Recognisance, is to bind a man from procuring hurt, which any impotent man is
able to do.

It rests, that I show, by what mean this Surety may be enjoined: and that
is, either by Word, or by Writing under Seal. By what means Surety of the
Peace, shall be enjoined By Word.
For a Justice of the Peace, may by word only command a man (being in his
presence) to find Surety of the Peace. 9. E. 4. 3. for, seeing that he is a
Judge of Record (says M. Fitzh. Fol. 8.) his Precept by mouth is stronger than
his Precept in Writing.

So if the Peace be demanded against one that is in his presence, he may
command the ^wor^fe, or other known Officer, or his own servant (if they be
then present also) to arrest the party to find this Surety 14. H. 7. 8. and
Mar. But, if ^yther the Officer, Servant or Party be absent, then it is
requisite to make a Warrant (or Precept) in writing: The form whereof may be
thus in English: for I see no cause yet why it should be directed in Latin to
a Conestable or Bortholder, that (by all presu^ption) understands no Latin.
By writing, or a Precept for the Peace


Elizabeth by the grace of God etc.
Kane.
TO our Shirife of Kent, the Conestables of the Hundred of Wroteham, the
Borsholder of the Town of Ightham, and to al and singular our Bayliffes, and
other our Ministers in the said Country, as well within liberties as without,
greeting.
Forasmuch as A. B. of Ightham aforesaid, Yeoman, has personally come before
G. Multon of the said town Esquire, one of our Justices of the Peace within the
said County, and has taken a corporal Oath, that he is afraid, that one C.
D. of Shipborne, in the said County Yeoman, will beat, wound, mayheme, or
kill him, or burn his houses, and has therewithal prayed surety of the
Peace against the said C. D. All, or any one of these causes may Suffice.
Therefore we command and charge you iontly and severally, that immediately
upon the receipt hereof, you cause the say de C. D. to come before the said G.
M. or some other of our said Justices, to find sufficient surety and
mainprise for our Peace, to be kept toward us, and all our liege people, and
chiefly toward the said A. B. that is to say, that he the said C. D. shall not
do, nor by any means procure or cause to be done, any of the said euilles,
to any of our said people, and especially to the said A. B. And if he the said
C. D. shall refuse thus to do, that then you him safetly convey, or cause to
be safel County, there to remain vuntill he sfely conveyed, to our next
prison in the shall willingly do the same: So that he may be before our said
Justices, at the next general Sessions of the Peace to be holden at M. in the
said Country, then and there ready to answer unto us, for his contempt in
this behalf. And see, that you certify your doing in the premises to our
said Justices at the said Sessions, bringing then thither this Precept with
you.

Witness the said G. M. at Ightham aforesaid, the 4. day of August, in the
xxiij. year of our reign.
Or thus, in the name of the Justice himself, mutatis mutandis.
GEORGE MVLTON Esquire, one of the Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lady
the Queen, within the said Country,
to the Shirife etc. greeting.
Forasmuch as A. B. etc. has personally come before me, etc. These shall be
therefore, on the behalf, and in the name of our said sovereign Lady, to
command you jointly, etc. to come before me, or one other of her Majesty's
said Justices of the Peace in the said County, etc.

Given under my Seal, at Ightham aforesaid, etc.
It is meet, that the precept for the peace, do expressly contain the cause of
the Peace, within it: for otherwise, how can the Officer or Party, take
knowledge, that Surety, must be provided for it: Yea (by the way let me say
it) every Precept (made by a Justice of the Peace) ought to comprehend the
special matter upon which it proceeds, even as all the Queens Writtes do
bear their proper cause in their mouth with them.

And, as for the Form that is now commonly used (To aunsweare to such things
as shall be objected) it was not fetched out of the old and learned
Precedents, but lately brought in by such as either knew not, or cared not,
what they writ.

The Warrant of the Peace is the better also, if it bear Date of the place
where it was made: for if a man be to plead such a Precepte for his excuse in
an Action of false imprisonment brought against him, he ought (in his Plea)
to show the place where the Warrant was made. 14. H. 8.18.

And this Precept may also be directed to any indifferent person, by name,
though he be no Officer at all: for so it seems to be permitted in the Oath
of the Justices of the Peace, and so is the Book also 14. H. 8.^8.

The commanding of Surety of the Peace has thus appeared: and now the
execution, and bringing of that commandment to effect, must next be disclosed.
How the commandment of the Peace shall be executed.


The execution of this Precept stands, partly in serving the Precept it
self: and partly in taking the Recognisaunce, if the party do come with
Sureties, and that there be no let in the way.

And because (for the most part) there is but one and the same manner of
doing, whether the Precept come from the Justice of the Peace, as he is a
Minister or as he is a Judge, I also will handle them together, noting, by the
may, those few differences that shall arise between them.

If such a Precept be made jointly to twain, yet the one alone may serve it:
If it be directed to the Shirife, he may command his Baylife, Vndershirife, or
other (sworn and known) Officer, to serve it, without writing any Precept.
The serving of the Precept for the peace.
But if he will command another man (that is no such Officer) to serve it, he
must give him a writ Precept, for other wise a Wnt of false imprisonment will
lie for the Arrest But if it be directed to the Baylife, or to a servant of a
Justice of ye peace, or other stranger, they must serve it themselves, for
they can command none other to do it, neither by word nor Precept. Mar.

A sworn and known Officer needs not to show this Warrant, when he does serve
if upon a man 8. E. 4.14: and 20. H. 7.13. etc for his Office does after a sort
auctorize him. But if the Justice will set his serua^ to serve it, ye servant
must show the Warrant (if ye party demand it) and otherwise the party may
make resistaunce, 8. E. 4.14. A Justice of the Peace (says M. Brook Titulo
Peace. 9.) may make this Warrant returnable before himself, and the Baylife
needs not to carry ye party before any other Justice. But Judge Fineux (21.
H. 7.20) says, ye if a Justice of the Peace do make a Warrant of ye Peace Ex
officio, (yt is, without any Writ of Supplicauit directed unto him) the^ the
party may choose to appear before him, or any other Justice in the Shire, and
that he shall punish the Baylife in false imprisonment, if he do otherwise
compel him: But that other wise it is in the execution of the Writ of
Supplicauit: for he, to whose hands it is first delivered, is aucthorized to
execute and return the Writ alone. And thereupon M. Fitz. (in his Not. br. Fo.
81.) affirms, that if such a Writ of Supplicauit be delivered to ye shirife,
the he may both execute it alone, and also take Suertie by Recognusance (though
otherwise, being but a Conseruator he could not do it) because the Writ does
enable him so to do: yet ye opinion of Littleton, 9. E. 4.31. is to ye contrary
of that.

The officer ought also to require the party to come and find Suertie of the
Peace before that he do arrest him, by the opinion 5. E. 4.13. And in truth,
the common form of the Precept is, And if he refuse so to do, that then he
shall convey him to the Jail: and therefore, if he will willingly come and find
Suertie, the Officer may neither absolutely arrest him, nor take fee of him.

And this may be the cause, that when one upon such Warrant comes to a
Justice of the Peace to find such Suertie, the Justice needs not again to
demand suertie of him, but may commit him, if he do not offer Suertie as the
opinion is. 14. H. 7.9.

If a Baylife do arrest a man for the peace, before that he have any Warrant,
and then after ward do procure a Warrant for it, this is valawfully done, and
will not excuse him in an Action of false imprisonment, ibide^^. But if the
Baylife do cause one by force of a Warrant, to come and find Surety of the
Peace, and when the party comes, the Justice will no bind him, yet the
Baylife is excused.21. H. 7.22.

If Surety of the Peace be required at the hands of a Justice of the Peace
(that dwells out of the County) against a man within the County, the
Justice may grant a Precept to be served in the County, but when the party
shall be thereupon warned and commanded to find Surety the Officer may not
have him out of the County to the Justice of Peace that made the Warrant,
Mar. For, a Justice of ye Peace has no autozitie, but in the County where he
is Justice by 13. E. 4.8. and Coment. Plowd. 37 and therefore it may be doubted
also whether such a Warrant be good, or no. The Case was there, that a Justice
of Peace in one County pursued a Felon, and took him in an other County,
whereupon it was holden, that he ought to be committed to the Jail of the
County wherein he was taken, and not of the County, wherein he which took him
was a Justice, for that, he (being out of his county had no more authority,
than a private man. But I think tha Baylife may not dispute the sufficiency
or insufficiency of such a Warrant, because he that awardeth it is a Judge of
Record 14. H. 8.18.

That which has been hitherto said is of the execution of the foriner part
of the Warrant for the Peace, that is so say, to warn and cause the party to
come and find Surety for the Peace. But if it falout, that he refuse to come
and put in such Surety then may the Officer, by virtue of his Warrant convey
him to prison. For (if you remember) the ^^^rdes are, And if he shall refuse,
then, etc. And now for our better instruction, let us see what an Arrest is.

Budee in his Greek Commetaries, is of the opinion, that the Freeh word
(Arrest) which with them signifies a Decree, or Judgment of Court, took
beginning of the Greek (...) that is, placitum and (as we might say) the
Pleasure (or will) of a Court. What ^^ Arrest i^.


And albeit that it were not out of our^ way, to think that it is called
Arrest, because it stays (or rests) the party, yet I believe rather that
we received the name from the Normane laws, because we use it in the same
sense with them: For commonly with us an Arrest is taken for the execution of
the commandment of some Court, or of some Officer in Justice. But howsoever
the name began, An Arrest is a certain restraint of a man's person, depriving
it of his own will and liberty, and binding it to become obedient to the will
of the Law: and it may be called the beginning of Imprisonment. The Precepts
and Writs of the higher Courts of Law, do use to express it by two sundry
words, as Capias and Attachias, which signify, to take (or catch) hold of a
man. But this our Precept notes it by the words Duci facias (cause him to be
conveyed, etc.) for that the Officer has (after a sort) taken him before, in
that he comes unto him, and requires him to go to some Justice of the Peace.

To this Arrest al persons (under the degree of Lords, (or Peers) of the
Realm) be subject: And Ecclesiastical persons (if they be not attendant upon
divine service) may be arrested for the Peace also: Mar.

The end therefore is, that if the party will not come to find Suertie of the
Peace, the Officer may (upon that Warrant) arrest and carry him to the Jail,
where he shall remain, until that he will freely offer, and find it.
Delivery of him that is imprisoned for refusing to find Suertie
But it is good to be enquired whether the Release, or Death of him that prayed
the Peace will not be sufficient cause to deliver such a prisoner: and if it
shall be, then by what order he shall be delivered. For as it seems to
some, yt any Justice of the Peace, may (upon his offer) take the Suertie and
deliver him: so it may be some doubt, whether he may be delivered (upon the
death, or release of the party) without the help of a Sessions, or Jail
delivery.

It appears 4. E 4.16. and by the opinion of Bryan. 2 H. 7.2. and 4. that if
such an imprisoned person had a suit hanging in the Common place aforehand, he
might by a Writ of Privilege be discharged of ye same, if they party, at whose
suit he was arrested for the Peace, were not ready in Court at the day of the
return of the Writ when he should be called to pray ye Suertie of ye peace
there again against him, and says, that it had bin always their common course
so to do: but diverse other there were of a contrary opinio, and it seems a
hard case, yt without any sufficient notice of such a removing of the party, a
man should be defeated of his Suertie so.

But now, if the party shall yield to find Suertie of the Peace, then may he
at his liberty, if the Precept proceed Ex offici^, and without the Writ of
Supplicauit, go to any Justice of the Peace, to offer this Suertie. To what
Justice be that is arrested may go.


Herevppon it happens often, that such persons, (choosing rather to be bound
by any other, tha^ him that makes ye Warrant) having any suspision of such a
precept awarded or likely to be awarded, do offer themselves, and become bound
before some other Justice. And thereupon do procure a Supersedeas from him to
be discharged of any other Arrest to be made. Yea, and many times (hearing of
such Precepts, and mis^iking to be bound in the Country) they go up to West
minister, and give Surety of the Peace there, either in ye Kings Bench for a
time only (as the manner of that Court is (or in the Chau^ce^ie for ever (as
they use it there) and do wythall procure a super sedeas from the Court where
they are bound, to close the hands of the Country Justices. And therefore it
is not amiss to say somewhat of this matter of supersedeas also.

If a Justice of the Peace then will (by a Supersedeas) discharge a Precept of
the Peace, that was made by his fellow Justice, he shall do well to take the
Recognusance according to the day of appearance (if there be any) and after the
form of ye former Precept (if there be any). Supersedeas by a Justice of the
Peace
For, as it is good reason, that having taken Suertie for the Peace, he may by
this Supersedeas save the party from finding other Suertie for the same cause:
So is it against reason, that he should give the party any other day of
apparaunce than the Precept had, and thereby discharge a matter of Record that
was made by one of equal authority with him. Fitzh. Fol. 9. Much less may
the Supersedeas of a Justice of the Peace, discharge a Precept of his fellow
Justice proceeding by virtue of a Supplicauit, for that it is of an higher
authority. Mar.

This Supersedeas sent by a Justice of the Peace, is sufficient, although it
neither name the Suerties, nor contain the su^mes in which they are bound: But
yet it is ye better form to express the both, as well because the higher
Courts use so to do: as also if the Bailife, Constable, or other Officer (to
whom it is delivered in discharge of his Warrant) be called at the next
Sessions by the suite of him that sought to have the Peace, to show how he
has executed his Warrant, and he come in and show forth the Supersedeas, the
party that is bound may be called thereupon, at the day that appears to be
limited unto him by ye Supersedeas, for it is under the seal of a Justice, and
does testifye that the party is bound and has found suertie, to appear at a
certain day, and if he make default, that being Recorded shall be sufficient
to cause him to forfaite the penalty of the Recognisance, although the Justice
that made it out, shall happen not to bring in the Recognusance it self,
according as he now ought to do by the Statute. 3. H. 7. ca. 1. And this may
be gathered upon the opinion. 2. H. 7.1 and may be seen by this form of it
here under written.

GEORGE MVLTON, one of the Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty within the County of Kent,
To the Shirife, Bailifes, Conestables, Borsholders, Ministers, and other the
Faithful subjects of our said Sovereign Lady within the said County, and
to every of them, sends greeting:
For as much as A. B. of etc. The form of a Supersedeas by a Justice of the
Peace.
Yeoman, has personally come before me at Ightham etc. and has found
sufficient suertie, that is to say, C. D. and E. F. etc. Yeomen, either of the
which has undertaken for the said A. B under the pain of xx, lb and he the
said A. B. has undertaken for himself under the peine of xl. lb that he the
said A. B. shall well and truly keep the Peace, toward our said sovereign
Lady, and all her liege people, and specially toward G. H. etc. Yeoman, and
also that he shall personally apeare before the Justices of the Peace of our
said soueraign Lady within the said County, at the next general Sessions of
the Peace to be holden at M. there: Therefore, on the behalf of our said
sovereign Lady, I command you, and every of you, that ye utterly forbear
and surcease, to arrest, take, imprison, or otherwise by any means (for the
said occasion) to molest, the said A. B. And that if you have (for the said
occasion, and for none other) take, or imprisoned him, that then you do cause
him to be delivered and set at liberty without further delay.

Yeouen at Ightha^ aforesaid under my seal, this last day of July in the
xxiij. year. etc.
Which also may be in the name of the Prince, and under the Test of the
Justice of the Peace, thus:
ELIZABETH, by the grace of God etc.
To the Shirife etc. greeting:
For as much as A. B. has come before G. Multon, one of our Justices of peace
within our said Cou^tie, and has found etc. We therefore command you and
every of you, that ye forbear etc.

Witness the said G. M. at Ightha^ aforesaid etc.
Thus much of the Supersedeas issuing from a Justice of the Peace, the which
ought to with-holde and stay the proceeding of his fellow Justices in the
said cause: in so much that if any Officer by any of their Warrants having
this Supersedea delivered to him, will nevertheless urge the party to find
new Suerty for the peace, he may refuse to give it, and (if he be committed to
prison for such his refusal) he may (as I think) have his action of False
Imprisonmente against the Officer upon the same.

Much more then will a Supersedeas, that comes out of the Chauncerie, or
Kings Benche, or from any Justice of the Kings Bench, discharge such a Precept
for ye Peace awarded from any Justice of the Peace. Supersedeas out of an
higher court.
And therefore, if the Justice of the Peace (to who^ such a Supersedeas shall be
delivered) will not thereupon surcease, an Attachment may be awarded against him,
for his comtempt, and he may be imprisoned, and fined, for it. It is good
counsel therefore, that M. Fitz (in his Not. Br. Fo. 238) gives, where he
wills the Justices of the Peace (after such a Supersedeas received) to
forbear to make any Warrant to arrest the party. and it they have awarded
it, then to make their own Supersedeas to the Shirife and other Officers,
thereby commanding them to surcease to execute it.

This impediment of Supersedeas (lying after this sort as you have seen in the
way to the Justice of the Peace) thus passed over, let us now suppose the
party served with the precepte, to come before some Justice of the Peace, and
let us enter into the taking of the Recognusance of him, for that is one part
of the execution of the Warrant for the Peace, and may do service whether the
party come to him that made the Precept, or to any other. The taking of the
Recognusance, for the Peace.


If the Justice of the Peace deal in this matter, as a Judge, and by virtue of
the Commission, then the number of the Suerties, the sum of their bond,
their sufficientie in goods or lands, the time how long he shall be bound,
and some other such circumstances, are referred wholly to his own
consideration, and if he be deceived in the ability of the Suerties, he may
compel the parties to put in others: Marrow.

The Commune manner is, to take two Suerties, desides the party himself: and
good reason it is that those should be such as have their names registered in the
Book of Subsidy: for albeit that here and there some may be sufficient, that
were not assessed to the Queen, yet it stands not well together that he
should become bound to the Prince in ten or twenty pounds, that was not
in the Subsidy found worth any thing at all.

But if he commmaunde the Peace as a Minister in execution of the Writts of
Supplicauit, then he must behave himself as the Writ it self directs him:
and that has not been always after one manner: for some form commands him
to take sufficient Manucaptors in any peine (or sum) to be reasonably set by
himself, so that he will be aunswerable for it at his own peril: and some
wills him to take sufficient Suertie in a sum certainelye prescribed unto
him, as a hundred pounds, in all, or every of them in twenty pounds, as it
may be seen at large, in the Register of Writtes Fo. 89.

A Justice of the Peace (says Master Marrow) may take this Suertie by a
Gage, or Pledge, which shall not be forfaited thereby, but paunded only, that
the party shall (under a certain peine) keep the Peace, which peine he
shall forfaite, it he break the Peace. And (by his opinion) a Justice of the
Peace may also take this Suertie by an obligation made to himself, by the name
of Justice of the Peace: For so shall it be (says he) advsum Domini Regis:
But if it were made unto him without his name of Justice of the Peace, that
then it could not be to the use of the King, unless it had the words, advsum
Domini Regis. Master Fitzharbert, on the other side (in his Not. Bre. Fo. 81.)
holds, that such an Obligation taken to the King, by a Justice of the Peace,
is nothing worth: for a man can not be bound to the Prince (says he) but
only by matter of Record, unless he will afterward come into a Court of
Record and confess it to be his deed, and pray that it may be Enrolled
there.

But the new Statute (33. H. 8. ca. 39) has made a plain law in these cases,
and wills yt all Obligations and Specialities (made for any cause touching
the King) shall be made in his own name, by the words Domino Reg^, and to none
other person to his use: and it ordains further, that such bonds shall be of
the nature of a Statue Staple: and that if any person take any obligation
otherwise, he shall be imprisoned at the pleasure of the King, or of his
honorable Counsel.

The safe way therefore, is to take this Suertie by Recognusance as is commonly
used, and that also by the words Dominae Reginae and then (upon the forfeiture
thereof) the Queen shall have execution accordingly.

Now, if a Recognusance be meant to be taken for the Peace, by a Justice of the
Peace, and yet do not contain within it, or in the condition thereof, that it
was taken For the keeping of the Peace, it seems to be void, as being then
taken, coram non Iudice because a Justice of the Peace has not power to take
Recognusances generally, but for matters concerning his Office specially. And
therefore Master Marrow adds further, that if the Recognusance be, That the
Recognusor shall not mayme, nor beat A. yet it is not good, because it ought
to be For the keeping of the Peace, and that may be broken otherwise, as by
burning ye house of A. or such like misdemeanour.

Although this Recognusance do not comprehend any day, in which the Recognusor
shall appear, but be generally to keep the Peace, yet it is good enough in
Law: for the chief matter is, The keeping of the Peace, and the time referred
to the discretion of the Justice, and so is it, by Master Marrow, if a day of
his appearance be put into the Recognusance, and no person be named in it,
before whom the party ought to appear: for he may then (says he) appear
where he will before that Justice of the Peace which took the Recognusance of
him.

And if the Recognusaunce be in xx. ^^. to be levied only of the goods, or only
of ye lands, of the Recognusor, it seems to be good enough: for peradventure
the words, Of the goods only or Lands only, shall be taken to be void, seeing
that the very acknowledgement of the sum of xx.^^. (before a Judge enabled to
take it) both makes it a debt, and implies the ordinary mean of Law to come
by it.

If this Recognusance be taken, To Keep the Peace against one special party
only, M. Marrow thinks it good: but aduize well of it, for the words in the
Commission of the Peace be, to take suertie Erganos, and populum nostrum.

But, for the better eschewing of Error and hard dealing in making this
Recognusance of the Peace, it is good to use the received form, which is thus:

MEmorandum, quod 4. die Iulij, Annoregni Domino nostrae Elizab:dei gratia,
etc. 23. The form of a Recognusance, for the Peace.
R. P. de Ightham in comitatu praedicta Yeoman in proprea persona sua venit
coram me Georgio Multon, vno Iusticiariorum dictae Dominae Reginae ad pacem in
dicto comitatu conseruandam assignatoru^, and assumpsit pro seipso sub poena
xx. lb Et H. I. de L, in comitatu praedicto Yeoman: Et. I. F. de M. in codem
comitatu Husbandman tune and ibidem in proprijs personis suis similiter
venerunt, and manuceperunt pro praedicto R. P. (viz.) quilibet little separatim
sub poena 100. ye: quod idem R. P. personaliter comparebit cora^ Iusticiarijs
dictae Dominae Reg: ad pacem ad proximam generalem Sessionem pacis in comitatu
praedicto apud Maidstone tenendam, ad faciendum and recipiendum quod ei per
curiam tunc and ibide iniungetur: Et quod ipse interim pacem dictae Dominae
Reg: custodiet, erga ipsam Domina^ Reg: and cuuctum populum suum, and praecipue
versus M. N. de Ightham praedicta Yeoman, Et quod dammu^vel malum aliquod
corporate aut grauamen praefato M. N. (Nec alicui de populo dictae Dominae
Reginae, quod in laesione aut perturbationem pacis ipsius Dominae Reg: seu
praefati M. N. cedere valeat) quonismode non faciet, nee fieri procurabit: Quam
quidem summam xx. lb praedict. R. P. and quilibet manuncaptorum praedictorum
praedictas separales summas 100. solid: recognouerunt se debere dictae Dom.
Reginae, de terris and tenementis, bonis and catallis suis, and cuiuslibet
eorum ad opus dictae Dominae Reginae fieri and leuari, ad quoru^cu^que manus
deuenerint, si contigerit ipsu^ R. P. praemissavel little aliquod in a aliquo
infringere, and inde legittimo modo conuinci. In cuius rei testimoniu^, ego
praedictus G. M. sigillu^ meum apposui. Dat apud Ightha^ praedict. die and An.
supradictis.

Or thus, a little different in form.

MEmora^du^ quod 4 die etc. A. B. de Ightha^ etc. Et C. D. de eade Yeome,
venerunt corae me G. M. etc. et. Manuceperu^s p 18. nuper de L. etc. quod ipse
personaliter co^parebit cora^ me praefat^ G. M. vel socijs meis Iusticiarijs
pacis D. Reg: ad proxima^ generaele Sessione etc. Et quod ipse interim geret
pace erga cunctu^ populu^ Do. Reginae, and praecipue erga R. B. etc (viz.)
quilibet manucaptoru^ praedictoru^ sub poena 20.lb. Et praedictus 18. manucepit
pre seipso sub poena 40. th. Quam quide summam 40.lb. praedictus 1. 8. and
quilibet manucaptorum praedictoru^ dicta^ summa^ 20.lb. recognoueru^t etc.

And this may be well done also, by a single Recognusance in Latin, with a
condition added in English, for the keeping of the Peace, and for the day and
place of the parties appearance at the Quarter Sessions.

The Suertie (or Recognusance) of ye Peace, thus commanded, and accao^plished,
order draws me to disclose, how ye Justice of the peace is to demean
himself with it. What shall be done, with the Recognusace.


If the Suertie were taken, by virtue of a Supplicauit, then must the Justice
of ye Peace (being in this case but a Minister) make retourn of ye Writ, and a
Certificat of his doing, into the Court from whence ye Supplicauit did proceed,
for help wherein, I will set him down that which I have seen put in practice
upon ^ Writ of that kind. The return ^ of a Supplicauit.


First, let him note upon the back of the Supplicauit thus: Executio istius
Breuis, patet in quadam Scedula eidem Breui annexa.



Then may that Scedule be thus: EGo Wilhelmus Lambard, vnus custodum pacis
Dominae Reginae in comitatu Kanciae, certifico in Cancellariam dictae Dominae
Reg^me virtute istius breuis (mihi per A. E. in eodem breui nominatum, primo
deliberati) personaliter coram me (tali die and loco) venire fecisse Thom: R.
in dicto breui nominatum, ac eundem Tho. ad sufficientem securitatem, and
manucaptores in^eniendum, secundum formam dicti breuis, (viz. (as the Writ
shall appoint, which is of diverse forms, as I told you before) compulisse: In
cuius ^ei testimonium huic praesenti Certificationi meae sigillum meum apposui:
Dat. apud D praedictam, in comitatu praedicto 5. die Iulij anno regni dictae
Dominae nostrae Elizabet. dei gratia, etc.23.



And if a Certiorari be directed out of the Chauncerie to the Justice of the
Peace for this Recognusance, because it was not sent up together with the
Certificat, (as there was no necessity that it should) then that Writ also may
be thus aunsweared. The return of a Certiorari.


Upon the back of the Writ, thus: VIrtute istius breuis, ego W. L. vnus
custodum pacis dominae Reginae in comitatu K. tenorem securitatis pacis (vnde
infra fit mentio) dictae dominae Reginae in Cancellaria^ sua^ sub sigillo meo
distinct and aperte mitto, prout patet in Scedula huie breui consuta.



The which Scedule may be thus: Memorandum, quod 20. die Iun. etc. (reciting
the whole Recognusance to the end thereof.) Then, In cuius rei testimonium ego
praedictus W. L. sigillum meum apposui: Dat. etc.

And this may serve also, where a Certiorari is brought to a Justice of the
Peace, to remove a Recognusance of the Peace taken by him Ex officio, without
any such Writ of Supplicauit, as you may read in the Register, Fol. 90.

But if the Recognusa^ce be not thus removed from the Justice of ye Peace, then
may he keep it till the Certiorari come to him for it.

On the other side, if ye Recognusance were take by virtue of his Office, than
(whether it were by his own discretion, or at the suit and desire of another)
he must send, or bring it in at the next Sessions, to the Custos Rotulorum, so
that the Recognusor may be there called, and if he make default, then the same
default to be recorded, as is appointed by ye Statute. 3. H. 7. ca 1. The
certifying of the Recognusace and release to the Sessions.


And here again, some difficulties do arise, ye may make the Justice of Peace
sometimes doubtful, how to hold, certify, or send in the Recognusaunce.
For sundry means there are, by which this Recognusance of the Peace may
(before any forfeyture thereof made) be after a sort discharged, and therefore
let us consider them apart, and withal give some advise what shall be best to
do therein.

The Justice of Peace, that of his own motion compels one to give Suertie
of the Peace until a certain day, may by like discreation before that day, may
by release it Fitzh. Fo. 10. Release of the Peace by a Justice of Peace.
And if it should fortune to be made to keep the Peace generally, without any
day limited, then would it be construed that it was to continue during the
life of the party bound, and then could no man release it, by Fitz. and 21. E.
4 40 If (at the suite of A.) yt Recognusance should be taken, To keep the
Peace against A only and none other, then may A. release it either before the
same Justice, or any other that will certify the Release, which certificate
being of Record, will discharge it, for to release it by his deed, is nothing
worth. Mar.

And so if it be versus cunctum populum, and praecipue versus A. yet may A.
after that sort release it (as I think) notwithstanding the opinion 21. E.
4.40. for albeit ye it seem popular, so ye others should have equal interest
with A in it, yet was it taken specially for his safety, as the word Praecipu^
does argue plain. And M. Brook says truly, that it is so used at this day.

But whether the Recognusance be at the suite of A. or by the mere motion of
the Justice in the behalf of A. the Queen can not release or pardon it
(before that it be forfeited) both for the mischief that may come to A
thereby, by Fineux his opinion 11. H. 7. 12 and for that the Recognusance being
taken according to ye common form, as is before set down, it is not properly a
debt to ye Queen until it be forfeited, as appears 11. H. 4.43: 1. H 7.10.
But being forfeited, she (and none other) may pardon the forfeiture, for then
it is become her proper debt. Now in these cases, ye Recognusance may not be
Cancelled, least peradventure ye Peace was broke (and consequetly ye
Recognusance forfeited) before the time of the Release made, Fitz. Fo. 10. and
therefore it shall be best in such cases to send to the Sessions the Recognusance
and the Release together: and that may be done in a few Lines under the
Recognusaunce it self:

First for the release of the Justice, thus: Ego prafatus G. M. qui supra
nominatum A. B. ad pradictam securitatem pacis inueniendam ex mea discretione
compuli, eandem securitatem pacis (quantum in me est) ex mea discretione 1. die
August:remisi and relaxaui: In cuius rei testimonium, huic prasentirelaexationi
meae sigillum meum apposui. Dat.etc.



And for the release of the Party before the same Justice that took it, thus:
MEmorandum, quod primo die Augusti, etc. praefatus C. D. venit coram me prafato
G. M. and gratis remisit and relaxauit (quantum in se est) praedictam
securitatem pacis per ipsum versus supra nominatum A B. petitam. Release by the
party.
In cuius rei testimonium, ego prafat. G. M.etc. Dat. etc.



But if the release be made before an other Justice which has not the
Recognusaunce, then this later form must be fremed accordingly.

Furthermore, if a man be bound before a Justice of the Peace, to keep the
Peace against all the Queens people, and to appear at the next Quarter
Sessions, and do afterward procure a Supersedeas; out of the Chauncerie,
testifying, that he has found suertie there against all the Queens people for
ever, this will discharge his aparance at the Sessions, because the granting
of this Supersedeas is the Act of the Queen, which is the fountain of
Justice, and controlleth all other authority, Fitz. Fol. 9. Certifying of the
Recognusance, and Supersedeas.
But if that Supersedeas should testify, that he has found Suertie in the
Chauncerie, but only until a certain day (which day is after those
Sessions) then M. Fitzh. thinks, that his appearance at the Sessions shall not
be discharged by the Supersedeas. In both these cases also, I would advise ye
Justice of the Peace, to send in the Recognusance and the Supersedeas also, if
it comes to his hands, for peradventure the Recognusaunce was broken before
the Supersedeas purchased: or, if. it were not, yet he shall be excused, and
the Recognusor never a whit the more endangered thereby.

Lastly, the death of the Prince discharges the Recognusance of the peace. 1.
H. 7.2. Cur. So does the death of the Recognusor: and so also does the death of
him at whose suit it was taken, if so be, that it were made to keep the Peace
against him alone.

But although the Mainpernours or Suerties die, yet the Recognusance lives:
for, if the Peace be broke after their deaths, their executors shall be charged
with it. Certifying of the Reco^^^sance, though it be discharged by death.
21. E. 4.40. Neither (in the former cases) is the Recognusance discharged by
such death, if it were forfaited before.

And therefore, here again my counseld is, to send in the Recognusance to the
Custos Rotulorum, for other wise, how shall the Justice of Peace be assured,
that he does not defraude the Queen of a forfaiture, that was grown unto her.

Thus have I both bound the party to the Peace, and conveyed the Recognusance
from the Justice of the Peace to the Custos R^^ulorum, ready to be called upon
at the Quarter Sessions: So that I might forthwith proceed to treat of the
good Abearing: But, beacuse I have told you (out of M. Mar. and by 21. E. 4.
40.) that if the Recognusa^ce of the Peace be forfeited, and that forfaiture
be levied, so that the Recognusance is utterly determined, yet (of Discrtion)
the party is to be compelled to find new Suertie or else to be sent to
prison, because it appears evidently, that he has broken peace, and is a
stubborn offender against the law, I think it fit to run swiftly over some few
things that may enfourme a Justice of the Peace, concerning such forfaitures,
to the end, that he may thereupon compel the offender accordingly. Causes of
forfaiture, so that the party shall be compelled to give new Suerties


The Condition of this Recognusaunce (of what good form soeur you make it)
stands upon two points: the one, for appearance at a time, the other, for
keeping the Peace in the mean while. Of th first of these I have, said
somewhat already in this Chapter: concerning the second point, this is
general, that whatsoever Act is a breach of the Peach, the doing thereof does
als beget a forfeiture of the Recognusance that is made for keeping of the
Peace: and what acts shall amount to a breach of the Peace, I will hereafter
show, in the next Chapter of this Book, where I shall (to an other end) have
meet place for it. In the mean space, take thus much here.

If a man be bound to keep the Peace against A and do afterward threaten A
to his face, that he will beat him, hie has forfaited his Recognusance. And an
Action of Trespass lies at the Common law against him ye shall threaten one
to beat him, as appears in diverse Books cases. 3. H. 6 18: 37. H. 6. 20. and
shall suppose it to be Contra pacem. But other wise it is, if A be not present
at that threatening, by good opinion. 18. E. 4. 28. yet if (in the absence of
A.) he does threaten, that he will beat him, and then do after ward lie in
await to beat him, he has in that case also broken his Recognusance. 22. E.
4. 35. per Cur.

Like forfeiture is it, he that is bound do but command or procure an other to
break the Peace upon any man, or to do any other unlawful act against the
Peace, if that it be done indeed. 7. H. 4. 34. and Brook Tit. Peace. 20.
tempore. H. 8.

For closing up of this part (concerning the Prevention of the breach of the
Peace) it remains, that I entreat of the Suertie of good Abearing, which is
of great affinity with that of the Peace, as being provided for preservation
of the Peace, as that o^ there is: for in the Commission of the Peace, they are
both conveyed under this one tract of speech, (Ad securitatem de pace and bono
gestu suo erga nos and populum nostrum inueniendum) against such as do
threaten hurt to men's bodies, or Fire to their houses, which things are now
commonly prevented by Suertie of the Peace only. Of the suertie of the good
Abearing, and where it lies.
And by the Book 2. H. 7.2. Suertie of the good Abearing is set forth to rest
in this point chiefly, That a man demean himself well in his prote and
company, doing nothing that may be cause of the breach of the Peace, or of
putting the people in fear, or trouble: and that it does not consiste in the
observation of things that concern not the Peace. And that it should differ
from Suertie of the Peace, in this, that where the Peace is not broke without
an affray, or battery, or such like, this Suertie de bono gestu, may be broke
by the number of a ma^s company or by his or their weapons o harness.
Herewithall also do certain Precedentes of the Kings Bench agree, which in
Suertie of the good Abearing (taken at the suit of some one person) do mingle
the words Amodo been se geret erga Dominum Regem, and cunctum populum suum, and
praecipue erga T. B. with those other words that are commonly put in the
Recognusa^ce for the Peace, as the Peace, as in ye new Book of Entrees Fol.
416. any man may plainly see.

But all this notwythstanding, me thinks that a man may reasonably affirm,
that the Suertie of good Abearing should not be restrained to so narrow
bounds. For first, the Statute (34. E. 3. ca 1.) enableth the Wardeins of ye
Peace, to take of all the that be not of good fame (where they shall be found)
sufficient suertie and mainprise of their good abearing toward the king and
his people. So that, if a man be desamed, he may by virtue hereof be bound to
his good Behavior, at the discretion of the Wardeins and Justices of the
Peace. But then the doubt rests in this, to understand concerning what
matters this defamation must be, and that (as I think) may be partly
gathered out of the aside Statute also. For, after it has first given power to
the Wardeins of the Peace, to arrest and chastise offenders (S. against the
Peace, Riotors and Baretors:) then it wills them, to enquire of such as
having been robbers beyond the sea, were come over hither, and would not labor
as they were wont: and lastly, it auctorizeth them, to take suertie of the good
behauior of such as be desamed, namely (as I think) for any of those former
offenses for so it stands well together, ye they shall both punish such as
have already so offeded, and shall also pro uide, that the others shall not
likewise offed. Moreover, it seems to me, that these statutes first (1. Mar.
Parl 1. ca. 3.) which gives this Suertie of good Abearing against such as
distube a Preacher, then (5. Eliza. ca. 21.) that provides the same against
the takers of fish in Ponds, or of Dear in Parkes, and lastly (23. Eliza. ca.
1.) which grants it against such as wilfully absent themselves from the
church by the space of 12. months. have this meaning, that a party (so bound)
may afterward forfaite his Recognusance, if he eftsoons offend against the
said Statutes.

Besides this, you may see (admitted by ye opinid of ye Court. 13. H. 7.10) yt
if a man do in the night season, hau^t a house that is suspeded for Bawdene, or
do use suspicious company, the may the Constable arrest his to find suerties of
his good abearing: For, Bawderie is not merely a spiritual offense, but
mixed, and but sounding little against the Peace of the land 27. H. 8.14 Fitz.
and 1. H. 7.6.

And therefore, it shall not be amiss at this day (in my sleder opinion) to
grant Suertie of ye good Abearing against him ye is suspected to have begotte a
Bastard child, to the end ye he may be forth coming when it shall be borne:
for other wise, there will be no Putatiue father found, when that the two
Justices of the Peace, shall (after the birth, and by virtue of the statute 18.
Eliza. ca. 3.) come to take order for his punishment. And for some advise by the
way in co^ceiuing rightly this suspicion, mark what M. Bracton writes: Oritur
suspitio ex fama, and ex fama and suspitione, oritur grauis praesu^ptio: Fama
vero suspitione induces; oriri debet apud bonos and graves, idque no^ semel,
sed saepius. Oritur etiam suspitio, ex facto praecedente, cui standum est donec
probetur co^trarium: nam qui semel est malus, semper preasumitu ess malus, in
eodem genere mali.

But the further that this bond of ye good Abearing does extend, the more
regard there ought to be in the awarding of it: and therefore, although the
Justices of the Peace have power to grant it, either by their own Discretion,
or upon the complaint of others, even as they may that of the Peace: pet I
wish rather, that they do not command it, but only upon sufficient cause,
seen to themselves, or upon the suit and complaint of diverse, and the same
very honest and credible persons.

And here, forasmuch as one Justice of the Peace (alone, and out of the
Sessions) may (both by the first Clause of the Commission, and also by the
opinion of M. Fitz. and 9. E 4. 3.) grant this suertie of the good Abearing,
(although the common manner be, that two such Justices do ioin in that doing,
whereof also M. Fitz has very good liking) I will not stick to set forth here,
the common forms, as well of the Precept, as of the Recognusance, for the same:
wherein, if I shalvse the names of two Justices, you must take that also to be
done according to ye common fashion, and not of any necessity in law. For, as
I would more gladly use the assistance of a fellow Justice in this behalf, if
I may conveniently have it: so (if that may not be had) I would not greatly
fear (when good cause shall require) to undertake the thing my self alone.

The Precept, may have this course.
GEORGE MVLTON, and William Laembarde, two of the Justices of the Peace of our
Sovereign Lady the Queens Majesty in the County of Kent, To the Shirife of
the said County, to the Constables of the Hundred of Wroteham, and to the
Borsholder of the Town of shipborne, in the said County, and to every of
them, greeting: For as much as A. B. of Shipborne aforesaid is not of good
fame, not of honest conversation (but an evil doer, Riotour, Barrettour, and
perturber of the Peace of our said Sovereign Lady) as we are given to
understande by the reaporte of sundry credible persons. The Precept of the
good abearing.
Any one of these, is sufficient cause.
Therefore, on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lady we command you and
every of you, that you cause the said A. B. to come before us, or some others
of our fellow Justices, to find sufficient suertie and mainprise for his good
abearing toward our said Sovereign Lady, and all her liege people. And if he
shall refuse so to do, etc. as in the Precept of the Peace, with a very little
change.

The usual Recognusance, has this form,
MEmorandum, quod 5. die mensis July, Anno regni Elizab. etc. 23. venit coram
nobis Georgio Multon, and Wilhelmo Lambard, and caetera, vt antea in
Recognitione pacis, vsque ad hoc: Quod idem R. G. personaliter comparebit coram
Iusticiarys dictae Dominae Reginae ac Pacem, etc. ad proximam generalem
Sessionem, etc. The Recognusance of the good Abearing.
Et quod ipse interim se been geret erga Dominam Reginam and cunctum pepulum
suum, and praecipue erge I. B. de C. etc. Et quod ipse non inferet, nec inferri
procurabit, per se nec per alios damnum aliquod seu grauamen praefato I. B. seu
alicuide populo ipsius Dominae Reginae de corporibus suis, per insidias,
insultus, seu aliquo alio modo, quod in lasionem seu perturbarionem pacis
dictae Dominae Reginae cedere valeat quouismodo, videlicet vterque praedictorum
H. C. and I. S. sub poena 100 th. Et praedictus R. G. sub poena 200. th. quas
quidem seperales summas 100. th. vterque praedictorum H. C. and I. S. (vt
praedicitur) perse, ac praedictus R. G. dictas, 200. th. recognouerunt se
debere dictae Dominae Reginae, de teris, and tenementis, bonis and catallis
suis, and cuiuslibet little, ad opus ipsius dictae Dominae Reginae, fieri and
leuari, St contingat preaefatum R. G. in alliquo praemissorum deficere, and
inde legitimo modo conuinci, etc.

Or by a simpel Recognusance, with this Condition Endorced, or under written.
COnditio Recognitionis praedictae talis est, Quod si praedictus R. G.
imposterum se been geret, and pacem Dominae Reginae conseruet, erga dictam
Dominam Reginam, et cunctum populum suum, et nullum damnum corporale etc.
Extunc Recognitio praedicta pronullo teneatur, alioquin in suo robore permaneat.

Thaue known it doubted, whether the Suertie of the good Abearing (commanded
upon complaint) may be released by any special person, or no, because it
seems more popular, than the Suertie of the Peace. Release, of the good
Abeari^^
But if it may (as it seems all one to me) then may the form of such a
Release be easily made, by that which is before concerning the Peace, using the
words, Securitatem de se been gerendo, in stead of the words, Securitatem
pacis.

And the like imitation may be used also, for a Supersede as of the good
Abearing, if at the least that be grauntable by Justices of the Peace.

I might here, without breach of Order prosecute the preservation of ye Peace,
by the preue^ting of such as be riotouslly assembled, and by handing the
Statute of Northampton, which seems (by plain speech) to be provided for
prevention of the breach of the Peace also: But because the first shall have
his proper place, and the latter is commonly put in ure at this day, after the
Peace broken by forcible Entry, I will spare to speak of any of them, till I
come to treat of those matters by them selves.

Of the breach of the Peace without a multitude against the person, and how it
may be stayed, or punished by one Justice of Peace out of the Sessions.
CAP. XVII.
The Prevention Of The Breach Of YE Peace Has Appeared, As Well In The Suertie
Of The Peace, As Of The Good Abearing: and Therefore Mine Own Order Requires,
That I Now Declare What One Justice Of The Peace May Do (Out Of The SesSions)
For PunisHment Of such as do break the Peace. Breach of the Peace without a
multitude.


For, our law is no less careful this way to conserve the Peace, both by
staying them that do any way adventure toward the breach thereof, and by
punishing them that do acually enter into the very violation of the same,
than it was provident to see it preserved before it came to any near show of
disturbance, or greater evil.

But because the breach of the Peace (as the law is taken at this day, whether
it be by word, or other act, (and that also whether it be to the person, or to
his goods, or lands,) may be as well committed by one only, or by two upon a
side (both which we hold to be done without a multitude, though two in precise
speech do make a number) as by three or more in one company (which the law
properly calls a multitude.) it shall be good to entreat by it self first
of that breach of the Peace which may be committed without a multitude, and
then to prosecute the other. If there withal we put the Justice of Peace in
remembrance, that by what way soever the may prevent or punish the breach of
the Peace in one person, the same means may he also bse against any multitude
so offending.

The breach of the Peace that may be practiced against the person, climbeth to
the destruction of the person, by sundry degrees: as by Threats, Assray or
assault and violent and malicious striking and beating, wounding, mayheming and
killing. The matter of manacing and threatening is sufficiently touched in the
last Chapter.

The words Affray and Assault, be indifferently used of many men, even in our
book cases, but yet there wants not a just difference between them in mine
opinion. Affray and Assault.


For, Affray, is derived of the french effrayer which signifies to terrify,
or bring fear: and is the more heinous trespass, for it is in law understood
to be a common wrong done, and therefore is inquirable and punishable in the
Turn of Shirife and in a Leet, by 4. H. 5.10. and 8. E. 4.5. Otherwise it is
of an assault, as it seems by those books. Yet it may be done, without word,
or blow, given: as if a man shall show him self furnished with armor or
weapon, which is not usually worn and borne, it will strike a fear into
others that be not armed as he is: and therefore, both the Statute of
Northampton (2. E. 3. ca. 3) made aganist the wearing of armor and weapon, and
the Writ thereupon grounded, do speak of it, by the words, effray delpays,
and interrorem populi.

An Assault, as it is fetched from an other fountain, namely from the Latin
Assultus which denotes a leaping (or flying) upon a man: So it can not be
performed, without the offer of some hurtful blow, or at the least some
fearful speech. And therefore, to rebuke a Collector with foul words, so
that he departed for fear without doing his office, was taken for an Assault,
27. lib. Assis. plac. 11. And to strike at a man (although he were neither
hurt, nor hit, with the blow) was adjudged an Assault, 22. libr. Assis. pl.
60. For this Assault both not always necessarily emplie a hitting: and
therefore, in Trespass of Assault and Battery, a man may be fouunde guilty
of the Assault, and get be excused of the Battery: 40. Ed. 3.40. and 45. Ed.
3. 24.

Manacings then, Affrayes, Assaults injurious and violent handelings, and
misentreatings of the person, batteries, malicious strikings, etc. be breaches
of ye Peace, and do draw after them the forfaiture of a Recognusance,
knowledged for the keeping of the Peace. What acts be breaches of the Peace
and what not.


And therefore (for example) if a man do imprison an other without warrant, or
do thrust him into a water (or river) whereby he is in danger of drowning, or
do raushe a woman against her will, or do commit manslaughter or burglarie, or
robbery, upon the person of an other, or do commit treason against the person
of the Prince, who as he is ye head of his people, so are they also wounded in
his hurt, he has broken the Peace. Mar.

But concerning the manacing, assault or battery of the person of one, this is
to be noted by the way, that it is not in all cases a violation and breach of
the Peace: for some are allowed to have privately, a natural, and some a C^^le
power (or authority) over others, so that they may excuse themselves if but
(in reasonable manner) they correct and chastise them for their offenses,
without imputation of any such breach. After the one forte, the parent is
suffered (with moderation) to threaten and chastise the child within age. By
reason of the other fort of power, the husband is not punishable (so that it be
not outragiously) if he chastise his wife, Master his servant, the
Schoolmaster his scholars, and a Jailer (or his servant, by his commandment)
his unruly prisoners and the Lord may beat his villain. But these things must
nevertheless be done in convenient place, and therefore not in the presence of
the Prince, as it is thought 27. lib. Ass. pl. 49. This power of the husband
over the wife, seems to be permitted by the words of the Supplicauit that is
set down for her in the Register. 89. when she stands in need of the
Peace against him, where it is said, That he shall be bound to do her no
corporal harm, but with this exception, Aliter quam ad virum ex
caussaregiminis and Castigationis vxoris suoe, licite and rationabiliter
per^^net: Wherein it agrees with the Civil Law, which yeldeth to the husband
that power, so that he use it Modice, moderately. And says M. Peter Martyr
upon the 1. to the Corinthians. c. 11. ver. 3. The husband may Corripere and
castigare vxorem eadem charitate qua Christus Ecclesiam verberat, nimiru^ vt
melior fiat, etc. The power of the Master and Schoolemaister, over the
Servant, and Scholar, is affirmed by M. Marrow, and confirmed by some opinion
in the book 21. E. 4. 6. and 53. Whereunto I may also add the mind of those
that made the Statute (33. H. 8. cap. 12.) concerning malicious striking in the
kings house: for they do therein specially exempt the Master that strikes his
Servant, with his hand, fist, small staff, or stick, for his correction for
any offense. Howbeit in these cases, I do advise both husband and master not
to provide so much how they may escape the breach of a Recognusance or
punishment of our laws, as to foesee that they keep the law of God, and do
nothing against honesty: the one as knowing that the wife is his own flesh,
and the other as considering that he also has a Master in heaven.

Every man also may take his kinsman that is mad, and may put him in a
house, and bind and beat him with rods, without breach of the Peace. 22.
lib. Aff. plac. 56.

A Constable or other Officer, or any other, being of their company, that shall
be driven to strike any person, for the better executing of their Office or
charge (as in many cases they may lawfully do) breaks not the Peace nor shall
be in any peril of forfeiting any Recognusance of the Peace, by reason of any
such assault or battery, as may be well inferred upon the book cases 17. E.
4. 5: 2. E. 4. 6. and 8: 4. H. 7. 1: and 14. H. 7. 8. For such Acts be
justifiable. And see for this purpose also M. Stamforde. Fo. 13. 14. 15.
Besides this, if a man be enforced to repulse violence (done unto his own
person, or to the person of his wife, father, mother, child, kinsman, master,
servant, or to his goods being in his possession,) either by threatening or
striking again: his so doing is also justifiable, as may be seen in Mar. 33.
H. 6. 18: 19. H. 6. 3: 9. E. 4. 48: and 35. H. 6. 50. But a Fermer or Tenant
cannot justify such an act in defense of his Lanlorde, nor a Commoner in
defense of the Mayor, or Bayliffes of a corporate Town.

If one man also hurt or kill an other at Fence play, or at the Title,
Turneament, or Barriers (in pefence of the Queen, and by her license) or in a
wager of Battle for the trial of a cause according to the ancient Laws of
this Realm, it is no breach of the Peace at all, Mar.

Thus far of those breaches, that may bring danger to a Recognusance of the
Peace: for some others there be, which are in a degree against the Peace, so
that an Enditement Contrapacem may be found upon them, but yet no forfaiture
of such a Recognusance shall ensue of them. Breaches of the Peace, that make no
breach of bond for the Peace.


As if a man (so bound) do take a man's goods wrongfullie, (so that it be
not from his person) or do Ravish a Ward from the possession of his Garden:
or do a Trespass in an others man's corn, or grass: or do Disseasse an other
of his lands: or do enter into lands, where he ought to bring his Action, it
will breed no forfaiture of his bond.

Therefore let us now come to the pacifying and punishing of the Breach of
the Peace upon the person, by one Justice of the Peace out of the Sessions.

A Justice of the Peace, is undoubtedly (for this purpose) endowed with no
less power, tha^ every Pr^uate man, or any Constable has: as it is plain by
14. H. 7. 8 and 9. E. 4. 3. And therefore it may not be thought Heterogeneum
(or besides my purpose) if I shall show what both a Private man and Constable
may do in this case: yea rather I choose to utter this matter under their
names, to ye end that I may with ye one labor bewray the duties, both of them
and of the Justice of the Peace him self in this behalf.

The Law looks, that every Private person, whom it shall happen to be
present at an Affray, Assault, or Battery (for now I will confound those
names) should do his part to depart them that fight together: and it does
(to that end) enable him also with some portion of authority. The duty of a
stander by at an Affray.


For, if two be fighting, every Stander by, may lawfully, and shall do well to
put them in sunder, and if he take hurt thereby, he shall have his remedy by
Action against him that did the hurt. To part them.


But yet he (being but a Private man) may do no hurt, if they resist him, for
they also stall then have Action for it against him: wherein his case differs
(as you shall see anon) from the case of an Officer.

And if an Affray be in the high streate, and one comes toward it with
harness, or weapon, to take with the one party, every man that sees it may
stay him til the Affray be ended.

Any man also may stay the Affravours, until the storm of their heat be
calmed, and then may he deliver them over to the Constable to imprison them,
till they find Suertie for the Peace: but he him self may not commit them to
prison, unless the one of them be in peril of death by some hurt: for then
may any man carry the other to the Jail, till it be known, whether he so
hurt, will live or dye, as appears by the Statute 3. H. 7. ca. 1. To stay
them.


But as the keeping of the Peace is more specially recommended to the charge
of Justices of peace, Co^stables, petit-Constables, Borsholders, Tithing men,
and such like Officers: so be they also therefore armed with a larger measure
of authority? And there fore if a Constable, or such other Officer do see a
man, endeavoring to make an Affray, he may command him to avoid upon pain
of imprisonment: and if the Affray be great, or dangerous, he may make
Proclamation, and may command the parties to prison for a small time, till
their heat be passed over, and then he must deliver the without any fine
taking. The Officers duty in an Affray.
But if two do use only hoate words, one against the other, the Officer
may lay no hands upon them, unless they do also draw weapon, or do
otherwise offer to strike: If they once fight together, then may the Officer
depart them, and if he hap to be hurt in that doing, he may have an
Action of Trespass for it: but if any of them be hurt by him in the
resistance, no Action lies for them: For, the Officer ought to do his best
to depart them: in so much as if it be presented at the Sessions of the
Peace, that he was present at an Affray, and did not use his endeavor to put
them in sunder that fought together, he shall be f^^ed for it: Otherwise it
is, if he were not present, but were only told of the Affray. Mar.

If any of the parties be in danger, by reason of a hurt received in the
Affray then ought the Officer arrest and carry the other to the Jail, until
he shall find suertie to appear at the Jail delivery. Fitzh. 72: 38. E. 3.
6. and 22: ^b. Aff. pl. 56.

And if two men be fighting in a house (the doors shut) then may the Officer
break open the doors to see the Peace kept, though neither of them have taken
hurt.

And yet when the Constable has taken an Affrayor he may not imprison him in
his house, but in the S^ockes, and that not above such a reasonable time as he
may provide to convey him to the Gaol^ till he find suertie of the Peace. 3. H.
4. 9: and 22. E. 4. 35.

And herein he differs from a Jailer, or the Shirife (who has ye charge of
the Jail) for he may make a Jail of his house: and so cannot a Constabe or
Justice of the Peace do. And by the Statute (5. H. 4. ca. 10.) the Justice of
Peace must send his prisoners to the common Jail.

If one do make an Affray upon the Justice of Peace, Constable, or such other
Officer, he may not only defend him self, but may also apprehende the
offendour, and send him to the Jail, till he will find suertie of the Peace.
5. H. 7. 6. And the Justice, or Constable may (if need be) commauno
assistance of the Queens people, for the pacifying of an Affray, 3. H. 7. 10.

If he that makes an Affray do fly into a house when the Justice of Peace (or
Constable comes to arrest him, they may (in fresh suit) break open the
doors, and take him, Mar. Or if he fly thence, they may make fresh suit and
arrest him, though it be in an other County, by the opinion of some men. 13.
E. 4. 9. And it should seem (by the reason of that Book) that in this case
also, they may break open the doors to apprehend him, because the Prince has
an interest in the matter, and then a man's house shall be no refuge for him, as
it should be in Debt or Trespass, where the interest is but only to some
particular party.

Now, if the Constable do arrest one, that has hurt an other, and do
voluntarily suffer him to Escape, and then he that was hurt ^ieth thereof
within the year and day, the Constable shall make a great Fine, and that to the
valewe of his goods, in the opinion of some. 11. H. ^. 12. and Stanford. 35.
1. But the offense shall not have such Relation to the stroke, as to make the
escape to become Felony thereby. Commentar. Plowd. 263.

Of the breach of the Peace without a multitude, or with a multitude, by
forcible entry into lands or tenements etc. And what one Justice of the Peace
out of the Sessions may do therein.
CAP. XVIII.
BEfore the troublesome reign of King Richard the second, it seems that the
common Law permitted any person which had good right or title to enter into any
la^d, to win the possession thereof by force, if otherwise he could not have
obtained it. And still at this day, if in a common Action or enditement of
Trespassle for entering into any land, the Defendant will make Title thereunto,
the whole matter of the Force alleged against him will rest altogether upon
the validity of his Title, as appears 7 H. 6. 13. and 40. And a man may
also at this day retain with force his own goods and cattailes against an
other, 19 H. 6. 31. and 9. E. 4. 18. But after the rebellious insurrecon of the
velleins and other of the commons which happned in the fourth year of that
Kings reign. The Parliament in 5 R. 2. cap. 7. (thinking it necessary to
provide against all occasions of any further vproare or new breach of the
Peace) did ordain among other things, That from thenceforth none should make
any entry into any lands or tenements, although his entry into the same were
lawful, but only in peaceable and easy manner, and not with strong hand, nor
with multitude of people, upon pain of imprisonment, and to be raunsommed at
the Kings will.

But because this Statute gave no quick remedy in this point, nor any special
power therein to the Justices of the Peace of the country, whereas the
experience of that busy time required a great deal more speed in suppressing
such disorder: After that they had in 13. of that king c. 7. Stat. 1. taken
order that Justices of Peace should be made of new in all the Counties of
England of the most sufficient Knights, Esquiers and men of law of the same
County. And that they should be sworn to keep and put in execution all
Statuts and ordinances touching their offices. The in 15 R. 2. c. 2 they
caused it to be further enacted, That when such forcible entry should be made
into lands or tenementes, or into Benefices, or Offices of the Church, and
complaint thereof come to any Justice of the Peace, he should take sufficient
power of the County, and go to the place where the forcible entry was made:
and if he found any that held such place forciblie after such entry made, the
same should be taken and put in the next Jail, there to abide convicted by
the Record of the same Justice, till they had made fine, and ransom to the
King, And that as well the Shirife, as all others of the County, should
attend upon the said Justice, to go and arrest: such offenders, upon pair^e
of imprisonment, and to make fine to the King.

Now again, for as much as this last Statute did not extend to those that
entered Peaceably, and then held with Force: nor against the offenders if they
were removed before the coming of the Justices, nor yet any pain therein
ordained against the Sheriff that did not obey the precepts of the Justices in
this behalf: it was not only ordained by a thribe Act ( made 8. Hen. 6.
cap. 9.) That the said former Statutes should be holden and duelye executed,
But it was adjoined also thereunto, That if any from thenceforth forth should
make such forcible entry into lands, tenements, or other possessions, or
should them hold forcibly, after complainte thereof made within the same
County to any of the Justices of the Peace thereby the parties grieved, that
the Justice so warned should in convenient time cause the last said Statute
duly to be executed at the costs of the said party.

And whether the perfons (making such entries) were present, or avoided before
the Justices coming, the same Justices (or Justice) in some good town next to
the said tenements, or in some other convenient place at his discretion,
should have power to enquire by the people of the same county, as well of
them which made such forcible entries into lands or tenementes, as of them
which held the same with force: And if it be found before any of them, that
any does contrary to this Statute, then the said Justices (or Justice) shall
do the said lands or tenements to be reseised, and shall put the party (so
put out) in full possession of the same. And when the said Justices (or
Justice) make such inquiry, they shall direct their Precept to the Shirife,
commanding him on the Kings behalf, to cause to come before them and every
of them, sufficient and indifferent persons, dwelling next about the same
lands or tenementes, whereof ^ucrie man shall have lands or tenementes of the
clear yearly value offourtie shillings at the least, and the Shirife shall
return twenty shillings in issues upon every one of them at the first
Precept retournable, and at the second forty shillings, and at the third
five pound, and at every day after, the double. And every Shirife of
County, and Bailey of Fraunchise, that shall not duly make execution of the
said Precepts, shall forfaite to the King twenty pounds for every defaulte,
and shall moreover make fine and ransom to the King. And as well the Justices
or Justice aforesaid, as the Justices of Assizes, may hear and determine such
defaultes of Shirifes or Baylies, as well by Bill at the suite of the party
grieved for him self, as for the King only, by way of Enditement, and upon
such due attaynder, he which sueth for himself and for the King, shall have
the one moietie of the said twenty pounds together with his costs and
expenses: and such Process shall be against: such so attaynted, as lies
against: any person endited, or sued, by writ of Treapasse with force and
Arms against the Peace. And the Majors, Justices of the Peace, Sherifes and
Baylifes, that are in Cities, or Bourowes (having fraunchise) shall have like
power in the articles aforesaid, as the Justices of Peace, and Shirits in the
Counties have.

But they which keep by force their poffessions in any lands or tenements,
whereof they or their auncesters, or they whose estate they have therein, have
continued their possession in the same by three years or more, shall not be
endamaged by this Statute.

This last Statute I have the rather exemplified at large, because it
contains a full direction in this business, yet because I have seen some
other things that ^ende to some little explanation, of some of the points of
the same, which be good to be considered of, I think that they also may be
well bestowed here.

This Statute therefore enableth any one Justice of the Peace to deal in this
matter upon occasion given, and is made, as well against such as enter with
force, as against those that enter Peaceably, and then hold in with force.
But whether the Justice be bound to ermine the goodness of his title that
enters, and accordind to the same to make or deny restitution, it has been
often times made a question, which surely in mine opinion should carry no great
doubt with it. For seeing that the Statute 5. R. 2. cap. 7. prohibited all
entries with force although they were otherwise lawful, and the Statute 15. R.
2. ca. 2. rehearsing the same, gives authority to every Justice of Peace
upon any such forcible entries, presently to commit the offenders there
found to the Caole, and this Statute meaning to supply some other defectes in
the former, gives special remedy to the party grieved by the aid of the
same Justice, by restoring of him to his possession again: I see not why the
Justice of Peace (who perhaps shall have but little skill in Law to discern
and judge of the Little, and yet be a fit man to suppress all force, and able
enough to restore a possession) should be tied to the discussing of the right
or title of either of the parties. And therefore 22. H. 6. 18. admits this
case, That if A. should disseyse B. and B. should enter again and put out A.
by force and strong hand, yet should A. be restored to his possession at the
hands of the Justice of Peace, although his first entire were very unlawful.
And that thereupon notwithstanding the restitution made, B. may have an Assise,
or else may enter upon him again, so as he do it in peaceable manner. And I
do little doubt, but that a Lessee for years, or a Copieholder being put out
with force, and the Lessor or Lord disseised thereby, the Lessee: or
Copieholder ought to have restitution by the help of a Justice of Peace upon
this Statute.

Now whereas the words be After complaint etc. that does not always in^orce
a necessity of Complaint, by the party grieved. For if a forcible entry be
committed, the Justice may inquire of it, and also make restitution, upon any
informacion or other knowledge thereof, though no complaint be made unto him by
the party grieved, as it is holden 7. E. 4. 18. Complaint.


It seems further that it should not be altogether requisite to the
punishing of the offenders by imprisonment and fine, that the party grieved
should be actually put out of possession. For all the said Statutes do
specially prohibit the forcible cntrie it self yet to have restitution upon
this Statute, the putting out must needs be found also. And therefore if ye
case be that after the death of A. a stranger enters into his lands and
holds the same by force against his heir, before be had gotten any
possession in deed, the heir of A. in this case (says Mar.) shall never
have restitution because he never had any other possession than a possession in
law, but no actual possession.

And by his opinion also, If a man claimed a rent or common in land, that is
so holden with such force that he can not distraine for the one, nor use the
other, this a force remoueable by this statute, but the party can have no
restitution here made unto him.

One person alone may commit this forcible entry, so also may he be punishable
for deteining of the possession by force. Entering or holding with force.
And it seems that this entry or deteyning must be with some offens^ue
weapons, as with bows, bills, swords, stones, harness or such like, yet
Mar. is of opinion, that if the Justice of Peace come and find the doors
shut, and they within denying him to enter, this is a deteyning with force, and
he may thereupon commit them.

If it be found that diverse persons have made a forcible entry to the use and
behouse of a stranger that is absent, although he does after agree unto it, but
enters not him self, this is no force in him, for says 2. H. 7. 16. A
forcible entry can not be without an entering actually.

Inquiry
The inquiry is to be of Jurors that must have lands or tenements of the
yearly value of xl. s by year at the least above all reprises. And Mar. is of
opinion, that if it be not so, the party grieved may stay the restitution for
that cause. But how he can hinder the restitution that the Justice of Peace is
to make upon such a verdit, otherwise than by causing the record thereof to be
removed into the Kings Benche I do not well perceive.

After the forcible entry, or the deteyning with force, or both be found by
the enquest, the Justice of Peace ought either by himself to put the party
grieved in possession again, or else he may direct his precept to the Shirife
to restore him. Restitution
But if that Justice of the Peace which made the inquiry, do happen to dye
before he make restitution, whether the other Justices of the Peace may at
their Quarter Seassions, having the record of that Inquiry delivered unto
them, award a writ of Restitution to the Shirife or no, if may be some doubt,
(albeit Mar. be of that opinion,) because it seems that they have no
authority to deal with that Record. But this is certain, that of that
presentment were received into the Kings Benche, the party grieved, then might
well enough have restitution awarded him out of that Court. 7. E. 4. 18. and 4.
H. 7. 18.

And in some cases there may be double or cross restitution made says Mar.
As if it be found that I my self was seized until A disseysed me with force,
whom also B. disseised with like force: in this case if A. have restitution
against B. the may I also pray myrestitution against A. But if I first have
restitution, then (says he) A. has lost ye advantage of his.

And if it were found by one Inquiry that I my self was saised until A.
disseised me with force, and by any other Jury found that the said A. was
saised until by me disseised with force, then every of us (says he) may pray
restitution, against the other. And he shall be in the worst case that has the
first restitution, for the other also (says he) shall have his restitution
after.

If two Iointenants were put out by force and one of them only would Complain
and seek for restitutio^, though this special matter were found by the
Inquest, yet should he that sued for it have restitution: And this would not
work any seuerance of the Jointure between them, Mar.

Restitution is not to be made but only to the party which was put out. And
threfore if the father were put out by force, and dies after inquiry and
before restitution, his heir shall never have restitution upon this statute,
no more than the executors of Lessee for years that was put out, shall have any
restitution, Mar.

If a writ of restitution be awarded to the Shirife, and he returns that he
is so resisted that he can not bring the party into his possession, he is to
be amerced for that return, says Mar. for he may take the power of the
county to execute the precept.

The case may be such, that the force is not punishable by any Justice of
Peace, upon this statute, nor any restitution can be made at all. As if the
house or lands be in one Cou^tie, and the men (forcibly arrayed for defense
thereof) be in a house or lands, that is in the County adjoining, no Justice
of Peace can meddle with this matter upon this Statute. No more can they if the
place it self extend into two Counties, and the parties remove their force
(before the coming of the Justice) out of that County wherein he is a
Justice, Mar. For Justices of the Peace have no power out of their own
Counties, but in certain especial cases given unto them by Statutes.

Lastly, upon the prouisoe in the latter end of this Statute concerning their
holding with force, which have had possession by the space of three years or
more, there arises some matter of doubt in mine opinion, how far the benefit
of that clause ought in good equity to be extended. three years possession.
For I find a difference taken 14. H. 7.28. between an action brought upon
the statute, and an indictment founded thereupon. In the action (says M.
Fineux) it will be a good bar for the defendant to plead, that he has kept
possession by three years space, yea though he has done so all that time by
force. But upon an indictment, possession by twentye years space together by
force, shall be no plea at all against the king, nor hinder the party of his
restitution out of the kings benche. Which opinion has been and still is
received for law, as I have learned. Yet if we consider well the reason of the
inserting of that prouisoe unto the statute, perhaps the diversity will not
fall out in all respects to be so reasonable, as it seems at the first show
to be plausible. For when this statute had in general terms brought within
the penalty of 15. R. 2 ca. 2. all such as should deteine any lands or teneme
ts with force, after that they had entered into the same in peaceable manner: yet
was it thought convenient (as in truth it was) to except out of that punishment
met all those, who having made their entries in peaceable manner, especially
upon good title, had continued that possession by three years space, before
any forcible deteyner of ye same, And therefore such persons be not only to
take advantage of that clause in actions brought against them upon the
statute (in mine opinion,) but against the King, to eschew the punishment of a
forcible defense committed, and against the party grieved, to keep him from
any restitution at the hands of the Justice of the Peace also. And therefore
M. Mar. speaks generally, that if the three years possession be found by
the Inquiry, then (...) forcible deteyners shall have the advantage of it,
against the King also, which seems to be a very reasonable opinion,
especially (as I have said) in case where the deteynors did enter peaceably and
by good Title. For so far extends the speech of all the Justice opinions,
22. H. 6. 18 And otherwise I see not how that may well stand which M Fineux him
self afterward 21. H. 7. 39. affirms, saying, that A man's house is his
Castle, which he may defend with force against any private army that shall
invade him. Nevertheless in the principll case 14. H. 7. 28. being as it is
there put of a wrongful entry, and that with force, and of the continuance of
that possession with force also by diverse years, I see no great reason why
such a disorder person should by any continuing of his wrong, take benefit by
this prouisoe either against the King upon an Indictment, or against the party
grieved to stay his restitution or to conclude him in an action brought upon
this Statute.

But now, whether such as be Indicted map be admitted to their Trauers before
the same Justice of the Peace or no, and where or before whom this Trauers is
to be made or received, I will not take upon me here to discuss. Tender of
Trauers.
This seems upon both the Statutes to be plain, that such persons as the
Justice of the Peace does find and see, continuing the force at his coming,
may be immediately committed by him to the next Jail without any gainesaying,
there to remain convict of that offense by the only record of the same
Justice, till they shall have made fine and ransom to the King for the same.
But upon the inquiry, it seems that he has no further power given unto him
by this last statute, than to make restitution only. And therefore the surest
may in this case is, to deliver over the Indictment either to the Custos
Rotulorum, or to the Istices of Jail delivery, as in other cases they were in
old time by the statute of 4. E. 3. ca. 2 appointed to do, or rather into the
kings Benche, referring the further proceeding thereupon unto their power an
authority.

And again, as touching the Assessement of the fines upon the offenders by
him committed to the Jail, some do think, that the self same Justice that
committed them, should have sufficient authority also to put them to their
fine, and upon pleuges found for the payment of it, to deliver them out of
prison again. Assesing the fine.
For (say they) he is the only Judge of that offense, and only has the
custody of that Record, and knows best how to rate the fine according to the
greatness of the trespass. And as he is bound by his oath and dewtie, (in
their opinion) to make out estreites of all Jssues and amercements growing due
to the Queen by such an Inquiry, so ought he also to estreit this fine and
send it up into the Eschequer, that from that Court the Shirife may be
commanded to leuy it to the Queens behoof. Yet to avoid all doubt, it
seems here also ye better course, to refer that matter to the Quarter
Sessions, or rather to the coming of the Justices of Jail delivery into the
Country.

These things thus said, I will (for the more complete furniture of the
Justice of the Peace in this service against forcible Entries) arm him with
these feme precedents following.

The Mit^imus to the Jail testifying the holding with force.

RObert Bing, one of the Justices of the Peace of our Sovereign Lady the
Queens Majesty within her County of Kent, to the keeper of her Majesty's
Jail at Maidstone in the said County, and to his deputy and deputies there,
and to every of them, greeting. Upon complaint made unto me by C. D. of Ightham
in the said county Yeoman, that one A. B. etc. and other Malefactors had
forcibly, and with strong hand entered into his house, etc. in Ight. aforesaid,
and him expulsed, and the same yet hold with force, I went this present day
to the said house, and there found the said A. B. etc. forcibly holding the
said house, etc. with bows and arrows, coats of plate, and long piked
staves, to the great disturbance of her Majesty's Peace, and against the form
of the Statutes in that behalf ordained: And therefore I send you by the
bringers hereof, the bodies of the said A. B. etc. convicted of the said
forcible holding by my Record, commanding you and every of you, in her
Majesty's name, that ye receive them, and safely keep them in your said
Jail, until that they shall have made their fine and ransom to the Queen,
and be delivered thence by order of the Law: hereof fail ye not upon the
petill that will fall thereon. Yeouen at Wrotham under my Seal, this 2. day of
September in the xxiij. year of our said sovereign Lady Elizabeth, etc.

And for his Inquiry, upon such a force, as follows:

The Precept to the Shirife.
RObertus Bing, vnus Iusticiariorum Domine Reginae, ad pacem in comitatu
Kanciae conseruanda^ assignatoru^, vicecomitt eiusde comitatus salutem: Ex
part dictae Dominae Reginea tibi mando and praecipio, quod venire facias coram
me apud Ightham in comitatu praedicto, 20. die Septem. proximo futuro. 24.
probos sufficientes and legales homines de Viceneto de Ightha^ preadicta,
quorum quilibet habeat xl.sol. terraru^ and tenementorum vel redditunm per
annum ad minus vltrareprisas, adinquiredum super sacramentu^ sunm, si A. B. and
alij malefactores et pacis dict. Dominae Reginae perturbatores, in vnu^
mesuagium and december acras terrae and alia tememeta de C. D. Yeoman, in Ightham
praedicta, manu forti, super possessionem praedict. C. D. ingressisu^t, aut
eadem cum fortitudine adhuc tenent and occupant. Et vide as, quod super
quolibet Iuratoru^ in hac part impanellandoru^ xx sol. de exitibus ad primu^
diem returns, and hoc nullatenus omittas sub paena xx. t^. quam noueris te
incursuru^, si in executione praemissoru^ tepidus ant remissus fu eris: Et
habeas ibi tune hoc praeceptum. Test me praefato R. B. 10. die scptem. Anno
regni dictae Dom. nostrae Eliz. dei gatia Angl. Fran. and Hib. Reginae, fidei
defensoris, etc. 23

And upon default of appearance of these Jurors, an Alias may be awarded, and
after ye Pluries infinite, til they come, but so that at the day of the second
Writ rl.and. must be returned, at the third Writ C.and. and at euetie day
after, the double.

The Inquiry (or Verdu) of the Jurors.
INquisitio pro Do. Reginae, capta apud Ightha^, in commit. Kanc. 20. die Sept.
An. reg. Do. nostrae Eliz etc. 22. super sacramentu^. A. D. E. F. G. I. L. M.
etc. cora^ R. B. vno Iusticiariorum dict. Do Reginae ad pacem in dicto comitatu
conseruanda^ assignatoru^. Qui disunt, quod vbi C. D de Ight. praedict. Yeoma^
diu legitime and pacifi^ setsitus fuit in dominico suo vt de feodo de vno
mesuagio, etc. cu^ pertinetys in Ight. praedict. and possess. sua^ sic
continuauit, quousque A. B. de.etc.andalij etc. i. die Sept. vlt. elapso, vt
and armis, viz. cu^ baculis gladija, arcubus sagittis, loricis, galeis, gunnis,
in mesuagium praedictum etc. intrauerunt, acipsum C. D. inde expulerunt, and
idem mesuagium etc.a praedicto die etc. vsque ad die etc. cu^ huiusmodi
fortitudine andpotentia tenuerunt and occupauerunt, in magnam pacis dict. Dom.
Reginae perturbationem, ac contra formam statuti tn tali casu editi and
prouisi, vbinullus eorum, nec aliguis alius cuins statum ipsi aut aliguis little
habuerunt ant habuit, aliquid in eodern mesnagio etc. aut aliqua inde parcella,
habuerunt aut habuit infra tres annos proximos ante ingressum suum praedict.
neque alio tempore praecedente, ad notuiam Iuratorum praedictornm.

The Warrant for restitution, to the Shirife, if the Justice himself will not
make restitution.
ROb. Bing, vnus Iusticiariorum etc. assignatorum, Vicecomiti einsdem comitat
us Salatem: Cuem per quandam Inquisitionem patriae coram me captam apud Ightham
in co. mitatu praedicto 20. die Sept.etc.super sacrametum ac per formam Statuti
in huiusmodi casu prouitsi co^pertum fuerit, quod A. B. etc.and alij etc. die
etc. anno etc. in quodda^ mesuagiu^ etc. Christopheri D.etc. in Ightham
pradicta, vi et armis ingressifuerint, ac ipsum C. D. inde expulerunt, et
pradict. mesuagiu^, etc. a praedicto die, etc. vsque ad diem etc. manu forti,
and cum potentia tenuerumnt and occupauerunt, prout per Inquisitionem
praedicta^plenius liquer de Recordo: Ideo ex part dict. Dom. Reginae tibi
mando and praecipio, quod ad hoc debite requisitus, vna cum posse comitatus tui
(sinecesse fuerit) accedas ad mesuagium and caetera premissa, aceadem cum
pertinentijs reseisiri facias, and prafatum C. D. ad, and in, plenam
possessionem suam inde, prout ipse ante ingressum praedict. fuer at, restitui,
and mitti facias, iuxtra formam dicti statuti de ingressibus manu forti factis
editi and prouisi: and hoc nullatenus omittas, periculo incu^bente. Test me
prafato, etc,

I will now come to the performance of ye promise which I made, concerning ye
statute of Northampton: for that also is now of late days chiefly put in ure
for the punishment of Forcible Cntries. The execution of a Writ upon the
Statute of Northam.
That Law (in effect, and for this purpose) is thus: No man whatsoever (except
the Kings servants and Ministers, in his presence, or in executing his
precepts, or their Offices, and such as shall assistthem: and except it be upon
cry, or proclamation made for arms, to keep the Peace, and that in places
where such acts do hape) be so hardy to come before the kings Justices, or
other his Ministers doing their offices, with force and arms: Nor bring any
force in affray of the Country: nor go, nor ride armed, by night, or by day
in faires or Markets, or in presence of the Justices or other ministers, nor in
my place elsewhere, upon pain to forfeite his Armoure to the King, and his
body to prison at the Kings pleasure. 2 E. 3. ca. 3.

Upon this Statute, he that is put out, or holden out of his land with force,
uses to have at this day a Writ directed out of the Chauncerie, either to the
Shirife only (as M. Fitz in his Not. Br. Fol 249. rehearses it, for I find
if not in the Register of Writs) or else Custodibus pacis, ac Vicecomiti, and
coru^ cuiliber (as the common manner is) commanding, that Proclamation be made
upon this Statute, and that if any be afterward found offending against the
same, that then they shall be committed to Prison (there to remain until that
some other commandment be given concerning them) and that their armor and
weapon shall be prised, and the same aunsweared to the use of the Rueene.

But, forasumuch as that Justice of Peace, (to whom this Writ shall be
delivered) is to make execution of the same, as a Minister only, and is to
Certify his dwing therein, I think good to lend him these few helps toward
it.

At his coming to the place, where the force is supposed by this Writ. he may
cause the Oyes for silece to be made, with this, or such an other Proclamation.
The Queens Majesty's Justice of her Peace straightly charge, and in her
Majesty's name commands all and every person to keep silence, whilst her
Majesty's Writ upon the Statute made at Northampton in the 2. years of King E.
3. her noble Progenitour, delivered to the said Justice, be read, and
Proclamation be thereupon made accordingly.



Then may he read the Writ, as declare the effect thereof in English.

After that let the Oyes be made again, and thereupon may this Proclamation
follow. Her Majesty's said Justice, does in her Highness name, and by virtue
of her said Writ, straightlye charge and command, that no manner of
person, of what estate, degree, or condition soeuen, now being within the
house of B. etc. named in the said Writ, shall go armed, nor keep force of
armor or weapon, nor do any thing there, or elsewhere, in disturba^ce of her
Majesty's Peace, or in offense of the said Statute, upon the pains of loosing
his said armor and weapon, and of imprisoning of his body at her Majesty's
pleasure.

God save the Qucene.



This done, the Justice may enter, and search whyther there be any force of
armor or weapon worn or borne against this Proclamation: or otherwise he may
enquire thereof by a Jury (for so the Writ it self does warrant him to do)
and if any such be sound, he ought to imprison the offenders, and to seize and
praise the armoure and weapon so found with them, But if (upon the Proclamation
made) they do depart in peaceable manner, then has he no warrant by the Writ to
commit them to prison.

And what weapons be offensive in the case of this Statute, he shall the better
discern, if he take with him these few lines drawn out of M. Bractons
Book, Fol. 162. where he speaks of the like violent disseisine, shus: Est
euam vis armata, non solum si quis venerit cum telis, verumetiam omnes illos
dicimus armatos, qui habent cum quo nocere possunt. Telorum autem appellatione,
amnia in quibus singuli homines nocere possunt, accipiuntur: Sed si quis
venerit sine armis, and in ipsa concertatione ligna sumpserit, fustes, aut
lapides, talis dicetur vis armat a. Si quis autem venerit cu^ armis, armis
tamen ad deijciendum non vsus fuerit, et deiecerit, vis armata dicitur esse
facta. Sufficit enim terror armorum, vt videatur armis detecisse.

But now let me show him a Form of Certificat (or return) of this Writ into
the Chauncerie and then make an end.

Upon the Writ it self these words may be Endorsed.

Executio istius Brcuis patet, in quadam Scedula eidem Breui consuta.

And the Scedule may be thus:
EGo Wilhelmus Lambarde vnus Iusticiarioru^ pacis Dominae Reginae in comitatu
Kanciae, certifico in Cancellariam dictae Dominae Reginae, quod virtute istius
Breuis mihi primo deliberati, public proclamari ex part dictae Dominae
Reginae feci, apud B. cuius in dicto Breut sit mentio (tali die etc) prout in
dicto Breui praecipitar: Et quod quidam. A. C. and D. E. de F. in comitatu
praedicto Laborers, praedictam proclamatio^e paruipendentes, post
proclamationem sic facta^ armatiiuerunt, ac armatam potentiam duxeru^t,
scilicet duas galeas, vnum arcum, and december sagittas, duos gladious, and
totidem pugiones, in perturbationem pacis dictae Do. Reginae, ac terrorem
popule sus, necnon in contemptum Statuti in dicto Breui specificats,
manifestum: Ac proinde, dict. A. C. and D. E. vna cum armataris fuis arrestaui
ac seisiui, and little corpora adproximam prisona^ dictae Dom. Reginae in
comitatu praedict. duci feci, ibidem moratura donec aliud a dicta Dom. Regi^^
Proipsorum deliberatione habouero in ma^datis. Armatur as etiam little praedict.
appretiari feci, per A. B. C. D. and E. F. de B. praedict. Yeomen, ad hoc
iuratos: qui dicunt, quod praedictae duae galeae valent x. s Et quod dict.
arcus and. 10. sagittae valent, vj. s Et quod gladij praedict. valent xx. s. Et
quod dictae pugiones vgalent. v. s. and sic quod armaturae praedict. valent in
tot xlj. s. de quibus paratus sum respondere secundum tenorem dicti Breuis. In
cuitus rei testimonium, huic praesentas certificationimeae sigillum meum
apposm. Dat. apud B. praedict. die and Anno supradictis.

By this you have seen, what one Justice of the Peace ought to do in execution
of this Statute as a Minister: and by the same you may also see, what he may
do therein of himself, Ex efficio, as a Judge, and without any Writ,
brought unto him, if one Justice may deal therein as a Judge.

For not only by the plain words of the Statute of Northampton, the Wardeins
of the Peace, have power (within their Wards) and are commanded to execute
this Act upon a prins. But also by express speech in the Commission it self,
eucrye Wardein of the Peace has the Statute of Northampton committed to his
charge. So that both in the matter and manner, the doing is all one, saving
that if he do it as a Judge he needs notto make any proclamation, the Statute
being a prohibition in it self, nor yet to send any Certificat into the
Chauncerie but only to make his own Record of that which he shall do in this
behalf, and thereout to send some estreit into the Eschequer, that the Queen
may be answered of the Armor or of the value there of. And here prehappes the
redemption of the imprisonment may be at the same Justices discreation, as in
the former Statutes of 15. R. 2: and 8. H. 6. it seems to be.

Of other breaches of the Peace, with a multitude, as by Riot, Route, or other
unlawful Assembly etc.
CHAP. XIX.
Our Parliaments seeing well that the assembly of many for breach of the
Peace, offers more danger and hurt, both generallye to the Commune wealth
wherein it happens, and perticularly to him against whom it is bent, than the
force of any one or two turbulent persons can bring, have no less carefully
endeavored to suppress the one, than wisely foreseen to prevent and punish
the other. And therefore, not only the Commission gives power to enquire of
Conuenticles against the Peace, but sundry Statutes also have devised many
means and pains to meet with, and to punish the same, whereas before they wet
punishable only, as other trespasses, though sometimes by a greater, and
sometimes by a smaller fine, as the case it self required. Conuenticles.


Unlawful Connenticles be not al of one fort: for sometimes those are called
Conuenticles, wherein many do impart with others their meaning to kill a man, or
to take one an others part in all things, or such like: Champerties also,
Maintenances, Conspiracies, Confederacies, and giving of Liueries to other than
to Meniall Servants and officers, be contained under the word Conuenticles
says Mar. And it appears, (27. lib. Assi. Pl. 44.) to be one of the
Articles enquirable in the Kings bench whether any persons take others to their
Auowment and Protection, and receive of them rentes (or other gifts) yearly
in the name of Chyuage (or rther Cheifage) because they seem to take upon them
to be their Cheifes, heads, or leaders. Chyuage.


But, for as much as all these couenaunts may be without any apparent show of
Assembly against the Peace (though otherwise they be finable offenses under
ye name and calling of Conuenticles as Mar. thinks) I will leave them, and
resort to those orther that bring manifest terror to the Subject.

Of these some consist of a number of people gathered together disorderly for
ye cause of some one or of a few persons, and do not breed any general or
present danger to the Estate or Couernement, and yet be against law, and be
called Riots, Routs, and Unlawful asseblies against the law, against which the
Statutes 13. H. 4. ca. 7:2. H. 5. ca 8: and 19. H. 7. ca. 13 were specially
provided: and before that, the penaltic of the Statute of Nort. 2. E. 3. ca. 3
ordained to be laid upon them by 2. R. 2. ca. 6. But others there be that
savor of a more general disobedience, and be (either in regard of the
number or quarrel) a very Seed of Rebellion if not the Weed it self, and
are therefore also sometimes called Rumors, great Ridings, Routs and Riots,
against the Peace 5. R. 2. ca. 6:7. R. 6.and17. R. 2. ca. 2. sometimes
Assemblies of people in great number, in manner of insurrection^. H. 5. ca. 9.
and sometimes Rebellio is Infurrections and Rebellious Assemblies 15. R. 2. c.
2:8. H. 6. ca. 14: and 1. Mar. Parl. 1. ca. 12. Of all which (so farrefoorth
as the Iusices of peace have interest in them) I will entreat, but yet
severally, and so, as either one, or more of the Justices of Peace have to do
with them, and that out of the Sessions.

They of the first kind be, as I have said, commonly called Riottes, Unlawful
Assemblies and Routes. But concerning the proper difference that is between
each of these three, all men do not thoroughly agree. And therefore (rejecting
al diversities of opinions) I will follow ye which I take to be most colorable
and most commonly received at this day: wherein nevertheless I submit my self
unto ye experience of ye Starchamber as to the best direction Ye the Justices
of Peace can have to follow in this case.

Riot seems to come of the French word Riotte. Rioter, which signifies to
braule, or scolde, for commonly Riottes in deed do follow of braulling in
word. Riotte.
And it is taken to be, Where there is an unlawful assembly of me (gathered
together) to commit an unlawful act, and they do excecute it in deed: as to
beat a man, or to enter upon a possession forcibly, or such like: ye fact is
properly called a Riot.

An Unlawful Aslebly is, ye company of three Unlawful persons (or more)
gathered together to do Assembly. such an unlawful act, although they do it
not in deed. Vnlzwful Assembly.


Our Rout is ye very same which ye Germans do yet call Rot, meaning a band or
great company of me gathered together and going about to execute, or executing
in deed, any Kiot or unlawful act. Route.
And (says Mar.) it is said properly of ye multitude ye assemble themselves in
such disorderly sort, for their common quarrel. As if the inhabitants of a
Towneship do assemble to pull down a hedge or pale, to have their Common,
where they ought to have none, or to beat a man, that has done them some
public offense or displeasure. But the Statute of 18. E. 3. Sta. 1. Which
gives process of vtlagarie against such as bring Routes into the presece of
the Justices or in Affray of the people: And the Statute of 2. R. 2. ca. 6.
that speaks of riding in great Routes to make entry into lands and to beat
others, and to take their wives etc. do seem to understand it more largely.
And it is a Route whether they put their purpose in execution or no, if so be
that they do go, ride, or move forward after their meeting. Broo. Tit. Riotte.
4. and 5. So as it seems a Route should be a special kind of Unlawful
Assembly. And a Riot, the disordered fact committed generally by any unlawful
Assembly.

Howsoever that be, two things are commune both to Riotte, Route, and
Unlawful Assembly: the one, that three persons (at the least) be gathered
together, for so is it commonly taken at this day, as I have learned. Things
Commune, and considerable, in Riottes etc.


The other, that their being together do breed some disturbance of the Peace,
either by signification of Speech, show of Armor, turbulent Gesture, or
actual and crpresse Violence so that either the peaceable sort of men be
unquieted and feared by the Fact, or the lighter sort and busy bodies
emboldned by the Example.

And, in these matters, not only the Fact it self, but also the Manner of
doing the same, fallcth sometimes justly into consideration: in so much as,
the lawfulness, or unlawfulness, of the thing it self that is done or
intended, does not always excuse or accuse the parties to a Riotte, Route, or
Unlawful Assembly, but so, that the Order and Circumstance of the doing,
must also be brought into indgement with it.

And therefore (says Maisler Marrow) the manner of the doing of a lawful
thing may make it unlawful: As, if many in one company (riding, or going, to
the Sessions, Fair, Market, or Church it self) will ride, or go armed, to
the terror of the people. And contrariwise, an Assembly to do a wrong (sateth
he) may be so handled, that it shall prove none of chese offenses: as, if I
gather mecte company together, to carry away a piece of Timber (which will
not be moved without a good many) whereto I pretends right, though in law it
be an other man's. And so also to do an unlawful thing, as if many do meet
to play at bowies, tables, or Cards, and do use no missebehauior against ye
Peace, they are not punishable in this degree. And yet, if he ye carries the
piece of timber away, will use dreadful words, as to say, ye he will carry it in
spite of him that has it, or ye he will have it, though he die for it, or
such like, his doing may their prove a Riot The manner and handling of a thing,
may make it either blameworthie or blameless.
.

Furthermore, ye intetio^ and purpose, of those ye be assebled, is worthy ye
weighing. For, to use harness on Didsomer night in London, or on Day day in ye
country, for sporteonly, is no such offense, seeing no terror follows of it,
and the words in terrore populs seem to be material in an Inditemet of this
kind. So, if ye Shirite or his Bailie do leuy people to serve ye Queens writs
of Capias, or if a Constable do gather assistance of me with weapon to part an
Assray, it makes no Riot. 3. H. 7. 1 and 10. So if ama^ (hearing ye another
will fetch him out of his house and beat him) do assemble company with force,
it will be no unlawful assembly 21. H. 7. 39. And so also if many be
assebled, and none of them knows to what end, it can make no Rout nos Riot
(as M. Mar. thought) til ye intent be known. For if the master intend to
make a Riot, and take his usual servants with him, not foretelling the what he
intedeth, and the commits an outrage with the, this is no Riot in the: for
although he shall be punished, they shall be excused. But otherwise it is, if
he make the privy to his purpose. Mar. and in ye report of Daliso. And in ye
former case, it is not material whether his number of servants be above his
degree, or no, so long as they be his Menials or household me. And if a number
of women, or infants (under ye age of discretion) do assemble themselves for
theit own cause, this is no unlawful asseblie punishable by these Statutes: But
if a man of discreation cause them to assemble to commit an unlawful act, then
it is otherwise says Mar. And I remember, ye not many years since women were
punished in ye Starchamber, and ye worthily, for yt (having put off their
seemly shamefastness, and apparelling the^ selves in ye attire of me) the
assebled in great number, and in Riottous manner pulled down an enclosure.

If many be at an Alehouse, a Christmasse dinner, or Churcbale, and (without
any intetio^ of an Affray) they suddenly fall together by ye ears, and make it
Lapitharu^ conutniu^, yet this is no Riot, unless they betake themselves to
parts, for so it will easily become a Riottous assembly. And if 12. Jurors
(being committed to their keeper) do fall out and fight, sire as against six,
this makes no Riot says Mar. because they were lawfully assembled, and were
compelled to be in company together.

Finally, if the Mayor and Communaltie of a town do assemble and make a Route
in their common quarrel, this offense shall be judged and punished in their
Na^^rail persons, and not in their body politic Mar.

Thus far you see, what these offenses be, and in what manner they may be
committed: now therefore behold what power one Justice of the Peace has over
them.

One Justice of the Peace, can neither make inquiry of a Route or Riotte when
it is done, nor assesse any Fine nor yet award any process for it, nor
otherwise meddle with it (in the nature of a Route or Riotte) but only as a
Trespass against the peace, or upon the Statutes of Northampton or of Forcible
Entries before treated of. The power of one lustice of the Peace, in Riotte etc.


And therefore if he hear of any Route or of any intention of a Riot, he alone,
or with his servants may go to ye place, and such as he finds Riottously
assembled and armed, he may arrest to find Suertie of their good abearing, and
may commit them to ward, if they refuse to give it, and take their weapons
from them: And if he come to the place, and do not find the yet come thither,
he may leave his Servants there, to make such arrest when they shall come:
So also, if he be sick, he may send his servants to ye place to arrest them.
And this is the judgment of all the Court, in the case of Sir Thomas Green
14. H. 7. 8. grounded upon the words both of the Commssion of the Peace, and of
the Statute. 24. E. 3. ca. 1 as I take it. But if one Justice of the Peace
alone will take upon him to Record a Riotte that he sees, the party shall
not be concluded thereby, for he may trauerse it: and if the Iussice will
commit one to ward pretending vntruelye yt he did a Riot, where he did none,
an Action of trespass lies for ye party against him. Fitz. Fo. 18.

So that (upon the whole matter) one Justice of the Peace alone may do
somewhat to preuet a Route or a Rior, before it be done, and for the stay of
it whilst it is a doing, but nothing in effect to punish it as a Riotte or
Route, when it is committed and done: For (as Judge Fineux says) (in that case
of Sir Thomas Green) ye Statute which I take to be that of ^4. of E. 3. ca.
1. was giucn as a hasty remedy, and for to prevent a mischief, being
imminent and before the eye, and therefore the law shall largely construe the
authority of a Justice of Peace in that behalf: So that he shall neither
need to make any Precept in wrting, nor to expecte the coming of his
Companions, nor to be present in his own person, but may use al reasonable
means for prevention and stay of the evil. And yet the ordinary power of
punishing Routes and Riots rests not in his hand, but rather belongs to two
Justices of the Peace, as it shall hereafter appear. In the mean time, I will
adioine somewhat out of the Statutes of our own age, the which seeing further
into the perilles that ensue of these unlawful conuentions, have also provided
further, as well in policy to preuente them, as in severity to punish them.

The statutes (1. Mar. Parl. 1. ca. 12: and 1. El. ca. 17.) do make three
degrees of Riottous and Seditious Assemblies, in certain special cases, the
first, consisting of the commune number of three petsons, and being under the
number of twelve: the second of twelve persons (or more) and the third of
forty persons and upward: Al which are to be punished diversely, according to
the number, intent, act, and obstinacy, of the parties assembled: wherein
there is some imitation of an ancient law that King Ina made against thieves,
whose degrees in offense the severed and punished by their number also, saying
thus: theofar we hatath oththe seofan menn: fram seofan hloth oath fif and
thrittig: and syththan here: yt is, Thieves we call them until the number of
seven mem: from seven, a Troop, until 35: and an Army, above that number.
Rebellious and unlawful assemblies.
But I will proceed.

One Justice of the Peace therefore, may (by virtue of these Statutes) make
proclamation in the Queens name, that the persons (assebled in offense of
these laws) shall sever themselves, and depart to their dwellings peaceably:
and withal may (at his difcreation) assemble her Majesty's subjects to take
the: and may also take them indeed if they disobey, and shall be unpunished
for ye hurting, mayming, or killing of any of them, if they make resistance.
Proclamation.
He also is to take the declaration of any person, that (being moved to any
such assembly) will within 24. hours after reveal the same unto him.

Here I must stay and for a time, go no further with these asseblies, because
the power of one Justice of the Peace fails me, and ertendeth no further in
them: the rest shall be disclosed, when order shall lead us to entreat of the
aurtoritie of two Justices.

What other things one Justice of the Peace alone, may do out of the Sessions,
by virtue of Statutes mentioned in the Commission.
CAP. XX.
BEFDKE that I shall descend to show such further parts of power as be
given to one Justice of the Peace by latter Statutes, it shall not be amiss
to take in my way, that remnaunte of his aucthoritye which lies in the
first Assignauimus of the Commission, and has not been yet fully applied to
the practice.

The whole consists of such members as I have already showed, namely of ye
Statute made at Winchester. 13. E. 1. of the Statute made at Northampton. 2. E.
3. ca. 3. the Statute made at Westminster. 5. E. 3. ca. 14. the Statute
mentioned to be made at Cambridge, (but mistaken for Canterbury) 12. R. 2. the
Statutes 1. H. 4. ca. 7: and 2. H. 4. ca. 21: of Liueries: and the Statute 3.
H. 5. ca. 6. and 7. of counterfeting and other falsifying of money.

Of this last Statute, as also of that at Northampton. I have heretofore said
what I thought. Concerning Winchester and Westminster, I say shortly, that by
the form of the Commission as it is, one Justice of the Peace may put the
articles of them in execution: First, by commanding fresh suit, hue and cry,
and search to be made by the Shirffes and Baylifes, and others, after thefts
and robberies: watches to be kept for arresting of suspected persons and
night-walkers: and highwayes to be enlarged: Then by seeing, that two
Constables be in each Hundred and Franchise: by forbidding Fairs and Markets to
be hold in Church yards: by compelling such as be between the age of fifteen
years and threescore, to be sworn to the Peace (for that also is in the
Articles upon the Statute of Winton) and lastly, by charging the Constables to
arrest such as shall be suspected to be Drawlatches, Wastours, or Robertsmen,
that is to say, either myching or mighty thieves, for the meaning must
remain, howsoever the word be gone out of use.

The Statute of Canterbury (made chiefly for Artisicers and Laborers, and
partly for Victualers) is repealed for the first, and runs for the last in a
generality. And as for that law, and those of H. the 4. concerning Liueries, I
see not what one Justice of the Peace may well do toward the execution of
them, further than by commanding the to be observed. For, the forfeiture
grows, either by Attainder upon inquiry, or by Record of the Justices in
their presence, as the Statutes themselves do appoint. And these both do
require two Justices, as the very words thereof, and of the second Assignammus
in their Commission, being in the plural number, do plainly purporte.

For, I do not think that any other manner of execution of these laws by one
Justice of the Peace, ought to be gathered by any general words of the first
Assignauimus. I know, that M. Fitz. in his Not. Br. Fol. 82. says, that albeit
a Justice of the Peace has none express authority within his Commission to
take a Recognusaunce of the Peace, yet of Congruence it follows, that he may
take it, because he has authority in plain words, to cause the Peace to
be kept, and to compel men to find Suertie for the same. And it is a Rule of
Law, Concesso vno aliquo, etiam id concedi videtur, sine quo prius concessum
habers nequit: But how far these things may be drawn, I will not
determine, remembering, that also is an other Kule, In generali concessione non
ventunt ca, quoe quis non esset verisimiliter in specie concessurus.

But as I have said heretofore, A new reforming of the present form of the
Commission would easily remove from us all these doubts.

This I do not like at al, that one Justice of the Peace, should take upon
him to bind an offender against any Penal Law, (being within the power of
Justices of the Peace, but yet neither comprehended in their Commission, nor
committed to the charge of any one of them) to appear at the Sessions, to
aunsmeare to his fault. For, although I have seen sundry old Precedents of
Attachments to be made from one Justice of the Peace against Laborers, to be
before the Justices at their Sessions, to aunsweare to their contempts: yet I
am not persuaded that the like may be done against the offenders of other
Statutes, unless it be specially therein so appointed: no more than it might
have been done in that case of Laborers it self, had not the Statute of
Laborers (25. E. 3. ca. 6.) expressly commanded it.

And I doubt not, but they of the last Parliament were also of this mind with
me: For, if they had thought it generally lawful so to do, they would not
have so specially provided for it, as you shall anon see in the notes of the
Statutes, (23. Eliza.) against Slanderous news, and against the taking of
Pheasants and Partriges. And surely, much harm follows of it, for it falls
out most commonly in experience, that those Justices which be most busy to
take such bonds, be no less ready to release them: and so (playing fast
and loose) they keep (as it were) privy Sessions within their own houses, in
which, both ye Queen loses her Fine and the common wealth an example: and if
the offender loose also, then that (belike) falls to the share of him that
works the deliverance.

And therefore, it were better (as I ween) that such offenders were first
Endited, and then that Process were orderly awarded against them, until that
either they yielded themselves, or were taken, or outlawed.

There is an other thing also, whereof I thought meet to admonish the
Justices of Peace, in this place. Many of them do use to give out their
Precepts to attach persons suspected of Felony, to have them brought before
them, which thing is neither newly devised, nor done without color: for they
have such a Precedent in the old Book of Justices of the Peace Fol. 41. and
there is no doubt, but that if a Felony be done, every man may arrest
whomsoever he suspecteth of it. But for all that, the whole Court (14. H 8.
18.) condemns such Precepts, because, if the Baih^e which serves the
Warrant, have suspicion in the party, he may of himself without the Warrant
arreste him: and if he have not, the Warrant of the Justice of Peace is no
warrant to arrest him, unless he be endited before.

What other things one Justice of the Peace may do, out of the Sessions, by
the power of other Statutes, not mentioned in the Commission.
CHAP. XXI
Seeing the whole power of one Justice of the Peace (as well in the very
business of the Peace it self, as in the execution of some Statutes mentioned
in the Commission) has now at length been rehearsed. Any one Justice of the
Peace.
It is convenient to sum up such other parts of power also as other Statutes
have put into his hands, which done, we will no longer treat of one Justice
alone, but will associate some other unto him.

Every Justice of the Peace is a Conseruator of Rivers within his County: and
(when he may attend it) ought to survey the Wears in Rivers, that they be of
reasonable wideness, and shall survey the offenses of taking Salmons in any
Waters (out of the County of Lancaster) between the Natituitie of the Virgin
Marie, and S. Martins day, and (there) between the feasts of S. Michaell, and
the Purification of the said Virgin: and taking young Salmons at Myll Pooles,
or other places, from the midst of April till midsommer: and of casting
Nets into any Waters, (by which the fry of any fish may be taken) and punish
the same by burning of their Nets and engines. Conseruator of Rivers.
Westminst. 2. ca. 47: 13 R. 2. ca. 19. and 17. R. 2. ca. 9.

One Justice of the Peace may take upon him to hear and order the
controversies, between Masters and servants, touching their departure, and
may allow of the reason, and sufficience of the cause, for which a Master may
put away his retained servant, or the servant may depart before the end of
his term: and may (in Day time or Daruest) upon request, and for the saving of
Corn, grain, or hay, cause such Artificers, and persons (as be meet to
labor) by his discretion to serve by the day, for the getting, cutting,
inning, or carrying thereof, according to the skill and quality of the person,
and may (upon his refusal) imprison him in the Stocks by the space of two
days and one night. Appretices. servants, and labors.
And his testimonial under his hand and seal to such as may pass in Day and
harvest time, from one Shire to another, is sufficient. And he also upon
complaint made, may commit that party to ward, that in his judgment shall
be thought meet, and yet shall refuse to be bound as an Apprentice, according
to the intent of the Statute, there to remain until he be contented so to be
bound. And also may by his discretion upon the complaint of the Apprentice,
take order between his Master and him, and for want of conformity in the
Master, may bind him to appear at the next Sessions before the Justices 5.
Eliz. ca. 4.

If any such person, as is declared to be a Roage Vagabonde, or sturdy Beggar,
by the Statute (14. Eliz. ca. 5.) being above the age of fourteen years,
shall be taken begging, or wandering, or missusing himself, contrary to that
Act, and be brought before a Justice of the Peace, he is presently to commit
him to the common Jail, or to such other place, as shall be by the Justices of
the Peace, (or three of them) at their general Sessions appointed therefore: to
remain there (without bail, or mainprise) till the next Session of Peace, or
general Jail delivery, which shall first happen. Roages and vagabonds.


And the Register book of the Pore within each division of the Justices of
Peace, is to remain with one of the Justices of that division. poor people
And either of those two Justices before whom the Collectours for the poor are
appointed to make their account, may commit him (that shall refuse or neglect
to make his account, by the space of 14. days after request to him thereof
made) to the next Jail, there to remain without bail or mainprise, til he
has made it, and paid the surplussage of his receipt 14. Eliza. ca. 5. Learn
if the Register Book is to have continuance still.

Upon information to any Justice of Peace of any unlawful hunting by night,
or with painted faces, or other disguising (in Forest, Park, or Warrein) of
any person to be suspected thereof, that Justice may make a Warrant to the
Shirife, Constable, Baylife, or other Officer, to take the party, and to have
him before him, or any other Justice of the Peace in that Cou^tie, who may
examine him of that hunting, and of the doers in that behalf, and if he do
wilfully conceal that hunting, or any person with him defective therein, then
the same concealment shall be Felony in such concealour, but if he confess
the truth of all that he shall be examined in that behalf, then his offense of
Hunting, shall be but Trcspasse and Finable at the next general Sessions of
Peace there. 1. H. 7. Hunting.
cap. 7.

Every Justice of the Peace may (as well within Liberties, as without) enter
into any common house or place, where any playing at the Bowls, Coytes,
Cloth, Cayles, halfe-bowles, Lennis, Dice, Cards, Lables, or at any other
game prohibited by any former Statute (of which sort be Footeball, and
casting of the stone by 12. R. 2. ca. 10.) or playing at any unlawful game
(already innented, or hereafter to be invented) shall be suspected to be used
against this Statute: and may arrest as well the keepers of such places, as
the players there, and imprison them until thosc keepers find Suerties to the
Dueeees use (to be bound by a Recognusaunce, or otherwise) no longer to
occupy any such play or place, and that the persons found there playing,
be in like forte bound by themselves, or with Suerties (at the discreation of
the taker) no more to play, or haunte, at, or to, any of the said places, or
at any of the said games. Unlawful games.
And every Justice of the Peace, finding or knowing any person (not exrepted
by this Statute) to use any unlawful game, contrary to this Act, may
commit him to ward, there to remain without bail or mainprise, until he
become bound by Obligation to the Queens use (in a sum to be thought
reasonable to that Justice) that he shall not from thenceforth use such
unlawful games. 33. H. 8 cap. 9.

Any one Justice of Peace (by the large words of the Statute) may enquire,
hear, and determine, by his discretion, as well by examination as otherwise,
the offenses committed in Tilemaking, and assesse the Fine therein limited.
Tyle.
And may call before him (at any time or place) such as have best knowledge
in Tilemaking, and appoint them Searchers of the said defaultes, 17. Edward.
4. cap. 4. But learn whether it be so to be taken or no.

If any Soldier, serving the Dueene in her Wars, do sell, give away,
wilfully purloine, erchaunge, alter, or put away, any Horse, Gelding, Mare, or
Harness, wherewith be shall be set forth, or which being taken from any other
soldier, shall be appointed unto him, and do escape the punishment, which
the Lieutenant, high Admiral, the Kings Deputy the Viccadmirall, Wardein, and
Captain, and their Deputies, in their absence may lay upon him, by this
Staute, then upon complaint and due proof of the offense to be made by the
owner, his executors or Administrators, to any Justice of Peace, where such
offendour shall be found, he shall be by him committed to Ward, there to
remain (without bail or mainprise) till he shall have satisfied the owner,
his executours or Administrators, of such Horse, Gelding, Mare, or Harness so
sold, given away, etc. unless he bring with him before the same Justice,
sufficient testitmonie from the said Lieutenaunt, or any of the persons above
named (in writing under their Seal) testifying, that the said Horse or
Harness, was lost in the Queens service against the will of that Soldier,
or was taken by any of them from him for any reasonable respect, and
appointed to some other to serve wythall 2. and 3. Edwardi 6. cap. 2.
Soldiers selling horse or harness.


If any person (to whom any Agnus Dei, Cross, Picture, Beade, or such
superstitious thing from the Sea of Rome, or the authority thereof, shall be
offered or delivered) do disclose the name and dwelling (or place of resort)
of such offerer or deliueredr, to any Justice of Peace of that Shire, where
he, to whom such offer or delivery is, shall be restant; then that Justice
must (within fourteen days next after) declare the same to some one of the
Queens privy Counsel. Agnees Der.
13. Elizab. cap. 3.

Every Justice of Pear may (within one Month after the speaking or
reporting) commit to Ward, any person, being vehemently suspected of
saying, or reporting of any slanderous news or thles, against the Queens
Majesty, (unless he do put in Suerties to appear at the next Quarter
Sessions, or Jail delivery) there to remain, till he shall find Suerties
for surhe his appearance. Slanderous news.
And may also (within one Month after such speaking, or reporting) rereyue
the accusation thereof, and put the same, and the names of the Witnesses in
writing, and certify it at the next Quarter Sessions, or Jail delivery. 23.
Elizab. ca. 2.

If any offender (confrarie to the Statute provided against the Disturbers of
any Preacher) shall be arrested and brought before a Justice of the Peace,
then be (upon due accusation there upon had by the said arrestor, or othet
person) shall foorthwyth commit the party so taken to safe custody, by his
discretion. Disturbing of Preachers
And within fire days next after the accusation, he and one other Justice of
Peace sall, etc. 1. Mar. Parlia. 1. ca. 3. But enquire, if all this Statute be
not repealed by 1. Elizab. cap. 2. in general worbes at the latter enbe thereof

Every Justice of the Peace may (within one Month after the arrival) seize
all the gwdes of any outlandishe persons (calling themselves Egiptians) that
shall come into this Kealme: and may also keep the one moitie thereof to his
own bse, making account to the Queen in the Escheaquer for the other moifie.
Egiptians.


And every person that can prove by two credible witnesses before him that so
seazeth, that any of those goods were craftily, or feloniously taken from him,
shall be incontinently restored thereto before the party that so seized them,
upon pain of the double valewe thereof to be forseifed to such proouer. 22.
H. 8. cap. 10. But note, that after the Month, the offense is made Felony,
and then it seems, the Queen is to have the goods wholly. 1. and 2.
Phil.and. Mar. ca. 4.

If any one Justice of the Peace do join with the Clearke of the Peace in
taking the Inroilment of an Indenture of bargain and sale of lands, fenements,
or heredifaments, lying in that County where he is Iultice, it is sufficient
as it seems by the words of the Statute. Inrollmer
27. H. 8. cap. 16.

Every Justice of Peace may eramine and search (by his discrefion) such as do
seel or set soorth so be sold any Candels, and other works of Ware, at higher
price than after the rate of four pence the pound, over the common price of
plain Ware, between Merchant and Merchant: and may also punish them by
forfeiture of the work fette forth to sale, and of the balewe of that which
is sold, and by Fine to the King. Warke of Wax
11. H. 6. ca. 12. as it seems by the large words of the Statute.

Any one Justice of Peace, is warranted to fette on the Pillorie, in the next
Market Town to the place of offense, any person that has broken the Assise of
Fuel, and is convicted thereof, and not able to pay the forfeiture, there to
be at eleauen of the clock upon the Market day, with a Billet or Faggot
bound to some part of his body. Assizes of Fuel.
7. E. 6. ca. 7. but consider, whether a Justice of Peace, may conuicte him of
the said forfeiture or no: for it seems by the words of the Statute, that
he is to be rather a Minister, than a Judge in that case.

If any person (above fireteene years of age) do by the space of twelve
Months, forbear to repair to some Church, Chapel, or usual place of
common Prayer, contrary to the tenor of the Statute (1. Eli. ca. 2.) then any
one Justice of Peace of the County where such offender shall dwell or be, may
make Certificat thereof in writing into the Kings Bench, to the end, that the
offender may there upon be bound in 200.lb at the leaft with sufficient
suerties to the good behavior for yt this so long obstinacy, besides the
other penalties 23. Repair to the Church.
Eliz. cap. 1.

Every Justice of Peace may eramine offenses against the Statute made for
preservation of Phesants, and Patriches, and against hauking in Corn (if the
same offenses be not before lawsully heard, or determined otherwise) and may
take bond of the offender with good suerties for his appara^ce af the nerf
general Seisions of the Peace, to aumswere to the said offense, and to pay the
penalty, or receive the punishment due therefore: and may also after conviction
and punisment of such offender, in taking or killing Phesa^ts or Patriches,
take like bosd of him and suerties, that for the space of two years, he shall
not offend against the said Statute. Phesants, and Patriches.
23. El. ca. 10.

If seems that one Justice of the Peace, may (upon complaint of the party
grieved) eramine the Shirife, Vndershirife, and Plaintiff, concerning the
taking or entering of plaintes in their Conntie Courts and books against the
Statute: And if he find thereby any fault or offense committed, that shall
stand for a sufficient conviction and attainder, without any further inquiry
or examina mination: So may be also eramine the Bailic of the Hundred for not
warning of the Defendant in such a plaint, according to his precept from the
shirife or Vndershinte, and if thereby he find a default and offense, that
also shall stand for a sufficient condemnation. Plaints in the County Courts.
And the said Justice must Certific those eraminations within a quarter of a
year into the Eschequer.

And further the Custos Rotulorum or ye Elbeft of ye Quorum in his absece,
ought (at the General Sessrions after S. Michael) appoint two Iuslices of the
Peace (the one being of ye Quorun to have the over fight and controlement of
the said Shirifes etc. and of ye amercemets. And that one of those Justices may
examine and (without further inquiry) convict the gatherers of the same, if
they gather any more money than is contained in their lawful Esfreites. 11. H.
7. ca. 15.

The Cerificate of one Justice of Peace (joined with the Customer of the place)
of the vnlading and felling of Corn, Grain, or Cattle, carried by Water from
one place to an other of this kealme unto the Customer and Controller of the
place where the same was embarked, is sufficient and enough upon the Statute
of forestalling. Certificar of selling Corn.
5. Edward. 6. cap. 14: and. 13. Eliz. cap. 25.

One Justice of peace may take out of Sanctuary certain abiured persons
thither and others being indicted of some kind of offenses mentioned in the
Statute, done after they become Sanctuary men, and may commit them to the
Jail in the Countis where the indictment is found, til they be tried.
Sanctuary pers^^.
22. H. 8. ca. 14.

Every person finding or seacute;eing any to offend the Statutes made
against the shooting in Crossebowes and Handgunnes, may arreste and bring, or
convey him to the next Justice of the Peace of the County, wherein be was
found offend, who (upon due examination and proof thereof before him made)
may by his difscreation commit him to the Jail, there to remane tpll be shall
truly pay the one moitie of the for feyture of this Statute, to the Queen,
and the other moitie to such (...) bringer or co^ueyer. Crosfebowes and
handguns.
33. H. 8. cap. 6. Here therefore this Iustrce of Peace having (as it seems)
the whole matter committed to him self in this case, is to be very
circumspecte therein, least he too hastelye conbemne the guiltless, or
negtigently^ suffer the offender to escape, for upon the offense sufficiently
proved, it is necessary that in his Mittimus or precept to ye Jailer there be
contained the names of all the parties, the offense, and how long he is to be
held in prison. And further he is to make a Record of this matter, and send
the Estreit thereof into the Eschequer, whereby the Barons may have intelligence
of the same, to have the Queens duty levied to her use. The form of this
Mittimus may be easily drawn by some other Precedents in this Book.

Every person (other than such as are auctorifed by value of 100. th. in
lands) ought, if he be auctorised to shoot, and do inhabit in the Country,
present his name to ye next Justice of Peace adjoining. And there upon the
Justice ought to present and record the same before the Justices of the Peace
at the next quarter Sessions 2 E. 6. ca. 14 But learn of others, whether this
matter is to have cotinuaunce still, or else did only extended to such
persons as had license at that time.

The Superuisors for amendment of ye highwayes, ought within one month after
any offense done by any against the Acts (2. and 3. Ph. and Ma. ca. 8: and 5.
Eli. ca. 13.) present that offense to the next Justice of the Peace: And there
upon he ought to certify the same at the next General Sessions within the
same County. Highwaies.
5. El. ca. 13.

Every Justice of Peace (as it seems) within the Shires next adjoining to
the river of Thamis, within their several jurisdiction, has power upon
complaint made unto him by the Duerseers and Rulers of the Whirrymen and
Waterme or two of the, or the masters of any such servant, both to examine,
hear, and determine all offenses committed against the Statute, and to set at
large him that shall be imprisoned, by the overseers and rulers, if there be
iufte cause, and also by his discreation to punish the overseers and Rulers,
that shall unjustly punish any person. Thamis.
2. and. 3. Phi. and Mar. cap. 16.

Every Justice of Pease (before whom any person, arrested for Manflaughter or
Felome, or suspicion thereof) shall be brought, ought (before he commit him
to prison) to take the examination of such prisoner, and the information of
those that bring him, and to put the same (or so much thereof as shall be
material to prove the Felony)in writing within two days after, and to take
Bond of all such as do declare any thing material to prove the offense, to
appear at the next General Jail delivery, and to glu^ evidence there
against the party. Examination of Felons to be committed.
2. and. 3. Ph. and Mar. ca. 10.

This bond spoken of in this Statute, and in some such like, seems to be met
of a Recognusa^ce, to be acknowleged to ye Queens use with Condition for the
person maunce of that, for which the Statute appoints it to be taken, For (as
before has been said) even as in the case of Suertie of the Peace and Good
Abearing. The form of the bond mentioned in this last Statute.
The Justice of the Peace takes usually a Recognusance, and is well warranted
so to do, being made a Judge of Record as touching matters of the Peace
though he has no full words for him neither in any Statute nor in his
Commission. So being auctorified by this Statute to deal in this matter, he
may be well said to hauetherin enclosed by a very good Congruence, power also to
Record the acknowledging of a sum of money to be forfeited to ye Queen, upon
not performing the Condition of the same.

The party therefore that informs against the Prisoner, may be thus bound, in
a single Recognusance.
MEmorandum quod 3. die September anno regni Dominae nostrae Elizabe. dei gratia
etc. 23. D. E. de Brasted in comitatu praedicto Yeoman personaliter coram me
Thoma Potter, vno Insticiarioru^ etc. adpace etc. assignatorum constitutus apud
Brasted praedict. recognoust se debere dictae Dominae Reginae december libras
bonae and legalis monetae Angleae, de bonis and catallis, terris and tenementis
suis fieri and leuari ad opus dictae Dominae Reginae, haeredum and successorum
suoris, sidefecerit in condition subsequenti. Kanc.


Th. P.

And with such a Condition.
THe condition of this Rccognusanceis such that whereas one A. B. late of C.
labourer was this present day brought before the said Justice by the above
bound D. E. and was by him charged with the felonious taking of twenty sheep,
of him the said D. and therevppon sent by the said Justice to the Qaeenes
Majesty's Jail: If therefore he the said D.shall and will at the next
general Jail delivery (to be holden in the said county) prefer, or cause
to be framed and preferred one bill of Inditemente, of the said fellonie,
against the said A. B. and shall and will then also give evidence therein
concerning the same, as well to the Jurors that shall then enquire of the said
fellonie, as also to them that shall pass upon the Trial of the said A. D.
That then etc. Or else etc.

The Mittimus of the Prisoner, after his examination, may serve thus:
THomas Potter, one of the Justices etc. To the keeper of the Queens Majesty's
Jail at Maydstone, etc. greeting. I send herewithal, the body of A. B. late
of C. Laborer brought before me this present day, and charged with the
felonious taking oftwentie sheep, which also he has confessed upon his
examination before me. And therefore these shall be on the behalf of our said
souereigue Lady to command and charge you, and every of you, that you do
immediately receive the said A. B. and him safely keep in your said Jail,
until that he shall be thece delivered by due order of her Majesty's laws.
Hereof fail you not, as you will answer thereunto at your uttermost peril.
Yeouen. etc.

There also you may see (if I be not deceived) the time when the examination
of the Felon himself, was first warranted by our Law. For at the Common Law,
his fault was not to be wrong out of himself but rather to be proved by
others.

And because that some Justices of Peace do upon this Statute use to take the
information of the bringers of the suspected persons upon their Oaths, and
other some do receive it without any Oath at al:Let us see by the way what is
wont to be said for either side, that a man may the better see what way to
incline and follow. Whether the examination ought to be upon Oath or no.


They that take the information, or examination (for this Statute does use both
the words) without any oath, do say, that if the makers of this Statute had
meant that an Oath should be take, then would they have expressed the same, even
as the Statutes for Bankcrupts (54. H. 8. ca. 4: and 13. Eliz. ca. 7.) the
Statute of Accomptantes in the Excheaquer (5. R. 2. ca. 13) The Statute of
Laborers (2. H. 5. ca. 4) and the Statute of choosing Knights of the
Parliament 8. H. 6. ca. 7. have done: in all which Statutes, Examination by
Oath is given in plain words.

But they of the other side seem strongly to defense their exacting of the
Oathe, by the example of the Justices of the higher Courts, and do allege,
that whereas the Statute (5. H. 4. ca. 8) ordained (without any mention of
Oath) that in Actions of Debte upon arrerages of acco^ptes, the Justices should
have power to examine the Attorneys and others, the Justices of ye Bench do use
in that case to minister an Oath to the examinate, as it may appear. 19 H. 6.
4: and 35. H. 6. 5 The like (say they) has been done in old time upon the
Statute (18. E.) that gives the examination of a woman covert in leuying of a
Fine: for (25. E. 3. 44.) a woman covert, party to a Fine, was examined and
sworn, whether she were of full age, or no: and the like also (as they say) is
done daily, in all the examinations of Su^moners, Viewers; Shirifs, Clearkes,
and of other officers, that do happen in the Courts at Westmin. And M Brook.
Tit. Exami. 32 is of opinion ye every examination is upon oath. And the Statute
2. E. 6. cap. 13. that gives power to the Ordinary to examine a man for his
personal tithe, excepteth an Oathe, as though else he might have done it by
exacting one.

Besides this, they add a reason, alleging, ye if these informers be
examined upon Oath, then although it should hap them to die before the
Prisoner have his Trial, yet their information may be give in evidence, as a
matter of credit, whereas otherwise it would be of little or no weight at all,
and thereby offeders should the eassier escape unpunished.

And lastly (say they) the precise penning of some particular Statutes, is no
sufficient warrante to understand all other Statutes accordinglye, unto which
opinion my self could be easily brought to subscribe.

Thus might (and would) I conclude this part concerning the power of one
Justice, saving only that this Statute does give me occasion to extend my
speeth a little further. For, whereas it requires that the Justice of Peace
should in taking the examination, make choice of such things as be material
to prove the offense, it seems necessary that he (being perhaps unskillful
in the laws of the land) should be somewhat instructed what acts those
be, that do amount to Manslaughter or Felony meant within this Statute, and
what other acts (though they carry some resebla^ce) of ye same) yet do not reach
so far. What Acts be Manslaughter, or Felony.
And hereby he shall ye better know, when to commit ye party ye shall be brought
before him, and when he shall not need to meedle with him at all. But now I will
only deliver him (so shortly as I can) those few helps ye do redily come to
my hand for knowledge of sundry Manslaughters and Felonies at ye Common Law,
leaving ye Felonies made by Statutes to appear unto him in ye rehearsal of ye
charge of ye Sessio^s of ye Peace in the next book when I shall come unto it.

The Statute 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. cap. 13. concerning the Baylemente of
prisoners (which gave the occasion of the making of this present Act) seems
to distinguishe Murder and other more capital crimes from Manslaughter and
Felony. Felonies touching the person.
And it is certain, that in common speech Manslaughter is taken to be a
special manner of wilful killing without any malice forethoughte off. And
Felony is not commonly understood to extend so far as unto Murder. Yet
seeing the principal consideration of this Statute is (in mine opinion) rather
to be practiced in case of Murder than in these other less offices, I will
adueture (though ye Statute have not the words) to mingle them together, and
make it here (as in truth it is) a chief kind of Manslaughter and Felony.
For as in old time every killing of a man was of ye Effect calied Murder
because death ensued of it (for of the Hebrew word Moth (says Postellus)
comes the Latin Mors, which the Saxons (our Elders) called Morth Morth and
Morthor Morthor as we yet sound it: so was that wilful manner of sleying with
malice prepensed long since and most properly called Felony, because it was
done Fe^eo animo, in malicious heat and displeasure, and per Felonia^ as the
Statute at Marlebridge. 52. H. 3. ca. 25. does fearme it.

Four sorts of Manslaughter.
Not every Manslaughter deserves punishment (says M Bracton) for inexpressing
that Homicidium corporale facto committitur quatuor modis s. Iusticia, Iusticia.
necessitate, casu velvoluntate there withal he adds that the first of
these is no sin at all, if it be done sincerely, and without delight in
shedding of blood.

And therefore neither is the Judge that by Justice condemns the guilty to
death, and commands the minister to do execution, nor the lawful Officer yt
executes the just commandment according to his warrant, guilty of any
offense, for which upon examination either of the^ ought to be committed to
prison.

But if the Officer will behead or otherwise execute him that is condemned to
be hanged, or if a private man without warrant whyll hang or kill such a
condemned or outlawed person, this will be a Felonious act stretthing to
Murder, by good opinion 35. H. 6. 58: and 27. lib. Ass. Pl. 41.

And though the law has been taken heretofore, ye one might justify ye
killing of a man attained upon a Praemunire, yet now ye same being prohibited by
5. El. ca. 1. if one that has killed such a person were brought before a
Justice of Peace, he might boldly commit him as a Felon.

In the second sort of Manslaughter (according to M. Bracton) as there be
manny differences, so is the law also diverse in the consideration of them. For
if a Justice of the Peace within his County, or Mayor, Bayliffe, or other
head Officer of any City or Town Corporate, within the same town or City,
or any other, having the Queens Commission or letters, do lawfully upon good
cause raise or assemble any number of men for the suppressing of any such
persons, as shall be unlawfully assembled contrary to the Statute. 1. Mar.
Parl. 1. ca. 12 And by reason of their still continuing together after
proclamation made, be driven to set upon them, and thereby any of the
stubburne persons be slain. This slaughter done upon this Necessity is so
justifiable both in the Justice himself and every other of his company, that
they ought not in any manner to be molested for it. 1. Mar. Parl. 1. ca. 12.

So if the Shirife or any other do by warrant or upon hue and cry made, arrest
one indicted of Felony, which does resist and is slain thereby. This fact done
upon this Necessity is Justifiable 22. Lib. Ass. P. 55. and Tit. Coron. Fitz.
288. 289. 290. For all these former cases tend to the commendable advancement
of Law and Justice.

By the old Statue. 21. E. 1. De Malefactoribus in parcis etc. If any
Forester, Parker, or Warrener, or such as be in their company (after hue and
cry made upon offenders within their charge to yield themselves, which they
refusce to do but fly and make resistaunce) do (not having any malice
prepensed) kill any of them, this is no Felony, nor the party to be
imprisoned or to forfeit any thing for it.

So if prisoners do assault their keeper, and in his defense he strikes any
of them to the death. 22 lib. Ass P. 55.

And so it is if any do attempt to rob or murder one in his mansion house or
dwelling place, or nighe any common highway, Carteway, horsewaye, or footewaye,
or Feloniously to break into his dwelling house in the night time, and in this
their attempt, the party or his servants then with hun do kill any of ye
misdoers (though ye law was somewhat doubtful before) it is now made out of
question by ye Statute 24. H. 8. C. 5. ye he shall not forfeit anything for
that fact, but shall go. quit For in these cases of Necessity he defends
himself and his goods against Kobbers and other notorious evil doers.

But he ye in an Astray is of necessity driven to kill the other in defense of
his own life, after that he has fled as far as he can, Is not so
priuileged, for although it be not accounted Felony yet Statute of Glove.
cap. 9: wills that such an one be imprisoned til the coming of ye Justices
of Jail delivery, and there (putting himself upon God and the Country)the
whole matter is to be found by the verdite. And then ye king shall grant him
a pardon of Course, but he shall forfeite all his goods 43. lib. Ass. Pl. 3.
for having killed the Kings lawful subject. And therefore the Justice of Peace,
may well under the name of Manslaughter in this Statute take upon him (as I
think)to commit such an offender and to take eramination and bond of the
informers according to the Statute.

The like is to be done (as it feemeth to me) in case one kill an other by
misaduenture against his will, as by casting a stone, or shooting an arrow, or
felling of atree unadvisedly, or such like 11. H. 7. 23.

That Manslaughter which is committed with an evil intent, or in doing an
other unlawful or evil thing, though that which is done was not premeditate,
is doubtless within the words and meaning of this Statute. ^oluntate.
And so much the more, is that which is done in such a case of malice prepensed
as I think.

For, if two do suddenly fall out, and thereupon draw their weapons, and one
kills the other, this is Manslaughter apparently within the compass of this
Law.

So if one be in the company of him that of malice prepensed sets upon
another to murder him, and does of a fodaine take the murderers part, so that
the other party is slain, this is Manslaughter in him according as the word
is commonly understoode.

And so is it if two play at fence, or run at the Eilte together, and one of
them be slain: For their first Act was unlawful, unless it had been by
the Queens license, says Fineux. 11. H 7. 23.

And if A does assult B. and strikes him, and whilst B. defends himself,
C. comes to part them, and is slain by A. this is Felony in A. But if they
both had appointed the place of purpose, to meet there, to fight one with
the other, and C. were slain in seeking to appease them, then will it be
Felony in both the other. 22. E. 3. Coro. Fitzh. 262 and in Dalizons reports.

If the mother destroy her child newely borne, this is Felony of the death of
a man, thougt the child have no name, nor be bapfized Coron. Fitzh. 418. And
the Justice of Peace may deal accordingly. But if a child be destroyed in the
mothers belly, is no manslayer nor Felone to be imprisoned upon this Statute,
Coron. Fitz. 146. and 263.

The husband minding to make away his wife, did by the advice of B offer her a
poisoned Apple to eat, and the not misfrusting any thing, gave the same to her
little daughter that stood by in the presence of her husband, which child he
loved well enough: yt child died thereof. And this was adjudged Murder in the
husband, because he offered ye poison, and then had a wicked intet to kill ons
therewith, and he was the original occasion of this death: But no offense at
al in the wife, for the was btterly ignorant of the evil, and simply gave it
her child, taking it to have bin very good meat. 18. El. Plow. Com. 474.

And if a man lay poison for Kats, and an other takes it at unawares, and dies
thereof, this is not any ways to be laid to the others charge, ibid.

If a mad man or a natural fool, or a lunatike in the time of his lunacie, or
a child ye apparently has no knowledge of good nor evil, do kill a man, this
is no selonious act, nor any thing forfeited by it. 21. H. 7. 31. and 3. H. 7.
1. for they cannot be said to have any understanding will. But if upon
examination it fall out, ye they knew what they did, and ye it was ill, the
seems it to be otherwise.

If it appear, that the party woanded or poisoned lived a year and a day
after the fact, then is it too late for ye Justice of Peacs to commit the
offender to prison, for then it cannot be though, that he died by ye means, as
it seems Cor. Fitz. 303. But it is plain by 3. H. 7. cap. 1. That if any man
be wounded in peril of death, the trespassor ought to be arrested, and put in
safe keeping till perfect knowledge be had, whether the party wounded will live
or dies and upon such matter within the year and day, the Justice of Peace
shall do well to commit him. But this is a general learning in all cases of Murder
or Ma^slaughter, ye the party hurt, must be dead in fruth before it be in
judgment of Law faken to be either of those offenses: for Voluntas at this
day is not construed for the deed it self, as in time past it has bin put in
ure.

Hitherto of Manslaughter, ye deals only with ye Person: other Felonies
stretch to goods also as Robbery ye had ye name at the first of Robe, because
he ye with force spoiled a man, took his robes or goods from him. Felonies
touching the person and goods. Robbery.
And in this kind of Felony, ye law has no cosideratio^ of ye balue of ye
thing take, because it is take from ye person so ye it is Robbery though it be
but worth a penny. And Braeton calls hiut Fure improbum and pradone qui rapit
rem aliena^.

And if a man without any title take my goods against my will lying in a
place where I am present, or do manace to kill me if I give him not my purse,
by means whereof I deliver it unto him, it is Robbery. Coron. Fitzh. 178 and
115.

So, if Thieves assault me in the high way for my purse, and I cast it down
into a Bush, (as I fly from them) of purpose to save it, and they take it up.

Certain persons took a man, and compelled him (by manace of killing) to
swear upon a Book, to bring them certain money, and thereupon he brought it
them:this was taken to be Robbery. 44. E. 3. 14 But if a man lie in awaite to
rob me in the high way, and draws his sword upon me, willing me to deliver
my purse, and I defends my self, so as he has not his will, or I take him
either by fight, or by hue and cry, it is not now take to be any Felony says
Stamford, because he has not taken any thing from me: and so is there an
opinion. 9. E. 4. 26. But the Law was holden to be otherwise. 27. Ass. Pl
28.and13. E. 4. 7.

And now seeing the benefit of Clergy is taken away from Pickpurses, and
Cutpurses, by 8. Elizab. ca. 4. let them also stand in this rank. A Burglour,
whom Britton calls a Burgessor, that by night breaks into a house (With
intent to Rob, kill, or do other Felony) though he carry nothing away, is a
Felone, 22. Assi. P. 95: and 27. Assi. P. 38. So if he do but break open the
house feloniously by night, though he enter not in, (says Staf. Fo. 30.) But
if this be done by day it is not taken to be Felony at this day without some
further felonious act done (says he) yet the Book Tie. Coron. Fitzh. 178.
and 185. do not make any difference. Burglarie.
And the Statute. 1. E. 6. ca. 12. takes away Clergy and Sanctuary, in case
where one is conuicte or attainted of Breaking any house by day or by night,
where any person being in the same, shall be thereby put in fear (not
speaking king of any other fact.) And Britton defines a Burgeslour to be he
that feloniously in the time of peace breaks open Churches, or other house or
the walls or gates of Cities or Burghs, whereof perhaps they had their first
name, or rather may be derived of Bower that is a Chamber, or inner rouine, and
Laron a Thief.

Burning of a house maliciously and wilfully, was Felony at the common Law,
as appears by Bracton, West. 1. ca. 15:10. E. 4. 14:and3 H. 7. 10. Burning of
houses.
And Brit. (Fol. 16.) says, that such as burn houses or corn feloniously,
ought to be burned. And one burned a barn felon:ously by night which was
adjoining to a house: and it was holden Felony at the Common Law. 11 H 7. 1.
And if a man's wicked intent were only to burn ye house of A. and thereby the
house of B. is also burned, the burning of this last house is Felony, because
it ensues of the fire that was first kindled, Plowed. Com. 475.

Dther Felonies there be of Goods only, called Larcinie of the Latin word
Latrocinium, and it is punishable either by beath or by discretion of the
Justices, which difference grows by the value of the thing stolen: for if it
ercede not twelve pence, the fact is but Petit Larcinic, and the offender is
not to die for it, W. 1. ca 15. Britton F. 22. Cor. Fitz. 404 406. although ye
Indictment shall suppose the fact to be done Felonice as in the case of
Mayheme. 27. H. 8. 22. Felonic of goods.


But it seems by 8. E. 2. Coron. Fitzh. 415. that if he be conuide of one
petite Larcinie, and after commits an other, and is conuicte thereof, and so
a third, when all these valued together, do amount about ru. pence, the for ye
last he shall suffer death, and Brit makes ye third offense always death. And
if diverse join in the stealing of goods, any thing amounting above the value
of twelve pence, it is Felonic punishable by death in them all Coron. 404

Bracton destneth Furtum to be Contractatio re^al^ens fraudnlents, animo
surandi, inuito ilbo, cuires illa fuerit.

The wife therefore can not the be accounted a Felone, though she steal the
goods of her hushand 21. H. 6. Coron. Fitz. 456. And if she steal an other
man's goods by the compulsion of her busbande, it is no Felonic in her 27. Ass.
Pl. 40. But if she do it at his commaunbement only, Bracton says it shall
not ercuse her. And the wife may of her self commit Larcinie, and shall suffer
for it Coron. 383.

In some case a man may be banged for taking his own goods, as if he first
deliver them to one, to keep, and craftily of purpose to charge him, he
steals them from him, this is Felony, by 7. H. 6. 43. 13. E. 4. 10. and 5.
H. 7. 18.

If a man steal out of an (...) manne^ ground, wild beasts which be
accounted Nullius in bonis, as Dear, Conies, Phesa^ts, or Doves, being abroad
at their libertic, or Fish in a river, this is no Felonte, 22. Ass. Pl. 95. But
if he take young Pigeons in the house, or young Boshauks ye cannot fly out of
their ayrie, or fish out of a pond or truncke, it is Felony. 18. 4. 8.

To steal Beese, Foockes, Dens, Peacocks, or Turkies, is Felome, for they
b^^ accounted in bonis.

So is it of a tame Dear, if the stealer knew it to be tame: and also the
flesh of any Dear that is killed by an other, the taking away of such a thing
with a felonious imtent, is Felony for they be also then reckoned in bonis and
baluable. But so to take away a Bore with Charters of land in it, or a Ward,
is no Felony, for they be not personal, but real goods, whereof there can
be no Felony committed. 10. E. 4. 15.

And therefore alse, if with a felonious intent one cut down and steal away
a tree, or corn that is standing, or rob an D^chard of the fruit growing
there, it is no Felony being at that time in manner parcel of the ground,
whereof there can be no Felony committed: but if the tree or corn were cut
down, or the fruit gathered before by an other, and left there, and then one
steals them, it is Felony, for at that time they were very personal
Cattels, 18. H 8. 2: and Coron. Fitzh. 119. and 256.

If a man clippe the wool from my sheeps back, or do kill my sheep, and
steal the skins, leaving the bodies behind, this is Felony of goods,
Dalizon. For the very sheep themselves were my goods, and might be stolen.

But the first finder and concealor of tresure found, ^lthough he keep it
with a felonious intent, or he that steals a wrecke of the Sea, or waued
goods, whilst they be in that nature, seems not to be chargeable in
Felony, by 22 Ass. Pl. 99. because the owner thereof is not known as yet.

If a man deliver his goods to another to keep, and he do fraudulenfly and
wilsully consume them or convert them to his own use, this is no Felony,
because prima contractatio, and first possession was not inuito domino, but of
his own delivery. 13 E. 4. 10.

And yet it is holden, if I bargain with one to carry certain bales of Woade
to Crambrooke, and he carrteth them to Canterbury, and breaks the Bales, and
takes out the Woade, and conuerteth it to his own use, that is Felony. So if
I deliver a ^un of Wine to him to carry, and he takes the Wine out of the
^unne, it is Felony. For here it may be said, that neither the very Woad,
nor the Wine were delivered him in that kind. But if he sell the ^unne of
Wine, or the Bailes of Woad together, as he received them, then is it no
Felony, because he had them in that sort of the delivery of the owner 13. E.
4. 9. and 10.

But if an Inkeeper sct a piece of plate before his guest to drink in, and he
carries it away with him, this is Felony. For here the guest had no
possession by the owner, but only the use of the thing 13. E. 4. 9.

So is it the guest do steal the sheets in which he lies, and be taken ere he
goes out of the house, as in the Dall, after that he is come out of the
Chamber, Coron. Fit. 204. and Dalizon.

If a shepherd steal the sheep, or a Butler the Plate, or an other manne any
other thing that is in his charge and keeping, it seems by the Justices (3. H
7. 12.) that it should not be Felony, upon the former reason, which seems
to have been the ancient law of the land also. For Glanuill in his 10. Book
cap. 13. says, Qnod Furtum non est, vbi initium habueru su^detencionis per
dominn rei. But because in some of these cases of Servants, there grew much
inconvenience unto Masters, therefore 21. H. 8 ca. 7. made it Felony, if
Servants of the age of eighteen years that had any goods of their Masters
delivery to keep to their use, should fraudulently convert the same to their
own uses, to the intent to steal them, if it amounted above to the valewe of
forty shillings, wherein Apprentices be excepted. And this statute being
afterward discontinued, was revived 5. Elizab. cap. 10. whereof more shall be
seen when we come to the charge. But thus much for this place and purpose, to
give some little direction to the Justice of Peace,) may at this time suffice.

What things any two Justices of the Peace may do out of the Sessions.
CAP. XXII.
THe authority and power of one Justice of the Peace (without ye Sessions)
thus perused and passed over, let us eramine the like power of two, boshe in
generality, and in particular.

It is universally true, the whatsoever thing one Justice of the Pear alone is
permit mitted so do, either for the conseruasion of the Peace, or in the
execution of the Commission or Statutes, the fame also may be no less
lawfully performed by two (or mo) Justices, except it be in a very few cases,
where some Statutes do seem specially to appropriate the execution thereof to
some one certain Justice, either in respede that he is Next to the place,
Eldest of the Quorum, or such like.

But we will proceed by particularities, The power of two Iusticcs of the
Peace, in punishing os Riots, etc.
and because the first place (of right) belongs to the Peace, (as where in
the office of this Iusticer chiefly consisseth) let us here supply in two
Justices that power in punishing Riots, Routs, and vnlawsull Aisemblies, which
we said before to be wanting in one: And that shall we the better do, if
we first of al lay open the Statute of King Henry the fouth, containing a
most ample authority, as well for the repressing, as for the Recording of the
same, and then adioyne somewhat out of some other Statutes.

IF any Riot, Assembly, or Rout of people against the law be made, the
Justices of Peace or 3. or 2. (at the least) of them, dwelling most highest to
the place, and the Shirif (or Vndershirif) of the County, shall come with the
power of the County (if need be) to arest them, and shall arrest them, and
shall have power to record that which they shall find so done in their prefencc
against the law: And by that Record such offe^dors shall be convicted in manner
and form as is contained in the Statute of Forcible entries, ( viz. 15. R2.
c2,) And if such trespassers be de parted before their coming, then these
Justices of Peace, or three, or two of them, shall diligently enquire within a
month after such Riot, Assembly, or Reut made:and thereof shall hear and
determine according to the law of the land: and if the truth may not be
found in the manner as aforsaid, then with in a month then next following the
said Justices and Shirif (or vndershirif) shall certify before the King and his
Council all the deeds and circumstances thereof, which Certificate shall be of
like force as the verdit of twelve me^ etc, And if such offenders do trauerse
the matter so certified, then the Ccrtificat and Trauerfe shall be sent into
the Kings Be^ch to be tried and determined as law requires. And that the same
Justices and Shirife shall do execution of this Statute, every one upon pain
of one hundred pound, to be paid to the King, as often as they shall be found
in defaulte. 13. H. 4. cap 7.

Whereunto the Statute (19. H. 7.) adds that it the said Riotte, Maintenance
and embracerie.
Route, or unlawful assembly, be not found by the said Jury, by reason of
any maintenance or embracerie of the said Jurors: then the same Justices
and Shirife (or Vndershirife) shall also certife the names of the maintainours
and embraceours in that behalf (if any be) with their misdemeanors that
they know, upon pain of every of the said Justices and Shirif (or
vndershirif) to forfeit twenty powndes (if they have no reasonable excuse) for
not certifying the same: which Certificate so made, shall be of like force as
before etc. And every person duly proved to be a mainteynor or embracer in
the same, shall forfeite twenty powndes to the King, and shall be committed to
ward, there to remain by the discreation of the Justices. 19. H. 7. cap. 13.

Hereunto also the Statue (2. H. 5.) adioyneth further, Assistance.
that the Kings liege people (being sufficient to travail) shall be
assistant to these Justices, Shirife (or Vndershirife) when they shall be
reasonably warned, to ride with them in aid to resist such Riots, Routs and
assemblies, upon pain of imprisonment, and to make fine and ransom to the
King. Provided always that the said Justices, Shirife (or Vndershirife) shall
do their said offices at the Kings costs, in going, tarrying, and
retourning, by payment thereof to be made by the Shirife by Indenture between
him and them, of the said payment. At the Kings charges
And that such Rioters attaynted of great and heinous Riots shall have one
whole years imprisonment at the least, without being let out of prison by
Bail, Maineprise, or in any other manner during the years aforesa;i would ^ and
that the Rioters attainted of petite Riots, shall have imprisonment as best
shall seem to the King and to his Council. And that the fines of such
Riotours attainted, shall be by the same Justices increased and put in
greater sums than they were wont to be put in such cases before that
time in aid and supportation of the costs of the Justices and other Officers
aforesaid in this behalf. 2. H. ^. ca. 8.

Now, if it be witnessed by two Justices of the Peace, and the Shirife, by
Letters under their Scales, to the Lord Chauncelour of England, that any
murders, manslaughters, batteries, robberies, assemblies of people in great
number in manner of Insurrection, or other rebellious Riots, have been done and
that such offenders have withdrawn themselves, to the intent to avoid the
execution of the common Law, then the Lord Chauncelour may make a Writ of
Capias, and thereupon (if need be) a Proclamation, etc. 2. H. 5. cap. 9.
Capias and Proclamation.
which Statute was made to endure till the next Parliament, and so
discontinued: but it was revived by 8. H. 6. and made prepetuall: which
moreover ordayneth, that (before this Writ of Capias shall be awarded) two
Justices of the Peace, and the Shirife of the Shire, where such Riot is
supposed, ought to witness, that the common voice and fame runs in the said
County, of the same Riots. 8. H. 6. ca. 14.

The Letter (or Text) of these Laws, being thus laid down, let us also
see what exposition and help M. Marrow and others do bring to some parts
thereof, namely, to that of king Henry the fourth.

Under the words, Power of the County, the Justices, Shirife, or
Vndershirife, ought to have the aid and attendaunce of knights, and of all
manner of Gentlement, yeomen, Laborers, Servants, Apprentises, and Willaines.
And so likewise of Infants, that be above fifteen years of age. For all of
that age were boude to have harness by the Statute of Winchester. But women,
men entered into the ministry, and such as be decrepite, or do labor of
any continual infirmity, shall not be compelled to affende. And it rests
in the discreattion of the Justices and Shirife or Vndershirife. Now many, or
how few, they will have to assist them, in making the arrest. But yet after
such arrest made, the Power of yt county, is bound to go with the Shirife to
the Jail to aid him thither also: which is otherwise in the case of a Felon
taken by Hue and Cry, for there when the Country has delivered him yt
Shirife, they are discharged, Mar.

This authority of assembling the power of the county, and of arresting and
imprisoning Riotters til due execution of law were done upon them, was once
before this time (namely 2. R. 2. 6.) committed to some, and was by and by
after resumed in the same year of the same kings reign, as a thing too
grievous to be suffered, that any man should be imprisoned without an Indictment
(or Sine leg ali indicio parium suoruns as magna Carta speaks) first had
against him.

But now, if information be made to two Justices of the Peace, that certain
persons be riotously assemb;ed at Dale, and they (assisted with the Shirife or
Vndershirife) do gather people to suppress it, and when they come to the
place, they find no Riote there, yet are they excusable for the assembly of
Power made by them, because they did it upon information. And if they do it
without information, and find a Riot indeed when they come, then shall they
not only be ercused for making such assembly of their own heads, but may
also lawfully proceed to punish the offe^dors. Fitz 17.

And that punishment must be grounded either upon their Record of the thing
done in their own presence, or else by inquiry upon the oath of other men.
And therefore if two Justices of the Peace (assisted with the Shirife or
Vndershirife do see a Riotte, they may command the Riottors to be arrested, and
and the parties shall be so concluded thereby ye they shall never be received
to Trauerse (or deny) it: But otherwise it is, if they do not see it themselves
14. H. 7. (as M. Fitz. Tit. Justice del peace 9. reports) who says moreover
(in his book of Justices of ye peace, Fo. 18.) that if they do so record a
Riote, as though they had seen it, the parties shall be stopped thereby,
although there were never any such Riot by them committed: for (says he) the
view of a Riot, is never to be trauersed. Likewise, if the Justices of Peace
be disturbed by Riotors in coming to their Sessions, they may (without any
Inquiry) make their record of it Fitz. 17: and 7. E. 4. 18. Recording of the
Riot

The Record which these Justices ought to make, must be by writting, and must
remain with the one of them: and the ^ and none other Justices) ought to
impri^^n the Riotors, and to assesse their fine, and cause ye same to be
estreated into the Escheaquer. If they see the Riot, and the Riotors escape,
yet they ought to Record it: but then they cannot arrest the Riotors at another
time, neither can they make any Process upon that Record, neither ought it to
be kept amongst the Records of the Peace but it must be sent into the Kings
Bench, that process may be there made upon it. And in ye case ye parties are
not to be admitted to their Trauerse there, but must of necessity make fine for
it. If these Justices come to see one Riotte, and another Riotte is made in
their presere, they may Record that. So if the Justices and the Shirife, or
Vndershirife be assembled at a place for an Arbitrament, or such other pris
uate cause, and a Riotte appears to be committed in their presenc, they may
Record it also. But if the Riottours (seeing them coming) do fly into
another County, and do commit a Riotte there, these Justices can not
Record that Riotte. If the Riottours make a Riotte upon the Justices and
Shirife that do come of putpose to arrest them, they may Record that. And it
seemth that they may like wife do so (though M Marrow denyedit) if they come
for an other cause and such a Riotte be done upon them. If a man be slain in
the Riot, or Maimed, or if Rescous be done to an officer, the Record must be,
Riotose occidit, or Riatose Maybemauit, or Riotose rescussit, and not Felonice
nor simply Rescussit: for their polver in this case is restrained to the Riot
only, and therefore the parties may (not withsta^doing their Record) plcade not
guilty, to the Felony, or Refcous, though not to the Riot it self.

If they make a Record of a Riotte, and do imprison the party till he have
made Fine, and it do after ward appear by the Record it self, that the Act
which they recorded is no Riot, yet be the parties without remedy. and if a man
be bound to the Peace, and such a Record of a Riotte is after wards made
against him, and others, he shall not justify, nor plead, not guilty, in a
Scire facias, upon his Recognusance. Mar.

But although these Justices, Shirife or Vndershirife, do not go to see the
Riotte, yet may the the Justices enquire of it within the month after it:and
they all are allo to make Certificat within a month after that, arcording to
the form of thc Statute. And although this Statute say, that the same
Justices shall do it, yet if other: Justices of the peace there do it, that
is sufficient. Mar. Inquiry of the Riottes, and certify.
So that if two Justices and the shirife go to see a, Riotte, and other two
Justices make the Inquiry, now the one sort or the other of them, with the
shirife or Vndershirife may Certify it.

If this inquiry be not made within the month, yet it is good, but then no
good Certificat can be made thereof: So if the Inquiry be within the month,
and the Certificat not made Within a month after, that is not good Mar.

But if the Justices do enquire within the month, and do give day to the
lurie to yield their Verdite after the month, that is good enough. If the
Enquest find, that the Riot was made by ry. persons, where in deed it was made
by Cpersons, it may be creatified so, and then the Cretificat (and not the
Indictment) shall be take: but if they barie only in the day, then the Indictment
shall be prefered to, if the Certificat. And if the Indictment be of ry.
persons, and the Certificat of ry. persons in harness, the Certificat shall be
preferred. So, if the Indictment speak only of a Riotous assault, battery,
and mayheming.

If four Justices, the shirife and Vndershirife, go to fee a Riote, and two
of those Justices and the Shifife join in one Certificat, and the other two
join with the vndershirif in an other Certificat, that Certificat (whereunto
the Shirife is party) shall be preferred: for in his presence the
Vndershirife has non authority. But yet if the Certificat be otherwile
equal, then the best shall be taken for the Queen. If (after the Riote seen,
and the Inquiry made) one of the Justices be put out of the Commission, then
cannot be Cretifi. But If he Recorded the Riot upon the view thereof, and the
Rioters had escaped, yet the might he Certifi Mar.

The force of this Certificat is, but only to put the parties to answer: and
forasmuch as it is of the nature of a declaration against them, it ought to
comprehend the certain year and day, thought peradventure (as M. Mar.
holds) it needs not to erpresse the Additions of the parties, being not
within the words of the Statute, 1. H. 5. Ca. 5.

Furthermore, whereas this Statute speaks of the pain of C. lb to be laid
upon the next Justices: Yet if other then the next Justices do perform the
office, that shall ercuse them that be the next justices to the place. And
that in ye cause why I have taken leave to place there things before, under the
audoritie of any two justices generally. Next Justices.
Yea, all the justices of Peace within the commission, how far off soellre they
dwell, dught (if they have notice of such a Riotte, Rout, 02 Assembly,) to
supply ye defaulte of the next Justices. For so it was now lately adjudged in
the star Chamber. Howbite that pain of an hundred pound was layds upon the
next Justices only, and theresidue were fined by discertio^ of that Court.
Lastly, every of these Iusticcs shall be ercosed of this penalty, by the not
coming of the shirief: But yet they ought (in this service) to send for the
shirife, and not he for the, Mar.

Thus much of the Riottes after this consideration: now a little for the
furtherance of the Justices in their execution, and then then other matters.

A Precept to the Shirife, to warn the Country to enquire of a Riotte.
GEorgius Multo^ and Wilhelmus Lambard dou Iusstiled;ticiariorum etc.
assignatorum, Vicecomiti eiusdem comitatus Salutem. Exparte ditae Dominae
Reginae tibi praecipimus, quod ventre facias coram nobis apud I. m comitatu
praedictor. die Ostob. proxime futuro. 24. probes, sufficientes, and legales
homines de comitatu pradisto, quorum quilibet babent terras and tenementa,
infra distu^comitatum libere per cbartam ad annuum valorem 20. solid. aut per
copiam Curiae adannuum valorem 26. solid. and 8. denars. aut per vtrumgum ultra
omnes reprisas, ad inquir endum pro indenitate nostra in bac parie super
sacramentu^ suu^ S. t A. B. C. D. E. F. s alis malefastores et pacis dista
Dominae Reginae Perturbatores ignoti, domu^ cuiusdam G. H. apud Ightham
praedista^, riotose fregerint and in ipsum insulsu^ fecerint, and
vnlnerauerint, contrapacem dista Domma Ragina, and contraformam Statuli m
ialicasu, 13. H. 4. 0 lim regis Angliae editi and proxist. Et hoc nullatenus
omittas sub poena 20th. quam incursurus as fi in executione pramissorum
defeceris. Kang
Et habeas ibitunc hoc praceptum: Testibus praefatis G. M. and W. L. 20. die
September. Annoregni dicta Demine nostrae Eliza. 23.

The Inquiry.
Inquisitio pro Domina Reginae etc. (as before in forcible entries) coram
Georgio Multon and Wilhelmo Lambard, etc. Quiad hoc inratiee onerati, dicunt
super sacramentum suum, quod A. B. C. D. E. F. simul cum alijs malefactoribus,
and pacis dictae Dominae Reginae pertur batoribus, ignotis ad numerum septem
personarum, mode guerrino arcaiati, vt and armis, viz. hawberdis, gladijs,
arcubus, and sagittis, 19. die men's. Sep. vlt. Praeterito, apud Ightham in
comitatn Praedicto inter horas octauam, and nonam, post meridiem eiusdem diei,
Domu^ G. H. de Ightham Praedict. Yeoman, scituata^ in Ightham praedicta.
riotose fregerunt, and in ipsum G. H. tunc and ibidem insuliu^ feceru^r, ac
ipsu^ tunc and ibidem verberaue runt, vulnerauerunt, and indignis modis
tractaucrant, is a quod de vita eius desperabatur in magnam pacis dict. Domine
Reginae perturbationem and popult terrorem ac contra formam Statuti de riotis,
routis, and congregationibus Gentium Anno. 13. H. 4. olim regis Anglia
progoniter is dicte Domina Reginae, editi and promisi.

The Certificat to the Queen and her Cou^ sell ought to be made by the two
Justices the Shirife or Vndershirife, Which may be done in English, after the
order of a Letter, and as the case shall require.

But the Record of the Justices, and the Shirife or Vndershirise (if they will
procee and that may) may be in this manner.

MEmorandum quod 20. die Septem. anneregni Dominea nostra Elizabe. der gratia
etc. 23. Questiled;tus est nobis Georgio Multo^ and Wilhelmo Lambard, duobus
Iuiticiariorum etc. essigmatoru^, and Thomae C.sub vicecomiti comitatus
ciusdem, quidam G. H. de Ightham in did. comitatu Yeoman, Quod A. B. C. D. E.
F. etc.and alij malefastorcs and pacis dicte Domina Reginae perinrbatores
ignoti domurn eiusdem G. H. apud Ig, pradicu. riotose fregerht, et ibidem in
ipsum G. H. insultum fecerunt, ac ipsum vulneraucrunt co^tra pacem dicta Domina
Reginae ac proinde pctyt 4 nobis sibi in hac part remedinm apponi: Quthus
guidem quarimonia and petitione anditis, nos dict. G. M. W. L. and T. C. ipso
codem dicto die ad domuns pradictans accessimus in propriss persouis noctris,
ac tunc and ibidem inuenimus prafatos A. B. C. D. etc. ad numerum septem per
sonarum modo gucrrino arraiatos, vz. gladijs pugionibus, lorisis galeis,
arcubus and sagittis, riotose in simul aggregatos domum proefatam fregisse.
multa mala in ipsum G. H. ibidem comminantes in magnam paeis dictoe Dominoe
Reginoe perturbationem ac popali sui terrorem, necnon in contemptum Statute de
Riotis, Routis, and congregationibus populorum Anno 13. H. 4. olim regis
Anglioe, progenitoris dictoe Dominoe Reginoe, and diti ac prossist. Ac
proptereanos proefati G. M. W. L. and T. C. corpora dict^ rum A. B. C. D. etc.
arrestari, Ac proximoe Gaols dictoe Dominoe Reginoe in comitatu praedicto duci
ficimus, per Recordum hoc nostrum connict. in praesentia nostra. In cuius
reitestimontnssnos Praefati G. M. W. L and T. C. huic dicto records nostro,
sigillae nostra apposuimus, Datum apud I. praedict. die and anno supradictis.

And now wishing the two Justices of Peace in this matter to look back into
ye which has been satd before of forcible entries and Kiots in the person of
one Justice, let us make speed to other statutes.

Any two Iushces of the Peace, may imprison forx. days, the Naister that
gives: and for x. days, the servant that takes more wages than after the
rates thereof made: and may imprison for a whole year, such servant, as
shall be Convicted before them by his own confession, or by the Dathes of two
honest men, to have made any assault upon his master, maisiresse, or other
person having the charge of him, or of the work: and they may appoint any
woman (being unmarried, of the age of twelve years, and under forty) that is
out of service, and that they shall think meet to serve to be retained by
their disrreatio^, and may upon her refusal commit her to Ward, till she will
be so bound to serve 5. Eh. ca. 4. Seruanes and Laborers.


Any two Iustrces of Peace, may license such as be delivered out of Gaoles, to
beg for their fees, or to travel to their Country, or friends: and may give
license for forty days to a Roge that is marked: and may make testimonial to
a Seruingman, that is turned away from his matster, or whose master is dead:
14 Eliz. ca. 5: and 18. Eliz. ca. 3. Beg for sees. Roag. Seruingme.


Such two Justices may certify at ye quarter Setsions that a City, or Town
Corporate, of the Shire (being no county of it self) is surcharged with poor,
together with the names and number of them, that order may be taken there for
their relief: they may License diseased persons (living of alms) to travel
to Bathe, or to Bucstone, for ease of their grief. 14. Eliz. ca. 5. Surcharged
with poor.
License to go to Bach or Bucstone.


By the oversight of two such Justices, and twelve discreet men of the
Hundred, and Hundreds adjoining, any person (within the Wealde of Kent) may
make in his own la^d a new highway, more commodious tha^ the old, 14. H. 8.
ca. 6. Chiungea high way.


Two such Justices may once every year appoint Overseers for that whole year
following of cloth to be made or sold, in any town (not being Corporate)
and may charge them upon their oaths, to see execution of some parts of the
Statute. 3. E. 6. ca. 2. yet in force. Appoint Overseers of Cloth.


Within sire days after accusation had, that any person has disturbed a
Preacher, and after his committing to safe custody by one Justice of the
Peace, one other Justice of that shire must join with him in the eramination
of the Offender, and may proceed to find him guilty by his own confession,
or two witnesses, and thereupon commit him to the next Jail, for three
months. 1. Mar. Parl. 1. ca. 3. quoere of the cotntinuance of this Statute,
as before. Disturb and Preacher.


Any two Justices of the Peace of the County, where any Logwood (alias
Biockwood) shall be found (in whose hands soever it be) may openly burn the
same, as forfeited. 23. El. ca. 9. Logwood.


What things, some two Justices of the Peace may do out of the Sessions.
CAP. XXIII.
IT falls out many times that the Statute laws regarding some Justices above
others, either for the opinion of the abilitis or learning that they should
have (being of the Quorum) or for the advantage and facility that they have to
dispatch the affair by means of their nearenesse and dwelling, or for the
indifferencis that they are likely to use in the handling of the cause (as
being neither of kindred nor alliance to any of the parties) do many times
make choice of two Justices, and do either altogether close the hands of the
rest, or else do chiefly reposs the trust in these that be so chosen and
elected.

Among those of this kind, the Bailement of prisoners worthily craves the
first place, whether you respect the weight of the matter that it concerns,
or the length of the discourse that it requires, the one tending to desired
liberty, and the other comprehending great variety.

This saving then, or delivery of a person out of prison, before he has
satisfied the Law, is uttered by three terms in our Statute laws, that is to
say, Bailement, Mainprise (or manucaption) and Repleuine. Difference between
Bailement, Mainprise and Repleuine.
And they be indifferently used to erpresse that suertie which the prisoner
is to find in such a case: For that which Bracton and the statute of W. 1.
cap. 15. made 3. E. 1. do speak of setting at liberty of accessaries by the
words Replegiari, and of letting out by sufficient Pleuin: Britton and the
Register do erpresse by finding of Mainprise: the Statute 5. E. 3. cap. 8. by
letting to Bail: that of Marlebrige cap. 27: made 52. H. 3. by tradi in
ballium vel Replegtari. And the Statute of 1. E. 3. ca. 9. making mention of ye
writ De Homine Replegiando to be directed to the garden of a Forest, declares
the effect thereof to be, that he should Repleuy the prisoner by good
Mainprise. The Statute 23. H. 6. ca. 10. that commands the Shirife to let
out of prison (such as he has arrested upon Enditements of trespass) upon
reasonable suertie of sufficient persons, calls the same a letting to Bail
or Mainprise. And lastly 1. 8 c 2. Ph. and Mar. etc. 13. seems to make all the
three words (...) and of the same signification.

Yet it seems that Replevine had his orginall of the word Pledges which
denotes them that undertake for the party, that he shall abide to be
justified by Law. And is used in diverse other cases, as in Replevine of
Cattle upon a distress. Replevine of Franchises in a quo Warranto, Replevine
of Land upon a Grande Cape, in old time, and Replevijng of the person of a
man in case of Villenage and this our case.

Bailement is derived from the French term Bailler. And that also comes of
ye Greek ((...)) they both signifiyng to Dehaer into hand: For he that is
Bailed is taken (or kept) out of prison and delivered (as it were) into the
hands of his friends as Suerties for him, whereof also the word Manucaptio
(or Maineprise which is all one) gives good evidence, the one mentioning the
delivery, the other the receiving. And in this respect, the Book of the
Norman Customs calls Bailement a live prison, for that the party is thereby
become prisoner to his friends that do undertake for him. But Bailmet and
Mainprise have bin take to differ in ye practse of our common law, for he which
is properly Bailed by ye Justices of any court has been nevertheless reputed
to be a prisouer there fril, and his suerties to be (as it were) his special
gardens, other wise it has bin thought of him that is let to Mainprise, as
may be seen by the Book cases 33. E. 3: and 36. E. 3. Coron. Fitzh. 12.and
13: 7. H. 6. 42: 31. H. 6. 10: 38. H. 6. 23: 9. E. 4. 2: and 21. H. 7. 33. But
at this day how long he shall he adjudged to be aprisoner, Erin Custodia
Mariscalli Mariscalcioe, and c. that is Bailed in the Kings Bench, the custom
of the Court it selse must rule the matter: for it differs somewhat (if I be
not deceived) from those opinons. Howbeit, forasmuch as in our course
(concerning Justices of the Peace) it is not so needful to siay upon the
difference between them, as to proceed to disrlose the use and manner of them:
Let us therefore examine the power of the Justices of Peace in this behalf.

It seemety, that Justices of the Peace might (after the statute of 34. Ed. 3.
cap. 1. (that made them complete Judges) have letten to bail such persons as
were indicted of Felony before them in their Sessions, as the Justices of the
Kings Bench use to do, but not such as were arrested for suspicion of Felony,
and not endited thereof before them, because before the enditement they were no
Judges over them: And for help herein, it was ordained (1. R. cap. 3.) that
every Justice of Peace might let to Bail any suspectes of Felony. But that
Law begatte some inconveniences, and therefors it was soon after repealed (by
3. H. 7. cap. 3.) which left power to two Justices of the Peace (the one
being of the Qorum) to let any prisoners (mainpernable by the Law) to
bail to the next general Sessions, or the next Jail delivery, and
wills, that they shall then certify such bail taken, upon pain to
forfeite for every defaulte (therevppon recorded) ten pounds, to the King
3. H. 7. cap. 3. And here again there sprang up an other inconnenience: for
then Justices of Peace would not stick to borrowe one an others name, (as
many yet still do) and by that means defraude the good meaning of the
Statute: Whereupon it was lastly further provided (by 1.and 2. Phil. and Mar)
as follows:

That no Justice nor Justices of Peace, Bailement of prisoners, and examination
before they be bailed.
should let to bail any person contrary to the said Statute of West. 1.
cap. 15. And that no person, being arrested for Manslaughter, or Felony, or
for suspicion of either of them, (being baileable by the Law) should be
bailed, by any Justice of Peace, if it be not in open Sessions, or by two
Justices of the Peace at the least (the one of them being of the Quorum,) and
the same Justices to be present together at the time of the said Bailement:
and that they shall certify (in writing, subscribed, or signed, with their
own hands) the said bailement or Mainprise, at the next general Jail
delivery, to be holden within that Shire, where that person shall be
arrested, or suspected: And that the said Justices, or one of them, (being of
the Quorum,) when such prisoner is brought bcefore them for Manslaughter or
Felony, shall bcefore any bailement) take the examination of that prisoner,
and the information of them that bring him, of the fact and circumstaunces
thereof, and the same, or so much thereof, as shall be material to prove
the Felony, shall put in writing before they make that Bailement: which
examination and bailement, the said Justices shall certify at the next Jail
delivery within the limittes of their Commission: And the said Justices shall
have authority by this Act, to bind all such by Recognusaunce (or
Obligation) as do declare any thing material to prove the said Murder, or
Manslaughter, offenses, or Felonies, or to be Accessorie or Accessories to the
same, as is aforesaid, to appear at the said next Jail delivery, where
the trial thereof shall be, then and there to give evidence against the
party, at the time of his trial, and shall certify all and every such
bond, in like manner, as is aboucsaide of the Bailement and examination 1. and
2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 13.

This Statute of Bailement I have recited the moze at large, because it both
comprehends some such other things as must concur with the Bailement of the
prisoner, and gives me occasion to set down the Statute of W. 1. and to
show what persons be baileable by the Law: for, to either of these it
refers it self (as you have seeacutene) and is also restrained by them.

Now by the Statute of W. 1. cap. 15. Prisoners that be before outlawed or
have abiured prouours: felons taken with the manner: those that have broken the
Kings prison: notorious and proclaimed thieves: those that are appealed of
prouours, so long as the prouours be living (if they be not of good same:)
those which are taken for felonious burnings, or for falsifying the Kings money
or his Seal: or which are taken upon excommunication, or for open evil or for
treason touching the King himself, or for the death of a man, or by the
commandment of the King himself, or of his privy Counsel, or by the
(absolute, and not ordinary) commandment of the Kings Justices, or for the
Forest: be not repleuisable by the common Writ nor without Writ by Shirifes,
nor other gardines of prisons. But he that is taken for light suspicion: or is
indicted of petite Larcinie, (not being guilty before of other Larcinie:) those
that be charged with the receipt of thieves, or felons, or of commanding, or
force, or aid: or charged with Trespass, that touches not loss of life, nor
member: and he that is appealed by a Prouour (being no common thief nor
defamed) after the death of the prouour, is baileable by that Statute.

Again, the Statute 23. H. 6. cap. 10. prohibiteth those that be in prison by
comdemnation, execution, Capias vtlagatum, excommunication: for Suertie of the
Peace: or by special commandment of any Justice, to be bailed, by Shirife,
keeper of prison, or other there Officer or Minister, But wills and
commands that all those that be Arrested by force of any Writ, Bill or
Warrant, in any action Personal, or because of any enditement of Trespass, to
be let out of prison upon reasonable suerties of sufficient persons having
sufficient within the Counties where they be to be let to Bail or
Mainprise, to keep their days in such places as the said Writtes, Bills or
Warrantes shall require.

Both these last Statutes (as appears) were at the first meant to give a rule
unto Shirifes and other meaner Officers, in what cases to let their prisoners
to Bail, and in what not, But as the Statute of W. 1. is by the express
letter of 1. and 2. of ph. and Mar. set forth as a line whereby the Justices
of Peace are to guide themselves: so it seems to me that they ought to have
an eye unto the other Statute also, for as much as, certain other persons be
therein also meneioned not to be Baileable by lame, and so within the reach of
these berie words that lir in the Statute 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 13.

This Statute of 1. and 2. Ph. and Mar. seems (as has been faide befoze
this) to distinguish between Murder, and Manslaughter making this offense
Baileable, but not the other: So as it should restrain (as it were) the
general words (death of a man) in the Statute of W. 1. to cause them to be
understood of Murder only. Manslaughter baileable, and not Murder.
And besides it makes mention of the Bailement of Acceslones whereof the
Statute 2 and 3. Ph. and Mar. cap. 18. has never a word. I will be therefore
a little bold to remember here some few cases of these matters, to give (as
my manner has been) some glimmering of light to the unacquainted Justices of
Peace with the grounds of our Law, how to difcerne and know them asunber, the
better thereby to grant or deny the suit for Bail that shall be made unto
them.

The sundry construction of the words Murder and Manslaughter, and how they
be commonly understood at this day, has appeared alredie.

Now if one do suddenly (without any occasion of present quarrel offered)
^rawe his swoorde, and therewithal kills an other, that stands by him,
this cannot be thought but to have been done of a pretensed purpose, and
therefore has been taken to be Murder. Dalison in his Keportes.

So is it taken if two fall out, and do appoint a place to fight together, and
there the one of them kills fhe other, ibid.

If a man assaulteth the Master upon malice prepensed to kill him, and he
kills the sruant, against whom he had no malice at all, yet is this Murder,
Plowd. Com. Fol. 101.

But if ye Master assaulteth one upon such malice, and the servant (not
foreknowing this matter) takes then his Masters part, and Kills the party,
it is but Man slaughter in him, though Murder in the Mailter, ibid. Fol. 100.

If one lies in awayte to kill one, and an other comes there by, and so by
mistaking him for the party, whole blood was thirsted for, he is slain, this
is Murder: for it was grounded upon malice prepensed, as in the case that has
been remembered heretofore of the intent in the husband to poyso his wife,
whereby in a manner against his will, his child was poisoned, ibid. Fol. 474.

Brook Chief Justice was of opinion, 4. and 5. Phil.and mar. That in all
cases, where a man alone, or with other, comes to do an unlawful act to an
other, as to beat him or diseise him of his land, etc. and kills him in
that doing, it is Murder: But if a sfranger be killed there, that then that is
but Ma^slaughter. And Dallison agrees with the first part of this opinon.

And he further reports, that if a maiden servant conspire with a man to
rob his maistresse and so they kill her, this is but Murder in the man,
though petit Treason in the maiden.

Accessories to all manner of Felonies be baylable by the statute W. 1. in these
words, (Those that be charged with the receipt of Thieves or Felones, or of
commandment, or offorce or aid thereunto.) Accessories.
And M. Stamforde. F. 71. affirms that those also which be charged with
abbetment, consent or procurement, be within the equity of the same words.

This statute therefore seems to make three sorts of acccessories, some to be
before the offense committed, as Commanders, abbetters, consenters, and
procurers: some at the deed doing, as those that then give force or aid
thereunto: and a third sort of those that receive the Felones, and comfort
them after the fact done.

But for as much as the second sort of these men be at this day accounted as
deep offen dors as the very doer him self is, there fore (in mine opinion) in
all such cass where he is not to be bailed by law, these men also ought to
remain in prison still, not withstanding the words of this statute.

Now to know sucb an Accessorie (as the law is taken at this day) and him also
from a principal, let these cases following suffice.

If one procure or command an other to kill a man, but is not present when
the other kills him, he is taken to be bat an Access^rie. But if he be
present at the very time, he then is taken to be a principal murderer. 7. H.
4. 27. and 4. H. 7. 18.

And if hunters that have agreed to kill such as shall resist them, do come
into a park, and one of them runs upon a man that rebukes them, and
kills him, it is Murder in all the hunters that be in the park, although
some of them do not see, and all be principals, as Dalison reports.

So if diverse come to do a Murder, and one of them only strikes and kills
the man, and the other be but present abbetting him and ready to aid him if
need were, they be all taken to be principal Murderers at this day. For their
presence is a terror unto the party slain, and the greater occasion of his
present death Plowd. Com. Fo. 98.

If a man command one to poison an other, and he kills him with a sword, yet
the Co^mau^der is Accessorie to this Murder. Da.

So if B procures one to kill A in the field, and he kills him in a Church,
or to kill him such a day, and he kills him an other day, B. is Accessorie to
the killing: but if after such procurement, and before the execution there of,
B. grows penitent, and charge him not to commit the fact, and he
notwithstanding performs it, now B is not Accessorie at al Plow. Com. 475.

And if B command one to beat an other, and he upon that beats him so as he
dies of it, B is Accessorie to this Murder. 3. E. 3 Coro. Fitz. 314.

If B commands A. to rob a Goldesmith of his plate as he rides to
Sturbridge fair, and he breaks his house by night in Cheapefide, and robs
him of his plate, B. is no Accessrie to this Burglarie. ibidem.

So is it if B command A. to burn ye house of C and he burns the house of D
then B is no Accessorie to ye burning. But if he had burned the house of C. and
by that fire the house of D had been burned also, then were B. Accessorie to
that burning of the house of B. because that burning followed of the fire which
was kindled by his commandment. ibidm.

To make receeiuers co^orters and aiders of Fe lonies, after the fact co^mtted
to be offenders and Accessories: It is requsite (says M. Stamf F. 41.) that
they have knowledge of the felony done, and it must be with an evil intent,
for if he aid him by his good word and suit for his de liuerauce, or writes
in his behalf for that purpos, he shall not be accounted an Accessorie, 26
AiT. pl. 47.

If a man do give a morfall wound to an other upon the first day of Augusft,
and a third person (knowing of the wound) receives him two days together,
and then he departs, and after he that was hurt, dies upon the tenth day of
August, this Keceipt makes him no Accessorie, for all the time of the Receipt
it was no slonie: But other wise it is, if he had receiud him continually, till
the death and after Dalison.

If a man pursue and take a Felon which has stlen his goods, and he takes his
goods from him, and then suffers him to go at large this makes him no
Acccssorie. But if he agree with bim, and take money of him, to the end that he
shall not gine evidence againtnst him, then is he an Accessorie to that
Felony, by the opinion of Justice Hales (M, 6. E. 6.) because it is a
comforting of him.

A wife may be Accessrie to a felony with out her hus band, by recciuing
Felons into ye house the husband not knowing of it, or wayuing the house to
soon as he knows of it. 15. E. 2. Coron. Fitzh. 383. But the wife shall not
be accounted Accessorie to the felony of her hus band, by comforting him, etc.
neither is she bound to discover him, Britton. F. 47.

But now to reture to Baylement. He which (within the year) is acquitted of
murder or manslaughter at the Queens suit, must be remitted to prison or let
to Mainprise, until the end of the year, and the party grieved may in that
mean time commence the Appeal. 3. H. 7-ca. I.

Further, me thinks that I may set down this as a rule (even at the common
law) conerning Bailements. That Justices of the peace can not meddle with
Bailement of any prisoner, except he be prisoner for such cause, as whereof the
Justices of the peace be competent Judges, Which also was the cause that one
Justice of ye Peace by force of the Commission only could not that have bailed
suspectes of Felony, before that they were indicted thereof (as I fold you,)
For out of their Sessions, and till indictment, they toere no Judges of the
master.

And on the other side, it seems that two Justices of the peace (the one of
them being of the Quorum) may (out of the Sessions) bail such as come into
prison by the process of the Sessions made upon penal laws, not forbidding
bail, because they be competent Judges of al those matters, insomuch as two
such Justices may hear and determine them.

Sundry doubts (I confess) may be made concerning the busiesse of Bail,
which I am not able to dissolve, and therefore am not much willing to move.
Dnely this J will say for all, that it becomes Justices of the Pear to be
bery circumspect in granting Bail, both for fear of wrong by denying it to
him that is rcple uisable, and for fear of danger to the service it self by
giving it where it is not grantable. And therefore I adnise them, to consider
strst, whether ye power of Bail (when it is required) be not take from them by
some of these former satutes: and then, whether that particular statute it
self against which ye prisoner is charged to offend) Do not spesally
prohibit the same: fbr you sall me meet with many statutes, which do not
only take bail from the offenders against them, wpon their solemn conviction
after Iudgemcnt, but also upon the Record of some one or Justices of the Peace,
by exammaion, proof by witnesles, or such other trial had before them.

for example, take a few of each kind, seeing it would prove froublesom to
rehearse the all.

1. He that is conutcttctc before the Justices of the Peace, upon the sfatut of
Liuerices, thall be committied to prison for one whole year without Bail or
Mainprise. 8. H. 6. C. 4. Liuerics.
2. He that is co^uicted before them, for abusing a license of transporting
bictuall, shall like wife be committcd by them, and shall remain there a whole
year without Bail, or Mainpnse. 1. and 2. Phil. Mar. ca. 5. License te
transporte.
3. He ye is convicted before them for offciding the sfatute made against
forstalling, etc shall be committed to the jail for two months without Bail
or Mainprise. 5. E. 5. c. 14. Forstalling
4. And be that is co^uicted before them for offense against the statute of
Mustcrs shall be awarded to eu roman in p^ison without Bail or Mainprise,
till he have paited the forfaiture, 4. and. 5 phil and Mar. ca. 3. Mustens^

1. Again if any one Justice of the Peace shall find or know any to baue
exercised any bnlawful games, he may commit him without Bail or Mainprise,
till he will become bound no more to use vnlalniful games. 33- H. 8. ca. 9.
Gamer^
2. ^o, he that is convicted before two Justices of ye peace to have refused to
srue for such wages as is by order appointed, shall remain in prison wout Bail
or Mainprise, till he will be bound to serve accor dingly. 5. El. ca. 4.
Seruaune.
3. He that is committed by two Justices of the Peace for keeping a common
Alehouse, of his own audoritie, shall remain in prison three days, and
without bail or mainprise. 6. E. 6. ca. 25. Alehouse
4. And the reputed father or mother of a Bastard child, that will not
perform the order set down by two Justices of ye peace thereto auctorised,
shall be committed, and shall remain in prison without bail or main prise,
till he or she will be bound, and. c. 18. El. c. 3. Bastard

Now (for an end of Bailement) I will show you one hiforme of a Bail, and an
other of a Liberate.

Memor andum, quod decimo die mensis Octobris, Annoregni etc. coram nobis G. M.
and W. L. duobus Iusticiariorum etc. assignatorum, venerunt A. B. and C. D. de
E. in dicte comitatu Yeomen, and ceperunt in balliu F. G. etc. Laborer,
(captum, and detentu in prisona. pro suspicione Cuiusdam felonia, eTC) vsque ad
proximam generalem Gaolae deliberationem in comittatu praedicto tenendam: Et
assump serunt super super se, scilicet quilibet little sub poena, 20. lib. de
bonis et catallis, terries et tenementis coru^ et curuslibet corums ad opus
dictae D. Reginae Leuandarums, si pradictus F. G. ad candem proximam Gaols
deliberationem personaliter non comparebit coram Iusticiarijs dicta Dominae
Reginae ad dictam Gaolam deliberandam assignatis, adrespondendum dict^ Domimae
Reginae tunc and ibidem de et super omnibus quaeilli obijcientur. Datum sub
sigillis nostris, die et anno supradictis. The Bail


GEORGE M. and W. L. two of the Justices of etc. The Liberate.
To the keeper of her Majesty's prison in in Maydstone, etc. greeting.
Forasmuch as F. G. etc Labourer, has before us found sufficient mainerprise to
appear before the Justices of Jail deliverie at the next general Jail
deliverie to be holden in the said County, there to answer to such things as
shall be then on the behalf of our said Sovereign Lady objected against him,
and namely to the felonious talking of to sheep (for the suspicion whereof he
was taken and committed; to your said Jail) we command you on the behalf of
our said Sovereign Lady, that (if the said F. G do remain in your said
Jail for the said cause, and for none other) then you forbear to grieve or
detain him any longer, but that you deliver him thence and suffer him to go at
large, and that upon the pain that will fall thereon. Yeouen at Ightham
aforesaid, under our Seals, this tenth day of October, etc.

The authority of some two Justices of the Peace goes yet further: for the
common manner is, that two Justices of the Peace (the one of them being of the
Quorum) do join in granting suerite for the good a bearing: but thereof I
have already spoken my mind. The good Abearing


Two Justices of the Peace (the one being of the Quorum) may prohibit and
remove common Aleselling, and may also allow the same, taking bond with
surety by Recongnusance for good rule to be kept in such Ale. house etc, by
their discretion. Alchouses
And they may also commit and imprison for three days those that keep common
Ale seling of their own heads, against prohibition, or without allowance
thereof, and after take recognusance of them with two suerties that they shall
keep none. 5. E. 6. ca. 25.

And hear, seeiing that the order of the Conditions of these bonds is partly
refer red to discretion, I will (for the better brideling) of these nurseries of
naughtiness) leave with you that form of the first of them, which I have
known practiced by that Honorable Iusticer, the lord Willliam Cobham, now
Lord. Warden of the Five Ports.

The Condition of this Recognusance is such, That whereas the withinbounden A.
B. is admitted and allowed by the withinnamed Lord cobbam, and William Lambard
(two of the Queens Majesty's Justices of the Peace within the County of Kent
within written) to keep a common Alehouse or Tippling house, and to use common
felling of Ale or Beer, only within the now house of him the said A. B. (and
notelsewhere) situate in the High streate of the Town of M. within written,
and called the sign of the Heart: If therefore, he the said A. B. during such
time as he shall keep such common Alchouse there, shall not suffer any
unlawful play, at the Tables, Dice, Cards, Tennis, Bowls, Closh, Coytes,
Loggets, or other unlawful games to be used in his said house or in his
garden, orcharde, or other his, ground, or place: Nor dress, or causc, or
suffer, to be dressed, any flesh to be eaten upon any day forbidden by the
Laws or Statutes of this Realm of England: Nor wittingly and willingly
admit, orreceiue, into his said house or any part thereof, any person
notoriously defamed of or for theft, incontinencie, or drunkenness, or that
shall be before hand notified to him the said A. B. by the Constable or
Borsholder of M. aforesaid, for the time being, or by the Deputy of either of
them, to be an unmeet person to be rcceiued into a common Alehouse: Nor keep
or lodge there, any strange person (above the space of one day and one night
together) without notice thereof first given to the Confiable or Borsholder,
or the Deputy of the one of them, there: And finally, if he the said A. B.
during all the time that he shall keep common felling of Ale or Beer in the
said house, shall and will there use and maintain good order and rule. That
then this present Recognusance etc. or elfe, etc. For, euerls place is not
meet:


Two Justices of the peace (to that the one Be of the Quorum) map (by
examination, or Inquiry) hear and determine the faults of head Dissicers in
cities, Boroughs, and market lowness, that do not twice pearely view and
examine Weightes, and Measures, and brake and burn the defediue: as also the
defaults of Buyers and sellers by other meightes and measures than they ought
to do, and may brake and burn the desectiue weightes and measures, and amerce
and fine the offenders by their discretion, and make process against them, as
if they were indisted of Trespass against the peace. 11. H. 7. ca. 4. and 12.
H. 7. ca. 5. Weightes and Measures


Two such Justices, may give license to Fencers, Beareweards, Common players
in Enterludes, Minstrels, Iuglers, Pedlers, Tinkers, and Petiechapmen, to go
abroad so as they shall not be taken as koges. 14. Eli zab. ca. 5. Pedlers,
Tinkers, Fencers, Players etc.


Suit may be commenced against a high Constable in the name of two of the next
Iustifices of the Peace to the place (if it be out of city, Borough and Lowne
corporate,) for not suing a negligent Collector of the money for the poor
within the time limited by the Statute: and they shall every half years take
the account of such Collector, and may take order with the Surplusage of such
collection, and may also commit him to prison for refusing to account, or to
bring in his surplusage contrary to the Statute 14. Elizab. cap. 5. Poor


Two Justices of the Peace (the one being of the Quorum) may imprison such as
do refuse to give toward the relief of the poor, or do discourage other
to give. poor
And the Bishop, or his Chauncelour, shall call the two Justices of the Peace
next inhabiting to any Hospital, to assist them in taking the account of such
as have had the collection of the revenues and profits of such Hospital, and
they three may charge the accomptant (under penalty to loose such sum of
money as they shall think meet) to account, and not to delay it, and forth
with to employ the Surplusage to the bse of the Hospital 14. Elizab. cap. 5.
Hospital


Two Justices of Peace (the one being of the Quorum) in, or next to the limits
where the parish church is, in which a Bastard child (left to the charge of the
Parsh) shall be borne, ought to take order by their discretion, as well for the
relief of the Parish and the keeping of the child, as also for the punishment
of the mother and reputed father thereof 18. Eli. ca. 3. Barstard child


Two Justices of Peace (the one being of the Quorum) upon complaint by any
competent Judge of Tithes, for any misdemeanour of ye defendant in a suit of
Lithes, may cause him to be attached, or committed to ward, till he find
suertie unto them by Kecognusance to the Kings use, to obey the Process and
Sentence of that Judge 27. H. 8. ca. 20. Tithes


And also upon complaint in writing by an Ecclesiastical Judge that has given
definitive sentence in case of Lithes (against one which wilfully refuses to
pay the Lithes, or sums of money so adjudged) two such Iustifices may cause
the party to be attached, and committed to the next Jail, till he find such
suertie as is aforesaid to perform that sentence 32. H. 8. ca. 7.

Two Justices of Peace, dwelling next any City or Town, where any Ketaylour
of woollen cloth shall present unto them any defective cloth against this
Statute being co^ferred with the Statute 4.and5. Phil. and Mar. ca. 5. shall
cause the same to be cut into three equal parts, whereof the one to be to the
Queen, the other to the Presentours, and the third to the Justices them selves
5. Ed. 6. cap. 6. Cloth.


No Fisherman shall be taken to serve as a Mariner by the Queens Commission,
but by the choice of two Justices of the Peace adjoining to the place where he
is to be taken 5. Elizab. ca. 5. Fisherman


Two Justices of the Peace (not being of kindred, alliance, counsel, or see, to
the Lord (or owner of a wood) appointed by the more part of the Justices of
Peace at their Sessions, upon complaint of the Lord made unto them, may divide
and set out the fourth part of it, if the Lord and Commoners thereof (being
first called before them) can not agree upon it. 35. H. 8. ca. 17:and 13. Eliz.
ca. 25. Divide the fourth parts of a wood.


Two Justices of the Peace whereof the one to be of the Quorum (appointed by
the Custos in the Cou^Rotulorum or by the Eldest of the Quorum in his absence)
are to ouversee and control the Shirifes books and amercements, and the
estreits of the said amercements, are to be made by Indenture between them and
the Shirife or undershirife, and to be sealed with their seals; And they may
upon suggestion make process as in an action of Trespass against the offenders
and against the Statute to answer before them. 11. H. 7. ca. 15. Amercern^^^
in tie cou^tie Court.


And here also, is place for those private Acts, wherein any power is given to
two Justices of the Peace, as,

5. E. 6. ca. 24. For the making of Couerlets and Dernikes, in Norwich. Norwich.


35. H. 8. ca. II. Forwages of the knights of Parle met.

II. H. 7. ca. 9. For recognusances to be taken of Lessces in Northumberland.
Wales Northumberland. Universities.


2. 8. c. 3. Phil. and Mar. ca. 15: and 13. Elizab. Cap. 21. For prohibition of
purueiances, within five miles of either of the universities.

14. H. 8. ca. 6. and 26. H. ca. 7. For laying out new high ways, in Kent and
Sussex. Kent, and Sussex. Cardiffe


23. Eliz. ca. II. For the repairing of Cardiffe bridge.

What things, three, or more, Justices of the Peace may do out of the Sessions.
CAP. XXIIII
THe Authority as well of any two Justices of the Peace generally, as of some
certain two susfices specially, being thus at some length unfolded, it
remains that (for an end) we speak somewhat of threee, and the greater
number.

Three Justices of the Peace (one of them being of the Quorum) may discharge
out of prison, any person committed thither for his offense in not declaring to
a Justice (within 24. hours) that he was moved to join in any unlawful
Assembly contrary to the statnte. 1. Mar. 1. Parl. ca. 12 and1. Eliz. ca. 17.
Unlawful Assembly


It is requisite that the Certisicat (that is to be made to the head Officer
of a City or Town corporate, where a child is to be put Apprentice to a
Merchant, Hercer Draper, Botosmith, Ironmonger, Imbrode, derer or Clothier,
that the father or mother of such child may dispende forty shillings freehold
by year) be bunder the hands and seals of three Justices of the Peace where
ye lands lie. 5. Eliz. ca. 4. Certify for an Apretile.


Three Justices of the Peace (the one of the being of the Quorum) may with the
Surplusage of the collections and forfaitures, by their discretions settle the
Koges (borne, or abiding for the most part of three years, in that Shire) to
work, there to be holden to work by ouerfeers, 14. Eliz. ca. 5. Roges.


The Bishop and his Chauncelour, and three such Justices of the Peace, have
power to eramine, how money or other relief (appointed by King Henry ye
eight, or any other, to the bse of ye Poor, or of amending of Highwayes or
Bridges) is bestowed, and to call to account the deteiners thereof, etc. 14.
Elizab. cap. 5. Money give to the poor, high ways, or bridges.


If seems, that three such Justices of the Peace may out of the Sessions take
information and accusation by the oaths of two honest persons, against such as
shall deprave the Sacrament of the body and blood of our Lord and Savior lesus
christ, against the Statute: and cramine them, what other witnesses were then
by:and to bynd them al by Kecognusance, to give in euidenee at the day of
trial. 1. E. 6. ca. 1. but enquire of this matter. Deprave the Sacrame of the
Lords supper.


Four Justices of the Peace (where of one to be of the Quorum) may (where a
decayed Bridge is, and where it can not be proved who, or what lands, be
chargeable to the repairing thereof) fare the inhabitants, make collectors, and
appoint overseers, for the amendment of the same etc. 22. H. 8. ca. 5. Four
^^^ccs.
Bridges.


Sire Justices of the Peace, may in sundry shires take order for common
Gaoles, whereof the Shirite shall have the custody, and to the which murderers
and felons etc. shall be sent:and may be and perform diverse incidentes thereto
by the Statuts. 23. H. 8. ca. 2:and 13 Eliz. ca. 25. Six Iufuo. Jail.


Sire Justices of the Peace (two of the being of the Quorum) may for a whole
year after the expiration of any Commission of Sewers, cxecute the laws of
the Comissioners of Sewers, unless that a new Commission of Sewers be
published within the year. 13. El. etc. 9 Sewers.


To this Title also, do these particular Statutes belong.

13. El. ca. 23: and 23. El. ca. 12. For pauing the street by Alegate.

34. H. 8. ca. For establishing Justices of the Peace in Wales etc.

27. H. 8. c. 5 For Justices of the Peace in Cheshire, etc.

23. H. 8. ca. 2: and 5. Eliz. ca. 24: and 13. Eliz. ca. 25. For the appointing
and building of Gaoles, in sundry shires.

18. El. ca. 20. For amending of Bridges within five milis of Oxford.

18. Eliz. ca. 10. For the reparation of the ferry called the Kings ferrie in
the Isle of Shepey in Kent.

Of the reward, and punishment, of Justices of the Peace, for things done, not
done, or misledone, out of the Sessions of the Peace.
CAP. XXV.
OF Reward and Punishment (as said Soio^) all Commonweals do consist: for as
the care of equity and Justice wareth cold, unless there be reward ready
for virtue: So the negligence of evil men must needs be corrected by
seueritic and chastisement of pains. And therefore, albeit the meaning of our
Parliamentes has always been, that choice should be made of such persons for
this Office of the Peace, as needed no reward for their travail in that
behalf, yet to the ends that they should with the more alacrity and
cheerfulness proceed in their affairs, they do now and then cast them a
trifle, rather to let them know that they do behold their well doing, than
that they ffande in need of any recompense. Reward


Hereupon every Justice of Peace, stting in ececution of the Statute of
Laborers and Servants, shall have five shillings the day (for three days
together)out of the forfeitures that grow by the same Statute 5. Eliz ca. 4.
Servants.


And if any persons (commanded by two Justices, of Peace to appear, to be
made an ouerseer to see Statute of Cloth making kept) do (without reasonable
excuse) refuse to come and to take upon him that office, he is to forfeit for
every such refusal forty fhillings: and thereof those Justices are appointed
to have the one half by the, Statute, 3. E., 6. ca. 2. Overseers of Cloth.


Those two Justices of Peace also heart adjoining, to whom any Cloth (faulty
against the statutes) shall be presented, may cut the same into three equal
pieces, and shall have to them selves the one of the same, by the Ad 5. E. 6.
ca. 6: and 4. E. 5: Phil.and Mar. ca. 5. Faulty cloth.


And every Justice of the Peace, is allowed to retain to his own bse, the one
moitie of all strangers goods, calling them selucs Egiptians that he shall
lawfully seize, by ver fue of the Statute. 22, H. 8. ca. 10. Egiptians.


The Justice, or Justices of the Peace, that do join with Clerk of the
Peace, in taking and Conusance of an Indenture of bargain and sale of land to
be Enrolled, shall have ry.^. therefore, if the land exceed not in value ^l.^.
by the year, and y.^. vj.^. if it do exced that value, by the Statute 27. H.
8. ca. 16. Inrolloment of bargaune and sale.


The Queens highness shall bear the costs that the Justices of Peace shall
sustain in the cxecution of the Statute of Riots, ^. made 13. H. 4. ca. 7: by
2. H. 5. cap. 8. Riot.


And ye Justices of the Peace shall make execution of ^ Statute of forcible
Cntries, at the costs and charges of the party grieved. 3 H. 6 ca. 9 Forcible
lourd


And twelve pence is given to the two Justices of Peace for every Recognusaunce
taking, of him that is allowed to keep a common Alehouse, by Statute 5. E. 6.
ca. 25. Alchouse.


On the other side also, the Statutes do now and then correct the dullness
of these Justices with some strokes of the rod or spur. Punishment.
And therefore even at the ^rst it was ordained, that if the Wardeins of the
Peace did not look unto the execution of the Statute upon such as should ride
or go armed in any place putting the Country in fear, then the Justices
assigned by the king should enquire of their defaulte, and punish them, Star.
North. 2. E. 3. cap. 3 Ride armed
.

And the Statute of Riots etc.(13. H. 4. c. 7) lays C. it. forfeiture upon
those Justices of

Peace that shall dwell nighest to the Riot, etc. if they do not put that
Statute in execution. Riots.


And those Justices of the Peace, and Shirife, or Vndershirife, which (in
sending their Certificat to the Queen and her counsel, concerning such a Riot)
do not with all certify the names of ye mainteinors and embraceors in that
behalf, with their misdemeanors that they know, shall every of them forfeite
twenty pounds, bnlesse they have reasonable excuse for not certifying the
same. 19. H. 7. ca. 13. Certificat.


That Justice of the Peace which seiseth the goods of any Egyptians, and does
not incontinently restore such part thereof as shall be proved before him, to
have been craftily or felonioufly taken, shall forfeite the double thereof, to
such prouer. 22, H. 8. cap. 10. Egyptians.


That Justice of Peace which does not (upon request made) give attendance upon
the Queencs Lieutenante of the Shire, for the suppreffion of any Rebellion, or
unlawful assmblie, shall suffer a years imprisonment, unless there be cause of
reasonable excuse. 1. Mar. Parl. 1. cap. 12: and 1. Elizab. cap. 17. Rebellious
assembly.


If any Justice of Peace shall be proved to be in dcfault, about thc execution
of the Act of the Poor, by two sufficient witreffes before the Justices of
Assise, at their next general Jail delivery, he shall loose o. tt. 14. Eli.
cap. 5 Poorch


That next Justice of Peace which fails in presenting the name of him that
preseteth it to him, according to the Statute of shooting in Crosbowes, or
Gunncs, shall forfaite ^ shillings. 2. E. 6. ca. 14. Gunnes and Crosbowes.
But enquire of the continuance of this, as before in the 21. Chapter.

That Justice of Peace, which does not (within fourteen days, after matter
vtt^ red to him concerning any Agneus Dei, etc.) signify the same to some one
of the Queens privy Counsel, shall incur the pains of the Act. 16. R. 2
of. Praemunire 13. Eli. ca. 2. Agnils Dei.


That Justice of the Peace, which (having taken any examination concerning
Plaintes in the Shirifes Court) does not Certify the same into the
Escheaquer within one quarter of a year after, shall loose forty sillings for
his default, 11. H. 7 qa. 15. Certify in to the Escheaquer.


Those Justices of the Peace, which do grant any Bail contrary to the Law, or
do not cer tifie the Bail and examination of the Felony, according to these
Statutes, shall pay such Fine, as the Justices of Jail deliueris shall
think meet 1.and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap:. 13: and 2.and 3. Phil.and Mar. ca.
10. Bail and scrisie.


Every Justice of Peace, ye (dwelling with in 7. miles London) does not (upon
request) assist the College of Physicians of London in the execution of the
Statute. 32. H. 8. ca. 8 shall be punished, as one that runnth in contept of
the Queen. 1. Mar. ca. 9. Physician.


And how that Justice of the Peace shall be punished, that shall take upon him
the office, not having twenty pounds in lands, it has lands. been showed
already. ca. 6. Not. XX. pounds in lands.


THE EPILOGVE.
THVS much (so shortly as I could) I thought fit to say concerning the
audoritie of Justices of the Peace, without the Sessions: wherein J have rather
sought to admonish them (by a slight view and rehearsal, of the most part)
what things they have to handle, than labored to accomplish them (with full
skill) how to administer and execute them all. The Epilogue.


Neither does that knowledge lie in my power, but in, but in their own
diligence and must therefore be woonne by a continual study and painful
meditation of the Statutes at large: toward their help and furtherance
wherein, J have entreated a godly and learned Gentleman ( M. John Tyndall, a
friend and fellow of mine in Lincolnes Inn)to take the pains to cull out all
those Statutes by them selves which are now in force, and wherewithal Justices
of the Peace have to deal: not altogether beheading the of their preambles:
For any whit curfailing the: the of their words: For other wise dismembring
them, or scattering their parts in sunder: But laying forth bodies of them
whole and at large, under their proper Titles, together with the material parts
of al their preambles, and not without any of their prouisoes: Eherewithal
amending the corruptions of the English translation out of yelatine and french:
And finally, adding unto the (where need shall be)some notes of helpful
direction:which things no man (that I know) has hitherto assayed. And this
shall shortly (I trust) come to light, either in a several Volume by it self,
or so marked in M. Rastals Abridgement, that every man (that will)may easisly
find much good by it.

THE SECOND BOOK, Entreating of the Sessions of the Peace, and of things
incident thereunto.
THE PROHEME.
IT may peradventure seem, that having already stood long in matters that
were of the less importance, and such as might be dispatched at home sine
strepitu, I will be now both long and tedious when I begin with those of
greater weight and which dos require the solemn Benche.

But, as at the first I thought it tete to help most, where most need was, I
mean, wherer one or two Justices (pressted with the necessity of time, and
destitute of the assistaunce of their learned companions) were to administer
office alone: So now, knowing that at the Sessions of the Peace there be
commonly many Justices in number, and amongst them sundry so well instructed
in law, as in being too busic with that which belongs thereto, I shall (as
the saying is) but set a candle in the Sun shine, and rather bewray want in
my self than bring help or light unto them. I purpose to run over this
residue more swiftly, except it be in a few places, where either the profit,
or necessity, (or both) of the matters them selves shall beg license and
pardon for me.

The description of the Sessions of the Peace.
CAP. I.
AS a man that has reseaed hurt in his body by a stroke where of he bleedeth
freshely, will be contented for the present to admit the help of any mean
Leche or Surgeon (coming next to hand) for the staun^hing of his blood, and
binding up of the wound, and yet would more gladly have used the conference of
diverse expert Surgeons for doing the same if the danger of the hurt would have
granted the time that will be lost in calling them together: So also the
common council of this Realm, finding that the bedie of it may be deeply
wounded in some one member, and perceiving that some evils must be resisted at
the very first, (least otherwise they grow past help, and ware incurable)
has many times thought it good to commit to one, or to a few Justices of
the Peace (for that they be ready, and at hand) the sfopping of the blood (as
it were) and first dressing of the wound, by repressing of force, and other
outrages, that do soudainly arise: and has yet nevertheless (when as the
time and matter will permit) politikely established an assembly, and
conference of all the Justice at certain tyme^ in full Court, and open Session.

And as it is true, thatif the publiqus peace should not be preserved by
taking of Suertie, before it be broken, If such as do violate the commune
tranquilitis should not be committed to prison, when they have broken it, If
seditious talebearers (the sowers of Kebellion) should not be snapt up and
restreyned, If finally riotous assemblies should not be dispersed, and forcible
inunasions withstoode and removed, the hurt body would bleed to death, and
too late and in baine would it be to summone a session for remedy. So when
the bridele is once cast upon the head of the offender, then, and not before
is the matter readis for the sitter. And great and many are the profittes, that
would follow of these Sessions, if they were often kept, and duly ordered.

I will for this time call a Session: of the Peace An assembly, of any two (or
more) Justices of the Peace (one of them being of the Quorum) at a certain day
(and place within the limittes of their Commission) appointed, to enquire by a
Iuric, or otherwise, to take knowledge, and thereupon to proceedc to hear and
determine, according to their power, of the matters within their Commission,
and Statutes referred to their charge. The description of 2 Session of the
peace.


And this Description excludes all meetings, that are only for Inquiry, in
se much as to enquire, and not to hear and determine, is but a half doing,
and not worthy the name of a Session of the Peace.

It shuts out also, such assemblics as do consist of two Justices of the
Peace, meeting only to enquire, hear, and determine of a Riotte, by virtue of
fhe Statute 13. H. 4. for that may they do (as also the former) though neither
of them be of the Quorum. So that it is but a particular service laid upon
two Justices and the Shirife, by this Statute, and the Record thereof shall not
(as I think) remain amongst the Recorder Of the Sessions Of the Peace, as
has been said already.

And therefore the assembly that I mean, is a meeting of such Justices for the
execution of their general authority: and albeit that happily some one matter
be the motive and thief cause of their coming together, yet if they deal
with that and others (witthin their Commission and charge) let it on Gods name
pass for a Session of the Peace according to my meaning.

These Sessions of the Peace then, bes grounded, chiefly upon the words of
the third Assignauimus in the Commission, the which (being, duos vestrum,
quoruus aliqucm, etc.) do very necessarily require the presence of one of the
Quorum: for the words of the second Assignauimus, do give no power to hear
and to determine, but only to make inquiry. Which three things, namely, to
Enquire, Hear, and Determine, do (in effect) comprehends whatatsoeuer
belongs to these Sessions: So that every thing, whereof I shall hereafter
entreat, will concern, either the Information of the Justices by inquiry, and
other meet mean: Dr the Hearing and trial of the cause: Dr the Judgment and
execution (which is the determining) given and done dponit. A partition of that
which follows in this book.
And therefore, in this pathe ( God willing) will I freade, and by it you shall
trars me to the end.

Who shall appoint the Sessions of the Peace: and how: and where.
CAP. II
THe Justices of the Peace, do (at their Sessions)take knowledge of causes
with in their Jurisdiction, either by the Dath Of lnquirours, or by the
presentment or declaration of other men: And this Inquiry is first prepared,
by the appearance of the Officers and Country, and by the Articles given in
charge: and then performed, by the presentment (or Jnditement) of them that had
the charge to make it.

The usual manner of calling the Officers and County together for this
feruice, is by a Precepte to the Shirife, wherein both the disposition of the
Justices is notified for) the holding of a Session, and feruice and attendaunce
of those others is cornmaunded to be thereat with them, which they be well
warranted to direct unto hun, by the last Assignauimus of theic Commmission,
and the Mandauimus that follows thereupon. The Form thereof has been like
this:

Thomas Randolphe, and Thomas Wotton, duo Iusticiarierum Do. Reg. ad pacem in
Comitaiu Kancia conseruandam, necnon ad diuersa, felonias, transgrossiones, and
alia malefacta in dicto Comitatu perpetrata, audienda and terminanda
assignatorum, Vicecomiti eiusdem Comitatus, Salutem: Ex part dictae Dominae
Reginae tibi praecipimus, quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in
Balliua tua quin came ingrediaris, and venire facias coram nobis vel socijs
mostris Iusticiarijs pacis and. (tali die etc) proxime futuro apud Maidstone in
Comitatu pradicto, 24. liberos and legales homines de quolibet hundrede in
Balliua tua, tam infra libertates quam extra, ad faciendum and exequendum tunc
and ibidem ea qua ex part dictae Deminae Reginae eis iniungentur: Scire facias
etiam omnibus Coronatoribus Comitatus tui, Seueschallis Constabularijs,
Subconstabularijs, and Balliuis, infra Hundreda praedicta, quod sint tumc ibi
ad faciedum and perimplendum ea qua ex part Dicta Dominae Reginae eis tunc and
ibidem smiliter pracipientur: Et tu ipse tunc sis ibidem ad faciendum and
exercendum ea quao ad officium tuum pertinent, and habeas ibi tunc nomina
Iuratorum, Cosronatorum, Seneschallorum, Constabularierum, and Balliuorum
praedictorum, and hoc praceptum. Precept, to summon the Sessions.
Dat. fsub sigillis nostris apud Boughton Maleherbe in comitatu pradicto. 16.
die Octobris, Annoregni dicta Domina nostre Reginoe Eliz. dei gratia etc. 23.

This precepte may be made by any two Justices of the Peace, so that the one
of them be of the Quorum for two such may hold a Session of the Peace, as it
does plainly appear by the Commission: and therefore (as Master Marrowe
says) it suffices not to have it run under the name of the Custos Rotulorum
alone, seeing that he has no more authority in this behalf, tha^ one of his
fellows has: for the worus of the said Ma^dauimus in the Commission to the
Shirife be, Coram vobis, sen aliquibus vostrum, venire faciat, tot, and tales
etc Ypa, if two such Iustica make a precept for a Session of the Peace, all
their fellow Justices, can not discharge it by their Supersedeas, but a
Supersdeas out of the Chaunccrie will discharge it, says Fitzherberf.

And if one Justice of the Peace alone would take upon him to hold a Session
of the Peace that was already summoned by such two Ius;tices, and will make
the Style of the Session in the names of him slefe and the other Justice, all
pre sentmentes so taken before him may be avoided: if the Sessions be in
truth holden by two suel sufficient Justices only, and the Style (or Title)
thereof be made in the names of three, then all the presentiments before them
shall stand good. For it will not help the party to say, that one of fhe
three was not there, when it shall appear that was of them (the one being of
the Quorum) were present, which will suffice. Mar.

Touching the time of holding the Session of the Peace, I will forbear to
speak, till I shall come to divide the Sessions. The time.


But the place of howing them is arbi, trable, and at the pleasure of the
Justices themselves so that it be meet for access: And although the precept
do appointe the Session to be holden in some one Eowne by name, yet may the
Iusces keep it inany other Eowue, and all the presentiments shall be good that
shall be taken where they hold it: But, no amerciament, can be fet upon any
man for his defaulte of apparanee there, because he had no warning of it, faith
Mar. The place.


So if (...) Iudices make a precept for a Session to be holden in dwne Eowne,
and (...) other Justices should make an other Precept for an other Session to
be holden at an other Town (or in an other part of the same Town) the same
day: then presentiments taken before either of them shall be good. Mar. And
then also it seems, that he which serves at the one Session, as a Iuror, or
Officer, shall be excused for his defaulte at the other, because they be
both the Queencs Courts and of equal authority.

And albeit that these Sessions be co^monlie and most orderly, summoned by a
Precept in writing, yet is not altogether of necesstie to have it so to make a
lawful Session: for if (...) such Justices of the Peace do get men to
serve, and do hold a Session without any Precepte before directed, all
Presentmentes made before them by twelve men shall be of force in Law: But
there again, no man shall loose any thing for his default, by cause none had
notice of their sitting, Mar.

What persons ought to appear at these Sessions, and therein of the Custos
Rotulorum the Records of the Sessions, and the Clerk of the Peace, and how
the Jurors ought to be qualified and ordered.
CAP. III.
FOr the better preparation toward this Inquiry, let us pervse the persons,
that are to attend and do service at the Sessions.

The Justices of the Peace be so necessary, as without theme (though all
others should appear)no Session can be kept:and, yet if any of them be
absent, their fellow Justices cannot amerce the, as the Justices of Assise may
do for their absence at the Gaoledeliuerie: for, Inter paresno^ est potestas
and the authority of all the Justices of the peace at the Sessions is equal,
so that like power has) he which is not of the Quorum, with him that is,
except it be in special cases set forth in the Commission and Statutes.
And therefore, it was holden (3. H. 7. Fitzh. Tit. Justice del Peace. 3) that,
if One which is not of the Quorum, will be so bold as to rebuke one that is of
the Quorum he and his companions may not commit him to prison for it. The
Iuftices.


The Recognusors that stand bound to the keeping of the Peace, and to appear
at the Sesions and such like, be commonly tied to the Quarter Sessions,
whereunto I am not yet come:And those prisoners that are sent by Justices of
the Peace for felony or manslaughter, or suspicion thereof, or be let to
Bail for Mainprise upon any such offense, be reserved till the Jail
delivery, wherewith I have not to do:The rest of that kind, and the Rogues
etc, may be brought forth at every Sessions of the peace. The Recognusors.
The Prisoners.


But two sorts of men there are, that owe their Drdinarie attendaunce at these
Sessions, that is to say the Officers(or Ministers) of the Court, and the
Jurors of the Country.

Amongst the Officers, the Custos Rotulorun has worthily the first place,
both for that he is always a Justice of the Quorum in the commission, and
amongst them of the Quorum, a man (for the most part) especially piked out
for wisdom, countenance, and credit: And yet in this behalf he bears the
person of an Officer; and ought to attend: for the words in the Commission be
to him by name, Quod ad dies and loca predicta brenia, prac^pta, processus, and
indictamenta praedicta coram vobis and dictis soci^s venire faciatis. The ^
Rotulorum


And as his berie name she weth, he has the custody of the Rolls, (or
Records of the Sessions of the Peace: and whether the custody of the
Commission of the Peace it self do perteine to him alone, it has been made
some question: For M. Marrowe says, that seeing the other Justices may hold
a Session without him, it is meet they should then have the Commission with
them. Who shall Keep the Commission of the Peace
But Chocke in the Book (9. E. 4. 2.) holds, that a Iustics of the Peace (in
making any Justification by virtue of his Dffice) needs not to the we the
Commifsion of the Peace, because (says he) the keepyng thereof belongs to
the Custos Rotulorum; and for the same cause also, the Bailie of a Justice of
the Peace shall not be driven to she we the Commission, as it seems, 20. H.
7. 7. And truly, since it is such a thing, as can remain but in the hands
of one at once, it seems most reasonable, that he which is put in trust
with the rest of the Records, should be credited with the custody of the
Commission also.

But under the name of the Records of Sessions of the Peace, I do not
comprehend all manner of records concerning the Peace, but those only which
ought to be at the Sessions of the peace: as Bills, Plaints, Information,
Inditemets, Presentiments, the Roolles of Processcs, Trialles, Judgments, and
Executions, and all other the Acts, of the Sessions of the Peace them selves:
And furthermore, the Peace and good Abearing, Recognusances concerning Felones,
and Alehouse kepers, and such like as ought to be certified or brought to the
Selssions of the Peace, must be numbered amongst the Records of the Sessions
of the Peace: For of all these there may be use at the Sessions, and therefore
the Custos Rotulorum, or some for him, ought to be ready to show them. The
Records of the peace.
And although it were before time at the liberty of a Justice of ye Peace, to
certify a Recognusaunce of the Peace to the Custos Rotulorum, (as you may see
2. H. 7. ^.) Yet now, by the Statute (3. H. 7. cap. 1.) he ought to certify,
send, or bring it to the next Sessions of the Peace, that the party may be
called, and to the end also, that his default (if he make any may be recorded:
and by such record of his default, he is concluded to say, that he appeared
there, 13. E. 4.

As for Precepts for Suertie of the Peace, special Records for conuictions of
forcible cntries, Riots, and such like, as he made out of the Sessions of ye
Peace by particular Justices; and be to remain with themselves, and not
appointed to be certified thither, I can not reckon them in the number of the
Records of the Sessions of the Peace: no more than I can well do the
Inrolments of bargains and sales, and such other Records lying in the charge
of the Custos Rot^lorum; or Clark of the Peace.

But M. Brook (Tit. Commission. 11.) adds, that the Records of the Justices
of the Jail Delivery do remain amongst the Records of the Peace also: ho
wheit, I think he meant notit of all the Records of the Jail delivery: for,
as the Justices of Jail delivery have their proper Clearke, which makes up,
and keeps the Records of things determined by that Commission: so the same
Justices (being withal Justices of Pear) do leave with the Clarke of ye Peace,
Indiremets, and such causes of the Peace, as be not determined, but ha^g in
mocesse, to the end offenders may be more speelig;vily Iusticed.

And it appears 13. H. 4. 10. that Hanford Justice of Jail delivery at his
departure called the Clarke of ye Peace, and willed him to take ye name of a
prisoner that had been sent thither for Felony, without any sufficient proof,
and to cause it to be inquired of at the next Sessions of the Peace.

The Office of the Custos Retulorum was of ancient time given by the
discretion of the Lord Chauncelour, until that (about the latter and of the
reign of king H ye 8.) sundry persons (no less unworthy to occupy the
Office, than greedy to have the place) did by labor and friendship obtain at
that kings hands, graunts of the same by his Letters Patents, for term of
their lives: by means whereof, so many cuilles did shortly ensue, both to the
hindraunce of Justice, and to the disherison of the Kings subjects, that ye
last Parliament of his reign, viz. 37. H. 8. cap. 1. did somewhat restrain that
course: and though it did ordain, that none should thencefoorth be appointed
custos Rotulorum in any Shire (a few place of Privilege only excepted)
without a Bil signed with the Kings hand, yet it took further order, that the
same Bill assigned, should be but as a Warrant to the Lord Chauncelour to
assign in the Commissions of the Peace, the same person to be Custos
Rotulorum, only until the King should (by an other Bill, signed with his
hand) make appointment of another for the same Office. The gift of the Office
of the Custos Rotuloru^.
But neither this ordinance had any long life: for within a feme years after,
it was thought so prejudicial to the power of the Lord Chauncelour, and so
troublesomea matter to sue to the King for bills so signed, that by the
Parliament (3. E. 6. ca. 1.) the Lord Chauncelor was wholly restored to his
au^tient authority in naming the Custos Rotulorum again (except in such
privileged places) without expecting any such Bill: and, that the Custos
appointed by the discreation of the Lord Chauncelour should enjoy the same
Office to be occupied by himself, or his sufficient Deputy, in as ample
manner, as if that Statute (37. H. 8. cap. 1.) had never been made.

The Clearke of the Peace owes his aftendance at these Sessions also: for he
rest death the Inditements, and se^ueth the Court: he enrolleth the Acts of the
Sessions, and braweth the Process. Clearke of the Peace.


He also must deliver Letters to such as be acquitted of felony, and will
beg for their fees 22. H. 8. cap. 12. He must record the burning of Roags
through the ears 18. Eliz. ca. 3. and must like wise record the Proclamations
of Rates for servants wages, and inroll the discharge of Apprentices 5. Eliza.
ca. 4. He is appointed to keep the counterpane of the Indenture of Armor 4.
and 5. Phil. and Mar. cap. 2. He keeps the Register Book of licenses given
to Badgers and Laders of corn, 5. Eliz. cap. 12. and of those that are
licenced to shoot in Gunnes 2. E. 6. cap. 14.

And he is bound (under the pain of xl. shillings) to certify into the Kings
Bench, transcripts of Inditements, Vtlawries, Attainders, and Conuictions, had
before the Justices of the Peace within the time limited by the Statute 34. H.
8. cap. 14. All which things he can not do, if he he present: so that he
is an Officer to this Court, and the Clearke of the Justices, as the Statute
12. R. 2. cap. 10. names him, and not (as M. Marrow thought) the Clearke of
the Custos Rotulorum only. And you may read (2. H. 7. 1.) that if a
Recognusance of the Peace be brought in to the Custos Rotuloru^, and the
party grieved will not sue forward, then the Clearke of the Peace, who is the
Clarke and Attornie of the King (says that Book) shall call upon it for the
Kings advantage: and I am sure, that the said Statute (37. H. 8. cap. 1.)
ralleth his place an Office also.

Howbeit the nomination and appointmet of him has long time belonged to the
Custos Rotulorum, and he is to enjoy his Dffice so long as the Custos Rotulorum
keeps his place, and may exercise it by himself, or by a Deputy sufficiently
instructed in the Law, and admitted by the Custos Rotulorum. The nomination of
the Clearke of the Peace


And this Office was also (for a time) given by the kings Letters Patents for
termc of life, as that of the Custos Rotulorum was, until the said Statute
37. H. 8. cap. 1. recontinud the ancient order of giving it to the Custos
Rotulorum only.

Furthermore, the Coroners, as the common form of the Precept shows, and the
Statute (27. H. 8. cap. 5.) presumes, ought to be present at the Sessions: But
yet that is not, for to certify their Inquisitions, for that ought (by 1. and
2. Phil. and mar. cap. 12.) to be done at the general Jail delivery: nor yet
to receive any Approuour, for neither that belongs to the Justices of Peace
9. H. 4. 1. but it is only (says M. Marrow) because the Coroners be parties
to the Exigents, and be Judges of the Vtlawries: Howbeit, they are (besides
that) Conseruatours of the Peace, and may (in cases) commit men to prison, and
therefore ought to be at the Sessions, to object against them. The Corosars.


The Shirife also, ought to attend at these Sessions, for the double duty
that he bears: the one, as Shirife to return the Precept, to take the
charge of Prisoners, and to serve the court otherwise: as he has in charge
by the Mandauimus that is metioned in the Commission to have been sent unto
him: the other, because he also has Care of the the Peace. The Shirife.


The Bailifes of Franchises, and the Constables of Hundreds, are to serve also,
ye one as Ministers, and the other as Jurors, and therefore ought to give their
attendaunce. Bailifes and Constables.


And every of these (except it be the Custos Rotulorum, for thereof I doubt)
may without controversy be amerced, if they make defaulte: But the Ordinary
owes not his attendaunce here at any Sessions of the Peace, as he does at the
general Jail Dehuerie, in the opinion of M. Marrow. The Ordinary.
I^deede, he is not warned by the commune Precept, and therefore cannot so
conveniently take knowledge of the Sessions of the Peace. Howbeit, if he come,
I think that he ought to serve, when he shall be called.

But especially there ought to appears such Jurors as be returned by the
Shirite, and warned by his Baylifes, whether it be for Enquiri or trial.
Jurors for Inquiry and tnall.
And in this behalf, both the Commission, the commune form of the Precept,
and the Law it self (11. H. 4. cap. 9.) wills, that they should be, probi
and legales homines: for if any of them be discredited in Law, as by Attainder
in Conspiracy, Attaint, decies tantum, Subornation of Perjury, or such like,
they be not Probi, and their presentment is void by it, unless there be
twelve besides them that are not so blemished.

Again, if they be outlawed, abiured, condemned in a Praemunire, or attainted
of treason, felony, or such like, then be they not Legales and their
presentment is merely void also, as it may be gathered upon the case 11. H.
4. 41.

And women, infants under foureteens years of age, Aliens, and such be within
orders of the Ministry or Clergy, cannot be empanelled amongst others.

And generally these Jurors ought also, either to be inhabiting within the
Shire, or else to have lands there: for the Commission wills, that they
should be such, Per quos rei veritas melius sciri poterit, which must
needs be understood of such as have cause to know the Country, And the
precept is usually according to the same form. But specially (in the County
Palatine of Lancaster) each of them ought to have to the yearly value of five
pound, by the Statute 33. H. 6. cap. 2.

If any of the Jurors returned be threescore and ten years of age, or have
any continual infirmity, or be otherwise decrepite, yet that shall not
excuse him for not appearing, if the Justices will require his service, but he
driven to his Action and gainste the Shirife for retourning of him, upon the
Statute of W. 2. cap. 38. Mar.

And if he have a Charter of Exemption, he ought to she we it to the Shirife,
against whom (if he will notwithstanding empanell him) he may have his Action
upon the Case, and has none other remedy by 18. H. 8. 5. Cur. which may be
truly said, as to the saving of his issues: but by some other books and namely
42. Ass. Pl. 5.and Mar. he is to be discharged upon his appearance, and
specially where he has in his Charter of Cremptio^ these words, Licet tangat
nos, unless there want others that he sufficient to serve.

Now, though some of the Cnquest of Cnquiry be of affinitic (or
consanguinitie) with any party grieved, that procures any indictment, yet that
hinders not their presentment: howheit it is no discreation for the Justices
to suffer any surhe to be empanelled amongst them.

The common manner in Kent (agreeing with the form of the Precept) is to
return particular I^ries for the Hundreds, and one general Jury for the body
of the Sh^re: this last is made up with us, (for the most part) of the
Constables only: and those others (if they be not filled at the first) are
wont to be renewed with the like, from Scssions to Sessions. General and
particular Iuries.
But that usage is no small hinderaunce to the service (as many do think) by
reason that (those particular Iuries being seldom served with full appearance)
the whole Cnquirie stands only upon their labor that are empanelled for
the body of the Shire, that is to say, upon one man of each Hundred, (at them
most) who cannot be thought to see so much as a whole Jury may and does.
And therefore, they think, that it were good to make up some of the
particular Iuries also, (when they be not full) de circumstanbus, out of other
Hundreds, by which mean, either the whole Shire, or (at the least) a great
many parts thereof, might be perused.

To this opinion M. Mar. seems to incline, saying, that in default of those
which are returned, the Justices may take a Jury de circumstantibus: And
hereunto also the Statute (3. 0 H. S. ca. 12.) she weth some further consent,
in that it gives power to the Justices, by their discretion to command the
Shirife, or his Deputis, to add, alter, or diminish, the names of the pannell,
which, if he refuse to do it, he shall forfeit xx.l. for the same contempt.
Neither is it to be objected, that men being all of one Shire, may not take
knowledge of things done in diverse Hundreds: Seeing they have diverse occasions
of meeting together, as at the Country Courts, the Shirifs furnes, the Assizes,
and general Duarter Sessions. And if a Jury of one Hundred would make
prese^tme^t of an offense done within any part of the Shire, out of their own
Hundred, this were good in Law. Besides which, if M. Mar. mixture be followed,
few of them that do appear, shall lose their labor, whereas now the most
of them do come in vain.

But these men be not truly Jurours til they be sworn, as their name
pretends, and otherwise their presentment is betterly void. How they of the
Jury must be sworn and ordered.


And yet if it should by any oversight happen, that they or some one of them
were not sworn at all, if the Record make mention that they be sworn, their
presentment is of force enough, for the Record may not be gainsayed.

Each Jury of Inquiry ought to contain 12. in number at the least, and if
there be 18. or more, it shall not be amiss: Bea the common order with us is,
to have them of an odd number, as 17. 19. 02 21. to the end (as it seems)
that if they should dissent in opinion somewhat equallye, yet there should
be always one to weigh down the side, and cast the balance. The number of
Jurors.
But if 12. of them, do agree, the gaine-saying of the residue can not hinder
the presentment.

The Justices ought not to commit these Jurors to any keeper: nor to keep
them without meat or drink: nor to carrye them out of the Town. And yet they
may adiourne them to an other place, to give their Verdite, and that may be
then taken by any two Justices, though neither of the be of the Quorum, faith
Mar.

If these Jurors do wilfully conceal offenses (presentable) and y be
complained of by Bill, then may the Justices choose an Enquest of persons,
(whereof every one may dispend forty shillings by year) to enquire of their
concealment: and if any such concealment be found within the year,
every one of the first Enquest shall be amerced in full Sessions, by the
discretion of the same Justices: 3. H. 7. ca. 1. Concealment.


And because the lurours of those days were yet wilful in their
concealementes, it was provided within eight years after, that the Justices of
Peace should determine rauses upon information without any such presentment.
But, In vitium, ducit culpae fuga, sicaret art, and therefore that ordinance
endured not long, as you shall hereafter perceive.

Finally, these Jurors ought not to discover their own doings: for it is a
part of their oath, that they shall keep the Queens Counsel, and their
fellows. And we read in Fitzh. ( Tit. Coron. 207. and 272.) that to indite a
man of Felony, and then to show abroad to others, what they have done
therein, has been taken for Felony: Nowbeit that offense is now taken to be
fineable only.

Of the Articles that are to be given in charge at the Scssions of the Peace.
CAP. IIII.
IT was the ancient manner, that twice in the year at the Shirifes Turn
(which was sometime a Court of great authority, and called the Shirremoote)
the Bishop of the Diocese, and the Alderman (or Carle) of the Shire, should
be present: the the one to inform the people in the laws of God, and the
other to instruct them in the laws of the land, Archaionom in legibus
Canuti, Cap. 17.

And it were to be wished, that as there is commonly at every Assizes, a
Sermon (uttered by some learned man) so also the like might be at each general
(or Duarter) Sessions of the Peace. For, seeing that the laws of men must be
obeyed for God, it does of necessity ensuc, that he which will seek to have
man obeyed rightly, must first cause God to be preached truly.

The Justices of the Peace (says M. Fitz) for therepartes be bound to inform
the people: And (no doubt) the charge is given, as well to instruct those that be
ignorea^t, least they offend unawares, as to enquire of those that have
already fallen into danger by offense: and thereof it is, that many Statutes
do expressly command, that they shall be openly read (or declared)at the
Sessions, as you shall see in place for it.

But the manner of giving the charge, and receiving the Verdite at this day,
differs from that which the Justices in Eire were wont to use: for you may
see, in M. Bracton (Fol. 116) that first one of the Justices did open before
the whole assembly, the benefits of the service in hand, the commodities of
keeping the Peace: and the euilles of the contrary: and that then the Articles
of the charge were read by one and one to the Jurors, who receiving the same
at the hands of the Justices) did also make aunsweare in the yielding up of
their Verdite, to each Article severally, and by it self. The ancient order,
of giving the charge in Eire.


Which custom, as it had many profits: so is it worthy (in mine opinion) to
be recontinued, and brought in ure again: neither ought the multitude of the
Articles (now inquirable) to discourage any man in this behalf: For, if those
Laws which be least serviceable (either for the present time, or for the
place, or other just respect) were only touched or run over, by way of
thorte Article: then would there be the more time affoorded, for speech that
might be well spente, as well in discourse of exhortation, or dehortation, as
in the larger handling of such other Statutes, whereof there is greater use
and necessity. And this liberty, the Justices in Eire themselves did use
also, as the same M. Bracton in the same place reports.

The points of the charge that we have in hand, may be reduced to a few
heads, and that after sundry sorts of distribution: of which (for examples
sake) I will show you some: first thus, The points of the charge divided.


Al ye matters inquirable, be either Eccleasticall or Temporal: and these
Temporal, be either high treason, petite treasons, felonies, or otherwise
punishable and finable offenses: Or thus,

All these points, do either concern God, the Prince, or Subject: Or thus,

All these Articles be offensive, either against the first, or the second
Table of the ten Commandments of God: Or thus,

All these matters be inquireable, either by virtue of the Commission of the
Peace, and of the Statutes therein contained, or else by power of the Statutes
not comprehended within the Commission: Or thus,

All these Laws do prohibit things contrary to some of the four Cardinal
(or principal) virtues, Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, or Temperance.

They may also be divided, by the barietie of the punishments, and by some
other Accidental respects: all which I leave to the choice of such as shall
give them in charge, and will now for this time set down the Articles
themselves, after the order of the first division, pointing out in the first
place the Ecclesiastical causes, and then pursuing the Temporal.

In which doing, first, I will omit all such Statutes, as do concern, but
only some one, or a few particular places: knowing that I write to the most
part, who have not to do with them. The manner of this Charge.


Secondly I will purposely pretermit the rehearsal of the punishments,
contained in the Statutes that I am to run through: a^well because those do
rather perteine to the Justices, than to the lurours, as also for that I have
an ancient Precedent of the Justices in Eire to make for me, who (in their
charge) did only deliver the Articles in offense, without any mention of the
pains due unto the same, As it appears in the small volume of the old
Statutes, under the Title, Capitula Itineris.

And thirdly, I will neither recite all the other parts of each general
Statute by it self, nor yet comprehend them wholly and fully with others:
because the first of the se ways wonld be very long, through the
ofteiteration of the same things: and the other would be so crooked I
comberous (through the barietie and difficulty of the exceptio^s) that the
hearer would be many times lost before I should come to the end.

I know that M. Fitzh. was of the opinion, that the Justices of Peace, ought at
their Quarter Sessions, and may at their private Sessions, give in charge to
the Enquest, all such matters as they have power to determine: and this he
urges, as well by the Dath of the Justices (who are sworn to do right in all
causes within their Commission, or the Statutes) as by the ignorance of the
Jurors, who cannot be instructed but by the charge: which if it be so, I see
not (for my part) how either these Justices (that are bound to utter all) can
be discharged, or the Jurors (that ought to hear all) can be enfourmed,
without this, 02 some such compendious and plain way, that may both shortly
for the time, and lightsomely for the order, comprehend the substance of that
which belongs to their Inquiry.

Howbeit, as I think it the best for the Justices, to rehearse all such
points, whereof the Jury may make presentment before them: so yet, I hold
them discharged (in my slender opinion) if they unfold only the articles of
their Commission, and of such other Statutes as do expressie auctorize them to
make inquiry.

For as there be sundry Laws that do give to Justices of the Peace a
certain special (02 particular) power in them, and do not yet yield unto
them any authority to enquire upon the same, of which sort be the Statutes
27. H. 8. c. 20: and 32. H. 8. c. 7. of Tithes: The Statute 35. H. 8. ca. 17.
of Woods: The Statute 23. El. ca. 9. of Logwood, and sundry others: So also
there be diverse others, that do aforde to the Justices of Peace the power of
hearing and determining and yet do not exprestie give them the name of Inquine.

And, for as much as they may hear and determine of these, by Information
(given to themselves and by them commanded to the Jury) it seems to me,
that they be not so necessarily bound to give them in charge, but that they be
well enough discharged if they lie open, and be ready to receive the
informations and presentiments that shall be offered upon them: And of this
kind be the Statutes of Highwaies (5. El. c. 13:and 18. El. ca. 9. (the
statute of Fighting in Church, or Churchyard (5. E. 6. ca. 4) the Statute of
Informours (18. El. ca. 5.) and sundry others, whereof it shall be superfluous
to make rehearsal.

Never the less, because I will not, that my fantasy shall either stand
against his judgment, or be prejudicial to other men's profit, I have
contended (what I may)to deliver the principal and most serviceable parts,
not only of the Commission and of such Laws as do specially conteyne their
Inquiry within them, but also of al such other Statutes as may be heard and
determined by Justices of the peace at any their Sessions, and that in so
narrow a room, as (if I be not, after some proof, deceived) they may be
distinuly read over in a couple of hours, or little more, so that the years of
the Kings and the other Notes, be left unread and passed over.

Ecclesiastical causes.
If any person have (within this half year)by writing, printing, teaching,
preaching, express deed, or act, advisedly, malitiouslye, and directly
affirmed, holden, set forth, or defended, the authority, pre-eminence,
power, or jurisdiction spiritual or Ccclesiasticall, of any foreign Prince
or person whatsoever heretofore claymed, used, or usurped in this Kealm, or any
ye Queens dominions, or have aduisedlye, maliciously, and directlye, put in
ble, or executed any thing for the ertolling, setting forth, or defense of
any such pretended or bsurped iurisdiation, pre-eminence, or authority, or
any part thereof. Treason the third offece Extolany foreign power.
Or if any person (co^pellable to take the oath of Kecognition of the Queens
Majesty to be supreme Governor in all causes within her domonions) have
refused to take the said oathe, after lawful tender thereof to him made 1.
Eli. c. 1 5. Eli. c. 1. enquirable by words of 23. El. ca. 1. Refuse the oathe.


If any person, under the Queens obedience have at any time (within this
year) by Writing, Ciphering, Priting, Preaching, or Act, aduisedlye holden, or
stood with, to extol, or defend the power of the Bishop of Rome, or of his
See heretofore calymed, or usurped within this realm:or by any speech, open
deed, or act, aduisedlye attributed any such manner of auctoritye to the
said See of Rome, or to the Bishop thereof, within any the Queens
dominions, ye shall present him, his Abettours, procurers, counselors,
aiders, and comforters. Praemunire Pope.
5. Eliz. ca. 1

If any person have by any means practiced to absolve, persuade, or
withdraw, any other within the Queens dominions from their natural
obedience, or (for that intent) from the religion now established here, to the
Komishe religion, or to move them to promise obedience to the Sea of Rome, or
other estate: Or if any person have been willingly so absolude, or wdrawn, or
have promised such obedience. Treason Withdraw any from obedience.


And if any person have willingly aided or maintained any such offender, or
knowing such offense have concealed it, and not within twenty days disclosed
it to some Justice of peace, or other higher Officer. Misprision of treason.
23 Eliz. ca. 1. Mass.


If any person have said or soong Hasse, or have willinglye heard Hasse, 23.
Elizab. cap. 1.

If any person have bsed, or put in bre, any Bull, Writing, or Instrument of
absolution or reconciliation, or of other sort, gotten from the Bishop of
Rome, or See of Rome. or from any person clayming authority from the same: Or
have by color of any such taken upon him to absolve, or reconcile any person:
or have published any such Bull or instrument. Bull, Agnus Dei, ^^c. Treason.
Or if any person have aided, comforted, or maintained any such offender, to
the entente to uphold such offense.

If any person (to inhome such Bull or Instrument has been offered or
persuaded have not Within fire Weeks next after signified the same to some of
the Queens privy Counsel, or to the Lord Presidence of the North, or of
Wales. Misprision of Treason.


If any person have brought hither from the Bishop, or See of Rome, or from
any person auctorized, or clayming to be auctorized by any of them, any Agnus
Dei crosses, pictures, beads, grains, or such like superstitious things, and
have the same delivered, or caused, or offered to be delivered, to any the
Queens subjects to bse or wear in any wise: and if any person hame to such
intent received or taken the same, and have not apprehended the offerer
thereof, nor within three days after disclosed him to the Ordinary, or to
some Justice of the Peace, nor within one days delivered the thing to some
Justice of the Peace. Premurire.
13. Eli. ca. 2: 23. Eliz cap 1.

If any person have used Invocation, or Conturation of evil spirits for any
cause: or have bsed Witchcraft, Inchauntmente, Charming, or Sorcerie, where by
any person is killed or destroyed: 5. Elizabeth. ca. 16. Folorie Coniuratio^.


If any person have within these fire months aduisedlye advanced, published
and set forth, by writing, printing, open speech, or deed, to any other
person, any fantastical, or false prophecy, upon arms, fields, beasts, or
hadges, or upon any time, name, bloodshed, or war, to the intent to make
thereby rebellion, dissension, loss of life, or other disturbance within the
Queens dominions. Prophesying.
5. E. ca. 15.

If person have, by setting of figure, casting of Nativity, or by Calculation,
Prophecy, Witchcrafte, Coniuration, or other unlawful means whatsoever,
sought to know, and have set forth by express words, deed, or writing, how
long her Majesty shall live, or who shall reign after her decease: Or else
have advisedly, and with a malicious intent against her Majesty, uttered any
direct prophecy to such purpose: And if any person have indeed procured, or
abetted any such offenders. Felony Sctfoorih how long the Queen shall live.
23. El. ca. 2.

If any person have unlawfully procured any other person to commit wilful and
corrupt perjury in any cause depending in suit in any of the Queens Courts
of Kccorde, or in any Leete, Court Baron, Hundred, or Court of ancient
demesne: or have corruptly suborned any witness sworn to testify in
perpetuam yet memoriam: Or if any have upon such procurement, or by his own
act wiltul ly committed such Perjury. Perjury.
5. El. ca. 9: and 14. El. ca. 11.

If any person have within these these months, by contemptuous, or reuiling
words, or have abuisedly in any other wise, depraved, despised, or reviled the
blessed Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ. Sacrament:
1. E. 6. ca. 1: and 1. El. ca. 1.

If any parson, Vicar, or Minister, have since the last Assizes refused to use
the common prayers, or to minister the Sacraments according to the book of
common prayers, or wilfully standings in the same, have bsed any other there
form in open prayers, or in administration of the Sacrament, or have spoken
any thing in derogation of the said book, or any part thereof. Service and
Sacraments.
Or if any person have since that tyine in any plate, song, or ryme, or by any
open word, or of any thing therein contained: Dr have caused, or maintained
any Parson, Hicar, or Minister, to say any Common prayer, or to minister any
Sacrament in other manner than after the said book: Or have interrupted any
parson, Vicar, or Minister to say open Prayer, or to administer any Sacrament,
according to the said Book. 1. Elizab. cap. 2. and 23. Elizab. cap. 1.

If any person (being above the age of rvi. years, and not having lawful and
reasonable crcuse to be absent) have not repaired and reforted to his or her
parish Church, or Chapel accustmed or (upon let thereof) to some usual
place where Common prayer shall be used, upon every Sunday, and other holyday,
and have not there orderly and soberly abiden, during the time of such Common
prayer, preaching, or other seruise of God: and how long such person has not
so repaired and resorted. Repair to Church.
1. Eliz. ca. 2: and 23. Eliz. ca. 1.

If any person have kept or maintained any Schoolemaister, which resorteth not
to the church or is not allowed by the Bishop, or Ordinaric of the Diocese.
Schoolemaister.
23. Elizab. ca. 1.

If any person have maliciously stricken any other with any weapen in any
Church, or Churchyard, or drawn any weapen there to that intent. Fighting in
Church or Churchyard.
5. E. 6. ca. 4.

If any person have kept Fair, or Market in the Churchyard. Fair, or Market,
in Church yard. Felony. Rob church or Chapel.
Stat. Winton. 12. E. 1.

If any person have feloniously taken goods out of any Church, or Chapel.

Lay causes.
If any person have counterfaited the Queens money, or have brought false
money into the Hcalme, cou^terfait like the money of England knowing the same
to be false, to make merchandise or payment there withal. Treason. Money.
3. H. 5. ca. 7: and 25. E. 3. ca. 2

Felonies, in lay causes.
If any Servant have killed his or her Master, or Mistress: or any Wife her
Husband: or any Gcclesiasticall person his prelate. Petite Treason Seruat, and
Ma. Husband and Wife. Clerk and prelate.
25. E. 3. ca. 2.

If and person have of pxepensed malice, killed or murbered an other openly, or
pxiuily whether he that mas killed were an Gnglishman, or a Stranger, living
under the protection of the Queen. Murder.


If any have wilfully killed any other by poisoning, and into be his aiders,
abetters, procurers, and counselors. Poysoining murder.
^. E.o. ca. 12.

If any person have by chance medley feloniously killed an other. Manslaughter


If any person of malice prepensed, cut out the tongue, or put out the eyes of
any of the Queens Subieas. Cut out toungue, or put out etes.
5 H. 4. ca. 5.

If any Jailer, keeper, or vnderkeeper of a prison, have by dursse and pain
compelled any his pxisoner, to become an appeacher of others agaianst his will.
Jailer handeling straightly his prisoner.
14. E. 3. ca. 10.

If any person have committed the detestable vice of Buggerie, with man, or
beast. Buggeric.
25. H. 8. ca. 6: and 5. El. ca. 17.

If any man have ravished a maid, window, or wife, above ten years of age,
against her will, although she consented after ward. Rape.
W. 2. ca. 34.

If any man have carnally known and carnally abused any woman child under ten
years of age, though the consented before. Child.
18. El. ca. 7.

If any person have taken a maiden, widow, or wife, having lands or goods,
or being heir apparent to any, against her will vniawfully, (other than his
ward, or bondwoman) and of his pxocurers, abetters and recetuers knowing
thereof. Take woman.
3. H. 7. ca. 2.

If any person have robbed an other, going or riding by ye way, or other wife,
how much, or how little soever it be that be takes from him: or have privily
and fraudulently piked or cut the purse of an other being upon him. Robbiie
8. El. ca. 4. Cutpurse. Rob house.
Gr have robbed any house by day, or by night, any person being in the same,
and thereby put in fear: Or has robbed any person in any part of his
dwelling, the owner, wife, children, or servants, being therein, or within any
other place within the precinct therefore, and then being waking, or sleeing:
Gr has robbed any person being in a tent or boothe in a Stair or Market, the
owner, his wife, children, or any servant being then within the same sleeping,
or waking. Boothe, or Tent.
5. E. 6 ca. 9.

If any person, or persons, have feloniously taken the goods of any other, and
wheteher the same be above (...). r. in value, or under. Laricinie, and petite
Larci. nie.


If any Purueiour for the Queens Mate sties house, or his undertaker, Deputy,
or servant, have made any puruciance without warrant, and have carried any
thing away against the consent of the owner, being above xu. d. in value.
Purueyours.
28. E. 1. ca. 2: 18. E. 2. ca. vltim. 5. E. 3: c^. 4.: 2. and 3. Phil. and
Mar. ca. 6.

If any Purueyour of the Queen, or his Undertaker, Depurtie, or Servant have
taken any carriage in any other manner than is contcined in his Commission. 36.
E. 3. 2. Or have made purueyance without the testimony and appraisement of the
Constables, and four honest men of the town, and without delivering tales or
Inventures under his Seal, testifying his purneyances, the goods being above
(...). O. in value. 5. E. 3. ca. 2: 25. E. 3. ca. 1. Or has taken any sheep
with their wooles, between Gaster and Hidsomer at small prices, and carried
them to his own house, and suorne them. 25. E. 3. ca. 15.

Quare, if the felouie of purueyours (made 36. E. 3. c2. 6.) be not altered by
23. H. 6. ca. 14.

If any person have found a Falcon, Lercelet, Lanor, Laneret, or other Falcon
that was lost, and has not forthwith brought it to the Shirife, that he might
proclaim it, but did steal and carry away the same. Hawkeembeselled.
34. E. 3. ca. 22: 37. E. 3. ca. 10.

If any Servant (being ruiu. years of age, and not being an Apprentice) has
gone away with, or has converted to his own use, any money Jewels, goods, or
catfails tails of his masters or maistresses, and of his or her delivery, of
ye value of foxty shillings, to the intent to steal the same. Servant
embeselling goods deliliuered.
21. H. 8. ca. 7.: 5. El. ca. 10

If any person have by night broken any House, Tower, Walls, or Gates, and
has entered in with an intentto do any robberrie, murder, or other fclonious
act there: Or if any person have burned any owelling house: or have by night
burned any barn near to a dwelling house. Burglair.
Burn house or barn.


If any person, emprisoned for felony, have broken pxison: 1. E. 2. Break
prison.
Or if any other person have broken the prison for such a prisoner, by which
he escapes: Or if any Jailer have willingly suffered such a pxisoner to
escape: and if any person being arrested for felony have been rescued and by
whom.

If any person have devised uniawfully and maliciously to set at liberty and
prisoner endited of treason (concerning the Queampeenes person) and have
expressly uttered the same devise. Enlarge a Prisoner.
14. El. ca. 2.

If any person have devised maliciously to take or keep from the Queen any of
her Castles, Towns, Fortresses, or Holos, or to raze, burn, or destroy any of
them maliciously and traterously (the same having munition or Soldiers
therein of hirs) and have uttered the same device. Take, keep, or destroy
Castles, etc.
14. El. ca. 1.

If any person have unlawfully hunted in the night in any Forcst Park, or
Warrein, or with painted fares, visours, or other dis, guisings to the intent
to be unknown, and have upon exmination by one of ye Queens counsel, or by a
Justice of Peace of the same Shire, wilfully concealed such hunters or
hunting, or have disobeied any arrest for such hunting, or made rescue to any
person warrantee to arrest such hunter, so that the warrant was not excuted.
Hunting by night.
^. H. 7. ca. 7.

If any person have practiced the art of multiplication of golo or silver.
Multiplying
5. H. 4. ca. 4.

If any have the second time brought, sent or received into any ship or
bottom, any rams, sheep or lambs being alive, to be co^vayed out of the
Queens dominions, or have procured the same. Convey sheep.
5. El. ca. 3.

If any person have solve, erchaunged, or delivered, within Scotland, or the
batable ground, to the use of any Scot (without the Queens license, under her
great Scale) or solve, exchaunged, or delivered to any Scot within England,
Wales, Barwicke the Marches or batable ground, to the intent to be conveyed
into Scotland (without such license) any horse, gelding, or mare: And if any
have so bought any of ye same. Convey horses into Scotland.
23. H. 8. ca. 16. 1. El. c. 7.

If any person have advisedly and with a malicious intent against the Queens
Majesty, deused written, printed, or set forth any book or writing,
containing any false, seditious, and slanderous matter, to the defamation of
her Majesty, or to the encouraging or mouning any inserraion or rebellion
within her Realm or Dominious: or have advisedly or with a malicious intent
against her Naiestie procured any such book or writing to be written, printed,
or set forth: Or have malitously, by any murders, writing, or printing,
withen, or desired her Majesty's death, or deprivation, or any thing directly
to that effect: and if any have aided, procured, or abbetted any such
offendour. Slanderous news.
23 Elizab. cap. 2.

If any perons (of, or above, the number of fwrlue) have been assembled, and
have infanded, gone about and practiced with force of arms unlawfully to
change any Laws of this Realine, or to cut or cast down any enclosure of
Park, or enclosed ground, or the banks of any fishpond, or any conduit head
or pipe, to the intent they should lie open, or void, or to have any Common
or may there: Or to destroy the Dear or Conies in any Park or, Warrien, or
Douehouses, or Fish in Poole, or pond, or to cut down any houses, Barnes,
miles, or Eayes, or to burn any stake of corn or grain, or other usual
sustacke of men: and (being commanded by the Shirife, or any Justice of Peace
of the Shire, or by the mayor, Shirif, Justice of Peace, or Balifes of the
City, Borough, or Corporate town where the assmbly was, by proclamation in
the Queens name to depart to their houses) have notwithstanding continued
together one hour after, or have after that forciblie attempted to do any such
thing. Rebellious assemble.


And if any person have bnlawfully, by ringing of Bell, sounding of Trumpet,
Drum, Norne, or other instrument, or by firing of Beacon, or by malicious
speech, or Outcrie, or by setting up or casting any writing, or by any other
act, raised, or caused to be raised twelve person, or above, in such manner,
and to anysuche intent as is aforesaid, and they (being commanded by
proclamation, as before) have neverthlesse continued together one hour after,
or have afterward attempted forcible to do any of the said things: And if
any the wife, or servant of any the said assembled persons, or if any other
person, have willingly and without compulsion, delinered, or conuyed money,
harness, weapon, or victual to any of the said person assembled, during their
aboave together, as before. And if any person have hindered or hurt any that
did proclaim, or meant to proclaim as before: and if any the parties so
assembled (knowing of that hindrance, or procuring it, have nevertheless
afterward committed or put in dre any the things aforesaid: And if any
persons to the number of forty or more) have so assembled, to the intent to do
any the said things, or any other Felonious or Rebellious act, and have
continued together three hours after such Proclamation made, at or nigh the
place of assemblye, or in some market Town next avioyning, and notice to them
thereof given. 1. Mar. Parl. 1. cap. 12: and 1. Elizab. cap. 17.

If any Soldier entered a Soldier of Record, and having taken part of the
Queens wages, or any Marnier, or Gunner having taken pressed wages to serve the
Queen on the Sea, have not accordingly gone to his Captain (unless he were
let by notorious sickness, or other impediment from God) or have departed
from his Captain without his license under his scale. Soldier, Mariner. er
Gunner, departing.
18. H. 6. ca. 19: 2. and 3. E. 6. ca. 2: 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. ca. 3: and
5. Eliz. ca. 5.

If any Strangers, calling them selves, or being commonly called Egiptians,
have remained in the Realm one month: And if any person (being 14. years of
age) which has been seen, or found in the fellowship of such Egiptians, or
which has disguisedhim self like to them, have remained here or in Wales, by
the ^pace of one month, either at one time, or at several times 1. and 2.
Phil. and Mar. ca. 4: 5. E: 1 z ca. 20. Egiptians.


If any bagabond (or Roge) have after 60. days next atter his marking through
the ear, or ^ud^ement to be so marked, fallen again to Rogish life (being
then 18. years dlue, or above:) And if any such Roge, being upon his said
second conviction taken into service for two years, have departed within
those two yearses against the will of him that by Recognusance took him into
service: And if any Roge being convicted in the second begree, have at any
time after been convicted of Rogish life 14. Elizab. ca. 5: 18. Elizab. cap. 3.
Roges.
There can be none accessaries to these two last felonies.

Note that some felonies be here omitted, either because there is none use of
them now, or else for that they before particular places: as,

The felony of proouisours. 13. R. 2. Stat. 2. ca. 3.

The felony of Woolles and Woolsellers, 18. H. 6. c. 15. and certain felonies
in the Statues of the Staple, 27. E. 3. whereof I doubr.

The felony of Powdike, 22. H. 8. ca. II: and 2. and 3. Phill. and Mar. ca. 19.

Itseemeth alfo, by the 25. E. 3. c. 2. that there is a felony, for riding
armed etc. which (I think) is not contructed now.

If any perons have commanded, counseled, waged, or procured to be committed
any Petit treason, Murder, Manslaughter, Rape, Robbery, Burglarte, or other
the felonies aforesaid. Accessaries before.


If any person knowing the said felons, have received, comforted, aided,
abetted or favored them, before their attainuer, or after. Accessaries after.


Hitherto offelonies and their Accessaries in lay causes.

If any person have mayhemed an other of any member, whereby he is the less
able to fight, as by putting out his eye, striking of his hand, finger or
foot, beating out his foreteeth, or breaking his skull. Mayheme.
And of their Accessories.

If any have committed unlawful assult, beating, wounding, or such like
trespass, against the body of any man: Or have with force and against the law
taken the goods of an other, or have done any trespass in the lands of an
other. Trespasses.
Commission of the Peace.

If any Ordinary, Archdeacon, Official, Shirife, Eschaetor, Corner,
Vndershirife, Baylife, Jailer, or other officer, have by color of his office,
or for doing his office, taken a greater, or more excessive reward or Fee,
than belongs to him: or have taken any Fee or reward for expedition in doing
his office, or have unlawfully exacted any Dathe, or other undue thing:
Commission of the Peace.

If any Eschaetor (other than of such a City, Eorowe, or Town, as has
authority to make Eschaetors within themselves by letters Patets of the
Queen, or her Progenitors) have taken upon him that office in this Shire, or
occupied it by him self, or an other, and had not then in this Shire, Lands,
Tenements, or Rents, for life at the least of xx. ^^. by year: or have sold,
or set to ferme that office, or made any deputies for whom he will not
answare, and whose names hep has not certified within 20. days after into the
Escheaquer, 12. E. 4. 9. Eschaetor.


Or if any Eschaetor has taken for the execution of any Diem clausit exiremum,
or other Writ in one County above forty shillings in all: or that xl.
shillings where the lands are not found to beholden in Capite: 23. H. 6. ca.
17: and Fitzh. 143. Or has taken for the finding of any Office of lands (not
exceeding five pound by year) above fifteen shillings in all, for all, the
things thereof, 33. H. 8. ca. 22.

If any Shirife have letten his County, Shirifes and their Ministers etc.
or any his Bailywikes, Hundreths, or Wapentakes, or have returned in any
pannelles, any Bailifes, Officers, or their servant, or seruauntsseruaunts,
or have refused to let to bail (upon sufficient suerties,) any person being
in his custody, because of any action personal, or because of Enditement in
trespass, and not being in for any condemnation, execution, vtlawrie,
excommunication, suertie of the Peace, or commandment of any Justice, or for
being a vagabound: Or have taken any Obligation by color of his office, but
only to him seife, and upon the name of his office, and upon condition only
to appear according to the Writ, or Warrant: Or have taken for an arrest,
above twenty pence. Or if he or any other minister, have taken any thing, for
making of any Return or Pannell: or above four pence for the copy of a
Pannell: above four pence for the said Obligation, or for any warrant or
precept: Or any Baily above four pence for making any arrest: or the Jailer
above four pence, upon the committing to his ward of any person arrested, or
attached. 23. H. 6. ca. 10.

If any Shitife, or other his minister, have arrested, or imprisoned, or caused
any fine, or ransom, or amerciament to 'bee leauied, of any person, by reason
of any priditment, or presentment made in the Shirifes turn, or lauway, witout
process from the Justices of peace for the same first obtained: Dr have not
brought in such enditmets and presentiments to the Justices of the Peace, at
their next Sessions. Shirifes, arresting, or leauying fine for Enditements in
his turn
1. E. 4. ca. 2.

If any Shirife, or any his ministers, have entered into his book, any
plaintes in any man's name, not being present in the Court, either in his own
person, or by sufficient and honest Attorney, or Deputy: Fr have entered any
more plaintes than the plaintise supposes that he has cause of action for: or
have leaused the Shire amerciaments without book endensed between them and two
Justices of the Peace: Dr if the Baylie of the Hundred have made default in
warning or executing any warrant against any Desendant in the Shirifes Court.
Shirifes entering of plaintes, and leauying amercements
Bailie serving warrant.
11. H. 7. ca. 15.

If any Shirife, or his minister, have leauied any the debtes of the ^ueene,
without showing to the parties the Cstreates of the same under the Seal of the
Creates. Shirifes must show the Estreats under the Eschequer seal.
42. E. 3 ca. 9.

If any Shirife, or Jailer, have denied to receive felons by the delivery of
any Cons tables or towneshippes, or have taken any thing for receiving of such.
Shirife and Jailer.
4. E. 3. Ca. 10.

In liberties, the Baylifes, Stewards, and other ministers there, have like
fees and punis hmentes for extortion, as Shirifes and their minister have out
of liberites 27. H. 8. cap. 24. Fees in liberties.


If any Corner have refused to do his office upon the views of a beade body by
misadventure, without taking any fee therefore. Coroner
^. H. 8. ca. 7. or have taken upon the view of the body of a man flayne, or
murdered, above thirteen shillings four pence, of the goods of the flaier or
murderer, if he had goods or (otherwise) of the town where he was flaine in
the day time and was suffered to escape. 3. H. 7. ca. 1.

If any Didinary, or his Scribe, or Register, have taken more, or greater fees
for the probate of a Testament, or for Letters of administration, than he ought
to take, that is to say, fire pence for the Scribe, for writing the probate of
a Testamente that shall be brought written in parchment, and likewise fire
pence for the Administration, where the goods of the Testator, or Intestate be
not above five pounds. Ordinary
If the goods be avoue fius pounds, and not above forty pounds, then two
shillings fire pence for the Drbinarie, ^ twelve pence for the Scribe. If they
exceed forty pouds, then two thillings fire pence for the Drdinarie, and two
shillings fix pence to the Scribe, or else one penny for every ten lines at
ten inches length, at the Scribes election: the like shall be given for every
copy of a Testament, or Inuentarie, or else after the rate of lines as before.
21. H. 8. ca. 5.

If the Drdinarie have cited any man to bear witness in the Spiritual Court:
Dr have exacted any Dth in any cause, other than Testamentarie, or Matrimonial.

If any Parson, Vicar, or Curate, have taken above ii^, pence for entering in ye
Church book the license of a sick peron to eat sleth upon the Wednesdayes:
5. Elizab. ca. 5: Dr above two pence for registring of a Testime niall of any
servant, departing from one place to an other. Parson, Vicar, Curate.
5. Elizab. ca 4.

Quaere. If the taking of Mortuaries (or corpse pres ets) against the Stature
25. H. 8. C. 6. be extortio^, or no.

If the Clearke of the Peace have taken above twelve pence for the inrolling of
the bargain and sale of any land not exceeding forty shillings by the year:
or above two shillings fire pence if the land exceed that value by the year
27. H. 8. ca. 16. Clearke of the Peace.
Dr if the Clearke of the Peace have taken above two shillings in all, for any
license and Recognusance of a Badger, Drouer, Kidder, or Lader, and for the
registring thereof 5. Eliz. ca. 12: Dr have sake above twelve pence for a
Recognusance of him that tabath a Roge into his service for one year. 14.
Elizab. ca. 5.

If the Clearke of any Justice of Peace have taken above twelve pence for any
Recognus ance of an Alehouse keeper, or Tippler. 5. E. 6. ca. 25

If the Clearke of the market has taken any commen fine to dispense with (...)
has rid with ^^oe than fire horses, or has tarried longer in the country
than the necessity of his business required. Clearke of the market.
13. R. 2. ca. 4.

If any Officer, have in any To^vne taken Stauage or Shewage (ye is to say) any
thing for the showing of wares or Marchaundise that be truly custonied to the
Queen before. 19. H. 7. ca. 8.

If the Mayor of this Town of Maidstone (and so of other Towns in other
Shires) have taken above f. (...) for sealing a Bushel measure, or above ob,
for any other measure: or above f. D. for sealing C. weight, or above ob. for
halse C. weight, or above a farthing for a my less weight. 7. H. 7. ca. 3: and
11. H. 7. ca. 4.

Sundry other sees of Officers there be, as of Alnageours, Gaugeors,
Sergeaunts at Aims and whereof there is not so common use. and therefore I
omit them.

If any Purueyour of the Queens Majesty's have taken any thing of the value of
forty shillings or under, without ready payment therefore made: If any
Constable, or Borsholder have not (upon request made,) assisted the owners to
refist the purueyours so taking: And if any of the Queens Officers have
procured any to be arrested or vered for such resistance 20. H. 6. ca. 8.
Purueyours.


If any Purueyour have taken or selled any timber trees (meet to be backed)
but only in barking time, except it were for the reparation, or building of
the Queens houses, or ships: Dr have taken any more than the very timber of
sach trees 5. Elizab. cap. 8

If any such Purueyour have taken any thing of any man, to the end to spare
him: or have taken corn by any other measure than by the striked Bushel, or
by any more than eight such Bushels to the Quarter: or have taken carriadge
therefore, without making ready payment. 25. E. 3. ca. 1:36. E. 3. ca. 3: and
1. H. 5. ca. 10.

Of Purueyours within five miles of Oxenford, or Cambridge fee. z.and 3.
Phil.and Mar. ca. 15:14. Eliz. ca. II.

If any common Informour, or Promoter (as he is commonly called) have
compounded or agreed with any person for any offense against any penal Law,
without the order or consent of some of the Courts at Westminister, or have
willingly delayed, or discontinued his suit once commenced. Iaformour.
18. Elizab. cap. 5.

If any man have rais^d hue and cry without cause, or it being raised, have
not been ready at the commandment of the Shirise, or at the hue and cry of
the Country to pursue and arrest Felons, or such as have daungerously hurt
any man: And if the Shirife or any Baylises have not followed the hue and cry
with horse and armor W. 1. 3. E. 1. ca. 9:3. E. 1. Hue and cry.
Officium Coronatorius: Statut. Winchester, 13. E. 1.

If the Watch of twelus men in every Borough have vene kept from sun rising
to sun setting between Aseension day and Michaelmas day, to arrest strangers
that pass by: Statut. Winton. Watch.


If any Lord of the Soil have not enlarged the high way from market to
market, so that no dike, bushe nor tree (except great tree) be within two
hundredth foot of each ^^^e thereof: Statur. Winton. High ^ies


If any persons (except the Queens servants and officers in doing her
services, and their company aiding them in that behalf) have ridden, or gone
armed by day or night: or have brought force in affray of the people, before
the Queens Iusties, or otherwise Statut. Northampion, 2. Edw. 3. cap. 3. Ride
or go armed.


If any person arrested, or imprisoned for Felony have benc negligently
suffered to escape. Escape by negligence.
1. R. 3. ca. 3.

If any be a Barrettour, or a common quarrellour, or otherwise of evil name
and fame, 18. Edw. 3. cap. 2: 34. Edw. 3. cap. 1. Barrettours, Mainteynours,
Embraceours.
Or a Maintainour of quarrelles, or an Cmbraceour of Iuries, 33. H. 8. cap. 10:
and 37. H. 8. cap. 7.

The word (Barrettour) may seem to be derined, either of the French Barat,
and so it seems to be taken in the Statute of Champartie. Barretour.
W. 2. ca. 49. signifying deceit, so that Barrettour should notisie a
deceiuer: or else of the Latin Baratro (or Balatro as some write it) which
berokeneth a vile knave, or vnthrifre: and by a Metaphore) a spotte in the
Common wealth. But whatsoever the word do properly denote, common use

(Quem penes arbitrium est, andius and norma loquendi.) takes it for a common
quarrellour, or a mainteinour of Quarrelles: and in that sense I think it to
stand in the old Statute, called Ragman.

If any be a Champartour, that is to say, one that moves pleas or suites,
or canseth or procures them to be moved, at their own costs, to the end to
have part of the Land, or other thing in variance. Champartours.
33. E. 1.

If any Iurour in any Cnquest here, have taken any thing of any man to make his
presentment favorable. Iurour.
5. E. 3. ca. 10.

If any person have by him self, or other for him, given any liuerie of sign
of company, or badge, or retained any man, other than his householde Servant,
Officer, or learned man in the Law. Liueries of companies and ba^ges.
1. H. 4. cap. 7: 2. H. 4. ca. 21: and 8. E. 4. ca. 2.

If any company of men (other then men of Fraternities, and men of Arts
in Cities and Boroughes) have made any one general suite of Clothe, Boodes,
or Hattes amongst them, to be known by. 7. H 4. cap 14.

If any person have within these three months advisedly and with a ma^icious
^ntent against the Queens Majesty, of his own imagination spoken any false,
seditious and flaunderous news, or sayings of the Queens Majesty: or have
within the said time advisedly and with a malicious intent spoken any such
news or tales to the flaunder and defamation of our said Queen, of the
reporting or speaking of any other, 23. El^z, cap. 2. False news.


If any person have by writing, or open speech notified, that the eating of
Fish or forbearing of Flesh mentioned in the Statute for the Wednessday (5.
Elizab. cap. 5.) is of necessity for salvation of souls, or is the service of
God, otherwise than as other politic Laws be, 5. Elizab. ca. 5.

If any person have falselye and deceitefullie gotten into his possession any
money or other things of any other man's, by color of false prtuie token, or of
counterfeit letter made in an other man's name. False tokens or letters.
33. H. 8. cap 1.

If any have uttered them selves to be Proctours, having no sufficient
authority, or have gone about idle, using crastie games, or pretending skill
in Palmestrie, telling of vestinies, or other abused sciences: or (that being
whole and able in body, and not having land, Master, nor mean to get their
siuing) can give no reckning how they get their living lawfully: If any
Fencers, Bearwards, Common players in Enterludes, or Minstrells (not belonging
to any Baron or personage of greater degree) Iuglers, Pedlers, Tinkers, or
Petit chapmen, have wandered about without license of two Justices of peace: If
any common laborers (being able in body) have used loytering, or refused to
work for the appointed wages: If any have counterfaited licenses, or
passeported, or have used such, knowing them to be counterfeit: If any Scholars
of Oxford or Ca^^^^^ge, have gone about begging not auctorized under the
University Seal, or shippemen, pretending loss by sea, or delivered
prisoners, begging for their fees, or travailing to their country or friends,
not being lawfully lycenced: If any servant departing out of service, be
found with a counterfeit Testimonial. Vagabonds and Roges.


If any poor body have frauailed from home toward Bathe or Buckston, without
lawful lic^nce, or being pro^ided for in his or her parish, have
notwithstanding secondly wandered abroad without license: For all these be
Roges and Vagabounos. 14. Elizab. cap. 5.

If any Constable, or Borsholder, have not bone his best endeavor to apprehende
such Roges as have begged or made abode within their limits, or have wilfully
suffered any of them to escape punishment: And if any person have given
harborow, or other relief to any such koge: If any person have hindered the
execution of the Statute concerning Rogesf, or have made rescous to any person
endeavoring the execution thereof. Officers not punishiing Roges.
Giuingreliefe to Roges.
Disturbing of the execution of the law against Roges.
14. El. ca. 5: and18. El. cap. 3.

If any persons to the number of three, or above, have been riotously assembled
to beat any man, to enter upon a possession, or to dos any such unlawful
act, have done it in deed, or attempted to do it: Dr have been assembled
together in Rowtes for any common quarrel: or otherwise unlawfully against the
Queens Majesty's Peace. Riots, Kouts unlawful assemblies
Commussion vunder the name of Conuenticles.

If any persons (above the number of two, and under xij.) being assembled, have
intended vnlawafull with force to murder, or stea any of the Queens subjects:
Dr to cut or cast vowne any enclosure, or banks of any fish pond, or conduit
head, or pipe, or to do any the Deeds (mentioned in unlawful assemblies
before) and have not departed upon proclamation, but have attempted to do any
of those things. Rebelliou^ assemblies


Or if any person (being moved to make any rebellious assembly) have not
within 24. hours after disclosed the same to a Justice of the Peace, or to the
Shirife: Dr if any person have stirred or procured any other to make such
assemblis. 1. Mar. parl. 1. ca. 12: 1. El. ca. 17.

If any have lain in awaite, to mayheme, or kill any other. Lying in awaite
Commossion.

If any have entered in to lands, or possessions with force, or entering
peaceably, have bolden the same with force. Forcible entries.


If any person have unlawfully broken, or destroyed the head or damme of any
pond, mote, stem, or several pit wherein fishes are put by the owner thereof:
or have wrongfully slshed in any of the same, to the intent to take away the
fish against the owners will: Dr have wrougfully entered into any Park, or
other ground, before this Statute enclosed, or after this Statute, (by the
iicence of the Prince) to be enclosed and bsed for keeping of Dear, and have
wrongfully hunted, oriuen out, hurt, or killed, any Daere there: Dr if any
person have unlawfully taken away any Hawke, or the eggs of any Hawke out of
the woods, or grounds of any other person. Cut pond head, fish:hunt
Dear:take Hawks, or their eggs.
5. El. ca. 21.

If any person have taken, or caused to be taken, upon his own, or other
men's ground, the eggs of any Falcon, Goshawke, Lannar, or Swanne: or have
taken any Cirer Falcon, Goshawke, Tercell, Lanner, or Lanneret: or have
purposely (...) them out of their Couertes: or have borne any Hawke of the
breed of England, called a Niesse Goshawke, Tasset, Lanner, or Lameret. Take
Hawks eggs: take Hawks, or driuc them away.
11 H. 7. ca. 17.

If any Artisicer, Labourer, or other Lay man, not having lands, or tenements
of forty shillings by year, or any sprituall person not advanced to ten
pounds living by the year, have kept greyhound, hound, or other dog to
hunte, or used firrets, nets, or other engines, to take or destroy, Dear,
Hares, Co^es, or other gentiemans game. Dogs, actts, firrets
13. R. 2. 13.

If any person have traced, killed, and destroyed any Hare in the snowc. Trace
hare
14. H. 8. ca. 10.

If any person whatsoever, have taken, or killed any phesants, or Partriches,
with any manner of net, or other devise whatsoever, upon the freehold of any
other, without special license, or in the night time, except it were
unwillingly, by lowbelling, or tramelling, who also did then and there
presently let them go again: Dr if any person have hawked, or with his
spaniels hunted in any ground (not being his own) where any corn or grain
did then grow, or before it was shocked, or copped, without the consent of the
owner of such corn or grain. Take phefants or partriches.
Hauking in corn.
II. H. 7. ca. 17: and 23. El. ca. 10.

If any person have by him self or an other, sold any marchandizes or wares so
any other, and have within three months next after that, by him self or by
any other bought the same, or any part thereof again, upon a lesser price,
knowing them to be the same: Dr if any person have by any corrupt bargain,
mortgage, or other means, taken in gain, abouc the rate of ten pounds for the
hundred, for one whole years forbearance, and so after that rate, for more, or
less. Usury.
37. H. 8. ca. 9: 13. El. ca. 8.

If any have within these two years forstalled, regrated, or engrossed
unlawfully: A Forstaller is he, that buyeth or causes to be bought, or makes
courract or promise for the having or buying of any victual, or wares, coming
by land or water toward any fair or market to be sold, or coming from
beyond the Se^ toward any City, port, Haven, Creek, or Road of this Realm
to be fold before the same shall be in the Fair or Market, City, Port, or
Haven ready to be sold: Or that by any means makes motion to any person for
enhauncing the price of the same: Or that does 'disswade, move, or stir any
person. Forstallers, Regrators, Ingrossers, Forstaller.
(coming to the Market or Fair) to forbear to bring any of the same to any
Fair, Market, City, Port, or Haven to besolde.

A Regrator is he, that regrateth or gets into his possession, in any Fair,
or Market, any corn, wine, sishe, butter, cheese, candles, tallowe, sheep,
lambs, calves, swine, pigges, geese, capons, hens, chickens, pigeons,
conies, or other dead victual whatsoever, brought to any Fair or Market to
be sold, and selIeth the same again in any Fair or Market keps there, or
within four miles thereof. Regras^^


An Ingrossor is he, that ingrosseth or gets into his hands by buying,
contract, or promise, taking (other than by demise, lease, or grant, of land
or of tithe) any corn growing in the sieldes, or other corn, or grain,
butter, cheese, sishe, or other dead victual, with in England, to the intent
to sell the same again. Ingrossor^
But such as buy barlye or oats (without forstalling) and turn the same into
malte or oatemeale, and sell it again: and such victualler of all fortes, as
buy victual (without forstalling) and sell it by retail again, and Badgers,
and Drouers, being lawfully licenced and not abusing their licenses are
excepted. So be all buyers of wines, oils, spices, and other foreign victuals
brought from beyond Sea hither, except fish and salt only 6. Ed. 6. cap. 14:
5. Elizab. cap. 12: 13. Elizab ca. 25.

If any person have within these two years bought corn in any Fair or Market
for change of his seed (having then sufficient for his house, and for sowing
his groude for a year) and did not bring this there if he might) so much as he
did so buy, and did not the same day sell it after the price then going. Seed
corn.
5. E. 6. ca. 14.

If any person have within these two years bought Dxen, konts, Steeres, kyen,
Heyfares, Calves, Sheep, Lambs, Goats, or Byddes, living, and solve any of
the same again alive, before he has kept them five weeks. Live cattle.
5. E. 6. ca. 14.

If any person not having the Hueenes speriall license, have bought or
engrossed tanned leather, to sell it again vnlesle he be an Artisicer that
makes wares of such tanned leather, and works itin the same. Tauned leather.
5. E. 6. ca. 15. ti. E1. ca. 9

If any person has bought any woollen yarne, and have not made clothe thereof.
Wollcn yorng.
8. H. 6. ca. 5 Dr have bought any wolle, but of the owner of the Sheep, and
of the Lithe. 14. R. 2. ca. 4.

If any Butcher, or other person have killed any young suckling calue, to be
sold whole, or by retaile, which was calued between the first of Januarie, and
the first of May. Sucking Calves.
24. H. 8. ca. 7:14. E1. ca. 11.

Or have killed any weinling, bullock, steer, or heifare (under ye age of two
years) to be sold whole or by retailer ibidem. Weinlings under 2. years
Caluesvnder five weeks old.
Or have killed any calfe to sell, being under sieve weeks old. 5. E1. ca. 8.

If any person have willingly (between ye first of March and last of June in
any year) taken away or destroyed the eggs of any wildswle (used to be eaten)
from the place where they did lay the. 25. H. 8. c. 11:3. E. 6. c. 3. Eggs of
wildfoule.


If any person (seeding above. 120. share sheep for the most part of the year
upon his grounds ye be meet for mylchckyen, and wherein no person has any
commune) have not kept for every. 60. such sheep reared up one calfe, during
the time of keeping such sheep. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 3:13. E1. ca.
25. Milche kyen and calves.
Or if any person (feeding upon his several passures above 20. oren, ronts,
steeres, scrubs, held fares, or kyne) have not for every ten such beasts kept
one myiche cow, and for everin two kyne waned and reared up yearly one calfe,
except it chance to dye. ibid. he that seedeth such sheep or beasts, only
to be spent in his house, is excepted, ibidem.

If any person have taken any Salmons between the feasts of the natiuitis of
the blessed virgin Marie, and of S. Martine, in any rivers or waters: Dr have
taken young Salomons at any will poole, or other place, between the midst of
April and Midsomer: or have at any time cast into any waters any net, by
which the Frye of any Fish may be taken. Salmons.
Frye of Fish.
W. 2. ca. 47. 13. R. 2. ca. 19:17. R 2. ca. 9.

If any person have with any net, or mean, taken and killed any frye or spawne
of any fish in any wear, fludgate, stream, or river (salt, or fresh) or at
the tail of any milk or have taken there any Salmons, or Droufs, out of
season, that is, being kippers or shedders: Dr have taken and killed any
pickerell under ten inches fish in length, or Salmons under. 16. inches, or
Drout under. 8. inches, or Barbell under. 12. inches: or have fished in any the
said places with any net, but such whereof every meshe was. 2. inches and a
half broad and But Angling is excepted, and so is the taking of Smeltes,
Loches, Minemes, Binheades, Budgeons, and Cles, in places only where they have
been used to be take. Frye of fish.
Salmons. Trouts.
Assise of fishes.
Ne^^s.
causes. Angling.
1. El1. cap. 17:14. El1. cap. 11.

If any Butcher, Fishmonger, Inholder, Lippler, Brewer, Baker, Poulter, or
other seller of victual, have not sold ye same at reasonable prices, and for
moderate gains. Victuallers, prices reasonable.
23. E. 3. ca. 6:13. R. 2. c1. 8. If any Beerebrewer, or Alebrewer have sold
their drink at higher prices than have been appointed by the Justices of
peace, 13. H. 8. cap. 4. Brewers.


If any Butchers, Bakers, Brewers, poulters, Cooks, Fruiterers, or any
mystery of any of them, have conspired, or taken any dathe, or promise, not
to sell but at prices sertaine agreede between them. Victuallers conspiring.
2. E. 6. 15.

If any Butcher have sold, or offered to fell, Swines flesh mezeled, or any
flesh that dyed of the morreine: Dr if any other Victualler have sold, or so
offered to sell any corrupt or unwholesome victual: State, Pictorum. cap. 7.
Corrupt victual.


If any person have, against proclamation thereof made, transported or
carried out of this Realm, any Corn, Grain, or Dalte, growing or made here:
or any Beer, Butter, Cheese, or Moodin any uessell (except to Barwicks, or
the Marshes thereof) without sufficient authority, or any Seafishe, or
herring not taken by a natural borne Subject here: or have by any means
conveyed, or wittingly consented to convey, any of the said things, to any
vessel being on the Sea, or in any place or haven of this keatme to be
transported over Sea, or into Scotland, without sufficient authority: or if
any person having license to convey any of the said things, have fraughted
or laden his vessel, or any part thereof, at any more places than one only:
1.and. 2 Phillip and Maric. cap. 6. 13. El1z. ccap. 13:13. El1z cap. 11.
Transport Corn, Beer Butter, Cheese Sea fish, Hering. Wood.


If any person have boughte to sell again any Butter or Cheese, unless it
be in open Fair or Markette by retayling it affect the weigh of Cheese Barrel
of But^e^ (...) a less quantity: or unless it be (...) for that which that
be retayled or ^ponte in their houses (...) 6. ccap. 2R and. 14. E(...)

If any person have packed Fisve in Barrels, and have mired the Countable
Fish with the small Fish. 22. Edward. 4. 2:11. H. 7. 23: Or have boughte of a
Stranger borne, or out of a Strangers bottom, any Herring (other than such
as comes hither by reason of Shipwreck) not sufficientlye salted, packed,
and casked. Fish packed. bought of Strangers.
5. El1. ca. 5.

If any have brought, sent, or received into any Ship or Bottom, any
Kammes, Shapes, or lambs, being alive, to be convyed out of the Dueenes
dominions: or if any person have procured the same. Ram. sheep, lambs
trnsported.
8. El. ca. 3.

If any person have dried in this kealme to be fold any fish taken or
brought hither by any stranger borne. Drying of fish brought by Strangers.
13. E1. ca. 11

If any Stranger borne, have brought into this kealme, any Coddes, or
Lings, packed in Barels, or other Caskes. Cods or lings in Cake.
13. El1z. ca. 11.

If any person have within this year, taken upon him to set price, to take
toll, or in demand any fare upon any (...) the taken by any Subject of the
Nueene in theys (...) vessels: or if any Purueiour or other person have within
that time, by color of any Comissio take any such Dering, or Seafish (other
than ye accustained composition Fish for Island) against the will of the
bringer in thereof: Dr if any person have within that time caused to be laden
and carried in any vessel (whereof any stranger borne, is wholly or partlye
owner or Master) any fish, victual, or other thing, from one Port or Creek
of this Kealme, to any other of the same: Or if any person have within that
time brought into this Kealme, or any part thereof, other than into the I Will
of Man, or into Wales, any Wine coming out of the Dominions of France, or
any Toulouse Woad, but only in such vessel whereof some Subject of the Queen
was then owner, or part owner. Set price of (...) upon Seafishe.
Puruciour.
Seafish and Herring.
Wine, Woad in a strange bottom.
5. El. ca. 5.

If any person auctorired to sell Wine by retaile, have within this year sold
the same above the prices thereof limited by the Queens Proclamation 5.
Elizabeth. cap. 5. Winesre^ayled.


If any person, not being the son of a Peer, or Earron of this Kealme, nor
having lands or profttes to the yearly value of one hundred marks, or goods
to one thousand marks, have kept in his house any vessel of Gascon, Guion,
French, or Rochell Wine, containing above ten Gallons, to the intent to
spends the same in his house. 7. E. 6. ca. 5. Not above ten Gallons of Wine.


If any person (other than by reason of age, sickness, childiug, or license)
have within thye year eat flesh in Lent, or upon any fish day observed by
the custom of this Kealme, 2. Ed. 6. ca. 19:5. Elizab. Cap. 5. ^ate flesh.


If any person, have upon any Weditesday (not falling in Christmasse week, or
Caster week) eaten other than of one dishe or kind of flesh, for the which
also he shall then have eaten at his table three full dishes of Sea fish of
three kinds. 5. Elizabeth. cap. 5.

If any common Brewer, Baker, or Assise of Tippler, have broken the Assise of
Bread, Beer, or Ale: And if any Steward of Leete, or Officer in Markette
Town, have taken any fine for breach of the Assise of Bread or Ale, in such
cases, where corporal punishmente is appointed. Assise of Bread and Ale.
13. R. 2. cap. 8.

If any person have boughte or sold by any unlawful weightes or measures:
or if any person have boughte or sold in any City, or Market, with any
weight or measure that is not lawfully marked, or signed: 11. H. 7. 4. Weights
and measures.
Or have bought Corn by heaped measure in any place (except within
shipborde) or have used double measure, the one to buy, the other to sell with,
15. R. 2. ca. 4:11. H. 7. ca. 4:5. E. 3. de Pistor.

If they of the Town where the Bings Standerd is appointed to remain, have not
their common weightes and measures signed, or have not thereby signed weightes
and measures to all that have required the same. Commune weights and measures.
And if the head officers of Markette Towns have not twice yearly made view
and examination of weights and measures there. 11. H. 7. ca. 4.

If any vessel for Beer or Ale have been sold or put to sale, being made of
unseasonable wood, or not having there upon ye mark of him that made it: Or if
any Barrel for Beer contain not of the Queens standard 36 Gallons: the
Kilderken 18 Gallons: the ^^rkin nine Gallons: Every Barrel of Ale. 32
Gallons: the kilderkin sixteen Gallons, and every Ferkin. Yessel for Ale,
Beer.
8 Gallons. 23. H. 8. ca. 4.

If any have made or brought into this Kealme any Tun of Wine, not
containing 252. Vessels for Wine, H^nny, Oil, Herring. Eles, Saln.^.
Gallons: or Pipe not containing 126 Gallons: or Tertian not contanning 8.
Gallons: or Hogsheade not containing ^3. Gallons: or But of Malmesey not
containing 126. Gallon: Or Barrel of Herring not containing 32. Gallons of Wine
measure: or Barel of Eles not cotayning two and forty Gallons: or Butte of
Salmon not containing 84. Gallons: or any Kilderkins, Lertian, firkins, or
Kundlets, but after Ye same rate. 2. H. 6. 11:22, E. 4. ca. 2:1. R. 3. ca. 13:
and 28. H. 8. cap. 14.

If any have made any vessel of Soap, that being empty contains not 32.
Vessels of Soap.
Gallons for the Barrel: 16 for the half Barrel, and 8. for the Firkin: or
weight above 26. th. the Barrel 13. th. the half Barrel, or 6. th. and a half
the Ferkin 23. H. 8. ca. 4.

If any Millers have taken toll by heaped mcasure. Toll Dishe
31. E. 1. de Pistor and Bracia.

If any Artificers, Workmen, or Laborers, have conspired, or promised
together, or made any oaths, that they will not do their works but at a
certain price or rate, or but at certain times, or but a certain work in a
day, or that one of them shall not take upon him to sinishe that which another
has begone. Artificers conspiring.
2. E. 6. 15.

If any Arrowheade smift have not well boiled, brased, and hardened at the
point with Steel, and marked with his mark such heads of Arrows and
Duarrels, as he has made. Arrowhead Smithes
, 7 H. 4. ca. 7.

If any person (during such time as he used the mystery of Lanning of any
Bide or skin of Dre, Steer, Bull, Cow, Calfe, red or fallow Daere, Goat, or
Seepe) have used althe mystery of a Shoemaker, Curriour, Butcher, or of any
Artificer using the cutting or working of such Leather. Tanners.


If any person have gashed or cut the Hyde of any Bull, Ox, Steer, or
Cow, whereby it is impaired: or if any Lanner have put to sale any such Hide.

If any person (other than such as at Mithaelmasse. 1559 had freeholde of
forty pou^ds by the year, or had then any Lanhouse and did occupy tanning of
Leather, or has been an Apprentise or taught as a hired servant seven years
to a Lanner, or has been wise to a Lanner, or the son of a Lanner, and
brought up four years in that Art, or the son or daughter of a Lanner, or
such as has married the wife or daughter of a Lanner that lest to the same
his Lannehouse and Fattes) has tanned any Leather, or has taken any profit
by the tanning thereof.

If any Lanner have suffered any hide to lie in the Limes longer, than till
the hair falls off, or may be taken off, or have used any other, than Lime,
Culuerdug, H^dung, cold water, Wose of cold water, and Okebark, in his
tanning, or have ouerlimed any Hides, in ye pits, or put the in vessels before
ye lime be perfectly wrought out, or have suffered his Leather to be frozen
with the frost, or be parched with the Fire, or the Sun: Or have tanned any
rotten Hides, or wrought them negligently in the Wose, or have not renewed the
Wose so often as need was: Dr have not suffered the Hides for utter soale and
clout leather to lie in the Wose twelve months, and for the upper leathers,
nine months: Or has not sufficiently tanned any Hide: Or has taned any hide
of Ox, Steer, or Cow, other wise than whole, and without cutting any part
thereof away, except three or four Bends overthwart for clout leather: Or have
tanned any Bull hide, Horse hides, or Sheep skin: Or have put any of them
to sale, being tanned.

If any person have put to sale any tanned leather (red and unwrought)
unless it be sufficiently tanned and dried, and unless it be in the places
appointed for it, in open Faires and Markets, and vnlsse it be first searched
and sealed: Or have departed with the hide of Ox, Steer, or Cow, but only
whole, without any part cut off, except bends for clouting leather, as
before.

If any person have bought, contracted for, or bespoken any rough hide, or
Calves skins in the hair (except salt Hides for the use of ships) but such
persons only as shall tawe the same: or shall, and may, by this Act tanne the
same: Or have bought or bespoken any tanned Leather, not w^ought into made
wares (other than necks or shreds of Sadlers, or gyrdlers, but such persons
only, as will convert and work the same into made wares 5. Elizab. cap. 8.

If any Currior have curried any leather, but in his own house, and that being
in a Corporate or Market town: Or have curried any Leather not well tanned, or
not thoroughly dried after his watte season: Or have used in his wette season
any deceitful means to corrupt the same: Or have Curried utter sole leather
with any other stuff than hard fallow, or inner soale, or over leather with
any salt stuff: Or have not liquored them both throwly: Or have burned,
scalded, or shaven foo thin, or not wrought sufficientlye any Leather: Or
have gashed or hurt any Leather by any means, 5. Elizab. cap. 8. Curriours.
Or have refused to Curry within five days in Summer, and ten days in
Winter, well and sufficiently, any Leather, brought to him by any cutter of
Leather, or his servant, bringing with him good stuff for the perfect
liquering of ye same 5. Elizab. 8.

If any Curriour have (during the time that he has occupied Currying) used the
feate of a Lanner, Shoemaker, Butcher. or other Artificer, using cutting of
Leather. 5. Elizab. ca. 8.

If any Shoemaker have made any Boots, Buskins, Shoes, Slippers, or Pantofles,
or any part of them of English Leather wet curried, (other than Deeres, Goats,
or Calves skins, dressed like Spanish Leather) but of Leather well tanned and
curried, or well tanned only, and well sewed with threede well twisted,
wared, and rosoned, and with the stitches hard drawn, with hard Leathers, and
without mixing of Neates or Calves leather in the upper leatheres thereof: Or
have put in any Boots, Buskins, Startups, or Slippers between the last of
September, and the twentieth of April) meet for any person, above four years
old, any dry English Leather (other than Calves or Goats skins, dressed
like Spanish Leather:) Or have showed for sale, any of his wares upon the
Sunday morning before divine service be ended 5. Elizab. cap. 8. Shoemaker
Or have put into any of his said wares, leather made of Sheeps skins, Bull,
or horse hide, or into the upper leather of any Shoes, Startups, Slippers, or
Pantofles, or into the nether part of any Boots, (the inner soale and half of
the Shoe only excepted) any part of the womb, neck, shanke, flank, pole,
or rheeke: Or into any utter soale, any other than the best of the Ox, or
Steeres hyde: or into the inner soale other than the wombs, neck, pole, or
cheek: or in ye treswels of the double soaled Shoos, other than the flanks of
the said Hydes, 5. Elizab. cap. 8.

If any Lords of Fair or Market, have not appointed two or three honest and
skillful persons, to be searchers and sealers of Leather there: And if any the
searchers and sealers so appointed, have refused to cut the wombs from the
utter soale Leather truly tanned, and before it he Curried: or have refused to
seal good Leather: or made befaulte in search: or not registered the bargains
for Leather, (taking his due sees) or have concealed any faults, 5. Elizab.
cap. 8.

If any person have denied any such searcher to enter into any place, to
search tanned Leather, and wrought ware, or to seize and carry away that
which was insufficient: Or if any have carried out of any Fair or Market, any
whole Ox or Steer hide (whereof any soale leather may be cut) before the
wombs be cut off: Or have put away any ta^ned leather (red and unwrought)
without registring the same, and the price thereof: or have bought any tanned
Leather, before it was seached and sealed, or have carried it out of any Fair
or market before it was registered, 5. Eliz. ca. 8.

If any Goldsmith, or worker of silver, have wrought any silver, that is not
so fine in allay as the Sterling, or have not set his mark upon his work
before he set it to sale, 2. H. 6. ca. 14. Goldsmiths and gilding.
And if any have gilded any Sheathes, or any metal but silure, saving the
Spurs of Knights, and the apparel of a Baron, or such as are above that
estate, 8. H. 5. cap. 3.

If any Tile maker, have not dug and cast up his earth, for Tile, till
after the first of November, or have not stirred and turned it till after the
first of February following, or if he have wrought it before ye 1. of March
following, or if he have not wrought and tried it from stones, veins, and
chalk: Or if he have made, or any person have put to sale any plain Tile
under ten inches and a half in length, six inches and a quarter in breadth,
and half an inch and a quarter in thickness: Or any roof Tile under
thirteen inches in length, and half an inch and half a quarter in
thickness, with convenient deepenessse: or any Gutter Tile, under ten inches
and a half in length, with convenient thickness, breadth, and deapth: And if
any searchers appointed for the onersight of the true making of Tile, have not
done their effectual endeavor and ^iligence in this behalf 17. E. 4. cap. 4.
Tilemakers


If any person have sold or set forth, Candelles or other works of Ware to
sale, at higher price than after the rate of four pence for the pound, over
the common price of plain Ware beetweene Merchant and Merchant 11. H. 6. cap.
12. ware wo^kess.


If any Clothmaker have not set his Seal of lead to his cloth, thereby
declaring the just length thereof, to be tried by the Water.

If any person have stretched any Cloth above one yard and a half in length,
or one quarter of a yard in breadth, or have put to sale, any cloth that has
shruncke more in the wetting than is aforesaid: Or have stretched any narrow
Streite or Kersey, above one yard in length, and half a quarter of a yard in
breadth, or have put any such to sale that have shruncke more in the wetting
5. E. 6. cap. 2. Clothmaking and Dying.


If any Diar of woollen cloth, have Died any brown Blewes, Pewks, Tawneis, or
Violets, that were not perfectly boiled, greined, or maddered upon the Woade:
and shot with good Cork or Orchall sufficiently.

If any person have Died any Wool for cloth called Kuffets, Marbles, Grayes,
Bays, or such like, or for Hats, or Caps, unless it were perfectly woaded,
boiled, and madered: Or have Died with Brazell, to the intent to make a false
color, in any such Cloth or Wool: Or have put any Flore, Chalk, Starch, or
other deceiuable thing upon any Cloth, (except certain Devonshire and
Cornwall straights. 7. E. 6. cap. 9) Or have occupied any iron Cards, or
Picardes, in rowing of any woollen cloth: Or have sold any cloth by any less
measure tha^ after the true content thereof by the yard, and inch: Or have put
to sale in this realm, any Cloth (being pressed) to be occupied in England,
Wales, or Ireland 3. E. 6. cap. 2.

If any Duerseets of Cloth, appointed by the Justices of Peace for this year,
have refused to be Duerfeers, or have not within their charge, made due search
thereof once every quarter: And if any person have interrupted them to make
such search. 3. E. 6. ca. 2.

If any Kentish broadcloth (except course cloth only, not exceeding sire
pound price) have been made, that contained not in length between 28. and 30.
yardes, being wet: and in breadth seven quarters within the lists: and in
weight 76. pound, being well scoured, thicked, milled, and fully dried 5. E.
6. cap. 6. and 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. cap. 5.

And so changing it after their Rates for other countries, as by those Statutes
appears.

For regrating of Woolles by Halifaxe men, See 2. and 3. phil. and Mar. cap. 13.

If any person have used, or caused to be used any racking, beating, or
casting of any deceitful liquor, or other mean, with any kind of linen
cloth, whereby the same became deceitful, or the worse for the good use
thereof 1. Elizab. cap. 13. Linen cloth.


If any owner of any Site or Precinct, and demeasnes of any late diffolued
religious house (that was in yearly value under two hundred pound,) do not
keep an honest and continual household there upon, and do not occupy so
much of the said demeasnes in tillage, as was occupied by the space of
twenty years, before the seaucn and twentieth year of King Henry the eight,
5. Elizab. ca. 2:14. Elizab. cap. 11. Scites of religious houses.


If any person having in his hands firtie acres of arable and pasture
together, or of the one sort alone, apt for tillage, have not within this year
tilled and sowell seasonably (without fraud) one Acre of land with Flare
seed, or Hemp seed, or both. Flax and Hemp.


But ground in a Park for Dear, and Wood land, Grove, Meadow, Fell, Fenne,
Saltmarsh, Heath, Common grounds vanpte for ^llage, grounds not tilled within
fiftiey ears before this Statute, and grounds plowed only for clensing of
it, shall not be accounted in these sixtic Acres, 24. H. 8. cap. 4: and 5.
Elizab. cap. 5.

If any person have at one time kept above the number of 2000. sheep of all
sorts, against the purport of ye Statute 25. H. 8. ca. 13. 2000. Sheep


If any owner, Officer, or kuler of any Fair or Market, have not appointed one
certain open place there, for the sale of horses, geldings, mares, and coltes,
and one sufficient person to take toll, and keep the said place: And if any
such Toll gatherer, or his Deputy have taken any more then one penny toll for
one contracte, or for entering the names of the parties, and that in the same
place only, and between ten of the clock in the morning, and Sun setting, 2.
and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 7. Fair and Market for horses.


If any Inholder (dwelling in any City, Town, Corporate, or Market Town,
wherein is any common Baker that has be apprentice there seven years) have
within his own house made any horsebreade: or (dwelling in any other
thorowfaire) have made it insufficiently and not of due assise 13. R. 2. cap.
8: and 32. H. 8. cap. 41. Inholder.
Horsebread.


If any Inholder have taken any thing for litter: or have taken above one
halfepenie in a bushel of Dates, over the common price in the market. Hay and
Oats.
13. R. 2. cap. 8: and 4. H. 4. ca. 25.

If any person have been retained into service to work for any less time
than a whole year, in any the arts of a Clothier, woollen Weauer, Tucker,
Fuiler, Clothe-worker, Sherman, Dier, Hosier, Tailor, Shoemaker, Tanner,
Pewterer, Baker, Brewer, Glouer, Cutler, Smith, Ferrour, Curriour, Sadler,
Spu^rier, Turner, Capper, Hattemaker, Feltmaker, Bowier, Fletcher, Arrowhead
maker, Butcher, Cook, or Miller. Seruantsnot retainable for less tha^ one
year.
And if any person being unmarried or under 30. years of age, and married, and
being compellable to serve in any of those Arts, have refused to serve.
Refusing to serve.


If any person being between the age of twelve years and threscore and being
compellable to serve in husbandry, have refused to serve in husbandry after
request thereof made by any person keeping husbandry: And if person have given
any wages, contrary to the rates of wages of servants, and laborers,
appointed and proclaimed. Greater wages.


If any person retained in Husbandry, or any the said Arts, have after his
reteinour expired, departed out of one limitte, town, or parish, into an
other, without a Testimonial: And if any person have accepted into his
service, any so departing without showing such Testimonial. Testimonial


If any person have put away his servant before the end of his term, without
reasonable and allowed cause before a Justice of the Peace, or at the end of
his term, without a quarters warning before given: And if any servant have
departed without such cause before the end of the term, or at the end
thereof, without such warning given before two lawful witnesses. Put away, or
depart away.


If any Artificer, or labourer, hired by the day or week, have not continued
at his work so many hours in the day as he ought: Or taking any work by
the great, have unlawfully departed before the finishing thereof. Undertake
work, and not finish it.


If any servant, workman or labourer have wilfully and malitiosly made any
assault or other person, having the charge of such workers or work. Assault
Master or dame


If any Constable, or head Officer, have not upon compiaint put into the stocks
two days and one night every Artificer or person, neete to labor, that have
refused to labor in Day time or Daruest, for the getting or carrying of Corn,
Day, or Grain, being thereto appointed by a Justice of Peace, or such
Constable, or heud Officer. Labor in Hay time and Harust.


If any person have taken any Apprentire against the order of the Law: and if
any person have therein as an apprentice seven years. Apprentices
5. Elizab. cap. 4. and 5.

Touching the abiding places and collections for the poor, there is no
general order taken in the Shire of Kent. 14. Elizab. cap. 5. Poor.


If the Churchwardens of any Parish have not every Sunday levied the money for
relief of the prisoners in the Jail, and one in every Quarter paid it to the
Constable of the Hundred: Or if that Constable have not at every Quarter
Sessions paid over the same to the Collectour thereto appointed: Or if such
Collectour have not weekly distributed the same for relief of the said
prisoners 14. Elizab. cap. 5. Prisoners relieved.


As touching stocks and store of etc. for the working poor, or houses of
correction for the idle poor, etc. little is done in this Shire as yet, but
for the most part left to the Parishes. Poor setto work.
18. Elizab. ca. 3.

If any person above sire years of age (except Maidens, Ladies, Gentlewomen,
Nobles, Knights, Gentlemen of twetie marks by year in lands, and their heirs,
and such as have borne Office of Worship) have not worn upon the Sunday and
Holiday (except it be in the time of his frauaile out of the City, Town, or
Hamlet where he dwells) upon his head, one Cap of wool, knit, thicked, and
dressed in England, and only dressed and finished by some of the trade of
Cappers 13. Eliz:cap. 20. Cappes.


If any man borne within the Queens dominions (except it be the son and
heir apparent of a Knight, or the son of one of higher degree, or such as
may dispende twenty pounds in lands by yearre, or revenues rr. pounds in
lands by year, or revenues for life, or be worth two hundredth pounds in
goods, or have been head Officer in any City, Borough, or Tower Corporate,
or be the Queens servant in ordinary, and wearing her liuerie, have worn
any manner of Silk, in, or upon his Hat, Bonet, Nightcappe, Girdle,
Scabbarde, Hose, Shoes, or Spur leathers: And if any person knowing any
servant of his to offend herein, have not within fourteen days next after
such knowledge, put him out of service, if he were no Apprentice, or hired
servant, and if he were, then if he have not put him away at the end of his
term, or if, having put him away therefore, he have retained him again
within one year next after that offense 1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. cap. 2.
Silk.


The Statute of Apparel (made 24. H. 8. cap. 13) is not thought altogether so
meet for this time, as it may appear by some Proclamations Published.

If any Bridges in the high ways (being out of the Cinque Ports and members
thereof) be broken, or decayed, to the annoyance of Passengers, and if yea,
then what Hundred, City, Town, Parish, or person certain, or body
politic, ought of right to repair or amend the same 22. H. 8. cap. 5.
Bridges.


If the Constables and Churchwardens of any Parish, have not in Easter week
called their parishioners together, and appointed overseers of the works for
amendment of the high ways, leading to any Market, or have not appointed the
fire days for that work: and if any such overseers, have refused that
charge. Highwayes.


If any person, having a Plowe land in tillage or pasture, or keeping a
draught or Plowe, have not found thereto one Waine or Cart, furnished to work
eight hours every of the said days: Or if any other person being assessed
in Subsedie to five pounds in goods, or forty shillings in lands, have not
likewise found two able men: Or if any other householder, or Cotager, have not
by him self, or an other so wrought every of the same days.

If the Hedges, Ditches, Trees, and Bushes, in and on each side of any such
high way be not kept low, scowred, and cut dowene by the owners of the
grounds adjoining: If any such ouerseer, have not within one month after any
of the said offenses done, presented the same to the next Justice of the Peace:
And if any person occupying land adjoining to any such high way, have cast
the scowring of any ditche thereof into the high may.

If any Overseers, Constables, or Churchwardens, have not levied the
forfaitures for the offenses aforesaid, and employed them upon their said
high ways, and accoa^^ed thereof. 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 8: 5. E^zab.
cap. 13: 18. Elizab. ca. 9.

If any person have, for lucre main^^^ned, or place of bowling, coyting,
closhe, ca^les, tennis, dicing, tables, carding, shouegroate, or any other game
prohibited by any former Statute (as footeball, and casting of the stone) or
any other unlawful ^^me game now invented: If any Artificer of any
occupation, or any husbandman, Apprentice, Labourer, servant at Husbandry,
Iorneyman, or any servant of Artificer, or any Mariner, Fisherman, Waterman,
or Seruingman, (other than of a Noble man, or of him that may dispend one
hundred pounds by year, playing within the precinct of his Masters house have
played out of the Christmasse at any of the said unlawful games, or in the
Christmasse out of the house or presence of their Master. 33. H. 8. ca. 9: and
vide. 12. R. 2. ca. 7. 8. 10. Unlawful ga^^^


If any person have shot in, used, or kept, any Handgun, but such as is in
stock, and Gun one yard long: or any Hagbut, or Demyhake, not being 3.
quarters of a yard long. Crossebowes and Gunnes.


If any person (not having one hundredth pounds revenue by the year) have
carried in his journey any Crossebowe bent, or Gun charged, unless it be to
the Musters: If any person have shot at large (other than at a Butte or
Bank of earth in place convenient) at any thing with any Gunne, in any City,
Borrough, or Market Town, or within a quarter of a mile of any of the, or have
commanded his servant to shoot in Crossebow or Gunne, at any thing other
then a Butte or Bank of earth: Or if any person (not having a hundredth
pounds by pear) or not dwelling within five miles of the Sea coaste, or not
dwelling in a house two furlongs distant from any City, Borough, or Town,
do keep or have in his house any Crossebow. 33. H. 8. c. 6. If any person
having a hundredth pounds by year, and having seized any Crossebowe or Gun by
virtue of this Act, have not broken the same in pieces within 20. days next
after such seisuret: ibid.

If any Merchaunt Stranger, being of any Country from whence Bowestaues have
been sent into this land, have not (for every Tun weight of burde that his
vessel contains) brought hither four Bowstaues. 12. Edward. 4 cap. 2: 33.
Henry 8. ca. 10: and 37. H. 8. ca. 7. and for every Butte of Malmesie ten
Bowstaues. 1. R. 3. ca. 11.

If any man being the Queens Subject, and not having reasonable cause or
impediment, and being within the age of firtie years (except spiritual men,
Justices of the one Bench, or other Justices of Assise, and Barons of the
Escheaquer) have not a long Bow and Arrows ready in his house, or have not
used shooting therein: or have not for every man child in his house between
seven years and seauenteene of age a Bow and two Shaftes, and for every such
being above seventeen years, a Bow and four Shaftes, or have not brought
them up in Shooting: If any man, under the age of four and twenty years,
have shot at standing pricks: or (being above that age) have shot at any
mark under eleven score yards with any Prickeshaft, or Flight. Archerie.


If the inhabitants of any town have not made and continued their Buttes as
they ought to do. Buttes.


If any Bowier, have not for every Bow that he made of Ewe, made also four
others Bows of apt wood to shoot in: Or have not sold his Bows for all
ages, at their due prices: If any stranger borne, not being a Denizein, have
used to shoot in a long bow without the Queens license: or have conveyed out
of her Maiestries dominions, any long Bow or Shaftes without such license.
Bowiers.
33. H. 8. ca. 9.

If any temporal person, having estate for life in freeholde, lands, or
tenements, to the value of 200. ^. by year or under, and not above 400. ^.
Armor.

Or (not being other wise charged) and having fees, annuities, or copiehold
lands, for life to ye value of 30. ^. or above, or having goods to ye value of
10. ^. or vpware, have not and keep not in a readiness, such Horses,
Geldings, Weapon, armor, and other furniture for ye wars, as after ye
proportion of his ability he ought by the Statute thereof made to have and
keep: 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. ca. 2.

If any temporal person of full age (whose wife not being divorced, nor
willingly abseting her self from him, does wear any Gown or Peticoate of
silk, or any Velvet in her kirtle, or in any lyning or part of her Gown
(other tha^ in Cuffes, or Purfles) or any Frenchhoode or Bonet or Velvet with any
habiliment, past, or edge of gold, pearl, or stone, or any chain of gold
about hit neck, or upon any her apparel) have not found and kept a light
Horse furnished, except he have been otherwise charged by the Statute to
find Horse, or Gelding. 33. H. 8. ca. 5: 4. and. 5. Ph. and. Mar. ca. 2.
Horse for apparel.


If the Inhabitauntes of any Parish, Town, or Borough, have not, or keep
not, such common armor and furniture for the wars, as has been appointed
for them by the Commissioners thereto assigned: 4. and. 5. Phi. and. Mar. ca.
2. Commune armor.


If any person being generally or specially commanded to Muster before any
(having authority for the same) have without true and reasonable cause
absented him self, or have not brought with him in a readiness, his best
furniture of array and armor for his own person. Musters.


If any person auctorized to Muster, or to levy men, for the Queens service
in war, have taken any reward for the discharge or sparing of any person
from that service: or if any person having charge of meanne for warrefare,
have not paid to his soldiers their whole wages conduict and cote money, or
have for any gain licensed any of them to depart out of the service 4. and
5. Phil. and Mar. ca. 3. Captains.


If any Soldier serving the Queen in her wars, have given away,
wilfullye purloyned, or pur away any Horse, Gelding, Mare, or harness,
wherewyth he was set forth. Soldiers.
2. and 3. E. 6. ca. 2. 4. and. 5. Phil. and Mar. ca. 3.

If any person have conveyed, sold, or given into any place beyond the Sea,
out of the Queens dominions, or to any Scottisheman, to be conveyed into
Scotland any Horse, Gelding (or Hare above ten shillings price) without the
Queens license under her great Seal, or privy Signet, unless it were to
serve the Queen in her wars. Couney Horses. etc.
1 E. 6. ca. 5.

If any person have put to feed in any Forest, Chase, Moore, Marish,
Heathe, Common, or waste ground, within this shire, where any Mares are used
to be kept, any stoned Horse, being above two years old, and not being
fourteen handefuls high, between the lowest part of the hoof, and the
top of the wyther: If any such Forest, or grounds, have not been yerelye
driven within 15. days after Michaelmas by the owners, or officers thereto
appointed. Horses and Mares for breed.
32. H. 8. ca. 13.

If watches have not been made upon the Sea Coasts in such places, and with
such number of people, and in such manner as it was wont to be. Sea Watch.
5. H. 4. ca. 3.

The Statutes of leuying the wages of the Kinghtes of the Parliament (made. 23.
H. 6. cap. 11.) has no great use. Parliament.


Note also, that these Statutes following. are to be openly published at any
Sessions of the Peace. viz.

The Statutes (36. E. 3. cap. 2. 3. and. 4.) shall be proclaimed by the
Justices of Peace every year, and thereof informed the people. Purueiours.
23. H. 6. cap. 2.

Alformer Statutes for victualers being in force shall be proclaimed two times
yearly, in the Sessions of Justices of the Peace. Victualers
23. H. 6. ca. 13.

The Act for Archerie (33. H. 8. ca. 9.) must be proclaimed at the several
Sessions of the Peace. Archerie.


Of the Enditementes, and Presentiments given by the Jurors: and of the Matter
and forine, and receiving, and rejecting of them.
CAP. V.
THe preparation to this Inquiry thus made, let us also look upon the
performaunce of the same.

The understanding (or knowledge) which the Justices of the Peace do take by
the travel of these Enquirours, is by the mean of their reaport, put in
writing, and commonly called, an Enditement, or Presentment between ye which
two words (howsoever they be confounded in common speech) me thinks that
there does easily appear a certain difference. Presentmet.
For I take a Presentmente to be, a mere denuntiation of the Jurors
themselves (or of some other Officer, as you shall hereafter hear) without
any other information: and an Enditemente to be, the Verdite of the Jurors,
grounded upon the accusation of a third person: So that a Presentment, is but
a declaration of the Jurors (or Officers) without any bill offered before: and
an Enditement is their finding of a Bill of accusation to be true. Enditemet.


The one seems to come of the Greek (...) I accuse: the other of the French
Presenter, to offer unto a man, or to set before him.

But (taking them as others do) let us consulte with M. Marrowe and others,
that we may learn of them what things be requisite to make a good Enditement.

For the Justices of Peace ought to have an eye upon the Enditementes taken
before them, and therefore they use to command, that the Enqueste shall take no
Bills, but such as the Justices themselves hane first perused: Howbeit, if
the Enquest do the contrary, it is good enough, so long as their bills do
carry sufficient form and matter with them. Justices of the Peace must look
upon Enditements.


And if the bills do want form only, the Justices may send for the
Presentors, and cause the to reform them at any time before they be removed
into the Kings Benche Stanf. 97. And thereupon it is said 35. H. 6. 14: and
12. E. 4. 18.) that if a bill of Enditement be delivered to a Justice of the
Peace, at (or before) the Sessions, which he promises to read, and to deliver
to the Jury, and does it accordingly, yet he shall not be punished for it, in
a writ of Conspiracy: But it may be thereupon deubted, whether he should
be so charged or no, if (upon former communication had, and request made) he
hun self did draw and write the bill: and therefore the safest way is, to
suffer the Clearke of the Peace, or some other Ministe: of the Court, to draw
and frame if, But to the matter.

First, this is general, that all Bills, Informations, and Enditements
grounded upon penal Statuts, wherein the Prince only is to reap the
forfaiture, ought to be commenced within four years next after the offece
committed: and if the suite be given to any other person, for him self and
the Prince, or for him self only, that ought to commence (for the Prince)
within two years, and (for every common person) within one year, next after
the offense done: And otherwise it is merely void: unless it be otherwise
limited by that special Statute upon which the Information, Enditement (or
Presentment) is made and framed. 7. H. 8. ca. 3. And if many be ioynfly
endited in one Enditemet, yetare they also each one severally endited thereby.
5. E. 4. 5. Markam.

Secondly, all Enditements, for as much as they be in the nature of a
declaration, ought to contain certainty, and therefore (as says M. Marrow)
five principal things (be most commonly) requisite in presentiments before
the Justices of Peace. (videlicet.)

1. The name, surname, and addition of the party endited: 2. The year, day,
and place, in which the offense was done: 3. The name of the person, to whom
the offense was done: 4. The name and value of the thing in which the offense
was committed: 5. The manner of the fact, and the nature of the offense: as the
manner of the treason, murder, felony, or trespass.
The name and surname of the party endited must be certainly expressed: and if
the Enditement be of an Accessorie in felony, the name of the principal must
be set down also. The name, and surname.
For if the Enditement be, quod A mandauit cuidam ignoto occidere B. id quod
fecit, this is vicious: but in treason, trespass, or maihem, where all be
principals, it may be, quood procurauit curauit personas ignotas, to do the
treason, trespass, or mayhem. Mar.

Besides the name and surname of the party endited, there ought also (by the
Statute) (1. H. 5. ca. 5.) in every presentment wherein process of vtlawrie
lies, to be added, his estate, degree, or mystery, and the County, Town,
Hamlet, or Place, where he is, or was conversant. Addition of estate, degree,
etc.
And even so ought it to have been at the commune Law also, as touching names
of dignity, made by creation, as Duke, Marquis, Earl, Vicount, Archbishop,
Bishop, Khight, or Serieant at the law, because every of these titles were
accounted percell of the name: But it was not so, for the names of Baron,
Banneret and Esquier, (which are but names of dignity without creation,) nor
for Chauncelor, Treasorer, Chamberlain, Shirife, Coroner, Eschetor, Baylife,
Deane, Archedeacon, Deacon, Prebendarie, or Person (which are names of dignity
by reason of office only) unless the presentment did charge them in respect
of their offices, for then the name of office also, as Bailie, or Elchaetor,
ought to be used in the Enditement. Mar.

But now Baron, Knight, Esquier, Getlema^, Alderman, Widow, Singlewoman, Deane,
Archdeaco^, Person, Doctor, Clerk, are good Additions of estate or degree, (as
and take it) within the meaning of this Statute of Additions: But Servant,
Butler, or Chamberlain, are not, because they be commune to gentlemen, and
yeomen, and thereby uncertain. Degree, or mystery.
So, Merchant, Grocer, Mercer, Tailor, Broker, Husbandman, Hosteler, Labourer,
Lighterman, Waterman, and c. be good Additious of mystery: But Citizen is
not, ^cause it is no mystery, art, or degree: Neither is Mamtainer,
Vagabound, Heretic, Dicear, Carder or such like, any good addition, because
they are every one evil, and against the law.

Also by the said Statute, (as I said) the Addition ought to compprehend the
County, and the Town, Hamlet, or place (known out of any Town, or Hamlet)
whereof the party is, or was: So that if there be diners Hamlets in one
Town, he may be named of the Town, or Hamlet: But if he be with in a Town,
then he must be named of the Town. Place.
35. H. 6. 30. And if the Town and the Parish, bear both one nanfe, he may
be named of the one, or of the other of them: But if there be two Town in one
Parish, then he ought to be named of the Town, and not of the Parish. 5 E.
4. 129: and22. E. 4. 2.

As for the Alias dectus, (which is often put in the Addition) the use thereof
is chiefly in Writtes grounded upon especialties, and to make the writ and
the writing to agree. Alias dicius.
For (as touching Enditemets) if the party be not well named, both for his
name of Baptism, Surname, Mystery, or degree, and place at the first, then
can not the Alias dectus make that good which was void before. Mar.

And it appears (1. E. 4. 2: and 2. E. 4. 1. 6.) that the Addition of the
degree or mystery must always be such as the party has at the very time:
But the Addition of the place may be of such where be was at any time before,
so that then the word nuper be used there. Furthermore the Enditement must
contain the day, year, and place, in which the offense was committed. The
year, day, and place.
8. E. 5. 8: 2. H. 7. 7: 25. E. 3. 43. And therefore if the Enditement suppose
it the tenthe day of March, without any more, that is not good: But if it
be, the tenthe day of March last paste, without showing in what year, that
is good enoughe: for the certainty may be found out by the Style of the
Sessions. So it it be the tenthe day from Easter Anno 23. Elizab. that is
good: Likewise if it be in the Vtas of the holy Trinity: and it shall be
there understood to be the very day of the Vtas (videlicet) the eight day
after the feast, and not quarto die after the Vtas: But if it be in festo
Sancti Petri, it is not good, because there be diverse feasts of Saint Peter,
and none without addition, says 3 H. 7. Fitz. Enditements. 22.

If it be Anno Domini millesimo quingentesimo octuagesimo primo, the year
shall be accounted after the computation of the Church of England, and not
of Rome, or other Countries abroad. If the offense be done in the night
before midnight, the Indictment shall suppose it to be done in the day
before: and if it happen after midnight, then it must lay it to be done the
day after. If it be in festo of any Saint, it shall be construed to be in
the very day of the feast, and not in the Eve. But if the presentment be in
the Negative, or in the affirmative rising upon a Negative, as that A. has
not scowred such a Sewer, or that by the not scowring thereof such Meadows
be drowned, in these cases there needs no year nor day. Marrow.

And not only this certeintie of the time, but that of the Place also must be
contained in the Enditement for it was adjudged (25. E. 3. 43.) that a man
should not be put to aunsweare to an Enditement of killing the Kings Dear,
because there was no place named, in which the offense was done: So an
Enditement supposing a felome to be done in such a place of such a County,
where in truth there is no such place in that County, is merely doyde by
the Statutes. Place.
9. Hen. 5. cap. 1: and 18. Hen. 6. cap. 12.

If a man being stricken in Midlesex, had dyed thereof in Essex, the Books. 3.
H. 7. 12: 4. H. 7. 18: 6. H. 7. 10: 7. H. 7. 8: 10. H. 7. 28: and 11. H. 4. etc
did not agree in which of these Counties he should be endited. But the Statute
(2. and 3. E. 6. ca. 24) takes order, that if the stroke (or poisoning)
happen to be in one County, and the death in an other County, the Enditement
in the County where the death is shall be good: and likewise, that if a
murder, or felony, be done in one county, and a man becomes Accessorie
thereto in an other County, the Enditement against the Accessorie shall be
good in that County wherein he becomes Accessorie.

Where (by the way) you may see in plain words of this last Statute, that
Justices of the Peace may take Enditements of Murder, as of Murder, though M.
Fitzh. (Fol. 17.) deny it, saying, that they can not enquire of Murder saving
only as of Felony, or Manslaughter.

And you shall read of an Enditement of Murde (before them) received. 3. H. 7.
5. agreeable whereunto was the opinion of Hales, and Portman, Justices, as I
have seeene in a Reaport of Justice. Dalison.

The certainty of the name of the person, to whom the offense is done, is
also in most cases requisite. The name of the person to who^e the offense was
done.


And therefore, if the presentment be, quod bona and catalla cuiusdam ^gnoti
cepit vi and armis, or quendam ignotum deproedauit, it is not good for the
uncertainty, yet if Felonice be added, then it is both the cases a good
Enditement of Felony, because of the, Kings advantage of forfayture thereby.

You may see an Enditement ( Fitzh. Endit. 9.) quod A. verberauit, and 20.
Iaccos pretu, etc. was thought sufficient without showing to whom the Iackes
did belong: whereat Master Stanford (Fol. 95. maruaileth, saying that be saw
no cause why it should be good, unless it were for that the matter could not
be made more certain. But peradventure adventure certainty in Inditements,
was not in those days thought so needful, as now it is holden.

If the goods of a Parson of a Church be taken, the Enditement must be,
bona rectoris, and not Ecelesioe. And if the goods of the Church, then Bona
parochianorum and not Ecclesiae: If they be the goods of a Mayor and
Communaltie, and the Mayor dies before the Enditement, then it shall be bona
communitatis, says Mar. but enquire of it, because there is no such name of
Corporation.

If the Enditement be, quod A. verberauit B. and vnum equum praetu 20. ssolid.
felonice coepit, and does not say, ^psius B. yet it is good enough 30. H. 6.
Fitzh. Endit. 9. But if it be quod vnu^ equum praedicti I. coepit, and there
were no mention of I. before, then it is void 9. E. 4. 1.

If the goods of a man be taken, and he makes his Executors, and dies, the
Enditement shall be, bona testatoris, but if they were taken after his death,
it shall be, bona testatoris in custodia Executorum existentia. If the
Enditement be, quod A. furatus est tunicam hominis ignoti, quem inuenit
mortuum, that is not good. 11. R. 2. Fitz. Endit. 15. If a man take away a
coat Armor, which hangs over a Loombe in a Church, the Enditement shall
say, bona executoris of him whose Loombe it is: but if a grave Stone be taken
away, the Enditement shall be, bona Ecclesiae: Mar. If my goods be taken by a
Trespassor, and an other takes them from him, the Enditement shall be, bona of
him which had the last possion. But if I bail goods to one, from whom they be
robbed then it shall be, bona of me in his keeping Mar. If an Enditement be,
bona Capallae in custodia, etc. or bona Domus, or Ecclesiae tempore vacationis,
it is good 7. E. 4. 14

The name (and value) of the thing in which the offense is committed, ought
also to be comprised in the Enditement: for an Enditement of the taking bona
and catalla, whether it be in Trespass or Felony, is not good, for the
uncertainty what goods they be: And if it be of dead things, it may be bona
and catalla expressing the names thereof in certainetie: But if it be of things
living, it shall not say bona and catalla but equum, bouem, onem, etc. The ^ame
and value of the thing.


Again the value (or price) of the thing is commonly to be declared: in
Felony, to make it appear from petit Larcenie: and in Trespass, to aggrauate
the fault and fine: But yet an Enditement of the taking of beasts
feraenaturae, as dear, hares, partridges, or phesantes, is not good, unless
they be taken in a Park, or Warrein, that be liberties. 8. E. 4. 5. So of
Charters, because their value can not be esteemed.

In all cases (says M. Marrow) where the number ought to be expressed in the
Enditement, there also it must be said, praetij, or ad valentiam: as if it be
of the taking of doves in a douehouse, or young hawks in a wood: And where it
is of a live thing, or things, it must be praetij: and so of a dead thing in
the singular number: but if it be of dead things in the plural number, then it
must be ad valentiam and not praetij. Praetis and not ad valentiam etc.
Again, if it be of a dead thing that goes by weight, or measure, the form
is to say praetij, and not ad valentiam.

If the Enditement be of taking away Coin, which is not current, it shall say
praetij: otherwise it is of money current, because that carries his value and
price with it. If it be quod proditorie facit grossos, veldenarios, it shall
be, ad valentiam, and it shall not say, 20. libras in denari^s, or in pecunia
Domini Regis, but ad instar pecuniae Domini Regis. Mar.

Sundry other dainty and nice differences does M. Marrow make, where a man
shall say praetis, and where ad valentiam, binding the Enditement to that rule
which the Register takes for original Writs of Trespass: But for as much as
Nele (9. E. 4. 26) says, that Enditements be not tied to any such form, and
because that rule of the Register is not very constantly observed in Trespasles
themselves, as a thing not material in the Opinion Of M. Fitzh. in his Not.
Br. (Fol. 88.) I thought it best to make choice of these (that I have) for
publicque use, and to leave the rest for private learning.

To the further certainty of the Enditement, the manner of the fact it self,
and the nature of the offense, ought to be mentioned also, for if the
Enditement be, quod A. captum profelonia, felanice and voluntaerie ad largum
ire permisit, this lacks the certainty for what felony he was taken, and is
thereby void 8. E. 4. 3. So, if it be, that a man made 100, shillings Of
Alchimie ad instar pecuniae Domina Reginae, and do not show like to what
money, as groates, or shillings, etc. it is void Fitzh. Endit. 10. The manner
of the fact, and nature of the offece
If the Enditement be, that a man is a common theeese, without the wing
especially, in what thing, it is noting worth 22. lib. Afs. Pl. 75. And so, if
it be of a general extortion against an Ordinary, without showing in what,
by 25. E. 3. Stat. 3. cap. 9. And so also, if the Enditement stand upon these
terms Only, Infidiatores viarum, and depopulatores agrorum, by 4. H. 4. cap.
2. And there upon the Court said, (17. E. 4. 4.) that upon such an Enditement,
the party shall be dismissed. Howbeit the Commission of the Peace has the
words, in infidys iacuerint, but it goes further, ad bentem nostraem
maybemandam.

Neither is it good in an Enditement against an Accessorie. to say, that he
received the goods, without telling, that he received 25. E. 3. 39: nor
without telling, that he (knowing it) received him feloniously 7. H. 6. 42.
unless he receive one that is attainted of felony in the same County: for
then heee must at his peril take knowledge of the Attainder, and so no suehe
mention of knowledge needs to be used, as it is holden 8. E. 4. 3. Sed quere
inde.

And if such an Enditement be, Sciens ipsas quatuor homines feloniam, etc.
fecisse, apud D. felonicee recepit, it is not good, for that it shows not,
which of them he received 30. H. 6. cap. 2.

Concerning the nature of the offense, this is to be observed, that in an
Enditement of treason (presentable before the Justices of Peace) the word
Proditorie ought to be used. In the Enditement of Murder, murdranit is
necessary. 9. E. 4. 26. for if it be, quod A. occidit B, malilia praecogitata
it is not enough, because one man may kill an other so, in a Wager of Battle,
and yet be no muderer. And for the same reason, if it be of Ma^slaughter, it
must be Felonice.

An Enditement was, that the son had taken the sick father, and carried him
into the cold weather, whereof he died, but it was disallowed because it lacked
felonice. Fitzh. Endit. 3. Again, if the Enditement be of Burglarie, then must
be Burglariter: if of Rape, then Felonice rapuit, for (without rapuit) it
suffiseth not to say, Felonice caepit Aliciam, and eam carnalster cognouit.

If it be, Furatus est, it seems to Marrow to be good without the word
felonice, but 18. E. 4. 10. is against him.

If it be felonice abduxit vnum equnm, it is not of value without saying,
caepit, neither is caepit good alone, without abduxit: for it must be felonice
caepit and Abduxit. Fitzh. Endit. 2. And if it be, felonice succidit arbores,
and illas asportauit: or, vi and armis succidit arbores, and felonice
asportauit, neither of thea^ will make it Felony, because the trees be a part
of the freeholde, whereof no felony can be committed: But if it be, vi and
armis sucidit arbores, and eas felonice (at an other day after) caepit and
asportauit, that will make it Felony, by reason that the seueraunce of the
trees from the freeholde, and the taking, were at diverse times. Mairr.

And albeit the Enditement be of a Mayheme, it must say, felonice n^^yhem^mit,
and yet mayheme is no Felony, but an heinous, and (as it were) a Felonious
Trespass But where in an Enditement of felony, the word felonice wants,
there the Enditement may nevertheless stand good to make it a Tiespasse. 2.
H. 7. 7:6. H. 7. 4: and 18. E. 4. 10.

And in an Enditement of Trespass, it seems that the words contra pacem
ought to be yet still: But the necessity of the words, vi and armis, (viz.)
cum baculis, cultellis etc. be taken away by the Staute. 37. H. 8. ca. 8.
Nevertheless M. Stamf. (F. 94.) is of the opinion, ye it is not amiss to use
those words, so long as the circumstances of the fact do require them, for
(says he) The circumstances of an act, do either aggrauate, or diminishe the
offense therein. If the Enditement be, of forcible entire, then the words vi
and armis be needelesse, because they are necessarily employed in the Forcc,
Mar. And if the Enditement be founded upon a Statut, it ought to say, contra
formam Statuti, or (where many statutes do concern one offense, as in the
case of Liueries and such like) contra formam disersorum Statutorum. But it is
not of necessity, that the Statue be rehearsed, but only that the offense
against the Statute be sufficiently desribed.

Thus far of these points. But now let us with a few words consider what
Enditementes be receiueable by the Justices of Peace, and what ought to be
rejected by them.

Generally, they may receive Enditements before them selves, of all causes,
being either within their Commission, or within Ye Statuts whereof they have to
enquire. Enditemeets to be received or rejected.
And they may also receive Enditementes taken before the Shirife in his Turn
lawfully, that is to say, so that the Tarne be holden within the month after
Easter, or within the month after Michaelmas, and so that those Enditements or
Presentmentes be indented and sealed between the Shirife and the Jurors, and
so that they be made by the Dth of twelve men at the least and that those
Jurors be of good fame and Legales homines, and may dispend yearly twenty
shilings of Freehold, or twenty six shillings eight pence of Copiehold W. 2.
ca. 14: 1. E. 3. ca. 17: 31. E. 3. ca. 14: 1. E. 4. ca. 2: and 1. R. 3. ca. 4:
And for this purpose the said Statute (1. E. 4. ca. 2.) binds the Shirife to
certify to the Iustces of Peace at their next Scssions, the Enditementes
found in hi Turn or Lawdaye. It seems also (by way of admitting) in the
Book (27. H. 8. 2.) that the like ought to be done of the Presentiments of
felony in any Leete, by virtue of the said Statute of 1. E. 4. ca. 2: But that
is further to be enquired of, for I find no better Warrant for it. This is
certain, that Justices of the Peace ought to receive Enditementes found in any
Lectes or Lawdayes upon the Statute made for the breeding of horses: to which
end also, the Courtholders of such Leetes are bound to certify the same unto
them within the spare of forty days. 32. H. 8. ca. 13.

Justices of the Peace have none auctoritis to receive an Enditement, of the
killing of a man se defendendo, says Stamf. 15. as he had heard say. But
enquire further thereof: for though it be not felony, as appears by the
Statute of Glo. c. 9. Yet be their other words in their Commission large enough
to give them power to hear and determine such an offense. But they are not to
receive an Enditement of the killing of a Heart proclaimed, for the Jurisdiction
of it belongs to the Justices of the Forest. 21. H. 7. 30. Fineux. And as it
seems) they may reject an Enditement that finds any matter of Record, as
Vtlawrie, or such like, unless it be showed unto the Jurors sub pede sigilli:
for Jurors are to find matters in deed only, and not of Record, 1. H. 7.
6: and 3. H. 7. 1. and 10: And so, if the Shirife will offer Enditementes of
Liueries, Rauishment of Women, or of Felonies by Statutes, or of such other
causes, whereof they have no power to enquire in their Turns, the Justices of
the Peace ought to relect them, 4. E. 4. 31: 8. E. 4. 5: 22. E. 4. 22: and
Stanford. 87.

Thus much for the better remembrance of our Justice of the Peace, I thougt to
say of Enditementes, the rather because it behooves him to Judge of them, and
for that they be the chief ground work whereupon the whole Trial is
afterward to be built and framed.

Of the Presentementes and Informations of Officers, and other men.
CAP. VI.
Having showed how these Justices take knowledge by the labor of Jurors in
Enquests, it follows to declare also how they may have understanding by
other men: And that is to be done, either by the presentment of persons
publicque, or by the information of private men.

In some cases therefore, these Justices may hear one an other: for every
Justice of the Peace, may (upon his proper knowledge) make Presentment at the
Sessions of any offense done against the Acts (2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. ca. 8:
and 5. Eliza. ca. 13.) concerning the amendment of the High ways. Presentmets
of Justices of peace and constables.
And in this, and such like cases, his reaport has the force of a Presentment
of twelve men: So that he and his fellows may procee upon it. 21. H. 6. 5. Of
like value is a Presentment made at the next Sessions by Searchers appointed to
examine the true making of Tile. 17. E. 4. ca. 4. And of like strength also (as
I think) is the presentment of the Constables concerning sundry poinctes
contained in the Statute of Winchester. 13. E. 1.

This Court may also be given to understand by the means of private men: and
that either for the Queen only, or for the Queen and them selves, or in some
special causes for them selves without the Queen. Informatio^ by private men.


That which is for the benefit of the Queen, or for her and the party, is
sometimes moved by the free offer of him that opens the matter, and sometimes
wrought by commandment of the Court.

The free motion of the party, is sometimes by word only, which is properly
but a Suggestion: and sometimes by writing, named, a Bill, plaint, Complaint,
or Information: all which be not always of one force in this business. Free
and Voluntary, information.


For, albeit that we read (1. E. 5. 6.) that the Court of Chauncerie will
sometimes both take knowledge, and also award Process, upon an Information by
word in the behalf Of the Prince, and that 39. H. 6. 41. also admits such a
matter: Yet I thinks that before Justices of the Peace, these suggestions and
Informations both (be they by word, or writing) are but of the force to
stir up the Justices to recommende the cause to the Enquest, and not to award
any Process upon them: unless it be in certain causes, where that validity
is specially given them by the Statutes, as you shall hereafter perceive.

There was once a time (I confess) when Justices of the Peace might have
awarded Process upon an Information for the King only) of offenses against any
penal laws, even as they may yet upon Enditementes against the Peace: But
that lasted not long, and therefore that course is holden now in special
Statutes only.

Nevertheless, at cuerie Sessions (says Judge Prisot. 35. H. 6. 15.) the
Justices of the Peace do use to make Proclamation, that if any will inform for
the Prince, he shall be heard: and thereupon any man may come in, and may both
inform the Justices of the Peace, and give evidence to the Enquest without
danger of Conspiracy, by the opinion of the Court in the last said book.

And as that which arises upon Presentment or Enditement, is properly called
the suit of the Queen: So this Other (whether it be by Bill, plaint,
Complaint, or Information, is most aptly termed the suit of the party, at
whose suit the Justices Of the Peace may hear of the abuse of Innekeepers, and
Victuallers, and of Extortions, and Regratories and perhaps of higher
offenses also, either for him self or for the Queen, but of the other
Articles in the Commission, at the suit of the Queen only, by ye express
form of the words in the last Assignau^mus of the Commission of the Peace, But
therein among other, some amendment (if I be not deceiueb) is to be desired: if
it be not meant ye they shall hold plea of Appeals between party and party,
which the Statute 8. H. 6. c. 10. seems also to allow unto them, In other
Statuts at large such rules are to be followed, as they them selves do
prescribe.

And in this Information, the Statute of Additions (1. H. 5. ca. 5.) seems
upon the bare words to have no place, for Informations be not mentioned in it
and upon that reason the Court (13. H. 7. 21.) did hold it clear, that if
Rescous be returned by the Shirife, against certain persons without their
Addititions, yet in ye case they may well be Vtlawed upon it.

The other compulsorie informatio^, grows by examination Of witnesses called
into the Court, and is set forth in the Statute of Drouers, and Badgers, (5.
Eliz. ca. 12.) where it appears, that upon the examination of two lawful
witnesses, the Justices of Peace may make Process, as if it were upon an
Inquisition of twelve men. Forced Information.


The like may they do, upon the Statute of Armor 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. ca.
2. Suit between party and party.
And the berie like also may they do upon the Statute made against
Forstallers. 5. E. 6. ca. 14. which last said Statute seems (for this point)
to have been followed, as a Pattern, by ye other two: so right they tread in ye
steps of ye same. Herunto also you may add, the examination of the M and
Marmers of ships, wherein corn or victual shall be transported against the
meaning of the Statute 1. and 2. Phil.and Mar. ca. 5.

Thus much, of the knowledge of cause exhibited by such as either do it at
large for the Queen only to have the offense punished, or be special1y
allured thereto by regard of benefit growing in common to them with the Queen
thereby. Now of those that seek to inform the Court for the profit due to
them selves alone.

The knowledge that comes this way, is by the private suit, and proper action
of the party, and is therefore in the Statute (11. H. 6. ca. 6.) termed a
suit between party and party, whereof that Statute had no less
consideration, than of those other suits that be for the Queen her self: and
therefore provided, that they also should not be discontinued by new
Commissions of the Peace to be made.

I know, that there be not many Statuts which do give power to ye Justices of
Peace, to hold Plea between party and party, and I think it has not been
often experimented upon those very Statutes which do give it: and how the
Judges do expound this very Statute I can not tell.

Never the less, because I may neither wittingly conceal any such part of
their auctority and Jurisdiction, although it were but my opinion, nor safely
reaport it without some proof, I will give you one example, of this kind (as
I take it) and leave the rest further search.

The Justices of Peace have power to enquire, hear and determine, of all the
defaultes against the Statute (made 23. H. 6. ca. 11.) concerning ye leuying of
the wages of ye knights of the Parliament) as well by enquire at the kings
suit, as by action at the suit of ye party.

In this and such like (as in Appeals by warrant of the large words of the
Commission as has been said) the Justices of Peace ought to proceed after the
usual manner of ather Courts of Record at the Common law, (if I do not
miscall it) and therefore I will go no further with it, but will prosecute that
hearing and determining that more properly pertains unto them, if first I may
show you, how they are sometimes prevented in that behalf.

Of the Impedimentes of proceading upon Enditements, before the Justices of
Peace.
CAP. VII.
IT falls out not seldom, when Justices of the Peace haus taken an End^ement
found before them, that they can not proceed to hearing and determining upon
it: either because it is grounded upon some such Statute as gives unto them no
further power, but only to enquire thereof: or else because the Enditement is
taken out of their hands by Certiorari, and conveyed to Justices of a higher
authority, at the solicitation and by the means of some parties grieved, to
the end that either they may trauerse, them above, or there avoid them for
insufficiency of form or matter.

And therefore, Justices of the Peace may only enquire, of certain the
offenses against the Acts. 1. El. ca. 2: and ca. 3:5. El. ca. 1:13. El. cap.
2. touching the acknowledging of the Queens supremacy, or the service of God,
or coming to the Church, or the stablishment of true religion: as you may
see. 23. El. cap. 1.

And they may only enquire, of any the Treasons, or Misprisions of treasons,
made by the same Act. 23. El. ca. 1.

Neither can they go any further, than only to enquire of, and to endite the
offenders against any the Articles of the Act made (23. El. ca. 2.)
concerning seditious rumors against the Queen.

In the rest (so far as I have found) their power of Inquiry is accompanied
with the authority to hear and determine also. For this want of Jurisdiction
is not found in the Commission of the Peace it self, but only in cortaine
Statutes that (for weighty causes) do restreine this further proceeding.

By what means such Enditements shall be removed to those higher Courts, I
will show you when I come to speak of Certifying the Records of the Sessions:
and will now go on with those other Enditements that be removed by labor of
the parties.

Albert, that in the removing of pleas between party and party, from
inferior to higher Courts, by Tolt, Ponc, Recordare; etc. there was wont to
be a probable cause alleged, for which the same were removed: yet in this
case of ye Crown there needs no cause to be comprised in the writ of
Certiorari, because they all be the Courts of the Queen, and it breeds
neither injury to the offendour, nor loss to any other person, in what Court
soever the offense be tried.

This Certiorari then, may command either the Record it self, or Tenorem
Recordi, to be sent up: and it ought to be obeyed accordingly. Enditements
removed by labor of the parties.
For, upon fail thereof first an Ali^s, then a Pluries (vel Causam nobis
significes) and lastly an Attachment, shall go out against them that should
send it, as M. Fitzh. notes in his Not. Br. Fol. 245. but I have heard that
they use also Sub poena at this day.

And albeit the Certiorari be a Supersede as of it self, yet may the party
upon the Certiorari purchased, have a Supersede as also, directed to the
Shirife, and commau^ding him that he arrest him not upon that Record, before
the Justices of Peace, Fitzh. ibid. Fol. 237. In which place also he doubts,
whether the Justices of Peace them selves ought of duty to awarde their own
Supersedeas to the same effect, after that the writ of Cortiorari is brought to
their hands.

This writ of Certiorari is ever directed to the Justices of Peace, and yet (as
you have heard) the Custos Rotulorum only has the keeping of these Records:
but the ancient Commission of the Peace had no Custos Rotulorum specially
named in them, and then this certifying belonged to them all, which form the
Writ retains to this day, And if it fall in question whether such a
Certiorari were delivered to the Justices of Peace, or no, that must be tried
(says the Book 10. H. 7. 24.) by the verdit of twelve men.

Now, if a Certiorari come to the Justices of Peace to remove an Enditement,
and the party sueth not to have it removed, but suffers it to lie still, the
Justices of Peace may proceed notwithstanding the Writ, as Hubbert the Kings
Attorney said, 6. H. 7. 16. for otherwise the trial of a Felon, if the
Enditement Were of Felony, might be delayed and deluded also: But yet Keble
held opinion against him, and was fearful that in such a case it might prove
felony to make execution after such a writ.

And if a Certiorari come to the Justices of Peace to remove an Enditement, and
in truth the Enditement was not taken till after the date of that Certiorari,
yet if the Enditement be removed thereby, it is good enough, for that they
both be the Queens Courts. 1 R. 3. 4.

In the making of a Certificat upon this Certiorari, the Justices of the Peace
ought neither to omit that which both auctorize them, nor to exceed that
which belongs unto them.

For, on the one side, if they certify an Enditement of Felony, as taken
coram Iusticiarys ad pacem, it is not enough, without saying further, Nec non
ad diuersas felonias, etc. and otherwise, it is doubtful, whether the Endited
shall be quite dismissed, or no: because the Justices of Peace have then no
Record at all remaining with them, for the Clarke of the Peace makes an
entry accordingly, and that Record which they sent up is insufficie^t. And
therefore, the Clarke of the Crown was forbidden to receive any such
Certificat. 12. H. 7. 25.

On the other side, if they certify one Enditement of felony not determined,
into the Kings Benche, they ought not Without warrant to certify an other
Record of the acquitall of that Enditee for the same matter: for, nothing
ought by them to be sent thither without warrant, but that which is
executorie, and needs the help of that Court. 8. E. 4. 18.

And if a Certiorari be, to send up the Enditement of A. in which Enditement
some others be endited together with the same A. yet need not the Justice of
Peace to make Certificat concerning any but A. 6. E. 4. 5. For although they
be named jointly, yet be they endited severally (as I have said before) and
the Queen may pardon A. without forgiving the other, 6. E. 4. 5. Markam.

Finally, it is noted (8. H. 5. 5.) that Hankforde the chief Justice of the
Kings Benche, abserued this order, that he which brought thither an Enditement
taken before Justices of the Peace, should endorce his name upon the backeside
of it: which I note, not to teach them of the Kings Benche, but to let
Justices of the Peace see, that there is some heed to be taken of him by whom
they send up their Enditements.

Of the Process upon Enditements, and Informations.
CAP. VIII.
THe Court being thus made privy and possessed of causes, must of duty
proceed to the handeling (or hearing) and trial of them: the which because
it can not indifferently do, unless it keep one ear for the offendour, that
he also may be heard in his own discharge, as others were heard to lay the
charge upon him, the manner is, to awarde Process against him to come in and
to answer.

For commonly, an Enditement, or Information (being but an accusation, or
declaration against a man) is of none other force but to put him to answer.

And thereof all Process has the name, because it proceeds or goes out
upon former matter, either Original, or Judicial. Process, whereof it is named.
How be it I make difference, whether this process be grounded upon an
Enditemet, or upon some other information: for they be not all one, unless it
be (in a few Statutes) so specially provided: Although the Statute (33. H. 8.
cap. 10.) did once conioyne and coople them.

The power of making process upon Enditements is given by erpresse words in
the end of the second Assignauimus of the Commission: and in other cases
(where it is not namely given) it is emplyed of congruencs (or rather of
necessity) in the words, hear and determine, which not be performed,
unless the party do either come in, graiis, or be brought in by process.
Authority to make out process.


This Process ought always to be in the name of the Queen, thus: Elizabeth
Dei gratia, etc. Vicecomiti Kancia, etc.

And the Test thereof may be under the names of any two Justices, so that it
be made sitting the Court in the Sessions. Test, of the Process.
Commission del Peace, and Brook Tit. Peace. 6. and 7.

But now, whereas the Commission gives to the present Justices authority to
make process upon Enditements, taken as well before former Justices, as before
them selves, all that doing was wont to be discontinued in Law by the coming
out of a new Commission of the Peace, until that the Statute (11. H. 6. ca.
6.) did establish, that no pleas, suits, or process, to be taken before
Justices of ye Peace should be discontinued by a new Commission of the Peace
to be made, but that they should stand in their strength, and that the
Justices assigned in ye same new Commission, should have power to continue ye
same, and to hear and determine all that which depends upon them. New
commissions of Peace, do not discontinue the old process.
And of the like effect, there is a branch in the latter end of the Statute,
1. E. 6. ca. 7.

Furthermore, whereas Shirifes and their Baylifes, used to arrest men, and to
proceed upon Enditementes found in their Turns or Lawdayes, an other
Statute made (1. E. 4. ca. 2.) wringeth that power out of their hands, and
delivers it over to the Justices of the Peace also, appoynting them to
proceed upon them, as if they had been found before themselves. Enditement
before Shirifes.


Now, seeing that this Process of the Sessions is sent out to this end, that
either ye party shall come in to answer, and be iusticed by law, or else
that he shall for his contumacie be deprived of the benefitte of law (for so
much in effect do the words of the Commission, Quensque capiantur, reddant
se, aut vtlagentur, importe in them) it follows, that in all cases of
Enditements, (if the party be returned insufficient) the Process of
Vtlawrie, lies against the offender, if he be not taken before, or do not
otherwise offer and yield himself. Process of vtlawrie.


But a good while after that Commissions of the Peace were first awarded, there
was not given by them any power to make out any Process of Vtlawrie, for I
have seen a Commission of the Peace (20. Ed. 3. Part. 1. Patent in dorso.)
wherein were words auctorizing the Commissioners to arrest all such as
should be endited before them: but by and by this follows, Et ad nomina
eorum qui fugerint, and coram vobis iusticiari noluerint, certificandum in
Cancellaria etc. So that if they might not get them arrested, they could
go no further but to certifye their names.

The mean to this Vtlawrie is not one in all cases: for upon Enditements of
Trespasses against the Peace, or such other contemptes, the Process is one:
and upon Enditements of Treason or Felony, it is another. The general
Process, upon Enditements of Trespass.


Upon Enditements of Trespass against fhe Peace, of Conspiracies, and of
Routes in presence of the Justices, or in affraye of the people, if the
offenders may not be found, nor brought in by Attachment, or Distress, (by
reason of their insufficiency) the Process Process of Vtlawrie is to be
awarded, by the Statutes. 18. E. 3. Stat. 1: and. 18. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. ca. 5.
The like is against such as be endited upon the Statute of Liueries. 8.
Henry. 6. cap. 4.

Abd a Venire facias first, and then (if thereupon he be returned
sufficient) a Distringas, and so the same Procese infinite til he come in: but
if a Nihil habet. etc. be at the first returned against him, then a Capias
alias, and pluries, and after an Exigent, (as it seems by Master Marrow, and
the old precedents agreeing with the Common Course as I take it,) is the
ordinary Process upon al enditements (not sounding in Felony or greater
offece) whether they be of Trespaslse against the Peace, or of contemptes
against penal Laws, unless it be otherwise specially provided by those same
Statutes whereupon such Enditements be altogether grounded: Of which sort
these be some.

The statute (22. H. 8. c. 5.) concerning Bridges in Highwayes, allows such
Process as the Justices of the Kings Benche do use, or such as the Justices
of the Peace them selves shall think meet by their Discretion, for the speedy
amendment of those Bridges. Special Process.


Upon Enditements of Liueries, maintenance Archerie, unlawful games etc. by
the Statute (33. Hen. 8. cap. 10.) there was given one Venire facias, one
Capias, and then the Exigent: But it is to be weighed, whether the Statute
(37. Hentie. 8. cap. 7.) which utterly replealeth that Statute (53. Henry.
8.) do transfer the manner of that Process unto the auntiente Quarter
Sessions, as it does sundry other parts of the said Statute.

The Statute of Laborers (23. H. 6. cap. 13) gave (after Enditements grounded
therevppon) an Attachement, Capias, and Exigent. But I think it no great doubt
but that that point is taken away by the new Statute of Laborers (5.
Elizabeth. cap. 4.) as well as all the residue of that Statute is.

The Statute 5. E. 6. ca. 25. giuth power to the Justices of Peace to enquire
of Alehouse keepers whether they have done any act to the breach of their
Recognusa^ce. Procrsse upon Recognusance.
And if any such matter be presented, then to awarde Process against the
offender to show why he should not forfeite his Recognusaunce: but what this
Process shall be I will not determine. For I do not find that in any other
case, though it appear that any man has forseited any Recognusaunce, that
the Justices of the Peace can awarde any Scire facias, or other Process to
call him in upon it, but are rather to certify the same into higher Courts,
that from thence Process may issue out, to call the party to answer
thereupon.

Some other Statutes there be, that have extended ye authority of the
Justices of Peace (in sending Process) beyond the bounds of their own
Commission. Process, in to other Shires.
For, by the Statute (1. E. 6. ca. 1.) three Justices of ye Peace (the one
being of the Quorum) may make Process against such as be there upon endited
for deprauing the Sacrament, by two Writtes of Capias, and the Exigent, and by
Capias vilagatum, into any place within the Queens dominions.

So, if a Servant depart into an other Shire, the Justices of the Peace of
that Shire, (where the departure was) may grant Writs of Capias, to the
Shirife of the other Shire, (where the Servant is) returnable before
themselves. 5. El. ca. 4.

The like may they do (by the said Statute (22. H. 8. ca. 5.) where a decayed
Bridges lies in one Shire, and the person or lands (chargeable thereto) do
lie in an other Shire.

But if the Enditement be in one ^o^tie, and the Enditee be named to be then
or Nuper dwelling in an other County, and there is a special course of
Process in that behalf for his benefit appointed by the Statute (8. H. 6.
cap. 10.) both for Treson, Felony, and Trespass: for (before any Exigent,
shall be awarded) one Capias must be sent out, and returned, and then a
second Capi^^ shall go (into the County where he is supposed in the
Enditemente to be or to have been conuersante) retourneable (before the same
Justices of the Peace, before whom the Enditement was taken) three months at
the least after the date thereof (for all Counties be now hold from month to
month by 2. Edward. 6. ca. 25.) by which last Writ, the Shirife shall be
commanded to take the Enditee, if he may be found within his Bay liwike,
and if not, then to make Proclamation in two Counties (before the return of
that Writ,) that the Enditee shall appear before the said Justices of the
said County (where the Enditements was taken) at the day contained in the
last said Capias, to aunsweare to his offense, at which day if he come not,
then the Exigent shall be awarded against him, and otherwise not.

And by ye equity of this Statute of (8. H. 6. ca. 10) (says M. Mar.) if the
Enditee be imprisoned in an other County, the Justices of Prace may awarde an
Habe^ corpus to remove him before them.

At this Process of Vtlawrie may be staid by a Super sedeas And Fitz. in his
Not: Br. (^o. 237.) has the case, that if an Exigent go out upon an
Enditement of Trespasle found bedore Justices of the Peace, fhe party may
find suerties in the Chauncerie (body for body) to appear at the day of the
Writ, and may then also have a Supersedeas from there to ye Shirife,
commanding him to forbear to take him, and to let him go if he have then
already taken him for ye cause. Supersedeas, to stay Procesle.
And again you may see in the new book of Entrees (Fo. 546) ye Process upon
such an Enditement stayed by a Supers;edeas issuing from one Justice of the
Peace alone, and testifying ye the party came before him and found suerties de
fine assidendo. But, as I believe ye former, so will I not persuade ye practice
of ye latter, because I think it not in ye lawful power of any one Justice of
ye Peace, to award any such warrant, but it must be done by two Justices at the
least.

I have yet to speak of Process upon Enditements of Treason and Felonies,
wherein I will be short, that I may pass over to other things. Process upon
Enditements of Treason, and Felonies, etc.


The Process upon an enditement of Treason, forcountersaying money, is by Capias
only, and so set forth, 3. H. 5. ca. 7. neither is there any other Treason
whereupon the Justices of the Peace may awarde Process.

It seems by M. Marrowe, that the Process at the common Law upon
Enditements of felony was but one Capias, and then the Exigent: But the old
Precedents (grounding the mselues upon the Statute (25. E. 3. c. 14.) do use
the mention of two Writtes of Capias before the Exigent. For that Statute
provides, that after return of Non est inuentus upon the first Capias, an
other Capias shall be incontinently awarded, whereby the Shirife shall be
commanded to seize ye cattailes of the Enditee, and safely to keep the till
the day of the Capias returned: and if he then also return Non est inuentus,
and the Enditee comes not in, the Exigent shall be awarded, and the Cattailes
shall be forfeited: But if he come and yield him, or be taken before the
return of ye second Capias, the goods and Cattels shall be saved unto him.

And here the Justices of peace have power to send into a Foreign Cou^tie:
for, whereas by ye common Law no man could be Attached, upon an Enditement or
vtlawrie of Felony, but only in ye County wherein he was Endited, or outlawed,
whereby many evil men were much encouraged, ye Statute (5. E. ca. 11.) did take
order, that Justices assigned to hear and determine Felonies) might direct
their Writtes to any County in England, to take such Enditees, whether
soever they had removed themselves. Process into For^^^ne shires.


And on the other side, if the Indictment be found in one County, and the
Enditee is therein named to be then dwelling in another County: I have told
you already (in this Chapter) for the benefit of the Enditee, what Process
belongs to it, and therefore I will in hand with Process upon Informations.

The power of making Process upon Informations, proceeds from special
Statutes, and may not therefore vary from their direction, although they vary
one from an other. Processevpon Informations.


For upon an Information, given for the Queen before Justices of the Peace,
upon the Statute of Liueries (made 8. E. 4. cap. 2.) the shall awarde such
Process, as is made upon an Original Writ of Trespass done against the
Queens Peace, because the Information it self is (by force of that Statute)
in stead of an Original Writ. Liueties.


And upon Information made unto them, that an Alehouse keeper has done any
act whereby he has forfaited his Recognusance, they may awarde Process
against him, to show why he should not forfeite his Rccognusance, by the
Statute 5. E. 6. ca 25. as has been said: But learn if that be meant of a
Scire facias, or of some other Proceffe.

Of Hearing, upon Confession.
CAP. IX.
THe party being thus brought in, (or otherwis yelding him self) to answer,
Justice requires, that he be heard to speak^ and therefore, hi^ may (as his
case will serve) either ronfessue) or deny the offense wherewith he is burdened.

And this Confession is of two sorts, free, or forced: and that former is of
two kinds also, absolutc, or after a manner. Free confession.


In the open (or absolute) Confession, he takes the fault upon him, and
peeldeth himself simply to such pain as the Court will inflid for it.

And this free Consfession is of great force in Law: for if it be upon an
Enditement of Batteric, and (after such confession had for the Queen) the
party beaten will also bring his Action of Trefpns for his own damage, then
shall the defendant be concluded by his confesession upon the Enditement, so
that he shall not be received to say the contrary. 9. H. 4. 8: and 11. H. 4.
65.

But the other, (which I call Consession after a manner)is only a not denying,
in which the party both cunningly, and (after a sort)take the fault upon
him, without confessing him self guilty thereof: as where he puts him
self in Gratiam Reginae without any more, or by Proteftation that heacute;e
is not guilty, pleads his pardon: And such a Confession (if I may so call
it) both not so conclude him, but that he may afterward plead Not guilty in
any Action brought aqainst him 9. H. 6. 60. Cur. and 11. H. 4. 65.

The forced Confession, whereof I spoke, is that which the Justices do wring
out Of ye party by the Examination of him, in such cases wherein it is
permitted. Forced Confefsion.
But because I intend to speak of Examination, by it self, I will reserve
this till I come to that.

Of hearing, by Discretion.
CAP. X.
WHether the offender, shall freely confess;ss the fault, or finely yield him
self to Grace, or pleace his pardon without confessing it, yet then is that
matter fullye heard, and the Court made ready to determine of it. But if he
shall deny the fact, then must some other course of Hearing (or trial) be
taken for it. And that is in some cases, by Dis;cretion of the Justices: in
some other cases by Examination of the parties or witnesses, and in s;ome other
cases by Ccrtificat of other men, but in meste cases by Trauers;e or
Araignement, both which last trialles are performed by the verdite of
twelve. For Ius;tices of the Peace, can not (upon an Indictment of Mayheme)
make the Trial by their own view, or inspection, as the Justices of ye Kings
Bench may, faith Mar.

The Statute (11. H. 7. cap. 3.) pretending, that offenses committed against
the Statutes Of Riotes, Retainers, Maintenaunces, Embraceries, Extortions,
Unlawful games, and such like mis;demeanours, were neither accordingly
punis;head before Justices of the Peace, by reason of the great corruption, and
favor of the Enquestes, fworne and charged there upon to enquire before
them, nor could be otherwise conveniently corrected by order of Law, wulesse
they were found and presented by twelve men thereto duly sworn, did enact,
that from thenceforth Iuftices of the Peace, upon information made (for the
King) before them should have full power by their Diseretion, to hear and
determine all offenses and contempts against many penal laws, then enforce,
and not repealed.

But (as one said) Exbonis legibus, mala exempla: So, the Parliament (1. H. 8.
cap. 1.) complained, that many men were deceitfully entrapped, and wrongfully
condemned thereby, and therefore it resumed that power: yea, and the King
withal chopped off the heads of some that had filled his fathers purse by the
execution of that and some other penal Statutes.

So that now again the Trial of offenses ought (for the most part) to
proceed either after the general order of the common Law, or upon such
special examination or other proof, as some Statutes do give in special
cases: and this hearing at liberty and discretion, has seldom airye place.

But whersoeuer it is permitted, that counsel which M. Bracton (lib. 1.)
gives, is to be hearkened unto: In Judicial hearing of a fault (says he)
besides the body of the fact it self, these seven circumstances are to be
weighed, namely, the cause, the person, the time, the place, the quantity, the
quality, and the event.

And for proof, that hearing by discretion, is yet in some sort suffered,
take this for example.

The Justices of Peace may hear by their discreation, as well by Examination,
as other wise, at the suite of the king, or of the party, the offenses done
against the Statute provided for the true making of Lile. 17. E. 4. cap. 4.

But how far this discreation, and the word otherwise may be extended in
this, and such like cases, it can not well be foretold, for it is referred to
them, and they must take counsel exre, and extempore, for it.

Of Hearing (or Trial) upon Examination.
CAP. XI.
THe obstinacy of evil dooers that would show no conscience in acknowleging
of their faults, and the corruption of Jurors that would present nothing,
that lay only in their own knowledges, has begotten and brought into our
Law this trial by Examination, wherewith it was not before acquainted.

And yet this manner of Trial is not loosly permitted to Justices of the
Peace, but in cases only, where, either the Statutes do generally refer
the trial to their Discretions, or else do specially auctorise them to take
the Examinations.

The Examination then, is sometimes of the offenders them selves, sometimes of
Witnesses that can speak to the matter, and sometimes both of the parties and
witnesses: of every of which I will give you an authority, or twain, and
leave the rest to your own reading and examination.

Upon appearance (after Procesle) against the offenders of these Statutes of
Liueries, Liueries.
the Justices of Peace may examine them, and there upon convince them so, as if
they were thereof convict by Enquest, 8. H. 6. cap. 4: and 8. E. 4. cap. 2.

They may also call before them, and examine, all such as shall be suspected to
keep Dear hayes, Dear hayes etc.
or Buckstalles, or that use to stalk or to take young Herons against this
Statute, and may (finding them faulty) commit them to prison, till they
find Suerties to pay the forfeiture 19. H. 7. ca. 11.

And because it is often seen, that those which have committed an offense,
will also increase their fault by denying of the same, therefore some Statutes
(as I said) do appoint, that the Justices of Peace shall take the examination
of others, besides the offenders themselves.

And thereupon, the users of false privy tokens, False tokens.
or of counterfaite Letters, may be tried out by the examination of Witnesses,
33. H. 8. cap. 1.

And the unlawful takers of Dawkes Hawks eggs, Hawks egg^.
or Swans eggs, may be detected and co^uinced by information, and such proofs,
11. H. 7. ca. 17.

Now, whereas some Statutes do enable the Justices of Peace to hear and
determine, by the general use of the word Examination, without showing of what
persons: it seems to me, that they may there upon examine as well ye parties,
as other witnesses.

Such a one is the Statute provided for ye true making of Tiles, Tiles.
17. E. 4. cip. 4: Such an other is the Statute made for the examination of
offenses done by Coroners 1. H. 8. ca. 7: Coroners.
And such an other also, is the Statute ordained for the examination of putting
into Foreits, or Wastes, any stoned Horses being under the height of fifteen
handfulles. Stoned Horses.
32. H. 8. cap. 13.

Thus far of Examinations: which whether they ought to be taken upon oath, or
no, you may conjecture by that which I have already said thereof in the
first Book: and yet (for more aid toward your resolution) I say now that
these Examinations ought (in my slender judgment) to be upon Dathe, because the
trial here depends upon them, whereas those others are but to inform the
Jury toward an ^^ditement only, in so much as the parties are bound to
give the matter of them innuidence Vina voce, when the trial shall be.

Of Trial (or Hearing) by Certificat.
CAP. XII.
BEfore some other Judges, the Law has allowed Trial by sundry sorts of
Certificat: as from ye Queen's Lieuetenaunt, in the case of Escuage: from the
Bishop, in the cases of Bastardic, Bygamie, Excommunication, etc. and in some
other cases from other men: But, before Justices of the Peace, I have not
hitherto found any trial by Certificat, appointed by Statute, but in this
one case following.

If any man (being impeached upon this Statute of Armor, for not having his
appointed furniture, shall allege, that the same furniture so lacking, could
not be conveniently provided, for want of the same within the Realm, this
shall be taken for a good answer (in case it be true) but if it be denied or
trauersed, issue shall be joined upon it, and the Trial shall be only by
Certificat to be made by the L. Armor.
Chauncelor, L. Treasouror, L. President of the Counsel, L. Steward of the
Queens house, L. Privy Seal, L. Admiral, and L. Chamberlain of the said
household, or by three of them, in writing under their Seals. 4. and 5. Phil.
and Mar. cap. 2.

For, the Certificat of the offense, and of the Recognusance taken by two
Justices of the Peace, one being of the Quorum of him that has obstinately
kept a common Alehouse against the Statute 5. E. 6. cap. 25. is made a
sufficient conviction of the same offense, without further Trial. Alehouse
keeper.


Of Hearing (or Trill) by Trauerfe.
CAP. XIII
THe most solemn, and ancient Trial of the fact, against an offender that
will not con. fesse it, is that which we see performed by the berdite of twelve
good and lawful men of the Country: and it also does best con, tent and quiet
the guilty man, for that it passes by his own Countrymen, Neighbors, and
Peers, according to the ancient liberty of the Land, wherevato every free
borne man thinks him self inheritable: and therevppon it is named (Mag.
Cart. cap. 29.) Legale indicium parium suorum, the lamfull judgment of a man's
own Peers, or Equalles, because, as the Nobility, soalso the Comminalty. are
to be tried, intreason, felony, or misprision of treason, not the one by the
other, but each by men of their own estate and calling. I mean by the word
Nobility, as our own Law speaks (which calls none Noble under the degree
of a Baron) and not as men of foreign Countries do dse to Gentile birth is
accounted Noble: for we daily see that both Gentlemen and Kinghts do serve
in the Parliament as members of the Comminaltie. Nowbeit, in cases of forcible
Centrie, Riot, Rout, unlawful Assembly, or such like, they of the Nobility
shall be tried by twelve men, as well as other inferior subjects. 3. and 4.
Phil. and Mar. reported by Dalizon.

This Trial happens before Justices of the Peace, sometimes upon Trauerse,
and sometimes upon Arraignment.

But yet, some things be commune to them both: For, if the party charged will
Demurre in Law upon the euidance, the Justices ought to record his Demurrer:
So if he will plead in Iuttification any matter of Recode that is before other
Justices, they ought to give him day to bring it in. Mar. So also if the
Justices (thinking an Enditement to be doide) have discharged the prisoner
(paying his Fees) yet, upon change of their opinion, they may stay him
again, at any time before Judgment, Fitzh. Endite. 27.

But if he plead a Pardon before them, in which certain persons be excepted,
and the Queens Attorney is not present to join issue, that he which
pleads it is one of those that be excepted, then they themselves may supply
the office of the Attorney, in that behalf. 8. E. 4. 7. whereupon also I
gather this general learning, that they ought not to suffer the Queen to be
disaduauntaged, where it lies lawfully in their power to prevent it.

And if an Indictment be challenged for such cause as these Justices will not
allow, then may they seal a Bill, of that exception for the party, if he will
write and require it according to the Statute W. 2. ca. 30. as M. Mar. writes.

The Trauerse took name of the French, de Trauers. Trauerse.
which is no more than de transuerso, in Latin, signifying, on the other side:
because, as the Eaditement on the one side charge the party, so he on the
other side comes in to discharge him self. For, whereas the Arraignement
proceeds upon him that is dnwillinglye brought in by Process, the Trauerse
is (for the most part) freely tendered die the party.

To Trauerse an Enditement then, is to take issue upon the chief matter
thereof, which is none other to say, than to make contradiction, or to deny
the point of the Enditement. As in a presentment against one for beating the
servant of A. the part may come in, and may choose to say, that he did not
beat him, (which is to trauerse the matter) or that he is not the servant of
A. (which is to trauerse the cause) but he cannot say, that A. lost not his
seruica: for thereby the battery is confessed, and then of necessity it
follows, that he is a Trespasser, 31. H. 6. 12: and Brook Til. Trauerfe 182.

And the liberty of Trauerse is commonly restrained to Enditements of
Trespasses, Contemptes, Riotes, and other inferior offenses, within the
Commission, or Statutes, auctoriring the Justices of Peace: and is not dsully
ertended to Treasons, or Felonies, as you shall hereafter see.

M. Brook notes, that it is not much dsed to Trauerse Enditements before
Justices of the Peace, but rather to remove them into the King Bench, and to
Trauerse them there. Trauerse, before Instices of the Peace. stices of the
Peace.
Howbeit commun experience at this days can shelve many Trauerses before
Justices of the Peace also. And there is no doubt, but that as Justices of the
Peace have power to awarde Process, and the parties also have libetie to
speak for them selves: So (having spoken) the Justices may Hear and Determine
of their speech, whether it touch them in feeeholde, or otherwife.

For although it be holden (2. R. 3. cap. 11: 19. H. 8. 11: and Fitze. Tit.
Afs. 442. and in other books) that a man shall not be received to trauerse a
Prefentment, unless it do charge his freeholde: yet Hussy and Fairetax said
(5. H. 7. 4.) that a Presentment (not concerning freeholde) which is found
before Justices of the Peace, may be traucrsed: and whether they meante it of a
Trauerse in the Kings Bench, or before Iustistices of the Peace, it makes no
difference, because the reason is all one, that is, if Process be awarded, the
party may come in, and offer his Trauerse, and otherwise the Process should
be in baine.

Hereunto agrees Moubray (41. Ed. 3. 26.) saying further, that in a Leete
such a Presentment is not Trauersable, because out of a Leetee no Process can
be awarded upon it. And this peradventure is the reason of the book (8. E. 4.
ca. 5.) and of M. Mar. where they say that a Presentment of bloudshead found in
the Shirifes Turn, and sent (as it otgh to be) to the Justices of Peace,
cannot be trauersed before them, as whereupon they can neither make Process,
nordischarge the party by way of Plea.

So that this seems a general learning, that wheresoever any Process
adrespondendum goes out upon such an Enditemente as is trauersable, there the
party may offer, and ought to have his Trauerse.

But Marrowc says, that if a man be of an Enquest that Endited him of
Trespasle, or such like (so that upon the matter, he emdied himself) this is
so strong, that he shall never be received to Trauerse it.

It is not my meaning to pester this latter Book with Precedents: But yet for
as musc as in ye Record of one Trauerse, there is at once discovered the Style
of the Sessions, the Enditement. the Process to aunsweare, the Trauerse it
selse, the Verdite, and Judgment thereupon, the Process of execution, the
yeeldng of the parties, and the assesmet of their fines, so that it alone may
serve in stead of all, I trust it shall not be troublesome to insect it.

ALias, seict cet ad Sessiossem pacis, tentam apssd Bridgewater in comitatu
pradicto, die Martis proxime ante festu^: Sancti Mathei Apostoli annoregni Dom,
nestra Elizabethae dei gratia Anglia, Fracaea, and Hibernia Reginae, sidei
defensoris etc. vicesimo, Coram Iohanne Stowell milite, Humfrido Walron vno
magistrorum Curia Cancellariea dscta D. Reginae, and alijs socijs suis
Iusticiarijs dicta Domina Reginae ad pacem in comitatu preadicto conseruandam,
Necnon ad diuersas felorias, trangressioncs and alia malefactain code comitatu
perpetrata audienda and terminanda assignatis, per sacramentum. xij. Inratorum
extitit prasentatum, guod Johannes Long, de etc. R. M. de etc Et T. L. de etc.
cum diuersis alijs ignetis malefactoribus, and pacis dicta Dom. Reginae
perturbatoribus, modo gueriino arraiati, vnsti, and assemblati, vicesimo die
Iulij in nocte eiusdem diei, anno. etc. Vi and armis (viz)Baculis, gladijs,
clipeis, pugionibus, falcactris, and alijs armis, tam inuasiuis, guam
defensiuis, apud C. etc, clausum cuiusdam Willi. Willkt (vocatum B.) illicite,
riotose, and routose, fregerunt, and intraueru^t, and octoplauctra foeni ad
valenciam etc. adtunc and ibidem existentia, de bonis and catallis dicti Willi.
Willet adtunc ibidem iniucte illicite ceperunt and acportauerunt, contra pacen
dicta Domina Reginae etc. Et coatra formam Statuti inde editi Se prouifi.
Enditcment
Per quod praceptum fuit vicecomsti quod non omitteret etc. quin venire faceret
eos ad recpondendum etc. posteag, scilicet praedicto die Martis proxime ante
feslum Sancti Mathai A^postoli an. vicesimo supradecto, coram prafatis
Iustictarijs venerunt pradicti I. L. R. M. and T. L. in proprijs personis suis,
and habito auditu Indictamenti praedicti, seperatime dicunt, quod ipsinon sunt
inde culpabiles, Et de hoc ponunt se super patriar: Et Adam Martin qui pro
Domina Reginae in hac part sequitur, similiter etc: Ideo veniat inde Iurata
coram Iucticiarys dicta Domina Reginae ad pacem in comitatu prudicto
conseruandam asignatis etc. ad Sessione pacis apud Wells etc. die Martis
proxime post Epipbaniam Domini tunc proxime futuro tenendnm. Processc to
aynsweare.
Trauersc.
Jury.
Et qui etc. Adrecognit etc. Quia tam etc. Idem dies datue est tam prasato Adam
Martin qui sequitur etc. quam preafatis I. L. R. M.and T. L. etc. Adquas quidem
Sessiones pacis, tentas eapud W. preadict. in comitatu pradico die etc. Day
given.
Coram "DomiHo T. P. G. N. and H. P. milit. and socijs suis Iucticarijs dictea
D. Reg. adpacens in comiteatu preadicto conseruandam, Necnonad diuersas
felonias, tra^sgressiones, and alia malefacta in codem comitatu perpetreatea
audienda and terminanda assignatis, venerunt tam prafatus A. Martin qui
sequitur etc. quadm prtfati I. L. R. M. and T. L. in proprijs personis suis, Et
Iuratores praedicti, per vicecomitem Comitatus prtdicti ad hoc impanellati, and
exacti, (viz,) Iacobus F. Genesis I. G. etc. similicar veneunt, qui ad veritatem
de premissis dicendam trialti and inrati dicunt super Sacramentum suum, quod
pradicti I. L. R. M.and T. L culpabiles sunt, and eorum quil^ber culpabilis
est, de transgressione, contempiu, and riot to pradict is in Indictamento
praedicto superim specificatis, modo and forma prout superius versus eos
supponitur: Iao concessu^ est curtam, quod praedicti I. L. R. M. and T. L.
capiantur ad satistaciendum dicta D. Reg. de finibus suis casione
transgressionis, contemptus, and riottipraedictis. Verdite.
Judgment.
Capias pro fine.
Qui quidem I. L. R. M. and T L. adtunc and ibidem praesentes ibidem in Curia
pet ierunt se ad ficum dicta Domina Reginae occasion pradicta admitti: Et
indeponunt se seperatim inmisericordiam Do. Re: Et assatur finis eiusdem I. L.
per Iucticiarios praedictos, ad 3. ^. 6. ^. 8. ^: Et finis einsdem R. M.
Assessatur ad xx. ^. Ponunt se in miscricordised. Reginae
Fine assefsed.
Et assessatur finis einsdem T. L. ad quinque hbras, bona and legalis moneta
Anglia, ad opm and vsum dictae Dominae Reginae.

And this is to be noted, that this Record was after ward removed into ye
Kings Be^ch, and that the paetie was dismissed there, for want of those worder
in the Enditemente that you see vnderlined in other letters in certain parts
of the same. Enditement void.


Of Trial upon Arraigne. went, and there withal of Felonies.
CAP. XIIII.
ARraignemcnte ^ Trauerse, do not so much differ in the nature (or substance)
of the Trial it self, as in the fame. Difference, between Trauerse, and
arraignment.
For, as there is no Enditement, Trauerfable by the party, but that he may
also be arraigned upon it: So like wise is there no Editemet, where upon the
party may be arraigned, but that he may also (if he will) tender his Trauerse
unto it.

The difference then stands in this, yt commonly he (which is to be
arraigned) comes in by compulson of bond or Process, and is touched with
matter concerning life and death, or some such heinous offense, and pleads
generaliye Not Guilty to the Enditement.

Commonly I say, because althoaghe he come in freeiyc, r be endited of some
inferior offense, yet he may be nevertheless arraigned: neither is he of
necessity driven to plead Not Guilty (which runs to the fact) but may
(if the case will suffer) plead a Justification 02: matter in Law, though it
be in case of Felony.

It feemeth to have horowed the name out of the word Arraye, which is the
pannell, or Jury, because he that is arraigneo, must be tried by them, being
first call, sworn, and tried, in order for that service.

If I should rippe dand prosecute the whole learning that belongs to
arraignement, I should but Acum agere, and yet not do it halfc so well as you
may elsewhere find it: and therefore, referring yon wholifor that matter to
the learned labor of IusticeStanforde I will onIy offer to consideration, a
point or twain, whereof it specially behooves the Justices of Peace to be
advertised, and then passs oner to determining. Felonies not triable before
luctices of the Peace


The first thing ie, that there be sunorye Felonies, ano sme (Cnditementes of
Felonies, the (which as it seems to me) Justices of the Peace can not hear,
or try at all: the second, that in the handling of the very Felomes
wherewith they may deal, there be yet certain considerations peculiar to the
Justices of the Peace only, and not common to them with other Judges over
Felonies.

Justices of the Peace, can not hear the trial of the Felony for using
Witchcrafte, or Sorcerie, whereby any man is hurt in body or goods: because it
is made Felony by the Statute (5. Elizabeth. cap. 16.) after a former
conviction only, the power whereof is not committed to the Justices of Peace,
and so they can take no knowledge of the Record thereof, not being before them
selves.

Of the same sort is that Felonye for Forgerie by the Statute (5. Elizabeth.
cap. 14.) after conviction for a former offense: and that Felony (after a
former conviction also) for slanderous speech against the Queens Majesty,
in offense of the Statute made 23. Eliz. cap. 2.

Neither does, the hearing and trial of that felony of a servant (taking the
goods of his master (after his death) belong to the Justices of Peacs in the
Country, because they can not take notice of his defaulte in the Kings Benche,
by which default it first begins to be felony, by the Statute (33. H. 6.
ca. 1.)

The like, though for unlike reason, is to be said, of the Felonious
embeseling of any the Records of the Courts at Westminster, agaynsre the
Statute 8. Henry. 6 cap. 12. And of an Acceslorie in one County, where the
Felony was done in an other County, upon the Statute 2. and. 3. Edward. 6.
cap. 24. because the jurisdiction over these Felonies, is not comp mitted to
the Justices of Peace, but remitted to other Judges, by the very same Statutes.

Furthermore, they can not make Trial of such as were endited of Felony
before the Coroners. or, before the Justices of Jail delivery, or of Oyer and
Terminer, if the same persons be not Justices of Peace also in the same Shire,
so as the Enditements be understood to be taken before the as before Justices
of the Peace, for their Commission and authority ertedeth only to such as
stand endited, before themselves, or former Justices of the Peace, or the
Shirife in his Turn.

Thus far of the first point:Touching the second, it seems, by Mar. (and
M. Fitzh. Fol. 16.) that albeit two Justices of ye Peace, (the one of them
being of the Quarum) may hear and try Felonies, yet no Justices of the Peace
have authority to deliver Felons, by proclamation, or without sufficient
acquital: nor yet to deliver such as be in prison for suspicion of Felony:
For they must proceed by enquiring, hearing, and betermining, as their
Commimission appoints them, and not rid the Jail other Wise as the Iusties
of Jail delivery may do. Things feuerall to lustices of the Peace, in the
trial of Felonies.
And therefore, such persons if they can not be endited, must either remain
the coming of the Justices of Jail delivery, as the commune manner now is,
or else (being removed into the Kings Bench) they may be delivered upon the
writ degestu and fama, as the to old order was, or otherwise as the manner is
at this day.

These Justices can take no appeal of any appronour, nor other before them,
say all the Justices of the Common Peace. 2. H. 4. 19. and so is it clearly
holden. 9. H. 4. 1. because their Commission stretches not so far. Where
upon (having had no leisure to make the search) I am induced to suspect that
the serme of those Commissions was in the last Assgnauimus other than these of
our time be in that point: which (as I have said before) be now very large,
and do give a great show to the contrary. But howsoever that be, yet it
seems no less reasonable, than serviceable, that if one Felon will accuse an
other before them, they may take his confession and reprye him, and thereupon
cause the other to be enqiured of, and then proceed against him.

Further, they can not arratgne one upon his abiuration says Mar.

It has also been thought unmeet, that they should try a Felon ye same day
in which they awarded the venire facias against the lurie. 22. E. 4. Fitz. Tit.
Coro. 44. but that has no necessity, and the law is now otherwise taken.

Marrow says, that they can not award the writ, venire facias tot matron as,
to try whether a woman (arraigned before them) be with child or no: but seeing
it stands with law and reason, so stay her for the time, that the child may
be preserved, can not but doubt of it.

They may give Clcargie to a Felon, if the Ordinary, or his Deputy, be
present to take him: but if they be absent, he must be repried, because (as
Marrow says) these Justices can set no fine upon the Ordinary for his
absence, no more than if he will accept one to read as a Clarke, where in
truth he can not. But if you read M.. Stanford (lib. 2. ca. 45.) he will
persuade you, that the Ordinary is not the Judge, but a Minister in the trial
of Cleargic and that Cleargic may lawfully be given and allowed in his absence.

Of ye Fine for his default at these Sessions I am doubtful, as I have said
before: but touching the allowance of Clcargie to the offender, I see no cause
at all, why it may not belong to the Justices of Peace, as well as to other
Judges, seeing that they be Judges of the felony, as other Justices are, and
other wise all men might be defeated of that privilege.

Marrow says also, that is Bygamie (that ungodly Popish counterplea) had been
alleged against one that prayed his Clergy, the Justices of Peace could not
have written to the Ordinary to certify the same. But let that pass, as now
not worth the debating.

And if a man outlawed of Felony by Process before the Justices of Peace, be
brought before them, and do allege that he was (at the time of the Utlawrie
pronounced) out of the Realm in the Queens service, under such a Captain, or
that he was then emprisoned in an other County, they can neither write to the
Captain, nor into the County. by the opinion of Marrow. Which if it be so,
it shall be good to learn further, what they ought to do with the prisoner
in such a case.

Thus much only, of things restrayning the Justices of Peace in the Trial of
felonies, where in also they are not now adays much occupied, the rather
because they defer it til the coming of the Justices of Assise by reason
that the Statuts (1. and 2. Phil. and Mar. ca. 13: and 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar.
ca. 10.) do enjoin them, to Certify at the next general Jail delivery,
both the examinations and bonus that they shall take, concernirg Felons and
suspects brought before them.

This I may add (not as a restreint, but for an enlargement of the authority
of Justices of the Peace) that if they see cause, and do write to the Clarke of
the Crown of the Kings Benche, for the names of any persons being other where
attainted of Felony by Vtlawrie, or being Clerks convict or attainted, he
ought without delay and under the pain of rl. ye. to certify the same unto
them, together with the causes of such attainder or conviction. 34. H. 8. ca.
14.

Of Judgment.
CAP. XV.
THe Justices of Peace, having thus sifted and tried ye causes in heauidence
given to the Jury or by the eramination of witnesses, or by Certificate
allowed, or other reasonable and discreet proof, are now come to make an
end, and to determine of it, For I may well apply that to hearing, and
determining, which M. Bracton requires to the making up of a true Judgment,
that is to say, an equal and indisferent acceptance of the persons: an
earnest examination and through search of the cause: a true delivery of the
sentence: and a diligent execution of the same. Of these, the two first belong
to Hearing (or Trial) which we have already handeted: and the latter two be
the very parts of determining, where with we have now to deal. For Judge meant
and Execution, doc make an end of the wbole cause, You have heard before, how
M. Fitzh. collectcth a general learning out of one special case in the
Commission, I mean, that if any difficulty doc arise in determination upon
Trial, the Justices of Peace are restreyned to proceed to Judgment: and you
may read (6. H. 7 16.) that if a Certiorari be brought to the Justices of
Peace, they are stayed (by the opinion of Keble) from determination, although
the Record be not there by removed from them.

But supposing that there is none impediment, let them proceed to Judgment.

The Judgments of the Justices of Peace, be in some cases arbitrarie (or
referred to discretion) and in other some cases prescribed or limited Of the
first sort take this one or two for all. Judgments by discretion.


He that is orderly convicted before them in their general Sessions, of the
deceiptfull getting of any thing into his hands by means of any false token
or counterfaite letter made in the name of any other, may be adjudged by them
to suffer Emprisonment, standing on the Pillorie, or any other corporal pain
that they shall appoint, except the pains of death. 33. H. 8. cap. 1.

And that Servant, Workman, or Labourer that shall so wilfuly and maliciously
make assault or affray upon his Master or Mastresse, or other that then shall
have charge over him, that he shall deserve further punishment than the
imprisonment of one whole year, may be put to such further open punishment (so
as it ertende not to life nor limme) as the Justices of Peace in open Sessions
shall think convenient. 5. Eliz. cap. 4.

Their prescribed Judgments be of sundry forms, according to the several
natures of the offenses (whereof they have to iuuge) which be diverse also.
Prescribed Judgments


For upon Murders, and other Felonies, they must pronounce the usual Judgment
of Felony:bpon such as be ccnuicted of Trespailes, Contempts, Riots, and such
other offenses, whereupon no certain for faiture is laid by Statutes, they
must adindge, that they be taken and raunsomed, and so to satisfy the Queen
for their offenses, by making their tynes: and upon offenders against such
penal laws, as do inslict any certain pain, they ought to adiudge as the
Statutes them solues do direct their course.

For, upon conviction of the first offense, against the Statut of for stasling
(5. E. 6. ca. 14.) they must awarde imprisonment for two months without Bail
or Mainprise, and the forfaiture of the value of the goods so had: upon the
second attainder (or conviction) such imprisonment for sir months, and the
double value of the goods: and upon contuition of the third offense, they must
give sentence that the offender be set on the pillorie, and to forfaite all
his goods, and further to have imprisonment of his body during the Queens
pleasure. Forstalling.


Against him that shall bring, or procure to be brought, into any ship, any
hind of she, being alive, to be conveyed out of any the Queens dominions,
they ought (for the first offense) to adiudge, that he shall loose all his
goods to the Queen. and suffer imprisonment by the space of one whole year
without Bail or Mainprise, and that at the years end he shall (in the full
market of some market town) have his left hand stricken off and naylco upon
the openest place of such market. Conucy sheep.
8. El. ca. 3.

Against him, that is convicted for the unlawful taking, or sleaing, of any
Dear, or for such taking of any Dawke, or eggs of Dawke (contrary to the
Statute 5. El. ca. 21.) they must adiudge treble damages to the party grieved,
three moan the imprisonment of the body of the offendour, and (after that
expired) to find suerties of his good behavior for seven years after, or
else to remain in prison until he shall find such suerties during those
seven years. Taking of Dear. or Hawks, etc.


And upon Certificat made at ye next quarter Sessions of the Peace, by two
Justices of the Peace (the one of them being of the Quarum) against him that
shall obstinately keep an Alehouse, contrary to the Statute (5. E. 6. ca.
25.) the Justices of the Peace ought (in the open Sessions) to assesse the fine
of twenty shillings: the which I do purposely rehearse, because they are there
warranted to Aslesse the, fine without process first made against the
offendour, unlike to the common order of assessing fines, as you shall see when
I come to that matter. Alehouse.


It were more laboursome, than profitable, to run over the diverse
Judgments that Statues doc appoint, and it may suffice in this place to have
given this rast of these few, and therefore I will in hand with Execution.

Of the Process for the Fine of the Queen, and of the assessing thereof: and
of Estreating for the Queen.
CAP. XVI.
SEeing that Execution is but a performance of the Judgment, I shall not need
to make long enumeration of the sorts of Executions, which are within the
power of the Justices of Peace. For bes;ides that by the knowledge of the one,
the other is known als;o, the Ius;tice of the Peace them s;elues have in many
cas;es performed their duty in both, when they have in the one pronounced
that which is due to the offendour.

Howbeit, for as much as that which they are to do by way of Execution,
offers profit, either to the Queen, or to her ubiected: and that which
pertayneth to the Queen, is brought about, eyhter mediatly, first by Process
(or Imprisonment) for the Fine, then by Assessing of the Fine, and lastly, by
Estreating the same: or else immediatlye, by Estreating of the penalty and
forfeyture: I will first bestow a few words upon the Fine and Estreates for
the Queen, and then speak of the benefit that belongs to the subject.
Execution, for the Queen.


Where the Conuictian is for Trespasses against the Peace, Riots, and such
other Contempts and offenses, against the Commission or statutes, for the which
no certain Fine is appoynated: there (as you have seen already) the
judgment is, That the party shall be taken to satisfy to the Queen her
Fine. And thereupon, the capias pro sine, and (if the party can not be found)
other Judicial Procsle goes out, till he be Vtlawed: unless it be in a very
few cases where by ye words of the Statuts them selves they may proceeede to
assesse the Fine in the presence of the parties, without calling them by any
Process: for, so it stands in the Statute of Alehouses. 5. E. 6. cap. 25.:
As I told you even now and in the Statute of High ways. 5. Elizab. ca. 13.

But if the party be brought in, then is he aprisoner, and then are the
Justices of Peace (by their discretion) to assesse the Fine, and so estreate
it, and deliver him.

For in no case (as J take it) can they of them selves levy any Fine, or
forfeiture, due to the Queen: insomuch as not they, but the Shirife is the
accompta^t for all such matters.

The imprisonment that I speak of, is only to the end that the Prince may
have the Fine: and therefore, upon the payment thereof (or upon pledges found
by Recognusance to pay it) the offendour ought to be delivered. Imprisonment.
2. Mar. Brook imprison. 100.

Hereof also the Fine took first his name, of the Latin Finis, because it
makes an and with the Prince, for his imprisonment for the offense committed
against his Law. Difference between Fine, and Amercement.


And in that respect chiefly, does it differ from an Amercement. For when the
offedor has not so deeply trespassed, that thereby he deserves any bpdly
punishment at all, as if he be nonsuit in an action, or do commit any such like
fault the is said to fall into ye Kings Mercy: because he is therein
mercifully to be dealt with: and by the Great charter. ca. 14. that Amercement
and sum of money which he is to pay for the same, ought to be asseased and
affeered by the good and lawful men of the neighborhood, which also Glanuil
lib. 9. cap. 11. affirineth to have been the Law of the land long before that
time, saying that Misericordia Domini regis est, qua quis per inramentu
legalium hominum de Viceneto, eatenus amerciandus est, ne aliquid de suo
honorabili co^tenemento amittat. But where the offense or Contempt falls out
to be so great, that it asks the imprisonment of the body it self, and that
during the Kings will and pleasure: then is the party to redeem his liberty
with some portion of money, as he can best agrse with the King or his Justices
for the same, which composition, is properly called his Fine, or his Ransom,
and in Latin Redeptio, as may be plainly seen by the Statue of Marleb. 52. H.
3. ca. 1. 2. 3.and 4. And by the Statute called Ragman, and diverse other
ancient Statuts, But of later time the Justices ahue in sonie cases of
Amercements also used to assesse and rate them selves without any other help:
As where the Dssicers of their Courts have offended, 33. H. 6. 54:34 H. 6. 20:
and Lo. 5. E. 4. 5. which seems to make an other difference between the two
words. But because neither of these be strictly observed in our common
speech, nor yet in the vndersranding of the Statutes of later time, I will no
longer stand upon it.

Now then, if the offense be Fineable, by general words only, without
speaking of any Fine, or without showing by whom it shall be assessed (for so
it is commonly in the elder Statutes that do prohibit any thing to be done)
there the assessement thereof belongs to the Justices, before whom the
Conviction is lawfully had. Fine, by diseretion of the Justices.


Again, if it be Finable by these (or such like) words, at the Kings will, or
At the Kings pleasure (as you shall find it in many Statuts) then also the same
Justices (before whom the Conviction wag) shall assesse the Fine at their wills
and pleasures: for (say the Books. 2. R. 3. 11: and 18. H. 8. 1.) the King (in
all such cased) bttereth his own will and pleasure, by the mouths of his
Justices.

And yet some Statutes (using playner speech) do namely refer the Fine to the
discretion of the Justices of Peace.

For, they may (after Conviction before them) Fine (by their discretions) such
as take Salmons, or destroy the Fry of Fish in Kiuers, against the Statutes.
Destroy the Fry of Fish.
W. 2. cap. 47: 13. R. 2. c. 19: and 17. R 2. c. 9. And as this is said of the
Fine, so sundry Statutes do give the same power to the Justices of Peace, in
the execution of the corporal punishment it selset as you have already heard in
the case of counfeiters of false letters or tokens, and may read in oter the
Statutes at large, For, I labor to be short, and therefore I give but an assay
of each thing, knowing that these Justices will not proceed to the execution
of any Statute without the sight of the Statute it self, howsoever they should
find it alleged by me.

And in these cases, (as in cases of Amercementes) the Justices ought to take
heed that the Fines be reasonable and just, having regrade to the quantity of
the trespase, and the causes for which they be made, as it is commaunaded by
the Statute. 34. E. 3. ca. 1.

This Fine (or peine) awarded by the discretion of the Justices of Peace, shall
do the more good, both to the Prince in profit, to the people in example, and
to the Justices themselves in credit, if it be pronounced-at the Benche
openly (as it ought to be) and not shuffled up in a Chamber (or Corner)
secretly, as in some places it has been bsed to be. Fine, to be assessed
openly.


I have heard, that in cases where the Statutes do appoint a certain
forfeiture, as five pounos or fenne pounds etc. yet the prartise is, to
mitigate the same by discretion, if so be that the party will come in, and
put himself in gratiam Reginae, without plain confession of the fault, as I
have fold you before. Mitigatioa of the forfeiture of a Statute.
So that the Fine shall be small, where the fault was great, and the penalty
of the Law it self not small.

But this manner of doing is (in my mind) so void of saunde reason, that I can
not reco^mende it to the Justices of Peace, but do rather condemn it as a
mockery of the Law, and I find, that sundry Statutes (fearing belikw some
such thing) have specially prevented it, comnaunding that Justice of the Peace
shall assesse no less Fine, than is in those Statutes them selves before hand
appointed.

Such is the Statute (17. E. 4. cap. 4) of Tiles: the Statute (33. H. 8. ca.
6.) of Crossebowes and hand Gunnes: and the Statute (5. E. 6. ca. 25.)
concerning Alcheuses: and such others may be found, if the Books of Statuts be
well perused.

But hitherto we have not sufficiently performed that, which the Commission of
the Peace has in these words: Saluis nobis amerciamentis, and ali^s ad nos
inde spectantibus: and therefore, it is not enough to have assessed the Fine,
but we must also disclose the means, by which, as well this Fine that is
reduced to certainetie by the discretion of the Justices, as all other
Amercementes and those other penalties and forfeitures that are certainly
prefined by words of the Statutes, may be levied and brought into the Princes
coffers. Estreating for the Qucene.


Order was taken by an ancient Statute, entitled de Scaccario, and noted to
be made 51. H. 3. that all Justices, Commissioners, and Enquirers whatsoever,
should deliver into the Eschequer at the feast of S. Michael yearly, the
extracts of Fines and Amerciaments taxed and mafe before them, that the King
might be duly answered thereof. and the same (in effect) was after ward
confirmed by an other Statute, entitled, De formamittendi extreta ad
Scaccarium, which although it be said to be made 15. E. 2. Yet forasmuch as it
mentions that the former Statute was made in the time of the father of that
King which made the later, it must needs be, that either the one or the other
of them was made in the time of King E. 1.

No doubt but this ordinance does extend to the Justices of Peace, as a man
may easily gather by words in the Statute of Laborers 5. Elizab. ca. 4: and
the act of Sewers. 13. Elizab. ca. 9. and other Statutes. But because it is
very general, and has nothing peculiar unto them from other Justices, I will
descend to lower times, and look there for nearcr helps

The Statute (12. R. 2. ca. 1) had allowed to eucrie Justice of the Peace four
shillings by the day, for the time of their Quarter Sessions, to be paid (by
the hands of the Shirife) of the Fines, and Amerciamentes coming of the same
Sessions. But, because it was soon after seen, that it was a great delay to
the Justices of Peace in this paymente, to expecte the leaying of these Fines
and Amerciamentes by Estreates, first sent up, to the Eschequer, and then
delivered thence to the Shirife (which was at that time the common manner of
leuying Fines and Amerciamentes) therefore it was within two years after
(videlicet 14. R. 2. cap. 11.) provided, that the Estreates of the Justices of
Peace should be indented (or doubled) and the one part thereof delivered by
them to the Shirife, so levy the, money thereof rising, and to pay the
Justices their wages by Indenture between him and them to be made: and the
other part thereof sent into the Eschcquer to charge the Shirife withal upon
the making of his account there.

And hereby (as I think) the Estreates of the Justices of the Peace be no we
an immediate warrant for the Shirife to levy, not only the Fines and
Amerciamentes, but also all other ^^^ues, Penalties, Lesses, Forfeitures, and
Sums whatsoever, arising before themL for the words of the Statute are
general, The money thereof arising and therefore whatsoever sums are to be
Escreated into the Eschequer by the one of these doubles, the sme are also to
be levied by the Shirife by the other double.

Such order did the Statute (3^. H. 8. cap. 10. of the fire weeks Sessions)
take, for the leuying as well of Fines and Amerciamentes, as of peines, Losses,
and Forfextures of money: So does the Statute of Tillage (2. and3. phil. and
Mar. cap. 2.) by way of admittance rehearse, that Justices of the Peace may
make out Process for the leuying of Fines and Forfcitures before themselves:
and so are the Estreates amde. and the Fines and Forfeitures thereby leauied,
at this present time, if I be not dece^ued.

And those are properly called Estreates, of the woord^ Extractae, because they
be short Notes (or Memorialls) extracted (or vrawen) out of the Records, by
the Clarke of the Peace, and by him indented and delivered sunderly, to the
Shirife, and to the Barous of the Eschequer, bearing this (or the like) Title,
Extract, finsium, and amerciamentorum forisfactormum, ad go^ralem Sessionem
Pacis, tentam apnd Maidstone, etc. Coram, etc. For the whole form of the
making whereof, there is full Direction given to all Clerks of Estreates, by
the Statute, 7. H. 4. ca. 3. Where unto I refer them

Howbeit, I do not think, that in our case, this duty of Estreating is so
peculiar to the Clarke of the Peace, but that the Justices of the Peace them
selves, ought also to have a common and careful eye unto it: For (if you
remember) it is both specially provided for in the Commission, and also an
Article of their Dath, to see unto the faithful Entry and Certificat of the
Issue, Fines, Forfeits, and Amerciamentes, that do happen before them: And
therefore, it were well done (in mine opinion) if the Justices would, by turns
(or other wise) both take knowledge of things that have passed before them, and
also take order that the same be certified accordingly: least other wise, it
lie altogether in the power of the Clarke of the Peace, to Save or Slay (as one
said) the Sparrow that he holds closed in his hand. Justices of the Peace
ought to have care of Estreates.


Of Executorie Process, and execution for the parties that sue, or for other
persons.
CAP. XVII.
ALbeit that the Justices of Peace have this power, to make warrant for leuying
the Amerciamentes, Fines and other forfeits, that do grow unto the Queen by
their service:yet is it commonly thought that they may not, (but in some cases
only, and that by special speech of the Statutes) make execution (either for
him that will sue, or for any other) of such part of the forfeiture, as the
Law does aford them.

For (most commonly) the party that will sue, is put to his Action at the
Common law for recovery of that which he is to have: as, for his moitie of a
forfeiture against the Status (24. H. 8. ca. 13) of apparel, he is perhaps
driven to his Action of Dstinue: for his maytie growing upon conviction of any
offense, centrarie to the Statute (13. Elizab. cap. 14.) concerning bringing
over of Bowstaues, or contrary to the statute of Musters (4.and 5. Phil.andMar.
ca. 3.) he is to commence his Action (or Bill)of Debt: and so of sundry others,
that are each where to be foud. Apparel.
(...) Musters.
But Where they have power either by their Commission Or by any Statute, to
hear and determine any cause at the suit of aprituate person, I do not see how
the cause can well be said to be fully determined till the complaint has had
the effect of his suit, which can not be without execution.

Doubtless, by special provision made in the Statute (5. E. 6. ca. 14.)
against Forestalle is the Justices of the Peace may make execration of the one
moitie of the forfeiture for ht in that sueth, by fieri facias, or capias, as
the Q ueenes Justices at Westminster use to dec. Forestallers


The like power in like words, have they, for leuying ye moitie of any
forfeture against the Statute of Armor, made 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. ca. 2 or
against the Statute (made 5. Elizab. cap. 12.) concerning Badgers, Drouers etc.
and their licenses. Armor.


For the moitie, growing to the Informour upon the Statute of Liueries (8. E.
4. cap. 2.) they shall make such execution, as ought to be had in Kccourries
of Der or Trespaile, at his own pleasure. Li ue ries.


They may also awarde execution for the party that sueth, upon the Statute of
Flax and Hemp (24. H. 8. ca. 4.) by such Process as to them shall seem by
their discretion. Flax and Hemp.


And the Estreates (made by the Clarke of the Peace) of forfaits for defaultes
of amending Highways, area safficient warrant to the Constables to levy the
same by Distress to the use of the Churchwardeins of the Parish where the
Default was, toward the amendment of the said ways. Highwayes.
2.and 3. Phi. and Mar. ca. 8:and 5. Elizab. ca. 13.

Ann like wise, the Estreates of the Justices of Peace (of any Fines, assessed
by them upon Presentmentes in the shnifesTurne) being enrolled, indented, and
deltuered to the Shinfe. are a good warrant unto him to leuy the same to the
use of him that was shirite at the time of such Presentmentes taken. Shirifes
Tisma
1. E. 4. ca. 2.

Search may aforde you some more eramples, but thrse may suffice for my desire,
which is not (in this, or any other) to recount all, but to make some proof of
that which I offer and propose.

Of Certifying Records of the Sessions of the Peace, to other Courts, or
Officers,
CAP. XVIII.
AS we have already manifested, that Justices of the Peace have not a
sufficient and through powur of them selves to hear and determine all causes
whereof they have in their Sessions authority to enquire: So also be there
sundry things determinable before them there, which nevertheless may (in some
respects) be brought to a second handling: either to the end to reuerse that
which they have done, or that their doings may be an evidence and testimony in
the trial of causes before other Judges.

And because this can not in any sort be performed, Without the presence of
those former Records (or the transcripts thereof) which due remain with the
Justices of the Peace, it is therefore requisite, that they we make Certificat
of them unto those other Courts, or officers, that shall be interessed to use
the same.

But as this Certificat ought in some cases to be made by the Justices of the
Peace, or their Clarke, without any writ of Certierari therefore directed, and
in some other cased they may spare to Certify until that Writ or some other
commandment be brought unto them: So also sometimes they are to certify and
send up only a Tenor (or Transcript) of the Record before them, and sometimes
the very Record it self must be conveyed from them.

The Clarke of the Peace must under the pain of rl. ^. certify into the Kings
Benche a true transcript of every Attainder, Vtlawrie, and Conviction (had
before Justices of the Peace in any place, except Wales, Chester, Lancaster,
and Durham) within 40. days after, if it be then Term, and if not, then
within 20, days after the beginning of the next Term that the same may there
also appear of Record to be used as that Statute has appointed if there be
cause: and he must also Deliver to the Ordinary a Transcript of Clerks
convicted or attainted before the said Justices. 34. H. 8. c. 14. Certify
without the writ of Certiorari.
But enquire whether this last be necdefull at this day, by reason that
Clerks be not now delivered to the Didinarie, by the Statute, 18. El. ca. 7.

And if a principal be attainted of murder or felony in one County, where
unto an other is accessorie in an other County, then upon writing from the
Justices of Jail deliueric, or Oier and Terminer, to the Custos Rotulorum,
where such principal is attainted, he must certify in writing under his Scale
to the said Justices, Whether such principal be attainted, or other wise
discharged, or not, that they may proceeds there upon to the trial of the
Acceslorie. 2. E. 6. ca. 24.

But in cases where Justices of the Peace have power to receive Enditements,
and no power to proceed any further upon them, (whereof you have already the
eramples, in the seventh Chapter of thts seconds Book) there they ought to
sunde up and certify the Enditements them felues, and that of duty (as I
think) without any Certtorari commanding the same: because, having none
authority to hear and try the offenses, the Records thereof shall be
unprofitable before them, and therefore they can have no just cause to retain
them: and yet (for the more suertie) it is specially commanded by 5. El. ca.
1. that they (shall certify the presentmentes of some offenses against that
Statute.

And so, if a man (bound to keep ye Peace do make default of appearance at the
next Quarter Sessions, the Recognulance it self (together with the Record of
that default) must be certified into the Chauncerie, Kings Benche, or
Excheaquer, that execution 3. Henri 7. cap. 1. and so ought it (as I think) if
it be presented that the partis has for fayted his Recognusance by breach of
the peace: And likewise, if it be presented before them, that the chattels of
a man attainted of felony, be in the hands of an other. For, in these, and
such other cases, where they can not of them selves proccede, they ought to
sand the Records to such as have auctozitie to determine upon them, and
otherwise they doc not discharge that duty, which the words Saluis, etc. and
alys ad nos inde spectantibus, in the Commission doc seem to expecte at their
hands.

Furthermore, the Statute of Purueyours (2.and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 6.) does
appoint the Justices of the Peace, to certify to the Treasorer of the Queens
household, the Dockets of Purueiours (brought to their Sessions by Constables)
that the serving of such Commissions, and the true aunswearing of purueyances,
may be the better eramined thereby: and although it may be doubted, whether
these be Records, or no, yet for that they are to be certified from the
Sessions of the Peace, I stick not to afoard them this place. And if you will
also repute in this number, the Licenses (and such other ates of that kind)
which pass at the Sessions of the Peace, I will not be against it.

Louching the Certiorari, if it be made accordingly, ye is of force to remove
not only Enditements or other executorie Records, wherein the Justices of
Peace can go no further, (and whereof I have spoken already) but also the
Records of caused, fully and lawfully heard and determined by them, to the
end that they may be reuersed and adnulled in the Kings Benche, if good
matter and cause due so require. Certiorari.


For that pre-eminence has the Kings Benche as you may see by Proof, yea,
all other the higher Courts, may write to the Justices of Peace, to certify
their Records, that do make for the Trial of causes hanging in them, as you
may read 19. H. 6. 19. where they of the Commune Place, did send to the
Justices of Peace for an Enditeiment, because in a writ of Conspiracy,
(brought before them) it was material to have it.

And yet, neither they of the Commune Place, nor Kings Benche, do use to write
for Enditements, or such other Records, unless they be there unto enduced by
a cause hanging in their own Courts before them, For, otherwise the right way
to remove them, is by Certiorari out of the Chauncerie, from whence they may
be transferred (by Mittimus) to any other Court. 41. lib. Ass. Pl. 22. Knyuet
Chief Justice.

Howbeit, a man may gather upon the Book (1. R. 3. 4.) that if any Record be
sent up without warrant to such a higher Court, they may there proceed upon
it, because it is a Record in that Court, and that Court is the Court of the
Queen, aswellas the other.

Of the genrrall, (or Quarter) Sessions, of the Peace.
CAP. XIX.
WE have hitherto labored, and at the length run over, sundry thing, which
(in the opinion of some men) be commune to all Sessions of the year: And yet,
becuse there be also certain things (as it seems to me) appropriated,
some to any, and others to some one, of the general Sessions, it remains
that we now distinguishe the Sessions of the Peace, and enter into
consideration what is a general, and what a special Session.

The general Sessions of the Peace be those, which are provided for the
general execution of the authority of the Justices of Peace, whether you
respect ye limits of ye place within their Commission or the bounds sof power
proceeding from the Commission and Statutes. The general Sessions.
For at these Sessions (as says M. Fitzh.) generally all things ought to be
given in Charge that do lie within the authority of these Justices to be
determined.

These be moreover called the Quarter Sessions, because they be holden
Quarterly, or four times in the year: and the statute (4. H. 7. ca. 12.)
termed them principal Sessions, for that in them chiefly, the power of
Justices of the Peace does shine and show it self: in which respect, some
other Statuts do give them the name of open Sessions also.

But we shall not not need to dwell upon the names, whereof there can be no
great controversy, seeing that they all do aim at one mark: rather, because
these general Sessions be at this day diversely summoned, begone, and
continued, in diverse parts of the Realm, it lies fitly in my way, to make
examination of that diversity in this doing.

For (to begin with the Summons) the manner is (in some Shires) to summon
yearly fix standing Sessions of ye Peace, in others 8. in others 12. or 16. and
in others otherwise. How many Sessions.
All which is done, chiefly upon pretense to ease the Inhabitants of the
County, for whom it would other wise be very painful to travail so often
from all the parts of the Shire, to any one place of the same.

And therefore, such as do maintain 6. or 8. Sessions do use to Summon all
the whole Shire to a couple of them, and to the residue they call only such;
parts of the Shire, as they do therefore specially appoint: But yet so, that
(upon the reckoning) each corner of the Country gives attendance at four
feuerall Sessions: which also falls out accordingly in those Shires where
they have ^2. or 16. Sessions for albeit that they do not at any one time
summone ye whole Shire to any one place (as ye others do) yet, dividing their
Shire into 3. or 4. parts, and keeping four several Sessions ineache of
those parts, they also (as well as the other) do serve their whole country
with four sundry Sittings. And therefore (in mine opinion) although none of
these do follow the precise letter of the law, which requires but only
four qnarter Sessions in any Shire, yet every of them draws near to the
true meaning of the law, which looks for nothing else but that the Court of
these Sessions should yearly be four times opened for the whole County.

But if there be any, that do (for this purpose) divide their Shire into
halfes, and do hold only four Sessions in the year, that is to say, two in
the one part, and two in the other, calling the one half of their Hundreds to
those two Sessions at the one place, and the other half to the other two
Sessions holden at the other place. These men (as some have thought,) do
neither retain the letter, nor attain the meaning of the law, in this their
doing. For, upon the matter, no part of their Shire has any more than two
Sessions, which manner, who sees not how much it may hinder Justice?

And although that they will peradventure seek to salve it, in saying, that
they do call the Constales of the whole Shire to every of those Sessions: yet
they can not so escape: for, both reason it self, and their own experience
herein, does inform them, that it is likely, they shall have more
presentmets, where more persons (that can present of their own knowledge) be
assembled, and do take the charge upon them.

Besides all which, these men do not bring ease, but travel and delaie to their
countriemen, whom by this mean they compel, either to go far, out of one part
into another, to have a fault punished, or else to tarry for help til a
Sessio^ shall be kept in ye part where they dwell.

Neither may I well omit, that this doing may breed danger to the Justices
themselves, whilst any of them (having taken a Recognusaunce of a Tippler)
does not Certify it until the Sessions happen to be in his own part, and in
the mean season, ye next Session of the Peace within the thire chances to
be holden in the other part: whereof what may follow, the Statute (5. E. 6. ca.
25.) will tell you, and teach them. And like fault is it, though not like
forfeite, so to receive a Recognusaunce taken for the Peace, as you may see by
the Statute. 3. H. 7. ca. 1.

Thus much of the summonas (or number) of these Quarter Sessions: The times, of
holding the Quatter Sessions
Now follows the time in which they ought to be hold at, about the which
also all Counties do not agree, and therefore, it shall be good (before other
things) to peruse those Statuts, which do (either in deed, or show) concern
this point.

The Statute 25. E. 3. ca. 8 ordained thus: Item that the said Justices make
their Sessions in all the Counties of England, at the least, four times in
the year, viz. At The Annuntiation of our Lady: Saint Margaret: Saint
Michael: and Saint Nicholas.


The Statute 36. E. 3. ca. 12. says, That the Commission of the Peace shall
make mention that the Session shall be holden thus: Within the vta of the
Epiphanie: Within the second week of Lent: Between Pentecost and Midsomer:
Within the vtas of Saint Michael.


The Statute 12. R. 2. ca. 10. does after ward set the matter at liberty,
saying, They shall hold their Session in every quarter of the year at the
least: But they of Midlesex be excepted by 14. H. 6. ca. 4.

Lastly the Statute 2 H. 5. ca. 4. does reduce the times to certainty again,
saying thus:

Over all the Realm, the Sessions shall be, In the first week after Saint
Michael, The Epiphanie, The clause of Easter, The translation of Saint Thomas
the Martyr.


The first of these four Statutes, does (in show, and in commune opinion)
concern Sessions of the Justices of Peace, but in truth it belongs not at
all unto them, for it was made to direct the Justices of Laborers in the times
of holding their Sessions and they were not Commissioners of the Peace, but
special Justices for ye causes of Laborers alone, not resiaunt in the
Country, but sent down for the time of that service, as it may expressly
appear, not only by the preamble and all the parts of the said Statute it
self, but also by the Statutes 28. Edward. 3. cap. 5:31. Edward. 3. cap. 6:
and. 34. Edward. 3. cap. 11. during all which time also, the Wardeins of the
Peace wese neither called Justices by any Statute, nor auctorized to deal
with Laborers. For in 34. Edward. 3. cap. 1. they are called Wardeins, and the
first name of Justices of the Peace by any Statute (that I have seen) is
found 36. Edward. 3. cap. 12. before mentioned, where it is said thus, In the
Commissions of Justices of the Peace, and of Laborers, express mention shall
be made, that they shall hold their Sessions etc. as before. And as for the
authority over Laborers, that was first appointed to Justices of the Pcace by
ye Statute 42. Edward. 3. cap. 6 in the fourth Chapter of which said Statute,
there were certain Commissions distiked (of which I believe that of the
Justices of Laborers was one) and order taken, that from thecefoorth some of
the Justices of the one Bench or other, or Justices of Assise, or Justices of
the Peace with other of the most worthy of the Country should be named in all
Commissions of Inquiry. So that we have not so do with the Statute 25 Edward.
3. cap. 8. and may therefore proceed to examine the rest.

The next is, the Statute 36. Edward. 3. ca. 12. But neythere that makes any
Laws for holding the Sessions of the Peace at this day, as well because it was
fet at large by 12 R. 2. ca. 10. as also (if it were not) because the
Commissions of our time, use no such mention as it commands.

Then came we to 2. Henri. 5. cap. 4. which restrayneth the liberty of 12.
Richard. 2. cap. 10. and reduces ye times of these Scssions to certainty
againet: and yet so, that the one of these Statutes does not frette the other,
for the latter is an exosition of ye former, so that it is all one as if they
both had been but one Law, and should have said, That the Justices of Peace
thall hold their Sessions in every quarter of the year at the least, namely
in the first week after Saint Michaell, in the first week after the
Epiphanic. etc.

Now, to prove that the Quarter Sessions of the Peace were holden after the
prescript of this Statute (2. H. 5. cap. 4.) until the time of the Statute, 5.
Eli. ca. 4. these be my warrants.

First, M Marrow says plainly, that in his days the Quarter Sessions were so
holden.

Secondly, for as much as there can be no higher authority of exposition
then to construe one Statute by an other, I will show you some Statutes also
that have accounted of these Sessions to be holden accordingly.

At the General Sessions after the seast of Saint Michaell, the Custos
Rotulorum, or (in his absence) ye eldest pf the Quor^ ought to appointe two
Justices of the Peace for the oversigt and controlement of the Shintes, and
their Clerks etc, by the Statute 11. H 7. cap. 15.

And at the general Sessions holden at Michaelmas, the Justices of Peace ought
to appopynte Searchers for Brass and ^ewter: by the Statutes. 19. Henri. 7.
cap. 6: and. 4. Henri. 8. cap. 7. where the word (At) must of necessity beee
understood for (After) whether you will take it according to the said Statute
2. Henri. 5. cap. 4. which says plainly (After) or according to 36 Edward
3. cap. 12. which says Within the Vias of Saint Michaell, seeing that the
Vias (as eueric man knows) is atwayes after the feast, and not before it.

But (to prove two at once) whereas the Statute 27. H. 8. ca. 5. had taken
order for Justices of the peace to be made in Cheshire, and certain other
shires, and had willed that they should be sworn to the keeping of their
Sessions of the peace etc. as other Justices of the Peace in other the Counties
of England were, it fell out, that the Gentlemen and freeholders of the
Country of cheshire were much troubled by attending yearly, both at the said
4. quarter Sessions, and also at 8 or 9. County Courts which they had besides
and thervpo^ it was provided (by another statute 32. H. 8. ca. 42.) ye the
administration of Justice (before time used in ye said) Cou^tie Courts) should
from thencefoorth be done and executed at two times in ye year only, ye is to
say, at the Sessio^s next after the feast of S. Michael, and at the Sessio^s
next after Easter yearly for ever.

I might add, that the quarter Sessions in the week next after ye Claute of
Easter, was tied to the Twesday of that week, by the Statute 33. H. S. c. 10.
And ye it was not without some grave consideration, that the Statute 2. H. 5.
ca. 4 did command the Sessions of the Peace to be holden over all England,
in one and the selfsame week: But I think it clearly enough proved, that
hitherto these Quarter Sessions ought to be directed by that Statute: and
therefore I will descend to the Statute 5. El. ca. 4. and weigh the time in
which they ought to be holden at this very day.

The words of that Statute be these: As much of all the Statutes heretofore
made, and every branch of them, as touch or concern the hyring, keeping,
departing, worKing, wages, or order of Servants, Workmen, Aruficers,
Apprentices, or Laborers, or any of them, and the penalties and forfaitures
concerning the same, shall be repealed and utterly void and of none effect: And
that all the said Statutes, and e^crie branch thereof, for any matter
contained in them, and not repealed by this Statute, shall remain and be in
full force and effect, any thing in this Statute to the contrary
notwithstanding.

Upon this Statute some have thought, ye the said Statute, 2. H. 5. ca. 4. is
repealed concerning the branch of the Sessions: And others do think the
contrary: and therefore let us hold the beam, and put in balance their
resons on either side.

They of the one side do allege, that this branch of the Sessions lies in
the midst Of that Statute (2. Henry. 5.) which was made for Laborers, and
that it was mente only of Sessions to be holden for the order of Laborers, and
so is within the words of repeal.

And they say also, that it will fall out vnseasonablie, to holdte the
Sessions (especially that after Michaelmas) according to this Statute, because
the same happens very near to that term of Saint Michael, whereat the
presence of many is no less requ^site, than at the Sessioans of the peac^.

They, on the other side, do gather upon the said words of 5. El. cap. 4.
that some parts of the Statutes of Laborers must needs remain in force,
notwithstanding those words of repeal: for otherwise (say they) the maKers of
5. E1. might (with less labor of speech) have repealed them al at once.

And threrefore they say, that two Statutes of Laborers, ( viz. 12. R. 2. cap.
3: and 23. H. 6. cap. 13.) be yet inforre, for so much of them as both)
concern Victuallers: and like wise, that so much of this Statute 2. H. 5. 4.
as does concern the resiancie of those Justices of the Peace which be named
of the Quoru^ and the holding of the Quarter Sessions, is unrepealed also: for
that that they concern not the hyring, keeping, etc, or order of servants,
etc. (which might be done without the Setsions of the Peace) but the general
service of the Commission and Statutes that do aucthorize the Justices of
Peacewhereof also these Scssions be called the Sessions of the Peace.

And it is not new (in their opinions) to find a general ordinance in a
particu lar Statute: as in the Statute 38. H. 8. ca. 39. made specially for the
erection of the Court of Surueyours, there is a general Laws, that all
Dhligations concerning the Kings commodity. shall be made to himself by the
words Domino regi,, etc.

Neither was there cuer (say they) any Duarter Sessions holden (only for the
causes of Laborers) by the lastices of Peace, although the petite Sessions of
Consta^les were chiefly bent to that feruice.

And that the said Statute 2. H. 5. did mean the very Sessions of the
Peace, and no other, they offer to prove by the authority of those self same
Statutes, which be alleged already for the holding of the Quarter Sessions,
until the time of this Act of Queen Elizabeth, for that they have heretofore
so construed and taken the Statute.

But to make the proof full, they add, that even this same Statute of
repeal. 5. El. cap. 4. both in a certain place there of speak of the Quarter
Sessions to be holden after Easter, which cannot be vnoderffoode of any other
of thosse Statutes cocerning the Sessions. but only of 2. H. 5. cap. 4.
because the rest (that have certainty) do appoint that Session, either at the
Annuntiation of the Lent And like wise, that the Statutes 8. Eli. cap. 9.
concerning the prices of vessels, of ^ope, Ale and Beer: and 14. Elizab.
cap. 5: and 18. Elizab. cap. 3. concerning poor people and vagabonds, have
mention of the Quarter Sessions, to be holden next after Easter. Which
Statutes, as they make not in this point, any new Law, but be grounded upon
former Law, supposed to be in force:So allowing of any one of these sour
Sessions, they do therein give allowance of all the other three also.

As for answer to the objection of the nearenesse of the Michaelmasse
Sessions to the Michaelmasse Term, they say, that this was foreseen to the
makers of that Statute 2. H. 5. who do therein dispense with, the absence of
the Justices of the Benches at Westminst. the Barons of the Escheaquer, etc.
And yet, to the end, that they also might once in the year be present at a
Session of the Peace for the better direction of that service, the Statute 33.
H. 8. ca. 10. did specially appoint, that the Easter Sessions should be
holden yearly upon the Tewsday next after Low Sunday, in every Shire of the
Kealme.

Now, if it shall seem to any man a strange thing that I move question of the
time of holding these Sessions: I let him know, first^ that it is one of the
Articles of the Oath ministered to the Justices of Peace, that they shall hold
their Sessions after the form of Statutes thereof made.

Secondly, that the articles of many Statutes, are inquirable, as it seems to
me, only at the Quarter Sessions: because they are not in the Commission at
all, and the Statutes them selves do appoint of none other Inquiry, but at the
Quarter Sessions: and then if the Justices of Peace do not hold their Quarter
Sessions according to ye times appointed by Law, they be no Quarter, but
Special Sessions, and consequently, such Statutes shall either not be enquired
of at all, or else enquired of without Warrant, both which be very great
inconveniences. So that this matter (if it be not rightly conceived) tends
both to the hurt of the conscience, and to the hindrance of this service.

Touching the continuance of these quarter Sesions, I have shortelye but this
one thing to say, that almost two hundred years ago, it was ordained by
statute (12. R. 2. cap. 10.) that they should be continued three days
together (if need were) upon pain of punishment: And yet in these days of
ours, wherein the affairs of the Sessions be exceedingly increased (and
consequently, more need to continue them now than before) many do scantly
affoorde them three whole hours, besides that time which is spent in giving
of the charge. How long the Quarter Sessions shall continue.


But it is more than time, that I descend to some of those Statutes, which do
specially rely upon the Quarter Sessions, and therefore I will first begin
with such as have refeence indifferently to any of them. Things referred to the
quarter Sessions.


The Justices of Peace may in their open Quarter Sessions, enquire of, hear,
and determine, all offenses (except treason, and misprision of treason)
committed against the Act made (23. El. ca. 1.) for reteyning the Queens
subjects in their due obedience. Pope.


They may also in their open Quarter Sessions, enquire of such as do extol the
usurped authority of the sea of Rome, against the Statute 5. Eli. ca. 1: And
the Clarke of the Peace must read that Act at every of the Quarter Sessions.
Pope.
Act read.


And they may in their general (or Quarter) Sessions, enquire of seditious
words, and rumors uttered against the Queens Majesty. 23. E. cap. 2.
Seditious words.


All the Articles, mentioned in the Statute (33. H. 8. cap. 10.) shall be
enquired of, reformed by the Justices of Peace in their ancient Quarter
Sessions. 37. H. 8. cap. 7. Execution of Statutes.


They may in their general Sessions determine of the offenses of killing and
selling Wainlings under two years age, 24. H. 8. cap. 6: and 13. Eli. cap. 25:
and of the offenses of not keeping Mylch Kine and Calves, 2. and 3. Wainlings.
Phillip. and Mar. cap. 3: and 13. Elizab. cap. 25. Milch Kine, and Calves.


The Inquiry, Hearing, and Determination of Forestallings, ingrossings, and
Regratings, may be at the Quarter Sessions. 5. E. 6. cap. 14. Forstalling.


The Inquiry, whether Alehouse keepers have forfeited their Recognusances,
ought to be at the Quarter Sessions 5. E. 6. cap. 25. Alehouse.


The Fine for unlawful Huntyng by night, or with painted faces, shall be
set at the next general Sessions, 1. H. 7. cap. 7. Hunting.


Justices of the Peace may in sheyr Quarter Sessions hear and determine
offenses against the Statute of Armor, 4. and 5. Phil. and Mar. cap. 2. and
may there enquire of, hear, and determine the offenses of putting to pasture
any stoned Horses, etc. under the height appointed by the Statute 32. H. 8.
cap. 13: And may there also, enquire of conueying Horses into Scotland. 23.
H. 8. cap. 16: 1. E. 6. cap. 5: and 1. Elzab. cap. 8. Armor.
Horses.


They may at their like Sessions, enquire of, and determine te offenses of not
amending the highwayes 2. and 3. Phil. and Mar. cap. 8: 5. Elizab. cap. 13: and
18. Elizabeth. cap. 9. Highwayes.


In their Quarter and general Sessions, they ought to enquire of, hear, and
determine the offenses of not keeping continual housholdes upon the
Precinctes of the late Monasteries 27. H. 8. cap. 5: 5. Elizab. ca. 2: and 14.
Elizab. ca. 11. Keep houholdes.


And in their Quarter Sessions, they may hear and determine the offenses of
Informers 18. Elizab. cap. 5: And at the like Sessions they may do the like
for offenders in Perjury, 5. Eliz. ca. 9. Informers.
Perjury.


Such as be suspected of using counterfaite Tokens, or Letters, may be
called by Process to the next general Sessions, and must be comuicted
there. 8. cap. 1. Counterfeit tokens, or Letters.


Justices of the Peace may in their open Quarter Sessions, call before them
the owner of a Wood, and twelve of the Co^moners there, for setting out the
fourth part thereof. Wood
35. H. 8. cap. 17: and 13. Elizab. cap. 25.

The proof of the sufficientie or insufciencie of the cause, for which the
Master may put away his servant, or te servant may depart from his Master,
before the end of the term, shall be made at the Quarter Sessions, 5. Elizab.
cap. 4. Master and Servant.


The licenses for Badgers, Drouers, etc. areto be granted in the open Quarter
Sessions, 5. Eliz. cap. 12. and the prohibition of transporting Corn, is to be
made by the more part of the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions. 13.
Eli. ca. 13. Badgers.
Transport corn.


The licenses that the poor of surcharged Cities, or Lownes, may beg, are to
be given at the general Sessions: and he that is grieved with any taxation
made upon him for the pore, may be eased there: and the taxation for the
reliese of the prisoners in Gaoles, ought to be made there also. poor.
Prisoners.
14. El. cap. 5.

The assigment of such as shall keep any Lauerne to utter Wine, ought by the
Statute (7. E. 6. cap. 5.) to be made at the general Sessions. Tavern.


A Beggars child may at the general Sessions, be bound to serve any subject
of this Realure, being of honest calling, 14. Eli. ca. 5: and 18. El. cap. 3.
Beggars child.


The Dockets of Purueyours ought to be delivered over to the Justices of Peace
at the next general Sessions, 2. and 3. Phil. and Ma. cap. 6. Purueiors.


The Act of rebellious assemblies (or the effect thereof) ought to be openly
read at ewerie Quarter Session, 1. Mar. Parl. 1. ca. 12: and 1. Elizab. cap.
17. Act read.


And enquire, whether the Proclamation (set forth 4. H. 7. cap. 12.) be not
yet to be read at every Quarter Session also: for some do think, that it was
to endure for the time of that King only. Proclamation read.


These, and some others (which I omit) have reference (as you see) to any of
the same general Sessions: for so many of the which, as be inquirable (and
ought therefore to be given in charge) I may seem, either to have committed
a Tautologie in reporting the twice, or (which is worse) to have written a
Repugnancie, in that I did first deliver them as common to all Sessions of the
Peace, and do now here restrain them as proper to the general. The reason
why some things be repeated.
But this is shortly the cause. Some men be of the opinion, that these
Statutes which be enquirable (by express words) at the Quarter Sessions only,
may nevertheless be enquired of at the special Sessions also. And I have
hitherto doubted, whether that be true in all cases, or no: for, as the
Justices of Peace have none other warrant to enquire of these matters, but
only by those Statutes which do appoint the inquiry to be made at the
Quarter Sessions: So (as me thinks) they ought to pursue that warrant, if
they will take upon them to enquire and have any care to have their doings
warranted. And I think it be no great doubt, but that as the Statutes do
many times give degrees of power, sometimes in great measure, and sometimes in
less: So also, the same Statutes may restrain the auctorifie of Inquiry to
some ceetain Sessions, and especially to the Quarter Sessions, in respect that
they be both more open, more commonly known before hand, and better furnished
with Justices, and consequently, the meeter for administration of Justice
specially in affairs of the waightier sort.

And therefore, I hane in this part labored, both to satisfy their opinion
in the one, and to serve mine own fantasy in the other.

But now also, let look out some such things, as be left only to the
Easter or Michaelmsse Sessions. Easter Sessions.


The prices of vessels, for Soap, Ale, and Baere, shall be set, and
proclaimed by the Justices of Peace at their Quarter Sessions after Easter. 3.
Elizab. cap. 9. Prices of Vessels.


The wages of Servants and Laborers, are to be rated by the Justices of Peace
at their Easter Sessions or within six weeks after Easter. 5. Elizab. cap. 4.
Wages of Servants.


And they maste yearly in the same Sessions examine the perfourmaunce, or not
perfourmaunce of the Statute, made for the poor. Poor.
14 Elizab. cap. 5.

They must also in the same general Sessions yearly take order for the
provision of storkes and store, for the fetting of youth, and idle persons on
work: and ought then also to appoint houses of correction for such as will not
work 18. Elizab. cap. 3. Work and correction, for idle persons.


At the Quarter Sessions to be holden after Michaelmasse the Justices of Peace
are to appoint Searchers for Brass and Pewter 19. H. 7. cap. 6: and 4 H. 8.
cap. 7. Michaelmasse Sessions. Brass, and Pewter. Shirifes Books.


And at general Sessions after Michaelmasse two Justices of the Peace ought
to be appointed by the Custos Rotulorum, or (in his absence) by the eldest of
the Quorum, for the ouerfight and controllment of the Shirifes Books, etc. 11.
H. 7. cap. 15.

Of the special Sessions of the Peace.
CAP. XX.
The special Sessions of the Peace, vo vary from the general, in this
chieflye, that they be holden at other times, when it shall please the
Justices themselves, or any two of them (the one being of the Quorum to appoint
them. And this power they have, not only by the Commission, where it says,
Adcertos dies, and loca, quos vos, seu aliqus vestrum, ad hoc prouideritis etc.
but also by the Statute 2. H. 5. cap. 4. which allows them to do it More
often (than the 4. times) if need do so require.

They be also (for the most part) summoned for some specill busnesse, and not
directd to the general service of the Commission: And yet, there is no doubt,
but that all the Articles within the Commission of the Peace, are both
inquirable and determinable, at any special Session of the Peace.

M. Fitzh. (as I have already noted) uses a third difference between the
general and special Sessions of the of the Peace, affirming, ye whereas at
the general Sessions, the Iostices of Peace ought of duty to give in charge, al
matters (within the Commission, or Statutes) that are to be determined) before
the: yet nevertheless at the special Sessions, they are at liberty to give
charge, either all, or any of them, as it shall seem good unto tyemselues.
What things ges be inquiuble, at the spcciall Sessions of the Peace:


I will not gainesay, but that the Justices of Peace, may at any special
Session of the Peace, give in charge all such Statutes as do give unto them a
general power of inquiry, (without using mention of any Session) as does the
Statute 25. H. 8. cap. 13. of Shcepe: yea, I will grant, that they may also at
their special Sessions of the Peace, give in charge to enquire upon all such
other Statutes, as do use the word Sessions indifferently without adding
General, or Special: of which sort there be a great many as 5. E. 6. cap. 4.
of fighting in Church, or Churchyard: 14. H. 8. cap 11: and 19. H. 7. cap. 11.
of Hunting: Elizab. cap. 13: of linen cloth 2.and 3. Phil. and Mar. ca. 7: of
Faires and Markets: 5. H. 4. cap. 3: of Seawatch: and 7. E. 6. cap. 5. of
Wines: and sundry others. But whether they may there also enquire of such other
statutes as do only assign the inquiry to be made at the Quarter S. ssions,
you have heard my mind, and read my reasons in the last Chapter.

Nowsoeuer it be, there might be great use of the special Sessions of the
Peace, if they were now and then holden (between the Quarter Sessions) to
deliver the Gaoles of vntuly servants, sturdie vagabonds, idle poor folks,
petite thieves, and some others. The use of the special Sessions.
For it is daily proved, that many, being sent thither for correction, do
come forth more corrupted than they went in: which evil happens by long
abode there in wicked company: whereas, if they had more speedy trial, both
they should be amended, and the Country less charged by it.

Foreign Realms and Countries do reap the fruit of speedy Justice; and if
our Gaoles in England were more often swepte and emptied, I doubt not, but
that we also should find a sensible profit to arise by it.

Peradventure some man will say, that by this mean we shall draw upon us
again, the same inconvenience of troubling the Country that happend by the
six we Sessions, which were therefore abrogated by the Statute. 37. H. 8.
cap. 7. But that is not to be feared: for, whereas those Sessions were to be
holden in every limite of the Shire, these may be kept only where the Jail
stands: the which, since it is commonly situate in a populas Town, shall
be easily able to furnishe this service without calling any other unto it.

Of the Rewards and Punishments, due to Justices of the Peace, in respect of
their Sessions.
CAP. XXI.
Well and evil doing, do from the first to the last deserve reward and
punishment: and therefore, as we closed up the first part of this Treatise
with them: So also shall this latter Book receive the same end and conclusion.

VVhilest it was at the liberty of the Justices of Peace, to hold their
Quarter Sessions as short time as they would, the Law did not allow them
any Wages for their pains. The Wages of the Justice of the Peace at the
Quarter Sessions.
But when the Statute (12. R. 2. cap. 10.) had bound them (under pain of
punishment) to continue their Sessions three days together, if the affairs
of their office did so require: the the same Statute thought it meet also to
allow to every of them four shillings by the day for the time of their
Session, to be paid by the hands of the Shirife, out of the Fines and
Amerciaments rising of the same Sessions. And that the Lords of Franchies,
should be contributories to those Wages, after the proportion of their
parties of the said Fines and Amerciaments.

But, because it was very Dilatorie for the Justices of Peace, to take those
Wages, at the hands of the Shirife (as I have already touched) upon the
Estreate sent out of the Escheaquer and for that also it grew in question,
whether such Lords, as were named in the Commissions of the Peace, should be
partakers of the same Wages: the Statute (14. Ric. 2. cap. 11.) did plainly
provide, that the Wages of these Justices should be levied and paid by the
Shirife, upon Estreates doubled and indented between the Shirife and them: And
that no Ducke, Earl, Baron, or Baronet (albeit they were Justices of the
Peace, and did hold their Sessions with the other eight Justices) should take
any Wages for their Office in this behalf.

And hereof also M. Mar. collecteth, ye howsoever many Commissioners of the
Peace there shall be assembled at these Sessions, yet only eight of them shall
receive the wages, because (says he) that at such time as these wages were
first appointed, ye law did take knowledge and make allowa^ce of eight
Justices, and no more. And he also makes it doubtful, whether it lie not in
the power of the Barons of the Escheaquer, to appoint which eight (when more be
assembled at the Sessions) shall have the wages paid them.

For the first point, it would be some what hard indeed, to strain that
Statute so far, as to give wages therbyto so many Justices as be now at these
days in every Shire, and would be present at the Sessions. Yet ye Statute of
Laborers. 5. El. ca. 4. ye wills the Justices of Peace in every shi^e to
divide the^ selves, and to keep two special sittings yearly for the execution
of that Law, allows to as many of them as shall give their attedance flue
shillings a day for three days together. But concerning the latter, it seems
by the late Statute it self, that the Shirife shall first pay the wages, and
the the Barons shall make the allowance, according to the Indenture. So that I
see no liberty of such nomination left unto them.

I confess, that it might breed, both offense against the Shirife, and
jealousy among the Justices themselves, to have one of them preferred before
an other in this payment: and therefore I think it wisely done (as it is used)
to bestow the whole allowance upon the defraying of their Commune diet.

If the Fines and Amercements of ye same Sessions (says M. Mar.) will not
fully amount to the sum of the wages then due to the Justices, yet shall ye
wages be ratably paid out of them, so far as they will extend.

Furthermore those two Justices of ye peace, ye do in their Sessions call before
the, and person suspected to offed ye Statute of Deerhayes, Buckstals, and
Stalking and do examine him thervpo^ and find him faulty therein, shall have the
tenth part of the forfeiture growing thereby. Buckstals.
19. H. 7. ca. 11.

Nitherto of Reward, henceforth of punishment. Punishmets at the commune law.
It seems, by ye opinion of some Justices (2. R. 3. 10.) ye if a Justice of
the Peace do any thing of Record ignorantly, and for want of knowledge, that
he shall not be punished for it. And this opinion of theirs is not new in this
Realm, although it be otherwise truly said, Imperitta quoque culpae
adnumeratur: for you amy read in the old laws, of King Edgar (cap. 3.) and of
King Canute (cap. 14.) that if a Judge had erred in his office, he might then
have excused himself, by oath, That he did it not of evil mind, and that he
knew not how to do better: which I speak not, to comfort men in careless
ignorance, but to show you that me may err, and that erring by infirmity they
are not altogether unworthy of pardon: and withal to let the Justices of
Peace see, that it may be a fault to err by ignorance, and that therefore they
ought to stay where they meet with no^ liquet, as their own Commission does
direct them.

Now, on the other side, if a Justice of the Peace will craftilye embesill an
Enditemet, or wilfully raze any part thereof, or maliciously enroll (or file) ye
for an Enditement which was never found by ye Jury. Then by ye resolution of
al ye Justices, assembled before ye King in the Star Chamber (2. R. 3) a
Co^missio^ may go out to enquire (by the oaths of 12. men) of such his
misdemeanor, and if he be convicted thereof, he deserves to loose his office,
and to make fine to the Queen according to ye quantity of his misprision and
offece. ibid. Fo. 10. And even so may he be punished (as this book leads me
to think) if he alter an Enditement of Trespass, into an Enditement of felony,
howsoever the opinion (27. lib. Asl P 1. 18) be foound against it.

A Justice of the Peace may also be endited of ye unlawful taking of money for
doing his office, or of such other falsitie. Fitz. Not. Br. 243. And if he
cause a man to be endited at ye Sessions, by former conspiracy, or indirect
practice, he is punishable for it as a private man. 21. E. 4. 67.

But if in the handling of a cause at ye open Sessions, it happen him to speak
against an offender somewhat excessiuely, yet he shall not be punished for it:
Iuris enim executio non habet iniuria^: Nevertheless, Judges ought not to
abuse their tongs by inteperance, but they must rather take great heed (as
Cicero, pro Font said, Quibus verbis vtantur, ne quid minus mother ate
prositum, ne quid ab aliqua cupidstate prolap sum verbum esse videatur.

Thus far of punishmets by ye commune Law, now to those by Statutes.
Punishmets by Statutes.


If ye Justices of Peace, hauving taken a Recognusance for an Alehouse, do not
certify it at the next quarter Sessions of the Peace, they shall loose five
marks. Alehouse Five Marks.
5. E. 6. ca. 25.

That next Justice of ye Peace, which does not certify at the next general
Sessions of ye Peace such presentmets as the overseers of the Highwayes have
before presented unto him, shall loose v. ^^. for every default. Highwaics.
Five pound.
2 and. 3. Phil. and Mar. ca. 8: and 5. El. ca. 13.

If any Justice of Peace (not being sick, nor having other lawful excuse, to
be testified under ye Oach of one assessed in the Subsidy book at v.^^. etc.)
do not assemble at the Easter Sessions to rate the wages of servants, etc. he
shall loose x. ^^. to the Queen. 5. El:ca. 4. Servant wages. Ten pounds.
And if any Justice of the peace (so assebled) shall depart thece before
conferece had about ye execution of this Act for setting idle persons on
work, he shall fofeit v. ^^. 18. El. ca. 3. Poor on work. Five pound.


The Justice of Ye Peace which fails to record at ye next quarter Sessions,
the name of any person (auctorized to shoot in a Gun) ye has preseted his
name unto him, shall loose xx. ^. 2. E. 6. ca. 14. Gunnes. Twenty shillings.
If that Statute do so far extend, whereof the words give cause of doubt.

And if the Proclamation, annexed to the Statute 4. H. 7. ought now to be read,
then if it be not read at each quarter Sessions, every Justice of the Peace
there present shall loose xx. ^. 4. H. 7. ca. 12 Proclamation read. Twenty
shillings.


If the Justices of the Peace, before who^ any presentmet shall be made at their
quarter Sessions against any person for extolling the authority of the sea of
Rome, do not certify the same into the Kings Bench within 40. days after, if
the Term be then open, and if not, then at the first day of the nextful
Term, they shall every of them loose E. ^^ for every default. 5. El. ca. 1.
Pope.
A hundredth pounds.


And those Justices of the Peace, which do not certify into ye Escheaquer,
their examinations taken concerning the entering of plaintes by the Shirifes,
shall loose xl.^ 11. H. 7. ca. 15. Examinations. Forty shillings.


The Epilogve.
Thus have I (by ye favor of God) brought this treatise to an end: wherein if
many things have escaped me unseen, I do not greatly marvel, when I look
back and behold the variety and multitude of the matter that I have passed
thorough: and it shall not be hard for him that meets with such Estrayes, to
take and lodge them in their right Titles here. The Epilogue.


Again, if I shall be thought to have heaped up too many conceits (borrowed out
of M. Marrowes reading) I make aunsweare, that I have omitted many, and have
made the best choice that I could: If furthermore, I shall seem to those that
be masters in Art and Method, mot to have thoroughly observed their rules,
and specially that (...) because I do many times mingle aliena, things not
preciselye pertaining to my matter in hand, To them I say, that it is the
received manner of teaching in out law, To show things by their contra^ies and
disterents: and seeing that great light comes to the matter thereby, I may
neither condemn it as unapt, nor reject it as unserviceable.

Moreoure, if I have been deceived in laying down ouerboldely mine own
opinion, I will no less gladlye be admonished of it, than readily reform my
mistakenings:

Finally, whasoeuer other thing is done amiss, I protest that it has escaped
of vnskill, and not proceeded of wilfulness, and therefore I desire that I may
be allowed the benefit of the pardon, which (as I told you even now) is in
like case grauntable to a Justice of the Peace.

Finis.
A Table, containing (very near) all the imprinted Statutes, both general
and particular, wherewith Justices of the Peace have in any sort to deal.
King. Year. Chap: Content. He the 3. 9 25 Of measures and weights. 51
Thassise of Bread and Ale. 51 The Judgment of the pillory. 51 The ordinance
for measuring. 51 Of weights and measures. Ed. the 1. 3 9 Of fresh suite after
Felons. 10 Of Coroners. 15 Of Bailement of Felons. 25 Against maintenance. 26
That Shirifes and other Ministersshall take no rewards. 27 Of fees for
delivering chapiters. 28 Of Maintenance of quarrels. 13 34 Of rauishing women.
47 Of taking Salmons. 49 Against maintenance. The Statute of Winchester. 28 11
Against mainteinance. 34 For measuring of land. Definition of Champartors. Ed.
the 2. 1 For breaking Prisons. 18 For Purueiours. For Estreats of the
Escheaquer. Ed. the 3. 1 14 For maintenance of quarrels. 16 For keeping of the
Peace. 17 Enditements before Shirifes to be taken by Indenture. 2 3 For coming
before the Kings Justices with force and arms. 6 A confirmation of the Statute
of Winchester. 4 2 Of Wardeins of the Peace. 4 That Purueiours pay in hand,
and have a warrant under the great or small Seal. 10 Against Shirifes and
Gaolers that will not receive thieves, and such other into their Gaoles. 5 2
Against the Kings Purueiours. 10 Jurors that take money shall no more pass
upon Iuries. 11 That Justices assigned to determine felonies have power to
write to foreign Countries. 14 Against Robertsmen, and drawlatches. 14 10
Gaoles of the Counties to be annexed to the Shirifes. 18. St. 2 2 Justices of
Peace made. 20 4 and 5 For mainteining of quarrels. 23 6 For Vitailers. 25 1
For Purueyours. 25. St 4 3 For forestalling of Wines. 25. St. 5 9 Auncell
weight taken away. 10 For weight and measuring. 15 For takers of Sheep. 27.
St. 2 4 None going to the Staple, be disturbed by the Kings takers. 10 For
waights of the Staple. 28 11 For safeguard of Marcha^ts aliens coming within
this Realm. 34 1 For Justices of Peace. 2 For Purueyours. 5. and 6 Justices of
Peace to enquire of measures. 22 For Hawks found. 36 2. 3. 4. 5. 6 Against
Purueyours. 12 For the Sessions of the Peace 37 19 For finding of Hawks. 42 9
For leuying of the green wax. Ric. the 2 1 3 All Statutes of Purueyours
confirmed. 4 For maintenance of quarrels. 7 For giving of Liueries. 2 2 For
forestalling of Wines. 5 7 For entering into lands. 7 8 For Purueyours. 13 For
riding in Harness. 12 3 A confirmation of all Statutes for Vitailers. 6 For
bearing weapons. 10 Justices of Peace to punish Vagabounds, and for holding
their Sessions. 13 4 Clarke of the Market. 7 Justices of Peace be made a new 8
For price of vitayle. 9 For weights. 13 For Hunters. 19 For safeguard of Fish.
14 11 For assigning of Justices of Peace. 15 2 For forcible entries. 4 For
measuring Corn. 16 3 The Clarke of the market to have ready his weightes
according to the Standard. 4 For liueries of companies. 17 8 For Riots and
unlawful asseblies. 9 That Justices of the Peace shall be conseruatours of the
Statutes made for Rivers. 10 Two men of Law to be assigned in the Commission
of the Peace to deliver Gaoles. 20 1 For riding armed in the Realm 2 For
wearing of Liueries. He. the. 4. 1 7 For giving of Liueries. 11 For extortion
by Shirifes. 2 14 For Purueyours. 21 For giving of Liueries. 4 25 For Hostelers
and Vitailers. 5 3 For watch upon the Sea coasts. 4 Multiplication made
Felony. 5 For cutting tongues, and putting out of eyes. 10 Justices of Peace
to imprison men in the common Jail. 7 3 Of the manner of making out Estreates.
7 For Arrowheads. 14 For giving of Liueries. 13 7 Of Riots and Routes. He. the
5. 1 10 For weights and measures of Corn. 2 4 Of the Sessions of the Peace. 8
For reformation of Riots and Routes. 9 Process against Riotours that flee into
woods. Stat. 2. 1 Of Justices of Peace. 3 7 For clipping, washing, and filing
ling of money. 8 3 For guilting and siluering. 9. St. 2 8 Of false Weights. 2
11 For the measure of Wines. He. the 6. 14 For Goldsmithes selling work of
silver. 8 4 For giving of Liueries. 5 For weights. 9 For forcible entries. 10
For process in Enditements and Appelles. 14 For Felons and Murderers, that
void themselves into woods. 11 6 For Commissions of Peace. 8 For weights and
measures. 12 For Waxechaundlors. 14 4 For Sessions in Midlesex. 18 11 A Justice
of Peace to have twetie pound land. 19 For Soldiers departing with out
license. 20 8 For resistance of Purueyours. 23 1. and 2. Against Purueyours. 10
For extortion of Shirifes. 11 For leuying Knights wages for the Parliament. 13
Proclayming the Statutes for vitailers. 31 3 Of attachements in the Courts of
the Marches. 33 2 A repeal of an act for Outlagaries in Lancaster. 7 For
Attorneys in Norff. and Suff. Ed. the 4. 1 2 For Enditemets and Presentmets in
Shirifes Turns and Leets. 8 2 For Liueries of companies. 12 2 For Bowstaues. 9
For Escheatours. 17 4 For making of Tile. Ric. the 3. 1 3 For Inquiry of
escapes:for letting of suspects of Felony to Bail. 11 For Bowstaues. 12 For
the measure of wine and oil. He. the. 7. 1 7 Against Hunters. 3 1 Giving of
Liueries: and certifying of Recognusance. coroners. 2 Taking Maidens, Widows
or Wives against their wills, made Felony. 7 4 For Weights and Measures. 11 4
One Weight and Measure to bevsed through the Realm. 9 For the inhabitants of
North and South Tindale. 15 Against untrue demeaning of Shirifes and their
Officers in holding their Counties. 17 Against destroying of Phesants and
Partriches with unlawful Engines, and for Hawks. 12 5 For Weights and
Measures. 19 6 For Pewterers and Brasiers. 11 For keeping of Deerehayes and
Buckstalles. 13 For punishment of Riots. He. the 8. 1 7 Concerning the office
of Coroners. 3 12 For reformation of Impanels for the King. 4 7 For Pewterers,
and true waights and beams. 6 6 For remitting Prisoners to the place where the
crime was committed. 14. 15 6 For High ways in the Wealde of Kent. 10 For
hunting the Heart. 5 Fees for Testaments, and letters of Administration. 7
Against servant imbeseling their Masters goods. 22 5 For repairing of
bridges in high ways. 10 Concerning Egyptians. 11 For Powdike in Maishland. 14
How persons commiting petie Treason shall abjure. 23 2 Where and after what
manner the Gaoles within England shall be made. 4 That no Brewers make vessels,
and the contents of barrels. 16 That no Horses be co^ucyed into Scotland
without license. 24 4 For sowing of Flax and Hemp. 7 Against killing of
Calves. 5 Against killing of Weinlings, 10 For Crow nets. 13 For excess in
apparel. 25 6 For punishment of Buggerie. 11 To avoid destruct. of wildfoule.
13 What Shecpe a man may keep. 26 5 For not conueying any persons goods or
Cattels over the water of Seuerne, after Sun set, until Sunnc rising. 6 For
Wales. 7 For amending high waves in Suffix. 27 5 Justices of Peace in Chester.
16 For inrolment of deeds. 20 An order for Tithes. 24 For recontinuing of
certain liberties take from the Crown. 32 3 Of Abiuration. 7 For true payment
of Tithes and offerings. 9 Against maintenance, etc unlawful buying of
Titles. 13 For breed of Horses of higher stature. 41 For baking of Horse bread.
43 Sessions in Chester. 33 1 Concerning counterfeit letters or tokens. 5 For
keeping of great Horses. 6 For Crossebowes and Handguns. 9 For maintenance of
Artillery, and debarring of unlawful games. 10 For the execution of certain
Statutes. 17 For confirmation and continuance of certain Ailes. 34-35 For
Wales. 14 For certificate of conuicts to be made into the Kings bench. 35 11
For payment of Knights and Burgesses wages of the Parliament in Wales. 17 For
preservation of woods. 37 1 Of the Custos Rotulorum, and Clearks of the Peace.
7 For abrogation of fix weeks Sessions. 8 That Enditemets lacking vi and
armis shall be good enough. 9 Against usury. Ed. the 6. 1 1 Against such as
speak against the Sacrament of the body and blood of Jesus Christ, and for
the receipt thereof in both kinds. 5 That no Horses be conveyed out of
England without license. 7 For continuance of process notwithstanding new
commission of the Peace. 12 Of poisoning. 2. 3 2 For true service in Capitaines
and Soldiers. 14 Against shooting of haileshot. 15 For vitailers and
handycraftes men. 24 For trial of murders in several Counties. 3. 4 1 Of the
Custos Rotulorum. 2 For true making of Woollen clothes. 21 Of retayling Butter
and Cheese. 5. 6 4 Against fighting and quarrelling in Churches. 6 For true
making of Woollen clothe. 14 Against regrators, forestallers, and engrossers.
15 Against regrators of tanned leather. 24 For making of Hattes at Norwich and
in Norfolk. 25 That Alehousekeepers be bound by Recognusance. 7 5 To avoid
great prices of Wines. 7 For the assise of Fuel. Marie. 1 8 That Shirifs shall
not be Justices of Peace during their Office. 9 For the incorporation of
Physicians in London. 12 Against unlawful assemblies. ph. and Mar. 1. 2 2 For
reformation of excess in apparel. 4 For punishment of Egiptians. 5 For
restreint of Corn etc. over the Sea. 13 An order for baylement of prisoners.
2. 3 3 For keeping of milche Kyne and rearing of Calves. 6 Against execssiue
taking of Purueyours. 7 For buying of stolen Horses. 8 For amending of high
ways. 10 For examination of prisoners suspected of ma^slaughter or Fell. 13 For
Woolles in Halyfaxe. 15 That Purueyours shall not take vitaile within fiuc
miles of of cambridge or Oxford. 16 For watermen upon Thames. 18 For
commissions of Peace, and Jail delivery in Towns corporate not being
cou^ties. 19 For Powdike in Marshland. 4. 5 2 For having Horse, Armor and
Weapon. 3 For taking of Musters. Elizab. 1 1 For restoaring to the Crownc the
ancient Jurisdiction. 2 For uniformity of Prayer, and administration of the
Sacraments. 7 For co^ueying horses into Scotland 12 Against deceiptfull using
of linen clothe. 16 Against rebellious assemblies. 17 For preservation of
spawne and frye of Fish. 18 For continuance of certain Stat. 5 1 For the
assurance of the Queens power over all estates. 2 For maintenance and increase
of tillage. 4 Orders for artificers servant. and laborers. 5 For maintenance
of the Navy. 8 For Shoemakers etc. using currying of Leather. 9 For punishment
of Perjury. 10 For servant embeseling their Masters goods. 12 For Badgers
of corn. and Drouers of cattle to be licenced. 13 For amending of high ways.
15 Against sonde and fantastical Prophesies. 16 Against Coniurations. 17 For
punishment of Buggerie. 19 For repeal of a Stat. for coueying Horse out of the
Realm. 20 For punishment of Vagabounds faining themselves Egyptians. 21 For
punishmeut of unlawful taking of fish. 24 For repairing of Gaoles. 8 3 Against
carrying of Sheep over the Sea alive. 8 For repeal of a branch of a Statute
for the stature of hotses in the I Will of Ely. 9 For repeal of a branch of a
Statute for the prices of barrels and kilderkins. 10 For Bowyers and the price
of Bows. 13 2 For bringing in, and putting in execution Bulls from Rome, 8
Against Usury. 9 For Commission for Sewers. 11 For maintenance of Nauigatio^.
13 For increase of Tillage. 14 For bringing Bowstaues into the Realm. 19 For
making of Cappes. 21 That Purueyours may take corn and vitaile within five
miles of Cambridge and Oxford, in certain cases. 23 For pauing a street
without Algate. 25 For continuance of certain Statutes. 14 1 For such as
rebelliously deteine any of the Queens Castles. 2 Against such as practice the
enlargemet of any prisoner Committed for high Treason. 5 For punishment of
Vagabondes and relief of the poor. 11 For continuation, explanation, etc. of
diverse Statutes. 18 1 Against diminishinge of the Queens coin, and other
coins current within the Realm. 3 For setting poor people on work. 5 To
redress disorders in common. Informers upon penal laws. 7 For taking away
Clergy from the offenders in Rape and Burglaric, and an order for delivering
Clearks co^uict without purgation. 9 For mending High ways. 18 For repayring
of Chepstowe bridge. 20 For repayring Bridges and highwayes near Oxford. 23 1
For due obedience to the Queen. 2 Against seditious words, of rumors. 9
Against logwood, or blocwood 10 For Phesantes and Partriches. 11 For Cardiffe
bridge. 12 For pauing without Algate




