THE FRENCH ACADEMIE, wherein is discoursed the institution of manners, and
whatsoever else concerns the good and happy life of all estates and callings,
by precepts of doctrine, and examples of the lives of ancient Sages and famous
men:

By PETER de la PRIMAVDAYE Esquire, Lord of the said place, and of Barree, one
of the ordinary Gentlemen of the Kings Chamber: dedicated To the Most
Christian King Henry the third, and newly translated into English by T. B.

Imprinted at London, by Edmund Bollifant for G. Bishop and Ralph Newbery.

1586

TO THE RIGHT VIRTUOUS AND WORSHIPFVLL GENTLEMAN, AND HIS SINgular good friend
Master JOHN BARN Esquire, T. B. C. wishes grace and peace in this life, and
everlasting happiness in the life to come.
SIR, having at length finished the Translation of this French Treatise of
Moral Philosophy, I presume the rather to recommend it to your Worships
favor, because your self did first commend it unto me for the variety of
excellent sayings and examples wherewith it is replenished. And surely I
persuade my self, that howsoever for want of a skillfull Translator it has
lost much of that grace, which otherwise it might have had, yet by reason of
the matter it self, and good disposition observed throughout the whole book,
it will be of some account with so many as prefer the soundnes of substance
before the swelling froth of curious phrases. True it is, that many words used
by the Author, and retained by me, are almost the same with the original
toongs from whence they were derived, and peradventure will sound harsh at the
first in their ears that never heard them before; but if they will have
patience a while, and let them pass to and fro upon the file of their teeth,
no doubt but in short time they will be as smooth as other Greek and Latin
words which now are taken for mere English. I might here allege reasons to
prove the necessity of retaining such words in translating: namely, that many
of them are proper names and words of Art, that as all occupations and
handicrafts have their several names of instruments belonging to their
science, so is it with Philosophy, and with every part thereof: but I make no
doubt of finding the Reader favorable in this point, considering that it
tends to the enriching of our own language, and has been practiced by the
learned of all nations that have gone before us, as is evident to such as are
skillful in the toongs. Concerning the profit of this book, I refer the
Reader either to the title thereof, which promises no more (in my opinion)
than is performed with advantage in the body of the same, or else to the
Authors Epistle to the Reader, wherein he sets down a summarie of that
doctrine, which is afterward handeled more at large. Wherein howsoever he has
very excellently behaved himself, and (as I am persuaded) gone far beyond
those that have handled the same matter before him, yet considering each man's
infirmity to be such, that he attaineth not to perfection in any work,
neither speaks all things that are to be spoken of the same thing, nor yet is
free from error in those things which he speaks or writes, I exhort all that
shall peruse this Treatise following, so far only to approve every sentence
and example of life, as it may be proved out of the records of holy
Scripture. Moreover, as many as are desirous to be bettered by the reading of
this book, they must think seriously upon that end unto which this Author
had regard when he penned it, which was the same that Aristotle had Arist. lib.
2. Eth. cap. 2.
in writing his Ethics or book of Manners: namely, the practice of virtue in
life, and not the bare knowledge and contemplation thereof in brain. And,
least any man should have that opinion of these Moral precepts, which all men
have of Platoes Commonwealth, or of Aristotle's Felicity, of Tullies Orator,
or of Moors Vtopia, that they contain in them rather an Idaea of good life,
than such a platform as may be drawn from contemplation into action, he has
joined works with words, practice with precept, and the fruits of rare examples
with the fair flowers of Philosophical instructions. But many are so far
from conceiving any such excellency in them, that so soon as they hear the
name of Philosophy, they think they have sufficient cause to condemn as
hurtful, all the writings of Philosophers, alleging that sentence of S.
Paul: Beware least there be any man that spoil you through Philosophy: not
considering that the Apostle does in the very next words expound himself, and
shows that he means nothing else but the deceitful conclusions of man's
reason, disagreeing from the doctrine of Christ revealed unto us in his word. I
grant that the word of God is only perfect, and contains in it an absolute
rule both of piety toward God, and humanity toward men, but it follows
not therefore, that we may not use the benefit of humane precepts, or tread in
the steps of heathen men, so far forth as their learning and lives dissent
not from the truth of holy Scriptures. Will any man refuse pearls because they
are offered him in base vessels? Or not use a light because it is not put into
a silver candlestick? And shall we pass over without profit, so many good
precepts and worthy examples of learned men, because they proceed from the
twilight of natural knowledge, and not from the clear sunshine of the word
of God? Let us rather harken to S. Augustine in his second book of Christian
doctrine, where he has these words agreeing very fitly to this matter. As for
those (says he) that are called Philosophers, if they Aug. lib. 2. de doct.
chr. cap. 40.
have vttred any truth agreeable to our faith and doctrine (especially the
Platonists) we are not only not to fear it, but rather to challenge it from
them as from unjust possessors thereof. For as the Egyptians had not only
idols and heavy burdens, which the people of Israel were to detest and fly
from, but also vessels and ornaments of gold, silver and raiment, which that
people at their departure out of Egypt challe^ged covertly to themselves for
better uses, although not of their own authority, but by the commandment of
God, etc. So the doctrine of the Gentiles has not only counterfeit and
superstitious forgeries and heavy packs of needeles labor, which every one of
us departing from their society under our Captain Christ, ought to detest and
shun: but also liberal Arts meet to set forth the truth by, and certain
profitable precepts of manners, yea some true points concerning the worship of
one only God. What their knowledge was concerning themselves, and their duty
one toward another, the whole Treatise following expresses at large, unto
which I had rather refer you, than use any needeles repetition in this place.
And as for that other point concerning the knowledge of one only God, it is
most certain, that from the light of Nature helped with industry, study, and
education, (according to the wisdom and dispensation of God) many notable
conclusions proceeded from sundry of them, as Augustine him self shows by a
long discourse in his eight book De Ciuitate Aug. lib. 8. de ciuit. Dei, cap.
6. 7. 8. etc.
Dei, where among other he alleges these out of Plato: That God is a
spirit, and of a far more excellent nature than the soul of man, or any
other spirit whatsoever: that God is one and the same, and always like unto
himself: that God is the light of our minds, whereby we attain to all our
knowledge and understanding: that no man is therefore blessed and happy,
because he has abundance of wealth, honor, strength beauty, or of any
external thing, nor yet for any gift of the mind, but because he enjoys God
the sovereign Good. How divinely does Aristotle write of God, and of his
fatherly providence, in his tractate De Mundo dedicated to Alexander? I know
that many with force of reason carrying them thereunto, have vehemently
suspected, that this piece of work came never out of his shop. Which although
it be granted for true, yet the book it self does evidently declare, that the
Author thereof was a mere heathen man, and directed only by his pure Naturals
when he wrote it: which being sufficient to show how far the darkness of
nature does comprehend the light and knowledge of heavenly things, is as much
as I Aristotle de Mundo.
require. This treatise being wholly occupied in these two principal points:
namely, in the description of the universal frame of the world, and in the
declaration of the nature of God the workemaister thereof, I will briefly set
before you the sum of the last part, which the Philosopher painteth out unto
us very notably in lively and orient colors. First he acknowledges, that all
things are of God, that they consist and have their being by his power, that no
nature whatsoever is able to continue, if it be not maintained and preserved by
him. And in setting out the manner of working whereby this mighty power of God
is forceable in the government of all things, he goes beyond the common reach
of natural men, affirming, that although God be present every where, yet not
by any bodily or local presence, as the common received opinion then was, That
all things whatsoever we perceive by sight, hearing, or any other sense, were
full of Gods, and as Seruetus blasphemously taught of late years, That God was
an essential part of every creature, but that he governs all things by his
power and virtue, whereby he effects whatsoever pleases him. Again, as he
subscribeth to the almighty power and providence of God in the being and rule
of all things, so he labors to make known the great wisdom of God by the
contemplation of the excellent course of nature, which is certain without
inconstancy, beautiful without blemish, and diverse without disorder. For what
can be more certain than the ordinary course of the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, which have continued in their appointed race from time to time, and
from one age unto another? What greater certainty than that which to our
comfort appears in the mutual turns and returns of times and seasons, of
Summer and Winter, Spring and Autumn, day and night? In regard of which
constant continuance of the irreuocable order appointed by God in this whole
frame, the world is called by the Hebrews gnolam: and in the Epistle to that
people, it is expressed by this word (...), (which many times signifies
perpetuity) Heb. 1. 2. and 11. 3. Concerning the beauty and glorious show
thereof, what thing more beautiful than the glittering face of the heavens,
decked and adorned with stars both great and small, as it were with jewels
and precious stones of all sorts? And for this self same cause it received that
name of (...) from the Grecians, and of Mundus from the Latins. Lastly, if we
look either to the variable motions of the Spheres in the ethereall region, or
to the contrary qualities of the elements in the aerie and lower part of the
world, or to the variety of fowls, fishes, beasts, plants, grain, stones,
metals, etc. and consider withal what a sweet harmony arises from all
these, as it were from a well tuned instrument that has strings of all sorts,
or like to a lively picture that has all kinds of colors mingled in it, or to
a well ordered city compounded of sundry occupations, callings, and
conditions, of poor and rich, young and old, bond and free, we may see if we
have but half an eye, and feel if we be blind, that in this rare piece of
work and frame of the world, there is most excellent conueiance without
confusion, great variety concurring in unity, and diversity of all kinds
without disorder. All this and much more is attributed by the Author of that
book De Mundo, (be he Aristotle, or some other heathen Philosopher) to the
only working of the power of the invisible God, of whom (says he) we must
thus conceive, that for his power he is most mighty, for his beauty most
excellent, for his life immortal, and for his virtue most absolute: and
therefore he cannot be seen of any mortal creature, but is notwithstanding
known by his works. For all accidents in the air, in the earth, and in the
water, may truly be called the works of God, who contains and preserves this
world, of whom (as Empedocles says) proceeded, All things that were, that
are, and shall be here,
Plants, Men, Beasts, Birds, and fish in waters clear.


But this Philosopher not contenting himself with this consideration and view
of God in his works, enters into a deeper meditation of his nature, by setting
down a very good exposition, and as it were a Commentary upon those names and
titles, which usually were attributed in his time unto God, thereby to make his
powerful government over all the world more known unto men. Although (says
he) that God be but one, yet we call him by many names, as (...) and (...),
because we live by him: (...), because he is of an immutable nature: (...),
because nothing is done by chance, but according to his most certain decree:
(...), because no man can possibly avoid him, or fly from him: (...), because
he abides for ever. And as for that fable (faith he) of the three sisters of
destiny, I mean of Clotho that spinneth of Leachesis that draws out to a
^ust length, and of Atropos that cutteth off the thread of man's life, it is to
be understood of God only, who (as it was said in old time) is the beginning,
midst, and end of all things. To conclude, there is a justice that is never
separated from God, which is the revenger of al transgressions committed
against the law of God, wherein every one must be well instructed that would be
partaker of humane felicity and happiness. Now judge, I pray you, whether a
Christian may not with profit enter into this school of nature, and reap
commodity by this little light of natural knowledge, which as it served to
make them without excuse that were endued therewith, because they knowing God,
did not glorify him as god, neither were thankful, but became vain in their
imaginations: so it is to be feared, that those self same men shall rise up in
judgment against us that profess Christianity, and condemn us in that great
and terrible day. For how many of us want that knowledge of the eternal power,
divinity, and providence of God, which was in Parmenides, Plato, Aristotle,
and others, endued only with the light of nature, whereby they were led from
the view of the creatures, to the consideration of the invisible things of God?
And if we look into the lives of men in these days, and consider what neglect
there is of those mutual duties which God commands us to exhibit one to
another, we shall soon see, that many a million of carnal Gospellers come
far short even of those civil apparent and half virtues of the Heathen, and
Lib. 6. Strommat.
may therefore be sent back to learn holiness of Socrates, justice and
innocence of Aristides, charity of Cymon, upright dealing of Phocion,
fidelity in perfourming promises of Regulus, moderation of Camillus,
parsimonie of Curious, gravity of Cato, and what not of Heathen men, whose
sight in these things was better at midnight, than ours is at midday. But my
meaning is not to approve that Apocriphal tradition of Clemens Alexandrinus,
who says, that as the Law was a schoole-maister to the Jews to lead them to
Christ: so Philosophy was to the Grecians to bring them to salvation. Now,
although this erroneous doctrine be as contrary to truth, as darkness is to
light, and as hell is to heaven, yet did Andradius defend it in a book set
forth by him at their instigation (as himself protests) who were of
greatest authority in the late Tridentine Council. Does not the Lord by the
mouth of Esaias tell us, that there is no light in them that have not recourse to
the Law and to the testimony, and speak not according to his word? Esaias 8.
20. Does not our Savior Christ send us to the Scriptures for everlasting
life? John 5. 39. How then dare any professing Christianity, affirm, that
Philosophers by the light of nature, and knowledge of Philosophy, without the
direction of the written word of God were made partakers of the righteousness
that comes by faith, and so consequently of eternal happiness? But to let
this blasphemous mouth pass, let us make that account of the writings of men
which they deserve, and reap that commodity by them, which we may without
prejudice to the written word. For my meaning is not in commending Philosophy,
to give greater credit unto it, or further to allow the use thereof, than may
stand with the majesty of the holy and sacred Scripture, which being the
Mistres of all humane arts and disciplines, uses them as her handmaids to
serve and obeie her. Therefore as it is unseemly for a maid-seruant to go
before her Mistres, to speak before she be spoken unto, or to use three words
for her one, especially in company where service and modesty is most
required: so it beseems not the ambassadors of Gods word (unto whom indeed
the knowledge of toongs and humane arts is a singular help) to use these gifts
otherwise than as handmaids in their studies and meditations to setue the
Scripture to the more plain and pure exposition of it, seeing they are sent to
edify others, and not to set our themselves. Now when they stuff a great part
of their speech with poetical philosophical sayings and examples (as also
they are wont to allege Hebrew, Greek, and Latin sentences to draw men into
admiration of their great learning) they set the Mistres behind, and give the
first and chiefest place unto the handmaidens. Is not this To make the cross
of Christ of none effect? I. Cor. I. 17. To use that kind of preaching that
stands in the enticing speech of man's wisdom; and not in plain evidence
and power, is it not to build faith upon the wisdom of men, and not upon the
power of God? I. Cor. 2. 4. 5. If disagreement of matter and form be
unseemly, how indecent is it in spiritual doctrine to use a carnal and humane
kind of teaching, I. Cor. 2. 13? to alay the strength of the word of Christ
with the waterish sayings and fables of men? to put upon the naked and glorious
face of God the beggarly clokes of Poets and Philosophers? When the Lord has
sanctified, not the corruptible seed of the sayings of men, but the
incorruptible seed of his own most holy word to the begetting of faith, are
not these new begetters ashamed to bring in another way of regeneration? When
Gods will is to have his children nourished with the sincere and unmingled
milk of his word, dare man use the infusion of water, to the weakening of
them whom he ought to confirm? When the King has appointed for his sons
and daughters the purest and finest wheat, shall the Steward, as if they were
swine, provide Acornes for them? But I detain you too long from entering into
the pleasant walks of this Platonical Academie and School of Moral Philosophy,
which being hewn out of the choicest timber of all Countries, was raised up,
and set together in France, and is newly rough-cast (as you see) by an English
workman: whose earnest desire is to have this small labor of his known to
other, and received of you as a monument of his grateful mind toward your
Worship, for the manifold benefits which he has from a child received at your
hands. In consideration whereof I am bold or rather bound, to offer my self
together with these my first fruits unto your good liking, beseeching him that
turned your bountiful heart toward me, to knit it so near unto himself, that
he may be your chief riches in this life, and your only happiness in the world
to come. Thus commending you and that good Gentlewoman your wife with all
yours, to the grace of God, I take my leave of you this 17. of October.

Your Worships ever bounden in the Lord, T. B. C.

FIDELI SVO AMICO, T. B. C. GALLICAE Academiae (...).
SIquis in natiuo solo collocatus, honestis quibusuis circumflue^s
voluptatibus, nec vlla necessitate eo impulsus, se tame^ amicorum hortatu in
turbulentissimas maris tempestates conijceret, vt pretiosam margaritam a suis
multu^ desideratam co^parareticerte and laudanda foret eius in tantis laboribus
subeundis alacritas, and postqua^ secundo vento vsus sit, summa cu^ laetitia
excipiendus illius reditus. Peregre, vt mihi visum est profectus es
aliquantisper (charissime amice) and licet ea fuit vitae tuae co^ditio, vt
bonis literis te oblectans, in ijs tanqua^ in tua patria consistere potuisses:
voluisti tame^ amicoru^ rogatu fluctibus te obijcere, and per aliquos scopulos
velut in Gallicam regione^ nauigare, vt hanc splendidissima^ gemmam, Academiam
nempe florentissima^, nobis etiam amicis tuis communicare posses. Appulisti
tandem ad portu^, syrtes omnes praeteruectus es, exoptata^ margarita^ tuo opere
assequuti sumus: no^ possumus ergo quin and tuam in istis laboribus
suscipiendis voluntate^ libenter agnoscamus, et in ijsde^ exantlandis
foelicitate^ libere praedicemus. Quamuis vero mul^orum in oculis vilescere
coepit Philosophia, cuius abditos the sauros in luce^ protulisti^eiusmodi tamen
sunt, quorum autoritas propter hominum leuitatem nullius est momenti, and quos
vere perstringit illud sermon tritum prouerbiu^, Scientia non habet inimicum
nisi ignorantem. Quis in Maronem Bathyllo atrocior? Quis in Vlyssem Thersite
acerbior? Quis Dialecticis arg^tijs Epicuro infestior? Et quales, quaeso* sunt,
qui canino latratu impetunt philosophia^, nisiqui huius Reginae aedes ne a
limine salutarunt? Siergo apud istos forsita^ sordescant tuae vigiliae, ne
demittas tamen animu^. Neque enim tam acre est eorum iudicium, vt iam
pertimescas, nec lingua adeo virulenta, vt vel minimam labeculam tuo nomini
aspergere possit. Ne solis quidem lumen caeco iucundum est: saluberrima
pharmaca ab imperitis conculcantur: pretiosissimae gemmae a gallo Aesopico
spernuntur: and ips^ philosophia, vitae lucerna, meant is medicina, gemma
lucidissima, a caecis, stolidis, brutis contemnitur. Si aut cum Neoptolemo apud
Ennium philosophandum saltem putassent, licet paucis; aut cum Diuo Paulo (...)
duntaxat (...) reiecissent; nos minime repugnantes habuissent: Quum vero vna
cum Apollonio philosophiam ludibrio habeant, eamque ab omni vetustate
constitutam cum Arcesila penitus labefactent, nullo modo audiendi, aut ferendi
sunt. At sicut Dicaearchus and Aristoxenus, quia difficilis erat animi quid aut
qualis esset intelligentia, nullum omnino animum esse dixerunt: Ita isti,
quorum obtusa acies philosophiae insignes fructus aspicere nequit, nullum esse
omnino philosophiae vsum clamitant. Verum enimuero, hab eat philosophia suam
laudem, sit vitae dux, morum magistra, virtutis columna, and ei tanquam reginae
solium suum tribuatur. Tuae tamen lauds nullae erunt, nullae ^e manebit
laurea, nullum hic est tuum inuentum, nullum tui acuminis specimen, nisi velis
tanquam ignauus miles de spolijs aliorum sudore partis gloriari, and latronum
more aliorum bona, alijs impressis notis, tanquam tua venditare. Siccine vero?
quid ita tandem? noui ego (mi amice) animi tui indolem, nullamque (vt ingenue
dicam, quod long a me docuit experientia) (...) in te contemplari potui: and
quamuis nulla benefacta lucem reformident, ea tame^ semper laudabiliora
duxisti, quae sine venditatione and populo test facta sunt, nullumque theatrum
virtuti conscientia maius indicasti. Cuius rei vel hoc vnicum satis est
argumenti, quod non (sicut illi philosophi de contemnenda gloria scribentes sua
nomina libris apposuerunt) voluisti hoc tuum opus tuum in front nomen gerere*
sed publicum potius commodum quam priuatam gloriam respiciens, incerto maluisti
librum prodire authore, quam nos certa carere vtilitate. Gloria autem indiuidua
virtutis comes, vide, vt te quamuis fugientem sequatur. Neque enim nihili est
tua industria aestimanda, quamuis alterius vestigijs institisti, nec parui
ducendae sunt tuae vigiliae, licet alterius opere prius elucubrata fuit ista
Academia. Aurum and argentum alunt ipsa terrae viscera: illis tamen
nonnihildebemus, quorum sudore ista metalla effodiuntur. Omne fere genus
mercaturae aliquibus in locis sua sponte nascitur; suo tamen honor minime
spoliandi sunt mercatores, quorum cum periculo vitaeque crebra iactura, tanta
nobis bona comportata sunt. Sit itaque Primaudayi aurea ista Academia, illius
sit pretiosissima haec supellex; tibi tamen aliquid interea laudis relinquatur,
cuius industria nisi sese opportune interposuisset, Anglis nostris nihil inde
emolumenti redundasset. Neque est quod quispiam agree ferat, siphilosophia
Graeca ac Romana vest vt plurimum induta, iam incipiat Britannico quoque
vestitu incedere. Bonum enim (vt pulchre philosophus) quo communius, eo melius:
and philosophiaipsa, soli haud dissimilis, in omnes terrarum orbs radios suos
disseminare cupit. Argiuorumres gestae celebres factae sunt primoab Homero:
neque tamen lusit suam operam Virgilius, cum easdem suo carmine celebrauit.
Philosophia diu Graeciae regionibus and septis inclusa mansit; nunquam tamen
consenescet Ciceronis laus, qui eam ipsam Latinis literis illustrauit. Et grata
(vti spero) memoria tuos labores prosequentur omnes, quibus factu^ est, vt
Academia ista, Gallicis antea circumscripta terminis, Anglis iamtandem
innotescat. Macte igitur virtute (charissime amice) and maiores tibi addant
spiritus istae primitiae ad maiora, si iusta se offerat occasio, suscipienda.
Spero etenim aliquando euenturum, vt, sicut in philosophico certamine vires
tuae se exeruerint, ita etiam in Theologico puluere pari saltem foelicitate
exspatientur. Interim been vale. 13. Octobr.

Tui studiosissimus, G. I.

TO THE MOST CHRISTIAN KING OF FRANCE AND POLONIA, HENRY the third of that
name.
SIR, if we credit the saying of Plato, Commonwealths begin then to be happy,
when Kings exercise Philosophy, and Philosophers reign. The wise man speaking
more d^uinely, exhorts kings to love and to seek after wisdom, that they
may reign upon earth rightcously, and in heaven eternally. And truly from
wisdom and philosophy, as from a lively fountain, flows the gift of
governing by good laws and good example, of defending by prowess, and of
nourishing by wisdom and providence, which are the bands of all perfection
requisite in an excellent and absolute prince, that desires to govern his
kingdom according to piety and justice. These three great and excellent gifts
depending of God, as every other grace does, one of those means whereby he
uses most commonly to enrich them that have the raines of worldly government
in their hand, is to imprint in their hearts a love and desire of learning and
sciences. But because they cannot so perfectly understand them, by reason of
their great and burden some charge, as private men may, who quietly enjoying
the fruit and benefit of their kings labors, addict themselves to no other
profession, their majesty's are so much the more pricked forward to love, to
inquire after, and to honor such their subjects, as are best able to set before
their eyes those virtuous and learned instructions that are drawn out of the
fountains of arts and disciplines. This moved Antigonus king of Macedonia to
write thus to Zeno the philosopher: I am assured that I excel thee in the
goods and favor of fortune, and in the renown of such things, but I know
withal, that thou art far above me, and go beyond me in that true
felicity, which consists in the knowledge and discipline of studies.
Therefore I desire earnestly that thou would come unto me: wherein I pray
thee deny me not, that I may enioie thy conversation and company, as well for
mine own profit, as for the profit of all the Macedonians my subjects. For he
that instructs a prince, does also profit as many as are under his charge.
This selfsame love of knowledge was the cause, that all the festival ornaments
of that great lover of virtue Ptolomie Philadelphus king of Egypt, were grave
questions as well of pietic as of phlosophic, which he propounded to be handled
and concluded by those learned men, whom he ordinarily maintained in his
train. Sir, the example of these two noble kings shining wholly in you, who
greatly love and favor learning, and the professors thereof, and open the gate
of that holy and virtuous discipline, which was so much cherished by ancient
men, that they might daily be instructed the better in the duty of their
charges, does promise to your good subjects and vassals, that by the grace of
God they shall see under your reign, the evil of those sinister effects
defaced, which have issued from these long troubles and civil wars. Whereof
all men have conceived a more certain hope, because they see, that you labor
with a holy zeal and good affection, to restore piety and justice to their
former strength and beauty, which were in a manner buried in France: and that
you have gloriously crowned that work, which that great king Francis your
grandfather did happily begin, to the end that arts and sciences might flourish
in this kingdom. The diner of that prince of famous memory, was a second
table of Solomon, unto which resorted from every nation such as were best
learned, that they might reap profit and instruction. Yours, Sir, being
compassed about with those, who in your presence daily discourse of, and hear
discoursed many grave and goodly matters, seems to be a school erected to
teach men that are born to virtue. And for my self, having so good hap during
the assembly of your Estates at Blois, as to be made partaker of the fruit
gathered thereof, it came in my mind to offer unto your Majesty a dish of
diverse fruits, which I gathered in a Platonicall garden or orchard, otherwise
called an ACADEMIE, where I was not long since with certain young Gentlemen of
Aniou my companions, discoursing together of the institution in good manners,
and of the means how all estates and conditions may live well and happily. And
although a thousand thoughts came then into my mind to hinder my purpose, as
the small authority, which youth may or ought to have in counsel amongst
ancient men: the greatness of the matter subject, propounded to be handled by
years of so small experience: the forgetfulness of the best foundations of
their discourses, which for want of a rich and happy memory might be in me:
my judgment not sound enough, and my profession unfit to set them down in
good order: briefly, the consideration of your natural disposition and rare
virtue, and of the learning which you receive both by reading good authors, and
by your familiar communication with learned and great personages that are near
about your Majesty (whereby I seemed to oppose the light of an obscure day,
full of clouds and darkness, to the bright beams of a very clear shining
sun, and to take in hand, as we say, to teach Minerua) I say all these
reasons being but of too great weight to make me change my opinon, yet calling
to mind many goodly and grave sentences taken out of sundry Greek and Latin
Philosophers, as also the worthy examples of the lives of ancient Sages and
famous men, wherewith these discourses were enriched, which might in delighting
your noble mind renew your memory with those notable sayings in the praise of
virtue and dispraise of vice, which you always loved to heave: and considering
also that the bounty of Artaxerxes that great Monarke of the Persians was
revived in you, who received with a cheerful countenance a present of water of
a poor laborer, when he had no need of it, thinking it to be as great an act
of magnanimity to take in good part, and to receive cheerfully small presents
offered with a hearty and good affection, as to give great things liberally, I
overcame whatsoever would have stayed me in mine enterprise. For I assured my
self thus much of your bountiful and royal greatness (which I crave in most
humble manner) that you would measure the gift and offer of this my small labor,
not according to the desert thereof, or by the person of one of your basest
servants and subjects, who presents in unto you, but according to the
excellency of those things, which you shall see handled in this Academie, and
according to the serviceable and most affectionate desire, wherewith I dedicate
and consecrate both goods and life to your service. I beseeth God, Sir, to
preserve your Majesty in great prosperity, increase of honor, and continuance
of a long and happy life. At Bar in the month of February, 1577.

Your most humble and most obedient servant and subject, Peter de la Primaudaye.

THE AVTHOR TO THE READER.
THE PHILOSOPHERS teach us by their writings, and experience does better show
it unto us, that to covet and desire is proper to the soul, and that from
thence all the affections and desires of men proceed, which draw them hither
and thither diversely, that they may attain to that thing, which they think is
able to lead them to the enjoying of some good, whereby they may line a
contented and happy life. Which felicity, the most part of men, through a
false opinion, or ignorance rather of that which is good, and by following the
inclination of their corrupted nature, do seek and labor to find in humane
and earthly things, as in riches, glory, honor, and pleasure. But for a smuch
as the enjoying of these things does not bring with it sufficient cause of
contentation, they perceive themselves always deprived of the end of their
desires, and are constrained to wander all their life time beyond all bounds
and measure, according to the rashness and inconstancy of their lusts. And
although they rejoice for a little while at every new change, yet presently
they loath the selfsame thing, which not long before they earnestly desired.
Their own estate always seems unto them to be woorst, and every present
condition of life, to be burdensome. From one estate they seek after another,
so that now they withdraw themselves from the service of princes, and mislike
public charges, and by and by they blame the private life, laboring that they
may be employed. They forsake one country to go and dwell in another, and
suddenly they desire to return again into their former ways. They that have
neither wives nor children, seek and wish for them, and when they have them,
they desire oftentimes nothing more than to be rid of them: and soon after ye
shall see them married again. Have they heaped up great store of wealth, and
increased their revenues by half so much more? they desire notwithstanding to
make it altogether as much. The soldier seeks to be a captain: from a
captain to be master of the camp: from master of the camp to be lieutenant
to the king: then he would gladly make himself king. The seely Priest would
be a Curate: from a Curate, Bishop: from a Bishop, Cardinal: from a
Cardinal, Pope: and then would command Kings and sovereign Princes. Kings
are not contented to reign over their own subjects, but bend themselves
always to enlarge their limits, to make themselves (if they can) the only
Monarchs. Briefly, all men whose hearts are set upon worldly goods, when they
are come to this estate of life, they would attain to that: and being come
thereunto, some other neae desire carries them farther, so that this mischief
of continual, uncertain, and insatiable lusts and desires does more and more
kindle in them, until in the end death cut off the thread of their inconstant,
and never contented life. This comes to pass, because the alteration of an
Estate and condition of life plucketh not out of the mind that, which presses
and troubles it: namely, the ignorance of things, and imperfection of reason.
But they, who through the study of wisdom are furnished with skill and
understanding, and know that all humane and earthly things are uncertain,
deceitful, slipperie, and so many allurements unto men to draw them into a
downe-fall and destruction, they I say, do lay a far better and more
certain foundation of their chief Good, contentation, and felicity. For they
are so far off from being carried away, as worldlings are, with the desire of
greatness, riches, and pleasure, that they rather desire less than they have,
contemn them, and so use them as though they had them not. And delivering
their souls by the grace of God, from all those perturbations, which besiege
them in the prison of their bodies, they lift up their wishes and desires, yea
they refer all the endsof their intents and actions to this only mark, to be
united and joined to the last end of their sovereign Good, which is the full
and whole fruition of the essence of God, that their holy affections might be
at once fulfilled and satisfied, by enjoying that divine light, through a most
happy and immortal life, when they shall be unclothed of this body of death,
and of all concupiscences and passions, and rejoice in such a felicity, as
neither eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor ever entered into the heart of man.
Moreover we ought to know, if we have never so little judgment and reason, that
in all worldly things how great and goodly soever they seem to our carnal eyes
and senses, there is such a mixture of bitterness and dislike joined with the
fruition of them, that if we could divide the evil from that which of the
ignorant sort is called good, and weigh them one against another, there is no
doubt but the bad part would easily weigh down what goodness soever could be
found amongst them. But how shall we call that good, which is so mingled with
evil, which oftentimes hurts more than it profits, and which being
possessed abundantly, cannot yet keep the possessor thereof from being
wretched and miserable? What contentation can a man find therein, seeing that
such a Good commonly slippeth away as soon as it is received, and always
works an insatiable desire thereof? What felicity shall we expect and look
for in the fruition of that thing, which waxes old and perishes, and which
men are always afraid to loose? Now I pray you, who can doubt justly, but that
the quality and nature of riches, of glory, of honor and pleasure is such?
Whereupon we must conclude, that man can find no goodness, contentation or
happiness, in any thing that is earthly and mortal. Besides, who knows not
sufficiently the poor estate of man's life, which in the fairest of his race
comes to nothing in the twinkling of an eye, so that all his bodily show and
brightness turns suddenly into putrefaction? Who does not try more than he
would, how full his life is of sharp griefs, and pricking miseries, and how
it is assaulted with continual troubles? With how many percing cares does it
abound, and what griping griefs do pursue it? Briefly, as a wise Grecian
said, having but the bare name of life, it is in effect and truth a continual
pain. And truly that thing has no being in deed, which changes without
ceasing, as the nature of man does, which never continues in the same estate,
no not the least moment that is. I would gladly ask of thee who read this,
or do mean to read it, what day, or what hour thou have passed, or now
passest over, since thou had any judgment or knowledge, wherein thy body
has not felt some grief, or thy heart some passion? As there is no sea without
tempest, war without danger, or journey without travel: so there is no life
without grief, nor calling without envy or care: neither did I ever see or
know that man, who has had no cause to be grieved, or to complain. Does not
experience daily teach us, that no man living can make choice of any estate
void of all trouble, or fly one inconvenience, but that he is in danger to
fall into another? Is it not also most certain, that a sudden joy or
prosperity, is but a fore-warning or sign of some grief and heavy calamity
at hand? But what? Shall we for all this think man so miserable, that sailing
all his life time in storms and tempests, he cannot possibly attain to any
safe haven against the rage of them? Shall we in such sort deprive him, (during
the time of his being in this world) of all Good, contentation and happiness, as
if there were no means to avoid, or at leastwise to mollify the mishaps and
miseries of mankind, that he faint not under the heavy burden of them?
Wherefore then do wise men by so many learned writings inuit us diligently to
seek after, and with a burning zeal to embrace holy virtue, saying, that by
her alone a man may live happily and contentedly in every calling, and may
enjoy therein the sovereign Good, through the tranquillity and rest of his
soul, purged of perturbations by Philosophy? Was it in vain and fruitles,
that an infinite number of famous personages, whom Histories, the mother of
antiquity set before our eyes, employed so great travel, passed infinite
watchings, for sooke and contemned riches, pleasures, honors, and worldly
commodities, to get and treasure up virtue only? And why do we, after their
example, despise all these things, and spend that which we account most
precious, I mean time, that we may be adorned and clothed with virtue, if it
cannot make us hit that mark, which every one so much desires and seeks
after with such great pain and labor, namely, that they may enjoy some chief
Good in this world, and lead thereby a contented and happy life? Be not
overtaken (friendly Reader) with this small difficulty, which perhaps might
cause a gross and feeble head not well instructed in wisdom, to stagger and
depart out of the right way. Now, although the heavenly word only has the
perfect and sound knowledge of wisdom, because he is that eternal wisdom
it self, yet man being his workmanship, and aided with his grace must not
leave of to seek for, and to require earnestly of him that gift of the
knowledge and participation of the secrets of that incomprehensible truth, (so
far forth as he may and shall be necessary for him) that his soul thereby
may obtain her permanent and lasting happiness. Moreover, albeit our sovereign
and chief Good, our perfect contentation and absolute felicity be only in
heaven in the enjoying of that divine light, yet we must not in the mean
while, (albeit we cannot fully possess that) leave of to seek without
ceasing, or give over in any sort to keep and follow that good and infallible
way of virtue, which causing us to pass over quietly, and to sustain with joy
of spirit the miseries of mankind, and appeasing the perturbations of our
souls, from whence proceed all the evils that torment us, and making them void
of all damnable effects, will teach us to lead a pleasant, peaceable and quiet
life, and to effect all things worthy and beseeming this certain hope, that
we shall one day (by the grace of God) be framed a new in that eternal, most
happy, and contented life. Let us therefore account this world, and all the
riches thereof, as a thing belonging to an other, as a stranger and nothing
appertaining to those men, who being regenerated by the spirit of grace have
profited well in the school of wisdom. Let us not seek for friendship
upon earth: let us not couete after riches, glory, honor and pleasure, which
none but fools do extol, desire and wonder at. We are not of this world,
but strangers only therein, and therefore let us set all worldly things
behind us, and account them unworthy the care of our immortal souls, if we
mean not to perish with the world by joining our selves there-unto. Let us
forsake it, I say forsake it boldly how precious soever it be, that we may
abundantly treasure up that great, This commendation of virtue is chiefly to
be understood of faith the root of all good virtues.
sweet and durable wealth, I mean virtue, which is honored, loved, and
desired for it self only, which is the true and wholesome medicine for
diseased souls, the rest of the mind oppressed with care, the cause (by the
will of GOD) of that chief Good wherein the principal end of the soul
consists, and the only assured guide which leads to the Haven so much
desired of every one, namely, the contentation of mind. Which thing this
present Academie does not only set before our eyes, but also does save and
keep us being already entered into this Haven of safety, against all
tempests, if we will our selves, and not spare our labor to reap profit of
those learned and wise instructions that are here given unto us by the
precepts of doctrine, and examples of the lives of ancient, virtuous, and
famous men. For first of all we shall learn hereby to know our selves, and
the end of our being. Secondly, we shall be instructed in good manners, and
taught how we may live well and happily in every estate and condition of life
whatsoever. Yea we shall find in the basest and lowest estate, which of the
ignorant and common sort of people is oftentimes called miserable, as much joy
and happiness, as a Monarch can be partaker of in the fruition of his
greatness, yea much more than he, if he be wicked: because vice in all
Estates makes the possessour thereof wretched, and contrariwise, Virtue makes
every condition of life happy. Moreover we shall see in this Academie, that
every one loving and fearing GOD may obtain this inestimable Good of virtue,
and thereby remain a Conqueror over the perturbations of his soul, which
breed all his misery, remembering this point always, so far forth as the
frail nature of man, aided by the Author of all goodness can attain to this
perfection. We shall learn here how we ought to govern our selves wisely and
duetifully in all humane actions and affairs, and in all charges and places
whatsoever, either public or private whereunto we shall be called. We may
note here cause of the subversion and ruin of many Empires, Estates and
Commonwealths, and of the glittering show and glory of infinite others: as
also the cause of the wretchedness and destruction of a great number of men,
and what has lift up others, and crowned them with honor and immortal
praise. We shall be taught here the government of a house and family, the
manner of the education and instruction of children, the mutual duty of
married couples, of brethren, of masters and servants, how to command, and
how to obey. We shall see here the order and establishment of policies and
superiorities: what is the duty of the Heads of them, of Princes and
Governors of nations, as also what the duty of their subjects is. Briefly,
both great and small may draw out from hence the doctrine and knowledge of
those things which are most necessary for the government of a house, and of a
Commonwealth, with sufficient instruction how to frame their life and manners
in the moulde and pattern of true and holy virtue, and how by means thereof,
(the grace of GOD woorking in them) they may run the race of their days in
joy, happiness, rest and tranquillity of spirit, and that in the midst of
greatest adversities, which the uncertainty and continual change of humane
things may bring upon them. Now because the sequel compounded of the sundry
treatises and discourses of this Academy, will sufficiently instruct thee in
all things above mentioned, as it promises in the forefront and title
thereof, I will not dilate this matter any farther, but only desire of thee
(Reader) patiently to hear these Academicall students, from the first of their
discourses unto the last. Their intent was only (as thou may understand more
at large in the entrance of their assembly) to teach themselves, and next every
one according to their ability, the institution of good manners, and rule of
good lining, for all ordinary and common estates and conditions of life in our
French Monarchy, to the end that every member of this politic body (brought
thus low with evils, and beaten with tempestuous storms) might somewhat help
and profit it by their counsels and instructions. And this thou may do
(friendly Reader) if thou take payns to read well, to understand better, and
(which is best of all) to follow the precepts, instructions and examples, which
thou shall find here: as also, if thou bring hither a good will and
cheerful disposition, void of all malicious envy, which at this day is
commonly practiced by most men of this our age (who like to malicious
Censorers) busy themselves rather in seeking out what to bite at, and to
reprehend in other men's works, than to draw out, and to commend that which is
good, or to assay to make them better. Besides, thou shall have somewhat to
commend in the order of these discourses, and in the manner of teaching which is
in them. For after the handling of that knowledge which is especially necessary
for man, all those virtues follow which he ought to embrace, and those vices
which he is to shun. Next, he is instructed in that which concerns
housekeeping: then in that which has respect to estates and policies, and
last of all how he may die well, after he has lived well. As for the manner of
teaching, which is diligently observed by these Academikes, thou shall see that
first they praise that virtue, or disprayse that vice which they propound to
themselves to discourse upon, that they may move and frame men's minds as well
to hate the one as to desire the other. Then they define that whereof they
discourse, that the end of the present subject may be better known. Afterward,
they give precepts to find out the means whereby to attain to that which is
Good, and to eschew the evil. Lastly, they add examples, which are lively
reasons, and of great weight to move men with delight to embrace virtue and to
fly vice. Now if thou think that too little is spoken, considering the
goodly and large matter here propounded, it is not because they knew not that
the excellency of every thing put forth here is so great, and the reasons so
abundant that a man might well make a book therofby it self, as many learned
men have done, but the chief scope and drift of these Interspeakers, was to
discourse briefly of such things as are necessarily required in the institution
of manners, and of a happy life. Nevertheless it may well be, that that which
thou find not sufficiently followed in one place may be learned in another,
if thou look unto the end. Moreover they who are here named, and who mind to
retain always the name of disciples, never purposed or presumed to set down
resolutions, or to appoint laws which are necessarily to be kept, and may not
be changed in any wise by those that are cleeresighted, according to the
occurrence and benefit of the estate of this Monarchy, but grounding their
counsels and instructions upon the soundest and most approved opinion of the
writings of learned men, both of ancient and late times, and upon such as drew
nearest to the infallible rule of the holy scriptures according to the small
measure of graces given them from above, they have left to every one (following
therein the ancient school of the Academikes) liberty to compare the motives
of the one side, with the reasons on the other, that the truth of all things
might be diligently searched out and inquired after, that none through any
headstrong conceit should be wedded to private opinions: and that afterward
choice might be made of the best, and of such as are most certain, thereby to
order and rule all intents and actions, and to refer them to the perpetual
glory of that great Lord of Hierarchies, who is the only cause and chief
fountain of all Good, contentation, and happiness.

Spe certa quid melius?
The Contents of the several chapters of this Book.
Chap. 1 Of Man. Page. 10 2 Of the body and soul. 19 3 Of the diseases and
passions of the body and soul, and of the tranquillity thereof. 27 4 Of
Philosophy. 38 5 Of Virtue. 51 6 Of Vice. 63 7 Of Sciences, of the study of
Letters, and of Histories. 72 8 Of the Spirit, and of Memory. 83 9 Of Duty
and Honesty. 92 10 Of Prudence. 103 11 Of want of Prudence and of Ignorance,
of Malice and subtletie. 115 12 Of Speech and Speaking. 126 13 Of Friendship
and of a Friend. 136 14 Of Reprehension and Admonition. 148 15 Of Curiosity
and Noucitie. 159 16 Of Nature and Education. 170 17 Of Temperance. 179 18 Of
Intemperance, and of Stupiditie or blockishnes. 189 19 Of Sobriety and
Frugalitie. 198 20 Of Superfluity, Sumptuousness, Gluttony, and Wallowing in
delights. 209 21 Of Ambition. 223 22 Of Voluptuousnes and Looseness of life.
234 23 Of Glory, Praise, Honor, and of Pride. 245 24 Of Shame, Shamefastnes,
and of Dishonor. 256 25 Of Fortitude. 265 26 Of Timorousnes, Fear, and
Cowardlines: and of Rashness. 277 27 Of Magnanimity and Generositie. 288 28 Of
Hope. 298 29 Of Patience and of Impatiencie: of Choler and Wrath. 308 30 Of
Meeknes, Clemency, Mildnes, Gentleness and Humanity. 319 31 Of good and ill
Hap. 328 32 Of Prosperity and Adversity. 338 33 Of Riches. 350 34 Of
Poverty. 358. 35 Of Idleness, Sloth and Gaming. 367 36 Of an Enemy, of Injury
and of Revenge. 378 37 Of Justice. 390 38 Of Injustice, and of Severity. 402
39 Of Fidelity, Forswearing, and of Treason. 413 40 Of Ingratitude. 424 41 Of
Liberality, and of the use of Riches. 434 42 Of Covetousness, and of
Prodigality. 444 43 Of Envy, Hatred, and Backbiting. 457 44 Of Fortune. 467
45 Of Marriage. 478 46 Of a House and Family, and of the kinds of Marriage: of
certain ancient customs observed in marriage. 484 47 Of the particular duty
of a Husband toward his wife. 500 48 Of the duty of a Wife toward her
Husband. 513 49 Of the duty of the Head of a family in other parts of the
house, namely, in the Parentall, Masterly, and Possessorie part. 523 50 Of the
duty of children toward their Parents: of the mutual love that ought to be
among brethren: of the duty of servants toward their masters. 536 51 Of the
Education and instruction of Children. 549 52 Of the division of the ages of
Man, and of the offices and duties that are to be observed in them. 561 53 Of
Policy, and of sundry sorts of Governments. 573 54 Of the sovereign
Magistrate, and of his authority and office. 584 55 Of the Law. 593 56 Of the
People, and of their obedience due to the Magistrate, and to the Law. 603 57
Of a Monarchy, or a Regal power. 615 58 Of diverse kinds of Monarchies, and of
a Tyranny. 627 59 Of the Education of a Prince in good manners and conditions.
640 60 Of the office and duty of a King. 652 61 Of a Council, and of
Counselors of Estate. 675 62 Of Judgments and of Judges. 689 63 Of Seditions.
703 64 Of the causes that breed the change, corruption, etc. of Monarchies and
Policies. 716 65 Of the preseruations of Estates and Monarchies, and of
remedies to keep them from sedition. 730 66 Of the Harmony and agreement that
ought to be in the dissimilitude or unlike callings of subjects, by reason of
the duty and office of every estate. 743 67 Of Peace and of War. 754 68 Of
the ancient Discipline and order of War. 764 69 Of the office and duty of a
General. 772 70 Of the choice of Soldiers, of the manner how to exhort them to
fight, and how victory is to be used. 783 71 Of a happy Life. 794 72 Of Death.
804
THE FIRST DAYS WORK of this Academie, with the cause of their assembly.
WHen GOD by his infinite and unspeakable goodness, beholding with a fatherly,
bountiful, and pitiful eye our poor France (which most cruel against it
self, seemed to run amain most furiously to throw it self headlong into the
center of some bottomless gulf) had sent from heaven the wished-for news of
peace in the midst of civil and domestical armies, (which a man might say
were of purpose prepared for the final overthrow of this French Monarchy,
that has flourished so long time) sparing by his heavenly grace and favor, and
that in despite of them, the blood of those men, who held forth their right
hand to cut off the left, among many, who touched with the love of their
country, and with true zeal to piety, reioiced at this so well liking and
healthful news, four young gentlemen of Aniou, who came together to serve
their Prince, and to sacrifice their lives, if need required, for the welfare
and safety of the Common wealth, were none of the last that sought out one
another, and met together to testify each to other (as their mutual kindred
and sworn friendship did inuit them) the joy, which filled their souls,
arising of so happy and unlooked for success and alteration of affairs: to
the end also that they might give glory and praise to him, who for the benefit
of his, knows well how to take order even in those things, which according to
the judgment of men are desperate and past recovery. And that which gave them
greater occasion to rejoice for this peace, and so diligently to seek out one
another was this, because contratie to hope, they saw the means offered them
to return home, and to continue an exercise that greatly pleased them, which
not long before the last fall of France into troubles they had happily begun.
Now to let you (readers) understand what this exercise was, these four
gentlemen being of kin, and near neighbors, and in a manner of one age, were by
the care and prudence of their fathers brought up and nourished together from
their young years in the study of good letters, in the house of an ancient
wise gentleman of great calling, who was the principal stock and root of
these fruitful buds. This man by reason of his manifold experience, and long
abode in strange countries, knew that the common corruption of French youth, of
it self inclined to pleasure, proceeded chiefly from the over great license,
and excessive liberty granted unto them in the Universities of this Realm, as
well through the fault and negligence of the governors and tutors in them, as
also because of the evil government of the towns at this day. He knew also
that they were no less abused, who thinking to avoid this dangerous
downe-fall at home, did send their children to study abroad amongst strangers,
where the traffike and merchandise of mischiefs is more common and easy to be
made, because they fear not that news will presently, or so speedily be
carried to their parents, as if they were near unto them. Oh how well worthy
of eternal praise is the prudence of this gentleman, bringing to my
remembrance Eteocles one of the most noble Ephories of Lacedemonia, who freely
answered Antipater asking fifty pledges, that he would not give him children,
least if they were brought up far from their fathers, they should change the
ancient custom of living used in their own country, and become vicious: but
of old men and women, he would give him double the number, if he would have
them. Whereupon being threatened by this king, if he speedily sent him not of
the youth: we care not (quoth he) for threatenings. For if thou command us to
do things that are more grievous than death, we will rather choose death: so
careful were the men of old time, that the dressing and trimming of these
young plants should not be out of their presence. But let us go on with our
matter. This good and notable old man having spent the greater part of his
years in the service of two kings, and of his country, and for many good
causes withdrawn himself to his house, thought that to content his mind,
which always delighted in honest and virtuous things, he could not bring
greater profit to the Monarchy of France, than to lay open a way and mean to
preserve and keep youth from such a pernicious and cancred corruption, by
offering himself for example to all fathers, and showing them the way to have
a more careful eye in the instruction of their children, and not so lightly to
commit them to the discipline of vices, by the hands of mercenarie and hired
strangers. And this was begun upon these four young gentlemen, whom he took
to his own house, by the consent of their parents, offering himself to the
uttermost of his power, to help their gentle nature, which appeered in them
worthy their ancestors, by training it up, first in the fear of God, as
being the beginning of al wisdom: secondly, in humane learning and knowledge,
which are necessary helps to live well and happily, to the benefit of the
society of men. To this end, after that he himself had showed them the first
grounds of true wisdom, and of al things necessary for their salvation,
according to the measure of grace given him from above, and as their age could
conceive them, he labored earnestly to have in his house some man of great
learning, and well reported of for his good life and conversation, unto whom he
committed the instruction of this young Nobility. Who behaved himself so well
in his charge, that not greatly staying himself in the long degrees of
learning, which being ordinary, and usual in our French Colleges, are often
more tedious (besides loss of time) than profitable to youth, after he had
indifferently taught his scholars the Latin tongue, and some smackering of the
Greek, he propounded for the chief part and portion of their studies the
moral philosophy of aucient Sages and wise men, together with the
understanding, and searching out of histories, which are the light of life:
therein following the intent and will both of him that set him on work, and
also of the parents of this Nobility, who desired to see their children, not
great Orators, subtle Logitians, learned Lawiers, or curious Mathematicians,
but only sufficiently taught in the doctrine of good living, following the
traces and steps of virtue, by the knowledge of things past from the first ages
until this present: that they might refer all to the glory of the divine
majesty, and to the profit and utility as well of themselves as of their
country. And yet in the mean while these noble and toward youths were not
deprived of other exercises meet for them, which (as the divine Plato says)
are very profitable for this age, and help much to quicken the spirits of
young men, and to make their bodies which are weak by nature, more strong and
apt to sustain travel: as namely, to ride horses, to run at the ring, to
fight at barriers, to apply themselves to all kind of weapons, and to follow
the chase of beasts. All which exercises this wise and ancient Knight did
intermingle with their earnest studies by way of recreation, himself standing
them in stead of a master. For in such exercises he was as fully furnished as
is to be wished in a man of valor and actiuitie, insomuch that he was more
expert than many of our time, who make no other profession. Now this school
having been continued for the space of six or seven years, to the great
profit of this nobility of Aniou, the four fathers on a day took their
journey to visit this good old man, and to see their children. And after the
usual welcome, which is between kinsfolks and friends, they discoursed
together of the corruption, which then was in all estates of France, whereupon
they foresawe (as they said) some great storm at hand, if every one did not
put to his helping hand for the correction and reformation of them, but chiefly
the secular power authorized of God for this purpose. They alleged for witness
of their saying many examples of ancient estates, commonwealths and kingdoms,
which were fallen from the height of glory and excellency into a general
subversion and overthrow, by reason of vices reigning in them unpunished. And
thus continuing their speech from one thing to another, they fell in talk of
the corrupt manners that might particularly be noted in all, and those
maintained by authority and with commendation, insomuch that both great and
small endeavored to disguise vice with the name of virtue. In fine they were of
opinion to hear their children discourse heervpon, that they might know and
judge, whether they had profited so well in the institution of good manners (the
rule of good life) by following of virtue, and by the knowledge of histories
(the pattern of the time past for the better ordering of the time present) as
their master, who was present at the discourses of these ancient gentlemen,
did assure them, by intermingling the praises of his scholars in the midst of
their grave talk, and vaunting that they were well armed to resist the
corruption of this age. For truly virtue purchased and gotten by practice, is
of no less power against all contagion of wickedness, than preservatives well
compounded are of force in a plague time to preserve in good health the
inhabitants of a country, and as heretofore that famous physicion Hippocrates
preserved his city of Coos from a mortality that was general throughout all
Grecia, by counselling his countrymen to kindle many fires in all public
places, to the end thereby to purify the air: even so whosoever has his
soul possessed, and his heart well armed with the brightness and power of
virtue, he shall escape the dangers of corruption, and eschew all contagion of
evil manners. But returning to the intent and desire of our good old men,
because they had small skill in the Latin tongue, they determined to have their
children discourse in their own natural tongue, of all matters that might
serve for the instruction and reformation of every estate and calling, in such
order and method, as themselves with their foresaid master should think best.
For this purpose they had two hours in the morning granted unto them, wherein
they should be heard, and as much after dinner, which was to each of them one
hour in a day to speak in. You may guess (gentle readers) whether this
lively youth did not bestow the rest of the day, yea oftentimes the whole night
upon the well studying of that which they purposed to handle, and with what
cheerfulnes of heart, and willingness of mind they presented themselves before
the honorable presence of their fathers, who were so greatly delighted in
hearing them, that for the most part in stead of four hours a day before
mentioned, they bestowed six or eight. For after they had heard the two first
discourse one morning, they had not the patience to refer the rest of that
matter unto the afternoon, when the other twain of their children should be
heard, but commonly commanded them presently to enter the lists, and to
proceed, as being jealous over their glory in regard of their companions. In
this commendable manner of passing their time they continued certain days. But
the sudden and sorrowful news of the last frantike return of France into
civil war brake up their happy assembly, to the end that these noble youths,
betaking themselves to the service due to their prince, and to the welfare and
safety of their country, might make trial of their first feats of arms,
wherein they wanted neither readiness, nor valor of heart, which being naturally
in them was also increased by the knowledge of philosophy. The study whereof
resembling (as Plato says) to a separation of the soul from the body,
stands wise men in stead of an exercise to die without fear, when duty
requires it, and causes them to esteem of death, as of the cause of the true
and perfect good of the soul. For which reason, Socrates, Xenophon, Architas,
Thucidides, Thales, Epaminondas, and a million of other famous men, learned
philosophers, and historiographers having charge of armies, never doubted, or
feared in any sort to offer themselves cheerfully unto all perils and dangers,
when the question and contention was for public benefit and safety, and in a
just war, without which a wise man never ought to fight. Yea I dare boldly say,
that the greatest, and most famous exploits of warfare, were achieved for the
most part by them and their like. Which served well for a spur to our young
Angeuins to cause them to undertake this journey with joy and cheerfulnes of
spirit, being resolved to follow with all their might the examples of such
great and notable personages, as histories, the treasury of time, did call to
their remembrance. When they were in the camp, each of them according to his
particular affection ranged himself under sundry cornets of great Lords and
good captains. But, as we said in the beginning, after news of the peace
proclaimed, which was so greatly looked for, and desired of all good men, they
labored forthwith to meet together, knowing that their ioint-returne would be
acceptable to their friends, especially to that good olde-man by whom they
were brought up. Moreover they deliberated with themselves as soon as they
were arrived at the old man's house, to give their fathers to understand
thereof, to the end they might be certified from them, whether it were their
pleasures to have them reiterate and continue in their presence the moral
discourses begun by them, as we learned before, that they might be refreshed
with the remembrance of their studies, and thereby also keep fast for ever
those good instructions, which by the daily travel of so many years they had
drawn out of the fountain of learning and knowledge. As it was devised by
them, the execution thereof followed, so that all these good old-men being
assembled together, taking up their first order, and conferring anew of the
same matters, daily met in a walking place covered over in the midst with a
goodly green Arbor, alotting for this exercise from eight to ten in the
morning, and from two to four in the afternoon. Thus they continued this
exercise for the space of three whole weeks, which make eighteen days works,
besides the three Saboth days, set apart by them, that they might rest and
cease from their studies, and attend the better to the chief point of that
holy days institution, which is to the contemplation, and consideration of
the works of God, of his law, and of his praises. During which time it was my
good hap to be one of the company when they began their discourses, at which I
so greatly woondred, that I thought them worthy to be published abroad, as
well to enrich our French tongue with an infinite number of grave sentences, and
speeches worthy to be remembered, being drawn out of the fountain of Greek
and Latin arts and disciplines, through the incredible labor of these youths,
lovers of virtue, as also to awake and stir up by their example all the
Nobility with a jealousy and emulation of glory, gotten by the same virtue.
For only virtue is able to guide and conduct gentlemen to honor, for the
obtaining whereof (as they say) they contend and fight so often, and can also
restore them to the fruition of their first rights of authority, and goodly
privileges, whereby (as we read of the ancient Romans) such as were most
worthy amongst the Nobility were chosen to attend unto these three things:
namely, to the service of God, which is to govern, as the scripture speaks:
secondly to the administration of laws and justice, which is the pillar of
kingdoms: and lastly to the tuition and defense of the Commonwealth by arms,
which is the assurance thereof against all practices and assaults of the enemy.
Of which three excellent administrations, necessary for the establishing and
maintenance of all estates and commonwealths, the most part of our Nobility
retains the last only, which likewise they seem to despise in a manner,
submitting to their great shame, by reason of their ignorance and weltring in
delights and pleasure, their conscience, honor, goods, and life, to the opinion
and judgment of those whom nature and right had subjected to them. But mark
how we devised to proceed in our discourses: to wit, that three of us one after
another should utter some sentence or memorable saying, in the praise of that
virtue, or dispraise of that vice, whereof we were resolved to speak, and that
the fourth should make a whole discourse of that matter. Which being ended, he
should begin the first proposition of the second treatise, and two others
should follow him therein: then the last should make the second whole
discourse for that morning. Likewise in the afternoon, the same party was to
lay open that matter, which was to be entreated of, and two others continuing
it, one of those, who in the morning did only propound, should discourse in
his turn: and then giving unto his companions new matter subject, he which as
yet had not discoursed at all, was to handle it, and so to make an end for that
day. And thus all four of us followed the same order daily, until every one
in his course had entreated according to appointment, both by the precepts of
doctrine, as also by the examples of the lives of ancient Sages and famous men,
of all things necessary for the institution of manners, and happy life of all
estates and callings in this French Monarchy. But because I know not whether,
in naming my companions by their proper names, supposing thereby to honor them,
as in deed they deserve it, I should displease them, (which thing I would not
so much as think) I have determined to do as they that play on a Theater, who
under borrowed masks and disguised apparel, do represent the true personages
of those whom they have undertaken to bring on the stage. I will therefore call
them by names very agreeable to their skill and nature: the first, ASER, which
signifies Felicity: the second, AMANA, which is as much to say as Truth: the
third, ARAM, which notes unto us Highness: and to agree with them as well in
name, as in education and behauior, I will name my self ACHITOB, which is all
one with Brother of goodness. Further more I will call and honor the proceeding
and finishing of our sundry treatises and discourses with this goodly and
excellent title of Academie, which was the ancient and renowned school amongst
the Greek Philosophers, who were the first that were esteemed, and that place
where Plato, Xenophon, Polemon, Xenocrates, and many other excellent
personages, afterward called Academiks, did propound and discourse of al things
meet for the instruction and teaching of wisdom: wherein we purposed to
follow them to our power, as the sequel of our discourses shall make good
proof. Begin then (gentle readers) to hear that which we spoke concerning Man
in the first days work, using these or the like speeches.

Aser, Felicity: Amana, Truth: Aram, Highness: Achitob, Brother of goodness.
Of Man. Chap. 1.
WHen I direct my flight now and then (my companions) even unto the heavens,
and with the wings of contemplation behold their wonderful greatness, their
terrible motions, being contrary and without ceasing, the lively brightness,
rare beauty, and incomparable force of the sun and moon, their unchangeable
course, one while cause of light, and by and by after of darkness, the infinite
number of goodly stars, and of so many other celestial signs: and from this
excellent and constant order of all these things, as one ravished and amassed,
when I withdraw my spirit lower into the elementarie region, to admire and
wonder at the situation and spreading of the earth amidst the waters, both of
them making one round mass or lump, which in the midst of this great
firmament occupies the room but of a prick or tittle in respect thereof:
besides, when I acknowledge in this earth and water as many sundry and most
beautiful plants, and kinds of earthie and waterie creatures, as there are
grains of sand on the sea banks: and when I delight my self in the variety
of minerals and precious stones, considering the form, quality, and virtue of
each of these things: briefly, when I admire the diversity of times and
seasons, the continual spring of fountains, the certain course of rivers,
and generally, so many wonderful works under the cope of heaven, I cannot
marvel enough at the excellency of Man, for whom all these things were
created, and are maintained and preserved in their being and moving, by one
and the same divine providence always like unto it self.

AMANA. There is nothing more certain than this, that all things whatsoever
either the eye can behold, or the ear hear, were created for the benefit,
profit, and use of man, and that he was made excellent above all things to rule
over them: yea the very Angels are sent to minister for their sakes, which
shall receive the inheritance of Hebr. 1.
salvation.


ARAM. Oh unspeakable and heavenly goodness, which have created man little
lower than thy self, and crowned him with glory and worship. But tell us I
pray Psalm. 8.
thee (ACHITOB) more particularly, what this great and principal work of
nature, Man, is, to what end his being was given him, and how he has showed
forth the fruits thereof. For it ^^st needs be, that there is something All
things were created for man.
in him greatly to be woondered at, seeing all things were created to serve and
obey him.


ACHITOB. To knowo our selves is true wisdom.
Truly ye have reason (companions) to begin our happy assembly with that
knowledge, which we ought to have of our selves, as being the storehouse of all
wisdom, and beginning of salvation: whereof we may have an assured testimony
from that father of Philosophy Socrates, who beholding the first precept
written at Delphos in that temple of Apollo, which was so renowned throughout
Graecia, namely, Know thy self, was forthwith driven into a very deep
cogitation, and being rapt with contemplation of spirit, he began from that
time forward to doubt and to inquire of himself. Whereupon contemning that way,
which all the Philosophers of his time, who busied themselves about nothing,
but only in finding out the causes of natural things, and in disputing
curiously of them, he gave himself wholly to the The soul is truly man.
knowledge of himself, I mean of his soul, which he maintained to be in deed
man, and by disputuation to entreat of the sovereign good thereof, and of
virtue. By which means the gate of wisdom was opened unto him, wherein he
profited in such sort, that according to Socrates was called the father of
Philosophy.
the oracle at Delphos, he was called of all men the wise, the just, the prince
of Philosophers, and father of Philosophy. And surely out of his sayings,
which being more divine than humane, were written by his disciples, all other
Philosophers have drawn their knowledge. Heraclitus another excellent man,
minding to give out in speech that he had done some notable act, worthy of
himself, said: I have sought my self. Which beginning truly is very
necassarie for man, as being a guide to lead him to the true knowledge of God,
which is a heavenly gift of God, and peculiar to his. And this is learnedly
taught us by the same Socrates, where he says, that the duty of a wise man is
to seek out the reasons of things, that in the end he may find that divine
reason whereby they were made: and having found it, may worship and serve it,
that afterward he may enjoy it, and Socrates said that the knowledge of God and
of our selves must be joined together.
reap profit thereby. Moreover he adds, that the perfect knowledge of ones
self, which consists in the soul, is in such sort joined with the knowledge
of God, that the one without the other cannot be sincere and perfect. And for
the same reason, Plato, his disciple, who for the excellency of his writings
was Wherein the dutio of man consists.
surnamed the Diuins, says, that the perfect duty of man is, first to know his
own nature: then to contemplate the divine nature: and last of all to bestow
his labor in those things, which may be most beneficial to all men. Ignorance
of a man's self (says Ignorance of our selves the cause of much evil.
Lactantius) and the want of knowledge wherefore and to what end he is borne,
is the cause of error, of evil, of leaving the right way to follow the
crooked, of wandering out of the plain way to walk in the ragged and uneven
way, or upon a dangerous and slipperie mountain: and lastly, of forsaking the
light to walk in darkness. Now if we account it a shameful thing to be
ignorant of those things which belong to the life of man, surely the not
knowing of our selves is much more dishonest. Let us then consider what man is,
according to that mean knowledge, which by the grace of God we are endued
withal, not staying in those curious definitions, which the Philosophers have
made. Man is a creature made of God What man is. Genesis 1. Col. 3.
after his own image, just, holy, good and right by nature, and compounded of
soul and body. I say of soul, which was inspired of God with spirit and
life, and of a perfect natural body, framed of the earth by the same power of
God. In this sort man had his being of the eternal workmaster of the whole
world, of whom he was created by his incomprehensible goodness, to be made
partaker of his immortality and permanent felicity, for this only end to
set forth the glory of his Creator, and to speak The end of man's being.
and do those things that are agreeable unto him, through the acknowledgement of
his benefits. From which end man being fallen of his own free will through
ingratitude and disobedience, was bereaved of all those ornaments, which he had
received before of God, and in steed of righteousness and holiness, all
iniquity, filthiness and uncleanness entered into him: whereby he was made the
slave of sin and of death, from whence all those miseries had their
beginning, wherewith the life of man is overwhelmed. His soul also, was
wrapped with infinite hurtful passions, and perturbations, which work in it a
continual disquietnes, and his body became subject to innumerable travails,
and violent untowardness. Of which corruption the ancient Philosophers had great
and assured knowledge, but the first and true cause thereof, which was sin,
and the voluntary fall of man, with his restoring unto grace by the
unspeakable goodness and mercy of his Creator, from whence he was fallen, were
always hidden from them, (as we shall see anon) as also from an infinite
number of men, who living holily according to the world never had the perfect
knowledge of God in his eternal son. As for any good thing whatsoever they
uttered, or found out, it came through earnestnes of study, by discoursing and
considering in the reasonable part of their soul, of those things which offered
themselves to their mind. But forasmuch as they were not wholly overwhelmed in
every part of reason, and yet had no knowledge of the heavenly word Jesus
Christ, they uttered many things contrary one to another: and in the midst of
their great and wonderful skill (according to that saying of the Scripture,
who hides his secrets from the prudent and reueleth them to babes) they had a
continual troubled spirit, wandering here and there as well in the seeking out
of themselves and of the causes of natural things, as of those things which
are above nature. And truly, the reason of man, naturally ingraffed in his
heart, which so far forth as he is man, and according to his ability and
There is a double reason in man.
manner of life he imitateth and follows, is diverse from that which by special
grace from above comes to the elect, accompanies them, and helps them in
all their actions. This is full of faith, and of vndeceaueable assurance of
eternal promises: the other, weak, troubled and woonderfully hindered, wherein a
man can never have any certain resolution. This is that which caused
Aristotle, who was Platoes disciple, and prince of the Peripatetike school, to
say, that the more knowledge a man has, the greater occasion of doubting was
offered. Neither can we Heraclitus wept continually.
judge otherwise but that the same reason of trouble and doubting moved the
above named Heraclitus that great Philosopher, to spend his life in continual
weeping, howsoever he alleges wisely, that it was for the compassion he had
of man's nature, both for that the life of men consisted in nothing but in
miseries, as also because all the labors wherein they exercised themselves,
seemed unto him to be worthy of great commiseration and pity: namely, seeing
that they being far wide of justice, did yet through too greedy desire make
themselves slaves Democritus always laughed.
unto all covetousness and vainglorie. This also was an argument of inconstancy
and wavering in Democritus, who never came abroad amongst men, but he laughed
vnmeasurably at all their works and deeds. Howbeit herein he said truly, that
the life of man was vanity and folly, and that all their lusts and desires
were fond, and worthy to be laughed at. But such extremities of laughter and
weeping are not seemly in him, who is well instructed in the study of
Philosophy, and in the certain knowledge The judgment of Philosophers
concerning the nature of man.
of himself: which thing these Philosophers so earnestly labored to attain
unto, as we shall see anon, after we have learned what other ancient men have
thought of the nature and state of man. What other thing (says Pindarus)
Pindarus.
is man, than the shadow of a dream in ones sleep? Whereby he shows the
vanity of man by an excellent manner of speaking, very significantly uttering
his meaning. For what thing is less than a dream, yea than the shadow of a
dream? Homer having compared mortal Homer.
creatures together, both in respect of their continuance, as of the maintenance
of their life, cries out, that of all those which walk on the earth and draw
breath, there is not one more miserable than man. Timon the Athenian Timon.
detesting much more than al these the imbecility of man's nature, used and
employed all his skill to persuade his countrymen to abridge and shorten the
course of their so miserable life, and to hasten their end, by hanging
themselves upon gibbets, which he had caused to be set up in great number, in a
field that he bought for the same purpose, unto whose persuasions many gave
place. Pliny rehearsing Pliny.
the great miseries wherewith man comes into this world, and the manifold
labors wherein he lives, said, that it were good for a man not to be borne at
all, or else so soon as he is borne, to die. It was a custom amongst The
custom of the Scythians.
the Scythians to weep at the birth of their children, and to rejoice, and make
a solemn feast at the death of their parents. Now as the opinions of these
philosophers here named by us, who being destitute of the light of God, and of
true religion had no other foundation but their own humane and weak
discourses, are to be rejected for enclosing all mankind in such a vile and
abject estate, so on the other side we must take heed, that we enter not into
that presumptuous opinion of many others, who endeavor to lead man to the
consideration of his dignity and excellency, as being endewed with infinite
graces. For they persuade him, that through the quicknes of his understanding,
he may mount up to the perfect knowledge of the greatest secrets of God and
nature, and that by the only study of philosophy, he may of himself,
following his own nature become master of all evil passions and
perturbations, and attain to a rare and supreme kind of virtue, which is void
of those affections: that being thus exempted and freed from all vice, he may
lead a most happy and perfect life. This did the Stoike philosophers The
presumptuous opinion of the Stoiks.
with one consent maintain and teach, saying: Whosoever received their
doctrine, if in the morning he were very wicked, in the evening he should
become a very good man: and if he laid himself down to sleep, being
ignorant, vicious and poor, the next morning he should arise wise, virtuous,
rich, happy and just. Zeno, Seneca, Diogenes* Chrysippus, and infinite mo,
otherwise endewed with most fruitful doctrine, as we shall understand
hereafter, were of this opinion. Insomuch that Chrysippus said, that Dion the
chiefest man for knowledge in Syracusa, was no less virtuous than his god
Jupiter, to whom they attributed perfect divinity. Seneca also boasted that he
had received life by the benefit of God, but to live well, from himself. Thus
whilst they granted to man's power such an excellent and divine disposition,
they lift him up in a vain presumption, in pride and trust in himself, and in
his own virtue, which in the end cannot but be the cause of his utter undoing.
We therefore holding the mean between these two contrary opinions (as the
perfection and goodness of all things consists in mediocritie) and continuing
to speak of man as we have already begun, do say, that the knowledge of
himself is very necessary for him, and that The end of the knowledge of our
selves.
having perfectly attained thereunto, he has cause both to be humbled greatly,
as also to glory and rejoice. First to humble himself through the sense and
feeling of his vanity, perverseness and corruption, in which respect he ought to
hate and be displeased with himself, because he beholds his destruction and
condemnation engraven in his conscience. Secondly, he is to glory in the
knowledge of God, which inseparably follows the other, after he has learned
this, that in the mercy of God he may recover that which is wanting in
himself, having once been made and fashioned of God, who is altogether pure,
wise, true, good and almighty, to the end he might be partaker of his glory.
For the obtaining heerof, he had given unto him from the beginning (as trusty
guides) godliness, holiness, and religion: godliness, to the end he might know
thereby, that he had God for his father: holiness, to yield unto him continual
glory and praise: and religion, to keep him in a continual meditation of his
grace and benefits, and to serve him for an indissoluble bond to knit him to
his Creator, who threatened him with death, if he did the contrary. But our
first father through ingratitude The wilful fall of man.
and disobedience, forsaking those heavenly guides to follow his own
free will, deprived himself and all his posterity of that promise of eternal
life, that was made unto him. Whereupon being dead to his first life, which was
most happy and innocent, through his offense and perverseness of his sin, he
began from that time forward to live a mortal life, so that his body and
soul became subject to infinite miseries and damnable infirmities, which draw
upon them the condemnation of eternal death. Notwithstanding God, whose
goodness and mercy are endless, reestablished and assured the succession of his
immortal inheritance unto those, whom it pleased him by The restoring of man.
grace to make dead to sin and alive to himself, through the satisfaction of
his wrath made by the innocence of his eternal son, purging them in his
blood, and opening unto them by him the gates of heaven, after he has renewed
them in righteousness, holiness and innocence, that they may follow after
godliness and religion. And knowing that man so frail and weak, might easily
fall down under the heavy burden of those miseries and calamities, whereunto
the corruption of his nature made him subject, and wherein by reason of
hereditarie sin he should remain during this mortal life, as also that
those furious and continual passions, which are mingled together in his soul,
being joined to the common infirmities of his body, would be of too great
force to throw him again headlong into destruction, this infinite mercy of
God appointed, that from the beginning there should remain All men naturally
have some love and liking of the truth.
in the spirit of man a little spark of light, which drives him to a natural
love of the truth, and to a desire to inquire after it, yea which pricketh and
provoke him not to sleep altogether in his vices. This weak instinct being
awaked stirred up, helped and disposed by the pure grace, virtue and power of
the author of all goodness, Effects of Christian regeneration.
draws and moves a Christian, regenerated by the holy Ghost (after knowledge
of himself, and hatred of that which is in him) to seek after and to covet
with a special hearty desire, that goodness and righteousness whereof he is
void, and that glorious liberty of which he deprived himself. Furthermore,
the same heavenly grace blessing this holy desire of the man regenerate,
causes him to draw out of the doctrine of holy scriptures that wherewithal
he may, if not heal perfectly his wicked inclinations, yet at the least
contain and repress them in such sort, that they break not out into any
damnable execution. He teaches him also to receive the infirmities of his
flesh as fatherly chastisements for his sin, and as necessary means to
exercise him, and to keep him in awe. And lastly, for the vpshot and
perfection of all happiness and felicity in this world, he instructs him how
he may lead a quiet and peaceable life in beholding the wonderful works of
the divinity, which he is to adore and honor, and in the amendment and
correction of his manners naturally corrupted, by squaring them after the
pattern of virtue, that so he may be made worthy and fit to govern humane
affairs, for the profit of many: and at length attain The perfection of a
wise man's life.
to the perfection of a wise man, by ioining together the active life with the
contemplative in the certain hope and expectation of a second, immortal and
most blessed life. Whereunto also the precepts and discourses of learned and
ancient philosophers, may serve for-our instruction and pricking forward: as
also the examples (which are lively reasons) of the lives of so many notable
men, as histories, the mother of antiquity, do as it were represent alive
before our eyes. And this in my judgment is sufficient generally to understand
of Man, seeing we are hereafter to discourse more particularly of both his
principal parts, the body and the soul.


Of the body and soul.
ACHITOB. THe body and soul are so knit and conioined together, that nothing
can separate them but death the destroier of all, which through sin, and for
the just punishment thereof entered into the world. And this is no sooner done,
but that whatsoever we see of man vanishes from before our eyes: the earthie
part returning into the mass of earth from whence it came, according to that
saying of Aristotle, that All things are resolved into those things whereof
they are compounded: likewise, that which is spiritual and invisible goes
into an eternal immortality from whence the being thereof proceeded.


ASER. Truly this knitting together, and conjunction of the body and soul is
a most wonderful thing in nature, yea, as many of the philosophers say,
against nature: seeing the soul, which is light, is contained within the The
wonderful conjunction of the body and soul.
body being heavy: that which is of celestial fire, within that which is cold
and earthie: that which is invisible within that which is palpable: that which
is immortal, within that which is mortal. But what? Where is the sense of
man, which is able to comprehend the reason of the doings of that great
Maister-builder of the universal frame? Yea there is more. For during this
conjunction, as all things that move within this general globe are maintained
by agreeing discords, even so of necessity All things are preserved by
agreeing discords.
there must be such a harmony between the body and the soul, that by the
help of the one, the other subsisteth and abides, and that through their
continual striving sometimes the one, and then the other be in the end obeyed.


AMANA, Thou tellest us here of a wonderful strange thing, that that which is
spiritual and immortal sometime obeieth that which is mortal, and made of a
corruptible lump. But I understand thee well. This proceeds of the
imperfection and imbecillitie of our nature. For (as Socrates said) if we were
perfect philosophers we would never agree with our selves, but resist
continually. Now following this matter, make us to understand more particularly
(ARAM) what the body and soul are, what properties they have, and what is the
excellency both of the one and the other.


ARAM. With a good will my companions, and first I The definition of a body.
will begin at the definition of a body. A body (as the Philosophers say,
speaking generally of all things that have bodies) is that which may be divided
and measured after three sorts, in length, in breadth, and in deapth. Or
according to others, a body is a mass or lump, which, as much as lies in it,
resists touching, and occupies a place. A body (says Plato) is that which
being in his proper place is neither heavy nor light, but being in a strange
place first inclines somewhat, then is driven and carried forward either with
heaviness or lightness. Hereupon, both he and other Philosophers discourse,
learnedly and profoundly of the particular nature of al bodies, of the earth,
of the fire, of the air, of the water, and of all other both simple and
compound bodies, and of their contrary motions. But seeing all those
discourses are at this present without the compass of our Academy, let us
simply with more profit, and that according to the scripture, define the
body, which we have undertaken to handle. We say Genesis 6. Romans 8. Gal. 5. The
works of the flesh.
then, that the body is flesh, that every affection of the flesh is deadly, and
that the works thereof are uncleanness, pride, fornication, enmity, debate,
wrath, contention, envy, murder, gluttony and such like: and therefore that the
body is made of mortal matter, of as small continuance as a vessel of earth,
sinning without ceasing, and endeavoring that that which is shut up within it,
should please it. Notwithstanding we ought not to neglect and contemn the
wonderful frame of this heavenly plant, as Plato calls it, saying, that the
root thereof is in the head drawing toward heaven: seeing, as in a little
world, we may behold Man is a little world.
therein the excellency of the woonderful works of God, and that in so great
measure, that the wisest and most eloquent men could never set them forth
sufficiently. And if we call to mind how by his almighty power he framed him
at the first of a piece of earth, we shall not need to Genesis 3.
stand long here to inquire and search out, how he could be engendered and
fashioned in his mothers womb, how he received nourishment and life, and
lastly, how he came into the light. As for example, how the six first days
after Of the conception and fashioning of man.
his conception, he is nothing but milk: the nine following, blood: twelve
days after, flesh: and how in the eighteen next ensuing, he is fashioned, at
what time the fruit begins to live, and to have sense, which is the five
and fortieth day after he was conceived. These are secrets of nature, which may
seem as incomprehensible, and beyond the capacity of man, as his first
creation. For what greater marvel can there be, than that of a little drop of
man's seed there should be engendered bones, sinews, veins, arteries, similar
and isntrumental parts, skin and flesh, and that all these should be framed
in that kind, figure, and similitude, which we daily see in men, who are all
created after that manner? What need we then to make an anatomy of all the
chiefest parts of the body of man, when as the consideration of the least of
them, which peradventure may be found to be most necessary, will suffice to
ravish us with admiration? What Of the excellency of the body, and of all the
parts thereof.
superfluous thing can be noted in the body? What small parcel is there, which
the noblest part may want conveniently, and which is not partaker of every
evil disposition thereof? What thing is there in the whole nature thereof,
which does not satisfy that duty very profitably, whereunto it is borne and
appointed, which moves not of it self, which either does, suffers or
disposes of it self otherwise than is most expedient and meet for it own
benefit, and for the rest of the frame of man? The progress and growth
thereof from day to day, from hour to hour, and that of all the parts
together of this principal work at one instant, even from the first hour of
his being until his whole perfection, are they not more heavenly than humane
things? What is more wonderful under the cope of heaven, than the conjunction
and subjection of the natural senses unto the body, I mean, of the sight,
smelling, hearing, taste and touching, whereby (says Plato) the common sense,
which is as it were a general receptacle, conceaueth al outward things? What
an excellent property in man is it, to void from him a profitable
superfluity of his nourishment, from whence the cause of the preservation of
mankind proceeds? Great secrets of nature.
The articulate and distinct voice, proper to him only, is it not worthy of
great marvel? What greater secret of nature could ravish the mind of man more
with admiration than amongst the infinite multitude of men in the world, to
consider the variety of their gestures, and diversity of their countenances,
that having al but one and the same form, yet not one almost resembles
another? And when in so great variety, two are found resembling in all points
one another, as we read of some, even of sundry nations, who have been taken
indifferently one for the other, is it not a stranger matter? How marvelous is
it, that all men having a tongue wherewith they speak and sing, yet we seldom
see that the speaking and singing of The diversity of men's voices and writings.
one resembles the speech and tune of another, whereupon it comes to pass,
that friends and familiars oftentimes acknowledge and understand one another by
their speech and voice before they see each other? Who will not admire this
great secret in the hand of man, that a hundred thousand writers may write the
same thing, with the same ink and like pen, and that with three and twenty
letters, which have each his own figure and shape, and yet the writings shall
not resemble one another so, but that every writing may be known by his hand
that wrote it? Briefly, what is there in the whole body of man, that is not
full of rare beauty? This is sufficient for the matter in hand, now let us
come to the soul, which is much The soul is infused not (...).
more noble, and infused into the body by God the Creator, without any virtue of
the generatiue seed, when as the parts of the body are already framed and
fashioned. This alone can lead us to the knowledge of God and of our selves, or
rather as Socrates said, we shall never understand perfectly what the soul is,
except we first know God, and behold it in him, as in a true glass, who only
can represent it unto us. Let us then see what the soul is, according to the
sayings of the ancient Philosophers. Thales Milesius, one of the sages of
Graecia, who flourished in Athens in the time of Achab king of Judah, was the
first The definition of the soul.
that defined the soul, affirming it to be a nature always moving it self.
Pythagoras (the light of his time, and the first that took unto himself the
name of a Philosopher, Pythagoras was the first that was called a Philosopher.
because all those, who before him were addicted to the contemplation of the
divinity, and of the secrets of nature, caused themselves to be called by the
name of Mages and wisemen, which he would not have spoken of himself, saying,
that this divine and lofty title of Wise, was proper to God only, and that it
far passed all humane ability) I say this excellent man Pythagoras affirmed
that the soul was a number moving it self. Plato says, that it is a
spiritual substance moving it self by harmonicall number. Aristotle says,
that the soul is the continual act or moving of a natural and isntrumental
body, that may have life. Or else, according to others, it is the light of the
substance, and in perpetual motion. They diui^e it likewise diuersely, and
make many parts thereof. The soul (as The division of the soul.
Pythagoras said) is compounded of understanding, knowledge, opinion and sense,
from which things all knowledge and Arts proceed, and of which man is called
reasonable, that is, apt to discourse by reason. Plato says, that Plato makes
six parts of the soul.
there are three virtues in the soul belonging to knowledge and understanding,
which for this cause are called cognitiue or knowing virtues: namely, reason,
understanding and fantasy. Unto which three others are answerable
appertaining to appetite: namely Will, whose office is to desire that which
understanding and reason propound unto it: Choler or Anger, which follows
that, that reason and fantasy offer unto it: and Concupiscence, which
apprehends whatsoever fantasy and Aristotle divides it in two parts.
sense object unto it. Aristotle makes another distinction of the soul,
saying, that one part of it is void of reason in it self, and yet may be
guided by reason: and that the other part is of it self partaker of reason.
And in another place this Philosopher says, that there are three things from
whence humane actions proceed, namely sense, understanding and appetite. Many
others both ancient and late writers make four parts of the soul:
Understanding, Four parts of the soul.
reason, anger and desire. The understanding lifts the soul up to heaven to
the contemplation of divine and intellectual things. Reason guides the soul
by prudence in all her functions. Anger is ruled and moderated by the virtue of
magnanimitic: and desire is governed by temperance. Of these a very harmonicall
Justice is framed, which gives to every part of the soul that which
belongs unto it. But the most sensible, common and true opinion, which the
wisest amongst the Philosophers had The best division of the soul.
of the soul, is that which divides it into two parts only, under which all
the rest are comprised: the one being spiritual and intelligible, where the
discourse of reason is: the other brutish, which is the sensual will, of it
self wandering and disordred, where all motions contrary to reason* and all
evil desires have their dwelling. Amongst all the philosophical discourses of
the soul, written by these great personages, this error is very great, when
they attribute such a strength and power to reason (which they say is resident
in the soul as a lamp to guide the understanding, and as a queen to moderate
the will) as that by it alone a man may well and justly govern himself. Now
although we know that this reason of man is of it self, wholly depraved and
corrupted, yet we may say well enough, that the soul, which is spirit and life
cannot be divided, being immortal: because whatsoever is divided, dissolueth
and parts a sunder, and whatsoever is dissolved, perishes. Nevertheless it
may be said to be compounded and made subject (during the conjunction thereof
with The soul cannot be divided but is made subject to two parts.
the body) to these two principal parts, of understanding and will. The
understanding serves to conceive and comprehend all things propounded unto us,
and to discern and judge what we ought, either to approve and allow, or what
to refuse and reject. The will is that which executes and brings to effect,
whatsoever the understanding judges to be good, and contrariwise flies from
that, which it reprooueth and condemns. And herein we agree with the
Philosophers, that the understanding, under which we comprehend the sense, is
as the governor and captain of the soul, and that the will depends of it.
But withal we say, that both the one and the other are so corrupted and
altered from their nature, (the understanding being obscured and dimmed with
the clouds of darkness, by reason of the first man's sin descended upon Both
parts of the soul are corrupted.
all his posterity through hereditarie and natural filthiness, and the will in
such sort corrupted by this disobedience, and so weakened and made feeble to
all goodness) that if there be none other guide coming from above to teach the
understanding, and to direct and lead the will, I mean, regeneration by the
spirit of God, both of them cannot but do evil, drawing the soul with them
to utter ruin and perdition, by causing her to consent to the law of her
members, which are the body and flesh, full Romans 7. 23.
of ignorance, of obscure darkness, of frowardnes, misery, calamity,
ignominy, shame, death, and condemnation. Notwithstanding, if in the
corruptible, heavy and gross lump of the body, within which the soul is
contained, we found matter of praise and of the contemplation of heavenly
things, what shall we say of that which is immortal, The properties of the soul.
which in a moment in her discourses and cogitations, goes through the whole
heaven, compasses the earth about, saileth all over the sea, without which the
body moves not at all, and all the beauty thereof turns suddenly into
putrefaction? This only can make a man happy both in this and in the other
life, by reason of the treasures of wisdom, the understanding whereof is
proper unto it: yea this is the only instrument whereby a man may behold the
divine nature. This is invisible, and cannot be perceived by any natural
sense: this is contemplative and active at one and the same time: this
beholds universal things, and practices particulars, The actions of the
soul.
understanding the one, and feeling the other. This has for the actions and
operations of her essence and nature, Will, Judgment, Sense, Conceauing,
Thought, Spirit, Imagination, Memory, Understanding and Reason: and The
beauty of the soul.
for her incomparable beauty, she has Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude and
Justice, without which the excellent order of all humane things would be
changed into disorder and confusion. This is that moreover, which being
illuminated Gal. 5. 22. 23.
with wisdom, brings forth the fruits of love, joy, peace, long
suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekenes, temperancie. Briefly, to
conclude our present speech, we may well say that the soul is so great and
divine a thing, that it is a very hard matter to comprehend it by reason, but
altogether incomprehensible by the outward sense: and that all man's felicity,
as well present as to come, depends of the soul, when, being regenerated (as
has been said) and made free and void of al wicked perturbations (as near as
the nature of man can approach The true delight of the sense.
to perfection) her humane contentation and delight is only in virtue, and in
the hope and certain expectation of a more sound and perfect virtue, by the
renewing and changing of this mortal life into that which is Phil. 4. 4.
immortal and most blessed: as S. Paul exhorts us hereunto, saying, Let us
rejoice in the Lord: both because Luke. 10. 20.
our names are written in heaven (as Christ says) and that our modesty,
meeknes and goodness may be known to all men. Moreover let us learn that in
the wonderful composition, conjunction and disposition of the soul and
body, there is matter whereby to draw man greatly to the consideration of the
chief end, for which he was first placed in the world, namely to glorify his
Creator in godliness, holiness and religion. He ought therefore both to serve him
with all the parts of his body, not abusing How a man ought to use both body
and soul.
them in any sort, but keeping them pure and clean, to be made members of the
glorious body of his eternal Son in the resurrection, and also to praise and
glorify him with all the gifts and graces of his soul, not defiling it with
uncleanness and vice, that she may, by the same divine grace, return unto the
full fruition of that most happy essence and nature from whence she had her
being. In the mean while let us learn that as the body uses many
instruments whereof it is compounded, and which are proper unto it, so the
soul, being much more noble, excellent and divine ought to use the body and
all the parts thereof: and that the soul is the organ and instrument of God
whereby he works in us, and lifts us up to the contemplation of his divine
nature.


Of the diseases and passions of the body and soul, and of the tranquillity
thereof. Chap. 3.
ARAM. Nothing worse to man than man himself.
ONe of the ancient philosophers used to say, that no living creature was worse
to man than man himself, because, albeit he has dominion over all things, yet
he cannot rule himself, nor his desires. Experience causes us but too much to
know the truth of this saying. For who can doubt in any sort heerof, seeing
blessed S. Paul himself confesses, Romans 7. 18. 19.
that he did not the good thing which he would, but the evil, which he would
not, and that in his flesh there dwelt no goodness? So undoubtedly we have both
body and There is no good thing in the flesh of man.
soul compassed about with so many pernicious passions, that it is very hard,
yea altogether impossible, that what good thing soever is in us should not
faint and sink under their heavy weight without a special and divine grace.


ACHITOB. Truly this is no vain speculation, nor unprofitable to man: as also
for a man to know, that he is as it were tied in this world to all uncertain
things, which he, being mortal by nature, cannot any way shun and avoid,
without the help of God. He which is in health expects sickness: he that is
sick, health. Does any one desire in his mind any thing? Before he enjoys
it, his desire is often changed into another. In a word, no man abides still
in one and the same estate. And therefore Plato Man is a mutable creature.
calls man a mutable creature, as if he meant to say, that he is easily
altered and changed.


ASER. The change which this divine philosopher meant (if I be not deceived)
has relation principally to the conditions of the soul, which, being filled
with infinite Pleasure and grief the cause of passions.
perturbations, fastened in the midst of it with the nail of pleasure and
grief, is carried away with inconstancy and uncertainty into a stream of
troublesome passions, which if they be not cut off and maistred by reason, draw
a man into utter destruction. But give us to understand (AMANA) more at large
of these passions of the soul, and of the way to remedy them: and if you
think good, you may speak somewhat of those of the body.


AMANA. Amongst the innumerable evils, which the desire of pleasure and fear
of grief, engraven in the most secret parts of our soul by our first
corruption, bring to man, this is the greatest and most pernicious, that they
make sensible things more evident and plain unto him than things intelligible,
and constrain the understanding to judge more by passion than by reason. For
using, through the sense o^ pleasure or travel, to attend to the erroneous,
uncertain, and mutable nature of the body, as to that which is subsisting and
subject to sight, he remains blind, and loses all knowledge of that which
truly is and subsisteth, namely, of the light of the soul, which is divine and
immortal. Moreover, applying himself wholly to the sensual and unreasonable
will, which is that part of the soul that proceeds of the corruption
thereof, he labors with all his might to quench and choke that weak
instinct of the soul, which aspireth unto the true Good, from whence she
perceives her self to have fallen. And this he does with such force and
power, that if God strengthen not the soul, and reason the divine guide,
accompany her not, without doubt she yields to such mighty enemies: and
then (as we have said) staying himself wholly in things subject to sight, he
appears too careful and curious in seeking to deck that, Manis more
careful of his body then of his soul.
which belongs to the body: but as for the soul (whereof all humane felicity
depends) because she is invisible, and not seen of him, it is the lest of
his cares to furnish her with that which she seeks and desires, and which is
necessary for her. Whereupon in the end it comes to pass that the lest
ouerthwarts and discommodities of his flesh seem very grievous and burdensome
to a man, but as for the incurable diseases, which ouerwhelme his soul, he
does not so much as feel them. Now to the end we may understand more
particularly that which is here propounded unto us, we will handle in order,
and as briefly as we may (this matter being very large) the diseases and
passions of the body and soul, with the remedy which we are to desire and
seek after. And first we will speak a word of the diseases of the body, next
of the natural and necessary passions thereof, albeit we will entreat of the
passions of the soul, as of our chief matter subject. Concerning the maladies
and evil dispositions of the body, one Hippocrates, one Galen, nay infinite
others skillful in physic, are not able to describe them exactly, much less
prescribe certain and sure remedies. But seeing it is not my purpose or
profession to stay long here, neither yet necessarily belonging to the cause
of our assembly, I will content my self to speak these few words by the way,
The end, cause, and remedy of bodily diseases.
that we ought to take every bodily infirmity as a fatherly chastisement of
our sins, and as a necessary mean to awaken us, to warn us of our duty, and
to keep us in awe. Besides, one principal cause of all bodily diseases
proceeds ordinarily from vices, which are the proper inheritance of man, and
with which we defile our selves continually. Therefore if we heal our souls,
we may cure our selves of the most of them: and as for others, which come by
defect of nature, or by some other hidden cause, we have the counsel and help
of physicions, whom willingly Natural passions.
and diligently we seek after. There are besides these, certain natural and
necessary passions in the body, properly belonging unto it, even from the
first creation thereof, which are not to be condemned, neither can be taken
away, but with the abolishing of man's nature: as the desire of drinking,
eating, sleeping, and such like, which only by the direction of reason are to
be freed from all superfluity. But it stands otherwise with the diseases and
passions of the soul, derived from our first corruption, and driven forward by
sin, being plentiful and rich, which without comparison are far more
dangerous than those of the body, more hard to be perceived and known, more
headstrong and uneasy to cure, and which is worse, man is very slothful in
seeking out a remedy for them. And for the most part thinking that he has
found some remedy, through want of skill and ignorance he falls into a worse
estate than he was in before, and as we commonly say, from a gentle ague into a
pestilent and burning The definition of passion.
fever. But first we will generally define this word, Passion, according to the
opinion of those philosophers, who were endewed with greatest light. Passion is
every natural and actual motion in the soul. This motion is of two sorts:
the one weak, good and holy, aspiring and reioicing in that which is truly
good: the other very strong, evil and pernicious, coveting with a disordered
desire, and delighting with an immoderate joy in a good falsely so imagined. The
matter of these motions are opinions, affections, and inclinations, which being
considered in their own nature, are through sin wicked and corrupt
throughout the soul, yea the blossom and root of them proceed from our own
substance, to the end (as Plato says) that no man should think God to be the
cause of evil. Now albeit these passions thus defined by the philosophers are
many in number, yet drawing nearer to the truth we may comprehend and divide
them all into two principal kinds. The first kind shall be that which The
division of passions.
we believe by faith: the other according to our opinions and affections. Under
the first we comprehend that which every one believes, thinks, and desires
concerning divine and heavenly things, as of true righteousness, of the
immortality of the second life, and of the judgment to come. Under opinions
and affections is comprehended whatsoever respects and concerns earthly
things, this life, manners, government of a household, of a common wealth, and
generally al humane inclinations and actions. As touching that which we believe
by faith, we are led thereunto, and stirred by the weak instinct and feeling
of All men have naturally a desire of happiness.
the divine nature imprinted in every soul, which after a sort moves man to
aspire unto, and to desire the true and sovereign good, and which, being more
power-full, and of greater efficacy in some than in others, causes the better
sort to delight also in the same good. Nevertheless it is proper to every man's
understanding, not to hold a No man by nature can find out the right way that
leads to happiness.
steadfast and sure way in seeking out the truth, but to wander aside into diverse
errors (as a blind man that walks in darkness) and to fill it self rather
with lies, and with a continual desire and curiosity of new, unprofitable,
and superfluous things, than to content it self simply with the truth,
insomuch that finally it misseth of all. But to the The word of God shows us
the right way to happiness.
end we be not of this number, we ought to hold fast the infallible rule of the
holy scriptures: which gift we are to ask, hope, wait, and seek for in the
only grace and mercy of that Spirit which indighteth them, and to look for
the full opening of these treasures in the second and eternal life. As for the
second kind of our passions, properly called perturbations according to the
philosophers from whence all the evils and miseries of mankind proceed, and
whereof we mind chiefly to speak, they are but affections and inclinations,
which come from our will, corrupted by the prouocations and allurements of Of
the perturbations of the soul.
the flesh, and which wholly resist the divine nature of the reasonable part of
the soul, fastening it to the body (as Plato says) with the nail of
pleasure. Which passions the mind of man commonly beholds clearly enough,
when it applies it self thereunto, if it be not altogether perverted and
depraved: yea by the grace and help of God, the mind is able to confirm it
self against any passion through the discourse of reason before it be in
force, and during the vehemency thereof, to fortify it self against The
scope of our passions.
it. And although the passion be contrary to reason, and have (for her only
scope) pleasure, and the fear of grief, which can prevail greatly with man,
yet reason by the means of Gods grace, can both easily constrain, master and
compel all passions in such sort, that they shall take no effect, and also
bring to pass, that whatsoever is rashly desired, shall be overcome by the
discourse of prudent counsel. And for this cause we say, that the first
motions are not in our power, but that the event and issue of them is in some
sort. Likewise reason does not wholly quench and extinguish all passions, which
cannot possibly be performed in the nature of man, but repelleth and has the
upper hand of them, as the precepts of doctrine, and infinite examples of the
lives of ancient heathen and pagan The ancient heathen may rise up in judgment
against many Christians in these days.
philosophers do learnedly teach us. Which thing as it ought to cause many at
this day to be ashamed, who vaunt themselves of the name of Christians, so it
condemns them in a fault not to be excused before the just judgment of God,
because those men, being destitute of the perfect knowledge of God, which they
say they have, far excelled and surpassed them in the bridling, ouercomming and
killing of so many pestiferous passions as compass the soul about, as we may
handle elsewhere, and see examples thereof worthy of eternal remembrance,
when we shall discourse particularly of virtues and vices. In the mean while
we may learn of Cicero (the father of Latin eloquence, whose skill in ioining
philosophy with the art of Rhetorike, was excellent, and who, in my judgment,
handles this our present matter more profitably than any other of the
ancients) that all the above named evil passions are perturbations, which if
they be not maistered by reason, deprive man of the sovereign good of the The
original, nature and effects of perturbations.
soul, which consists in the tranquillity thereof. Moreuer he says, that
through ignorance and baseness of mind, they proceed only of the opinion of
good or evil, either present or to come, which we imagine to be in the
imperfect and transitory things of the world, and which are accompanied
unseparably either with good or evil. In respect of good things, we are carried
away with a vehement desire or coveting of them, besides an immoderate joy in
them: in regard of evil things, we are oppressed with fear and sorrow. And
these are the four springs of all vices and All perturbations are contained
under these four heads, Desire, Joy, Fear, Grief.
sins wherein men plunge themselves during this life, and under which all
perturbations are comprehended, which fill the soul with endless trouble and
disquietnes, causing man to live always discontented, and to find every
present kind of life burdensome, and so to seek after and to desire another.
But as fearful men, (says Plutark, An excellent comparison.
that excellent philosopher, and schoolmaster to that good Traian) and they
that are at sea, subject to casting, thinking they shall be better in one place
than in another, go from the stern to the stem, then to the bottom of the
ship, afterward to the highest part, from thence go into the skiph, and in the
end return into the ship, without any amendment of their evil, because they
carry always about with them both fear and grief: so the alteration of
life, and of worldly conditions and estates into others, does not purge, but
rather increase the perturbations and diseases of the soul, if first the cause
of them, I mean ignorance of The cause of the diseases of the soul.
things, and the imperfection of reason, be not taken out of it. These are the
mischiefs, which trouble both rich and poor: these are the miseries, which
wait upon great and final, bond and free, young and old. Thus is the spirit of
sick persons vexed, and that continually. One while the wife is troublesome,
the physician unskillful, the bed uneasy, the friend that visits
importunate, he which visits not, proud: but being once healed, they find
that whatsoever was irksom unto them before, now pleases them. But that which
health does to the diseased body, the Reason is the medicine of the soul.
same thing reason works in the soul of a prudent man, by curing the
passions and perturbations thereof, and by causing him to rest joyful and
contented, in what estate and condition soever he be. Let us note moreover,
(which we touched in the beginning of this present discourse) that all these
passions of the soul are much more dangerous than those of the body, because
the most hurtful passions of the body, are first engendered of those in the
soul. For the body yields it self ready to serve the desires, appetites,
and pleasures of the soul, which being overcome and in the power of fleshly
prouocations, procures in the end destruction to them both. But contrariwise,
the soul being ruled by reason, resists mightily all corporal passions,
and is nothing at all, or very little made partaker of their evil
dispositions: whereas on the other side the body is constrained to alter and
change with every infirmity of the soul. If the mind be troubled, what
cheerefulnes can be seen in the face? The diseases of the body hinder not the
soul from effecting all good and virtuous actions: yea many have brought forth
the fruits of wise philosophers and great captains, when they were vexed with
diseases, which they could never do, at least very few of them, that were
corrupted and defiled A sound soul corrects the naughtines of the body.
in soul. And therefore Democritus said very well, that it was much more
convenient and meet for a man to have care of his soul, than of his body. For
if the soul be perfect, she corrects the naughtines of the body, whereas the
strength and disposition of the body without the use of reason, hurts both
the soul and it self. Moreover, that the passions of the soul are harder to
be perceived and known, and consequently more uneasy to be cured, who does
not easily feel it, being grieved but in the least part of his body? yea what
grief does not of it self sufficiently appear, either by some inflammation,
or by the color of the visage, or by some other outward show? But how many do
we fee, whose souls are extreemly sick, spoiled and corrupted with vice, and
yet being deprived of all feeling they think themselves to be the soundest men
in the world? And that they are headstrong and uneasy to The passions of the
soul are headstrong and hard to be cured.
be cured, we may know by this, that the body is in the end so farforth
obedient, that if reason be urgent upon it, she forces even the natural
passions of hunger, thirst and sleep, and finds out besides a thousand
remedies to help it self. But when the passions of the soul have once been
grounded and rooted within it, without resistance they have such pearcing
pricks, that oftentimes they press and ouerwhelme all reason, which is their
only medicine and preservative. And yet to fill up the measure of all misery,
such is the froward nature of man, that he is much more slothful to seek out
this remedy of the soul, than that of the body, as we touched in the
beginning of this present discourse. Moreover, the judgment of reason being
oftentimes diseased within him, is the cause, that when he thinks to find
health, he increases his evil, and falls into those inconveniences, which
he desired most of all to eschew. Example hereof we have in those, who, being
The passions of men commonly bring forth effects contrary to their purposes.
led only with a desire of glory and honor, obtain nothing by their doings,
if we consider them well, but shame and dishonor. The like may be said of all
the other diseases of the soul, which commonly are accompanied and followed
with effects contrary to their ends and desires. What remains then, seeing
we perceive the dangers to be great, which follow all the perturbations of the
soul, but that, knowing it to be more easy not to receive them, than to drive
them out being received, we prevent them, and hinder them from taking lively
root within our souls, by making reason (which, as Hesiodus says, is Reason,
is wisdom inspired from heaven.
a divine guide, and wisdom inspired from above) so strong and powerful, that
it may be able, by the grace of God, to resist all the assaults of unbridled
desires, and the froward affections of this flesh? But behold yet a better A
remedy against passions.
and more certain remedy: namely, that being assured, that all perturbations
are but opinions drawn from our will, through a judgment corrupted with the
affections of this flesh, we labor by good and sound reasons to overthrow and
confound these false and erroneous opinions, persuading our selves that
whatsoever we imagine to be good or evil in the world (which is the cause that
our minds are deprived of their rest and quietness) is indeed neither good nor
evil, and so consequently, that it ought not in any sort to breed passions
within us. Hereof the sequel of our discourses shall (by the help of God)
give us to understand more at large, and furnish us with examples of pernicious
effects, which proceed from all the passions of the soul. We will here by the
way note their force, having learned out of Histories, that they have
oftentimes set upon the hearts of men in such violent manner, that some through
desire, some for joy: those by fear, others by Examples of death by ouergreat
joy.
grief have ended their lives. Diagoras the Rhodian, and Chilon hearing that
their children had won the price at the games of Olympus, felt such a motion
in them of the Herennus died for fear.
spleen, that they were stifled with laughter. Herennus the Sicilian, as he was
led prisoner, for being a copartner in Plautius through grief.
the conspiracy of Caius Gracchus, was so astonished, and oppressed with the
fear of his judgment to come, that he fell down strke dead at the entry of
the prison. Plautius the Numidian looking upon his dead wife took it so to
heart; that casting himself upon the dead body, he arose no more, but was there
stifled with sorrow. As for extreme desire or coveting, there is nothing that
so greatly moves or carries away the minds of men, or that comes nearer to
their destruction, than this foolish passion The effects of desire.
indangereth their life. Galeace of Mantua saying oftentimes to a damsel of
Pauia whom he courted and made love to, that he would suffer a thousand deaths
for her service, if it were possible, was in jest commanded by her to cast
himself into the river: which he presently performed, and was drowned. But we
shall allege more fitly such testimonies of the fond effects of desire, and of
all the perturbations of the soul, when we discourse more particularly of
every vice that proceeds from them. In the mean time I would gladly ask
this question of him, that is most ignorant, vicious, and carnal, whether he
will not grant virtue to be a good of the soul. There is none so impudent
whose conscience would not compel him to confess the same. And yet no man is
carried away with too Virtue is alwais without excessive passion.
great a desire of virtue, neither does any rejoice therein too excessiuely,
after he has obtained it. Likewise there is none that fears so vehemently,
least he cannot obtain her, as that the fear thereof drives the soul out of
his place and rest. For no man can fall into this fear, least he should not
become virtuous, except he be very desirous to be so indeed: and none can have
this desire, except reason, guided with heavenly light, and doing her duty in
him, had wrought the same: but reason thus qualified must needs be an enemy to
all perturbations. Thus we see that no man, through fear of not being
virtuous, is overtaken with perturbations. The like may be said of sorrow. For
albeit a man be grieved because he is not virtuous, yet his mind is not
excessiuely disquieted, seeing this desire is never in him, but when reason
commands according to her divine nature, by causing us to know our selves.
Whereby we perceive that perturbations never arise in us for that which is the
true good of the soul, but only for that which fools do falsely call good,
and which the philosophers call the goods of the body and of fortune. But
these being naturally subject The nature of worldly goods.
to corruption, and, as we have already said, inseparably accompanied with
vehement desire, unbridled joy, fear and grief, (as we shall see more at
large when we handle them hereafter) are unworthy to be cared for by the
immortal soul neither may or ought they to be called goods because they are
possessed, much less evils, when they are wanting. If we be thus persuaded, we
shall be masters over all perturbations, not esteeming that which is mortal
and frail, worthy to be either wished for, or delighted in. Hereof it will
come to pass, that our soul and spirit shall be quiet, and reason, which
knows how discern good from evil, will deal with us as a good husbandman,
and vine dresser deals with his tree and vine, when he cutteth off the dead
branches and unprofitable twigs, to the end that all noisome sap and moisture
may be taken away. And thus shall we be taught to desire and do that, which we
ought, and every contrary inclination shall be weakened, not taking effects,
and the soul shall fulfill her duty, in commanding absolutely over all the
prouocations of the flesh, and in quenching them so foone as they do appear.
For as they that have healthful A wise soul governs the affections.
bodies, (says Epictetus) easily endure both cold and heat: so they that have
a stayed and settled soul, have the dominion over anger, grief, joy, and all
their other affections. What it is to live happily.
Then shall we live happily, not being terrified with any fear, nor vexing our
spirits with any longing or tedious desires, nor being tormented with any
lusts and disordred affections, and lastly, not suffering our selves (being
drunken with sugared poison) to be over come and bound under the yoke of
pleasure. This shall we learn by the study of Philosophy, which is a
certain remedy, and a sound medicine for every vice and passion, and is able
to enrich and cloth us with reason, which is such a beautiful, perfect and
profitable ornament.


Of Philosophy. Chap. 4.
AMANA. THe life of man (said Pythagoras) is like to that general assembly of
Graecia at the Olimpyan games, where many carried with glory and ambition,
presented themselves at those exercises, that they might bear away the crown
and prize: otehrs led with covetousness, came thither to traffike, selling and
buying merchandise: and a third sort of men, more praise worthy and noble came
thither also, who sought not after vaineglorie, or covetousness, but carefully
marked whatsoever was done in that assembly, that they might reap profit and
commodity thereby. So men coming The common drife of men.
into this world, as into a fair or mart, some give themselves to ambition and
vaineglorie, others to covetousness, and to heap up treasure. But they that are
of a more divine nature, sequestring themselves from worldly affairs,
meditate upon heavenly things, and thereupon fasten the scope of their
intents, desires and wills. Divine Plato, ioining action with contemplation in a
happy and perfect life, says, that next to the glory of God we must What men
ought chiefly to level at.
have regard to do that which is profitable for the Commonwealth. Which
excellent opinions of these two philosophers are comprehended under this only
word of practicing philosophy, and that art, which gives us the precepts
thereof, is called philosophy, whose work and effect (as Seneca, Neroes
schoolmaister said very well) is to find out, and to know the truth both of
divine and humane The work of philosophy.
things. Justice, piety, religion, yea the whole company of virtues never
depart from her. She teaches us to adore and serve God, and to love men.


ARAM. Surely philosophy is the mother and continual spring of all good
knowledge. For she teaches us to know good and evil: she provoke us by the
vprightnes of reason to fly this thing, and to do that, causing us to live as
wise and prudent men, joyful and contented in every estate, whereupon arises
the sound rest of the spirit. Moreover, the excellency of this knowledge (as
Plato says) is so great, that it is but one and the same thing to be a king, a
governor of a Commonwealth and a philosopher: because the royal, civil, and
philosophical arts are compounded of the same matter, namely, of justice and
prudence.


ACHITOB. Philosophy cannot sufficiently be praised, seeing that whosoever
obeieth her may pass his days without tediousnes. For the true scope thereof
is to seek The proper end and scope of Philosophy.
to glorify God in his wonderful works, and to teach a man how to live well,
and to help his neighbor. Which perfection cannot be attained unto without a
special and heavenly grace, and that after the knowledge of the sountaine
from whence all goodness comes. And this has been the cause, as I think,
why so many great philosophers, knowing certainly wherein the true and perfect
felicity of man living in this world consisted, namely, in the tranquillity
of the soul, and laboring continually to root out, or at least to weaken all the perturbations thereof by the vprightnes of reason, and to engraffe virtue
therein, yet could never perfectly enjoy this souerigne Why the philosophers
could never attain to the sovereign good in this life.
good, which they so much desired, because they were ignorant of the fountain
from whence it proceeded, which is, the grace and mercy of our God in his
beloved son. And albeit their life was maruellously quiet, and void of many
vices, yet it stands us in hand (if we be Christians in deed) to lead,
without comparison, a more happy, contented and excellent life, and to exercise
philosophy according to that true wisdom, which our Lord Jesus Christ
teaches us. But I think ASER is prepared to speak of this matter, and to
discourse thereof more at large unto us. Let us harken then what he will say.


ASER. That which presently offers it self to be handled, requires truly
a far better spirit than mine. Notwithstanding, that I seem not to shun
those lists, into which we entered willingly, I purpose according to my weak
judgment, to tell you first what philosophy is, what good comes unto us by
it, the means to learn it, and to profit thereby, how a man may know he has
it, and how he must show forth the fruits thereof: and lastly how we ought to
contemn all things that we may obtain it, after the example of some ancient
Sages, whom The definition of philosophy.
we will allege. Philosophy is a love or desire of wisdom. Or otherwise, it
is a profession, study, and exercise of that wisdom, which is the knowledge
of divine and humane things, and which properly belongs to him, who only is
sufficient of himself, and is wisdom it self, namely, to God. Pythagoras
was the first that gave the name to philosophy, which being divided as well by
him, as by other The di^ision of philosophy.
ancient philosophers into diverse and sundry arts and sciences, we may
distinguish into two general parts only: into the Contemplative part, and
into the Moral, which some call Active. We will make two kinds of the
Contemplative, Of divine philosophy.
Divine, and Natural. As touching the divine part, it is that highest and most
unchangeable knowledge, whereunto we must wholly refer the end of our being, and
the scope of all our purposes, studies, and actions, namely, to be able to know
and to glorify the Creator and preserver of the whole world. Of this eternal
knowledge, which Socrates called Wisdom, we say with Justin, who was both a
philosopher and a martyr, that all lovers of Christian faith ought to endeavor
not to be ignorant, no not of any point How we must behave out selves in
searching our the secrets of God.
belonging to the knowledge and perfect keeping of God his commandments, but
especially they must have in singular recommendation his service and true
worship. As touching the absolute and perfect knowledge of heavenly mysteries,
they ought to desire the understanding of them so far forth as they are able,
and according to the gift and measure of graces, which shall be given them from
above. But if the eye of their soul dazell in the consideration of them, it
shall be sufficient to honor and admire them with due reverence, and to believe
them steadfastly, knowing that man's understanding is not able to attain to the
exquisite knowledge of so high mysteries. Natural philosophy consists
chiefly in the Mathematiks, Of natural philosophy.
which are divided into many parts and particular sciences, of which the most
of them seem to many not greatly necessary, as that which entreats of the
nature of the heavens, of the sun, of the moon, of their motions, measures,
and of the natural causes of al things. Which oftentimes serves rather to
content the curiosity of hawtie spirits, than to make them better, insomuch
that sometimes, by speculations, and by vain and frivolous questions, they
seek out the natural causes of things so curiously, that in the end they
strive to find out another beginning of all things than God: whereby at length
they remain deceived and confounded in their knowledge, as both the writings
of so many ancient philosophers, and also the life of many in our time do prove
unto us. Nevertheless, there are some parts of the Mathematiks necessary to be
known for the great profit that may come unto us by them, as Physic,
Atithmetike, Geometry, and others. But the subject of our Academie will not
suffer us to handle all these sciences at this present. I will say thus much
only by the way, that we ought so to rule and direct the profession of all
natural philosophy, that A^ule to be kept in natural philosophy.
we use it not before we have been well and sufficiently instructed in the
fear and knowledge of God, and of all things that concern a good and happy
life, and that vaineglorie should not be the end of that study, but that it
should ravish us more and more in the contemplation of the works of that great
maister-builder of the whole frame, to the end to glorify him in greater
measure. And yet we must above all things beware, that we fall not into that
curse of the prophet, which he denounces against those, who being destitute of
Gods grace by reason of their sins, give themselves to soothsaying, and to
seek Against sorcerers, magitians and birth-gazers.
after sorcerers, magitians, and calculators of natiuities, which things we see
are too common amongst us: insomuch that he is judged as it were miserable,
that knows not his Horoscope, from whence so many abuses, inuocations, and
cursed charms have proceeded by little and little. Let us shun such vain
knowledge, proper to infidels The issue of all things is to be referred to the
providence of God.
and Atheists, and refer our events and issues (which albeit we knew before,
yet could we not assure our selves that we should avoid them) to the only
providence and direction of God. It remains now to entreat of the other part
of philosophy, called Moral. Of this, I think Of moral philosophy.
Socrates the wise man meant to speak, when he said, that philosophy
consisted not in learning many things, or in meddling with many arts, but in
the perfect knowledge of justice, prudence, and of all other moral virtues. He
adds further, that this philosophy works two things in our mind, the one
in purging it as well of perturbations, as of false opinions, and the other, in
causing it to return into the right way by reasons and exhortations drawn
from earthly and sensible forms to such as are spiritual, which are enclosed
within our souls, that by them we God the Idea of all good.
may be led to God, the Idea and pattern of all good. This is that moral
philosophy, which we have undertaken to handle in all our discourses, and
which is so necessary for the life of man. For as the untamed horse by reason
of his ouer-great wildnes is not profitable for any thing: so he that is drawn
away by his affections (which philosophy only can moderate) is unprofitable
and unworthy of all company, and of all government either public or private.
It is philosophy that teaches us the doctrine of The benefit that comes by
philosophy.
good life, and causes us to know our miseries, and the means whereby we may
be delivered from them. She it is that frames in our understanding the
judgment of reason, and learneth us to lead a life agreeable to doctrine:
showing unto us what true honesty is, what perfect beauty, and what in truth
and in deed is profitable. She represseth all evil passions and perturbations
of the soul, appeaseth the insatiable desires thereof, delivers it from all
fear, and from all earthly carefulnes, filling it with tranquillity,
constancy, assurance, magnanimity, and sufficiency. She purges pride,
presumption, ambition, choler, revenge, covetousness, injustice, and in a word,
she it is, that (by the means of reason guided by the heavenly spirit, which
teaches us reason, and gives it unto us for a law) frames all the manners and
behauior of man according to the pattern of virtue, by ingraffing it in his
settled soul, as his only permanent good, and by causing him to do that
willingly, which others (as Xenocrates said) do by compulsion, and for fear of
laws. We are by philosophy instructed at large in that duty and obedience,
which we owe to our parents, superiors, and laws: and taught how much we ought
to love and honor one another, our wives, our children, our brethren, yea al
those that are not of our blood. She it is (says Cicero) that contains the
discipline of virtue, of duty, and of good life: she is also Philosophy is
the art of life.
the art and mistress of life. Briefly, by philosophy we are taught that
perfection, which concerns all the actions and dealings of men, even from
those who are placed in the government of monarchies, kingdoms, commonwealths,
cities, and nations, unto the lest that lives under them. For she teaches the
one sort how to command well, and the other to obey well, and to maintain
themselves upright in every estate and condition of life, in the alteration
either of prosperity or of adversity, yea even to show themselves constant in
contrary things, by shunning pleasure and sustaining grief, by despising
glory and enduring contempt. And to this effect, one of the wise Hebrew
interpreters, being demanded by Ptolemie Philadelphus What it is to play the
philosopher.
king of Egypt, what it was to exercise philosophy, answered, that it was to
reason well and directly, to reap great profit by all things that happen, not
to be carried away by lust, to contemn all vanities proceeding of worldly
pleasures, and to be guided in every action by a certain mediocritie. Now
seeing it is out of question that the fruit and commodity of moral
philosophy is such and so great, let us in the next place consider where and
Where and how philosophy is learned.
how we may learn it, that we may put it in practice. There is nothing more
true than this, that it depends in such sort of the former, which we called
contemplative and divine, or rather is so joined unto it, that without this, it
can never but be imperfect in man, seeing the fear and knowledge of God is the
beginning and perfection of all wisdom. True philosophy is to be found in the
word of God.
Moreover, it is so well and perfectly taught us in the word of God, that
nothing more may be added or desired. Nevertheless the doctrine joined with
examples, which we may draw out of histories, and from the lives of wise men,
by things that have been done in deed, is of great force and efficacy in the
soul to draw and move it with delight to seek to resemble them. For when as
man, naturally desirous of glory and immortality, shall see, that
philosophers and virtuous men, who were so much commended and renowned, are as
it were revived again in these days, after so many ages past, he will be
thereby awakened and pricked forward by this jealousy of glory, which by
nature is in him, to desire and bring to pass all great matters worthy to be
remembered, to the end he may deserve the like praise and commendation. Therefore
we shall reap no small profit hereby, yea it will be unto us as an entry to
a happy and holy life, and as a guide to sacred contemplations, if we
earnestly embrace and exercise our selves in the reading and study of good
authors, who teach us the precepts of good life: to whom (as Alexander the
great said, speaking of his master Aristotle) we How much we owe to good
authors.
find our selves no less bound and beholding, if we thoroughly taste their
doctrine, than to our own fathers (without offense unto them be it spoken) of
whom we have only our life and being. But because the excellency and highness
of this part of philosophy, called moral (which is for the correction of life
and manners) is such and so great, that the sound and perfect knowledge thereof
is very hard, and seeing that good beginnings in all great matters are always
the difficultest part of them, we must lay a good ground of our enterprise, if
we mean to attain thereunto, and then ascend upward from one degree to
another. The The chief foundation of al philosophy.
chiefest and most necessary foundation must be a perpetual and fervent love
of the truth, and of eternal things, joined with the separation of lies, and
of the desire of temporal things far from us. Secondly, these particulars are
Necessary points for a philosopher.
(as Plato says) very necessary for us: a lively and sharp wit, a nature apt
to co^templation, likewise grave, prompt, hardy to execute, and provident of
public commodity. But above all things the knowledge of the true God is
infinitely necessary for him that will be a philosopher, because that, as all
things without the enjoying of their use and goodness, are possessed without
profit: so to have knowledge of arts and sciences without the understanding of
the true God, is frivolous and unprofitable. Yea no man can do any thing that
good is, whether it be in private or public affairs, if by reason he knows
not what that is, which ought to be called good. But in this thing we shall be
well instructed (God willing) by the sequel of our discourses. Thirdly, we
must continue without ceasing the study of this moral knowledge, as Cicero
the father of eloquence does familiarly teach us, saying, We must learn
always.
that in our studies we are to use some intermission only, for the recreation
both of body and mind in all honest sort, but we must never leave and forsake
them altogether. Neither ought these intermissions to be of any long
continuance, because vice always watches to ouer-run us so soon as we let
our selves loose unto idleness, to the end to stir us up through the intisements
of the flesh, to follow Against presumption and self liking.
our natural imperfections. Much less ought we, through presumption of our
selves, and confidence in our own virtue and sufficiency, altogether to
forsake the profession of this study, as they do, who think themselves such
great doctors, that nothing may be added to their knowledge. Of these men we
may truly say, that they never had the true knowledge of this moral
philosophy, wherein the more we profit, the more we shall desire to learn:
and whether we be young or old (as Socrates said) we shall always find what to
learn, and be occasioned to diminish all vain opinion of our selves, seeing
this is one of the most notable effects thereof, to purge all pride and
presumption. A fit comparison.
For as those vessels (says Plutarke) wherein we put liquor, do let out the void
air according to the measure of that which goes in: so when the soul fills
it self with certain and true goods, vanity voideth and gives place. This
is that which Plato says in these words: The more reason a man gets by
philosophy, the more pride and Antisthenes, an example of great love to
knowledge.
arrogancy he loses. We have a notable testimony hereof in Antisthenes, who
after he had heard Socrates dispute, took so great pleasure, and found such
deep skill therein, that albeit he was very learned, and had a great number of
scholars, yet he willed them to seek another master, because he purposed to
learn himself. And by reason of the distance of place where he dwelt, he came
twice a day above three miles on foot to hear Socrates. Plato.
Likewise Plato showed well how smally he presumed of his exceeding great
knowledge, when not contenting himself therewith, after the death of his
master Socrates he made a voyage through Egypt, and after into Italy, to hear
and confer with the best learned of those countries, and to learn that which
he knew not before. Which zeal of his and burning desire unto wisdom being
so laudable, God so recompensed, that none of the Ethniks (except Socrates)
ever came near unto his divine knowledge of eternal things. We see then how
we must be the disciples of philosophy all our life time. Now as there is
nothing, wherein a master builder reioiceth so much, after he has laid a good
foundation of some great work, as to see the progress and proceeding thereof:
so after we have laid our first happy resolution (as is said) of attaining to
the knowledge of philosophy, and have tasted of the first principles of her
wholesome fruits, it will turn to our great contentation, and occasion of
proceeding, when we see and perceive that we profit and amend by this study.
This will appear unto us by the consideration How we may know whether we
profit in philosophy.
of our present works and actions, being compared with the former, and by the
diminishing and qualifiying of our wicked passions and natural inclinations,
which the profession of this science will undoubtedly work in us. For as we
take it for a good sign when a disease remooueth into some parts of least
account: so when our vices are changed into more meek and soft passions, it
puts us in hope that we shall wholly deface them afterward. The right and
perfect way hereunto is to enter deeply into our selves, and to take a perfect
and sound knowledge of our natural, hurtful and most vehement inclinations by
comparing one with another. Next, as a good and expert Physician before he
deals with dangerous diseases, begins A good way to overcome great faults.
with gentle preparatiues, we are first to correct lesser faults, that after we
may the easier overcome the greatest. For it is certain, that by such an
exercise and custom of keeping our selves from things that are after a sort
excusable, yea that are permitted and lawful, it will be far more easy for
us afterward to amend and abstain from unlawful things. After we have thus
reformed our selves, we shall wholly forsake small imperfections (which will be
easy for us to do) and make no more reckoning of little offenses, as those
which we shall avoid altogether. From thence we shall come to consider and to
discover better the nature and cause of our greater and more hurtful passions,
together with their vglines and deformity. Then laboring to diminish their
force by eschewing prudently the causes of them, and by cutting often one branch
now, and then another, we shall in the end wonder to see how reason perfecteth
in us her office of commanding absolutely over all the perturbations of our
soul, I mean so far forth as humane frailty aided by God, can (as I When
we may be called Philosophers.
said before) attain to perfection. Then may we truly call our selves
Philosophers, when by our own example we make it known, that the life of man
at all times, in all places, in all passions, and generally in all affairs
receives the use of Philosophy. Now after we have well profited through so
great diligence and watchfulnes, through such industry of mind and continual
study, I mean after we are become better than we were before, by reason of
the tranquillity of our souls purged from perturbations, we must be careful
that this our commodity redound also to others, as the commandment of God and
natural duty bind us thereunto. Then (I say) we shall have attained The
perfection of Philosophy.
to the perfection of this goodly knowledge, when we are serviceable to our
neighbors, brethren and countrymen, not of vain glory, or for terrestrial
riches, but for the love of virtue only, which of it self is a goodly
recompense for it self, being joined with a happy expectation of heaven. But
let us note farther for the last point of our discourse, (whereof I have
already briefly spoken) that one of the surest means, which we can take to
come to a true knowledge of Philosophy, is, not to esteem at all, but rather
to contemn whatsoever is subject to corruption, and is in the power of
variable fortune, as the Philosophers use to speak: namely, vainglory, worldly
wealth, and other earthly goods, forasmuch as the desire of getting, keeping
and increasing them is that which carries us away most, and which hinders
every other good and The contempt of worldly goods necessary in a Philosopher.
virtuous inclination. Therefore let us freely forsake all such things, let us
withdraw our minds from all bythoughts, and despise all earthly
discommodities: yea let us patiently sustain all grief, that we may yield
our selves wholly to the study of Philosophy, which is the Crates.
cause of so many good things. Crates the Theban forsook his patrimony of
eight talents (which according to the common computation amounts to four
thousand, eight hundred crowns) that being delivered from the Notable examples
of love to Philosophy.
care of hous-keeping, and of guiding his goods, he might follow the study of
philosophy with greater liberty. Anaxagoras.
Anaxagoras for the same cause suffered his lands to lie waste, and after long
study returning to his house, and finding it altogether fallen into ruin and
desolation, he said, if these things had not perished, I had perished: as if he
had said, that he should never have gotten the treasure of knowledge, which was
the ornament of his mind, if he had given himself to gain and to gather
goods. Democritus Democritus.
Abderita, being very rich (as may be gathered by the feast which his father
made to that innumerable army of Xerxes who came into Graecia, which
consisted, as Herodotus writes, of more than two millions of fighting men)
gave all his patrimony to his country, reserving to himself but a little
some of money to live withal, that he might have the more leisure to study
philosophy, for Euclide.
which cause he went to dwell at Athens. Euclide, of the town of Megara, being
very desirous to hear Socrates dwelling at Athens, between which two cities
the war was so cruel, that no Citizen of the one city durst be seen in the
other, without inevitable danger of death if he were known, had
notwithstanding so great love to wisdom, that although he were an Ethnic,
and doubted of a second life, yet he preferred the desire of knowledge before
the care of his life, and being apparailed like a woman, went once in two days
to Athens and abode there all night to hear Socrates, who commonly spent the
most part thereof in discoursing of wisdom, and then returned again about
the break of the day. Now to conclude our present treatise, we will hold this,
that only philosophy can give us certain knowledge, and teach us how we
Philosophy only teaches us to know our chief good.
may enjoy in this life our only and soueraign good, which is the rest and
tranquillity of our souls. Yea she is unto us in stead of a guide to lead us
to the eternal fruition of our supreme and euerabiding good, which is
promised, and purchased by the blood of the immaculate Lamb in that second and
most happy life. And, as Plato said, speaking by the mouth of Socrates, that
they only shall attain to the kingdom of heaven with God, who end their days
in this life purged by philosophy, so shall it be by the unspeakable love of
this eternal wisdom, that we shall be purged, cleansed and saved. Yea through
the expectation of this blessed felicity we may a great deal more perfectly
than did all those great and ancient philosophers, lead a contented, joyful
and quiet life, void of all perturbations and fear, for as much as they knew
the justice of God only, and not his mercy, which is assured unto us in his
beloved son. Moreover they were ignorant (notwithstanding their philosophy)
of the chief point of his justice, namely of the beginning of all things and
of their The true cause of joy and tranquillity in a Christian soul.
end, which the word of God teaches us together with the truth of that
permanent happiness of the soul, whereof they had but a shadow in their life.
Heerof our Lord Jesus Christ himself has left good and sure pledges in the
depth of our hearts, saying that he gave and left his peace with us, his peace
(I say) in our souls, and not with the world. Therefore it appears
sufficiently, that nothing is so much to be desired, whether we regard profit
to our selves, or service to the whole body and society of our brethren and
countrymen, as the study of philosophy, which is the knowledge of life, and
the true medicine and tillage of the soul whereby all virtue is taught us.


The end of the first days work.
THE SECOND DAYS WORK.
Of Virtue. Chap. 5.
ASER. AMongst the infinite number of them that were honored with this fair
name and excellent title of Philosopher, What this word Philosopher means.
which is as much to say, as a lover of wisdom, there were three principal
sects, that contended together by general rules; but especially about the
sovereign good and felicity of man: namely, the Academiks, the Peripatetiks,
and There were three chief sects of philosophers.
the Stoiks. The best of them all, and they which came nearest to the knowledge
of the truth were the Academiks, whose first authors were Socrates and Plato,
who, as we heard yesterday, always taught, that our true good consisted in the
tranquillity of the soul, void of all perturbations, and in stead of them
adorned and enriched with all virtue, which is the proper substance and matter
of philosophy, and therefore called the only permanent good of the soul.


AMANA. I can not but greatly commend this paradox of the Stoiks, that There is
no good but virtue, nor evil but vice, which is the contrary unto it. And to
go a little further, following their opinion and the opinion of many ancient
wise men, I say, that The virtuous man only is free and happy, Who are happy
and who unhappy.
yea although he were in Phalaris bull: and that The vicious man only is a
bondman and unhappy, albeit he had the riches of Craesus, the empire of
Cyrus, and the glory of Alexander. For great callings are nothing where the
mind is not content, and where the heart pricked with desire troubles the
tranquillity of the soul.


ARAM. Riches (says Pythagoras) are no sure pillars, and glory is less
certain. Likewise beauty, and the disposition of the body, magistracies and
honors are all of Worldly goods are of no force.
no force: but Prudence, Magnanimity, and Justice are ankers of greatest stay,
which cannot be plucked up by any tempest. For it is the will and law of God,
that virtue only should be mighty and firm, all other things being but toys
and fooleries. But we must now learn of thee ACHITOB, that which is necessary
for us to know concerning this excellent disposition of the soul.


ACHITOB. The disputation concerning the good of man has indeed always been
great amongst the learned, so that as well their diverse opinions, as their
arguments would stay us here with too long a discourse, especially seeing they
are unnecessary for us, who seek only to be instructed in the truth. Now
that we may attain heerunto, and to the perfect understanding of that matter,
which is here propounded unto us, we will here set down this Maxim, or
principle, confessed of all the greatest and most ancient philosophers, and
agreeable to that truth, which is taught us in the holy scriptures, that There
Two sorts of goods.
are two sorts of goods, the one which is the last end, the other is the means
to attain thereunto. The first is the sovereign, supreme, most perfect, and
eternal good, which we expect and hope for in the immortality of the second
life, when we shall enjoy that true and absolute felicity, which neither eye
has ever seen, nor ear heard, neither has entered Virtue is the effect of
regeneration.
at any time into the heart of man. That which we call the means whereby we
come to the first is virtue only, whereof we are now to speak, and which is
the proper effect of our regeneration by the spirit of God dwelling in us.
First then let us consider what virtue is, also the division, sountaine,
incomparable excellency, and invincible force thereof, with those wonderful
effects which it works in him that possesses her: wherein also we will see
some notable examples of ancient men. Virtue (as the The definition of virtue.
philosophers say) is a disposition and power of the reasonable part of the
soul, which brings into order and decency the unreasonable part, by causing
it to propound a convenient end to it own affections and passions, whereby the
soul abides in a comely and decent habit, executing that which ought to be
done, according to reason. But to speak more briefly, Virtue is a proportion
and vprightnes of life in all points agreeable to reason. The division thereof
is altogether like to that of philosophy. For they are so linked together,
that it is all one to be virtuous, and to be a philosopher, the one being the
matter and substance of the other. Virtue therefore is divided into
Contemplative and into Moral. The eternal Wisdom by the operation of his
spirit, guides and lifts up the contemplative virtue to her proper end,
which is that happy and immutable knowledge, that concerns the majesty of
God. This did Socrates call Religion, and the greatest virtue, saying further,
that the contempt thereof brought upon men a cursed ignorance, and that no man
ought to persuade himself, that he could find amongst Socrates called
religion the greatest virtue.
the race of men any greater virtue than religion and piety toward God, whose
honor is the foundation of every good work, which if it be overthrown, the
other parts are as soon dispersed as the pieces of a ruinous building. Yea
religion is not only the head of justice and virtue, but also is as it were
the soul to give vigor and strength unto it. From this supreme science flows
prudence, The duty of prudence.
which is a work thereof, appointed to govern, rule, and moderate by the
means of moral virtue, the passions and affections of the unreasonable part
of the soul in all mediocritie, by cutting off all excess and defect of those
passions, and by moderating them between too little and too much, thereby to
^^epe men from erring. As for example, she holds a man within the limits of
prowes and valor, least he should cast away himself through rashness or
cowardlines: she causes him wisely to use liberality, because he should not
be spoiled by covetousness, or fall into prodigality. And that he should not be
cast down too much in adversity, nor lift up beyond measure in prosperity,
she keeps him upright and constant both in the one and in the other. Thus
does virtue generally teach a man, by following the reason of true prudence, to
rule all his inclinations and actions as well for his own private good, as for
the profit and utility of humane society. Whereby it appears sufficiently
unto us, that the foundation The foundation and spring of all virtue.
of all virtue is that divine reason, which flows into our souls from the
free goodness of our God, and which takes lively root by care, study, and
diligence, when the selfsame grace blesses our labor. For without this we
can do nothing, so that all our meditations and purposes to live uprightly,
continently, and temperately become vain and frivolous before his majesty. In
this manner, of that excellent reason and wisdom, wherewith the eternal
wisdom enricheth us, that we might know good and evil, prudence is
engendered, which is most necessary for the government of earthly things
(whereof we will entreat hereafter) and whereby man is enriched with moral
virtue, as with an infallible rule of all his works and actions, to the end
that fully enjoying Wherein humane happiness consists.
humane felicity, which consists in good manners, qualities and conditions of
the soul, he may bring forth the fruits and effects thereof to the profit of
many. We say then, that all virtue consists in mediocritie, as vice does in
excess or in defect, in regard whereof she is in the midst, albeit in respect
of her self, I mean of her perfect and absolute excellency she is extreme,
and stands not in need of any increase or diminution. Now as all the
imperfections of the soul are called vices and passions, so all their
contraries, which serve for remedies unto them, are named virtues. And although
virtue be always one, so that he which heartily imbraceth one part of it is
desirous of them all, yet may she be called by diverse names, even by so many,
as there is always in every good action some particular virtue, that makes it
eminent, and to be seen above others. Moreover, according to the diverse
subjects wherein she is, she brings forth diverse effects, conforming her
self in some sort to the manners, conditions, and natural inclinations of
those which possess her. Hereof it comes, that some are more apt and
constant in some The gifts and graces of God are diverse in men.
one virtue than others are (for all can not do all things) and that one
practices it after one fashion, and an other otherwise. Now it follows, that
I handle hereafter distinctly and in order, the plurality of virtues, with
their several properties. But in the mean while, to speak generally of this
precious and inestimable riches, I mean of virtue, and of the great, worthy,
and wonderful effects, which she brings forth in men, first, she is the The
excellency and property of virtue.
only proper and true good of the soul, that can not by any accident be
violently taken and carried away. She alone makes her possessor happy, causing
him to find every kind of life that is sweet, pleasant, and acceptable,
contained in her. Virtue alone, is the only matter of rest and tranquillity
in the mind, being by reason purged of fear, of trouble, of worldly desire and
joy. Of this lively fountain spoke Democritus, when he said that joy was
ingendered in men's hearts, of the mediocritie of pleasure, and of a moderate and
temperate harmony of life. Virtue (said Thales) is the profitablest thing in
the world, because Every thing is made profitable through virtue.
it makes all other things profitable, by causing men to use them well. Yea we
may say further, that all other gifts and riches remain unprofitable and
hurtful, without the ornament of virtue. Cicero proves by many goodly
reasons, that only virtue is of it self sufficient to cause men to live well
and happily. And surely every good and virtuous man of what calling soever he
be, is so happy, if he have grace to know it, that he need not to wish for any
thing with passion or travel in this life, but rather is content of himself
in regard of men, and contemns the care of worldly things, not judging any
thing evil, which necessity of nature, or rather the ordinance of God brings
upon him. And where miseries are doubled, there virtue shows her effects most
wonderfully, giving us thereby to understand, that she consists in such things
as are most rare and difficult. For which cause her strength Virtue compared to
a palm tree.
is compared to the date tree, which the more it is pulled down, the more it
returns upward: so when virtue is most oppressed of her enemies she shines
most gloriously. Only virtue appears wonderful to the mind that is
clothed therewith, and keeps it from coveting that which others commonly
worship, namely, great callings, riches, pleasures and glory. She despises the
praise and flattery of men, whereunto so many others make themselves The reward
of virtue in the life to come is of the free mercy of God.
slaves, and remains alwais free in her self, and free to every one, without
any other hope of reward, then to be accepted of God, and to effect things
meet tobe rewarded eternally in the next life by the liberality of God. If we
compare worldly goods with virtue (calling that good which usurps that name,
and is subject to corruption) first, as touching those which the philosophers
call the goods of fortune, and namely nobility, wherein at this men stay so much,
what is it but a good of our ancestors? Riches are easily lost, yea causes the
possessor of them to be sooner lost: and as for the glory of the greatest, yea
of al principality, it is Comparison of worldly goods with virtue.
no less uncertain. Concerning the goods of the body, beauty and comelines is
but a flower of small continuance: health, which is so precious, soon changes:
strength is lost by infinite inconveniences. Al bodily pleasure is imperfect,
and followed of perturbations. But virtue is that only divine and immortal
quality in us, which, (as Hesiodus says) Nothing has power over virtue.
is a stable and sure possession both to the living and to the dead: over which
neither fortune, slander, sickness, old age nor adversity have any power: and
as for length of time, which diminishes all things, it always adds somewhat
to virtue, and increases it. All the other goods above rehearsed, are from
without a man, working oftentimes destruction to their possessors, and commonly
coming to those that are least worthy of them. Only virtue is the proper
inheritance of the soul, works the hapines thereof, and makes a man always
worthy of true glory and praise, causing him to be honored and esteemed even of
his enemies. In a word it cannot (as Cicero says) be uttered how much Virtue
cannot be valued.
virtue surmounteth all other things in glory and excellency. And if all other
goods of men (says Socrates) were laid by themselves they would amount in
value but to one mote in respect of the price of virtue. Plato his disciple
says, that the difference of virtue compared with other goods, is so great,
that if they were put into one skale of the balance, and virtue into the other,
this would ascend up to heaven, and the other would touch the earth. Moreover,
he wrote four and fifty books or dialogues, which did all entreat of virtue,
out of which men may reap infinite profit, especially out of those that
entreat of a commonwealth, or of laws. In these books that he might not seem
ungrateful Why Plato in his works brings in Socrates speaking.
toward his master Socrates, who would never write any thing, he brings him
in rehearsing that, which at other times he had heard him speak. Stilpo the
philosopher, being in his city of Megara when it was taken and spoiled by
Demetrius king of Macedonia, who favoring him, asked if he had lost any thing
that was his, made this answer: No sir (quoth he) for war cannot spoil virtue.
And indeed this is that riches wherewith we ought to furnish our selves which
can swim with us in a shipwreck, and which caused Wherein the happiness and
greatness of a king consists.
Socrates to answer thus to one, who asked him what his opinion was of the
great king, whether he did not think him very happy; I cannot tell (quoth he)
how he is provided of knowledge and virtue. Who may justly doubt whether virtue
alone is able to make a man happy, seeing it does not only make him wise,
prudent, just and good, both in his doings and sayings, but also commonly
procures unto him honor, glory and authority? It was through her What it was
that procured to Alexander the surname of Great.
means, that Alexander deserved the surname of Great, by that experience which
she gave him in war, by his liberality in riches, by his temperance in all
his sumptuous magnificence, by his hardines and constancy in fight, by his
continency in affections, by his bounty and clemency in victory, and by all
other virtues, wherein he surpassed all that lived in his time. Yea the fame
and renown of his virtues procured a greater number of cities, countries and
men to submit themselves willingly unto him without blowestriking, than did the
power of his army. Wherein this sentence of Socrates is found true, that whole
troops of soldiers, and heaps of riches, are constrained oftentimes to obey
virtue. What said Darius, monarche of the Persians, when he understood both
what continency Alexander his enemy had used toward his wife, who being
exceeding beautiful was taken prisoner by him, and what humanity he showed
afterward in her funerals when she was dead? The Persians (quoth he) need not
be discouraged, neither think themselves cowards and effeminate because they
were vanquished of such an adversary. Neither do I demand any victory of the
gods, but to surmount Alexander in bountifulnes. And if it be so that I must
fall, I beseech them to suffer none but him to sit in the royal throne and
seat of Cyrus. Will we have testimonies of the inuicible force of virtue, and
of her powerful and praisewoorthy effects in most sinister and untoward
matters? Histories declare unto us, that amongst all the virtuous acts, which
procured praise and renown to the men of old time, those were the notablest
and most commended, which they showed forth Examples of the force and effects
of virtue, in adversity.
at such time as fortune seemed to have wholly beaten them down. Pelopidas,
general captain of the Thebans, who delivered them from the bondage of the
Lacedaemonians, Pelopidas.
is more praised and esteemed for the great and notable virtue, which he showed
being prisoner in the hands of Alexander the tyrannous king of the Phereans,
then for all his victories gotten before. For at that time his virtue was so
far from yielding any jot to his calamity, that contrariwise with an
unspeakable constancy he recomforted the inhabitants of the town, that came
to visit him, exhorting them to be of good courage, seeing the hour was come,
wherein the tyrant should be at once punished for his wickedness. And one day he
sent him word, that he was destitute of all judgment and reason, in that he
vexed his poor citizens, and caused them to die in torments who never offended
him, and in the mean time suffered him to live in rest, of whom he could not
be ignorant, that escaping his hands he would be revenged of him. The tyrant
maruelling at his great courage, asked why he made such great haste to die. To
this end (quoth he) that thou being yet more hated of God and men than
Philocles.
thou art, might the sooner be destroyed. Philocles, one of the most famous
Athenian captains of his time (who caused this law to be made, that the right
thombe of all prisoners taken in war from that time forward should be cut off,
that they might not handle a pike any more, but yet might serve to row with an
oar) being taken prisoner with three thousand Atheniens in one battle, which
Lysander admiral of the Lacedaemonians obtained against him, and al of them
being condemned to die, was demanded of Lysander what pain he judged himself
worthy of for counselling his countrymen to so wicked and cruel a thing. To
whom he made this only answer with an immovable virtue, Accuse not those who
have no judge to hear and A most constant death.
know their cause. But seeing the gods have showed thee this favor to be
conqueror, deal with us as we would have done with thee, if we had overcome
thee. Which being said, he went to wash and bath himself, and then putting on
a rich cloak as if he should have gone to some feast, he offered himself first
to the slaughter, showing the way of true constancy to his fellow citizens.
Anaxarchus the philosopher, Anaxarchus.
being taken prisoner by the commandment of Nero, that he might know of him,
who were the authors of a conspiracy that was made against his estate, and
being led toward him for the same cause, he bit his tongue in A wonderful
magnanimity.
sunder with his teeth, and did spit it in his face, knowing well that otherwise
the tyrant would have compelled him by all sorts of tortures and torments to
reveal and disclose them. Zeno missing his purpose, which was to have killed
the tyrant Demylus, did as much to him. But what is more terrible than death?
Notwithstanding when did virtue better show her greatness and power, then when
death labored most to overthrow her, as being resolved of that saying of
Cicero, that all wise men die willingly, and without care, A wise man dies
willingly.
but that the unwise and ignorant are at their wits end for fear of death? If
many, who have not known the true and perfect immortality of the soul, and
some, only led with a desire of praise and worldly glory, others touched with
duty and kindled with a love toward their country, have showed the increase
of their virtue in the horrors and pangs of death, what ought they to do, who
expect certainly an everlasting life? Phocion, after he had been chosen
general captain of the Athenians four and forty times, and done infinite
services to the commonwealth, being at length through certain partakinges and
divisions overcome with the weakest side which he had mainetained, and being
condemned to drink poison, was demanded before he drank, whether he had no
more to say. Whereupon speaking to his son, he said, I command thee to
bear the Athenians no rancor and malice for my death. And a little before this
speech, beholding one of those that were condemned to die with him, to vex
himself through impatiencie, what meanest thou poor man, The fear of death
does not astonish the virtuous.
(quoth he to him) do thou not think thy self happy that thou may die
with Phocion? The fear and appreheusion of death does astonish, as we commonly
say, the stoutest, but not the most virtuous. For they know (as Plautus
Callicratides.
says) that he dies not, who for virtues sake is put to death. Callicratides,
General of the Lacedaemonians, being ready to give battle to his enemies, the
soothsaier, after sacrifice done to the gods said unto him, that the intrals of
the sacrifices promised victory to the army, but death to the captain.
Whereunto he answered as one without all fear; although he believed it as an
oracle from heaven, Sparta consists not in one man. For when I shall be dead
my country shall be nothing lessened, but if I recule now and draw back, the
reputation thereof will be diminished. Whereupon substituting in his place
Cleander, as successor in his office, he gave battle, wherein it happened unto
him as the soothsaier had told him. If we desire infinite such examples,
histories are full of them, even of those who loved rather to kill themselves
(which a Christian never ought to do, but only to suffer death patiently, if
it be offered unto him) than to commit any thing unworthy their virtue.
Themistocles being unjustly banished Themistocles love to his country.
from Athens, retired to the king of Persia, whose great favor and benefits
received, caused to say to his children, We had been undone, if we had not
been undone: as also to promise, that he would employ himself in his service.
Notwithstanding when he saw the war begun again between this king and the
Athenians, wherein he was offered a great charge, he chose rather to hasten his
death by a poison which he took, than to seem to be pricked or provoked with
malice against his ungrateful countrie-men, least thereby he should obscure
and blot the glory of so many goodly exploites, triumphs, and victories,
which he had obtained. Now if death can not stop the course of virtue, how
much less can any other weaker. accident do it? Old Age, which diminishes Age
has no power over virtue. Agesilaus.
and consumes all the strength of the body, could not weaken the great virtue
of Agesilaus king of Lacedemonia, who being fower-score years of age, and
seeing the glory of his country brought to nothing by that victory, which
the Thebanes had obtained against him, withdrewe himself into the service of a
king of Egypt, and took the charge of a captain under him, that through the
good service he should do him, he might deserve (whereof he assured himself)
to have succor of him for his own country affairs. Envy (says Thucidides)
is heard to be overcome, and follows great estates and potentates. Honor,
glory and riches, are but firebrandes to kindle it. Notwithstanding the
excellency of virtue oftentimes triumphs over it, so that the envious are
constrained to speak well of virtuous men. We see then clearly, and have
better experience thereof in our selves if we be decked with virtue, that she
is of an invincible force, and that all things are tamed by her. For who can
doubt that through her, great empires, monarchies, commonwealths, estats and
cities have much more flourished, than through force and might of arms? The
Virtue causes kingdoms to flourish.
sequel of our discourses shall furnish us with examples hereof. Now to
conclude our present matter, knowing that virtue deserves so great praise in
regard of her fruits, and of her wonderful great effects, we say, that
Virtue is the only honest, profitable, and pleasant good.
she is the only good both for honesty, profit and pleasure, between which
there is such a conjunction, that they cannot be separated one from another,
(as hereafter we may entreat more at large) so that the seuering of these three
things to attribute them to other earthly and perishing goods, is the fountain
of all vice, deceit, and mischief. If then, trouble, loss, hazard or danger
are to be found in the practice and exercise of this holy and sacred virtue
(as even the greatest worldly happiness is counterpoised with evil and
difficulty) ought we not to despise all such things, yea death it self for
that happy recompense, which is assured unto us, not only of immortal glory
and praise (which the men of old time promised to themselves) but also of life
everlasting, whereof the most of them were ignorant? Let us not be like to a
little child (for he that is a child in mind differs nothing from a child
in age) who seeing a trifle wherewith he plaieth taken out of his hand, casts
away for anger that which he holds in his other hand, although it be some
dainty thing and good to eat. But let us with fervent zeal and burning
affection, always embrace this so precious and chaste beauty, I mean virtue,
which alone fills the life of man, with true, sound and perfect contentation.
Let all things come behind virtue, after the example of so many excellent and
ancient personages, who ought to make us blush for shame, when we consider,
that the care of Anacharsis forsook a kingdom that he might the better
obtain virtue.
earthly goods has the first place amongst us. Anacharsis a Barbarian, being
led with the only love of virtue, left the kingdom of Scythia to his yoonger
brother, and went into Graecia, where he profited so well with Solon, that he
deserved to be placed in the number of the seven Sages. Three things
necessary for the obtaining of virtue.
Now if three things (after we have asked them of him who only can and will give
them unto us) meet together in us, namely, Nature, Reason, and Use, we may by
them being directed, illuminated, and guided by the spirit of God, attain to
the top of humane perfection in this rich virtue, which being thus grounded
(like to a strong and lively plant) will take sure footing and root within us.
If she meet with a good and well disposed nature, that is able to endure labor,
and that is tilled by reason with the precepts of philosophy, whereby it is
made firm, mighty, and fruitful, then use and exercise will bring forth the
fruits thereof, as well for our own, as for the common profit of men.


Of Vice. Chap. 6.
ACHITOB. The knowledge of goodness must go before the love of it.
AS he that is ignorant of goodness cannot love it, or boast (except it be
falsely) that he seeks after it, and if he should find it, yet he could not
acknowledge it, or reap any profit thereby: so he that knows not evil, can
never hate it sufficiently, much less shun it, or keep himself from falling
into the snares and ambushes thereof, where it lies in continual watch to
surprise and overtake men. Ye shall have very few, but say, that they are
enemies to evil, and that they labor to drive it as far from them as they
can. But what? As they never knew what goodness meant, so they know as little
of the contrary. Now having by our last speech declared sufficiently, that
virtue is the only true good of the soul, it is out of question, that vice,
which is altogether Vice is the only evil of the soul.
contrary unto it, is the only evil thereof, and the fountain of all the
miseries of man, as well earthly as eternal. Which, that we may more surely
avoid, and mark better the excellency and beauty of virtue, by the
lothsomnes and deformity of vice (because contraries set one by another, as
black near to white, show themselves a great deal better) I think it will
not be to wander besides the matter, if we bestow the rest of our mornings
work in the handling thereof.


ASER. There is no evil in man (as the philosopers say) but vice, if we take
that for evil which is offensive. Neither What we ought to call evil.
does any thing offend and make a man worse, but that which endammageth his
soul. And in this manner vice only and sin is hurtful unto him, yea (as
Plutarke says) is sufficient of it self to make a man miserable.


AMANA. As virtue (says Plato) is the health and Virtue is the health, and
vice the sickness of the soul.
forceable vigor of the soul, so vice is the sickness and imbecillitie thereof,
which having gotten a habit, makes a man vicious and corrupt. For it is
certain that if men had sufficient force and constancy to resist vice (which
we have by inheritance) they would follow after virtue. But being overcome by
the loosenes of their sensuality they are led captives, as it were in a
triumph, under the yoke of sin. Let us then hearken to ARAM, who, I think,
will not forget to paint out unto us this pernicious Hydra with all her colors,
that she may be so much the more odious unto us.


ARAM. I have always learned of wise men, that this saying of an ancient man
is most true, That there is a hundred times more pain in doing evil, than in
well doing: Vice is like a dropsy.
and that vice has the same effect in the soul, which the dropsy has in the
body. For both of them do plant in man a continual desire of that which
breeds his greatest bane. Whereupon most miserably he seeks after his own
perdition and ruin with pain and travel, whereas he might pass through
felicity in this life, into that life which is eternal and most happy. One
chief occasion heerof, as I think, may be attributed to the ignorance of
evil. For what wicked man is so dull of understanding, that, if he knew
certainly what vice were, would not with all his might separate himself as
far from it, as for the time he drew near unto it? By a stronger reason it
follows, that he which truly knows it, before it be grown When we begin to
hate vice.
to a habit within him, will shun it more diligently: because we begin then to
hate vices (as Plutarke says) when by reason we understand what shame and
harm comes of them. Therefore it must needs be very profitable for us to
utter heerin that, which we have learned by the study of philosophy, and that
briefly for this present, hoping hereafter to entreat more particularly of the
principal parts of vice. First we will define it, then consider the pernicious
effects thereof in the soul, and the fruits which it brings with it:
thirdly, declare how it never escapes unpunished: and lastly, show how we must
fortify our selves against the privy watchings and snares of such a dangerous
and mighty enemy. Vice is an inequality and The definition of vice.
iarring of manners, proceeding from man's natural inclination to pleasures and
naughty desires. This inclination not being reined with the bit of reason,
guided by the spirit of grace, nor ruled by the wise declarations thereof,
causes a man by little and little to give over himself to all wicked passions
(the end of one being the beginning of another) whereby he becomes most
unhappy, yea more wild and savage than any brute beast. Chrysippus a Stoike
philosopher, called vice the proper essence of unhappiness. And surely it is a
very perfect workmaister of wretchedness, disposing and framing men to all kind
of mischief and misery. For after it has once taken hold of the soul, it
will never forsake it until it has wholly bruised, overwhelmed, and destroyed
it, filling it daily with The effects of vice.
perturbations and new passions, with voluptuousnes, rancor, enmities, revenge,
murders, anguish, fear, fruitless repentance, ambition, covetousness, and with
all other lusts, which are incurable diseases of the soul, after they have
once taken root therein. For the more they wax, the more they will grow, vice
being (as Plato says) of an Vice is of an endless stock.
infinite and endless race. And therefore the above named Chrysippus said not
without reason, that to avoid so dangerous an enemy, and one that ought to be
so odious unto Although we are to hate vice with a perfect hatred, yet we must
not kill our selves to be (...) of it.
us, it were better for us to cast our selves headlong into the sea, than to
suffer it to reign over us. Plato also writes, that it is far better for a
man not to live at all, than to live wickedly, or in ignorance. For such a life
can have no fitter name, than to be called a true shadow of death, I mean of
eternal death, which follows the wicked even at the heels. Bias, one of the
Sages said, That no man could justly be termed a captive, although he were
laden The vicious man only is a captive.
with irons, except also he were compassed about with vices. Moreover, we see
that neither sword nor fire does carry away a man so violently as vice does.
Many have suffered a thousand outrages and punishments with such constancy,
that tyrants were sooner weary of persecuting them, than they of suffering.
Besides, they had so great power over themselves, that in the midst of torments
they were able to stay their voice altogether: insomuch that one would have
either judged them to be senseless, or else think that in seeing them he did
not see them. But vice always discovers it self, and every where appears
Nothing more hurtful than vice.
shameful, infamous, and hurtful. Thales called vice the hurtfullest thing in
the world, because that where it is, it marreth and destroieth all. Moreover,
it makes those things, which otherwise seem honorable and magnifical,
loathsome and unpleasant, when it is mingled with them: yea it appears so much
the more infamons, as the nobility Vice joined with authority is more
hurtful.
and authority whereunto it is joined is greater, because then it discovers
better what pernicious and damnable effects it has. For taking a swift course
by the high way of power, and driving forward every wicked affection to
execution, it causes choler to be turned presently into murder, love into
adultery, covetousness into confiscation, and so in other passions. But as the
vices of the greater sort are more dangerous, so no doubt, shame and dishonor
are likewise doubled upon them, because they are better seen and noted,
whereby they become more odious and contemptible to every one. Besides, their
reward lies at their gate in great measure, which will not be long from them.
For to whom more is given, of him more shall A good lesson for great men.
be required. And I pray you what greater cause of shame and blushing can that
man have, who being borne to command men of all estates and conditions, does
himself obey such vile and abject things, as are sensuality, ignorance,
concupiscence, and other like passions wrought by vice, which being without
reason, are made to obey and to be ruled by reason? Neither are we more to be
excused than the greater sort when we follow after such things, because we are
but of mean and small calling. For every one is borne to command himself,
whereunto our chief study and labor ought to tend. We have further to note
diligently, that vice is not only hurtful to him that is infected therewith,
but also that it uses him as a minister and instrument to corrupt and spoil
others. For The property of the wicked.
you shall never see any wicked man, that labors not to make others like
himself: which if he cannot do, yet he will so think of them, and seek to
persuade all others, that they are such, or rather worse than himself. Whereby
it is easy enough to judge, that this is that, which undoes and destroieth
communalties and Commonwealths, towns and cities, when the governors and
magistrates of them are ministers of vices. The change of monarchies, estates,
and kingdoms proceeded always of vice. Roboam The alteration of kingdoms
comes of vice.
through want of prudence, Sardanapalus through intemperancy and luxuriousnes,
the last French king of the race of Clouis through retchlesnes, Perses of
Macedonia thorough rashness, with infinite others, whose examples we shall see
hereafter, lost their kingdoms through vices. But that we may yet have greater
occasion to hate and shun this horrible monster of nature, let us know that
vice chasticeth it self. Which is not done only by man's law, out of which the
mightier sort (as Anacharsis said) escape as great flies that break through
the spiders web, the punishment Offenses are never without pain.
also of which may oftentimes be avoided for a time, but even the pain
follows the offense so near, that it is equal unto it both for age and
time. For from that very instant wherein wickedness is committed, she frames
for and of her self her own torment, and begins to suffer the pain of her
mischievous deed through the remorse thereof. This is that worm that
continually gnaweth the conscience of a malefactor, and accompanies his
miserable life with shame and confusion, with frights, perturbations, anguish,
and continual disquietnes, even to his very dreams, so that all his life time
he is destitute of all tranquillity and rest of spirit, wherein only humane
felicity consists. And therefore one of the Hebrew interpreters well and
truly answered king Ptolemie, who asked him how he might be in rest when he
dreamed: Let piety (quoth this wise man unto him) be the How a man may have
continual quietness.
scope of all thy sayings and doings. For by applying al thy discourses and
works to excellent things, whether thou sleep or wakest, thou shall have
quiet rest in regard of thy self. Truly that man fears nothing, whose soul
being free from all notorious crimes, follows the will of God, who directs
all counsels to good. But (as Plato says) there is nothing that makes a man
so fearful, as the remembrance of his life passed in shame. Yea presently The
force of conscience in the wicked.
after the offense (says Justin Martyr) the conscience of a wicked man is unto
him in stead of an accuser, a witness, a judge, and a hangman. This is that,
which the scripture Leuit. 26. 36.
teaches us in Leuiticus, saying, that the wicked shall tremble at the fall of
the leaf of a tree, and that they shall be as if their life hung by a thread.
We ought to be persuaded that this violence of man's conscience comes from
God, who causes his enemies to feel his judgment and fury in such sort,
that they cannot abide it, but are constrained to condemn themselves. And if
our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart. Now although the word
should wholly fail in this, yet we have the testimony of nature imprinted
with such characters in our hearts, that it did even compel the ancient poets
to find out and to faigne Furies, as reuengers of our sins, which are nothing
else but the torments of evil consciences. This is that Esaias. 66. 24.
worm whereof Esaie speaks, which dies not, but gnaweth Examples of tormented
consciences in the wicked.
and deuoureth them without ceasing. Caligula, a most cruel Emperor, never had
secure and quiet rest, but being terrified and in fear, awoke often, as one
that was vexed and carried headlong with wonderful passions. Nero, after he had
killed his mother, confessed that whilst he slept, he was troubled by her, and
tormented with Furies, that burned him with flaming torches. Let us not then
suppose A wise man is ashamed to attend before himself.
that, although a wicked act may be hidden and kept close from men, therefore
the torment is the less, (which a wise man never thinks of, knowing that he
ought to be in more reverence of himself than of others) but rather more
grievous within us, not for the only fear of worldly shame or punishment, but
for the apprehension of the just judgment of God, from whom nothing is hid. He
pursues the wicked hard at the heels for the most part, and knows how to
take vengeance of their iniquity in due time. And if he defer the punishment,
it serves but to Why God deferreth his vengeance upon the wicked.
aggrauate their condemnation so much the more upon their heads, and to make the
punishment more horrible, whereof we ought to stand in greater fear, than of
any bodily pain, because the dolor thereof abides for ever. He that would go
about to repeat here severally al those vices wherewith men may be infected,
and wherein we see them commonly wallow, should find their number very great,
yea infinite. But (as Democritus said) let us only lay open that which is
within us, and we shall find there a heap and conserve of many, diverse, and
different evils, which have their original beginning from thence. For as
shadows follow bodies, so passions and vices follow souls. Hereafter we may
discourse more particularly of the greater part of them, and of their proper
and peculiar effects, with that just punishment, which commonly followed them.
In the mean time we may learn this, that if custom be of so great force,
that (as we say) it overcomes nature, it is chiefly to be seen in vice and
dissolutenes, which is a gulf wherein a man may very easily cast himself
Custom in sinning is dangerous.
headlong, but it is a very difficult matter, yea impossible to withdraw
himself again. And (as a wise Roman said) most horrible and execrable
offenses through use and custom are made small faults, and are commonly
practiced. For it is the property of vice to be headstrong and contentious,
seeking to defend it self by reasons, which, although they be altogether vain
and frivolous, yet of great weight in regard of the weak flesh of man, which
easily suffers it self to be bound under the yoke of sin. Therefore we are
to take good heed, that we suffer not our selves to be surprised by so
dangerous an enemy, nor give him any access or entrance into us: I mean that
he should not dwell in us (for otherwise we know that perfect righteousness is
in God only) but rather let us exercise How we should fortify our selves
against vice.
all those things that are contrary to vice, accustoming our selves in such
sort to master our common and small imperfections (which are but too abundant
in the iustest men) that they take no effect, howsoever of themselves they may
seem excusable. By this means we shall labor evermore to make choice of the
best in all indifferent things: which will stand us in stead of a sure rampire
against the tyrannical reign of this enemy to virtue. We read of Pythagoras,
that he accustomed himself to abstain from cruelty and injustice even toward
brute beasts, by The humanity of Pythagoras even toward brute beasts.
requesting fowlers, after they had taken birds to let them fly again. And
when he came amongst fishermen he bought their draughts, and after caused all
the fish to be cast again into the sea. Moreover, he forbad all his disciples
to kill a tame beast at any time. After his example let us abstain from all
things that may procure vice, and never suffer such speeches as these to pass
from us: What good will this do if that be wanting? Now I will deal in this
manner, another time I will do better. Oh how slipperie are such ways, how
easily does vice glide away like a stream under An excellent comparison
teaching us not to suffer any unlawful thing.
such pretenses? For as a wedge makes but a small cleft in the beginning, yet
afterward the rift being greater sundereth al in pieces: so the sufferance of
unlawful things how small soever it be, leads men by little and little to an
unmeasurable licentiousnes. Moreover, who can assure himself of tomorrow, yea
of a quarter of an hour? The oracle of Apollo answered those of Cyrrha, that
if they would live in peace among themselves, they should make continual war
with their neighbors strangers. So, that we may pass the course of our short
days in peace, rest and tranquillity of spirit, and that we fall not into the
cruel paw of this adversary to all goodness, we must daily fight against We
must never harken to the heralds of vice.
him, and never give ear to his heralds and ambassadors of peace, which are
pleasures, neglect of duty, and such other baits, which he presents to us,
to deceive and beguile us withal. It is most certain, that vice puts How
vice deceives men.
on a visard, and goes disguised and covered with goodly shows that belong
only to virtue, and chalengeth falsely unto it self those goods, which indeed
and truth man ought to desire. And being thus clothed, with the help of
corruptible pleasures that lightly pass away, it yoketh base minded men, whose
care is only set upon the desire of earthly things, which it sets before
their eyes as their felicity, impudently imputing to virtue all those evils
that are in it self. But they that have sufficiently profited in philosophy
through the knowledge of that which is good, and of such things as are truly
fair and beautiful, never harken to such hurtful allurements, but rather do
The prudence of the serpent.
as the serpent does, that stops her ears with her tail, to the end she may
not hear the charms and sorceries of the inchanter. But if through the
neglect of all good admonition, we give place amongst us never so little to the
baits of vice, they may easily in the end (as thorns and thistles growing
near to good seed, do oftentimes choke it) darken all that good instinct of
nature that shall be in us. Diogenes the Cynike, walking one day through that
Why Diogenes asked his alms of images.
street in Athens, wherein there were many images of such ancient men, as had
best deserved of the Common-welth, asked his alms of them all one after
another. Whereat some maruelling and demanding of him the cause why: I learn
(quoth he to them) to take denial patiently: even so when we can so far
command our selves, as to shun all vain and unprofitable business, wherein this
age delights, and which serve but for allurements and baits to nicenes and
pleasures, let us not be ashamed not to follow them, but rather let us say,
that we learn to contemn that which is contemptible, and to make choice
(according to that ancient precept of Pythagoras) of the best kind of life that
is, to the end, that custom may by little and little make it easy and
pleasant unto us. To conclude therefore our present matter, we say that vice,
being inseparably accompanied with a thousand miseries, and with unspeakable
and exceeding mischiefs, which draw man into utter ruin and eternal
perdition, may be truly called the only evil of the soul, as that which of
it self is able and sufficient to make him unhappy, who receineth it for a
ghest. And as such a hurtful thing, we ought to hate and to fly from it, by
the means of virtue that is contrary unto it, laboring by all means to have
our souls pure and clean from all wicked deeds, wills, and counsels, and our
manners undefiled, not being troubled or infected with any evil perturbation,
wherewith vice always abounds and is rich.


Of Sciences, of the study of Letters, and of Histories. Chap. 7.
ARAM. IT is a usual speech in the mouths of men altogether ignorant of the
beauty and profit of Sciences, That the study of Letters is a bottomeles The
speeches of ignorant men touching the study of sciences.
gulf, and so long and uneasy a journey, that they which think to finish it,
oftentimes stay in the midway, and many being come to the end thereof find
their minds so confused with their profound and curious skill, that in stead
of tranquillity of soul, which they thought to find, they have increased the
trouble of their spirit. Under this goodly pretense, the most part say, that it
is better not to know much, yea nothing at all: attributing the cause of man's
imperfection, unto science. Being thus persuaded, if they have already any
beginning and entering in learning, they draw back, and seek to hinder and to
turn Why many fathers set not their children to school.
others aside from following them. For this cause many fathers set not their
children to learning, or else because they find this way of preferment too
long and costly, and have other more short and profitable means now a days
whereby to enrich them. But both the one and the other are greatly to be
condemned, because we are to spare no labor and travel, that we may get the
treasures of the soul endued with reason, which are sciences, wherein al humane
felicity consists, and which never breed vexation of spirit. But all wits
are not fit and apt to comprehend and conceive them. Neither does the
corruption of our nature better appear, than in this, that we love rather to
enrich our selves and our children with wicked and perishing goods, than with
true certain and immortal goods, the happy knowledge whereof sciences and arts
do bring unto us. Now having through the grace of God received this benefit by
your liberality (most honorable fathers) as to have been instructed in the
best and most necessary points of knowledge, we thought it would not be
tedious unto you to hear us discourse, that we might stir up the memory of
our studies, and that the beauty and commodity of sciences might work in our
affections a lyking and desire to continue and to finish them.


ACHITOB. Man (says Aristotle) was created to understand Man was created to
understand and to do.
and to do. For it is necessary that instruction go before working. Knowledge
begets judgment, and by judgment men execute all good and virtuous
actions. Whereupon it follows, that the study of letters is rich, and
undoubtedly gives us the knowledge of things. Moreover nothing may be compared
to sciences, which comfort us in our life time and cause us to live after death.


ASER. O science (says Plato) how would men love thee if thou were known?
Fire and air are not more necessary for life, than is the art and rule of
good living, which is showed unto us by learning. And as health is the
conservation of the body, so is doctrine the safegarde of the soul. But we
are to understand more amply of thee (AMANA) what is the greatness and beauty
of sciences.


AMANA. Whatsoever is profitable, not only for a house and family, for a
city and nation, but generally for all mankind, may well be accounted dear,
precious and woonderful, and as so excellent a thing ought to be bought with
all that a man has: especially if it be the true substance of all happiness and
felicity, and the efficient cause of prudence, which is an excellent guide for
men's actions to make them worthy of an immortality. What can one desire more
than profit, pleasure and honor, which are those things wherewith all men are
commonly led? The treasure of Arabia and India may well bring some pleasure to
man, but yet always imperfect: seeing all riches is of it self blind, and
brings no light to the soul, but receives her brightness from the soul when
it is framed according to virtue. Great and proud armies may by notable
victories procure to themselves renowm and glory, but blame worthy: a title of
honor, but forced and unjust, if their enterprises are not grounded upon
equity and justice. The merchant sailing on large and terrible seas, may reap
profit by his traffic, but bought with the peril of his life, and hazard of
his certain patrimony. Neither can this be done, except he have first laid a
good ground of his voyage upon a sure discourse of reason, and upon the
direction of a good and wise pilot. Now of all these things, thus poor of
themselves, and begging all their ornaments else where, what certain joy, true
honor, or great profit may a man challenge to himself and not rather look for
a sudden change of them into a worse estate than they were in before, through
the inconstancy and uncertainty of man's nature? Where then shall we seek for
these great and rare properties, to find that which of it self will be unto
us profitable, pleasant, and The benefits which come by knowledge.
honorable altogether, and that not for an instant, but for ever? Truly in
science or knowledge, which first is able to mollify man's nature, being before
savage and wild, and to make it capable of reason: secondly, frames and
setleth his judgment, that he may pass the course of his days in all
tranquillity of mind to the profit of many: lastly, causes him to die in
honor, with certain assurance of eternal life and happiness. It is knowledge
that makes man prudent, (for doctrine brings forth prudence) The proper
work of the spirit of man.
and works unspeakable pleasure in his soul. For the searching out of the
truth is the proper work and perfection of the spirit, neither does any
delight come near to that which a man takes in learning. It is science which
guides men's judgments, whereby their chiefest deliberations and counsels
are executed, as well in feats of war, as in the establishment and preservation
of laws, kingdoms, monarchies, commonwealths, cities and peoples: likewise in
the regiment and government of all worldly affairs, either general or
particular, which are well or ill guided, according as he that manageth or
governs them is instructed. To this purpose Seneca said, that they, who
being destitute of knowledge, did learn It is long ere men without knowledge
become good magistrates.
only by experience to govern public affairs, although they were borne with a
divine and happy spirit, yet both late, and to the detriment of their
commonwealth, they would in the end become good governors of the people. As
contrariwise, they that should come thereunto being guarded with the precepts of
knowledge, (so they carried a good mind) would quickly and without pain
become worthy of their charge. O wisdom (says Cicero) The praise of
wisdom.
the guide of our life, the only cause of virtue, and enemy tovice, what
should, not we only, but even all the life of men be without thee? Thou have
builded towns: thou have gathered together dispersed and wandering men that
they might live in a society of life, and in common friendship. Thou
compellest them to come together, first by keeping all in a house and by
marriage: then by the common use of words and speech. Thou have been the
inuentresse of laws, and the mistres of manners and discipline. We have no
recourse but to thee in our afflictions: we crave aid and succor of thee: we
put our selves wholly into thine arms. Truly one day well and justly spent
according to thy holy precepts, is to be preferred before an immortality of
time consumed in wickedness and vice. With what riches shall we furnish our
selves rather than with thine, which have liberally given us the means to
obtain tranquillity in this life, and have taken from us all fear and terror
of death? Briefly, we may be assured, that science is the only divine and
immortal quality in us, and that infallible rule, which brings both peace
and war to their perfect proportion: without which whosoever goes about to
frame any glorious or happy building, does as much as if he should undertake to
sarle in the midst of the sea without a rudder, or walk through unknown
places without a guide. Now the ancients knowing the greatness and difficulty of
knowledge, and that it cannot be obtained (as it falls out in all great
matters) without great pain and travel, that their labor might become
profitable unto us, they I say, who had spent their life even with sweating,
in seeking out the secrets of nature, and were desirous to ease man's study,
who otherwise is inclined from his youth to pleasure and rest, have divided
science for us into diverse parts. Which they did to this end, that step by
step, according to the nicenes of our spirits (even as our bodies are first
nourished with milk and then with stronger meats) we might find therein apt
and conceiueable food, and in the end be made partakers of the secrets of
perfect wisdom, every one according to his capacity and need, expecting the
full understanding thereof in the immortality of that second and most happy
life. First then al arts and The division of sciences.
sciences handled by reason, were divided into three principal kinds: into
Philosophy, Rhetoric and Mathematicke. Afterward, each of these sciences was
divided into three other parts and kinds, Philosophy into Moral, Logical and
Physical or Natural. Rhetoric, into Demonstratiue, Deliberatiue and
^udiciall. Mathematick, into Arithmetic, Music and Geometry. Since that, for
greater facility, and that it might be more easy to learn, all humane
philosophy has been reduced into art, as we have it at this day, from whence
the name of liberal arts came, because they are worthy and beseeming a free
man. Grammar. Rhetoric.
Their names are these: Grammar, which is the entrance and beginning of all
knowledge: Rhetoric, which is the art of fine speaking, and of persuading:
Dialectick or Logic.
Logic, which is to learn the truth of all things by disputation: Physic.
Physic, which is the study of natural things: Metaphysick.
Mathematick and the parts thereof, as, Arithmetic.
Metaphysick, which is of supernatural things: Mathematike, which has many
members, whereof Arithmetic is the first, which is the science of numbers, and
the foundation of all the other parts of Mathematicke, without which science of
Arithmetic, Plato denied that any Geometry.
man could be either a philosopher or captain general. Next to that is
Geometry, that is to say, the art of measuring the ground, very necessary
likewise for a captain, and for many other martial affairs. Then follows
Cosmographie and Geography, to know the situation Cosmography.
of the whole world, even from the tower of the highest heaven, called the first
moouer, unto the center of the Geography.
earth, and likewise of the diverse regions thereof with their particular
temperatures. After that is Astronomy, the Astronomy.
science that teaches us to know the course of the stars and planets, which
thing practice only might teach us, I mean so much as is necessary for us,
as our first fathers were a long time content therewith, until the curiosity
of men invented these names of Saturn, Mars, and others, attributing natures
unto them according to their imaginations, and also power over our bodies: yea
those things that shall perish and are without life, are said to have power
over our immortal souls. And from thence proceeded judicial Astronomy,
wherewith so many good wits are deceived, and of which so many abuses have
their beginning. Next, Music is set down also for a member of Music.
the Mathematics, as being a science drawn from numbers, because that by them
harmonicall proportion was found. Lastly follows Poetry, which is attributed
to Music. In this short discourse the wonderful greatness Poetry.
ofscience appears sufficiently, as also how hard, yea impossible it is, to
attain to the perfection thereof through the sound knowledge of all the parts
thereof. Wherefore Those sciences are first to be learned, that are most
necessary.
we are first to seek after those that are most necessary, and then to desire
a mean understanding of them all according to the gifts and graces of God
bestowed on our souls. But above all things we must shun that idleness and
rechlesnes which is in many, who by reason of the difficulty, which they hear
say is in sciences, and distrusting themselves for ever coming near the skill
of so many good wits, as have gone before them, remain as buried in ignorance,
and unprofitable amongst men. The greatness of Alexander stayed not his
successors from trying the issue and event of all sorts of noble enterpises.
And the wonderful knowledge of Plato could not keep Aristotle from handling
philosophy as he thought good. He that distrusteth his wit and the invention
thereof, shows himself too ungrateful. For it seems he will condemn
nature the mother of all things, as though she had put all her gifts and graces
in some men, and ever after purposed to be idle and barren, having no more
strength to bring forth any thing worthy commendation. We must not therefore
in this sort be discouraged in the searching out of every good discipline,
knowing that those things also, which draw near to perfection are great. But
yet for the chief part of all our studies, let us take Moral philosophy,
whereof we have already discoursed, that we may frame our manners according to
virtue, and lead and direct our selves to that end, which we desire, even to
live well and happily. So let us practice that What kind of knowledge is
especially required in a philosopher.
divine saying of Plato speaking by the mouth of Socrates, That more virtue and
piety is required in a philosopher than knowledge: and that all science, which
is to be required in him, is, that above all things he worship and reverence
God the only true master of wisdom, and author of whatsoever may be known:
and that he endeavor to separate his soul from his body, as much as may be,
by contemning pleasures, ambition, vaineglory and riches, that so he may lay
hold of the treasures of immortal life. This we may learn by reading books
and writings, which are the instruments of wisdom, and are left unto us by
learned men for a rule and for instruction. By the study hereof we shall
attain to that knowledge of the true and perfect good of man, which consists
in virtue and verity, the only nourishment, rest and tranquillity of the
mind. But will we know further what profit we may receive by the doctrine of
ancient men? Let us only read Anacharsis letter to Craesus touching the
studies of Graecia.
that which Anacharsis wrote to Craesus king of Lidia. Know (quoth he to him)
that in the studies of Graecia we learn, not to command, but first to obey:
not to speak, but to keep silence: not to resist, but to humble our selves:
not to get much, but to content our selves with a little: not to revenge our
harms, but to pardon injuries: not to take from others, but to give our own:
not to take care to be honored, but to labor to be virtuous. Lastly, we learn
to despise that which others love, and to love that which others despise, that
is poverty. Behold the fair fruits of science, and of the study of these
ancient Sages, to which no treasures of worldly riches are in any sort
comparable, and which we ought to desire above The praise and prosite of (...).
all things. Moreover, by this study of letters, we shall be taught to search
out diligently the understanding of histories, which are the treasury of things
past, the pattern of those that are to com, the picture of man's life, the
tuchstone of our doings, the workmaster of our honor, and as Cicero calls
them, the witness of times, the light of truth, the life of memory, the mistres
of life and the messenger of antiquity. Histories cause us to behold that
without danger, which so many millions of men have tried with the loss of
their lives, honor and goods, that we may be made wise by their peril, and
stirred up to follow the virtue of others, which has brought them to the top
of all felicity and glory. Now if we think to learn by our own experience
these excellent instructions which we may draw out of histories, in stead of so
rare treasures we shall know but few things, and those with loss and peril
amongst a thousand adversities, from which the understanding of that which is
past, saves and delivers us. Prudence gotten by experience is too perilous,
and so long a coming, that very often a man dies before he have obtained it,
so that he had need of a second life to employ about it. But we must hasten it
forward by the searching out of things, which have come to pass both before
and since our time, in the study both of philosophy, which is rich and
plentiful in worthy examples, and also of histories, which are a singular gift
of God, whereby he would have his wonderful works continued in the How a man
may become happy.
memory of men. For this cause Zeno, being demanded how a man might become
happy, answered, if he drew near unto and haunted the dead: meaning thereby,
if he read histories, and endeavored to learn their good instructions that have
gone before us. Ptolemie also asking one of the wise interpreters, wherein a
king ought to exercise himself, In the knowledge (quoth he) of things which
have been done, and in reading books of things which Wherein kings ought most
to exercise themselves.
daily offer themselves, or which are fit for present affairs, and lastly in
searching out whatsoever is written for the preservation of kingdoms and
correction of manners. And truly they that are exercised in the understanding of
histories, although they be but young, yet in knowledge of worldly matters they
become like to the aged and grayheaded: as contrariwise they that are ignorant
of things done and past before their being, remain always children, and even
within their own country where they were borne, they are in the same estate
in respect of knowledge that forreners are. If we yet desire more testimonies
from amongst the ancients, of the honor, love, zeal, and ardent affection,
which they bare toward the study of good letters, and how the chief glory
of all their heroical and noble acts does of duty belong to science, we The
saving of Philip at the birth of Alexander.
read of Phillip king of Macedonia, that when Alexander was borne to him, he
gave thanks to God, not so much because he had this son, as because he was
borne in the time of so wise a philosopher as Aristotle was, whom he made his
schoolmaister. Of him Alexander learned many goodly sciences, as well in
philosophy as in physic, and namely, those Acroamaticall sciences, that is,
speculatiue, and such as could not be learned but by hearing a teacher. Of
which Sciences this great Monark was jealous, and taken with so greedy a
desire, that hearing how Aristotle had published certain books, he wrote a
letter unto Alexanders letter to Aristotle.
him in this manner: Alexander sends greeting to Aristotle. Thou have not done
well to publish these books of speculatiue sciences: forasmuch as we shall have
nothing above others, if that which thou have taught us privately come to be
published and communicated to all. For I would thou should know, that I love
rather to excel others in the understanding of high and notable things, than
in power. How greatly this excellent prince always loved knowledge, appears
sufficiently by the exceeding liberality and gifts, wherewith he honored the
masters and teachers thereof (as we may somewhat touch it hereafter) as also
in that he always carried Homers Iliads about His love to learning.
him, which usually he laid under his pillow, naming it the nourishment and
preserver of warlike virtue. Caesar in the Julius Caesar.
midst of his camp had his commentaries in his bosom, and that time which he
spared from fighting, he bestowed in reading and writing, holding a lance in
the left hand, and a pen in the right. We see in these two mighty and sacred
princes, and in infinite other great personages both Greeks and Romans, the
wonderful effects of knowledge, which conducted them to the top of all honor,
felicity, and prosperity. Xenophon, the disciple of Socrates Xenophon.
serves for another witness, who being guided by an unspeakable prudence and
providence gotten in the study of philosophy, brought an army of a thousand
footmen out of Persia into Greece, going over the foords of fifty rivers, and
through the midst of a hundred thousand enemies pursuing him, and yet his array
was never broken, albeit he fought with them sundry times. Besides, if we are
desirous of testimonies of the incredible delight, which the study of any
science works in men's souls touched with the zeal of knowledge, we read of
Nicias Nicias.
the painter, how he took such great delight in his works, that oftentimes he
inquired of his servants whether he had dined or no. Archimedes drawing his
geometrical figures Archimedes.
upon a table, was as it were by force drawn away of his servants, that he
might anoint himself with oil (according to their custom) before he did
eat: and during the time of his anointing, he would trace new figures upon
his body. Socrates was seen standing a whole summers day for the space of 24.
hours continually in Socrates conclusion drawn out of 24. hours
contemplation.
contemplation and discoursing in his mind: which was when he drew this
conclusion out of his thoughts, that There was but one only God, and that the
soul was immortal. The Emperor Charles the fourth going on a day to a College
Charles 4.
in Praga, to hear the disputations of virtue that were there, remained above
four hours on foot in hearing them. And when his courtiers, to whom he was
wearisom, Robert king of Sicilia.
told him that it was time to sup, he answered, that It was no more time for
him, and that he had supped. Robert king of Jerusalem and Sicilia, a very
learned prince, was so affectionated to letters, that he oftentimes said, that
if he were to lose either his kingdoms or his learning, he would choose rather
to be deprived of them than of knowledge. What greater testimony of love
toward Science can one desire Ptolemie Philadelphus.
than that of Ptolemie Philadelphus, that virtuous king of Egypt, who with
incredible charges gathered together into his library five hundred thousand
books, and purposely caused seventy and two of the most learned and religious
men of Judea to come and translate the holy Bible out of Hebrew into Greek?
And surely we should be too ungrateful toward our princes, if amongst so many
famous men we should leave no place for that great Charlemaine.
Emperor and king Charlemaine, who was skillful in the Greek and Latin toongs,
and who in favor of those toongs, and of the lovers of knowledge, erected the
University at Paris, and that at Pauia, according to the pattern of those
places of learning which were at Athens. Francis 1.
Francis the first, a prince of most famous memory, so loved and favored
letters, and the professors of them, that he deserved the name of the restorer
of sciences and good arts, sparing neither care nor means to assemble together
books and volumes of sundry sorts, and of all languages for the beautifying of
his so renowned a library, which was a worthy monument of such a magnificall
monarke: whose praiseworthy qualities we see revived in our king, treading in
the selfsame steps. Now to conclude our present discourse, we learn hereby
to despise all earthly goods for the obtaining of knowledge, which of it self
is truly profitable, delectable, and honorable altogether, and whereby we are
taught how to live and die well and happily. And because that arts and sciences
consist of many parts, let us apply our minds to the study and contemplation
of those which together with delight do also draw us to that which is our
proper and peculiar good, namely, to the knowledge of truth and virtue, which
work in us always an affection and zeal to follow them, and cause all arts
and sciences teaching other things to be esteemed base, mechanical, and
unbeseeming good wits. This did Antisthenes give one to understand, who greatly
commended Antisthenes saying touching a flute plaier.
Ismenius for an excellent plaier on the flute: it is true (quoth he to him)
but otherwise he is good for nothing. For else had he not been so good a
minstrell. So, every one applying himself to some base and vain art,
produces for witness against himself that labor, which he has bestowed about
unprofitable matters, to prove that he has been idle and slothful in
learning honest and profitable things. And for the last fruit and use of our
speech we see here what great occasion we have all our life time to become the
disciples of knowledge, which is so high and profound, and to diminish all
pride and presumption of our skill, after the example of that wise man
Socrates, who although he were the learnedest of his time, and so The modestic
of Socrates touching his own skill.
judged to be by the oracle at Delphos, yet always said, that he knew nothing.
And when he was demanded any thing, he would never answer resolutely, as if he
would have been believed, but doubtingly used to say, I think so, or, It may
be so. Being therefore desirous to learn with all modesty, let us endeavor to
seek out more and more by travel and study, the assurance and knowledge of
verity and virtue.


Of the Spirit and of memory. Chap. 8.
AMANA. Having now discoursed of the greatness, beutie, and profit of knowledge,
I think, that if we were to wish for two helps very necessary for the
attaining unto it, those ought to be a spirit or mind ready to conceive, and
memory, firm to retain: without which two things we shall profit our selves
little, and much less a great many.


ARAM. Those two things, which thou propoundest unto us would seem wonderful
if they were together. Quick wits commonly want memory.
For we commonly see, that they who have a ready and quick wit, for the most
part want memory: and they that learn with greatest difficulty and pain, do
best retain and keep that which they have once learned.


ACHITOB. This talk of the spirit, whereunto you attribute the property of
comprehending (and yet speak not of the soul) is undoubtedly worthy of great
consideration. For even when we speak of a young infant, we say by and by, that
his spirit or wit will grow with his body, and of a crooked old-sire, we say
that his spirit waxes old with him, which in many we see oftentimes becomes
altogether dull and unfit for the ordering and government Psalm. 102. 26.
of affairs. Now that which waxes old draws to an end, as the scripture it
self teaches us concerning times and seasons, which wax old like to men's
garments, and are to take end. And yet we know that the soul is immortal, and
therefore waxes not old. So that one would think, that the soul and spirit
are two distinct things, although we see every where the one taken for the
other. But let us hear ASER discourse of this matter, and so we shall learn
what the spirit is in the soul.


ASER. As the works of the divine power are altogether incomprehensible to the
outward sense of man, and It is very hard for a man to know himself.
very hard to be comprehended by reason guided and conducted by grace from
above, so we are not to think much if the knowledge of a man's self, which is
most necessary, be so hardly found out by him, seeing his composition far
passes all the works of nature, that are visible and subject to sight. Now if
a man cannot know himself, how should he hope to comprehend greater matters,
which are supernatural and hidden in the heavens? And who can rightly boast,
that he has the true and perfect understanding of the chiefest part and most
powerful beginning of himself, namely of his spirit? Who am I, said
Socrates opinion concerning man.
Socrates? Am I a subject compounded of soul and body? Or rather a soul, that
uses the body, as a horseman does a horse? Or, is every one of us that
principal part of the soul, whereby we understand, discourse and do, and all
the other parts of the body but instruments of this power: Or if there be no
proper substance at all of the soul by it self, but that it is only a
temperature and complexion of the body so framed that it has power to
understand and to live, am I not a savage beast, more crafty, bold and furious
than ever was the serpent Typhon? Or else, am I a meeker and simpler creature,
pertaker of a better estate, and void of pride? All the excellentest
philosophers that ever were handled this self same matter as well as Socrates,
with incredible travel and pain, that they may attain to this knowledge of
the noblest part in the, which is the soul and spirit, taking indifferently
the one for the other. But first of all this wise Socrates spoke excellently of
the dignity and immortality of the soul, saying, that in truth the soul is
man, and not this mortal The soul is (...) man.
mass and lump of the body, which of it self is no more than a simple and
base instrument is in regard of the most cunning workman of any art of
science. And for this cause giving up the ghost amongst his disciples, and
being asked by Clito where he would be buried: As for Socrates Socrates answer
touching his bur^all.
(quoth he to him) take thou no thought or care. For thou can not stay him,
whose tomb has been from all time ready for him. But concerning that which
he leaves here below, it is not worthy to be cared for by him. The greatest
thing (said Periander) that may be said to be contained Periander.
in a little place, is the soul in a man's body. Empedocles Empedocles.
speaking of the generation of the soul says, that neither blood, nor the
vital spirit congealed have given unto us the substance of the soul, and the
beginning of life. The body only is compounded earthly and mortal. But the
generation of the soul is heavenly, being Of the generation of the soul.
sent here below as a passenger, and stranger, or as one that is banished and
sent out of his country. Whereupon she continually sigheth, groneth, and as it
were dries away, (like to a good plant translated out of a good plot of ground
into a bad) until in the end she return, and be received into her immortal
habitation, after she has changed her present life, which is unto her but as a
vain illusion of some dream; in respect of a true, certain and permanent
life. Surely these philosophical speculations are not vain and frivolous, but
very necessary to lead us to that happy end of our being, which we seek for.
For if we be well instructed concerning the great and honorable place and
condition, which the soul enioieth above the body, as well in her immortal
generation, as in her contemplation and action, as also that of her happiness
depends (as before we handled it) the felicity of the whole frame of man,
will we not apply all our principal care, study and diligence in providing
such things for her as she desires, and which are meet and healthful for her?
But we have further (thanks be given to the author of all good) a second and
more perfect understanding of the soul, than had all these notable heathen men,
both in respect of the blessed immortality and also of the cause thereof. We
know also that so long as she is detained in this mortal prison of the body,
and that we are become new creatures The soul is divided into the spirit and
the flesh.
by the grace of God, she is divided into these two parts, the spirit and the
flesh, between which there is a perpetual combat. Yea the flesh continually
offers to the spirit a thousand temptations, to delight it withal. For the
body and flesh consisting of mortal and corruptible matter, are but a lump
of sin, and full of wicked desires, The spirit of the godly both by creation
and regeneration is enemy to vice.
whereas the spirit of it self virtuous and good, and of an immortal essence,
is of it own nature enemy to vice and iniquity: so that being ruled and
guided by the spirit of God, it loves and desires eternal happiness, and
reioiceth in justice, purity and holiness. And yet the soul is not so freed
from the slavery of sin, but that there remains in her many steps of the
earthly man, so that she always carries about with her the relickes of the The
fight between the spirit and the flesh.
flesh, whereby her liberty is so much diminished. This is that fight whereof
the true children of God have daily experience, when they are lifted upward by
the spirit, and by the flesh turned downward: by the spirit they bend with an
ardent desire toward immortality, by the flesh they are carried astray into
the way of death: by the spirit they think to live justly, by the flesh they
are stirred foreward to iniquity: by the spirit they contemn the world, by
the flesh they desire wordly delights. But in the end the grace of God causes
the spirit to remain superior, Romans 8 7.
so that his children walk not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit. Whereas if we be left of God to What we are being left to our selves.
our own corrupt and perverse nature, we have not sufficient strength to resist
the temptations of this wicked flesh, but in stead of commanding it, we obey
it with shame and confusion. And then accustoming our selves to sin, and to
consent to the desires of the flesh, the divine part of the soul is so
weakened, that she has no more strength or feeling of her essence, which is
enemy to vice, but having forsaken God, he forsakes her, and gives her over
into the power of carnal desires. So that by this long dwelling in sin, being
as it were altogether dead, she takes no more counsel of reason, but
follows after detestable vices, and such as are against nature. But on the
contrary side being guided by the grace of God, after we have labored by
fasting, watching and prayer, to resist the vnpure desires of the flesh, all the
concupiscences thereof will at length be so tamed and forced, that the soul shall
execute her office in commanding over them absolutely, and in choking them so
soon as they shall spring up. Therefore it comes from the spirit, that we
aspire continually to our last and soueraign good, that with a singular desire
of heart, and with all our affection we study to seek and find it out, even
with tears and sighs, by reason of those continual impediments, which the
flesh lays before us in following our course. Moreover the spirit causes us
to employ all our might in the separation of the soul from the body, and in
dispising pleasure, ambition, vainglorie and riches, that we may offer an
acceptable present, by yielding unto him the soul, which he has given us.
Which thing cannot be done (says Plato) but by keeping it, as much as may be,
purged and cleansed from earthly spots, that she may be known and acknowledged
above amongst her companions, considering that no defiled thing shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven. In this discourse of the soul and of the spirit
thus intermingled, I think we may here set down some special difference
betwixt them, although undoubtedly the one is taken indifferently for the
other, without any absurdity, The difference between the (...) and the spirit.
yea they are one and the same thing. The difference may be made in this sort,
if we say, that the soul is common to all things that have life, as we use to
say, that all beasts are animated, and have sensitive souls: but that the
spirit, which is immortal, and capable of reason and knowledge, is proper and
peculiar to man only. And it seems that Sophocles would teach us this
distinction, when he says, that The spirit is the same thing to the soul,
which the eye is to the body. Socrates also putting a difference between the
soul and the spirit, said, that as eucrie seditious man is to be banished out
of a well governed city, so a spirit inclined to all mischief is to be
removed from that soul, which we would save. Or else we may say otherwise
(not dividing any thing) that the spirit is the first and principal The three
parts of the spirit.
part of the soul, wherein the Mind, the Understanding, and the memory are
contained, which are most necessary for the direction of all good and virtuous
actions, and which stand in need of preservation, nourishing, and exercise, and
therefore they are said, (not without reason) to increase and decrease in the
mind of man. The mind is as a white paper, wherein as a man grows in age
and judgment, he writes his cogitations and thoughts, which the study of
letters and learning do afford him. Understanding is framed by the knowledge
of reason, and lastly Of Memory.
memory follows and preserves it, being the mother of the muses, and the
treasorie of knowledge. Plutark calls it the hearing of deaf things, and the
sight of the blind. There is nothing, that serves so much to beget and
preserve learning and knowledge, as memory does, whereof we have many examples
among the ancients. We read Mithridates.
of Mithridates king of Pontus, who was a great enemy to the Romans, that he
had under his dominion two and twenty nations, speaking diverse languages, all
which he learned and answered their ambassadors in their own toongs. Which
thing he could never have comprehended without an excellent and happy memory,
which also was the cause, that Themistocles knew personally and could name all
his countrymen, by their proper names. The emperor Frederick the 11. spoke the
Greek, Latin, Hebrew, Frederick.
Arabian, Morisko, Almaigne, Italian and French tongue. In our time there was an
interpreter of Sultan Solymaus, Genusbey.
named Genusbey, borne in Corfou, endued with the richest memory that ever
was. For he spoke perfectly the Greek tongue, both vulgar and learned, the
Turkish, Arabian, Moorish, Tartarian, Persian, Armenian, Hebrew, Russe,
Hungarian, Sclauonian, Italian, Spanish, Almaign, P. Crassus.
Latin and French. It is recorded of Publius Crassus, that at one instant he
heard five sundry languages spoken, and answered each of them in the same tongue.
Whereby we see that he was endued with an excellent and quick spirit, apt to
conceive, and with a firm memory, able to retain them altogether: and this
may be seen in many. But the From whence judgment proceeds.
perfection of these two great gifts of nature, is a good and sound judgment,
proceeding from pondering, and from a firm discourse of reason lightened by the
spirit of God, and by the same spirit purged from error, illusion, and all
vain opinion, which are usual in man, and hinder him from judging aright of
the truth. But to continue our speech of the wonderful effects of memory so
much esteemed of Plato, that he writes, that we should leave of to be men, and
become like to the gods, if our memory could retain and keep so much as the
eyes can read and see. We must not here forget to make mention of Julius
Caesar, Julius Caesar.
that great monarke, of whom Historiographers report, that at one time he
caused his Secretaries to write unto four several persons of sundry matters,
and that oftentimes he would indight a letter to one of his Secretaries, read
in a book, and hear another speak all at one time. Seneca rehearsed two
thousand sundry names, having Seneca.
only heard them pronounced before, beginning at the last and continuing to
the first. By these examples we see the greatness of memory, whereby we may
easily indge how profitable it is for the enriching of the mind with all
things necessary to the government of man's estate. Yea A good ^se of memory.
it is unto us a help requisite to salvation, as that whereby we keep in
remembrance the gifts and graces, which we daily receive from the goodness and
favor of God* to this end, that we should not be ungrateful, but yield unto him
glory and praise without ceasing. Now because one of you (my companions)
touched this, that they which have a ready and quick wit, commonly want
memory, and that they which hardly learn, retain and keep better that which
they have learned, I will give you this reason with Plutark, that hardness of
belecfe seems to be the cause Reasons why quick est wits have woor^t
memories, and con^^^wise
why men comprehend slowly. For it is very evident, that to learn, is to
receive some impression: whereupon it follows, that they which resist least,
are such as soonest believe. And therefore youth is easier to be persuaded than
old folks, sick than sound, women than men: and generally the weaker that thing
is, which discourses and doubts, the easier may a man put and add unto it,
what he will, as likewise the self same thing is sooner lost and let slip
away. Some others (as Iustine Martyr says) have rendered this reason of the
quicknes or slownes of man's wit, saying, that it comes of the good or
immoderate mixture and temperature of the elements, of which our bodies are
compounded and framed, and of the symmetrie and proportion of the organicall or
iustrumentall parts joined together in him. And surely these seem to give the
true reason thereof. For we see many, who in their beginning and first age show
that they have a prompt and sharp wit, but when they come to old age are
changed, and become slow and dull to conceive. Which is a great token and
argument that a good or bad complexion and constitution of the body, is the
cause of such a disposition, either in quicknes or slownes of spirit, as the
difference of years does afford them. Besides, do we not perceive, that they
which have the head ouergreat and ill fanored, whom we commonly call great
blockheads, (because there is not an equal symmetry and moderate proportion
between that and the other parts of the body) are naturally unapt to
conceive, and to bring forth any sensible and witty thing? But the resolution
of all this speech shall be, that all gifts of the spirit are from above, and
that amongst 1. Cor. 12.
all sorts of men, there are some found, that are prompt and witty to
comprehend great and divine things, by a special grace and favor, which God
has bestowed upon them. Some by the gift of the holy Ghost have wisdom,
others knowledge and understanding of things, and all given to every one for
the profiting both of himself and of his neighbor. Knowing therefore by this
present discourse, according to the weakness of our judgment, the creation and
nature of the spirit, which is the principal and most noble part of us, and
that whereof depends and proceeds all our happiness, rest and felicity, let
us be careful and diligent to search it out, and to provide such things as it
desires of us, as helps to that effect, bestowing all our care, labor and
study, to adorn and deck it with righteousness and holiness, according to the
holy desire thereof, wherein consists life and peace. And let us beware that
we seek not to feed it with strange meats, which may make it sorrowful, and
with which our flesh abounds to her death and destruction. But mortifieng
Romans 8. 1.
all the deadly desires and affections thereof, let us labor not to walk any
more according to the flesh, but according to the spirit, and let us know that
all wearisomnes and tediousnes which troubles the tranquillity and rest
thereof, proceedcth from the want of experience in affairs, from the want of
good discoursing, grounded upon a resolute and settled judgment, and from the
want of skill fitly to apply our selves to present occasions. And this is that
which troubles all sorts and conditions of life, as well rich as poor. But
the way to preserve the spirit in rest and quietness, is to nourish and
exercise it in the study of wisdom, where it learneth reason, which of it
self can cure it of all sorrow, anguish and grief through wise discoursing,
and work in it a like inclination and constant behauior in every alteration
of life, causing man to live happy throughout the whole course of his life,
not without the hope and certain expectation of a blessed immortality.


The end of the second days work.
THE THIRD DAYS WORK.
Of Duty and Honesty. Chap. 9.
ASER. The end of the creation of all things.
ALthough all things were created of diverse natures and properties, and many
of clean contraries, yet by an incomprehensible wisdom they were appointed to
refer themselves to one only certain and common end, namely, to show forth
the infinite power and greatness of their worke-maister, sufficient in the lest
of his works with admiration to ravish man, to whom he has made al things
subject. But as in him alone the treasures of his heavenly graces have been
without comparison more liberally unfolded, and that in all fulness and bounty,
as well in regard of the goods and commodities of this life, which he draws
from heaven, from the earth, from the air, from the water, from beasts and
plants, and generally from all things contained under the cope of the
firmament, as also in respect of that unspeakable happiness and eternal
felicity, which by the special grace of God is purchased and assured to him
only in the immortality of the second life, so also has God from the
beginning until this present and for ever, reserved to himself a particular
What homage we owe to God.
homage, and that not for a time, or for certain years of his life, but to
continue without intermission from time to time, namely, love testified by
obedience, which we may comprehend under this only word of Duty, called by
the philosophers, the welspring of all virtuous and laudable actions, and the
foundation of honesty. Therefore I propound this matter to you (companions) to
be discoursed upon.


AMANA. Which is the chief end of our being.
The duty of a good man consists in his good behavior toward the chief
and only end of his being, compounded of these two things, the glory of his
Creator, and the love of his neighbor. But the last undoubtedly depends of
the first. For without the fear of God, men will never preserve equity and
love amongst themselves: as contrariwise the honoring of his majesty teaches
them to live uprightly one with another.


ARAM. We ought not to assure or fortify our selves with any other bulworke,
than to do, to counsel, and to utter al good and honest things, according to
duty, whereunto we are called by nature, not only for our selves, but also for
the benefit and profit of many. Therefore of thee (ACHITOB) we shall understand
more at large what Duty and Honesty is.


ACHITOB. No treatise in philosophy (says Cicero) is so necessary as that of
Office and Duty: forasmuch as no part of man's life, whether it be in public
or private affairs, or in what action soever it be, either ought or may be
destitute thereof. For therein consists all honesty of life, and, if it be
neglected, all infamy. And albeit most part of the ancient philosophers
comprehended duty and honesty under virtue, affirming them to be one and the
same thing, yet following the opinion of that great orator and philosopher, who
has handled moral philosophy in very good order, we may distinguish them
after this sort, saying, that duty is the end whereunto virtue tends,
namely, when in all our actions we observe honesty and comlines. In which
distinction we see nevertheless such a conjunction of these three things,
Virtue, Duty, and Honesty, that the one is the end of the other, the
perfection thereof consisting in all three together. Duty then What ^u^ie is.
is that, which binds the soul, cheerfully and willingly without force or
constraint to give to every one that which belongs unto him: honor, to whom
honor: reverence, to whom reverence: tribute, to whom tribute: The division of
duty.
and succor, to whom succor belongs. This duty is divided into two general
kinds: the one is that which appertains to the perfect and sovereign good:
the other concerns the preservation and safety of the common society of
men, and consists in moral precepts, according to which the behauior of al
sorts of life may be squared. What duty we owe to God and therefore.
As touching the first, no doubt but all men are beholding and bound unto God,
both for their being and preservation thereof, as also for that abundance of
goods necessary for this life, which he powers forth most liberally, both on
the good and on the bad. Moreover, Christians are further tied and bound unto
him for the certain hope of their salvation in his eternal son. For all
which things he asks nothing of us but love and goodwill, testified by honor,
reverence, and service according to his holy ordinance, every one after the
measure of gifts and graces, which he has from above: knowing that more is to
be required of him to whom more is given. Obedience to Gods law is the mother
of all virtues.
This obedience being grounded upon that rule of perfect righteousness, which is
given unto us in the law of God, is the mother and preserver of all virtues,
yea the What our duty toward our neighbor is.
beginning and root of al goodness. The other part of duty, which respects
our neighbor, and whereof we are chiefly to entreat in this our Academie, is
nothing but charity and love of our like, as of our selves, which is greatly
recommended unto us in the scripture, as being very requisite unto salvation.
This is that duty, whereby we are bound not to do any thing against public
laws, equity, and profit, but to be always constant in the perfect exercise
and use of virtue, by doing honest and seemly things for their own sakes, and
not of necessity and constraint. We are not only borne (says Cicero) for our
selves, but our country, parents, and friends both will and ought to reap
some commodity by our birth. For whatsoever is upon earth was created for men,
and they for themselves, Man created for man.
that one might aid and help another. So that if we will follow nature, we
must employ our goods, travel, and industry, and whatsoever else is in our
power, in the behalf of common commodity, and in the preservation of humane
society: yea, that man lives most happily, who, as little as may be, lives
to himself. And on the other side, no man lives more disorderedly, than he
that lives to himself, and thinks on nothing but his own profit. This is
that duty, which requires that for the safety of our parents, friends and
country, we should offer our selves to all perils, not respecting our own
profit or commodity. Neither ought we to esteem any thing just and Profit
(...) be separated from honesty.
profitable, except honesty: which are so linked together, (as the philosophers
say) that they can no more be separated than whitenes and cold from snow, and
heat and light from fire. So that if any man be persuaded, that the rule of
honesty and profit is not one and the same, he will never be without fraud or
wickedness. For thinking thus with himself, this indeed is honest, but that is
profitable for me, he will not fear to break and rent a sunder all equity
ordained and appointed either by divine or humane laws. And this division is
the fountain of all vice, falsehood, and mischief. A good man (says Plato)
may not slander, steal, or lie for his own commodity. Is there any thing
then in this world of so great value, any treasure so precious, that ought to
cause us to loose the name of virtuous and just? We ought rather to turn
profit toward honesty, and that in such sort, that howsoever the words seem
to differ one from another, yet we should make them but one thing. Moreover,
the same divine philosopher says, that the true beauty of the soul, which is
honesty, is nothing else but the brightness of that perfect and chief good
that appears in those things, which may be known by the eyes, ears, and
mind, whereby it is caused to return toward the Idea and pattern of goodness.
Whereby this excellent man means no other thing, than to give us to
understand, that whatsoever goodness and honesty is in us, comes from God, as
from the fountain thereof, unto which by the same virtue it returns, leading
the soul with it to live eternally. Besides, from him and by him comes the
beginning and proceeding of our good works: yea it is he that makes us to go
forward according to true duty, which consists in Two things requisite in
every good work.
these two points: first, that the intention and end of our actions be rightly
framed: secondly, that the like means to attain to that end be found out. For
these two things may agree or disagree one from another, as we see sometimes
the end well propounded, and yet men err in the means to attain unto it: and
contrariwise, it falls out oftentimes, that the means are good, and the end
propounded, bad. So that it is from this lively and euer-flowing fountain,
which is the cause of al good, from whence we are to look for the perfect
knowledge of our duty, and the ends and means whereby to execute it, to the
glory of God, and to the good and profit of our like. And from this general
virtue, and fountain of honesty and Four rivers issue out of the fountain
of duty.
duty, four rivers issue and spring, called moral virtues: namely, Prudence,
which is as a guide to the rest, and knows what is profitable for it self,
for others, and for the commonwealth: Temperance, the mistres of modesty,
chastity, sobriety, and vigilancie, and of all order and mediocritie in all
things: Fortitude, which makes a man constant, patient, courageous, hardy,
and ready to enterprise high, great, profitable, and holy things: and
Justice, which is the bond and preservation of humane society, by giving to
every one that which belongs unto him, by keeping faith in things promised,
by succoring gladly the afflicted, and by helping every one according as
ability serves. Which virtues are the true and certain goods of the soul,
whereby all actions are directed according to duty, as we shall speak
particularly thereof hereafter. In the mean while let us enter into the
examples of the ancients, and see how exactly and inuiolably they observed all
points of duty, choosing rather to sacrifice their lives, than to infringe,
and break any of them, much more contemning all other weaker occasions,
wherewith lewd and base-minded people suffer themselves to be easily corrupted.
And first, touching the first point of duty naturally Examples of the zeal of
the ancients in the service of there god.
imprinted in the souls of the greatest infidels, which is to acknowledge some
divinity, with what zeal (although inconsiderate and rash) did the ancient
heathens and pagans precisely observe their paganism, even to the sacrificing
and cheerful offering up of their own children to their gods, as we read of
the Carthaginians? What say I, their children? yea oftentimes themselves,
whereof Calanus an Indian Gymnosophist serves for a Calanus.
witness, who seeing himself old, after he had offered sacrifice to the gods,
bad Alexander the Great farewell, with whom he came to Babylon, and took his
leave also of all his other friends. Then lying along (according to the custom
of his country) upon a little pile of wood, which he had prepared for that
purpose, he caused fire to be put unto it, and so burned himself for a
burnt-offering to his gods, not stirring at all, but continuing with such a
wonderful constancy, that Alexander, who was present, confessed himself to
be vanquished of him in greatness of heart, and magnanimity of courage. Who will
not admire the strict observation of the ancient religion of the Egyptians,
Graecians, and Romans, moved with a desire of yielding the duty of their
being to the honor of a divine nature? But for shortness sake, and not to wander
far from the subject of our assembly, I pass it over with silence. Here I
will only allege one notable example of the Jews, who were more zealous
professors of their law, The zeal of the Jews to their law.
than ever were any people. Caius a Roman emperor, sent Petronius into Syria
with commandment to make war with the Jews, if they would not receive his
image into their temple. Which when they refused to do, Petronius said unto
them, that then belike they would fight against Caesar, not weighing his
wealth, or their own weakness and inability. We will not fight (quoth they)
but had rather die than turn from the laws of our God. And forthwith casting
themselves on the ground, and offering their throtes, they said, that they were
ready to receive the blow. In this estate (as Josephus reports it) they
remained for the space of forty days, letting slip the time which then was,
of sowing their grounds. Which caused Petronius to defer the execution of his
charge, and to send the declaration of these things unto Caesar, whose death
rid Of the love which a man owes to his country.
the Jews out of danger. Now we are to consider with what burning affection the
ancients embraced common benefit and safety, seeking to profit all men,
according to the true duty of a good man, but especially their country, in
whose service they thought it great happiness to lose their lives. For truly
besides the sweet affection, which nature has imprinted in our hearts toward
our country, and the conformity of humors, which commonly is found in our
bodies with that heavenly air where we have our first breathing, which seems
to be a mutual and natural obligation, the reason of all humane right, and the
religion of divine equity, besides the duty of conscience, bind all persons
to serve the public wealth of their country, to the uttermost of their power:
and that so much the rather, because that under it, the life, honor, and goods
of every particular man are comprehended. This reason Cato of Vtica.
caused Cato of Vtica, a Consul and noble Roman, to answer one of his friends,
who was come to give him thanks for defending him in judgment from a false
accusation, that he was to thank the Commonwealth, for whose love only he
did, spoke, and counseled all things. This also made him to undertake the suit
for the office of Tribuneship of the people, that he might resist the faction
of In what case a good man may sue for an office.
Pompey, by whom he saw Metellus set on work to sue and seek for the same
office, for the assurance of his affairs and strengthening of his league. Now
is the time (quoth Cato to his friends) wherein I must employ and bestow the
power of such an office, and of so great authority, as a strong medicine, in
time convenient, and upon necessary causes, and either overcome, or die
honorably in the defense of common liberty. So likewise he opposed himself as
much as he could, against all novelties and alteration of affairs between
Caesar and Pompey. And when the selfsame Pompey, being desirous to win him to
himself, sought to bring it to pass by alliance, and thereupon demanded two
of his neeces in marriage, one for himself, and the other for his son: Cato,
without any longer deliberation, answered him presently (as being netled) that
carried back the message, that he should return to Pompey and tell him, that
Cato was not to be taken by the means of women. Which was not because he would
not have him esteem greatly of his friendship, which he should always find in
him to be more sure and certain than any alliance by marriage, so that he
only sought after and did things honest and just, but at this time he would
not give hostages at Pompeies pleasure against the Common-welth. Afterward the
affairs of Rome being brought to such necessity through corruption of money,
and by unlawful and forceable means in procuring public places of
authority, many Senators being of opinion, that Pompey was to be chosen sole
and only Consul, Cato also was of the same mind, saying, that men ought to
choose a less evil to meet with and to redress greater mischiefs: and that
it were better willingly to bring in a kind of monarchy, than to defer it so
long, until the issue of present seditions should by force and constraint
establish one. And it may be (quoth he) that Pompey will have a longing desire
to preserve the Commonwealth, when he shall see, that it is so liberally and
freely committed to his fidelity. This election being approved and ratified,
Pompey sent to seek Cato, and having heartily thanked him for that honor, which
he had done him, requested him to be a daily assistant and Councellor unto him
in his office. To whom this grave man made answer, that he did never oppose
himself heretofore against him for any ill will he bare him, neither gave
this last counsel for any good he meant toward him, but all for the good and
profit of the Commonwealth. And as touching his private and particular
affairs, he said, he would give him the best counsel he could, whenever he
asked his advise: but for public matters, he would always speak what he
thought were best, although he never asked him any thing. Thus did Cato behave
himself al his life time as a good citizen, and as an upright and just man,
free in speaking for the truth, and altogether void of corruption. Metellus a
Senator of Rome left us a notable testimony, that he esteemed of Duty, as of
a sacred and inviolable thing, when he would not swear to the people to
observe and keep that, which was to be ordained and established concerning a
law put up by one of the Tribunes against all right and equity,
notwithstanding that the Consul with the rest of the Senators through
constraint and fear, which they had of the people, had sworn unto it, and
given their Metellus.
promise. Then Metellus departing from the assembly, said, that it was too
easy a matter to do ill, as also a common thing to do well where no danger is,
but to do well when peril is certain and sure, that was the proper duty of
an honorable and virtuous man. For this cause being banished, and making light
account of the matter, he used these or the like speeches: When things shall be
amended, the people repenting them of their error, will call me back again: but
if the affairs continue still in the same state, wherein they now are, it will
be best for a man to keep Lycurgus.
himself a far of. Lycurgus after his laws were given to the Lacedaemonians
fained that he had some thing else whereof to take counsel with Apollo
concerning their estate, and therefore at his departure from Lacedaemon to go
to Delphos, he caused his citizens to swear and promise, that they would keep
his laws inuiolably until his return, either dead or alive. This done he
went to the i will of Candie, where he remained in perpetual and voluntary
banishment, and commanded that after his death, the ashes of his body, being
burnt should be cast into the wind, that by this means the Lacedaemonians
might never be absolved of their oath, but that his country might always
receive the fruit of his labors, for desire whereof he had freely forsaken it
altogether. Marcus Otho the emperor Marcus Otho.
has left behind him a more wonderful example of the great love he bare
toward his country, for the benefit whereof he died willingly. For after he
had lost a battle against Vitellius and Cecinna, fighting for the empire, he
was solicited by the rest of his army, which was yet of great strength, to
try fortune once again, and to use them and their persons as long as they had
one drop of blood, and life in their bodies. And at the same time a simple
soldier, having his sword in his hand, spoke thus unto him: Know, O Caesar,
that all my companions are The courageous mind of a soldier.
determined to die thus for thy sake, and therewithal he slew himself before
him. Then Otho casting his eyes all about, spoke unto them in this sort: I
account this day more happy to me (Companions) than that other wherein ye did
choose and pronounce me your emperor, beholding you so well affected in my
behalf, and receiving such honor from you with so great a demonstration of
friendship. And if I have been worthy to hold the empire of Rome by your
election, I must now show it, in not sparing my life for the good and safety
of my country. I know well that the victory is not yet wholly mine enemies:
and I have received news of such and such forces (which he named particularly
unto them) that are ready to join with us. The Senate is on our side, and the
wives and children of our enemies are in our hands. But what? This war A
notable example against civil war.
is not against a Hannibal, or a Pirrhus, or against the Cymbrians, that we
should fight for the possession of Italy, but it is against the Romans
themselves: so that in this war both the conqueror and conquered shall offend
and hurt their country, because, whatsoever serves for the benefit of him
that overcomes, turns to the damage of the Commonwealth. Believe me, I
know better how to die than to reign, especially considering that I shall not
so much profit the Romans, although in the end I should remain the stronger,
as now I can by sacrificing my life for the peace, union, and concord of my
countrymen. This done, he took order for the Senators and others of his army
to retire and save themselves: and said to a nephew of his whom he had adopted,
I command thee my son, as the last admonition which I can give thee, not to
forget altogether, nor yet to print it too much in thy memory, that thou have
had an uncle, who was emperor. Then laying him down to rest, the next morning
very early he took his sword, and turning the point thereof with both his
hands against his stomach, he fell upon the top of it, without showing any
other token or feeling of grief, and so died, being only seven and thirty
years of age. Codrus Codrus.
king of Athens did no less for his country. For having understood, that the
Oracle had promised and assured the victory to the Thracians, who were enemies
to the Athenians, if they saved their king alive, he went into their camp
disguised like a handicrafts man, and slew one of their men, whereupon he was
presently slain of others, not being known what he was. And thus were the
Thracians deprived of the hope of victory, which before they accounted
certain, and in a manner gotten of the Athenians. M. Curtius.
Marcus Curtius a knight of Rome, who being Consul wan a notable battle
against the Cymbrians, threw himself headlong into a deep gulf, which was
made in the midst of Rome by an earthquake, and which had greatly dammaged the
city. The reason moving him so to do was, because the Soothsaiers had given
out, that the gods would not be pacified and appeased toward the city before
the gulf had swalowed a man on live. Curtius being desirous to procure the
benefit and ease of the Commonwealth, would serve himself for this sacrifice.
And so it came to pass: for presently this gulf closed up to the great
astonishment of all the people. How shall we think that these, and so many
others, as histories set before our eyes, who have freely offered their lives
for the safety of many, and chose rather to undertake any danger, than to
turn aside in any thing from that which they knew to be the duty of a good
man, how (I say) shall we think that they would have fainted or yielded
through the enticements of honor, grace, favor, and riches, whereby the
greatness of their courage, limited only with the bounds of right and justice,
might have been weakened? But hoping that the sequel of our discourses will
furnish us with more ample testimonies both of this and of all the other parts
of duty, which respect every particular action, and fearing least I have been
somewhat too long in the examples already alleged, we will conclude our
present matter with this general instruction, that unto what estate, quality,
or condition soever men are called, they ought to propound to themselves in all
their actions, Duty and Duty and honesty are to be propounded in all our
actions.
Honesty, searching for them in the holy scriptures, and in the precepts of
good life conformable thereunto, which are left unto us by the ancient Sages
and wise philosophers, to this end, that being well instructed in true piety,
we may first of all give honor and glory to God, and then be beneficial,
helpful, and profitable to his creatures. These graces we may, by the
direction and blessing of God, draw out of those four rivers which proceed and
flow from this general virtue and fountain of Honesty, of which we are to
discourse particularly hereafter, namely, of Prudence, Temperance, Fortitude,
and Justice, which are those moral virtues whereby all good and virtuous
actions are brought to pass.


Of Prudence. Chap. 10.
ACHITOB. THere is one only wise, souereign Creator of al things, the almighty,
strong, and terrible, who sits upon his throne, from whom comes Ecclus. 1.
18.
al wisdom, which always has been, and is for ever with him, and which he
has powered out upon all works, and upon all flesh according to his
liberality, and gives her abundantly to them that love him. She teaches the
doctrine of God, and causes us to choose his works. She decketh us with
prudence, justice, and courage, giving us the knowledge of the time past, and
judgment of that which is to come. The multitude of those which are endued
with these gifts and graces are the guard of the world, and a prudent king is
the assurance of his people. The sequel therefore of our speech leads us to
the handling of Prudence, the first river of the fountain of Duty.


ASER. Wisdom raineth down knowledge, and wise Ecclus. 1. 23.
understanding, and brings to honor those that possess her. Of her therefore
we are to seek for true Prudence, a necessary guide to all our actions, but
we must hate the prudence of the flesh, which is folly before God, and makes
all the thoughts of the wise of this world to become vain and foolish.
Moreover, Cicero says, that no man can be prudent but he must be good.


AMANA. O how learnedly has Socrates taught us to know and mark this true and
heavenly Prudence, proceeding from the love and fear of the highest, from that
earthly Prudence, which is full of darkness, when he says, What prunence is.
that Prudence is the general virtue, the princess and guide of moral
virtues, and that wherein the knowledge of our sovereign good, and of the end
of our being consists, as also the choice of those ways whereby we may come
unto it. But let us hear ARAM discourse more largely of the great, worthy,
and wonderful effects of this rich virtue.


ARAM. All the life of men expressing a worthy end of their being, consists
in contemplation and action. For knowing that the thoughts of all mortal men
are unstable, and their inventions uncertain, because the body and the
affections thereof oppress the soul, and cast down the spirit laden with
care, they lift up their hearts toward the brightness of the eternal light, who
of his mere grace prepares their souls, lighteneth their understandings, and
directs their paths to the knowledge of that true and perfect Idea of Good,
from whence Prudence flows, that she may govern their actions according to
Gods will, and to the profit of humane society. The effects of the virtue of
prudence.
Therefore it is from knowledge and reason gotten in the study of wisdom by
the grace of God, from whence the virtue of Prudence proceeds, which is that
rule of all the actions of man, whereby through good and sage advice he
discerns and chooses good from bad, that which is profitable from the
contrary, to the end he may shun the one and practice the other. This is that
which Aristotle says, that the office of Prudence consists in skill to
consult and to choose, to the end to execute that which virtue commands,
namely, Honesty and decency, and that for no other respect than for the love
thereof. And The difference between science and prudence.
therefore wise men have put a difference between Science and Prudence, saying,
that Science is a dead knowledge of things, which of it self cannot change the
will in such sort, that it may embrace and follow the known good, or avoid the
evil: which is evident in wicked men endued with knowledge. But Prudence is a
beam proceeding from that true sun, which does not only illuminate and
lighten the understanding, but also warmeth and kindles the affection. This
virtue (says Bias one of the Sages of Prudence compared to the sight.
Graecia) is amongst the rest of the virtues, as the sight is amongst the five
senses of man's body: thereby giving us to understand, that as the eye, of all the other senses is most beautiful, subtle, and pearcing, so the virtue of
Prudence by her quick and clear light directs and conducteth al virtues in
their good and commendable operations. It is by her that man is always clothed
with a mild and settled disposition, whereof he stands no less in need, than
a ship floating on the sea does of the presence of a pilot, that he may
prudently undertake, and wisely execute whatsoever he knows to be good, after
mature deliberation, and consideration of all the circumstances of the fact.
Moral philosophers attributed three eyes to this virtue Prudence has three
eyes.
of Prudence, namely, Memory, Understanding, and Providence: which three things
Cicero calls the parts of Prudence. With the first she beholds the time
past: with the second, the time present: with the third, the time to come.
Moreover, a prudent and wise man, by the consideration of things past: and of
that which has followed since, judges of that, which in the like case may
fall out in the time following. And after long deliberation, he expects the
times, waigheth the dangers, and knows the occasions: and then, yielding now
and then to the times, but always to necessity, so it be not against duty,
he boldly sets his hand to the work. For this cause Isocrates said, that a
prudent man ought to remember things past, to use things present, and to
foresee things to come. A prudent man (says Demosthenes) accounts it a point
of folly to say when a thing is com to pass, Who would have thought it could
have been? Now Prudence is apparent in him that possesses her, first by the
rule and government of his person, whether it be in things within him, as in
his manners and conditions, or in outward things concerning his body, as in
sobriety of diet, comely intertainment, good housekeeping, commendable use of
his substance and riches. Of which perfections and other praise-worthie
effects, that flow from Prudence under the name of sundry virtues, we are to
entreat particularly hereafter, as also how a prudent man being adorned with
them may first become a good Oeconomist, that is, a governor and father of a
family, and after attain to that great virtue of political knowledge, which
is the art of skillful governing and ruling a multitude of men. And then
although he doubt not, but that it is an act of Prudence to know what is good
and profitable for the Commonwealth, yet that he may know how to execute
that office with a perfect and absolute virtue, he seeks for all occasions to
profit the same, and unto what place of authority soever he be The
praiseworthy effects of prudence.
called, he always shows forth dutiful effects of a good man. He never
gives or takes but good counsel, and always utters the same freely. He is
able (says Plato) to discern the good from the bad. He helps innocence,
and corrects malice. He is not astonished for any fear, nor alters his
mind for dispraise or commendation: he is not discouraged through violence or
false accusations, neither is pressed down with sorrow, or puffed up with
prosperity. And as one not ignorant of the uncertainty of worldly things, he
abides constant in all changes, and like to himself, knowing how to choose
the less evil in all inconveniences, as the better. He shows himself
valiant in all things. He is master of his pleasures, and knows how to
command himself. He can reap profit by most sinister accidents, yea by his
greatest enemies, and yet hurt them not. The conversation of the prudent is
always healthful and profitable. His quips, his laughters, his sports are not
without some fruit, having in them a certain power to correct and move those
that do amiss. He believes not (says Heraclitus) any thing lightly, but is a
severe examiner of the truth. To be short, Prudence causes a man to refer all
his actions both private and public to the best end, which is, to serve God,
and to profit his neighbor. This did Socrates teach very well, saying, that All
the desires and inclinations of our soul guided by prudence tend to happiness.
Wherein we may note The conjunction of all the virtues.
the indissoluble conjunction of all the moral virtues, of which no one can be
had perfectly, but with her companions, albeit each of them have her particular
and proper duty. But prudence is especially necessary in them all, as it will
yet better appear in the further handling thereof, albeit the effects hereunder
mentioned of this first virtue being narrowly considered, may give us
sufficient proof thereof. Now to incite and stir us up to embrace it with
greater zeal and affection, and to seek after all means of obtaining it,
either by good instruction, or by long use of things, let us call to mind
certain examples of the ancients, thereby to mark what woonderful fruits this
virtue of Prudence has brought forth in them. If we consider all the
heroical facts of the worthiest captains and generals of armies that ever
were, we shall find that they brought them to pass more by prudence, than by
any other force and mean. Which thing Alexander the great, and first Monarke
of the Graecians knowing very well, whenever any speech or comparison was
made before him of Virtue or Science, he always had this verse of Homer in his
mouth: In counsel wise, and valiant in the fight: as if he would have said,
that of all virtues Prudence was most prince-like, and that prowess was
practiced by means thereof. And indeed he being richly endued therewith,
undertook the conquest of the Persian empire, yea of all the world, when he
had but thirty thousand footmen, Of the prudence of Alexander.
and four thousand horsemen, with money and victuals to furnish them only for
thirty days. But what? The means whereunto he trusted was Prudence, followed
of Patience, Valor and Temperancie, wherewith the study of philosophy had
furnished him for his voyage. In this journey he did not only in two battles
overthrow Darius monarke of the Persians, who had above twelve hundred
thousand men, but also brought under subjection fifteen sundry nations, and
took five thousand cities and towns, and labored to put in real execution
and practice that form of government of estate, which was so greatly esteemed
of Zeno the Stoic philosopher, and tended in effect to this end, that all men
generally might live together, not being divided by towns, peoples and
nations, nor separated by particular laws, rightes and customs, but that we
should take all men for our countrymen and fellow citizens: that as there is
but one world, so there might be but one kind of life. Thus did this prudent
and virtuous monarck give out that he was sent from heaven to be a common
refourmer, governor, and reconcilour of the whole world, so that he employed
all his might to reduce and bring to civility barbarous kings, to plant
Grecian cities, that they might live ciuilly amongst the untamed and savage
nations, and established every where laws and a peaceable kind of life, even
amongst unbridled people, who never heard word spoken either of peace or
laws. Those whom he could not assemble together by persuasion of reason, he
constrained by force of arms, so that he caused them all to drink as ye would
say, in the same cup of love and friendship, by intermingling their lives,
manners, marriages and fashions of living. He commanded that al men living should
account the whole habitable earth for their country, and his camp, for their
castle and tower of defense, and that all good men should be of kin one to
another, and the wicked only strangers. Moreover, he willed, that the Grecian
and Barbarian should no more be distinguied by their garments, but that the
Grecian should be known and discerned by virtue, and the Barbarian by vice,
accounting all virtuous men Graecians, and all vicious men Barbarians.
Therefore Plutark said very well, that they who were tamed and brought under
his yoke were a great deal more happy than those that escaped his power,
because these men had none to cause them to leave of from living miserablic,
and the other were compelled by the conqueror to live happily. Whereby he
deserved no less the name of a great philosopher, than did Pythagoras,
Socrates and others, who although they wrote nothing, yet were so called, for
their manner of life, and for that which they spoke, did and taught. In all
which things Alexander approaching next unto them, went also beyond them in
this, that they taught men of good understandings, namely such as were
Graecians as well as themselves, and that without great pain and travel: but
this monark sustaining infinite labor, and cheerfully sheading his blood did
change into a better estate, and reformed the rude manners of innumerable savage
people, even of such as were brutish by nature. Now let us speak of Caesar the
first Roman Emperor. Was it not prudence especially that prepared Of the
prudence of Pulius Caesar.
the way for him to so mighty an empire, first by reconciling together Crassus
and Pompey, two of the greatest Roman Senators, by whose favor he obtained
afterward the dignity of Consulship? When he was placed therein, being
desirous to win the good will of the people and knowing that he was already
well under propped of the Senators, he preserred many laws in their behalf.
Besides he was very sumptuous and popular, if ever any Roman was, not sparing
any cost upon plays, turneies, feasts, largesses, and other baits to curry
favor with the meaner sort of the people, and to gain the honor and credire of
a man that is gracious and charitable toward the poor. And when he was sent
to take upon him the government of the Gauls, he warred there ten years,
being guided by an unspeakable prudence, that was accompanied with diligence
and forecast: so that by using all occasions wisely and to purpose, he subdued
there three hundred sundry nations, took eight hundred towns and in many
battles discomfited three millions of men. The commentaries which he wrote
himself, declare sufficiently that his own virtue wrought more exploits than
all his army. Of this also he gave proof enough in the beginning of the
civil war between him and Pompey, wherein he used such diligence, that
coming out of France he made himself master of all Italy in threescore
days, without any effusion of blood, and drove away his enemy. And Cicero, who
(as some say) conspired his death, in an epistle calls him Caesar noted two
faults in Pompey.
a monster of prudence and of incredible diligence. Was it not prudence whereby
he noted two faults in Pompey, which after were the cause of his overthrow? The
first in an encounter of their armies, wherein Caesar being at that time the
weaker had the woorst. And when he perceived that his enemy pursued him not,
but retired to his camp, he said. The victory this day was in the power of
our enemies, but their captain could not perceive it. The other fault which he
noted was at the battle of Pharsalia, where Pompey was quite overthrown,
because he charged his soldiers being ranged in battle to stand still in
their places, and so to attend their enemies. Then Caesar said, that in so
doing Pompey took from his soldiers the vehemency and violence of giving
the onset, which is as a spur unto them in their race, besides the heat of
courage which this speedy running forward works in the^. We see then how
necessary this virtue of prudence is in Agesilaus.
feats of war, which caused Agesilaus king of Lacedemonia, after great losses
sustained by the violence of Epaminondas, the general captain of the
Thebanes, to say to his men, that they should not greatly care for the
multitude of their enemies, but bend all their force against Epaminondas only,
because none but wise and prudent men were valiant, and the only cause of
victory. And therefore if they could beat him down, they should undoubtedly
have the rest at their devotion. As indeed it came to pass in that battle
which they fought together, wherein the Lacedaemonians half discomfited, one of
those that fled being pursued by Epaminondas, turned back and slew him: The
loss of a capt^^^e is commonly cause of the ruin of an am^e.
whereupon the rest took such courage, and the Thebans were so dismayed, that
the victory remained with Agesilaus. Now if in warfare prudence bears such a
stroke, who doubts but that in civil and politic government she is as
necessary, or rather more? Divine Plato in his book of a commonwealth says,
that if a man would do notable acts worthy of perfect praise in the
administration of the commonwealth, he must have prudence and justice,
followed of power and fortune. But we may further say, that only prudence has
set aloft and preserved many great estates from ruin and subversion. The
Athenians being divided and banded into three contrary The prudence of Solon.
parts and factions, Solon being very prudent and wise, would not join himself
to any of them, but kept himself indifferent to all, practicing and speaking
whatsoever he could devise to join and reconcile them together again. Wherein
he behaved himself so well, that being chosen by them all for the only
pacisier and reformer of their estate, he placed it in greater glory than ever
it was in before, by his prudent and wise laws which were received The
prudence of Lycurgus.
as inviolable. The prudence of Lycurgus, the reformer and lawmaker of the
Lacedaemonians, was the cause of the maintenance of their estate above five
hundred years, so that it was the chiefest in all Graecia both for glory and
excellency of government, from whence they fell not until such time as they
wholly neglected those goodly ordinances and laws which he left them. A prudent
man always gineth good counsalle, and utters the same freely, being also a
good and willing help to innocence. Phocion speaking his mind one day in the
counsel chamber Phocion.
of the Athenians, against the enterprising of a certain war, and seeing that
his advise so greatly displeased them, that they would not give him leave to
utter his mind, he spoke freely unto them in this manner: Ye may perad^^nture
(O Athenians) force me to do that which ought not to be done, but ye can not
constrain me to speak any thing contrary to my opinion that ought not to be
spoken or counseled. Demosthenes knowing the innocence of a poor woman
drawn into judgment with danger of being overthrown, saved her by his great
prudence. The prudence of Demosthenes in defending the innocence of a poor
woman.
For two strangers having given her a good sum of money, to keep with this
condition, that she should not restore it to the one except the other were also
present, within a while after one of them came very sorrowful faining that his
companion was dead, and bringing some counterfeit token thereof with him.
Whereupon he so persuaded this poor woman, who meant simply plainly, that she
restored the money to him. Afterward the other came, and demanding the money
also, brought this woman before a judge, who being without hope of escaping,
Demosthencs answered for her, that she offered to give him the money so that he
brought his fellow, because, as himself confessed, she ought not to give it to
the one without the How a prudent man may reap benefit by his enemies, and by
mishaps.
other. The profit which a prudent man draws from his enemies is in this,
that he knows and takes them for spies, for enuiers at his life, and
ioint-labourers with him for honor and glory: whereupon he is the more careful
that his doings may be blameles. And to this purpose Diogenes answered wisely
to one, who demanded how he might be avenged on his enemy: By making thy self
(quoth he) a virtuous and good man. Most finister accidents likewise turn to
the profit of a prudent man. For being long time before prepared for all
events, the woorst that happen confirm him further in the knowledge of the
uncertainty of human things, and lift him up so much the more to the
contemplation of heavenly things, that he may desire nothing but the blessed
immortality Anaxagoras.
of the soul. Anaxagoras hearing news of his sons death, said nothing but
this, that he knew he had begotten him a mortal creature. The foresight of
prudence The prudent foresight of (...).
makes it also to be greatly admired. Marcus Cato, when he saw that Pompey
joined himself in league with Caesar, told him, that he did put Caesar's yoke
upon his own neck, which then he perceived not, but that shortly it would
weigh heavy upon him, and then should he find himself taken and tied. A
prudent man is not amassed through fear either of blame or of false accusation,
but always goes with his head upright, trusting to his innocence, and to his
own virtue. Scipio Africanus being accused of many things by the Tribunes of
the people, answered nothing to the crimes laid against him, but only said
thus: In such a day as this is, sirs, I overcame both The prudence of Scipio in
answering to an unjust accusation.
Carthage and Hannibal, and therefore I am now going to the Capitol to
sacrifice to Jupiter the best and greatest God, and to give him thanks for the
victory. In the mean while if any man long to proceed against me in judgment,
let him do it. After he had so said, he went toward the Capitol, being
followed of his friends, and of the greater part of the Senators. When the
people saw this, they likewise accompanied him, so that in stead of condemning
him, they caused him in a manner to triumph again. Emilius Scaurus being also
accused of a certain Emilius Scaurus.
crime by Varius, made this only answer: O ye Romans, Varius affirms this
crime laid against me to be true, and Scaurus denies it: whom will ye rather
believe? By this wise and courageous answer he made the accusation of no
effect, because his honesty was well known to every one. The conversation,
assemblies, laughters, quips, and pastimes of prudent men are never without
some profit. Plato in his book entitled Conuiuium, that is, a feast,
discourses of the last end of men's actions, and of the sovereign and chief
good of man, but yet in very familiar speeches, by certain examples, and
pleasant fictions, and devises fit for the time and place, and not with serious
and grave words, as he uses to do in his other writings. Moreover, learned
devises are the sports and delights of The sports of prudent men.
wise men, who account all other pastimes vain and unbeseeming them, and as
hindrances and lets rather of their pleasure, than occasions of any
recreation. Notwithstanding, wisely applying themselves to places and persons,
they can in their serious discourses intermingle some honest pastimes, but yet
not altogether without profit. As Plato in his foresaid feast interlaceth
certain comicall speeches of love, how beit all the rest of the supper there
was nothing but wise discourses of philosophy. A Lacedemonian Pleasant sayings
full of doctrine.
being asked of a certain matter by an other, answered clean contrary to the
truth. And when the other told him that he lied, behold (quoth he again) what
a fool thou art to ask me that, which thou know well enough. Diogenes in a
great assembly of people, purposely going backward, and seeing that every one
laughed at him, asked them alowd if they were not ashamed to mock him for
going backward when he walked, whereas they did so all their life time. And as
Aristippus on a time beheld him washing of coleworts for his supper, he said
unto him: If thou did know (Diogenes) how to obey kings, and to seek them
out, thou would not wash coleworts. And thou Aristippus (quoth he) if thou
knew how to wash coleworts, thou would not serve kings, but live at
liberty. What profitable doctrine may a man draw out of these philosophical
disports and jests? Further, A prudent man does not ouerlightly believe any
thing.
a prudent man never believes any thing ouerlightly, but lays aside all
reputation and credit of him that speaks, and examineth the speech by it
self: so far is he from giving credit to an ignorant or naughty fellow.
Neither will he be dazeled with fine and eloquent speech, but (as Zeno said)
considers whether his speech be tempered with sense and reason, that so he
may judge foundly of the truth, and take order thereafter. O what number of
examples to this purpose might be alleged of the great harm that has
followed the credulity and light belief of magistrates, governors, and heads
of monarchies and nations. Alas, our poor France has but too great experience
thereof to her confusion and and destruction. But this matter may offer it
self hereafter to be more amply handled, as also other effects of Prudence,
which I have briefly touched. In the mean while we will conclude, that
Prudence is an excellent gift of God, that it is the guide and light of all the
moral virtues, from whence all good and noble actions have their being and
beginning, and that without it a man can do nothing that is excellent and
praiseworthy.


Of want of prudence and of Ignorance, of malice and subtlety. Chap. 11.
ARAM. NO man (says divine Plato) can be hurt or deceived but by himself.
Which proposition at the first sight may seem somewhat absurd. But if, being
well instructed in philosophy, we will follow the opinion of the ancient Sages,
that Whatsoever How none can be hurt but by himself.
we see of the body subject to sight, is not man, but that the soul only,
which is invisible and immortal, is that which truly ought to be called man,
and that whereby we live, and for which we ought to live, it is out of doubt,
that none can hurt our souls but our selves. The knives wherewith we hurt our
souls are either want of prudence, or Malice, which are as pernicious things,
as can come to man, seeing by them he commits all sins and offenses
whatsoever, and by them hurts himself only, when as oftentimes he thinks
to offend another. As then in our former discourse we have scene the laudable
effects of Virtue and Prudence, so let us now consider my Companions of the
dangerous fruits of these two vices, which are altogether contrary unto it.


ACHITOB. If the blind lead the blind both will fall into the pit: and he that
knows his masters will, and does it not, shall be much more chasticed than
the ignorant. So that both want of prudence and malice are two plagues in the
soul greatly to be feared: and therefore Bias says, Be neither simple nor
subtle.


ASER. Herillus the Chalcedonian affirmed, that Science was the sovereign
good. But we see contrariwise many excellent men for skill and doctrine, who
live most wickedly. So that in my opinion if it be not accompanied with
virtuous deeds, it ought rather to be called the chiefest evil: forasmuch as
he that sins through ignorance, is more excusable than the malicious, who
sins Virtuous actions are to be joined with knowledge.
wittingly. And for defense of my saying, besides the authority of the
scripture, I have Plato, who says, that Science without the knowledge and
practice of that which is good, is very pernicious. But let us harken to AMANA,
who will discourse unto us more at large of these two vices, want of
discretion, and malice or subtlety.


AMANA. All virtue being in the midst of two vices, the one of them is clean
contrary unto it, and the other being more dangerous, seeks to cover it
self with her name, and it is called of the philosopher a false follower of
virtue. For this cause they placed want of prudence, which vice is in the
defect, at the right hand of prudence: and at the left hand, Malice or Craft,
which is the excess, and causes a man to sin, not through ignorance, but by
deceit and subtlety, and that under the name of Prudence. First then let us
consider of want of prudence or unskillfulness, and of the effects thereof in the
soul. Unskillfulness What want of prudence is.
proceeding, or rather being the same thing that ignorance is, causes a man (as
Aristotle says) to judge evil of things, to deliberate worse, not to know how
to take the advantage of present good things, but to conceive ill of those
things that are good and honest in man's life. And as Prudence is the knowledge
of that which ought to be done or left undone, so unskillfulness is the ignorance
of those self same things, and is always followed of incontinencie, of want
of civility, and of forgetfulness. Briefly, want of prudence is so contagious
and pestilent a thing in the mind of man, that all other infirmities of the
spirit, wherewithal it is commonly molested, and all evil actions seem to
proceed from the same. And truly wheresoever it is, there neither God can be
truly honored and served, nor vice avoided, nor any action, either public or
private can be orderly, and according to duty executed. For as a weak and
diseased sight cannot behold the light of the sun, so an unskillful soul
cannot know the truth, Unskillfulness causes a man to fall into severity, when
he The pernicious effects of ignorance.
thinks to exercise justice. If he would be liberal, he becomes prodigal. If
he thinks to avoid superfluity, he falls into covetousness. If he have any
apprehension of the divine nature, he consumes his soul with a confused fear
through superstition. If his mind cannot conceive that there is a most happy
and blessed nature, forthwith he judges, that there is none at all: and thus
guided by ignorance all his desires and inclinations tend to wretchedness and
misery. Moreover, Plato says, that ignorance takes away the sight of the
mind from those that are tainted therewith, as blindness takes away the sight
of corporal eyes from those that lack their sight. And further he testifies,
that the ignorant mind is vile and wretched, and that it is more expedient not
to live at all, than to live in ignorance. But if we give credit to Cicero, he
only lives indeed and possesses a soul, who settling himself to some good
matter, seeks after renown by some notable fact, or by some good art. It is
good (says Socrates) to leave off altogether the use of that thing whereof we
have no skill to use it well. And so for those that know not how to use their
eyes, ears, and whole body, it were more profitable neither to see, hear, or
help themselves any way with their body. In like manner it were better for him
that knows not how to use his soul, to have none at all, than to live. And
if he must needs live, being borne, he should be happier in the estate of a
slave than of a free man. The speech of this wise philosopher expounds it
self sufficiently, as tending to no other end than to give us to understand,
that it is better not to be, yea never to have been borne, than through
ignorance to follow vice: and further, that it is more dangerous when a man may
freely do so without fear of any greater than himself. For as droonkennes
engenders rage and madness, so (says Aristotle) ignorance joined with power
begets insolency and fury. And it is all one (as Plato says) to place an
ignorant man in authority, as to lay a great burden upon the shoulders of a
man half dead through weakness. All these things make me judge an ignorant man
to be, I will not only say, like an image or block of wood, but in a manner
nothing differing from brute beasts. This caused the ancients to use this
saying: All ignorant men are evil.
that Every ignorant man was evil. And Terence going yet further says, that
The earth bears nothing worse than an ignorant man. And in truth what
mischiefs do we not see to come of ignorance? If a man be of a mean or base
The effects of ignorance both in rich and poor.
estate, it makes him good for nothing, fearful, superstitious, unprofitable,
needy, uncivil, slothful, and unfit to every good thing. If he be mighty
and rich, besides that he may fall into the said miseries through the same
imperfection, he will so much the sooner become arrogant, cruel, rash,
talkatiue, covetous, unconstant, given to voluptuousnes, and unjust. In a word,
the more means he shall have to exercise vices, the richer in them will he
grow to be through ignorance: and so not being able to govern himself, he
must needs be unworthy to intermeddle at all either in political or
Oeconomicall government. If an ignorant man possess any great benefit or
felicity, he can never know so much, before he has lost it again. Moreover,
this mischief follows him, that he can never make his profit of any good
counsel, because of the presumption of his own opinion, which he always
thinks better than any other: yea he supposes that nothing can be well done
except he put to his helping hand. For (as Menander says) nothing is so rash
as ignorance. And the more that an ignorant man is lift up unto some
excellency of dignity or riches, the more insufferable he is, as one that
knows not how to use them: so that he is puffed up with pride above measure,
and not content with his estate, but driven with ambition, he presumes
oftentimes to undertake things against all reason and equity. And contrariwise
if fortune change, he abaseth himself out of measure, showing nothing but
abiection of mind, inconstancy and impatiencie, and that with so great trouble
and disquietnes of spirit, that oftentimes he is wholly besides himself. Now
these are but small fruits of ignorance, namely, to make a man importunate: to
cause him Common effects of ignorance.
to stay another that has great affairs, saying, that he has many things to
communicate unto him, when in truth they will do him but small pleasure: to
desire one that has lost his suite to bestow a dinner upon him, promising to
tell him a way how he may recover it again: to speak ill of women, when he is
invited to weddings, or in their company: to request him to walk that has
already gone a great way: when he sees a thing sold to bring a chapman to the
seller, who would have given a great deal more for it: to repeat one thing
oftentimes: to show himself ready to do that which a man would not have him
to do, and yet dare not well deny it him: to wonder at all things, and to
speak all in a word, an unskillful man is always in all places and in all
affairs uncivil and impertinent. The examples of these foresaid effects are
but too familiar amongst us. And first concerning these of small and mean
estate and condition, how many millions of men have there been in the ages
past, and do live yet among us, whose life being ignorant of every good cause
and reason, is not much unlike, and in The spring of all errors.
many things worse than that of brute beasts. The original of so many errors,
foolish opinions, and impieties, has it not had passage through the midst of
their souls, because they had no true knowledge of the end of their being, nor
of his will by whom they live? From thence it comes, that the best advised
among them exercise base handicrafts, not being desirous to learn further:
that some lead a servile and contemptible life, bringing their bodies and
souls in subjection to the lusts and wicked desires of the greater sort: that
others remain idle and unprofitable seeking to maintain their lives by
unlawful means: that all through a blockish ignorance deprive themselves of
all present and eternal felicity. Now albeit these poor men, who have no
great means to execure their wicked desires, may after a sort seem tolerable
and excuseable to man's judgment, because their ignorance does not greatly hurt
any but themselves, yet it falls out far worse with those that have wealth at
will, and authority to command others, who not knowing how to use their goods
well by virtuous deeds, abuse them to all vice, dissolutenes, and pleasure:
whereby for the most part they cast themselves headlong into infidelity and
Atheism, because they never had true understanding of the perfect divinity,
nor yet considered the perfection of his works both in heaven and earth. O
pitiful calamity The reasons which moved the heathen to believe that there
was a divinity.
abounding in this our age more than ever it did. A thousand millions of Pagans
and heathens considering that there was nothing to be misliked in the heavens,
neither any negligence, disorder, or confusion in the moving of the stars, nor
in the seasons of the year, nor in their reuolutions, nor in the course of the
sun about the earth, which causes the day and the night, no not in the
nourishing and preservation of all sorts of living creatures, nor in the
generation of yearly fruits, and for a thousand other good considerations,
believed and worshipped one supreme eternal essence, which governs all
things. And shall they that carry the name of Christians, to whom the
unspeakable treasures of the heavens have been opened and offered with
innumerable graces, shall they, I say, doubt, yea impudently deny that there
is a God? But let us return to our matter. It is most certain, that the
higher that ignorant men are advanced, so much without question are their
faults greater than those of meaner estate, because they are hurtful to many.
Yea oftentimes it has come to pass, that one only fault of such a man has
been the loss and destruction of an infinite number of Nicias feared an
eclipse of the moon.
men. Nicias the general captain of the Athenians, through the fear which he
had conceived of the darkness of an Eclipse of the moon, and not knowing the
cause thereof, stayed so long until his enemies had enclosed him round about:
whereupon he was taken alive of them, and put to death, besides the loss of
forty thousand Athenians Caligula and Domitian.
that were taken and slain. Who doubts but that ignorance drove Caligula and
Domitian into such pride and cruelty, that whilst they sought to be worshipped
in stead of the true God, they were the cause of the death and destruction of
more than a hundred thousand men? In the time Otho 1.
of Otho the first there fell a stone from heaven, which astonished all
Germany, and turned them from prosecuting an enterprise of great weight and
importance for the benefit of their country. If they had known it to be a
natural thing, and such as had come to pass long before, as Aristotle
affirms, they had not been so fearful, nor received that damage to the
detriment of the Commonwealth, which came to them afterward. That speech of
Anaxagoras a Greek philosopher, agreeable heerunto, is worthy to be
remembered, when he said, that a man ought Anaxagoras saying against the
superstitious fear of celestial signs.
to drive out of himself, and to tread under his feet all superstitious fear
of the heavenly signs and impressions of the air, which work great terror in
them that are ignorant of their causes, and that fear the gods with a forlorn
and amassed fear, because they want that certain knowledge that philosophy
brings, which in stead of a trembling and always terrifying superstition,
engenders true devotion, accompanied with an assured hope of good. Let us
look a little into our Chronicles, and consider what profit our kings received
by their ignorance, when they were called Simple, when they stood but for
images, and were seen of their subjects but once a year. They suffered their
wise masters of the palace to take knowledge of, and to order and rule all
things, who depriving them as unworthy of all authority, took possession in
the end of their crown. And surely it is no less pernicious for the greater
sort to advance ignorant men to charges and places of honor, and to use their
counsel, than to be ignorant themselves. For (as we said) ignorance causes
him that is advanced to forget himself, and lifts him up into all pride.
There are amongst us too many examples of the ambition and presumption of many
ignorant men, who, contrary to Torquatus that refused the Consulship, because
of his diseased eyes, altogether blind as they are, deaf, dumb, and destitute
of all natural light, of prudence and experience to guide themselves, are not
contented to manage the sails and tacklings, but desire to have the rudder of
the Common-welth in their hands. And it is greatly to be feared, that such
unskillful and ambitious Cleander a traitor to Commodus his Lord.
men will in the end show themselves both in will and practice to be imitators
of one Cleander an outlandish slave, who being preferred by Commodus the
emperor to goodly offices and great places of honor, as to be great master of
his men of war, and his chief chamberlain, conspired notwithstanding against
his Lord, seeking to attain to the imperial dignity by feditions, which he
stirred up in Rome between the people and the soldiers. But through good order
taken, his enterprise took no effect, except the loss of his own head, and
destruction of his house. Although oftentimes it falls out clean contrary
through the just punishment of God, for the ignorance and impiety as well of
the monarks themselves, as of their people. Now if fortune turn her self
about, and set her self never so little against an ignorant person, he is
straightway overcome with a thousand perturbations, and urged with despair, as
being only grounded before upon the vain and weak hope and confidence in
external and uncertain goods. Perses, king of Macedonia, and one of the
successors of Alexander the great in his The hase mind of Perses being overcome
of Emilius.
great conquests, but not in his unspeakable virtues, was overcome in battle by
Paulus Emilius, chief captain of the Romans, and was led toward him. Emilius,
as soon as he saw him, arose from his seat, and went forward to receive and
honor him, as being a great personage, and fallen into that mishap by the
hazard of fortune. But Perses, being wholly beaten down through faintnes and
baseness of mind, cast himself at his feet upon the ground with his face
downward, using such abject requests and supplications, and so unbeseeming the
virtue of a king, that the Conqueror could not abide them, but said thus unto
him: Alas poor ignorant man as thou art, how do thou by discharging fortune
accuse thy self in this sort to be the only cause of this ill success that
is befallen thee, seeing thou never deseruedst that honor, which thou have had
heretofore, because of thy base mind within thee, which has made thee an
unworthy adversary of the Romans? And truly a man cannot justly be called
through the benefit of fortune, but by knowing how to use her well and wisely
both in prosperity and adversity. As for an ignorant and baseminded man, the
higher that fortune lifts him up in great estate where he shall be viewed of
many, so much the more she discovers, descrieth and dishonoreth him. For
great calling, and riches are no more able to lift up the heart of a base minded
fellow, than poverty can abate and lessen the great courage of a noble heart. I
could here allege many mo examples of the pernicious effects that are (as we
have said) wrought in the soul by ignorance, but hereafter they will come in
more fitly, when we shall discourse particulerly of vices. Only I say here
with Plato, that arrogant ignorance has now more than ever seized upon the
minds of men, and filled them with evils, as being the root and spring of
them: that it peruerteth al things, and causes him that possesses her to
taste in the end of a most bitter fruit. Now to come to malice and craft,
What malice and craft are.
which is the excess of prudence, it is that which leads a man through
wilful ignorance, to oppose himself against that which he knows to be
dutiful and honest, causing him under the counterfaite name of prudence to
seek to deceive those that will believe him. This vice is the chief cause of
ambition and covetousness, which most men serve in these days: but above all
things it is an enemy to justice, causing all their actions to tend to the
overthrow thereof. To this purpose Cicero says, that the craftier and subtiler
a man is, the more he is to be suspected and hated, as one that has lost al
credit of goodness. All knowledge severed from justice ought rather to be
called craft and malice than science and prudence. Neither is the only act of
malice (as the same author says) evil and wicked, but also the deliberation
thereof although it take no effect, yea the only thought thereof is vile and
detestable: so far is it, that any covering or cloak can excuse a fault
committed of malice. Also he says, that in deliberating, Virtuous men seek
after honest, not secret things.
all hope of concealing and hiding the fact must be taken away, forasmuch as
virtuous men ought to seek after honest, not secret things. Moreover it is the
property of a malicious man to choose hypocrisy and dissimulation for his
companions. Besides he has for his first author and father, satan, who by his
subtlety and Satan the father of malice and subtlety.
craft abused the simplicity of our first mother to the overthrow of all
mankind. Amongst many we may note here the example of Nero a most cruel
emperor, who being instructed from his youth by that wise man Seneca his
schoolmaster, in the beginning of his empire counterfaited so great
bountifulnes and clemency, that when he was to set his hand to the
condemnation of one adjudged to die, he cried out and said, Would to God I had
no learning, then should I be excused from subscribing to The malice of Nero.
any man's death. Notwithstanding within a while after he disclosed his
detestable impiety and cruelty, by putting to death his mother, his tutor and a
great number of honest men against all right and justice. Moreover he purposely
caused fire to be put into all quarters of Rome, forbidding under pain of
death that any should quench it, insomuch that more then half the city was
clean consumed. Afterward, to the end he might have some coulor to persecute
the christians, he laid to their charge the kindling of the fire, and so put a
great number of them Tiberius.
to death. Tiberius also in the beginning of his reign behaved himself so
wisely, virtuously and gently, that he seemed to be (says Suetonius) a simple
and plain citizen. And yet soon after he became as detestable a tyrant as
ever was, for cruelty and filthy pleasures. True it is that one may attribute
the cause of such sudden alteration of humors to the sovereign authority and
power of commanding, which commonly has his property to make him that seemed
good to become wicked: the humble to be arrogant: the pitiful cruel: the
valiant, a coward. But it is always more likely that a prince changing his
nature so quickly uses to counterfeit and to dissemble, and to put a goodly
vizard upon his face, as historiographers write, that Tiberius could behave
himself cunningly in that sort. Now that we may profit by this discourse,
Math. 10. 16.
let us learn to be prudent and simple as the scripture speaks, eschuing all
shameless and damnable malice and deceit, al want of prudence and ignorance,
which procure the loss of soul and body, whereof a man may accuse none but
himself. For ignorance (says Menander) is a voluntary mischief. And
although the knowledge of good and evil is most necessary of all others, yet
is it most easy. For the obtaining whereof, and avoiding (through the grace of
God) of that condemnation, which is to fall upon the blind, and upon the
guides of the blind, let us never be ashamed to confess our ignorance in
those things whereof we want instruction: following therein that precept of
Plato, That we must not be ashamed to learn, least happily we be hit in the
teeth to our confusion with that saying of Diogenes to a young man whom he
espied in a tavern, who being ashamed to be seen there, speedily fled
further into the same. The more thou runnest in (quoth this wise man to him)
the further thou art in We must not deny or hide our ignorance.
the tavern. Even so we shall never cure our ignorance by denying or hiding it,
but the wiser we seek to be accounted, the more ignorant we shall remain: not
unlike to poor men, who being desirous to seem rich, in the end find
themselves poorer than before, by reason of their vain and foolish expenses.
But the ignorant man that searches for wisdom and inquireth after her, shall
be in some sort esteemed wise, and that inquiry ought to be taken for an
argument of his wit and prudence: as contrariwise he that takes himself for a
wiseman and presumes too much of his skill, falls often into shame and
dishonor, being reproved of many. Therefore let us daily accuse our selves of
too much ignorance, knowing that even the sharpest sighted do see but through a
cloud and mist, I mean the instruments of our body, from which we shall not
be delivered until we have put of this mortal to be clothed with that which
is immortal in the enjoying of the blessed life. So that it will be always
necessary for us during this life, to learn and to profit in the knowledge
of the truth, which is an enemy to ignorance.


Of speech and speaking. Chap. 12.
AMANA. Having spent all this day in discoursing of Prudence, and of those
vices that are contrary unto it, I think that to finish this days work, we
shall do well to take in hand again, and to follow that which was too briefly
handled concerning the commendable effects of this virtue of prudence in the
soul of a wise man. This appears no less in speech than in any other action
thereof, forasmuch as of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. But it
is a great virtue to speak little and well. The discourse of this matter I
leave to you my companions.


ARAM. Surely the speech of man is a divine work, and of great admiration. And
therefore we ought to account it sacrilege to pollute and defile so holy a
thing Math. 12. 35.
with filthy and vile talk. A good man always draws good things out of the
treasure of his heart, and a wicked man evil things. Therefore I greatly
commend that saying of Plutark, that speech is as it were the nourishment of
the soul, which is corrupted, and becomes odious through the wickedness of
men.


ACHITOB. He that has knowledge (says the Pro. 17. 27. 28.
wise man) spares his words: even a fool, when he holds his peace is counted
wise, and he that stops his lips, prudent. If any man long after life, and
to see good days, let him refrain his tongue from evil, and his lips 1. Per.
3. 10.
that they speak no guile. For every one shall eat of the fruit of his mouth
to salvation, or to condemnation. But we will hear Aser discoursing more at
large upon this matter.


ASER. In the writings of the learned we find mention made of a double speech
or reason: the one internal, or of the mind, called the divine guide: the
other A double speech or reason.
uttered in speech, which is the messenger of the conceits and thoughts of man.
The end of the first is friendship toward a man's self. For respecting only
the mark of virtue, through the instructions of philosophy, it makes a man
to agree always with himself, it causes him to complain never, to repent
him of nothing, it makes him full of peace, full of love and of contentation
in his own virtue, it heals him of every rebellious passion that disobeieth
reason, of all contention between will and will, and of the contrariety of
discourses. O rare excellency, which flows from wisdom into the souls of
blessed men! The end of the other reason or uttered speech, is friendship
toward others, which causes us to speak and teach whatsoever is fruitful
and profitable for every one, and carries with it great force to persuade. Of
this speech we purpose here to entreat, as of that which occupies no small
place, but even very great amongst the secrets of nature, and which ought to
ravish us into an admiration of his works who is author thereof. The
philosophers, diligent searchers out of the reason How speech is framed.
of all things, said that speech is made by the air beaten and framed with
articulate and distinct sound. But howsoever it is framed, the reason thereof
is hard to be comprehended of humane sense. And we ought to be so much the more
desirous to know for what cause it was given us, and to fear least we make it
unprofitable, or wickedly employ so great, wonderful and divine a thing.
Democritus said that words were the shadow of works. Themistocles compared
speech to a rich cloth of tapistrie, Words are the shadow of works.
figured and set forth with stories, because that both in the one and the other
those things that are fashioned and represented are then seen when they are
opened and displaied, and are not subject to sight, neither bring any delight
or contentation, when they are folded up and hidden. When a wise man opens
his lips (says Socrates) we behold as it were in a temple, the goodly
similitudes and images of the soul. Virtue (says Plutarke) has no instrument
so gracious or familiar as speech, which being followed of works, is of great
efficacy and force, and woonderfully pricketh forward those that hear us,
causing them to give credit to our sayings, and working in them a desire to
resemble us. And AEschines said very well, that it is not so necessary, that
the Orator and the Law should agree in one and the same thing, as it is
requisite, that the life of a philosopher should be conformable and agreeable
with this doctrine and speech. Moreover a wise man ought to take every word he
speaks for a voluntary and particular law, laid upon himself, seeing that
philosophy is a profession of serious, grave and weighty matters, and not a
play or prittle prattle, vnconstanly uttered to obtain honor only. Whereby we
see that all talk ought to have reason for a foundation, and the love The
foundation and scope of all speech.
of our neighbor for a mark to aim at. This is that which Agapetus would teach
us, when he says, That the tongue is a slipperie instrument, and brings great
danger to those that neglect it: but if we direct it with a religious
understanding, it will sing us a song tuned with all the concords of a true
harmony of virtue. Plutark says that speech ought to be like gold, which is
then of greatest price and value, when it has least dross in it: so a few
words ought to comprehend great store of substantial matter and instruction.
Such was the speech of the ancient Graecians, as the sentences uttered by them
do testify: namely, Know thy self, Nothing too much, Nothing more than
enough, and other short speeches full of great and profitable doctrine.
Whereupon Of Laconicall speech.
this proverb arose, Laconical sayings, that is, short and sententious, which
resemble streams running through a narrow straight, where the water is so
pressed together, that one cannot see through it. And so truly it was very
hard without skill and great labor to comprehend the deapth of the sense and
understanding of their words, which were full of sententious gravity. And when
they were to answer any thing propounded on a sudden, avoiding all
superfluous speech, their answers were very witty and well contrived, their
words very significant and short, having in them both grace and gravity joined
together. As when Philip king of Macedonia wrote unto them, that if he entered
within Laconia, he would overthrow them topsy turuy: they wrote back unto him
only this word, If. And another time, as Demetrius one of his successors,
being angry with the ambassador which they sent unto him, asked if he came
alone from the Lacedaemonians to him, the ambassador made this only answer,
One to one. Pittacus A pretty saying of Pittacus.
used to say, that a dry and thirsty ear must be washed with a sentence that
is good to drink, and that speech grounded upon reason only, is able to
content and satisfy the hearing. Notwithstanding that we may the rather and
the more profit others, we are not to neglect, if it may be, the ioining of
grave doctrine with sweet gracious and eloquent speech, mingled with some
pleasure, grace, and delight, but void of all dissolutenes. For (as Euripides
says) that is the goodliest assembly in the world, where Of grave and eloquent
speech
the graces and muses meet together. Right and reason are invincible, being
well vttred; because the soul is thereby induced easily to believe the good
reasons she hears, through the delight that is joined with them. Examples
also being vttred fitly, and with a good grace, profit no less than the other,
because with the force of persuading, which is in the nature of the example,
there is joined the virtue of delighting. But we must carefully avoid all
subtlety of speech, all proud, superfluous and unprofitable talk, least that
be justly objected unto us, which Phocion replied to Leosthenes, who labored
to persuade the Athenians to war by an eloquent and very lofty oration. Thy
words (quoth he to him) young man and my friend, may fitly be compared to
Cypres trees. For they are great and tall, but bear no fruit worth any
thing. Or else that may be objected unto us, which Aristotle Against prating
pleaders.
answered to a great pleader of causes, who at every sentence he rehearsed,
asked him if that were not a strange thing. Not that, (replied he) but this is
a greater marvel, that any man having two legs can abide thy babbling. And to
another, who after a long discourse said unto him, I have troubled thy head
philosopher: not a whit (answered he) for I thought not upon it. Such bablers,
whom Plato very aptly calls thieves of time, are compared by Plutark to
empty vessels, which give a greater sound than they that are full. So he that
is poor in respect of the goods of the soul, has always some fond speech in
his mouth. But we must above all things shun this The tongue is the best and
woorst thing that is.
vice of intemperancie of the tongue, which Bias called the best and woorst thing
that was. It serves us to profit and instruct others, and by the same also we
hurt and corrupt others. And as a little fire consumes a great wood, so this
little member, which is a fire, yea a world of iniquity, defiles all the
body, and sets on a flaming fire the whole world, if it be not extinguished
and repressed. It seems that nature would teach us this by fortifiing the
tongue better than any other part of the body, and by setting before it the
bulworke of the teeth, that if it will not obey reason, which being within ought
to serve in stead of a bridle to stay it from preventing the thought, we might
restrain and chastise the impudency thereof with blouddy biting. And because
we have two ears and two eyes, it ought to serve us for instruction, that we
must hear and see much more than we speak. Do we not also see, that sight and
hearing go before speaking, and that of necessity, an infant must first
understand before he can be Isocrates appointed two times of speaking.
able to speak? Isocrates appointed only two times to speak in: the one, when
the matter is necessary: and the other, when a man speaks that which he
knows. And this we may put in practice without blame in this manner. As
touching the first point, it is lawful and seemly for us to speak when we
stand in need of any thing: secondly when our speech shall profit any: also to
delight and recreate one another with pleasant devices, void of dissolutenes,
to mollify and to ease the travel of our affairs, or else to relish our rest
the better, and to induce us thereby to give glory to God. All speech not
grounded upon one of these three causes were better restrained than vttred.
Moreover we ought to observe inuiolably the second point of not speaking that
which we know not, except it be in seeking and asking after instruction:
remembering that which Apelles once spoke to Megabyses a great Persian Lord, who
coming into his shop to see him, intermingled Apelles speech to a Persian lord
some talk of the art of painting. So long (quoth Apelles to him) as thou were
silent, thou seemedst to be some man of great account, by reason of thy chains,
carquenets of gold and purple gown: but now there is not the least of these
boys that grind oker, who does not mock thee, hearing thee speak that which
thou know not. By which saying we may note, that great men How great men
ought to speak.
ought to weigh well, and to consider of that which they speak in public
places, and to use grave and sententious words of another phrase than that of
the vulgar sort, or else to hold their peace if they have not this gift of
speaking. Or at the least they are to speak but little, seeing the very
words, gesture and countenance of a prince, are oftentimes taken for laws,
oracles, and decrees. Tiberius also brought up this custom of speaking to the
prince by writing, and of his answer by the same, to the end that nothing
should escape his mouth that was not well considered of before. But to continue
our matter, as the above named painter had set forth a table of his own for
all men to behold, and had hid himself behind it, that he might hear what
could be reprehended, a shooemaker espied a fault in the fashion of the
latchet, which Apelles afterward corrected. And having the next morning hung
Apelles speech to a shoemaker.
it out again to be viewed, this shooemaker passing by, and seeing that his
opinion was followed, entered further to speak against other lineaments. But
the painter not able to bear his boldness came from behind his table and
stopped his mouth with this saying, That a shoemaker ought not to judge of
greater matters than of the shoo. This is the meaning of that common proverb,
to go about to teach Minerua: which is so intolerable a thing in men of honor,
and so pernicious in the simpler sort that are light of belief, Alexander gave
money to a poet to hold his peace.
that for this cause Alexander the great gave money to Cherillus an ignorant
poet to hold his peace and to leave writing. And seeing we are entered into
this matter, we must know that we ought to be much more stayed and Nothing
ought to be written without great deliberation.
advised in writing any thing, than in bare speaking: because a rash and
inconsiderate word may be corrected presently, but that which is once set down
in writing can no more be denied, or amended but with infamy. As therefore a man
had need of a ready and quick wit to be able to speak well: so great wisdom
is very necessary to write well: yea the same rules and precepts that belong
to speaking, agree also to writing. Besides, writing is called of many, a dumb
speech, which ought to be short and full of instruction. Caesar in a letter
which he sent to Rome from Notable and pithy letters of ancient men.
the Persian battle wrote but these three words, Veni, vidi, vici, that is to
say, I came, saw, and overcame. Octanian writing to his nephew Cains Drusus,
said thus: For as much as thou art now in Illyria remember that thou deseendest
of Casars, that the Senate has sent thee, that thou art young, my nephewe and
a citizen of Rome. Plato writing to Dionysius the yoonger, used these words
only: To kill thy brother, to double thy tributes, to force the people, to
forget thy friends, to take good men for thine enemies, are the works of a
tyrant. Pompey writing to the Senate from the east parts, said thus: Fathers
of the Senate, Damascus is taken, Pentapolis subdued, Syria, Ascalonia and
Arabia are confederates, and Palestina is vanquished. We see then the manner of
writing used by the ancients, for which brevity they were as much esteemed, as
the great discoursers of these tiems after inst occasion of correction. But to
return again into the pathway of speaking, we have in Cicero a notable
instruction A good precept for speaking.
for this matter. Let our speech (says he) be sweet and pleasant, not
headstrong: and when we discourse, let us not be so long that we hinder others
from speaking. For speech of all other things ought to be mutual and equal.
Moreover we must have respect to that thing whereof we speak. If a man
discourse of grave matters he must add a certain severity, but if he speak
of delectable things, a pleasant and gracious behauior. Above all things we
must take heed, that our speech discover not some vice to be in our manners,
which commonly falls out when we speak evil of a man in his absence, either
to move laughter or to his shame and reproach. We must also remember, if our
speech upon some occasion coming between intermit the first discourse, that
it return again in convenient time. But that is as things fall out. For all
take not pleasure in the same things, nor at all times. And as we have begun
upon some occasion, so we must end by some means. Now because in every action
of our life, the perturbations of the soul are to be eschewed, we must be
careful that our speech be void thereof: namely, that it be without choler,
without extreme affections, also without carelesnes, and other such like
imperfection. Especially we must strive to make it known, that we love and
reverence those with whom we speak. Further we must know that silence in due
time The praise of silence.
and place, is profound wisdom, a sober and modest thing, and full of deep
secrets. This caused Archidamus, when he saw that Hecatus the orator was blamed
for not speaking one word at a banquet, to answer for him, that they which
know how to speak well, know also the time of silence. Hyperides likewise
being at a feast Hyperides.
amongst a great assembly, very full of noise and pleasure, and being asked
why he spoke nothing, answered thus: It is no time now to discourse of those
things for which I am fit: and as for those things, which the time now
requires, I am unfit. Bias being mocked of a babbler because he spoke nothing
all a supper while, answered him thus: How is it possible that a fool should
hold his peace at the table? The ambassadors of the king of Persia being at a
feast with a citizen of Athens, and seeing Zeno the great philosopher say
nothing, they began to flatter him, and to drink to him, saying, what shall we
tell the king our master concerning you, master Zeno? Nothing else (quoth he)
but that you saw an old man, who knew well how to hold his peace at the table.
And truly no speech vttred did ever so much good, as many kept in have
profited: and that which is restrained may be spoken at any time, but a word
given out can no more be called back again. For words (as the poet says)
have wings, and are presently dispersed every where: and many repent that they
have spoken, but never that they held their peace. How many examples do
histories set before our Examples of mischiefs caused by the intemperancie of
the tongue.
eyes of men, who through the intemperancie of their toongs, have thrown
themselves headlong into infinite calamities, and of mighty cities and great
estates destroyed and overthrown through the disclosing of some secret? The
city of Athens was taken and destroyed by Sylla the Roman dictatour, who by
his spies was admonished of the prattling of certain old men in a barbars shop,
where they talked of a certain place of the town that was weakest, and woorst
defended. The overmuch talk of one only man was the cause that Rome was not
delivered from the tyranny of Nero. For seeing one of the prisoners that was
taken by the tirant to be dismayed because he should be put to death, he willed
him to pray to God, that he might escape but until the morrow only, and then
he should have cause of reioicing. Whereupon the prisoner thinking with
himself, that it were better for him to choose a certainty than to expect an
vncortainty, and to prefer a safe way to save his life, before a just,
disclosed this speech to Nero, who knew well how to remedy the conspiracy. The
gentleman of Normandy who in his confession told a Franciscan friar, that he
was once minded to have killed king Fraunces the first, may well be placed
amongst these overmuch speakers. For the king being advertised hereof by the
Franciscan friar, sent the poor penitentiarie to the court of parliament,
where he received sentence of death. Those that are nobly and roially brought
up (says Plutark) learn first to hold their peace, and then to speak.
Therefore Antigonus the great being demanded by his son, at what hour the camp
should dislodge: art thou afraid (quoth he to him) that thou alone shall not
hear the trumpet? Of concealing a secret.
He trusted not him with a secret matter, to whom the succession of the empire
was to come: teaching him thereby to be more close and secret in such matters.
Every particular man likewise ought to be no less advised in using great
discretion when the question is of vttring any thing, which a man would have
concealed. For he (says Plato) to whom one discloseth a secret gets the
others liberty. Now in this laudable silence which we commend here, we have
this to mark well, that when the question is of speaking a truth, or of
profiting another, we ought not to doubt in any case, what pretense soever
there be, to speak utter, maintain and freely to give counsel in that thing,
which concerns the duty of a good man, or the charge whereunto we are called.
The sages and virtuous men heretofore have always showed themselves to be such
in their free counsels and wise declarations, as hereafter we may handle more
largly. In the mean time we may have here Demaratus for an example of this
commendable liberty Examples of the commendable freedom of speech.
of speech, who coming from Corinth into Macedonia, when Phillip was at
variance with his wife and with his son, was demanded by the king whether the
Graecians did agree well among themselves. Truly sir (quoth he to him) it
becomes you well to inquire after the concord of the Athenians and
Peloponesians, and in the mean while to suffer your own house to be full of
division and domestical discord. Diogenes also being gone to the camp of the
same Phillip, at the same time that he returned from making war against the
Grecians, and being led before him, the king asked him if he were not a spy.
Yes truly answered the philosopher, I am a spy and com hither to espy thy
impudency and folly, who not constrained by any, do set down as it were on a
dicing board in the hazard of one hour, both thy kingdom and life.
Demosthenes being demanded of the tirant Epemetes why he wept so bitterly for
the death of a philosopher, a companion of his, seeing it was a strange matter
to see wiseme^ weep, yea altogether unbeseeming their profession: know (said
he to him) that I weep not for the death of this philosopher, but because thou
art alive. For I tell thee that in the Academies we are more sorrowful for the
life of the wicked, than for the death of good men. Let us learn then by your
present discourse, that talk being the messenger of thought discloseth our
manners a great deal more than the lines and draughts of our face do. And as
that tree whose root is dry can have no green leaves: so from a vicious and
corrupted soul nothing but vile and filthy speeches can proceed, which a wise
man ought wholly to shun, because to make small account of evil words leads
a man by little and little to dishonest deeds. Let all vain speech also be
banished from us, and let us take great heed, that we never speak, either in
sport or earnest, any one word that is not true: knowing that to be true in word
is the beginning and foundation of a notable virtue. Moreover let us know that
truth is not only betrayed of those that speak falsely, and maintain a lie,
but also of those that dare not confess and defend it publicly. Let us know
that above all things we must dedicate The constancy of Gordius.
our voice and speech to sing the praises of God, remembering the saying of that
holy man Gordius, who, as he was led to the place of punishment was exhorted by
some to leave his opinion, and so save his life. To whom he answered, that the
tongue ought to utter nothing that is injurious to the Creator thereof. Lastly
let us know that we must refer every word to the glory of his name, and to the
profit of our neighbors.


The end of the third days work.
THE FOVRTH DAYS WORK.
Of Friendship and of a friend. Chap. 13.
ASER. MAn being a reasonable creature borne for civil society to observe
laws and justice, and to exercise in the world all duties of gentleness and
goodness, the fairest and most fruitful seed that God has infused and sown
in his soul, and that draws him to this end, is love and charity toward
his like. But as every action of man's life stands in need Prudence requisite
in a friend.
to be guided by the virtue of Prudence, whereof we discoursed yesterday, so in
truth she is very necessary in every good and unfeigned friendship. For this
cause I think (companions) that we shall observe the order of our discourses,
if we begin this days work with the handling of friendship, and of the true
and perfect duty of a friend.


AMANA. No outward thing is to be preferred before friendship.
Nothing that seems to be profitable, whether it be honor, riches, pleasure,
or whatsoever else is of this kind, ought to be preferred in any respect
before friendship. Yea a man is to make more account of friends (as Socrates
said) then of any other mortal thing.


ARAM. Perfect friendship (says Aristotle) is to love our friend more for his
benefit than for our own: and therefore a friend is always profitable and
necessary. But he is greatly deceived (says Homer) that seeks for a friend
in the court, and proves him at a feast. But let us hear ACHITOB discourse
hereupon.


ACHITOB. Rare things are commonly most esteemed amongst men, and the more
precious they are of their own nature, so much the more are they had in
request. This we may very aptly apply to a friend, seeing there is Nothing more
rare or excellent than a friend.
nothing so rare as one that is unfeigned and steadfast, neither any thing so
excellent and perfect as he is, if he be a good and prudent man. And for this
cause the philosophers accounted friendship to be the chiefest and most
excellent good of fortune, as being least of all subject to her, and most
necessary for man. But because the wickedness of men is so great in these
days, that nothing is so sacred and holy which is not violated, corrupted and
brought to confusion, no marvel if men impudently abuse this name of a friend
(so much reverenced in old time) that some take it to themselves being
altogether unworthy thereof, and others as freely, although to their loss
and shame, grant them this excellent title, and esteem them for such in truth
toward them, as they falsely vaunt themselves to be. But that we be not
deceived with the greater number, which is not always the surest mark, let us
briefly consider what friendship is, what fruits spring from her, who may
rightly challenge this title of a friend, what manner of one we ought to choose,
how we must try him before we take him for such a one, then the means whereby
to keep him, and lastly what mutual duty friends are to use one toward
another. First we say with Socrates, that The principal cause and end of all
true friendship.
true friendship cannot be framed but by the help and grace of God, who draws
like to the love of his like: that every perfect friendship is to be linked
with the bond of charity, and ought to be referred to God, as to our
sovereign good and cheifest friend: and therefore that true friendship cannot
be settled between the wicked, who being at discord within themselves, can have
no concord and agreement one with another. Moreover, there is to be found in
friendship whatsoever men think worthy to be desired, as honesty, glory,
tranquillity of mind, and pleasure: and consequently a happy life, which
cannot be amongst the What friendship is.
wicked. Friendship is a communion of a perpetual will, the end whereof is
fellowship of life, and it is framed by the perfect habit of a long continued
love. Whereby we may perceive, that there is a difference betwixt The
difference betwixt friendship and love.
love and friendship: because love is a desire of the thing loved, and a
beginning of friendship, but friendship is an inueterate and ancient love,
wherein is more pleasure than desire. To love (says Cicero) is nothing else
but to be desirous to profit and pleasure another without hope of recompense.
For otherwise friendship would be a mere merchandise, whereas it ought to be
as free as charity. Socrates also said, that the end of friendship was, that
of two souls one should be made in will and affection, and that none should
love himself better than his friend. For there is a mean to be kept in all
things, except in conuersing with a friend, in regard of whom this ought to be
resolved upon, that he is either wholly to be forsaken, or wholly to be
trusted. What shall I hide from my friend (says Homer) or what lets why I
may not think my self alone when I am with him? Whereby it appears unto us,
that a friend is a second self, and that whosoever would take upon him What
things are requisite in friendship.
this title in regard of another, he must transform himself into his nature
whom he purposes to love, and that with a steadfast and settled mind to continue
so for ever. Hereupon one of the ancients speaking of him that loves
perfectly, says, that he lives in another man's body. Friends therefore ought
of necessity to have a conjunction and conformity of manners, of desires, of
passions, of speech, of studies, of pleasures, of inclinations, of
intermissions, if they mind to profess perfect friendship. Whereby we may
easily guess, that he which entertaineth many friends, depriueth himself of
the name of a true and steadfast friend, because it is altogether impossible for
a man to fashion himself to all patterns, and to apply himself to all
natures, so diverse in every one: especially considering that he shall very
hardly find himself like affected in all things to one alone. Now after we
have found such a disposition and conformity in him that offers himself to
be our friend, we must enter further into the knowledge of him, by sounding
out the depth of his heart, that we may be certain and sure of his good
disposition. For to see outwardly a resemblance of our manners and conditions in
another, is not sufficient to prove them such in deed without dissimulation,
unless they be grounded upon a good and virtuous nature, which is simple,
upright, and unfeigned. For otherwise we see that many (like to Proteus taking
diverse shapes) are so subtle, that when they would currie favor with any man
to deceive him, they disguise themselves, and for a while apply themselves to
all his humors. This is practiced chiefly by flatterers The common practice of
flatterers.
toward great men, who will counterfeit rather than they will not imitate the
natural vice of the prince: so that as soon as ever they see him laugh, they
betake themselves to laughing, albeit they know not wherefore. And namely we
read that Alexander the great, and Alphonsus king of Arragon, having each of
them somewhat a wry neck, this by nature, the other through custom, the
flatterers and courtiers held their necks on the What manner of man we must
choose for our friend.
one side, to counterfeit their imperfection. To the end therefore that the
sugared poison of such fained friends deceive us not, we must make choice of an
honest, prudent and wise man for our friend, whose fidelity (as Cicero says)
integrity, constancy and liberality are approved of every one, and whom we
shall perceive to be led and possessed with the same zeal to virtue that our
selves are, to the end we may be aided and furthered by them in all good and
laudable actions. For (as Plato says) friendship is given by nature for a
help to virtue, not for a companion of vices. To this effect Pythagoras says,
that it is not good to join hands with every one. Dicearchus also would give
us to understand the same when he says, that we must make all men our well
willers if it be possible, but only good men our friends, who are not obtained
but after a long time, and that by virtue. And as when we pass by a bramble or
a burre that takes hold of us, we cast it far from us, but contrariwise
seek for the olive and the grape: so we ought to seek after their friendship,
that deserve it, whose minds have sufficient matter in them to cause them to be
loved, but to forsake, yea to reject such as are unworthy, and vicious,
sensual and disordred, although they fawn upon us: because their conversation
marreth and corrupts every good nature. Therefore Bias said very well, that
a wiseman receives not every one unto his friendship. Having thus chosen him
whom we desire to entertain for our friend, and laid the chief foundations of
friendship upon his agreement of manners with us, and upon his good disposition
(which we may know by familiar conversation with him, and by diligent inquiry)
before we can assure our selves or boast that we have a true friend, we must
prove his stedfastnes and constancy, and not trust to offers and promises,
whereof men are very prodigal now a days. But this is clean contrary to
the duty of a true friend, whose property is to be sparing in speech, and
prodigal in deeds, because great proffers are meet to be used toward
strangers, and good deeds toward true friends. Now to prove a friend, we must
not stay until need and necessity urge us, least such trial be not only
unprofitable and without fruit, but also very hurtful and dangerous unto us,
because at such a time as necessarily requires friends, we make trial of him,
who in truth is no such man. How we must prove a friend.
But we are rather to govern our selves with prudence and foresight, as we use
to do in the receipt of gold and silver. For before we have need to employ it,
we consider whether it be current, that we may be sure it will serve the turn
when necessity requires. To this purpose Theophrastus said, that we ought to
prove strangers to love them, and not love them to prove them. Therefore
albeit the true and right trial of a friend is in adversity, as of fine gold
in a furnace, yet that is to be understood of him, who is such a one indeed.
For if we should expect the first trial upon our selves in time of certain
danger, thereby to be assured and out of doubt, if then he should fail us it
would bring us in great peril: so that we were better to try him when we
stand not in need, requesting him notwithstanding, as if we were urged, and
stood in need of his help and assistance in a matter of importance. If then he
go forward with a sound zeal and ready affection, we are assured of him
against another time. But if he stagger, and do it coldly, or turn away his
face and refuse it, besides that we have no hurt or hinderance, we shall also
gain much by withdrawing such a friend gently, and by little and little How we
must shake off a false friend.
from our table, and from our prosperity: always wisely observing that this
friendship be simply forsaken, and no enmity undertaken. For it is not good
or seemly to quarrel with him, with whom we have lived familiarly. Moreover,
we must note here, that trial is to be made in an honest, not in a wicked
matter. For we must not do, as we read that Alcibiades did, who, being desirous
to know whether he had so many friends as he thought he had, called How
Alcibiades tried his friends.
them upon a day one after another into a dark place, and showed unto them an
image of a dead body, saying, that it was a man whom he had killed, and
requesting them to help to carry it away. But amongst them all he found none
except Callias that would harken thereunto. This kind of proouing a friend
makes us unworthy of such a name, and occasioneth every good man to withdraw
himself from our friendship. If we do all things (says Cicero) both good and
bad for our friends, such friendship may more truly be called a conspiracy of
evil men, than a confederacy of good men. But, as we have said, we must gain
another man's friendship by virtue, and not by vice, as also try a friend in
just and reasonable causes: as if we be oppressed unjustly, if affliction and
adversity follow hard at our heels, if need or any other huma^ne accident
betide us, into which the best men commonly The means to keep a friend.
fall. After we are sure that we have a friend (which truly is very great
riches) there is nothing that we ought to desire more than to preserve and
keep him. And first the mutual opinion, which ought to be in every friend of
the virtue of his companion serves very much for this matter. For as Cicero
says, The opinion of virtue is the fountain of friendship, and it is proper
to virtue to win men's hearts, to draw them unto it self, and to preserve their
friendship. Next, the conjunction of manners and wills keeps back all riot and
contentions, when as the will and mind of the one shall no sooner be declared,
but the other presently puts to his helping hand to bring it to pass.
Thirdly, we are to observe this first law of friendship inuiolably, not to
require our friend to do any thing that is not just, or not in his power to
perform, but to content our selves with the use and service of that which he
has, without further seeking his hinderance, after the example of the
industrious and painful be, which draws honey out of flowers, and hurts
not the fruit. Above all things we must hold this for a general rule, which we
have already touched, that true and perfect friendship ought to be Friendship
must be free.
free, as charity is, from whence she has her beginning: I mean, that it
ought to exercise it self not for hire or recompense, but only for his love,
who is beloved of us. For the one is proper to a friend, the other sauoreth of
a hireling. True it is that friends in these days are like to crows, which
fly not but toward those places where there is some thing to feed upon: even
so they commonly visit not men's houses except it be for profit, neither
reverence a friend longer than they see him in prosperity, or may reap some
commodity by him. But we must shun such parasites, who are but saluting and
table friends. Moreover, we must rejoice and delight in the company and
conversation of our friend, as in that wherein the sweetest and most pleasant
fruit of friendship consists. And for want of this benefit, friends must
often communicate together by letters, thereby to show that they live in
remembrance one of another. For by the letter of a true friend the spirit is
refreshed, the eyes delighted, friendship confirmed, and the mind contented.
Besides we must have our virtues, spirits, prosperity, yea acquaintance, and
all common together, and nothing secret or hidden. Lastly we must yield to our
friend all duties and services of sincere friendship, and that in all honest
and profitable things according to right and justice, which are the bounds and
limits of an holy love, desiring the like of him toward us. Above all things
his affliction or adversity, and all injury offered him, ought to be common
to us with him, wherein we are to assist and help him with all succor and
sweet consolation, which is as sovereign and fit a remedy as can be applied
unto him, especially when good doctrine is joined with our speech. Heerof
Phalereus confessed Phalereus.
very well that he had good experience when he was banished from his kingdom,
saying that his meeting with Crates the wise man had taken from him all care
and thought of his misery. And if friendship can greatly diminish the grief
that comes by adversity, no doubt but it can add as much grace and pleasure
to prosperity. We may effect all duty whatsoever we owe to our friend, by How
many ways we owe duty to our friend.
succouring him with four things: namely, with our person, with our goods, with
comfort, and with counsel. Which we may also comprehend under these two
duties, of releeuing the necessity of our friend, and of comforting him in his
tribulation. Now because, what perfection soever is in our friend, as likewise
in our selves, it cannot be but there will be always some imperfection mingled
therewith (men's doings being never without some evil) we must not presume to
be able to build such a perfect friendship as shall be void and free of all
vice. And therefore How we must bear with the imperfections of our friend.
we must gently support and bear with all wants and discommodities of our
friend, and oftentimes frame our selves to many passions, so they be not
directly contrary to virtue, but such as proceed from the imbecillitie and
frailty of nature common with us. Nevertheless against such imperfections we
must in time convenient and to purpose, use free and gentle admonitions, which
are so necessary in friendship, and worthy of such consideration, that in my
opinion we shall do well to make a several discourse thereof. Now if it come
so to pass, that some displeasure or iar happen between us, then is the time
wherein we ought most of all to study and labor how we may do some profitable
or honorable thing to our friend: and not harken to slanderous toongs, which
watch for some small and light occasion to power out the poison of discord,
thereby to rent and break a sunder our good and sure friendship. To such
parasites, and scrap-gatherers at free-cost feasts, who seek for nothing but
their own gain by the disagreement of others, we must never give ear, but
drive them as far from us, as they think to come near us. And to the end we
may be the better affected and disposed heerunto, we must often call to
remembrance, what benefit and happiness comes to such men as are linked
together by true and unfeigned friendship: as namely, in those affairs at which
we cannot be present our selves, the fidelity of a friend supplieth our place.
From whence we will draw this conclusion, that he which violateth friendship,
sets himself against the common succor and aid of all men, and as much as
in him lies, overthrows humane society. For we cannot do all things our
selves, and therefore friendships are joined together, that by mutual duties
one may profit another. Now considering that all the above named things are
both necessary and also very hard and difficult to be observed and kept in
true friendship, a man may easily judge that this so excellent a sympathy and
fellow feeling of two friends is very rare, and not easily found: and by a more
forcible reason it follows, that it is altogether impossible that Against the
plurality of friends.
many such friends should be linked together. So that whosoever goes about any
such matter can never attain to a certain and durable friendship. For it must
needs follow, that he which begins new friendship cannot but diminish and
wax faint in affection in regard of his former friendship, wherein he was in a
manner settled. Yea, how can he observe all dutiful points of a steadfast friend,
as well in mutual conversation and communication of all things, as in helping
his friend in all his affairs, if he have many friends to look unto, who may
all stand in need of him at one and the same time? It is certain that in
serving one he would be wanting to the other, and peradventure to both, whilst
he doubts which to help first. But there is yet a further matter in it. Do
we not take him for our enemy, who is enemy to our friend? It is most
certainly so: as the wise man Chilon very fitly signified so much to one who
boasted, that he had never a fo. Then have thou never a friend, quoth Chilon,
seeing it is He that has never a fo, has never a friend.
impossible, by reason of the wickedness of men, that two persons should live in
the world without enemies. Whereupon Plutarke says, If thou seek for a
swarm of friends thou considerest not that thou fallest into a wasps neast of
enemies. Hereof it is that histories, when they set before us examples of true
and excellent friendship make The best and most excellent friendship is
between one couple.
mention only of two persons: as of Jonathan and David, whose friendship could
not be hindered by the wrath of the father of the one, no not although he knew,
that his friend should reign over him, notwithstanding he were by inheritance
to succeed next in the kingdom. So we read of one Achilles and Patroclus, of
whom the one falsified his oath, which was that he would never fight, to the end
he might revenge the death of the other. There was but one Orestes and Pylades,
both of them calling themselves by the name of Orestes who was condemned to
die, thereby to save the life of his companion. Neither was there any mo than
one Ephenus and Eueritus, and one Damon and Pythias, two of which being
condemned to die by Dionysius the tyrant of Siracusa, had their pardon granted
them by reason of the constancy and stabilitie of the friendship that was
between them and their companions, whereof they showed this proof. The two
condemned persons besought Dionysius to license them to go unto their country,
that they might take some order for their household affairs before they died.
The tyrant scorning at this, asked them what pledges they would pawn for their
return. Whereupon the two other friends willingly offered themselves for
pledges, and so six months space being granted, they were set at liberty.
When the end of this time drew nie, many mocked these poor cautions: but they
nothing astonished made answer, that they were certain and sure their friends
would not in any case fail of their promise. And indeed they arrived the last
day that was granted unto them. Whereat the tyrant wondering, forgave the
condemned parties, and prayed them to receive him for a third man into their
friendship. So great force had virtue, that it could pacify choler and
cruelty in his heart, whose virtue consisted in nothing else but in Pisistratus
letter (...) his nephew.
vice. We read of a letter written by Pisistratus, prince of the Athenians,
serving for a notable example of the force of friendship, which oftentimes is
greater than all consanguinitie. For having intelligence, that Thrasillus his
nephew was of a conspiracy against him, he wrote unto him in these words:
Nephew Thrasillus, thou should have called to remembrance, not that I brought
thee up in my house, that thou art come of my blood, that I have communicated
my secrets with thee, that I have given thee my daughter to wife with the half
of my goods, but above all things, that I loved thee as a friend. Thou art
become a traitor toward me, which I would never have suspected, considering
that I never deserved any such thing at thy hands. And therefore I would gladly
I had so much authority over my self, that as I can shake off this alliance,
so I could also falsify our friendship, which I can neither do, nor determine
of, my fidelity saved. For the consanguinitie that I have with thee may be
separated, as being within the veins: but the love I bear thee cannot, seeing
it is within my heart. A thousand other examples of couples joined in friendship
are to be found in hihistories. In the mean while we have to note, that
although we measure friendship here by the number of two, yet our meaning is
not to exclude others altogether. For we know, that true charity extends it
self unto every one, that we are bound to love even our enemies, and to do
good to all, but yet amongst all we may choose one only friend to love, and to
be loved again of him in perfection. Nevertheless we must labor by a thousand
good duties to get the good will of all men, and in what place soever we be to
follow the wise counsel of Polybius given to Scipio Africanus, that he should
never depart from the public place of authority before he had gotten unto
himself some new friend and well willer. This belongs to them especially
that have wealth at will, and are in public offices, and favored of the
mightier sort: and therefore are so much the more bound thereunto, as also to
take delight in doing good to many, not sparing any of their substance. We
have famous examples hereof amongst the ancients. That great Roman captain
and Consul Titus Flaminius, who delivered and freed all Graecia Titus Flaminius.
from bondage, and twice in battle ranged discomfited Philip king of Macedonia,
is exceedingly commended of historiographers, not only because he was ready
to pleasure every one, but also because he took such delight therein, that he
would always remain well affected even to those whom he had once pleasured,
as if himself had received the benefit: insomuch that he was always ready to
do them more good. Whereby he showed himself truly zealous of virtue, which is
never set on work for the hope of any earthly recompense, seeing the price and
reward of a virtuous deed ought only to be the doing thereof. Therefore Cicero
said very well, that no Commonwealth can either with too little, or too late
recompense her native countriman. Now to conclude our present discourse, we
say, that friendship is so excellent a thing, that there is no comparison
between it and any other worldly good: that it is virtue, which frames and
unites together perfect friendships, and that if they be once forsaken, they
cannot longer continue. Therefore honesty (as Cicero says) is to be placed
above friendship and profit, and religion, justice, and fidelity are to be
preferred before the unjust requests of our friends, howsoever they might be
profitable for this life, either to them or to our selves. We say, that whilst
we labor to make all men our well-willers by doing them good, according to the
duty of a good nature, if we meet with one sure and certain friend amongst
them all, we have gotten a great and incomparable Nothing better than to live
with a virtuous man.
treasure: seeing there is nothing more fit for life, or more commodius for a
good and happy life, than to live with a virtuous man and our friend, whose
fidelity, integrity, and constancy are ruled by charity. Lastly we say,
Three things necessary in friendship.
that three things are very requisite and necessary for the foundation and
assurance of this friendship: namely, virtue, as that which is honest:
Conversation, as pleasant and agreeable: Profit, as helpful. Which is as much
to say, as, that we must receive a friend after we have known and proved him,
that we must rejoice in his company, and use him in our need, as we desire him
to do the like by us. So that he which can boast of such a friend is very
happy.


Of Reprehension and Admonition. Chap. 14.
ACHITOB. Divine Plato writing a letter to Dionysius the tyrant of Syracusa in
the behalf of Helicon the Mathematician, after many and great commendations
spoken of him, adds this, that he wrote these things of a man, that is, of a
living creature, Man is mutable.
by nature mutable and soon changed. The like also he spoke of those that were
well brought up and instructed in Athens. I fear yet (quoth he) that being
men, and the offspring of other men they will make known the great infirmity
and frailty of man's life, which truly, being compassed about, and as it were
besieged with infinite miseries, is so easily troubled, that the wisest stand
always in need of instruction, and ought to be awakened and admonished of
their duty. Whereunto the free reprehension, and sweet admonition of a friend
does not a little profit. Wherefore my counsel is, that we handle it
presently, without departing from the matter of our former discourse.


ASER. True friends (says Socrates) must not through flattery seek to gain
the favor of their friends, but reprove them rather, that for their benefit
they may reduce them to a better way.


AMANA. To admonish and to be admonished (says Seneca) are proper to true
friendship. And Cicero says, that a man may despair of his safety, whose
ears are closed up against the truth, and cannot abide reprehension. Let us
therefore hear ARAM handle this subject.


ARAM. One of the greatest, most profitable and necessary fruits, which spring
out of every good and holy friendship, and are noted and reaped by the
acceptable One of the greatest fruits reaped in friendship.
and long conversation of a prudent and wise friend, is that free reprehension
and sweet admonition, which ought to be mutual between all true friends:
seeing the frail inconstancy of man is such, that even the iustest man (as
the scripture says) sins seven times a day. But man having pride and
presumption naturally rooted in his soul, howsoever he sees a mote in his
brothers eye, yet he perceives not the great beam that closes up his own
eyes. This makes him bold (as it is the property of vice to be headstrong) to
defend and maintain, that he has always done well, and not easily to harken
to his reasons that reprooueth him, were it not that the mighty and inviolable
bond of friendship, as of a second-selfe did constrain him to lend his ear to
his friend through the opinion which he has conceived of him and his virtue.
True it is, that if there were amongst us such a reformation of life and
manners, and that love joined with obedience A notable custom of the
Lacedaemonians.
might take place now, as it did long since amongst the Lacedaemonians, (who
observed this custom inviolable, to punish him that did not reprove another
fault committed in his presence, with the same punishment which was inflicted
upon the offender himself, and sharply to chastise him that resisted, or was
angry at the reprehension) we should not see so great winking at vices and
imperfections, nor such impudent resisting and shameless contempt of all good
admonition as reigns now a dais amongst us, who unskillfully term this
friendship, not to correct one another, but rather to cover and to wink at all
faults. But seeing our age is so greatly corrupted, we may easily know what a
precious and necessary thing it is, to have found a prudent and wise friend,
who knows how to use wholesome and sharp reprehension, as a preservative
medicine, that saves the patients life, being ministered in convenient time,
and to purpose. Which thing if it be not wisely observed herein (as in all
other things) it greatly hurts, and depriueth the admonition of profit and
efficacy. Therefore a friend being opposite to a flatterer, who studieth for
nothing but to please, to do and to speak to his liking whom he flattereth
(which is enough to overthrow friendship, whose strength is only in virtue) A
friend compared to a musitio^.
ought to deal as a skilful musician, who in the tuning of his instrument
sets up some of his strings, and lets down others. So a prudent friend
yields unto some things, but refuses and contrarieth others, changing his
mind as honesty and profit require. He is not afraid sometime to make his
friend sad with intent and purpose to profit him, not to break friendship.
Likewise he is not greatly to care although he see his friend angered, so that
he be bettred, considering that anger may better be tolerated than vice.
Agesilaus king of Sparta said, that he liked Agesilaus.
well to be praised of such friends as would not spare him at all, but were
ready to blame him also whenever he gave them occasion so to do. To this
effect Epictetus said, that as a woolfe in some sort resembled a dog, so a
flatterer was like a friend: and therefore that we ought to beware, least in
stead of good dogs for safeguard, we receive unto us most pernicious and
hurtful woolues. For it is better (as Antisthenes said) to stand at the
courtesy of crows than of flatterers, seeing the one devour dead carcasses,
and the other living men. Now let us consider of the means how to use aptly
and to purpose this so healthful medicine in friendship, I mean reprehension
and admonition. Sometimes it is necessary (says Cicero) for us to rebuke How
we must use reprehension.
our friends, wherein we are to use a more austere countenance and vehement
speech: but too great severity and overmuch sadness ought to be far from us.
For although gravity be a virtue, yet friendship is more familiar, free and
pleasant. We must also take heed that it appear not we be in choler, but
rather that we com against our wills to do this duty, as surgeons do to cut off
and to burn, and that very rarely, when there is no way to find or use any
other receipt. Moreover if one behold his friend in some great affliction,
knowing it to be the nature of adversity to make men of troubled and vexed
spirits, soon cholerike and unwilling to hear, and at such a time to be
offended at good and true speeches (even as honey although it be sweet, yet
breeds grief when it is applied to ulcers) I say a friend well advised ought
then to beware that he use no sharp or biting words, which are apt to provoke
him to anger, that is pressed with adversity. And this did Pythagoras mean to
teach us learnedly by that enigmaticall precept or riddle, which forbids us
to Stir up the fire with a sword. A man ought rather in such a case to
minister some such sweet and gracious speech of comfort, as yields and gives
place a little to the just grief of his friend, and from whence he may draw
some ease of his evil, whether it be in talking thereof together with him, or
otherwise in lamenting the same. And this must be done before any mention be
made of a remedy, or any other convenient matter of talking with him be sought
after. In this sort for a man to comfort himself is no less difficult a
matter (as Thales said) than it is for a physician to cure himself. Above all
things we must be very circumspect when we see our friend lately angered by
reason of some pregnant and notable injury or wrong received from another. For
then in stead of being importunate with him presently to forgive the injury,
or of seeking to persuade him to think it a small fault, thereby endeavoring at
the first dash to bring him to reason, we must entreat him gently to defer
the punishment, and after by little and little, and by degrees to pacify and
appease him. For it is very certain, that when wrath is much kindled and the
heart enraged, a man cannot easily receive comfort, nor so suddenly conceive and
understand reason. And therefore Plutark amongst other things gave this Time
brings as many things to good order as reason does.
counsel to the emperor Traian to be patient toward furious folks,
considering that time moderateth as many things, as reason does change.
Notwithstanding when the question is of restraining a disordinate pleasure, of
repressing choler or peeuishnes that passes the bounds of all reason, of
bridling insolency, which is gone too far out of square, of hindering some
notable covetousness, or of staying some foolish motion, or superfluous passion,
then is the time wherein a prudent and good friend ought to be vehement and
earnest, and to double the speech of his admonition: yea to frame himself so,
as if the imperfection proceeded from himself, and as though his own utter
undoing lay thereupon. In such a case he is to follow that good Grecian
captain Phocion, who, when his friend would have cast away himself, said that
he would not suffer him, because he was made his friend for that purpose.
Therefore whenever any such occasion is offered, a man is not to stay until
the fault be committed, that he may then give his friend some good instruction.
For then it would come to late, and no less unfitly, than that Porters
warning, who after he had hit Cato, bad him beware. What (answered Cato) will thou give me yet another blow? Moreover we must take good heed that all
reprehending of one friend by another be done (as we commonly say) between
two private walls, that is, secretly when the door is shut: because the
discovery of any sin or vice (even as of some foul disease) is always
shameful. The example of these two sages, Socrates and Plato, will fitly agree
to this matter. Socrates being somewhat more earnest than his custom was with
one of his familiar friends before a great company, Plato could not contain
himself but said unto him: Had not this been better spoken privately apart?
And had not your self (quoth Socrates) done better, if you had told me
privately of this which now you utter? Whereupon we may further learn this
lesson, that it is always easy enough to reprove another, but that al our
reprehensions are blame worthy, if we reap not this instruction thereby, to
correct, or to avoid the like errors in our selves. Thus does the self same
Plato teach us saying, that we must descend into our inward parts, and say
every one with himself, Am not I such an one? Otherwise We must correct in
our selves those faults which we reprehend in others.
a man might truly reproach us with that saying taken out of an old Tragedy,
Each wounded wight does seek to salve the sores that others have. But as we see
our own eyes shine within the apples of our neighbors eyes, so ought we in
the life of other men to lay our own before us, and to purge them of those
vices which we reprehend. For as Lysander made this answer to a Megarian, who
thrust himself foreward to speak aloud for the liberty of Graecia in a
general assembly of counsel, That speech my friend had need of a mighty
city: so may it be said to every one that uses freely to reprehend others,
that his manners had need to be well reformed. Therefore Plato said that he
corrected Speusippus by the example of his life. In like sort, Xenocrates
casting his eye upon Polemon, who in dissolute Sundry instructions how to
admonish wisely.
apparel was entered into his school, changed and reformed all by his only
looks. This also will be a good and honest way to make our reprehension both
profitable and well liked of, when we infold our selves in that fault, which we
reprove in others: as that wise man Socrates used to do, when he checked and
taught young men, saying that himself was not delivered from ignorance, but
had need to be instructed with them in virtue, and to seek out the knowledge
of the truth. For when one accuses himself as subject to the same faults that
his friend is, and protests that his meaning is to correct and reprove him,
as if he were himself, it causes him that reprehendeth to be loved and
reverenced, and procures greater credit to his sayings. Let us further
observe this, that every reprehension between friend and friend ought to be
pure, and void of all private passions. Insomuch that if we perceive our
selves contemned, and after a sort despised, yet must we testify our sincere
and loving affection in speaking freely in the behalf of others that are
likewise despised, but not framing our talk in any sort for our own defense.
Every admonition thus grounded as I have said, cannot but be profitable and
well liked of our friend, as that which causes the offender both to reverence
him that gave it, and to blush for shame, not daring once to lift up his eyes
against it. But forasmuch as naturally we hate to be reproved and blamed, as
we learned in the beginning of this discourse, we must know that to cure such a
pernicious inclination, nothing can profit us so much as to believe, that the
beginning of good life is Reprehension is the beginning of good life.
to be blamed and baited at. For man, by nature inclined more to vice than to
virtue, can never hate evil before he understand what misery it brings. So
that when he sins if his friend lay the infamy and shame of his offense
before his eyes, unless he be altogether past shame, and fraught with
impudency, he must needs give place to the truth, which is invincible, and so
with shame not to be discommended, he is induced to reform his life according
to the pattern of comlines and honesty. Therefore Plato said, that we are
greatly beholding to them that tell us of our faults, and show us what way we
must keep: because it is better for us to amend by being corrected of
another, than to undo our selves by foolish perseverance. Moreover as all true
and perfect love ought to be general, and to extend it self indifferently
unto all without exception of persons, so likewise every one according to his
several place ought to admonish and to correct those that do amiss as often
as occasion is offered unto them, and cheefely they that are near to great men
are bound to do it, but with discretion and great deliberation. Thus much did
Solon signify to one, who by way of admonishment Solons good advice for
counsailors to princes.
told him, that princes were either not to be approached unto, or else to be
pleased: Nay contrariwife (said the wise man) either they are not to be come
near unto, or else the truth is to be told them. We may observe infinite
examples amongst the ancients worthy to be remembered, of the great freedom,
which they used in reprehending and showing the faults not only of their
familiar friends, but generally of all others: and especially of their kings,
princes and magistrates, who because they see and hear for the most part by
other men's eyes and ears, ought necessarily to have such friends, counsailors
and servants about them, as will freely tell them the truth, as hereafter we
may discourse more at large. This caused Plutark to Philosophers ought to be
conversant with princes.
say, that a philosopher ought cheefely to keep company with princes and great
lords, and that it was the point of a wise man, and of one that is well affected
to the common wealth to be endued with common love, and to inquire after, or to
accept and intertaine such a friendship, as might be commodious and beneficial
to many in particular, and much more in general to them all. And truly they
that company with private men, and labor to instruct them, may well make them
contented, mild and gracious in themselves, and profitable to them only: but
he that takes away an evil quality from a lord and magistrate, or directs
his will and intention, as it ought to be, plaieth the part of a philosopher in
the behalf of common commodity, and corrects that mould and pattern
according to which all the subjects are framed and governed. This kind of free
admonition Solon used toward Croesus, Solons counsel given to Craesus.
whom he perceived to be blown and puffed up with pride, through an opinion of
earthly and uncertain felicity, admonishing him to expect what the end would
be. The Gods (quoth he to him) have given to us the residue of the Graecians
all things after a mean sort, and namely a base and populer wisdom, not
royal or magnificall: which as it gives us to understand that the life of man
is subject to infinite changes, so it forbids to trust or glory in the
goods of this world, or to make great account of any man's felicity, that is
yet in danger of alteration. For time daily brings many sundry accidents to
man, whereof he never thought before. But when the gods continue the prosperous
estate of a man unto the ends of his Why Plato went into Sicilia to Dionysius.
days, then will we account him happy. The desire, which Plato had to profit
many caused him to sail from Graecia into Sicilia, that by grave discourses
and wise instructions he might stay and contain within the bounds of reason the
young years of Dionysius, prince of that country, who through unbridled
liberty, and power not limited, waued hither and thither without restraint.
Afterward when he began to be in love with the beauty of learning, he left of
by little and little his droonkennes, maskings, and whoordoms, wherein before
he gloried, insomuch that his court was wholly changed upon a sudden, as if it
had been inspired from heaven. But within a while after. Dionysius giving ear
to flatterers, banished Plato, to whom when he took his leave of him, the
tyrant said, I doubt not, Plato, but thou will speak ill of me when thou art
in the University amongst thy companions and friends. Whereunto the
philosopher smiling, and observing that freedom of speech, which he had
always used toward him, made this answer, I pray God, Sir, there may never be
so great want of matter to speak of in the University, that we need to speak
of thee. He was no sooner shipped from Sicilia but Dionysius returned to his
former fashions, and called back again dancers, minstrels, baudes, and such
like vermin, where of commonly there is want about great personages, so that
presently your might have seen his court, yea all the rest of his people,
overwhelmed in all delights and pleasures. Such great force has a prince to
alter and change at his pleasure the hearts of his subjects, but yet always
rather to vice and folly than to virtue. And to go on with our matter of the
free and bold admonition of great men, the self same Plato used it very fitly
toward Dion, who had driven Dionysius out of his jurisdiction, and that at
such time as the said Dion was in the greatest glory of al his prosperity.
Amongst other things Arrogancy dwells in the end with solitarines.
he willed him to beware of arrogancy, as of her that dwelt with solitarines:
that is to say, which in the end was forsaken of all the world. The same kind
of admonition Speusippus followed, writing to the same Dion, willing him not to
persume or wax proud of himself, because he heard women and children utter
his praises and commendation, Notable counsel for princes.
but to have regard only to this, that Sicilia might be adorned with religion
and piety toward God, with justice and good laws toward men, and that the
University might always be had in honor and estimation. O counsel full of
Christian instruction, and worthy to be daily set before the eyes of
Christian princes, who may also learn of Demetrius king of Macedonia to take
in good part, to Demetrius.
reap commodity, and to reward those that reprehend and admonish them of
their duty. After he had taken the city of the Athenians, who had rebelled
against him, and stood in great need of victuals, he caused a general
assembly of the people to be made, wherein he declared, that he gave them
freely a great quantity of corn. In which oration it fell out so, that he
committed an incongruitie of speech, whereat one of the inhabitants suddenly
stood up, and pronounced the word aright as he should have uttered it. For this
correction (quoth Demetrius) I give thee besides five thousand measures of
wheat. The example of good Traian writing to his master Plutarke, ought
especially to be imitated of great men. I advertise thee (quoth he) that hence
forward I will not use thy service to any Traians letter to Plutarke.
other thing, than to counsel me what I ought to do, and to tell me of those
faults, wherinto I may fall. For if Rome take me for a defender of her
Common-welth, I make account of thee as of the beholder of my life. And
therefore if at any time. I seem unto thee not well pleased when thou
reprehendest me, I pray thee master, not to take it in ill part. For at such a
time my grief shall not be for the admonition thou use toward me, but for
the shame I How Philoxenus corrected Dionysius tragedy.
shall have because I offended. Philoxenus the poet may also serve for a witness
of free correction, void of all flattery in regard of great men. For when
Dionysius prince of Syracusa sent unto him a tragedy of his own making, that
he should read and correct it, he sent it back again unto him all rased and
blotted from the beginning to the end, because he found it in no respect
worthy to be published. Neither does antiquity only afford us such examples
of bold reprehension by word of mouth, used by wise men in old time, but there
has been also in our ages worthy examples of base and contemptible men, yet
full of good learning. For proof here of may serve that quip, which not long
since a peasant gave unto an Archbishop of Cullen, who was well accompanied
with armed men according to the custom of Almaigne. This countrie-fellow
beginning to laugh, and being demanded by the prelate the The free gird of a
peasant given to an Archbishop.
cause thereof; I laugh (quoth he unto him) at S. Peter, prince of prelates,
because he lived and died in poverty to leave his successors rich. The
Archbishop being touched therewith, and desirous to clear himself, replied
that He went with such a company, as he was a Duke. Whereat the peasant
laughing more than before said, I would gladly know (Sir) of you, where you
think the Archbishop should be, if that Duke of whom you speak were in hell.
Neither may we omit the answer which a poor Franciscan Friar made to Pope
Sixtus the fourth, who from the same order being come to that great dignity,
showed him his great wealth and riches, saying, Friar, I cannot say as S. Peter
did, I have The like given to Pope Sixtus the 4. by a Friar.
neither gold nor silver. No truly (answered the Franciscan) no more can you
say as he said to the impotent and sick of the palsy, Arise, and walk. Now
concluding our present discourse we learn, that free reprehension and gentle
admonition grounded upon reason and truth, and applied fitly, are of such
virtue and efficacy with men, but especially with a friend, that nothing is
more necessary or healthful in true and perfect friendship: and therefore
ought to be joined inseparably therewith, according to that saying of the wise
man, that Open rubuke is better than Prou. 27.5.
secret love, and that The wounds made by a lover are faithful, but the kisses
of him that hates, dangerous. In the mean time we must (as S. Paul says)
restore those that fall with the Gal. 6. r.
spirit of meeknes, considering our selves, and never betraie the truth for
fear of the mightier sort.


Of Curiosity and Novelty. Chap. 15.
ARAM. MAn having by nature imprinted in his soul an affected and earnest
inclination to his sovereign good, is drawn as it were by force to search it
out in every thing, which he esteems fair and good in this world. And from
hence proceed all those his affections which carry him hither and thither,
causing him to rejoice in and to desire greatly all variety and novelty. But
the ignorance of things, and imperfection of reason, which abound in him,
because of his corruption, make him for the most part to labor and take
delight in evil rather than in goodness, if he be not by other means called to
the knowledge of the truth: which ought to be the principal and most worthy
object of our minds, esteeming all other knowledge vain and unprofitable being
compared to this, which is so great and divine. And in this respect curiosity
tending to understanding, (albeit in many things it be very hurtful,
especially being left unto it self) is also very profitable and necessary,
when it is directed and guided by the grace of God to the best end. Wherefore I
think my companions, that it will not be unprofitable, if in this matter we
discourse of these two things, Curiosity and Novelty, which seem to proceed
from one and the same fountain, and about which the virtue of prudence shows
great and worthy effects.


ACHITOB. Curiosity indeed desires in part to know and learn much, which
cannot be condemned. Nevertheless we must wisely beware that we employ it not
upon evil and vile things, but rather testify always, that we are of a grave
and contented nature, which is enemy to all novelty, and to superfluous
things that are without profit.


ASER. Novelty causes us through error of judgment to esteem those things
wherewith we are not acquainted, greater, and more to our liking, and so to buy
them dearer than better things that are common and familiar. It is the very
guide of the curious, causing them to contemn their own climate, and to
hazard what good thing soever they have, to possess that which belongs to
others. But let us hear AMANA who will handle this matter more at large.


AMANA. Amongst those learned precepts belonging to good life, which were
written in the temple of Apollo in Graecia, this was in the second place.
Nothing too much. Mediocritie must be used in all actions.
Solon said, Nothing more than enough. Pittacus, Do all things by a
mediocritie. These sayings are very short and of one matter, but yet
comprehend all prudence necessary for the governing of man's life, as well for
the preservation of the tranquillity of the soul, and of the spiritual gifts
thereof, as of all humane goods, called by the philosophers, the Goods of the
body and of fortune. The ancients being desirous to make us understand this
the better, propounded unto us every virtue between two vices, teaching us
thereby, that we cannot decline never so little either to the right hand or to
the left, but we step aside from the right way of virtue, which is our only
and true good: and that al difference The difference of good and bad consists
in mediocritie.
between good and bad consists in a certain moderation and mediocrity, which
Cicero calls the best of all things. If men had from the beginning contained
themselves within the limits of these divine precepts, it is certain they
would not so lightly have abandoned the simplicity and first modesty of their
nature, to feed their minds with a vain curiosity and searching out of things
supernatural, and incomprehensible to the sense and understanding of man.
Which things the more they thought to know, the greater occasion of doubting
they found in them, so that for all their labor and understanding they could
never carry away any true knowledge, or certain resolution. And even as that
man, who not contenting himself with the abundant light of the sun beams,
but Against curiosity in knowledge.
seeking with his eyes to pearce through the brightness thereof even unto the
midst of the circle of the body, must questionless become blind: so falls it
out for the most part to those, who go about too curiously to inquire after
that which is not lawful to be known. The ill success of our age affoordeth
us too many miserable testimonies, wherein at this day we see nothing but
contrarieties of opinions and uncertainties, through their subtilties and bold
curiosities, who have sought to pluck (as a man would say) out of heaven the
secrets hid from the angels: yea, which is worse, have boasted that they have
attained unto the knowledge of them, filling our times with trouble and
confusion under that false pretense. There are others also no less hurtful,
who have binne such curious Inquisitours of the causes of all natural things,
that through frivolous and unprofitable questions they have fallen into that
impiety, as to seek for another beginning of all things, than God. Whereupon
this proverb, which is too true, arose, Of three Physicians one Atheist. This
kind of curiosity, is of all others most pernicious. But forasmuch as it is
without the compass of our Academie, we let it pass with this short mention
thereof, and with this only addition, that God commonly punishes the pride of
such men by those fruits, which we see them bring forth, and by taking from
them their understanding in principal and most necessary matters, wherein
notwithstanding they think themselves to be wonderful and jolly fellows
above all others. As touching this point the example of Socrates is very
memorable, and to be imitated, who being demanded what the world was, answered,
that A notable saying of Socrates.
since he had any judgment he gave himself to seek out the true knowledge of
himself, which yet he could never find. But so soon as he had attained
thereunto, then he would seek for other things that would do him no service or
pleasure. Aristotle (as Justin Martyr writes) who for the excellency of his
skill in natural philosophy was The death of Aristotle and Pliny through too
much curiosity.
called the god of the earth, burned with such a desire of curiosity in
understanding the causes of natural things, that because he could not know and
conceive the cause and nature of Euripus, which is in Chalcis a city of
Eubaea, I mean of the flowing and ebbing of the sea, which turns and
compasses about that place, nor give a sufficient reason thereof, he died for
very shame and grief which he conceived thereupon. Pliny also, who wrote the
history The burning of Aetna.
of natural philosophy, was choked with the flames and vapors of the mountain
Mongibel in Sicilia, whilst he sought to find out the cause of them, and from
whence that great fire came, which spoiled the country round about in the time
of Titus the emperor: insomuch that seven or eight towns were burned, and many
persons traveling by land, and sailing on the sea were stifled with the ashes
thereof, carried about by the vehemence of the winds. But let us leave these
curious spirits, and speak of two Two general kinds of curiosity.
other general kinds of curiosity, which respect chiefly our moral
philosophy, and from whence all corruption of good manners proceeded. The first
kind concerns our selves only, and the other our brethren and countrymen. To
speak therefore of the first, it brings forth pernicious effects after
diverse sorts and manners, but amongst us Frenchmen they appear principally in
that Against the curiosity of seeing strange nations.
burning desire, which inflameth us to travel into strange nations, and in our
carking and caring for the nourishment, clothing, and decking of our bodies,
and for the setting forth and trimming up of our houses with curious and
unprofitable moueables, wherein we exceed all the superfluity of other
countries. When the ancients speak of the felicity that accompanied the
golden age, amongst the good conditions, and commendable manners, which they
noted in that holy and first simplicity, they never forgot this, that the men
of that good time tilled and manured their grounds, and cared not what
strangers did in far countries. Moreover, since the time that men made light
account of their own climate, through a curious and insatiable desire of
appropriating unto themselves the inheritance and labor of others, besides the
cruelty, violence, and murders, which prepared a way to their miserable
platformes, all corruption of good manners at home, and all bastardlike attire
have followed thereupon. We might here note infinite testimonies of
antiquity, and especially of our ancient progenitors the Gauls, who were
very warlike, and lived within their bounds in all simplicity of manners, and
frugalitie of life. But our own example, to our unspeakable shame and
misery, is so evident before our eyes, that I need no better proof of my
saying than that experience which we feel by our own peril. For One evident
cause of the ruin of France.
the ruin and destruction of this french monarchy proceeds of no other second
cause (our iniquity being the first) than of the mixture, which we have made
of strangers with our selves. Wherein we are not contented to seek them out
under their roofes, unless we also draw them unto us, and lodge them under our
roofes, yea prefer them before our own countrymen and citizens in the
offices and honorable places of this kingdom, against the law and right of
every good and well established policy. Besides we adore and reverence all
their novelties and subtle inventions, and that so ignorantly, or rather
blockishly, that suffering them to suck us even to the very bowels, in stead
of all our riches and spoils, which they for their part have drawn from us,
they have left us nothing but new manners and fashions of living in all
dissolutenes and pleasure, except this one thing also, that we have learned of
them to dissemble, and withal to frame and build a treason very subtillie.
Such is the provision wherewith our french youth is commonly furnished by their
Italian voyages. To this purpose Gueuara, Chronicler to the emperor Charles the
first, writes that from foreign countries men commonly bring news to prattle
of, and strange customs to practice: and that few come out of Italy, that are
not absolute and dissolute. Lycurgus for-bad traffic with strangers.
Lycurgus by his laws commanded the Lacedaemonians not to go out of their
kingdom, nor to converse with strangers, saying, that although by their
traffic with them they might be enriched, yet on the other side they would
grow poor in regard of their own virtues. Titus Liuius, Macrobius, Salustius
and Tully cursed and bewailed the conquests and victories, which Rome had in
Asia, saying that if the Romans brought the Persians, and Medes under
subjection by force, yet the self same Asians overcame the Romans with their
vices and delights. This does Five vices brought out of Asia by the Romans.
Cicero testify writing to Atticus, where he says that these five vices,
namely, to make glorious sepulchers, to wear rings of gold, to use spice in
meats, to alay wine with snow, and to carry about with them perfumes and
sweet smells, were sent to the Romans for a present from the Asians, as a
revenge for the cities which they had taken from them, and for the blood which
they had drawn of them. And which was woorst of all, he says, that these
vices would always remain with them, but the country conquered, for a little
time. Experience tells us, that no country is so poor, which is not
sufficient and able, all superfluity cut off, to nourish and maintain those
men that are bred in it with things necessary for them. Whereupon a man may
easily guess, that want of prudence, and ambitious desires first invented the
art of Navigations and sailing into far countries. Fabatus the consul in
seauenty years which he lived, departed not once from his village of Regio to
go to Messana, which was but two miles off Why Fabius would never go on the
water.
by water. And when one asked of him the cause why, The bark (quoth he) is
foolish, for it always stirs up and down: the mariner is foolish, for he
never abides in one opinion: the water is foolish, for it never stands still:
the wind is foolish, for it runs continually. Now if we use to go from a
fool when we meet him upon the land, what reason were it for me to hazard my
life with four fools upon the sea? But whatsoever my speech has bin
hitherto, my meaning is not to find fault with the right use of hospitality,
which ought to be maintained and kept inviolable in every well established
common wealth. In this respect France has been commended above all nations
for intertaining and receiving all sorts of people: provided always that they
be not preferred before our own children, and that they be contented to obey
and live according to the common laws of the country. Neither do I reprehend
that traffic and trade with strangers, which serves for a bond of human
society, and whereby the commodities of one to another are communicated
together with common profit: provided always that superfluous and
unnecessary things be left and forsaken. But ere we enter too far in with
them, it were good for us not to undertake such voyages to gather wit and
experience (as the most say) before we have profited well in the knowledge of
virtue, and are guarded with good and commendable manners, which are able to
resist all new and strange corruption: whereby otherwise the nature of man
desirous of diversity and novelty, suffers it self easily to be overcome,
making merchandise amongst them of naughtines rather than of goodness. As
hitherto experience shows us, that from this fountain has proceeded the
curiosity of supersluous apparel, of gold, of silk, tapistrie, pictures,
vessels, perfumes, painting of faces, delicasie of meat, and all prouocations
of voluptuousnes, whooredome, gluttony, and of other filthy dissolutenes, and
infamous vices, too much known amongst us, whereof we have heertofore made
mention, and will hereafter continue the particular discourse of them. Now
after we are well armed at all points with good doctrine and virtue, we may
according to the example of Plato, of Apollonius Plato and Apollonius were
great traueller^.
Thyaneus, and of many other notable men, seek after those that are best
learned in strange countries, that we may profit and be instructed by them.
Plato after he was well instructed by Socrates sought out the Mages and wise
Men of Egypt, by whose means he saw the books of Moses. Then he went into
Italy to hear Architas Tarentinus, the most renowned philosopher of that
country. Apollonius, who matched in learning all the philosophers of his time,
traveled over three parts of the world to see and to confer with all the
skillful men of his age: and being returned into his country, and enriched with
woonderful knowledge, he distributed all his goods, whereof he had great
abundance, amongst his brethren, and to the poor: and withdrawing himself
into the fields, he lived with bread and water only, that he might have his
mind free for the contemplation of heavenly things. Now let us come to the
other kind of curiosity, which as we said, Of curiosity in seeking to know
other men's imperfections.
concerns our brethren and countrymen. This is that which Plutark calls a
desire to know the wants and imperfections of other men. It is commonly joined
with envy and evil speaking, and is by that excellent philosopher compared to
adultery, which may be called a curious inquiry after another bodies
pleasure. Moreover curious folks through an ouerweening incontinencie, seek
to violate and to discover their neighbors greatest secrets, especially those
which are blamewoorthy, that by publishing and blabbing them out, they may
nourish the intemperancie of their toongs. For as venomous serpents seek after
infected and stinking places: so curiosity delights in finding out evil
things, but despises those that are good and commendable. If there be any one
imperfection in a stock or kindred, if any infamy, fault, error, or evil
government in a house, any quarelling, any thing to be misliked or loathed
therein, it is the delight of curious folks to learn that thoroughly, that they
may sport themselves, and tell long stories of them, by that means using their
memory for a loathsome register of other men's vices, and yet neither see or
know any fault of their own. This causes them all their life time to be the
disciples of ignorance and not of philosophy, which teaches us, not other men's
faults, but our own, as also the means how we may be delivered from them.
Diogenes beholding one of his scholars in a public place talking very
earnestly with a young man that was thought to be subject to his pleasure,
demanded what talk they had. To whom the disciple answered, that the other
rehearsed unto him a notable trick of youth, which he had played the night
before. Then Diogenes said to them both, My will and commandment is, that each
of you have forty stripes with a whippe, within the Amphitheater, or playing
place: Thou (quoth he to his scholar) for giving ear unto him, and he for
the folly committed, because a philosopher deserves as much for harkening to
folly recited, as does the vagabond that rehearses it. What punishment think
you would this wise man have judged them worthy of, who harken and inquire so
curiously after other men's faults and imperfections? And yet a man may truly
say of the most of these men, that they will never look upon, or consider
their own lives, which is a very unpleasant spectacle unto them, nor yet
return and look back with reason, as with a light, upon themselves. But
their soul being full of all sorts of evil, and fearing that which she feels
within her self, leapeth forth and wandereth here and there in searching
other men's doings, thereby feeding and fatting her own ill nature, and using
curiosity as an eye to look upon other men. The curious are more profitable
to their enemies than to themselves.
Heerof it comes, that a curious man is more profitable to his enemies than
to himself, because he discovers, manifests, and shows unto them from
what they are to beware, and what to correct: and yet in the mean while he
sees not the most part of that which is within himself, so greatly is he
dazeled by beholding that which is without in other men. He opens all even to
the very walls of strange houses, and pearceth like a wind into the midst of
those things that are most secret. His mind is both upon the palaces of the
rich, and cotages of the poor. He ferretteth out every thing, and inquireth
many times after the affairs of the greatest, which is the cause of his
overthrow, when he busieth himself too far in them. This was wisely noted by
Philippides, when Lysimachus the king asked Curiosity in princes affairs is
perilous.
him what part of his goods he would have imparted unto him. What you please
sir, quoth he, so it be no part of your secrets. Now if we desite to divert and
to quench the heat of this vicious passion of curiosity, which is too
familiar amongst us, and unseemly in a prudent and virtuous How we must cure
curiosity.
man, we must sometimes abstain from inquiring after lawful things, though
otherwise not necessary. In the exercise and practice of justice, it is
expedient sometime to leave untaken that which a man may lawfully take, thereby
to accustom himself to abstain more easily from taking any thing unjustly.
Likewise it is good for a man sometime to abstain from his own wife, that he
may attain to the virtue of temperancie, and so be never moved to desire
another man's wife. In like manner, if in stead of showing our selves to be of
the number of these diligent and curious inquirers after unprofitable news, we
signify rather to him that comes to tell us of some news, that he should
please us better if he had some good and profitable, matter to speak, than
should we thereby give testimony of a stayed and settled nature despising
curiosity. Examples against curiosity.
This was noted in Alexander the great, who seeing a messenger running apace
toward him with a smiling countenance, said unto him (not showing himself to
be moved at all, or desirous to understand what he would speak) what good
news can thou bring me my friend, unless thou did come to tell me that Homer
is risen again? And truly he had great reason to think that no more
excellency could be added to his valiant acts and deeds, except it were to
have them consecrated to immortality, by Against lightness of belief.
the writings of some learned and notable wit. The example of Phocion deserves
well to be here alleged against curious folks, who are commonly light of
belief. For as soon as the Athenians received news of Alexanders death, they
purposed presently to alter their estate, and to shake off the yoke of the
Macedonian alliance. But Phocion being of a contrary opinion said unto them,
If this news be true to day, it will be true also to morrow. And therefore (my
Lords Athenians) make no haste, but deliberate leisurely, and look safely to
that which ye have to do. It is certain, that if we use in this sort to show
our selves stayed in such things, and in all other things of small importance,
wherein our natural inclination would provoke us to be curious, as namely, to
break off good communication Faults whereinto curious men commonly fall.
begun upon the receipt of a letter, to forsake company to run and meet a
messenger only to know what news he brings, and a thousand such like sudden
motions proceeding of lightness and curiosity, I say by avoiding such things we
should prepare a way to the restraining of al curiosity in greater matters,
which otherwise may procure blame. As for example, to open another bodies
letter, to intrude our selves into the secret counsels of our neighbors, to
seek out their faults and imperfections, to inquire busily after that, which
may grieve our familiar friends, or to ask them of that, which they like not
of, neither is grounded upon any good cause or reason, least peradventure the
answer of some wise man should turn more to our shame, than be framed
according to our desire. Thus dealt Demaratus with a curious and importunate
Witty answers made to curious questions.
fellow that had oftentimes asked of him, who was the honestest man in Sparta:
He that resembles thee lest, quoth he unto him. The answer also of an Egyptian
was not unfitly made to one that asked him what he carried there folded. It is
wrapped up (quoth he) because thou should not know what it is. Now by that
which has been hitherto discoursed, it appears sufficiently, that al kind of
curiosity is hurtful, hateful, and greatly to be blamed in every one, if it
be not bounded and limited by the reason of true prudence, which guides and
stirs us up to seek after good, honest, and profitable things, either in
heaven, in earth, in the air, or in the sea, according to the gift and
capacity of our understanding and judgment, which may be necessary for us to
know, or may help us to live well and happily. For whatsoever is more, we
ought to account it unprofitable and superfluous. Let us learn then, not to
know more than we ought, but unto sobriety, containing Romans 12. 3.
our spirits within the limits of mediocritie, simplicity, and modesty. Let
us forsake all sophistical curiosity, and worldly wisdom, which is mere
foolishnes before God, that we may embrace a simple, popular, and Academicall
kind of knowledge, which will teach us to know our selves and our duty,
whereby we shall be led to that happy end, which we seek for and desire. Let
us not admire any more the merchandise and outward shows wherewith strangers
feed the eyes of curious folks, but let us wonder at virtue only: saying with
the comicall poet, where he speaks of those that covered their bedsteads with
gold and silver, what great folly is it to make sleep so dear, which God
has freely given unto us? So to seek for that of strangers with such great
expenses which we may have at our own haven better and more co^modiously, were
all one, as if we should leave the substance, and run after the shadow, or that
which is certain for an uncertainty. We may have in France (if our blockishnes
stay us not) Universities and schools for all honest exercises meet for our
nobility without strangers. And if we think that in some places amongst them,
they have better teachers than we have, let us first seek amongst our selves
for those instructions that are most necessary, namely, for the knowledge of
good letters, and institution of virtue, and then if we think good, we may
hear their teachers and masters, without infecting our behavior with the
corruption of their manners. Besides by the same study we shall learn to shun
al curious inquiry into other men's imperfections, that we may diligently look
into our own.


Of Nature and Education. Chap. 16.
AMANA. SEeing that in the entrance of our former treatise, we began with that
natural instinct of man, which moves and disposes him to desire and to
seek after his good, we may in continuing the same matter find more profitable
instruction, by considering his nature more narrowly, as also what comes unto
him by good education, which, that I may so say, stands him in stead of a
second nature. To you therefore (my Companions) I leave this matter to be
entreated of.


ARAM. The nature of man is like to a pair of balance. For if it be not
guided with knowledge and reason unto the better part, of it self it is carried
to the worse. And although a man be well borne, yet if he have not his
judgment fined, and the discoursing part of his mind purged with the reasons
of philosophy, it will fall often into gross faults, and such as beseem not a
prudent man. For in those men that are not endued with virtue ruled by certain
knowledge, nature brings forth such fruits as naturally come from the ground
without the manuring and helping-hand of man.


ACHITOB. That which commonly causes men to will evil rather than good,
proceeds chiefly of this, that they have no knowledge or experience thereof.
And therefore Socrates said, that as bringing up makes dogs fit for hunting, so
good instruction causes men to become profitable in the managing of a
commonwealth. But it comes to thy course, ASER, to discourse upon this matter.


ASER. This has been always a great question among the skillful and diligent
inquiters after the perfection of nature, whether learning or nature teaches
us to know our selves. Justice (says Cicero) is naturally planted in us from
our birth, as also religion, piety, grace, duty, and Natural virtues
according to the Philosophers, who had no knowledge of man's fall.
truth. Whatsoever is according to nature (as the philosophers say) is certainly
ordained and appointed, because nature is nothing else but order, or rather the
effect of order. But disorder, like to Pindarus sand, cannot be comprehended in
any certain number: neither can that which is against nature be defined,
because it is infinite. When they speak generally of nature, they make two The
division of nature.
principal kinds: the one spiritual, intelligible, and the unchangeable
beginning of motion and rest, or rather the virtue, efficient, and preserving
cause of all things: the other, sinsible, mutable, and subject to generation
and corruption, respecting all things that have life, and shall have end.
Aristotle says, that nature in one respect is said to be the first and chief
matter subject of every thing that has being, namely, of those things which
have in them the beginning of their own moving and mutation: and in another
respect, it is called the form of any thing. But leaving the infinite
disputations and curious inquiry made by the philosophers concerning this
excellent matter, whereof we have not here undertaken to entreat, we say What
nature is.
with Justin Martyr, that Nature (in which the steps of the divinity shine and
are lively represented) is that spirit or divine reason, which is the
efficient cause of natural works, and the preserving cause of those things
that have being, through the only power of the heavenly word, which is the
workmaister of nature, and of the whole world, and has infused into every
thing a lively virtue and strength, whereby it increases and preserves it
self by a natural faculty. Or to speak more briefly, Nature is the order
and continuance of the works of God, obeying the deity, and his words and
commandments, and borrowing her force and strength from thence, as from her
fountain and original. In this nature thus defined, which respects all
things created, we have here to consider of and to handle particularly,
according to our meaning at the first, the nature of man only, which natural
philosophers call the instinct and inclination of every ones spirit. The
property and light of nature.
There is nothing more true, than that nature of her self leads men in some
sort to that which is decent and honest: neither is learning able to show any
thing, which is not to be found in nature, whether we go about to teach the end
of man, which the philosophers call, the action of virtue, or whether we seek
out the causes and beginnings of other sciences. For other is no man so
barbarous or wicked in all the world, who is not touched with honesty, and who
retains not somewhat of the light of nature. Which may be clearly perceived
by this, that a virtuous action pleases him, so that he is even constrained to
commend it. And if he might taste thereof never so little, not being
fore-possessed with other disordinate desires, no doubt but he would become
such a one, as might purchase and deserve praise and commendation. But here we
must acknowledge the first corruption of our The corruption of nature.
nature whereby it is inclined to pleasure, and to eschew labor, which are the
welsprings of vices and of infinite evils. And if our nature should be suffered
to run with the bridle at liberty, whether soever it is driven by carnal
desires, having none of them cut off by wise admonitions and lively
persuasions, there is no beast so untamed or savage, that would not be milder
than man. Whereupon it follows that nature must of necessity be tamed, and
as it were mollified by the study of good letters, and by the instruction of
good philosophical reasons, which as they serve for nourishment and food to
our minds, so by them our manners and actions are framed and guided according to
virtue and prudence, and we made able to learn how, by the compass of reason,
to attain to mediocritie, wherein perfection consists, and to reject excess,
which is always dangerous. A good plaier on a lute or violl touches no other
stringes than those that are touched by him that is most unskillful.
Notwithstanding being taught in the beginning, he knows afterward through use
what strings make that sound, which the earc judges by the harmony and
agreement of sound to be delectable, whereupon he is taken for his
crafts-master. Even so a perfect virtuous man uses only natural gifts, but
reason and practice brings them to their perfection. Every Three things
nece^^arie for the perfection of (...).
good beginning comes unto us by nature, the progres and growth by the
precepts of reason, and the accomplishment by use and exercise. Nature without
learning and good bringing up is a blind thing. Learning without nature
wants much, and use without the two former is imperfect. It is true (as Plato
says) that some may be found, that are of a strong and forceable nature, and
thereby endued with reasonable good sense and judgment (which is in man as the
rudder in a ship) so that they make show of great virtues. But those men are
not without many great vices also, if they want good education and learning:
not unlike to a good fat ground, which brings forth many good and bad
herbs together, if it be not well dressed. Now if this good nature be ill
brought up, without doubt it will spoil it self and become very pernicious.
Scipio and Catiline were both high minded and courageous by nature, but
forasmuch as the one was always obedient to the laws of his commonwealth,
and used his virtue as reason required, he was accounted virtuous, and the
other wicked and wretched for doing the contrary. You ask of me (says
Socrates in Xenophon) whether courage or greatness of heart proceed of nature or
of learning. For my part I think, that as we see some borne with stronger
bodies than others are, so by nature we have minds more fit to sustain perils
and adversities than others have. And that this is so, we see many brought up
with the same manners, and instructed under like laws, and yet some of them
more hardy and bold than the rest. Notwithstanding there is no doubt but the
goodness of nature is helped by learning and institution. It is certain (says
Plutark) The difference between philosophers and the common people
that there is in all men some light of good and right judgment, but yet the
difference between philosophers and the common sort of men is great: because
philosophers have their judgment more stayed and assured in dangers, whereas
the vulgar sort have not their hearts fortified and defended with such
anticipations and resolute impressions aforehand. Albeit therefore many notable
men (as Cicero says) have achieved many brave and virtuous exploits being
guided by their natural judgment only, and by daily experience in affairs,
yet infinite faults may be noted in them, especially in their behavior and
manner of life, which might have been amended and corrected by the knowledge of
letters. Moreover the judgment of man wauereth too easily to settle and
resolve it self upon any thing: yea it is driven by a thousand occasions from
the ground of her former discourses, if it be not built and laid upon certain
knowledge and reason, which the study of wisdom teaches us. And as for that
prudence, which is gotten only by use, and by a man's own experience, it is
too long, dangerous and difficult, because it is not able to make us wise but
after our own peril: and oftentimes whilst we seek it, death makes haste to
prevent it, or else follows it so near, that we had need of a second life
to bestow about it. Thus we see that if there Three things co^cur^e in perfect
virtue.
be any want in any one of these three, Nature, Reason and Use, virtue also
must needs fail and be imperfect in that point. True it is, that a good
natural inclination deserves more praise being without learning, than
learning does without it: because even knowledge serves many times for an
occasion to the wicked, who abuse it maliciously, to further their vnpure
purposes. Nevertheless, we can accuse nothing but their perverseness, which by
reason of their ignorance, would not have stayed it self from uttering such
pernicious effects in them, and peradventure worse. For in what measure soever
it be, yet (as Socrates said) they that have been well brought up and
instructed, are in some sort forced to moderate themselves. Besides, they that
are not altogether well borne, yet being The defect of nature is helped by good
education.
helped by good training up and exercise of virtue, they may after a sort
repair and recover the defect of nature. Idleness (says Plutarke) annihilateth
and corrupts the goodness of nature, but diligence in good education
corrects the naughtines thereof. And as we see, that drops of water falling
upon a hard stone make it hollow, and that iron and copper consume and wear
only with handling, and ground that is more uneven and stony than it ought,
yet being manured and dressed, bears fair and goodly fruit, and
contrariwise good ground becomes unfruitful, and waxes worse and worse the
more it is left vnlabored: even so good manners and conditions are qualities,
which in long process of time are imprinted in the soul, and moral virtues
are attained unto through The weakness of our natural inclination to goodness.
care, diligence, labor, and long exercise. Therefore although nature has this
property in all men, that it is in perpetual motion through a weak instinct,
and that in some stronger, in others weaker, which causes her to aspire unto
and to desire the excellency of her first perfection, whereof she knows her
self void, yet if she be not always helped and driven toward the better
part, she will soon suffer her self to be carried to the worse. They are but
little sparks (says Cicero) which through vice and corrupt manners are so
easily quenched, that the light of them A similitude.
appears not. And as the heat buried in the veins of a flint, seems rather
dead than alive, if the sparkles be not drawn forth by the steel: so this
immortal portion of celestial fire, being the fountain and first motive of
all knowledge, remains without any profit or commendable action, if it be not
sharpened and set on work. We are no sooner borne, and taken in hand to be
brought up, as Plato says, but we follow after wickedness, as if we had sucked
iniquity together with our nurses milk. Afterward being committed by our
fathers to the hands of teachers, we so inwrap our minds with errors, that
those weak seeds of virtue, which are in us by nature, must needs give place
to vanity, and to opinion. But if good wits find good bringing up, then they
grow always up from better to better. Whereupon in my opinion that old
proverb was not spoken without reason, that education goes beyond nature.
Which thing when Lycurgus was desirous to let the Lacedaemonians understand, he
nourished two dogs of one and the same litter, using the one to hunt, Lvcurgus
example of two dogs.
and bringing up the other in the kitchen. And when the people were gathered
together, he spoke unto them in this manner: It is a matter of great importance
(O ye Lacedaemonians) to engender virtue in men's hearts by education, custom,
and discipline, as I will let ye see, and sensibly perceive out of hand. Then
he caused both the dogs to be brought, and casting off a hare on the one side,
and setting a platter of broth on the other, he let loose his dogs, of which
the one followed after the hare, and the other ran to the broth. Thus fares it
(quoth he) with men, who may be made more virtuous by good education, than by
nature. Neither will it profit them at all to descend of Hercules race, if they
practice not those works whereby in his life time he grew to be most famous in
the world, and if they exercise not themselves all the days of their life in
honest and virtuous actions. Furthermore if we desire examples of this, that
learning, institution and education avail greatly to conform and frame our
hearts and wills to virtue, yea to alter and make them better, Socrates
confesses Socrates and Themistocles were by nature vicious, but by education
virtuous.
in Plato, that by nature he was inclined to vices, and yet philosophy made him
as perfect and excellent a man as any was in the world. Themistocles in his
youth (as himself confessed) for want of discipline was carried away by his
desires like to a young unbridled colt, until that by Miltiades example, who
was then famous amongst the Grecians, he caused the viuacitie and quicknes of
his spirit, and the ambition, which naturally was in him to attend upon
virtue. Besides, education and custom have power to change not only the
natural inclination of some particular men, but also of whole countries, as
the histories of most nations in the world declare unto us: and namely of the
Germans, who in the time of Tacitus had neither The Germans much changed by
institution.
law, nor religion, nor knowledge, nor form of commonwealth, whereas now they
give place to no nation for good institution in all things. Let us not then be
discouraged or faint by knowing our natural imperfections, seeing that through
labor and diligence we may recover that which is wanting: but happy is that
man, and singularly beloved of God, to whom both good birth and like bringing
up are granted together. It follows now to discourse particulerly of the
manner of good education and instruction of youth: but this will come in more
fitely, when we shall entreat of Economy. And yet seeing we are in the
discourse of man's nature, I think it will not be from the purpose, nor without
profit, if (to make us more severe censurers of our own faults) we note, that
although our behauior be cheefely known by the effects, A man's natural
inclination may be espied in a small matter.
as a tree by the fruit, yet many times a man's natural inclination is better
perceived in a light matter, as in a word, in a pastime, or in some other free
and private business, wherein virtue or vice engraven in the soul may be sooner
espied, than in greater actions and works done publicly: because in these
matters shame or constraint commonly cause men to use dissimulation. Howbeit
this also is true, that the more power and authority a man has, when he may
allege his own will for all reason, the inward affection of his heart is then
best discovered. For such an unbridled license moves all, even to the very
depth and bottom of his passions, and causes all those secret vices, that are
hidden in his soul to be fully and Great men ought especially to learn
virtue.
evidently seen. Whereupon it follows that great and noble men ought above
all others to learn virtue, and to study to live well, especially seeing they
have all those requisite helps and commodities, through want of which most men
are hindered from attaining thereunto. Let us therefore learn by our present
discourse to know, that the nature of all men, by reason of the corruption of
sin, is so depraved, corrupted and imperfect, that even the best men amongst
many imperfections carry about them some envy, ielousy, emulation and
contention against some or other, and rather against their very friends. This
did Demas a noble man and greatly conversant in matters of estate, declare unto
the council in the city of Chio, after a civil dissension wherein he had
followed that part which overcame. For he persuaded those of his side not to
banish all their adversaries out of the city, but to leave some of them after
they had taken from them all means of doing more harm: least (quoth he unto
them) we begin to quarrel with our friends, having no more enemies to contend
withal. For this cause we must fortify our selves with understanding and
knowledge through labor and study of good letters, that we may restrain and
repress so many pernicious motions mingled together in our souls. Let us know
moreover, that seeing our nature is assaulted and provoked by a vehement
inclination to do any thing whatsoever, it is a very hard matter to withdraw
and keep it back by any force, no not by the strength or fear of any laws,
if in due convenient time we frame not within it a habit of virtue, having
first wished to be well borne. But howsoever it be, let us endeavor to be well
borne through custom and exercise in virtue (which will be unto us as it were
another nature) using the means of good education and instruction in wisdom,
whereby our souls shall be made conquerors over all hurtful passions, and our
minds moderate and stayed, that in all our doings, sayings and thoughts we
pass not the bounds of the duty of a virtuous man.


The end of the fourth days work.
THE FIFTH DAYS WORK.
Of Temperance. Chap. 17.
ASER. THe divine excellency of the order, of the equal and wonderful
consta^cie of the parts of the world, as well in the goodly and temperate
moderation of the seasons of the year, as in the mutual coniunctio^ of the
elements, obeying altogether with a perfect harmony the gracious and
sovereign government of their creator, was the cause that Pythagoras first
called all the compass of this universal frame by this name of World, which
without such The Greek word (...) used by Pythagoras, and translated of the
Latins M^ndus, and of us World, signifies a comely order.
an excellent disposition would be but disorder and a world of confusion. For
this word world, signifies as much as Ornament, or a well disposed order of
things. Now as a constant and temperate order is the foundation thereof, so
the groundwork and preservation of man's happy life, for whom all things were
made, is the virtue of temperance, which contains the desires and
inclinations of the soul within the compass of mediocritie, and moderateth
all actions whatsoever. For this cause, having hitherto according to our
judgment sufficiently discoursed of the first river of the fountain of
honesty, I think we ought to set down here in the second place (although it
be contrary to the opinion of many philosophers) this virtue of Temperance,
saying with Socrates that she is the groundwork and foundation of all virtues.


AMANA. No virtue can be without temperance.
As a man cannot be temperate if first he be not prudent, because every
virtuous action proceeds of knowledge: so no man can be strong and valiant,
if he be not first temperate, because he that has a noble and great courage
without moderation, will attempt a thousand evils and mischeefes, and will
soon grow to be rash and headie. Likewise justice cannot be had without
temperance, seeing it is the chief point of a just man, to have his soul free
from perturbations. Which cannot be done except he be temperate, whose proper
subject the soul is.


ARAM. Heroical virtue (says Plato) is made perfect by the mixture and
joining together of Temperance and fortitude, which being separated will at
length become vices. For a temperate man that is not courageous, easily waxes
to be a coward and faintharted: and a noble heart not temperate, becomes rash
and presumptuous. Let us then hear ACHITOB discourse of this Temperance, so
excellent and necessary a virtue.


ACHITOB. Agapetus a man of great skill, writing to the emperor Justinian,
amongst other things had this saying: The true marks and ornaments of a king.
We say that thou art truly and rightly both emperor and king, so long as thou
can command and master thy desires and pleasures, and art beset and decked
with the crown of Temperance, and clothed with the purple robe of Justice. For
other principalities end by death, whereas this kingdom abides for ever: yea
others are many times the cause of perdition to the soul, but this procures
a certain and an assured safety. When we have considered well of the worthy
effects and fruits of this virtue of temperance, no doubt but we will subscribe
to this wise man's opinion, and to as many as have written of the praises and
roialties of that virtue. Temperance (says thagoras) is that light, which
drives away round about What temperanceis.
her the darkness and obscurity of passions. She is (says Socrates) the
wholesomest virtue of all. For she preserves both publicly and privately
humane society, she lifts up the soul miserably thrown down in vice, and
restores her again into her place. Temperance (says Plato) is a mutual
consent of the parts of the soul (from whence springs continency) causing
all disordered and unbridled desires to take reason for a rule and direction.
Temperance (says Cicero) is the mother of all duty and honesty. It is the
property of justice not to violate the right of another man, and of
Temperance, not so much as to offend him. In Temperance a man may behold
modesty, with the privation of every perturbation in the soul, as also away
how to frame al things according to that which is decent or seemly, which the
Latins call Decorum, being What Decorum, or comelines i^
a conueniencie meet for the excellency of man, and that wherein his nature
differs from other living creatures. For as bodily beauty moves and
reioiceth the eyes, by reason of the goodly and seemly composition of all the
members, wherein all the parts with a certain grace agree together: so this
decency, which is honesty and seemelines, shining in man's life by his good
order, constancy and moderation both in deed and word, moves and draws the
hearts of those amongst whom we live. This virtue The definition of temperance.
then of temperance is a steadfast and moderate rule of reason over
concupiscence, and over other vehement motions of the mind. But she commands
chiefly over those two perturbations of the soul, grounded upon the opinion of
good, I mean, Unbridled desire, and unmeasurable joy, whereof heertofore we
made mention. Thus we see, that no man can find out any thing that is so
excellent and What passions are ruled by temperance.
wonderful as temperance, the guide and governor of the soul, which because of
her exceeding great light cannot be hid in darkness: which compels us to
follow reason, brings peace to our minds, and mollifieth them as it were by
concord and agreement. She serves for a bridle to restrain all pleasures, and
in the midst of them makes man good and virtuous. She serves for a knife to
cut off all superfluous, vain, and unnecessary desires as well of the soul
as of the body: and is as it were a rule directing natural and necessary
desires by fit choice of times, and by temperate use of mediocritie. Wherefore
we may say, that this virtue of temperance comprehends in it all the other
virtues: that through her a harmony, concordance, and conjunction of them all
is made: that she ministers unto them all occasions of beginning, and being
begun confirms them by a firm and steadfast safety. Breefly, temperance (as
Plato says) is a general surname of those virtues, whereby a man moderateth
his own affections, and frames his gesture and behavior in such sort, that
no effeminate or loose manners, no clownish or uncivil fashions are seen in
him. O (says Euripides) how is temperance to be esteemed, which is the cause
of such great glory and honor amongst men? This virtue is divided Four parts
of temperance.
into four principal parts, into Continency, Clemency, Modesty, and Order.
Continency is that part, whereby concupiscence and desire are governed by
counsel and reason. Clemency is that, whereby the minds of men, rashly carried
away with the hatred of any one, and with desire to hurt him, are kept back by
gentleness. Modesty is that, whereby honest shame and bashfulnes purchases
good and due deserved renown. Order is a disposition of all things in their
convenient place. All these virtues are undoubtedly joined with temperance, and
consist as well in action, as in the discoursing of the mind. For by ioining a
certain mediocritie and order unto those things that belong to this life, we
preserve honesty and duty. Every virtue (says Iamblicus, a notable man)
despises whatsoever is frail, mortal, and momentanie, but temperance more
than the rest: because she contemns, and through chastity beats down all
those delights and pleasures, whereby the soul (as Plato says) is fastened
unto the body as it were with a nail. Therefore if temperance rooteth out
whatsoever she finds imperfect and subject to perturbations, how shall she not
therewithal make us perfect? This is the meaning of that which the poets would
give us to understand under that fained fable of Bellerophon, who being aided
by modesty put to death that Chimaera, and all other cruel and savage
monsters. But as long as the immoderate force of our affections reigns in us,
it suffers not men to be men, but draws them to the il favored nature of
beasts void of reason. Contrariwise, this holy moderation, whereby pleasures
are contained within certain bounds, preserves families together, and cities:
and which is more, draws us in some sort near to the divine nature. Thus we
see that she is the foundation and ornament of all good things. If we should
endeavor to rehearse here al those excellent praises, which philosophers give
to this virtue of temperance, because of her worthy effects and wholesome
fruits, which she brings forth in the soul, we were not able to perform
it, although we should bestow this whole days work about it. But because in
the sequel of our discourses, as well in the handling of vices as of virtues,
we may consider further how necessary temperance is, and what profit it
brings to the whole life of man, we will content our selves to learn of
Plato, that temperance is the pillar of fortitude, The commendation of
temperance.
the helmet and shield against luxuriousnes, the keeper and guide of the eyes,
the preserver of good will, the rasor of evil thoughts, the corrector of
untamed desires, an enemy to the disordered will of the soul: that it
shunneth natural desires, hinders dishonest actions, breeds continency,
mollifieth men's hearts, and gives reason for a rule in all things. Now let us
note out amongst the ancients, some examples of the force and greatness of this
virtue of temperance, which has made many excellent Wonderful examples of
temperance. Scipio Africanus.
men worthy of eternal renown. Scipio Africanus general of the Romans, at
the taking of the city of Carthage had a young damsel to his prisoner, of
rare and excellent beauty. And when he understood of what great calling she
came, and how her parents not long before had betrothed her to a great Lord of
Spain, he commanded that he should be sent for, and restored her unto him,
without abusing her in any respect, although he was in the flower of his age,
and had free and sovereign authority. Moreover, he gave for a dowry with her
the money that was brought unto him for her ransom. An act no doubt of great
continency in a victorious captain toward his captive, whereof Aulus
Gellius, ioining it with that which Alexander.
we read of Alexander the great, makes this question, whether of the twain
behaved himself more virtuously. For Alexander having vanquished in battle
king Darius, and retaining as prisoner his wife, which excelled all the dames of
Asia in beauty, and was withal but young in years, the victorious Monarke
being but young also, and having no superior above him to whom he was bound to
give an account of himself, had notwithstanding such great knowledge how to
command himself, that albeit by his acquaintance and friends he was
sufficiently certified of the excellent beauty of this Lady, yet he bare no
ill thought toward her, but sent to comfort her, and caused her to be
entertained and attended on with no less honor and reverence, than if she had
been his own sister. And to avoid all suspicion and occasion of evil, he
would not see her, nor suffer her to be brought before him. The temperance
Cyrus.
of Cyrus king of Persia is also very famous amongst the historiographers. For
when one of his minions stirred him up to go and see fair Panthaea, saying
that her rare beauty was well worthy to be seen: that is the cause
(answered this young prince unto him) why I will altogether abstain at this
present from beholding her at thy persuasion, least she her self hereafter
should induce me through the remembrance of her perfection to go to her, and so
cause me in the mean time to let slip many affairs Architas.
of great importance. Architas was so temperate, that he would not so much as
utter one filthy word: and if he were driven to declare it upon some just
occasion, then he wrote it, showing by this silence, how dishonest a thing it
was to commit that, which being only uttered ought to Xenocrates.
cause a man to blush. Xenocrates was endued with such a great gift of
continency, that Phryna a very fair and notable courtisan laid a wager with
certain young men, that if she lay with him, she would cause him to break his
temperance. But Xenocrates, having granted her the half of his bed, for
example sake to those youths, was nothing more moved for any thing she could
do. Whereupon Phryna being very angry made answer in the morning to those
that demanded the wager of her, that she lay not with a man but with a block.
Isaeus the philosopher being Isaeus.
asked of one that looked upon a very fair woman, whether she seemed not unto
him to be fair, made this answer. My friend, I am not diseased any more in my
eyes: and so would not behold her at all. Caius Gracchus the Roman, C.
Gracchus.
as long as he governed Sardinia, would never suffer a woman to set foot in
his house, except it were to demand justice. Antigonus king of Macedonia,
hearing Antigonus.
that his son was lodged in a house where there were three very fair
daughters, made an edict, that no courtier should lodge in any matrons house
that had daughters, if she were under fifty years of age. Pompeius would
Pompeius.
never speak to the wife of Demetrius his freeman, because she was so fair,
that he feared least he should be in love with her. In the number of these
ancient, famous and virtuous men, that great captain Francis Sforce duke of
Millan F. Sforce.
deserves to be placed, whose continency was wonderful, even when he was
yet young, and general of the Florentine army, at the taking of Casanoua. For
as certain soldiers had taken a maid of an exccellent beauty, and at her
entreaty and earnest request had brought her before him, Sforce asked the
maid why she desired so earnestly to come before him. To this end (quoth she)
that thou might deliver me from the soldiers, and that I might please thee.
Sforce seeing her to be very fair, accepted of her, and at night caused her
to lie with him. But as he would have drawn near unto her, the maid cast her
self on both her knees before him without the bed, and besought him to save
her virginity, and to restore her to him unto whom she was made sure.
Whereupon Sforce willingly agreed, beholding the abundance of her tears, which
were testimonies of the chastity of her heart. Will we have examples of this
virtue of temperance in other circumstances of her effects? Ambition truly is
the most vehement and strongest passion of all those wherewith men's minds are
troubled, and yet many notable and virtuous men have so mastred it by the force
of their temperance, that oftentimes they accepted of offices and estats of
supreme authority, as it were by compulsion and with grief: yea some
altogether contemned and willingly forsook The temperance of Pompey against
ambition.
them. Pompey receiving letters of absolute authority from the senate to
conduct the war against the two kings Tygranes and Mithridates, cried out: O
God, shall I never come to the end of so many travels? Shall envy always
hold me in such sort as her slave, that new and great charges daily laying
hold upon me, I cannot rid my self of these snares, to the end I may live
sweetly with my wife and children at my house in the country? Pittacus
Pittacus.
one of the Sages of Graecia, being constrained to take upon him the charge of
an army, accepted it with great grief, saying before them all: O how hard a
matter it is Pedaretus.
to be a good man! Pedaretus the Lacedemonian having escaped to be elected one
of those three hundred senators, which governed the estate of Sparta, returned
from the assembly very ioifull, saying, that it was an easy matter to find
in that city three hundred better and more Scipio.
honest men than himself. What did Scipio, of whom we have already spoken,
after he had performed a thousand glorious facts for the greatness of the
Roman empire? He forced the nature of ambition, which is always carried with
a desire of new glory, and changed the rest of his life into quietness: and
abandoning the affairs of estate, Torquatus and Fabritius.
he went and dwelt in the country. Torquatus and Fabritius absented themselves
from Rome, the one because he would not have the dictatorship, and the other
the consulship. It is not long since Aimaeus duke of Sauoy willingly gave
Aimaeus.
over his duchy into his sons hands, and became an hermit: and after that being
chosen pope, he gave up the seat willingly Amurathes.
to another. Amurathes, the second of that name, emperor of the Turks, after he
had obtained infinite victories, and vanquished the king of Hungary, became a
monk of the straightest sect amongst them. That great emperor Charles the
fifth, did he not resign his empire into Charles 5.
the hands of the princes electors, and withdrewe himself into a monastery?
But what need we marvel at the knowledge of these examples, which show the
effects of this virtue of temperance against strange passions arising in us,
proceeding of our nature corrupted with sin, and ruling in us through the
ignorance of that which is good, when we may see, that temperance does not
only serve for a good guide and schoolmaster to our passions and to our
natural and necessary desires and pleasures, that are borne with man from the
beginning to rule them with mediocritie and reason, but also compels them
oftentimes to submit themselves, thereby triumphing over their necessity,
although (as Thales said) it be invincible? And then how much more easy will it
be to restrain, yea, wholly to overthrow the foolish desires of vanity? Sous
Sous.
a captain of great renown, and king of Lacedemonia, being besieged in a
narrow straight, and very craggie place void of water, after he had endured the
necessity of thirst to the uttermost, he offered to the Clitorians his enemies,
to restore unto them al their land, which he had won of them, so that he and
all his company might drink of a fountain near unto them. Which being thus
agreed upon between them, he led al his men thither, and said unto them, that
if any one would abstain from drinking, he would resign his royalty of
Lacedemonia unto him. But none would accept thereof, insomuch that all drank
except himself, who going last down into the fountain did nothing but
refresh himself, and wet his mouth a little on the outside, in the presence of
his enemies, not drinking one drop thereof. By means whereof he maintained,
that he was not bound at all unto his promise, because all drank not: and so
he continued the war to the great honor and advantage of his country.
Lysimachus, Lysimachus.
one of Alexanders successors in the empire, had not so great power over the
like passion. For being compelled by thirst, he diliuered himself and all his
army to the Getes his enemies. After he had drunk, being prisoner, O God
(quoth he) how faint-harted am I, that for so short a pleasure have deprived my
self of so great a kingdom! Cato.
Cato the yoonger, traveling over the deserts of Lybia, endured very sore
thirst. And when a soldier offered him a little water in his morion, he threw
it upon the ground in presence of them all, to the end his army might know,
that he would be in no better estate than they. Truly a worthy example for
all captains: for by so doing, that which would hardly have quenched the
thirst of one, restrained Rodolphus.
it in a whole army. The emperor Rodolphus, who of base estate attained to this
dignity by his virtue, upon the like occasion made an answer worthy to be
remembered. For when a full cup of beer was brought unto him in the war which
he had against Octocarus king of Bohemia, at what time he was in a place where
his whole army was greatly troubled with thirst, he would not receive it, but
said unto the bearer thereof, that his thirst was for all his army, and not
only for himself, and therefore that cup of beer was not sufficient to quench
it. We read of Socrates Socrates.
that whenever he felt himself very thirsty, he would not drink before he
had spilt and cast away the first pitcher of water, which he drew for himself
out of the well, to this end (as he said) that he might acquaint his sensual
appetite to expect the convenient time of reason. Seeing therefore by such
examples and infinite others contained in histories we have certain and
assured proof of the force of temperance over natural and necessary
passions, how credible is it, that she may have far greater power over those
other passions that came from without us, after we fell from our first
creation? Let us therefore conclude by our present discourse, that the virtue
of temperance is very necessary and profitable for a happy life, as that
which has this property belonging unto it, to be skillful in chasing a
mediocritie in pleasures and greefes, in keeping that which is honest and
virtuous, and in shunning of vice, especially of carnal pleasures, although
she serve also to moderate all the actions of our life. And if a prudent man
auoideth dishonest things in public places, a temperate man goes farther,
eschewing them in solitary and obscure corners. If justice suffers no
violence to be used, or wrong offered to any, temperance further permits
none to offend any: and therefore is very well called of the philosophers, the
mother of all duty and honesty.


Of Intemperance, and of Stupiditie or blockishnes. Chap. 18.
ACHITOB. BEing instructed in the virtue of temperance, which, as well as her
fellow virtues, consists in mediocritie, we are now to consider of her
extremities and vices that are in excess and in defect. Intemperance is clean
contrary unto it, which as Cicero says, inflameth, provoke, and troubles
the tranquillity of the spirit: but concerning the defect, I find no proper
name given unto it by the philosophers. But I leave the handling of this matter
unto you my Companions.


ASER. Intemperance (says Plato) was so called of the ancients, because that
perverse, cruel, great and variable beast Lust, exercises therein more power
than it ought, Predominant passions in intemperance.
as also disordered joy does the like. Whereupon it comes, that intemperate
men enjoying the pleasure of their senses, imagine falsely that true felicity
accompanies them therein. But truly whosoever obeieth bodily pleasures,
serves most cruel tyrants.


AMANA. Nature (said Architas) has given no plague more pernicious and hurtful
than the pleasure of the body. For whereas God has bestowed upon man nothing
more excellent than the soul and reason, there is none so great an enemy to
this heavenly gift as voluptuousnes: because where luxuriousnes and
concupiscence reign, there temperance can have no place: yea, all virtues are
banished out of their kingdom. But let us hear ARAM discourse of these vices
here propounded unto us.


ARAM. Some sins are punishments of other sins.
I red in Plato not long since, that there were many sins, which ought rather
to be called punishments of other sins going before, than sins. According to
the course and sequel of his speech, if my memory be good, I think his
meaning is, that men suffering themselves to be overtaken of vice in the
beginning, as it were in sport, never take heed unto themselves, until they be
wholly abandoned and given over (as S. Paul says) to their vile affections,
Romans 1.
and pleasures of their hearts, in all uncleanness and turbulent passions of
ignominy and reproach. Insomuch that after they have opened the gate to their
concupiscences, and to the desires of the flesh, of whooremongers, covetous
persons, reuengers of their own wrongs, belly gods, gluttons, and from other
less imperfections, being notwithstanding foul and beastly, they become
Sodomites, Church-robbers, parricides, Epicures, Atheists, and full of all
execrable villainies, which are comprehended What intemperance is.
under this word of intemperance. Intemperance is very well defined of the
philosophers to be an ouerflowing in voluptuousnes, forcing and compelling all
reason in such sort, that no consideration of loss or hinderance is able to
stay or keep back him that is through long custom infected with vice, from
betaking himself of set purpose, and as a man would say, willingly and
desperately, to the execution of all his desires and lusts, as he that places
his sole and sovereign good therein, seeking for no other contentation than in
that thing, which brings to him and to his senses delight and pleasure. For
this cause Aristotle distinguishes between intemperance and incontinencie The
difference between an incontinent and an intemperate man.
(albeit many take them indifferently one for an other) saying, that an
incontinent man chooses not, neither consulteth when he offends, as one that
knows full well that the evil he commits is evil, and had resolved with
himself not to follow it, but being overcome with perturbations, yields
thereunto. Whereas the intemperate man commits evil of election and settled
purpose to follow it, accounting it a good thing, and to be desired. And this
comes through a long custom and habit of vice, which is the cause that he
never repents him of the fact, but takes pleasure therein: whereas on the
contrary side the repentance of an incontinent man follows hard at the
heels of his sin and transgression. In this manner then proceeds
intemperance, until men are wholly addicted and given over to vice. This is
the cause why the sensual and unreasonable part of the soul contendeth no
more with reason, which then is as it were stark dead, and suffers it self
to be carried to ugly and unnatural vices, and to all fleshly desires: because
the divine part of the soul is weakened in such sort, that she has no more
strength, nor feeling of her essence, which is an enemy to vice. And thus
accustoming her self to follow nothing but the will of the body, she
forsakes God altogether, who seeing himself forsaken, leaves her to her
concupiscences, from whence is engendered this exceeding luxuriousnes even
against nature, this mortal, venomous, and bloody envy, this furious and
barbarous cruelty, this insatiable covetousness, this bloud-thirstie ambition,
and other incurable diseases of the soul, too well known amongst us, whereof
the sequel of our discourses will afford a more ample knowledge unto. Thus we
see that intemperance (as Cicero says) is the mother of all the perturbations
in the soul, and causes man (as Socrates said) to differ nothing from a
beast: because he never thinks upon that which is best, but only seeks how
to satisfy and content the unbridled desires of pleasure and lust, having no
more use of reason than beasts have. Intemperance (says Eusebius) corrupts
the soul, and destroieth the body, because it constrains a man, for love of
pleasure, and desire to satisfy it, to do that which he knows well is
dishonest and vile. And as the winds torment and A fit similitude.
toss that ship, which they have seized upon now here now there, and will not
suffer it to be guided by her master: so intemperance moving and compelling
the soul to disobey reason, suffers her not to enjoy tranquillity and rest,
which is an assured haven of harbor from all winds. Intemperance (says
Aristotle) is a vice that proceeds from the coveting part of man, whereby we
desire to enjoy unlawful pleasures. It is her property to choose the fruition
of hurtful and vile pleasures, supposing none to live happily, but such as
pass away their life in them. The companions of intemperance.
This vice is unseparably accompanied with the troubling of all Order, with
impudency, vnseemlines, luxuriousnes, sloth, negligence, and dissolutenes. In
a word, intemperance remooueth and troubles all tranquillity of the mind, and
leads men to all kind of wickedness, the end of one vice being the beginning
of another: which Socrates called the punishment of sin, that does not
cleanse but kill the malefactor. There is no kind of dissolutenes wherein the
intemperate man plungeth not himself, no wickedness or cruelty, which he
executes not for the satisfying of his unclean desires and insatiable lusts,
no fear or imminent danger, which can draw him back. And further, he laboreth
oftentimes to procure, that glory and honor should be given to his most cursed
and execrable misdemeanors, imagining and fansying with himself dreams
answerable and agreeable to that he most desires. Wherein he resembles mad
men, who have always before their eyes those Ideas and shapes, which
Intemperate men resemble mad folks.
work the apprehension of their fury, and hold them in the vision and inward
view of that which most troubles their diseased brain. But to make this vice
of intemperance more odious unto us, and to move us more earnestly to fly
those causes that nourish it, laboring to cut off all those branches and
hurfull fruits, which it brings with it, as superfluity, gluttony, ambition,
pride, and other excesses in all kind of delight, whereof we will entreat more
particularly hereafter, let us call to mind examples of such pernicious
effects, as it has brought forth in them that voluntarily submitted
themselves under her tyrannous government. Although we should search throughout
all ancient histories, yet hardly could we allege a more evident Heliogabalus.
testimony, than the life of Heliogabalus: because there is no kind of cursed
mischief, of detestable lust, of injustice, and of cruelty wherewith he was
not defiled. Yea, he fell into such a furious frenzy of vice, that seeking to
become a woman, and to be married to one of his minions, thinking in that sex
better to satisfy his beastlines, he apparelled himself after such a fashion,
that he was neither man nor woman. And knowing it impossible for him by reason
of his impiety and corrupt life, to escape a miserable end and violent death
(which ought rather to have been unto him an occasion of amendment) he was so
bewitched with intemperance, that he prepared poisons ready at hand to poison
himself withal, if he perceived himself pressed of his enemies. And to make
his death luxurious according to his desire, he kept his poisons in vessels
made of precious stones. He provided also silken halters to hang himself
withal, if he saw that more expedient for him, than to be poisoned: or if he
should think it better to murder himself, he kept for that purpose knives
made of precious metals. Likewise he caused a high tower all gilded to be
built, and all (...) his death as fittest occasion should be offered. In the
mean while he gave not over that execrable kind of life, which through Gods
just judgment he ended, being deprived of all those means wherewith he desired
to serve his own turn in his death. For he was strangled by the soldiers of
his guard, who trailed him in Nero.
that manner through all places of the city of Rome. Nero, one of his
predecessors, was little better than he. For he slew a Roman Consul called
Atticus, that he might have the free use of his wife: and pleased himself so
much in his cruelty, that he was the murderer of his own mother, brother,
sister, and of two wives which he had, named Octauia and Poppea. Likewise he
put to death his schoolmaster Seneca, and many other good men. But his end
dissembled not his life. For being hated of all and sought for to Commodus.
be slain, he killed himself. Commodus an other emperor, not finding wherewith
to satisfy his intemperance in three hundred concubines, and three hundred
buggerers, which he kept in his palace, committed incest with his own sisters.
Caligula.
Caligula also did the like, but the one of them was Proculus.
slain by his wife, and the other by his concubine. Proculus a Romain emperor,
was so much given to lust, that he bragged how in fifteen days he had gotten
with child a hundred virgins of Sarmatia, which he had taken prisoners in
Chilpericus 1.
the war. Chilpericus the first, king of France, to the end he might the
better enjoy a whore called Fredegonda, who^ afterward he married, compelled
his first wife named Andeuora, to become a religious woman, and put to death
two children which he had by her through the counsel of his said concubine.
Then having in his second marriage taken to wife Galsonda daughter to the king
of Spain, he caused her to be strangled, and married Fredegonda, who perceiving
afterward that he noted in himself this looseness of life, and offensive kind
of government, caused him to be slain. A just punishment suffered by God for his
Xerxes.
intemperance. Xerxes, monarch of the Persians, was so intemperate and given to
lust, that he propounded rewards for those that could invent some new kind of
pleasure. And therefore coming into (...) infinite number of men to subdue it,
he was overcome and repulsed by a small number, as being an effeminate and
faintharted Epicurus.
man. Epicurus a learned philosopher was so intemperate, that he placed the
sovereign Good and Felicity in pleasure. Sardanapalus.
Sardanapalus monarch of Babylon, the first of the four Empires, was so
addicted to lust and intemperance, that he stirred not all day long from the
company of women, being apparelled as they were, and spinning purple. Whereby
he became so odious, that two of his lieutenants judging him unworthy to
command over Asia, and over so many good men as were under his Empire, raised
his subjects against him, and overcame him in battle. Whereupon dispairing of
his safety, he caused a great Tabernacle of wood to be set up in a sure place
within the cloister of his palace, and compassed it round about with great
store of dry wood. Then he caused his wife and his concubines whom he loved
best to enter into it, and all the wealth he had to be brought thither. This
done, shutting himself within it, his Eunuchs and servants according to the
oath which he had taken of them, put fire to the said frame, and so this
miserable king of the Chaldeans and Assyrians, with all that was with him, was
suddenly consumed with fire, and ended his monarchy, which his victorious
lieutenants divided betwixt them, the one taking himself for king of Babylon,
the other of Medea. Antonius, one of Caesar's successors in the Empire, Antonius.
procured his own ruin through intemperance and loosenes, and stirred up
against himself, the envy and murmuring of the Romans for his retchlesnesse
of feats of Arms in that war over which he was general against the
Parthians. For to the end he might quickly return to his concubine Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt, he hazarded all in such sort, that without doing any thing
worthy his first reputation, he lost more than twenty thousand of his own men.
Afterward, Octauius his companion in the Empire, being armed against him, that
he might revenge the injury which he had done him in forsaking his sister whom
he had wedded, to live in his uncleanness, gave him battle: wherein Antonius
seeing his friend Cleopatra fly, who had born him company in that war,
followed her with three skore of his own galleys, albeit the fight was yet
equal, and the victory doubtful. Thus he betrayed those that fought for him,
to follow her, who already had begun his destruction, to the end she might
accomplish the same, as in deed it fell out after. For being besieged within
Alexandria by the said Octauius, and without hope of safety, he thrust himself
through the body with his sword, whereof he died: and Cleopatra also procured
her own death by the biting of the serpent Aspis. Boleslaus the second king of
Polonia, Boleslaus 2.
being given to all uncleanness and filthiness, made no dout to take women by
violence from their husbands. Whereupon the bishop of Cracouia often admonished
him thereof, and when, by reason of his obstinate perseverance, he proceeded
against him even with excommunication, he was carried headlong with such fury,
that he killed this holy man. After that, his subjects coming against him, he
was constrained to fly into Hungary, where falling mad, Adrian.
he slew himself. The emperor Adrian took such glory and pride in all execrable
vices, that he commanded a Temple with a sumptuous tomb to be made for a
naughty man named Antinous, who^ he had miserably abused in his life. Johannes
a Casa.
In our time Johannes a Casa Archbishop of Beneuento, and Legate in Venice,
wrote a book in praise of the abominable vice of Sodomitrie. Sigismundus
Malatesta, lord of a part of Romaignola a province of Italy, striued to have
carnal knowledge of his son Robert, who thrusting his poinado into his
fathers bosom, revenged that great wickedness. By these examples and infinite
others whereof histories are full, it appears sufficiently, that man burning
with intemperance, cares not at what price, with what shame, hurt or
hinderance, he may come to the execution and practice of all such pleasure and
delight, as he propounds to himself. As if he purpose to have his fame
continue for ever, he will not stick to do it, although it be by some notable
wickedness. And thus we read of him The Temple of Diana was burnt by
Erostratus.
that burnt the Temple of Diana, which was accounted the fifth wonder of the
world, and was two hundred and eight and twenty years in building by the
Amazones within the city of Ephesus in Asia. The planks thereof were all of
Cedar wood, and the doors and garnishing of the walls, of Cypres. This wretched
caitife confessed, that he put fire to that sumptuous building for no other
cause, than to leave his fame and renown behind him in the world: but
commandment was given that none should fet down his name in writing.
Nevertheless he is named Erostratus, by Solinus and Strabo: from whence came
that proverb, This is the renown of Erostratus, used when any man seeks to
be famous by a wicked act, which we may also apply to all intemperate men. As
touching the defect of Temperance, whereof mention was made in the beginning of
our present discourse, and which has no proper name, but Or Stupiditie.
improperly is called by some Stupiditie orsencelesnes, it is rarely found
amongst men, who by nature are given to pleasure, and carried away with all
kinds of desires and lusts. For where shall we find any so dull and blockish,
that has no feeling of pleasure, and that is not moved with glory and honor?
Such a man may be truly taken and accounted as one void of sense and feeling,
and like to a block. Neither does it belong to tempera^ce to be deprived of
all desires, but to master them. For that man (as Cicero says) that never had
experience of pleasures and delights, neither has any feeling of them, ought
not to be called temperate, as he that has done nothing which may testify his
continency and modesty. Thus ye see we have no matter offered wherabout to
bestow time in reproouing this vice of defect, from which men are too careful
to keep themselves. But to come to the conclusion of our discourse, we say with
Aristotle, that concupiscences and desires change the body, and make the soul
outrageous: that so many as are infected with such a pernicious and damnable
vice as intemperance is, are no me^, but monsters in nature, leading a life
altogether like to that of brute beasts, which being destitute of all reason,
know nothing better or more honest than pleasure: and having no knowledge of
the justice of God, neither reuerencing the beauty of virtue, bestow all the
courage, craft and force that nature has given them, to satisfy and to
accomplish their desires. So that if death brought with it an end of all sense
and feeling, and an utter abolishing of the soul, as well to men as to beasts,
intemperate folks should seem to gain much by enjoying their desires and
lusts during their life time, and to have good cause to wax old, and even to
melt in their foul and filthy pleasures. But seeing we know (for truly he
that doubts hereof, is very ignorant and most miserable) that sense and
feeling remain after death, and that the soul dies not with the body, but
that punishment, yea everlasting pain is prepared for the wicked, let us be
careful to do the will of our father which is in heaven, whilst we have time,
that in the triumphing day of his eternal son, we may not hear to our
confusion, that sentence of his mouth, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity.
At which time, the just shall shine as the sun in the kingdom of Luke 13. 27.
God, and the wicked shall be cast headlong into everlasting fire, where shall
be weeping and gnashing of teeth.


Of Sobriety and Frugalitie. Chap. 19.
ARAM. SOcrates used to dispute earnestly and gravely of the manner of living,
as of a thing of great importance. For he said, that continency in meat and
drink, was as it were the foundation and beginning of skill. And truly the
mind is much more prompt to comprehend all good reason, when the operations of
the brain are not hindered by vapors, which the superfluity of meats send
up thither. I am of opinion therefore, that we handle this virtue of sobriety,
which depends of temperance, and is contained under the first part thereof,
namely under continency.


ACHITOB. To live well and frugally (says Plato) is to live temperately: and
(as Epictetus says) there is great difference between living well, and living
sumptuously. For the one comes of temperance, frugalitie, discipline,
honesty, and moderation of the soul, contented with her own riches: and the
other of intemperance, lust, and contempt of all order and mediocritie. In the
end, the one is followed with shame, and the other with true and lasting praise.


ASER. We can not well use our spirit (says Cicero) when we are stuffed with
meat. Neither must we gratify the belly and intrailes only, but also the
honest joy of the mind. For that which is contained in the other parts,
perishes: but the soul separated from the body, abides for ever. Let us then
harken to AMANA, of whom we may understand how necessary sobriety is for a
happy life.


AMANA. The cause of the long life of our Elders, and of the shortness of ours.
If we set before our eyes the long and happy life of the Ancients, so long as
they observed sobriety and frugalitie: out of doubt we will attribute one
principal cause of our so short life, and so full of infirmities, to the riot,
superfluity, and curiosity of diet, which at this day are seen amongst us.
The life of our first Fathers, was it not maintained a long time with fruits,
milk, honey, and water? Who ever came near their long and happy days, since
those times? What preparation of exquisite victuals did those six hundred
thousand Israelites think to find, that came out of Egypt to go into a new
land, walking forty years through the wilderness, drinking nothing but water,
and many times wanting that? After those first ages, the Grecians and Romans
loved sobriety, more than all other nations. And as the Hebrews used to eat
but once a day, which was at dinner, so the Grecians only supped. For this
cause we read that Plato, being demanded whether he had seen any new or strange
thing in Sicilia, answered, that he had found a monster of nature, which did
eat twice a day. This he spoke of Dionysius Dionysius a monster, and why.
the tyrant, who first brought up that custom in his country. In the time of
Julius Caesar the Germans, a strong and warlike people, lived only of milk,
cheese and flesh, not knowing what wheat and wine were, nor yet what it was to
labor the ground, or to sow. Yea how many millions of men are there at this
day in the West regions and Islands, who know not what all this superfluity and
daintines of fare means, and yet live long and healthie in all frugalitie,
the greatest part of them upon herbs and roots, whereof they make cakes in
steed of wheat, and others of raw flesh? Whereby it is easy to judge, that
sobriety is the preservation and maintenance of health, and of natural
strength and vigor, and so consequently of the life of man. But when we look
higher, and with The sobriety of old time, and corruption of ours, compared
together.
the eyes of our mind mark the excellent glory and immortal praise, deserved
by so many Camilli, Scipiones, Fabriti^, Metelli, Catones, and by a thousand
other famous families, which executed so many worthy acts by their own
virtue, and yet in the mean while kept such a simple and sober diet, that the
most of them were contented with bread, herbs, and water, endured and tolerated
cheerfully all injuries of weather, went but homely araied, and altogether
contemned gold and silver: out of question we will judge those men very blind,
and far from the white of such glory and honor, who embrace nothing but
dissolutenes, superfluity, lust, dronkennes, pride, and all such like
imperfections, that bear sway amongst us, who behold Vice mounted so high,
that men must in a manner blush as much to speak of Virtue, or to be virtuous
in a thousand companies, as in that happy time of the Ancients, they were
ashamed of vice, or to be vicious. And truly I think that these men being past
shame, care but little for the glory that has been in many ages, seeing they
live for the body only, after a brutish impiety, without all regard of the
foul, or of the second life. What say Sobriety preserves health.
I for the body? Nay rather they are the destroiers thereof, seeing it cannot be
denied but that sobriety is a great benefit, and help to preserve health and
bodily strength, and to expel diseases, and is to be used as a good foundation
to attain to a happy old age. The experience hereof is well known to every
one, although there were no other proof but this, that we see the simple sort
of people, that labor and travel to live with bread and water, grow old in
health, whereas our Princes and great Lords being delicately brought up in
idleness, die young men, tormented with infinite diseases, especially when they
grow a little in years. Further, let such dissolute men as make pleasure the
end of their desire, know, that sobriety leads those that follow her, to
far greater and more perfect There is more pleasure of the creatures in
sobriety, than in superfluity.
pleasures, than incontinencie and superfluity do. For these excessive
fellows never expect hunger, or thirst, or any other pleasure of the body,
but through intemperance prevent them, and so enjoy scarce half the pleasure.
But sober and temperate men, forbearing the fruition of their desire a long
time, have a far more perfect taste of them, because (as Cicero says) the
pleasure of life consists rather in the desire, than in the satietie thereof.
And if mediocrity be not observed, those things that are most acceptable and
pleasant, become most unpleasant. Do we not also see, that when the body is not
ouercharged with meat and wine, it is better disposed, and more temperate for
every good action? And as for the spirit, for which we ought chiefly to live,
it is more ready and nimble to comprehend and conceive what right, reason, and
true honesty are. For (as Aristotle says) sobriety causes men to judge
better and according to truth, of all things, and in that respect is very
necessary for the attaining of Philosophye. Likewise sobriety retains that
in a wise man's thought, which a fool without discretion has in his mouth. And
therefore (says Cares) we must strive by all The belly is an unthankful beast.
means to restrain our belly, because that only is always unthankful for the
pleasures done unto it, craving continually, and oftener than it needs: so
that whosoever is not able to command over it, will daily heap up mischief
upon mischief to himself. But frugalitie and sobriety are the mistresses of
good counsel, and the badges of chastity. For this cause Titus Liuius
commends more the barrennes and sterilitie of a country, than fertility and
fruitfulnes, saying that men borne in a fat and fertile soil, are commonly
do-littles, and cowards: but contrariwise, the barrennes of a country, makes
men sober of necessity, and consequently careful, vigilant, and given to
labor: as the Athenians were, being situated in a very unfruitful place. We
make great account (says Paulonius) of frugalitie, not because we esteem the
creatures themselves vile, and of small value, but that by means thereof we
may increase the greatness of our courage. And if the greatest and chiefest
benefit that could come to man, were (said Solon) to have no need of
nourishment, it is very manifest, that the next to that is to have need but of
a little. But amongst so many good reasons of such excellent me^, the counsel
of Epictetus is well worth the marking, where The counsel of Epictetus
concerning eating.
he says: then when we would eat, we must consider that we have two guests to
entertain, the body and the soul, and that whatsoever shall be put into the
body, departs away quickly, but what good thing soever enters into the
soul, abides for ever. To this effect Timotheus a Grecian captain, having
supped with Plato in the Academie at a sober and simple repast (for the
greatest festiual dainties were olives, cheese, apples, colewoorts, bread and
wine) said, that they which sup with Plato, feel the benefit thereof How wise
men in old time feasted one another.
the next day, yea a long time after. For these wise men met together at bankets
void of excess, not to fill their bellies, but to prepare and dress their
minds, and to learn one of another by their goodly discourses of Philosophy,
whereof a virtuous soul has better taste, than the body of a well relished
and delicate meal. Such were the feasts of Pythagoras, Socrates, Xenocrates,
and of other Sages of Grecia, where the discussing of good and learned matters
there handled, brought through the remembrance of them great pleasure, and no
less liked commodity, and that of long continuance to such as were present at
them. And as for the pleasures of drinking and eating, they judged the very
remembrance thereof to be unworthy and unbeseeming men of honor, because it
was to pass away Against vain delights in feasts.
as the smell of a perfume. Neither would they suffer that men should bring into
their assemblies the vanity of foolish delights, as of the sound of
instruments, of enterludes, or of any other pastime, which a wise man ought
rather to esteem as a hinderance of delight, than any pleasure at all. For
having within themselves sufficient matter of recreation and reioicing, through
their learned discourses, it were mere folly to beg strange and frivolous
delights from without them. And Plutark says, that The belly a feeding beast.
the brutish part of the soul, depending of the feeding beast, and incapable
of reason, is that which is pleased, brought to order, and satisfied by songs
and sounds, which are sung and tuned unto it: even as with the whistling of
lips or hands, or with the sound of a pipe, sheepeheards cause their sheep to
arise, or lie down, because they understand not an articulate or distinct
speech, that has some pith in it. Therefore I commend Euripides, for
reprehending such as use the harp, so long as a feast lasts: When music is
most convenient.
for (quoth he) music ought rather to be sent for, when men are angry, or
mourn, than when they are feasting or making merry, thereby to make them give
more liberty to all pleasure, than before. I suppose the Egyptians The custom
of the Egyptians at bankets.
did better, who used in the midst of their bankets to bring in the Anatomy of
a dead body dried, that the horror thereof might contain them in all
modesty. For this cause the memory of the Emperor Henry the third, greatly
recommendeth it self, who banished all pomp and vanity from his wedding, and
drove away the plaiers and iesters, causing a great number of poor folk to
come in their place. The custom which the Lacedaemonians observed, The custom
of the Lacedaemonians.
when they lived under Lycurgus laws, is also worthy to be remembered: which
was, that no torches or lights should be brought unto them, when they departed
from feasts at night, that it might be an occasion unto them to fear
drunkenness, and so to avoid this shame, that they only could not find out
their houses. Now in those happy times vines were planted and dressed, that
wine might be drunk rather in time of sickness, than of health: insomuch that
it was not sold in Tauernes, but only in Apothecaries shops. Those ancient
Sages commonly measured their drinking by that saying of Anacharsis, The manner
of drinking in old time.
that the first draught which men drunk, ought to be for thirst, the second for
nourishment: and as for the third, that it was of pleasure, and the fourth of
madness. Pythagoras being much more religious in this matter, and living only
of herbs, fruit, and water, said: that the vine brought forth three grapes,
whereof the first quenches thirst, the second troubles, and the third
altogether dulleth. He never drank wine, no more did that great Orator
Demosthenes, nor many other famous men, of whom histories make mention. The
kings of Egypt were forbidden wine, which they never drank, except on certain
days, and then by measure. And truly it brings with it pernicious effects,
as well to the soul, as to the body. For from it proceeds the chief and
most common cause of bodily diseases, and of the infirmities of the soul. But
to continue the examples of love, which the Ancients bare The sobriety of
Alexander.
to the virtue of sobriety, this was it that caused Alexander the Great to
refuse those Cooks and Paisterers, which Ada Queen of Caria sent unto him,
and to send her word back again, that he had better than they were: namely,
for his dinner, early rising, and walking a good while before day: and for his
supper, a little dinner. Notwithstanding, in the end the Persian delicacies
and riches (which always is the property of such goods) caused this virtuous
monarke to change his commendable custom Against excessive drinking.
of living, and to approve and like of excess in drinking: to which vice,
that he might give greater authority, he propounded six hundred crowns for a
reward to him that drank most, and called a great cup after his own name.
Which cup, when he offered to Callisthenes one of his fauorits, he refused,
saying: that he would not for drinking in Alexander, stand in need of
Esculapius. With which the King perceiving him self touched, was so incensed
against him, that he caused him to be put in a cage with dogs, where he
poisoned himself, being impatient of his captivity. Wherein we may note how
ridiculous their blockishnes is, who for fear, not of such an entertainment as
this wise man received, but of being taken and reputed as void of good
fellowship, and uncivil, cast themselves into the danger of a sore sickness,
rather than they will refuse to drink carouse, when they are invited
thereunto. Hereby also those men show their want of judgment, and of
convenient matter to talk of, who cannot entertain their friends without
dronkennes and gluttony. And the other, if they knew how to make denial fitly,
and in good sort, besides the profit which they should receive thereby, their
company would be more Cyrus.
desired, than it will be for their dronkennes. Cyrus, Monarke of the Persians,
from his childhood gane great testimony, that he would one day become a very
sober man. For being demanded by Astyages his grandfather, why he would drink
no wine, he answered, for fear least they give me poison. For (quoth he) I
noted yesterday when you celebrated the day of your nativity, that it could
not be, but that some body had mingled poison amongst all that wine, which ye
then drank: because in the winding up of the table, not one of all those that
were present at the feast, was in his right mind. Afterward this virtuous
Prince always lived very frugally: for proof whereof may serve his answer
made one day to Artabazus, as he marched in war, who asked of him what he
would have brought unto him for his supper: Bread, (quoth he,) for I hope we
shall find some fountain to furnish us with drink. Porus a noble king of
India, lived Porus.
with water and bread only. Phaotes also king of the same Phaotes.
country, did the like: and the greatest feasts which he made, or suffered
his Courtiers to make, was only with a kind of venison. Alphonsus king of
Arragon, and Cocilia, Alphousus.
a very sober man, was demanded of certain of his Princes, why he drank no
wine: because (quoth he) wisdom is hindered through wine, and prudence darkened:
which two things only are able to make a king worthy of that name he bears.
Agesilaus king of Lacedemonia, having Agesilaus.
been always brought up in the discipline of Lycurgus, who had banished all
riot and superfluity from that city, by the utter defacing and abolishing of
gold and silver, became very wonderful, by reason of his simplicity and
plainnes, in feeding and clothing his body, and in behauing himself as the
meanest of his subjects. He used to say (which he likewise put in ure) that he
which commanded and ruled many, ought to surpass them, not in dainties and
delicacie, but in sustaining labor, and in nobility of heart. The benefit which
(as he said) he reaped thereby, was liberty, whereof he assured himself, that
he could never be deprived by any alteration and change of fortune. And as he
passed with his army by the country of the Thasians, they sent him certain
refreshing of sloure, and of dainty cates, as comfits, and other dainty
devices made of paast: but he would take nothing save only the flower. And
being urged of others to receive all, he said: Well, if ye think it good,
divide the rest amongst the Ilots, (who were their slaves) for it agrees not
with them that make profession of manly fortitude and powers, to take such
iuncates. For that which allureth and inticeth Good cheer keeps ba^e (...) on
men of a slavish nature, ought not to be acceptable to the^ that are of a
frank and free courage. But is there any thing now a days, I pray you, that
so much allureth and keeps base minds in the service of great men, as the
daintines of their table, And surely the Ancients did not unfitly apply the
name of Tyrant to a rich man, keeping a sumptuous table, as to one that
compels men to follow and to obey him. Nevertheless, a courageous heart
suffers not it self to be taken with such baits: but let us continue the
examples ^^^peius
of sobrietic. Pompey the great, having all his life time loved modesty and
frugalitie, gave yet a more certain testimony thereof, when, by reason of a
lingering disease, he had lost his appetite to meat. His Physician appointing
him to eat of a Blackbird, he was given to understand by his serunats, that
because they were out of season, it would be a hard matter to get any, except
it were of Lucullus, who kept some all the year long, and would willingly give
him some. What (quoth he then) if Lucullus were not a dainty and nice glutton,
could not Pompey live? No, no, let me have something made ready that may easile
be gotten. M. Cate.
Marcus Cato after he had overcome Spain, and triumphed of notable victories,
albeit he was now old and very rich, yet he would add nothing to his ancient
manner of living, which was very austere, but drank almost nothing but water,
and for the most part did eat nothing but bread and biefe, laboring in the
field in time of peace Epaminondas.
as much as the meanest of his servants. Epaminondas the greatest captain and
philosopher of his time, lived so thriftily and temperately, that being invited
by a friend of his to supper, and seeing great superfluity and sumptuosnes, he
returned very angry, saying, that he thought he had been requested to
sacrifice, and to live honestly together, and not to receive reproach by being
entertained C. Fabritius.
like a glutton. Caius Fabritius a notable Romain captain, was found by the
Samnite ambassadors that came unto him eating of reddish roasted in the ashes,
which was all the dishes he had to his supper, and that in a very poor Scipio.
house. Scipio Aemilius kept a very honorable table for his friends (for in
his time riot had already begun to enter into Rome) but going aside himself, he
would eat nothing but bread. Masinissa king of the Numidians, was of so great
Masinissa.
sobriety, that even at ninety years of age he would eat but once a day,
and then upon homely meats without sauce. Mithridates king of Pontus, being
very old, never Mithridates.
sat down at the table to eat, and lived very frugallie. Hannibal fed upon
no other meat, than did the meanest of Hannibal.
his soldiers. The reason why I stay longer in the examples of this virtue of
sobriety, is to show the beastlines of men in our age, to whom it seems an
impossible, vain and contemptible thing, to live in such sparing and
austeritie of life: saying, that there were none but certain foolish
Philosophers (for that is the Epithet, which the ignorant sort give to
virtuous men) and some simple Hermites, who lived after that manner. Therefore
that they may vnseele their eyes, let them behold here, how in all sorts and
conditions of men, even in the greatest, the virtue of temperance, frugalitie
and sobriety, did appear and shine. The emperor Vespasianus one day in every
month used to Vespasianus.
eat nothing. The priests of Egypt, the sages of India and Persia, and
Jupiters priests serving false gods did never eat any flesh, nor drink wine.
Notable examples for those that have the first places in the Church, who ought
to be as a lamp in the midst thereof. Neither may they take example by
Ethnikes and Pagans only, but also by many holy men, who had in them the true
love and fear of God. Daniel and his companions neglecting the Kings Daniel.
table, lived with pulse and water only. S. John Baptist passed John Baptist.
over the greatest part of his age in the desert, cating nothing but Locusts
and wild honey. S. Hierome makes mention of one Paul an Hermit, who lived
from sixteen years unto sixty, of Dates only: and from sixty years unto
the age of six skore and five years (when he died) he was fed with a little
bread brought daily unto him by a Crow. Maxentius bishop of Poytiers, lived
always with Maxentius.
barley bread and water. But to the end we may reap profit by all that has
been here spoken, let us learn of Socrates, that the soul which has gotten
the habit of frugalitie, and is contented with her estate, passes away her
dais in this world, as he that in the spring time takes small and easy
iournies in a pleasant and fruitful region, with great contentation of mind and
little labor. And let that notable and divine precept of Empedocles sound often
in our ears, Behave thy self full soberly, and free from all offense.
Let us adorn and deck our life with this good and rare virtue of sobriety,
which will teach us to renounce worldly vanity, and to content our selves (next
unto God) in virtue only, and in heavenly riches. And although delicacie of
fare be so common amongst us Frenchmen, and maintained with such impudency,
that we permit amongst us, and study kitchen Commentaries, as much as any good
Science, so that it may seem a very difficult matter to take it away, and
banish it from amongst us, yet is it not altogether impossible, as many think.
But let us follow that ancient precept of Pythagoras, To choose the best kind
of life, and no doubt but custom will by little and little make it easy and
pleasant unto us. And if we be despised and rebuked of others, we may answer as
Socrates did, who being Socrates feast.
reproved because he had made no greater preparation of meat in a feast
whereunto he invited many of his friends, said, If they be virtuous, there is
enough, and if they be not, there is too much. So let us not seek to please
and to imitate the most part of men, but the best and smallest number: neither
let us look unto custom, but to that which is decent and honest. But if we
persevere in our dissolutenes and superfluity, as if we were Christians in name
and sect only, but Epicures in life, we are to fear that in the end need and
necessity will force us to forsake it. And as it fell out to king Darius, who
after he had lived a long Darius in his thirst, judged puddle water to be good
drink.
time in all abundance of delights, and never knew what hunger or thirst meant,
as he fled from the battle gotten by Alexander was very thirsty: and after he
had drunk puddle water proceeding from a river tainted with dead bodies, he
burst forth into this speech, that in all his life he never drank better
drink: so likewise after we have been tamed with miseries and calamities, we
must confess, but too late, and peradventure (O dangerous downfall) without
hope of recovery, that our estate is yet better (albeit most miserable) than
our offenses have deserved, even then when God for our dissolutions shall
withdraw his blessing wholly from our grounds and possessions. This he has
already begun to perform in some measure, Tokens of the wrath of God
by causing the ground to bring forth unto us thistles and thorns, in steed of
good grain and fruit, and by continuing amongst us wars and hurly burlies,
which are accompanied with pestiferous diseases, that he may ouercharge those
with the scourges of his just vengeance, who will not humble themselves under
the sweetness of his word.


Of Superfluity, Sumptuousnes, Gluttony, and wallowing in delights. Chap. 20.
AMANA. SEeing we have summarily understood the excellency and profit of the
virtue of sobriety, that it may yet better appear by the contrary, and that
we may be so much the more induced to desire it amongst us, I think we shall
do well to entreat of superfluity, sumptuousnes, and gluttony, whose fruits
are The chiefest cause of destruction to Commonwealths is excess in delights.
weltring in delights, which is the principal cause of destruction (as Plato
says) to Kingdoms, Monarchies, and Commonwealths. Therefore I propound these
vices to you my companions to discourse upon.


ARAM. Whatsoever is desired more than that which is necessary for the life of
man, is superfluity, which causes so many foolish and excessive expenses
amongst us, that, besides the ruin and decaie of many good houses, the
destruction of the body, and, which is more to be feared, of the soul also,
does for the most ensue thereupon. Therefore Erasmus said very well, that
nothing is more abject and hurtful, than to live as a slave to the pleasure of
the mouth and belly.


ACHITOB. Those men (says Plato) that are addicted to the service of their
bellies, and care nothing for the food of their minds, are like beasts, who
never enjoy true pleasures. Which thing also may be said of them that like
fools depend more of opinion than of reason. But it belongs to thee ASER to
handle this matter here expounded, more at large.


ASER. Good things (said Lycurgus) are contrary and enemies to him that abuses
the gifts of nature: as if a valiant man should love rather to be a thief,
than a soldier: or a beautiful person an adulterer, rather than a married man.
So is it with the goods of Fortune, as we term them, the possession of which
gives occasion to those that are unworthy of them, to commit many follies.
Amongst which we may note superfluity for a very pernicious vice, having this
property in it to draw the wills of men secretly, and to induce them to covet
delights. Whereunto after they have once addicted themselves, they busy their
minds with nothing but to make provision of frivolous, exquisite, and
sumptuous things, taking small care, yea forgetting easily those things that are
profitable and necessary, whereof afterward they perceive themselves Pleasure
the end of superfluity.
to stand in great need. Now the end of all superfluities, wherein men plung
themselves after diverse manners, is pleasure, which chiefly and for the most
part they seek in such a riotous and delicate life, as causes the body
without labor to enjoy all his desires, lusts, and delights: or else in the
fruition of worldly glory, wherein through unprofitable and superfluous
expenses, they strive to excel, or at leastwise to match those that are
greater than themselves. Concerning the mark whereat they aim, there is
nothing more hurtful to man, than pleasure and delight, which (as Plato says)
serves for a bait and allurement to draw him to commit wickedness, as
hereafter we may discourse in more ample manner thereof, as also of that
luxurious life, whose desire and contentation is in whoredom. And that I may
begin to handle the other two general points, wherein they that are given to
superfluity and costlines, seek delight, namely the delicate life and
curiosity of expenses: let us consider of the fruits that issue and proceed
from them. First, when men suffer Of the delicate life.
themselves to be overtaken with the Epicures doctrine, and appear so careful
to serve their belly, nourishing it in excess, daintines, gluttony, and
dronkennes, is it not from this headspring from whence diseases and evil
dispositions of the body proceed? We are sick (says Plutark) of those things
wherewith we live, neither is there any The seed of diseases.
proper and peculiar seed of diseases, but the corruption of those things within
us, which we eat, and the faults and errors which we commit against them.
Homer going about to prove, that the gods die not, groundeth his argument upon
this, because they eat not: as if he would teach us, that drinking and eating
do not only maintain life, but are also the cause of death. For thereof
diseases gather together within our bodies, which proceed no less of being too
full, than of being too empty. And oftentimes a man has more to do to consume
and digest meat put into his body, than he had to get it. Physicians (says Of
the shortness of man's life.
Seneca) cry out, that life is short, and art long: and complaint is made of
nature, because she has granted to beasts to live five or six ages, and
appointed so short a time of life for men, who are borne for many great things.
We have no small time, but we lose much time, and life is long enough, if it be
well employed. But when it passes away through excess and negligence, and no
good is done therein, in the end through constraint of extreme necessity,
although we perceive it not going, yet we feel it is gone. Moreover a man may
reckon greater store of griefs than pleasures, that come to him from his
nourishment: or to speak better, the pleasure of eating is but small, but the
toil and trouble that men have in providing it, is great. It were hard to
repeat the shameful pains and toilesome labors wherewith it fills us. Many
a man's The soul of gluttons com-Pared to a millstone.
soul (says Solon) is overwhelmed, and as it were clothed with fear, least it
should stand in need within the body, as it were in a mill, and turning
always about like a millstone, it seeks after nourishment. Hereupon it
remains void and destitute of feeling, and desire of all honest things, and
attends only to the insatiable lusts of the flesh, which is never
contented, because need and necessity The custom of the Egyptians.
are always joined with desire of superfluity. The ancient Egyptians used this
custom to cleave in sunder the body of a dead man, to show it to the sun,
and to cast the guts and intrailes into the river, and being thus cleansed, to
imbaulme the rest. And in very deed those inward parts are the pollution and
defiling of our flesh, and are properly the veric Hell of our bodies. But,
which is worse, is it not the stuffing and filling of the belly that makes
the mind for the most part dull and incapable of any science or reason,
whereby the divine part of man is oppressed and overwhelmed through the weight
and force of that part, which is mortal? A wise soul is a clear brightness,
said Heraclitus. O how hard a matter is it (says Cato) to preach to the
belly, which has no ears, and which will take no denial, howsoever the case
stands: And as when we behold the sun through thick clouds and undigested
vapors, we see it not clear, but with a pale and wannish light, and as it
were plunged in the bottom of a cloud: so through a troubled and defiled
body, heavily laden with food and strange meats, the brightness and clearnes
of the soul must needs become pale, troubled, and dimmed, not having such
forceable light, as to be able thereby to pearce through unto the contemplation
of those things that are great, heavenly, subtle, exquisite, and hard to
discern. I thought in my heart (says the wise man) to withdraw my flesh from
wine, that I might bend my mind to wisdom, and eschew folly, until Proverb.
31. 4. 5.
I knew what was profitable for the children of men. It is not for kings, it is
not for kings to drink wine, nor for princes strong drink: least he drink
and forget the decree, and change the judgment of all the children of
affliction. Prou. 23. 29. ^0.
To whom is woe? To whom is sorrow? To whom is strife? To whom is murmuring? To
whom are wounds without cause? And to whom is the rednes of the eyes? Even to
them that tarry long at the wine: to them that go and seek mixed wine, which in
the beginning is pleasant, but in the end pricketh like a serpent, and
poisoneth like a Cockatrice. And in another place, the wise man speaking of
gluttony, faith: that it dries the bones, and that more die by it than by the
sword. We see that beasts fatted up languish through sloth and idleness: neither
do beasts faint through labor only, but also by reason of the mass and heavy
weight of their own bodies. Furthermore, the vice of gluttony and drunkenness
is never alone, but draws with it a thousand other excessive and dissolute
fashions. For (as Plato says) it stirs up lust, grief, anger, and love in
extremity, and extinguisheth memory, opinion, and understanding. Brieflye, it
makes a man twice a child. And in another place, the same Philosopher says,
that gluttony fatteth the body, makes the mind dull and unapt, and which is
worse, undermines reason. Wine has as much force as fire. For as soon as it
has overtaken any, it dispatcheth him. And as the North or Southwind
tormenteth the Lybian sea, so, and much more does wine vex a man. For it
discloseth the secrets of the soul, and troubles the whole mind. A drunken
governor and ruler of any thing whatsoever, brings all to ruin and
overthrow, whether it be a ship, or a wagon, or an army, or any other thing
committed to his keeping. We see by the goodly sentences of these Authors, how
many discommodities and mischiefs come as well to the body as to the soul, by
this excessive superfluity and curiosity of nourishment, whether it be in
drinking or eating. We see also that from this self same springhead proceed
those unmeasurable and loose behauiours in all kind of delights, in carding and
dicing, in dancing, masking and mumming, in love of maidens and adultery with
wives, the filthiness whereof is so shameful, and discovers it self so much,
that I shall not greatly need to loose time in reproouing thereof. For it is
most certain, that all such inventions are merely heathenish, or rather
devilish, when men commit such reprobate actions with public Against masks and
mummeries.
liberty and license. Especially we have to note this well that concerns
masks and mummeries, so common amongst us, and the cause of infinite offenses,
that forasmuch as the face was appointed and ordained of God to be seen openly,
and the mouth to speak, we destroy the ordinance of God, as much as lies in
us, and become contrary unto him, when we take unto us a false face, and
deprive our selves of speech. It may be said, that many think no harm when
they do these things. But that which of it self is evil, cannot be excused,
and no fashion of living taken up and practiced through the only motion of our
sensuality (such are these delights and pleasures) can be maintained, neither
has it any good and lawful defense. Now let us consider some examples of
those pernicious effects which proceed from this Epicurian vice of
intemperance. Esau fold his birth right through a gluttonous The Israelites.
desire. The self same cause moved the Israelites to murmr many times against
God. The drunkenness of Lot.
Lot caused him to commit incestwith his daughters. Alexander Alexander.
the great darkened the glory of his valiant acts with this vice. For being
overtaken with wine, he slew Clitus one of the valiantest captains he had, to
whom he was beholding for his own life. Afterward, when he was come to himself,
he would oftentimes have murdered himself, and Dionysius.
wept three days together without meat and drink. Dionysius the younger, was
sometime more than nine days together drunken: and in the end he lost his
estate. Cyrillus son in his drunkenness wickedly slew that holy man his
father, and his mother also great with child. He hurt his two sisters, and
defloured one of them. Ought not this to cause the hair of our head to stand
upright, as often as any occasion is offered unto us, whereby we might fall into
Lucullus.
such inconveniences? Amongst the Romans Lucullus, a man of great dignity, and
commended of Historiographers for many brave exploits of war which he did in
Armenia, and for his bounty, justice, and clemency, is yet greatly blamed,
because toward the end of his dais, omitting all intermedling with the
government of public affairs, he gave himself to all kind of excessive
sumptuousnes, and superfluous wasting of that great substance which he had.
Whereof this only testimony recited by Plutarke, shall serve for sufficient
proof. Cicero and Pompey meeting him one day in the city, told him that they
would sup with him on this condition, that he should prepare nothing for them
but his own ordinary diet. At the least wise (quoth he unto them) give me
leave to bid my Steward make ready supper in my hall of Apollo: and by that he
beguiled them. For his servants understood thereby what cost he would have
bestowed thereupon: in so much that a supper of fifty thousand drachmes of
silver, which amount to five thousand crowns, was prepared for them. This was
so much the more wonderful, because so great and sumptuous a feast was made
ready in so short a time. But this was his ordinary diet which he caused many
times to be prepared for himself alone. And as his men asked him on a day who
should dine with him, seeing he commanded them to make ready such a great
feast; Lucullus (quoth he) shall dine with Lucullus. This superfluous The
sumptuousnes of a Franciscan Friar.
pomp and magnificence, will not be thought very strange, if we compare it with
that which not long since a simple Franciscan friar called Peter de Ruere made,
after he had attained to the dignity of a Cardinal through favor of the Pope
his kinsman. For within the space of two years which he lived in Rome, he
consumed in feasts and banquets the sum of two hundred thousand crowns,
besides Philoxenus.
his debts, which came to no less sum. Philoxenus the Poet wished that he had
a neck like a Crane, to the end he might enjoy greater pleasure in swalowing
down wine and meat: saying, that then he should longer feel the taste thereof.
We read of the emperor Vitellius Spinter, Vitellius.
that he was so much given to superfluity and excess, that at one supper he
was served with two thousand several kinds of fishes, and with seven thousand
flying fowls. But within a very little while after he changed his estate, being
executed publicly at Rome at the pursuit of Vespasianus, who was chosen
emperor in his place. In our time Muleasses Muleasses.
king of Thunes, was so drowned in pleasure and delight, that after he was
banished from his kingdom because of his whoredom, in his return out of
Almaign, being without hope that the emperor Charles the fifth would help him
at all, he spent one hundred crowns upon a pecock dressed for him, as Paulus
Iouius rehearses: and that he might take the greater delight in music, he
covered his eyes. But the judgment of God was such upon him, that his own
children made him blind with a bar of hot iron. Concerning examples of the
misery that follows and accompanies riot and delight in playing, dancing,
and mumming, we see daily that a thousand quarrels, blasphemies, loss of goods
and whoredoms proceed from thence. And oftentimes God suffers the punishment
thereof to be notorious, even by unlooked for and strange means: as not long
since it happened to Jews Archb. of Magdeburg, who dancing Jews Archbishop.
with gentlewome^ until midnight, fell down so fiercely upon the ground, that he
brake his neck with one of the women which he led. Charles the 6. being clothed
like a Charles 6.
wild man with certain of his familiar friends, and dancing by torchlight, was
also in great peril of burning, if a ge^tlewoman had not cast her cloak upon
his shoulders. And I think it will not be from the matter, if we say that it is
a shameful thing to suffer amongst us, or to loose time that ought to be so
precious unto us, in beholding and in hearing plaiers, Against plaiers.
actors of Interludes and Comedies, who are as pernicious a plague in a common
wealth as can be imagined. For nothing marreth more the behauior, simplicity
and natural goodness of any people than this, because they soon receive into
their souls a lively impression of that dissolutenes and villainy which they
see and hear, when it is joined with words, accents, gestures, motions and
actions, wherewith players and iuglers, know how to enrich by all kind of
artificial sleights, the filthiest and most dishonest matters, which commonly
they make choice of. And to speak freely in few words, we may truly say,
that the Theater of players is a school of all unchasteness, uncleanness,
whoredom, craft, subtletie and wickedness. Now let us speak of those that
propound (as we said) unto themselves Against the curiosity of super fluous
expenses.
the vainglory of outward show among the best, and men of great calling, through
frivolous, unprofitable and superfluous expenses, as in sumptuous and costly
apparel, precious and rich moueables, goodly furniture and trapping of horses,
great train of serving men, dogs, birds, and other vanities, gifts and
presents sent to such as are unworthy, thereby to obtain the good will of
them that are most wicked in authority, to the end to prepare a way unto high
callings, and to preferments unto offices. Besides the wasting of their goods
hereupon to their shame and confusion, which they should employ upon charitable
works, they spend many times other men's goods, even the substance of the poor,
which they craftily get by unlawful means. This is that which at length (as
Crates The beginning of civil wars.
the Philosopher said very well) stirs up civil wars, seditions, and
tyrannies within cities, to the end that such voluptuous men, and ambitious of
vain glory, fishing in a troubled water, may have wherewith to maintain
their foolish expenses, and so come to the end of their platformes. Heerof we
have many examples in the civil wars amongst the Romans, as namely under
Cinna, Carbo, Marius, and Sylla. Likewise in the conspiracy of Catiline and
his accomplices, who being of the chief families in Rome, and perceiving
themselves to be brought to the estate of bankrupts, as we commonly say, sought
by all means to prosecute their first deliberation, which was always to seem
great and mighty. Thus dealt Caesar in procuring to his country that civil
war, which he made against Pompey, after he had indebted himself in seven
hundred and fifty thousand crowns, to get the favor and good liking How
Heraclitus dissuaded superfluity.
of the people. This is that which Heraclitus meant to teach his countrymen,
when, after a sedition appeased and quieted, being asked what way were best to
be taken, that the like should not fall out again: he went up into that place
from whence orations were made to the people, and there in steed of speaking,
began to eat a morsel of brown bread, and to drink a glass of water. Which
being done, he came down again, and spoke never a word. Heerby he would
signify, that until daintines of fare were banished the city, and immoderate
expenses cut off, and sobriety and modesty brought in their place, they should
never be without sedition. If this counsel were ever requisite in a Monarchy,
it is certainly most necessary at this present for ours, wherein all kind of
supersluitie, riot, and weltring in pleasures, curiosity in apparel,
tapistrie, and pictures, vessels, perfumes, and painting of faces, abounds in
greater measure than heertofore it did amongst the Persians, which was the
cause of their final subversion, and of Alexanders greatness, who subdued them.
That which for the space of five hundred years and more, maintained the
Lacedemonian estate, being the chiefest in Grecia for glory and goodness of
government, Lycurgus banished all strange wares from Lacedemonia.
was the cutting off and abolishing of all superfluity in diet, apparel,
moueables, and of all strange wares, which Lycurgus banished. Whereby also
foreign merchants (the cause of corruption) banished themselves, as they that
seek not after others but for gain, by selling their novelties very dear
unto them. Neither did the Roman Commonwealth flourish more at any time, than
when those men that carried about them perfumes and sweetesmels, and those women
that were found swilling like drunkards, were corrected with the same
punishment. This caused Cato, being the Censurer of the election of Why Cato
would not choose Publius General of the war.
two captains, that one of them might be sent as General of the Pannonian
war, to say with a loud voice, that he would dismiss Publius his Allie,
because he never saw him return wounded from the war, but had seen him walk
up and down the city of Rome perfumed. What would he have said of our
Courtiers, so finely curled, ruft, and perfumed? The Kings and Magistrates of
those so happy times, were the principal obseruers of their own laws and
edicts, reforming themselves before all others, and living so austerely, that
their example constrained their subjects more to follow them, than all the
punishments which they could have devised to propound unto them. We have a
notable testimony hereof in Agis king of Agis.
Sparta, who in his return from the war wherein he had overcome the
Athenians, being desirous to sup privately with his wife, sent into the kitchen
that was appointed for his band and company (for they lived all in common,
being severed into quarters) to have his portion. But this was denied him, and
the next morning for this fact he was fined by the Ephories, who were joined in
sovereign authority with the kings, for the maintenance of laws and of
justice: in which sentence and judgment of theirs, he willingly rested. But to
return to our matter, Against excess in apparel.
how ought we to blush for our riot and excess in apparel, which we maintain
with such glory? What folly is it to employ the industry of the soul,
ordained for heavenly things, in trimming, decking, and gilding her enemy,
her prison, and if I may so speak, her poison, the body? Excess of apparel
(says Erasmus) is an argument of the incontinencie of the soul, and rather
whetteth the eyes of the beholders thereof to wicked desires, than to any
honest opinion and conceit. Deck not thy house (says Epictetus) with tables
and pictures, but paint it with temperance. For the one is to feed the eyes
vainly, but the other is an eternal ornament, and such a one as can never be
defaced. If we make account of things of small importance, we despise those
that are of great weight: but in not caring at all for little things, we make
our selves worthy of great admiration. That great Monarke Augustus Augustus.
Caesar ware no other garments than such as his wife and daughters made, and
those very modest. Agesilaus Agesilaus.
king of Lacedemonia, never had but one kind of garment for winter and summer.
Epaminondas General Captain Epaminondas.
of the Thebanes, was contented with one only gown all the year long. Further,
if we look unto their simplicity and modesty in their train and followers,
truly it was worthy of reverence, being without pride, pomp, or superfluous
magnificence. Scipio Africanus that great Captain, going as delegate into
Asia, to compound and end certain contentions that were between the kings of
Examples of moderate train of serving men.
that country, was accompanied but with two of his friends, and with seven
slaves. Cato the elder, visiting the provinces of his government, took but
three servants with him. Now a days we see, that the least accounted
gentleman amongst us, thinks it a cracking of his credit to ride so ill
furnished. And yet the most part even of the greatest, never make any great
inquiry how their train defray their charges. But howsoever they may say,
that they know not of the excess and riot committed under their authority,
and in their service, yet they are not thereby excused. For we ought carefully
to beware, that no man abuse our name. Now, if princes and governors A good
lesson for Princes and Magistrates to learn.
of Commonwealths in steed of abridging superfluous charges, take delight
therein themselves, from thence proceeds the necessity of charging and
ouercharging their people with imposts and subsidies to maintain their
excess, and in the end comes the overthrow and subversion both of the one
and the other. But they ought rather both to abstain from such vanities
themselves, and also to seek by all means to banish them from their subjects:
and where their own example and bodily punishments are not sufficient for
this purpose, there ought Commendable imposts for Princes to lay upon their
subjects.
they to lay great imposts upon all such things as serve but to spill and
corrupt their subjects. Such things are all exquisite dainties and prouocations
of appetite, all sorts of toies and trifles, perfumes, cloth of gold and
silver, silks, sypers, networks, lace, wouen works, and all works of gold,
silver, and inammell: all kind of superfluous apparel, with colors of skarlet,
crimson, and such like, the forbidding whereof hitherto has profited little.
For the nature of men is such, that they find nothing more sweet and
acceptable, than that which is straightly forbidden them: so that the more
superfluities are prohibited, the more they are desired, especially of foolish
men, and of such as are vainly brought up. Therefore it were good to raise the
price of these things so high by means of imposts, that none but rich men and
dainty folks may use them. And such subsidies would as much set forward the
glory of God, the profit of the common wealth, the desire of good men, and
relief of the poor, as many others now used are quite contrary hereunto. Then
these speeches would no more be so common amongst us, as now we hear them
daily uttered by our Courtiers: We will (say they) keep company and be seen
amongst the greatest, and be esteemed thereafter. If we spend not freely, men
will make no account of us. It is our honor and greatness, and the way to
procure glory and renown to our houses and families. But I would gladly tell a
great number of them, that they would be very much troubled to make answer to a
law made by Amasis king of Egypt, and after established A good law to cut off
the occasions of idle expenses.
in Athens by Solon, whereby it was enacted, that every one should yearly make
it appear unto his Provost or Bailie how he lived, and if he approved not his
manner and trade of life to be just and reasonable, he was condemned to die. If
in like case these great spenders were to give an account from whence they
receive wherewith to satisfy their pride and vanities, a man should find that
their purchase (as we say) is far better unto the^ than their rents, and that
they commit a thousand wrongs and detestable vices to make supply to their
lavish expenses. As for them that have goods lawfully gotten, yet in spending
of them wastfully, they give sufficient testimony, that they care and seek
for nothing but a vain and vanishing glory, which oftentimes, contrary to
their expectation, is waited upon with great infamy, and with the certainty
of perpetual punishment. And in the mean while they neglect that glory which
is eternal and always profitable, which they should enjoy by well using, and
not by mispending their goods, whereof they are but Gardians and Stewards, and
must one day yield up an account of them. O witless man (said one of the
ancient Sages) what will the remembrance of vain glory profit thee, if thou
art tormented and vexed where thou art, and praised where thou art not. This
deserves a longer continuance of speech, but we may hereafter discourse
thereof more at large. In the mean time let us note an other mischief, which
commonly follows Poverty so^oweth superfluous expenses.
superfluity of expenses, namely poverty, whereinto many rich men fall before
they be aware, and are then very much grieved therewith, and not able to bear
it. But the shame and reproach thereof is yet greater, because they fell into it
by their own folly and misgouernment. Therefore to the end we walk not in such
a slipperie way, which in the beginning is large and pleasant, but yet leads
the trauailer unto a downfall from which he can never escape, let us leave and
forsake the discipline and life of Epicures, Our palate must not be more
sensible than our heart.
and beware that our palate and tongue be not more sensible than our heart. Let
us lead a life worthy an honest Academie, and beseeming the doctrine of the
ancient Sages, that is, a simple, sober, and modest life, adorned with
temperance and continence, knowing that diet and decking of the body ought (as
Cicero says) to be referred to health and strength, not to pleasure and
delight, and that all outward excess is a witness of the incontinencie of the
soul. And for the perfection of all that lasting and inevitable misery which
belongs to them that are given to voluptuousnes and superfluity, let us
hear that sentence of scripture, and fear least we be comprehended under the
judgment thereof, Continual misery and James 5. 1. 5.
mourning be upon you that have lived in pleasure on the earth, and in
wantonness, and have nourished your hearts as in a day of slaughter.


The end of the fifth days work.
THE SIXTH DAYS WORK.
Of Ambition. Chap. 21.
ASER. AS often as I remember the strange tragedy of the Roman Emperors,
since the time that the Empire was mounted up to the very top and height of
her greatness until her declination, according to the uncertainty of all
humane things, and how within the space of one hundred years, wherein there
were three skore and 73. Emperors of Rome within 100. years.
thirteen emperors, only three of them died of sickness in their beds, and
all the rest by violent death; I cannot sufficiently admire (considering the
inconstancy and short continuance of so great a government, which cannot but
be well known to every one) the folly of men, which commonly affects them
with an unmeasurable desire to rule, whereby they are all their life time
slaves to ambition, which is one point of the vice of intemperance whereof we
spoke yesterday. And thus in my opinion we are to begin our days work with the
description of this pernicious passion.


AMANA. It is natural in man, the greater his stomach is, the more to labor to
excel others, which is accompanied with an exceeding desire to rule: whereupon
he is easily driven forward to do unjustly, if by wisdom he be not moderated.


ARAM. Ambition and contention for honor (says Cicero) are miserable. And
many forget justice, after they are fallen into a desire of glory, empires and
honors. Go to then Achitob, let us understand of thee more at large what are
the effects of this vice.


ACHITOB. Eudoxus a Greek Philosopher desired of the gods that he might behold
the sun very near, to comprehend the form, greatness, and beauty thereof,
and afterward be burnt of it, as the Poets report, that Phaeton was: such a
hardy and bold passion to undertake most The force of desire to enjoy any
pleasure.
difficult and dangerous things, is the desire of enjoying any pleasure
whatsoever. This may chiefly be spoken of ambition, which is the most vehement,
strongest, and most disordred passion of all those desires which so sore
trouble men's minds, and fill them with an insatiable greedines of glory, Two
kinds of ambition.
and with an unbridled desire to rule. But to handle it more profitably, we
will make two kinds of ambition, the one respecting private me^ only that live
under the power and government of heads, of estates and policies: the other
shall be of the heads themselves, of monarchs and governors of peoples and
kingdoms. In the mean time we What ambition is.
may thus generally define ambition, calling it an unreasonable desire to enjoy
honors, estates, and great places. Further it is a vice of excess, and
contrary to modesty, which is a part of temperance. For that man (as Aristotle
says) is modest, who desires honor as he ought, and so far forth as it
becomes him: but he that desires it more than he ought, and by unlawful
means, is ambitious, and The effects of ambition.
carried away with a perturbation of intemperance. Ambition never suffers those
that have once received her as a guest, to enjoy their present estate quietly,
but makes them always empty of goods, and full of hope. It causes them to
contemn that, which they have gotten by great pains and travel, and which not
long before they desired very earnestly, by reason of their new imaginations
and conceits of greater matters, which they continually bark forth, but
never have their minds satisfied and contented. And the more they grow and
increase in power and authority, the rather are they induced and carried
headlong by their affections to commit all kind of injustice, and flatter
themselves in furious and frantike actions, that they may come to the end of
their infinite platformes, and*of that proud and tyrannical glory, which,
contrary to all duty they seek after. These imperfections happen unto them,
because from the beginning they studied to hoord, and heap up external,
mortal and hurtful riches, before they had laid a good foundation of reason
The cause of ambitious desires.
through knowledge and learning, thereby to direct aright their purposes and
doings, according to comelines and honesty. And therefore oftentimes they are
deceived and miss of their intent, and even loose that which they might have
had, because they sought over boldly to lay hands on that which they could not
so much as touch. So that we may well say with Timon, that the elements and
matter of mischiefs, are ambition and avarice, which are found both together
for the most part in the same persons. But to enter into a more particular
consideration of the nature Envy a note of an ambitious man.
of every ambitious man, he has commonly this property, to envy the glory of
others: whereby he becomes odious, and stirs up against himself the envy
and ill will of every one. Moreover this his jealousy over another man's glory,
is so much the more hurtful unto him in that he might, being set in high
estate and authority, use the help and company of such as are virtuous and
noble minded in the execution of great matters, if in stead of taking them for
his adversaries in the pursuit of virtue, he favored them, and drew them near
unto himself. Whereby we may judge, that there is none so pernicious a plague
for the overthrow of virtue, as ambition, because it is never without
contention for glory and honor, even against the greatest friends, from whence
in the end proceed the greatest enmities. Cicero also says very well, that
whatsoever has this quality, that many things of the same kind cannot be
excellent, thereof arises for the most part such strife, that it is a very
hard matter to observe holy society. For equity is not easily kept
inviolable, when one desires to be greater than all the rest. It comes
through Sedition a fruit of ambition.
the fault of ambition (says Aristotle) that many seditions arise in cities.
For the mightier, not the vulgar sort, contend for honors and promotions. But
if, as Plato writes, there were a Commonwealth of good men, you should see as
great strife for the avoiding of offices, as now men contend to command and
rule. Also the honor of a good man (says Plutark to Traian) consists not in
that estate or office which he presently inioieth, but in his former deserts;
so that it is to the office whereunto men give new honor, as for the person he
has but a painful charge. Out of the sayings of these great Philosophers, we
will draw this conclusion, that we must labor more to deserve estates and
honors, than dare to procure them, and account that thing unworthy and
unbeseeming us, which is obtained by unlawful means. Now, as the ambitious
man is intolerable in all his actions, so especially he brings himself in
derision and reproach, through this burning desire of glory and praise, which
he looks that others should yield unto him, and wherein he takes
unmeasurable delight. Now, if he perceives that he cannot be commended
Ambitious men full of selfe-praise.
for his doings that are unworthy of honor, the thirst of glory wherewith he
pineth away, compels him to borow of himself by his own commendation
against all seemelines: which is neither more nor less, than if the body of a
man in time of famine, not receiving nourishment elsewhere, should take of it
own substance against nature. Further, if we should go about here to make
recital of those notable evils and mischiefs, which the ambition of some
particular men has brought upon Monarchies, cities, and Commonwealths, and
generally upon all those persons which were under their bloody reign, the
whole life of one man would not suffice to describe them. But to touch this
point briefly: we may note in all ancient histories, that the greatest plagues
of flourishing Civil wars a fruit of ambition.
estates, and oftentimes their utter subversion, came from civil wars and
dissentions stirred up by ambitious men, desirous to command, and to be
preferred before others. What did at any time procure the ruin of Grecia,
flourishing in arms and sciences, so much as the ambition of those men who
sought to bring the public offices into their own hands, as Leosthenes,
Demosthenes, and many others did, who were not afraid to kindle the fire of
domestical division, not caring what would be the issue of their damnable
enterprises, so they might make way for their devised platformes? How many
mischiefs did Alcibiades Alcibiades.
procure to his country, being an enemy to peace, and given to all kind of
novelties and seditions? Who used to say, that a noble heart ought to labor but
for one thing in this world, namely, to be great among his own countrymen,
and to purchase fame and renown among strangers. Which had been well spoken,
if he had added, by Justice, and Virtue. Was it not from the same fountain of
ambition, that so hurtful wars to both those Commonwealths of the
Lacedaemonians and Athenians, the one being masters of the sea, and the other
of the land, took their beginning, and thereby were both brought to ruin in
the end? Was it not the same cause of ambition in certain particular men,
which procured the speedy return of that good king Agesilaus, to redress the
civil dissentions of Grecia, when he was in Asia continuing those goodly
victories, which he had against the Barbarians, for the comfort and liberty of
many Grecian cities? O ye Grecians (said that wise Prince, being then very
sorrowful) how many more mischiefs do ye procure to your selves, than were
procured unto you by the Barbarians banded together for your overthrow, seeing
ye are A very fit admonition for France.
so unhappy as to stay with your own hands that good speed, which conducted
you to the top of felicity, and to turn back into your own entrails, those
weapons which were so well guided against your enemies, by calling back the
war into your own country, from whence it was so happily banished? The
great and large scope of the Roman Empire over three parts of the Caesar and
Pompey.
world, could not satisfy the ambition of Caesar and Pompey, whilst the one
could abide no equal, and the other no superior: insomuch, that they omitted
and forgot no means to increase their greatness, although it were with the
charges of the Commonwealth. As we may read among other things of Caesar, who,
to ground and underprop his power well for continuance, gave at one time to
Paulus the Consul, nine hundred thousand crowns, for fear lest he should
oppose himself against his enterprises: and to Curio the Tribune he gave
fifteen hundred thousand crowns, that he should take his part. After the
death of The Triumuirate.
these two Princes, that great dominion could no better content the
Triumuirate, namely, Octauius, Antonius, and Lepidus, who by force of arms
ceased not to put their country to sword and fire, until the sovereign
authority became resident in one alone. But why should we seek among the
Ancients, or amongst our neighbors for examples of the pernicious effects of
this vice, seeing we have so many at our own gates? Who kindled that fire in
France, which had taken hold of all the parts thereof, and The ambition of the
Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy.
almost consumed it utterly under the reign of the Dukes of Orleans and
Burgundy, who strove together for the government of the kingdom? Were there
not upon the same occasion more than four thousand men slain in one day
within Paris, the most of them being men of name, at the instigation and
procurement of the Duke of Burgundy, who had taken possession thereof? But alas
the continual and present remembrance of our late and unspeakable miseries,
procured chiefly from the same fountain of ambition, and known to women and
children, staieth me from seeking farther for testimonies of this our present
matter. Yea, I fear greatly, that we shall shortly see (I would to God I might
be deceived) the final and entire ruin of our Monarchy, which has
flourished as long as ever any did, and continued longer unvanquished of
strangers. For we see her own children bathing their hands in her blood, and
seeking to pluck out Ambitious men can be no good counselors to Princes.
her heart and intrailes, and to cast them as a pray before her enemies. O how
would Princes chase far from them all ambitious persons, if they were well
instructed in virtue, and in the knowledge of those evils which such men
procure! seeing it is impossible that any good counsel should proceed from
them, but only such as tends to the advancement of their private greatness.
Now if ambition be the mother of civil wars, is it not the same also of all
other wars, which are daily bred between Kings and Princes, through the
desire of increasing their bounds, of seazing upon other men's territories, to
the treading down, oppression, and ruin of their poor subjects, and
oftentimes of their own estats? Is it not ambition which blinds men so, that
they are not content to be chief among a million of others over whom they
command, unless they be equal or superior to one or two of those whom they know
to be greater than themselves? The desire of having more (says Plutark) is a
vice common to Princes Effects of ambition in great men.
and great Lords, which, by reason of ambition and desire to rule, brings
forth in them oftentimes an unsociable, cruel, and beastly nature. And as
Ennius says, there is no faith or assured society in kingdoms. For they,
whose greedines neither sea, nor mountains, nor inhabitable deserts can stay,
and whose insatiable desire of having, cannot be limited with those bounds,
which separate Asia from Europe, how will they content themselves with their
own, and not seek to usurp that which belongs to another, especially when
their confines and borders touch one another, and are joined so near together,
that nothing is between them? It is impossible. And in truth, how soever they
dissemble, they purposely war one with another, watching continually for
means to surprise and ouerreach each other. But in outward show they use these
The names of Peace and War abused much by Princes.
two words of Peace and War, as a piece of money, according as it shall make
best for their purpose, not for duties sake, or upon reason and justice, but
for their own profit and advantage, wickedly disguising in that manner the
intermission and surceasing from the execution of their ill will and purpose,
with the holy name of justice and amity. Princes therefore must not think it
strange, if sometime private men (howbeit that does not excuse them) find the
like dealing profitable unto them, according as it falls out for their
purpose. For in so doing, they do but imitate and follow them that are their
masters in all disloialtie, treason, and infidelity, thinking that he
bestirreth himself, who least of all observes that which equity and justice
require. This did Dionides the pirat fitly give Alexander the Great to
understand, when he asked of him why Dionides answer to Alexander.
he troubled the whole sea, and robbed every one. Know (quoth he to him) that
thou and I are of one disposition and calling, except in this, that I am called
a Pirate for skouring the seas with a few men, and thou a prince, because thou
inuadest and spoilest every where with great and mighty armies. But if thou
were Dionides and I Alexander, it may be I should be a better prince than thou
a good pirate. With which free speech Alexander was so delighted, that in stead
of a guilty man brought before him to be punished, as was Dionides, he made
him one of his great captains. But to continue our matter, if Right (say
Ambitious men) may be violated, it is to be violated for a kingdom. O speech
full of all impiety, yea such as will cause the^ Examples of the fruits of
ambition.
to buy the violating of so holy a thing very deerly, seeing they spare not him
who calls himself equity and justice it self. Further, if (as histories
teach us) some have been so wretched and miserable, as to give themselves to
the Art of Necromancie, and to contract with the devil, that they might come
to sovereign power and authority, what other thing, how strange soever it be,
will not they undertake that suffer themselves to be wholly carried away with
this vice of ambition? It is ambition that sets the son against the
father, and imboldeneth him to seek his destruction of whom he holds his
life. Henry the fifth by force deprived his father from the Empire, and caused
him Fredericus. 3.
to die miserably in prison. Frederick the third, after he had reigned thirty
years, was miserably strangled by Manfroy his bastard son, whom he had made
prince of Tarentum. And after he had committed this Parricide, he poisoned his
brother Conradus, lawful inheritor to Frederick, that he might make himself
king of Naples. Antoninus and Geta, brothers and successors in the Empire to
Seuerus their father, could not suffer one another to enjoy so large Antonius
and Geta. Solomon.
a Monarchy: for Antoninus slew his brother Geta with a dagger, that himself
might rule alone. Solomon king of the Turks, grandfather to him that now
reigns, when he heard the loud acclamations and shoutes for joy which all his
army made to Sultan Mustapha his son, returning out of Persia, after he had
caused him to be strangled in his outward chamber, and presently to be cast out
dead before his whole army, he made this speech to be published with a loud
voice, that there was but one God in heaven, and one Sultan upon earth. Within
two days he put to death Sultan Soba, because he wept for his brother, and
Sultan Mahomet his third son, because he fled for fear, leaving one only
alive to avoid the inconueniencie of many Lords. These are but of the smaller
fruits of this wild plant of ambition, in respects of those that cause men to
put innocents to death, that themselves may take surer footing to grow up and
increase. And no doubt but for the most part, just punishment for example to
me^, follows such an ambitious passion, whereof there are infinite examples
both in the Greek and Latin histories. Marcus Marcus Crassus justly punished
for his ambition.
Crassus a Roman Consul, and the richest man in his time, not contenting
himself with many goodly victories gotten by him, but burning with an excessive
ambition and desire of new triumphs, and being jealous of Caesar's glory,
obtained by his great feats of arms, presumed at the age of three score years
to undertake the war against Arsaces king of the Parthians, contrary to the
will of the Senate, feeding himself with vain hope, which led him to a
shameful death joined with public loss and calamity. For being overcome and
his army discomfited, he was miserably slain with twenty thousand of his
men, and ten thousand taken prisoners. Marius having passed Marius.
through all the degrees of honor, and been six times Consul, which never any
Roman before was, not content with all this, would notwithstanding take unto
himself the charge of the war against Mithridates, which fell to Sylla by
lot, even then when he was weakened with old age, thinking with himself to
get the Consulship the seventh time, and to continue that sovereign authority
in his own person. But this was the cause of his utter overthrow, and of that
slaughter, whereby all Italy and Spain were imbrued with blood by Sylla, and
the popular estate brought in the end to extreme tyranny. Spurius Melius a
Senator S. Melius.
of Rome, was murdered for his ambition, and his house rased by Cincinnatus
the Dictator, because he sought by means of a certain distribution of wheat,
to make himself M. Manlius.
king of Rome. Marcus Manlius was also upon the like occasion thrown down
headlong from the top of a rock. Therefore it appears sufficiently unto us
how pernicious this vice of ambition is in the souls of great men, and worthy
of perpetual blame. And although the matter be not of so great weight, when
they that follow this vicious passion are but mean men and of small account,
yet we are to know, that all they depart far from duty and honesty, who,
for the obtaining of glory and renown, show themselves inflamed and desirous
to excel others in all those things which they ought to have common How and
wherein we may seek for honor.
together for the mutual aid and comfort of every one. Only we must seek,
without pride and envy, after excellency and preferment in that which is
virtuous, and profitable for humain society, contenting our selves
notwithstanding with that, which we are able to perform, and so we shall never
be blamed: but justly may we be condemned, if we undertake that which is above
our strength. Especially let our desires and passions give place to the Cretes
and Hermias.
benefit of the Commonwealth, as heretofore Cretes and Hermias, two great men
of Magnesia, dealt one toward an other. Their city being besieged by
Mithridates, and themselves having before been at great strife for honor and
pre-eminence, Cretes offered Hermias to let him have the charge of captain
general, in the mean time he would depart the city, or if he had rather
depart, that he should leave that office to him. This offer he made, lest if
both of them should be together, their jealousy might breed some mischief to
their country. Hermias seeing the honest offer of his companion, and knowing
him to be more expert in feats of war, willingly surrendered the authority of
commanding unto him. Now to end our present discourse, let us learn to know
their outrageous folly, who for imaginary honors, and those of so small
continuance, that the wise man compares them to smoke dispersed of the wind,
desire nothing more than to run out the race of their days in continual
miseries and calamities, travels and cares, depriving themselves of all
liberty, and which is worse, pawning their souls to an eternal and most
miserable thraldom. Thus let us detest ambition, which is an infinite evil and
companion of pride, so much hated of God and men. Let us consider a little that
point of Philosophy which we find written by Traian to Plutarke. I envy (said
Traians letter to Plutarke.
this good prince) Cincinnatus, Scipio Africanus, and Marcus Portius, more for
their contempt of offices, than for the victories which they have gotten:
because a conqueror is for the most part in fortunes power, but the contempt
and refusal of offices and honors consists only in prudence. Let us mark
well the example of the emperor Flauius Vespasianus, who being admonished by
his friends to beware of one Metius Pomposianus, (because Vespasianus.
it was a common rumor that he should one day be emperor) was so far from
procuring him any harm or displeasure, or from hating or envying him, (as it
is the property of ambitious men, to fear above all things least their estate
be touched, because they would reign alone) that contrariwise he made him
Consul the next year. Whereat his familiar friends wondering, and dissuading
him from it, My meaning is (quoth he to them) that he should one day remember
this good turn. Let us also propound to kings and princes that sentence of
Titus the emperor, who making a feast one day with a cheerful countenance to
the contentation of every one, in the end of the banquet struck himself on
the breast at the table, and fetched a great sigh withal: Whereupon his
favorites demanding the cause why, I cannot (quoth he) keep my self from
sighing A notable saying of Titas.
and complaining, when I call to mind that this great honor which I have,
depends upon the will of fortune: that my estates and dignities are as it
were in sequestration, and my life as it were laid in pawn and pledged unto
me. Let the saying of that good prince Another of Philip king of Macedonia.
Philip king of Macedonia be well noted of great men, who on a day falling all
along in that place where wrestling was exercised, and beholding the fashion of
his body printed in the dust, Good Lord (quoth he) how little ground must we
have by nature, and yet we desire all the habitable world. According to his
example let us all humble our selves in the acknowledgement of our imbecillitie
and poor humain estate, and let us moderate our unruly affections through the
contempt of those things which worldly men desire and seek after, judging them
an unworthy reward for virtue. Let every one of us content himself with his
estate and calling, so that it tends to the right end, namely, to his glory
that gave it unto us, and to the benefit and profit of his creatures, and let
all be done according to that measure of graces which he shall bestow upon us.


Of Voluptuousnes and Lechery. Chap. 22.
ACHITOB. AMong those faults which men commit, being led with desire and
pleasure that is naturally in them, we noted a little before, luxuriousnes and
whoredom. But because we then reserved it to a more ample handling of
Voluptuousnes, and of a lustful life, which is the chief work thereof, and
whose desire and contentation is in lechery, to the end we may the better
discover that sugared poison, which lurketh under these detestable vices, I am
of opinion that we must begin to enter into this large field, so fruitful for
thorns and thistles, which to sick eyes many times seem fair blossoms of
some goodly fruits: propounding to the sight of every one, the nature and
effects of the tyrannical power of pleasure, a mortal enemy to the reign of
Virtue.


ASER. Pleasure (says Plato) is the hook of all evils, because men are taken
thereby as fish by a hook. For it Pleassure the hook of all evil.
quenches the light of the soul, hinders all good counsel, and through
inticements turns men aside from the way of virtue, throwing them down
headlong into the gulf of confusion, which is luxuriousnes and whoredom, a
most wicked and abominable vice above all others, whereby all virtue is hurt and
offended.


AMANA. He that is given to pleasure (says Cicero) judges all things, not
according to reason, but according to sense, esteeming that best, which most
delights him: so that he easily suffers himself to be kindled with the
burning fire of luxuriousnes, which is hurtful to every age, and
extinguisheth old age. But let us hear ARAM upon this matter.


ARAM. It is no new opinion, that many judging according to their sensuality,
and being altogether ignorant of the true nature and immortality of the soul,
have placed their sovereign Good in pleasure, and in the enjoying of those
things which most of all tickle the senses. Aristippus Who they were that
placed their chief Good in pleasure.
and all the Cyrinaiks, Epicurus, Metrodorus, Chrysippus, and many others, who
falsely took unto themselves the name of Philosophers, labored to prove it by
many arguments, cloking their wickedness with grave and lofty words, saying:
that none could perfectly attain to pleasure, except he were virtuous and
wise. But that which Cicero alleges against them, is sufficient to discover
the mask of their impudency, and to convince them of lying: namely, that we
must not simply look to men's sayings, but consider whether they agree in their
opinions. For how is it possible, that he which places his chief Good in the
pleasure of the body, and in neuer-feeling grief, should make account of, or
embrace virtue, which is an enemy to delights and pleasures, and commands us
rather to suffer a cruel and dolorous death, than to start aside against
duty? It is certain, that he which places his chief. Good in pleasure, has
no regard to do any thing but for his private profit. Whereby he declares
sufficiently, that he cares not at all for virtue, especially justice, which
commands nothing so much, as to leave our own particular pleasure and
profit, and to embrace, though with our peril and loss, the public welfare.
Moreover, how could he be courageous, if he thought that grief were the
extremest and greatest evil, or temperate, supposing pleasure to be perfect
felicity? Besides, what can be more unbeseeming man, appointed for all great
and excellent things, than to take that for his chief Good, whereof brute
beasts have better part than we, and to leave the care of that which is divine
and immortal in us, to attend to that which is mortal and subject to
corruption? But these erroneous and false opinions, being contrary to
themselves, are so absurd and full of blockish ignorance, that we need not
here loose much time in confuting them, and conuincing them of lies.
Notwithstanding, it being so common a thing with men, to embrace pleasure as
the principal end of their actions, because naturally they desire pleasure,
and shun grief: it will be easy for us to show, that ignorance only guides
them, when being deprived of the knowledge of that Good which is to be wished
for, and is pleasant and acceptable, they seek after, through an evil choice,
the greatest mischief of all, I mean pleasure, unseparably followed of
grief, which men labor most of all to eschew. Let us then see what What
pleasure is.
pleasure is, and what fruits she brings with her. Voluptuousnes or pleasure
(says Cicero) is properly called that delight, which moves and tickleth our
senses, which slideth and slippeth away, and for the most part leaves behind
it occasions rather of repentance, than of calling it again to remembrance. For
many through wicked and unnecessary pleasure have fallen intogreat diseases,
received great losses, and suffered many reproaches. It always (says Plato)
brings damage and loss to man, ingendring in his mind sorrow, sottishnes,
forgetfulness of prudence, and insolency. Wheresoever sweet is (says The
fruits of pleasure.
Antipho) there presently follows sour. For voluptuousnes never goes alone,
but is always accompanied with sorrow and grief. Pleasure (says Plutark)
resolves men's bodies, mollifieng them daily through delights, the continual
use of which mortifieth their vigor, and dissolueth their strength, from whence
abundance of diseases proceeds, so that a man may see in youth the beginnings
of the weakness of old age. Voluptuousnes is a cruel beast, making men her
slaves, and chaining them (as Sophocles says) with diamond chains. She is so
much the more odious, by how much the more she hides her venom, putting upon
her the garment of good liking, betraying virtue, and killing a man even when
she flattereth him. When pleasures come (says Erasmus) they flatter us with a
disguised visage, and when they depart, they leave us full of sorrow and sadness.
Which Xenophon very wittily The sundry profers which Vice and Virtue made to
Hercules.
devised under the name of Hercules, saying: that as he went one day into the
fields, in a certain threefold highway he met Virtue and Vice, both of them
being in the shape and apparel of women. Vice being clothed in a stately,
delicate, gorgeous and lascivious gown, with a smiling, painted, and colored
countenance, which did wonderful allure by reason of the sweetness and
flourishing beauty that seemed to be in it, offered her self suddenly unto the
said Hercules, saying: that if he would follow her, she would cause him to lead
his whole life in delight and pleasure. But Virtue with a sorrowful, lean, and
dismayed face, and clad with a long and plain robe, without any decking of her
speech, used these words: If thou will come to me Hercules, thou shall be
endued, not with bodily ornaments, nor with vading and vanishing beauty, but
with certain other riches which are more worth, and endure for ever. For
whosoever believes me, forsaking that which seems fair, and cleaving to
those things which outwardly appear austere and hard, he receives in the end
an eternal felicity. Let us unclothe voluptuous men (says Plutark) and
consider their doings. They are drunkards, whoremongers, sluggish in all
weighty matters, neglecting the benefit of the Commonwealth, of their parents
and of their friends. But of all kind of voluptuousnes, Lechery is most
defiled, filthy, vile, and pernicious, whereof especially we are now to
discourse, being What whoredom is.
properly called of the Philosophers a furious passion, which corrupts the
sense of man, and a burning fire that consumes him. All unmeasurable pleasure,
which men take by their five senses, is vile and dishonest: but the Grecians
after a special manner called those men incontinent and immoderate, who
exceeded in tasting and touching. And Hippocrates said, that he supposed
copulation to be a part of that foul disease, which we call the Epilepsie The
effects of immoderate copulation.
or falling sickness. And truly there is nothing more certain, than that
immoderate use of the venereous act spoileth beauty, defiles the body,
dries it up, and causes it to stink, makes the face pale, wanne or yellow,
weakneth the members and ioints, ingendreth Sciaticke goutes, colic passions,
griefs of the stomach, giddines of the head, or dimnes of sight, the leprosy
and pocks. It Osey. 4. 11.
shortneth life, takes away the understanding, darkeneth the memory, and as
the Prophet Osey says, takes away the heart. Moreover, how odious all
whoredom ought to be unto us, so that it be not so much as once named amongst
us, the only curse that is laid upon it of God, ought sufficiently to persuade
us, seeing thereby he condemns it both with temporal and with eternal
death. But we have besides, many goodly sentences and notable examples of
Ethnicks and Pagans, and namely of the just punishment, which for the most part
followed this detestable vice hard at the heels, and which ought to stir us up
to hate it, and to fly from it with all our might, especially when adultery
is joined therewith, which is when The effects and end of concupiscence.
the sacred knot of marriage is violated and broken. Concupiscence (says
Aristotle) changes men's bodies, and breeds madness in their souls. The end
thereof is luxuriousnes, from whence proceed a thousand wrongs, violences,
incests, murders, poisonings, and innumerable other impieties. Is it not then a
sign of great loosenes and baseness of mind, for a man to subject himself to
carnal concupiscences, which are disordered desires contrary to reason, and
whose office and practice is to choose evil for good? Let us here give ear to
Socrates disputation with Enthydemus, being very fit for our present matter.
Socrates disputation against incontinencie.
Tell me O Euthydemus, do thou think that liberty is a good, great, and
profitable possession, whether it belongs either to a man, or to a city?
Very great. Therefore whosoever serves the pleasures and unbridled desires
of the body, so that for love of them he cannot execute that which he knows
to be very good, Do thou think that he is free? No. It may be thou iudgest
it a thing worthy a free man to be able to put in practice whatsoever he
takes to be good, and contrariwise, to be hindered from so doing, to be servile
and slavish. So it is. Thou beleeuest then that no incontinent men are free.
Yea truly, and that justly. Think thou that incontinent men are hindered from
doing that which is honest, or compelled to commit vicious things? I think
they are as much compelled to do the one, as hindered from practicing the
other. But what masters do thou think them to be, who forbid well doing,
and constrain men to embrace evil? In good truth, very wicked. And do thou
not think that bondage of all others most troublesome, when one serves most
wicked and naughty masters? Yea. Then incontinent men are of all others most
miserable, of what estate or condition soever they be. Besides, he that never
thinks upon goodness, but seeks by all means to fulfill his untamed desires
of pleasure and lust, has no more use of reason, than beasts have. This wise
Philosopher teaches us sufficiently how hurtful and pernicious a thing it is
to suffer the desires of the flesh to reign in us, considering that they draw
us vehemently to the practice of them, to our own destruction: especially The
fruits of whoredom.
whoredom, which brings with it all kind of mischief, dissolueth and weakneth
the body, and offends all the virtues and goods of the soul. Through her it
comes that men abase themselves so low, as to submit both their bodies and
souls to the inconstant will and unruly desire of a foolish woman. For we see
some men so bewitched with a harlot, that if need be, and she command it,
they will hazard their honor and credit, and oftentimes make themselves an
example to a whole country upon an open scaffold. And then they labor to cover
their folly with this goodly name of Love, which is better termed of Euripides
by the name of Fury and madness in men. For true and good love, which is the
fountain of frie^dship, is alwais grounded upon virtue, and tends to that
end: but this slipperie and loose love, is a desire founded upon the opinion
of a Good, which in deed is a most pernicious evil. And if adultery follow
vp^ it (which The miserable effects of Adultery.
according to Aristotle is a curious inquiry after another man's love) the vice
is two fold more detestable and wicked, because that he which commits it,
seeks against all duty of nature to take away another man's honor and
reputation, spoileth him of that which he accounts most precious, namely, of
the love and friendship of his wife, breaks the peace of a house, causes the
wife to loose her soul, who otherwise peradventure would not have yielded, if
he had not corrupted her. In a word, it is the cause of infinite miseries and
offenses which we daily see come to pass. Amongthe Ancients this vice was so
odious, that it was narowly sought out, and chasticed with very grievous
punishments. In so much that Julius Caesar caused one of his captains to be
beheaded, because he had dishonored the mistress of the house where he
lodged, not staying until one accused him, and without any complaint made unto
him by her husband. There was a law among Zaleucus law against adultery.
the Locrians, established by Zaleucus, which condemned all those that were
convicted of this vice of adultery, to have their eyes pulled out. This law was
afterward so well kept, that his son being taken with the fact, and all the
people entreating for him, Zaleucus would never suffer the punishment to be any
thing lessened. And yet to satisfy their importunity in some sort, he caused
one of his own, and another of his sons eyes to be plucked out, choosing
rather to bear half the punishment allotted for the offense, than that it
should remain unpunished, and the law The law of lulia against adulterers.
violated. Augustus Caesar made the law Iulia, entitled of Adulteries, wherein
is declared, how process ought to proceed against those that are attainted of
it, and how such as are convicted thereof are to be punished, even to permit
the father to kill his daughter being taken in the fact with the adulterer.
After that Fabius Fabritius was slain by his wife through treachery, to the
end that she might have greater liberty to commit adultery, one of his
younger sons when he came to age slew his mother with the adulterer, and was
absolved thereof by the Senate. We read also The punishment of adulterers used
among the Egyptians.
that the lest punishment used by the Egyptians against adulterers, was to cut
off the womans nose, and the privy parts of the man. Briefly, we shall find,
that in all nations where honor and civility is never so little regarded, this
vice of adultery has been grievously punished, and greatly hated of all noble
minds. Herein the example of Alexander Alexander hated adultery.
is worthy to be remembered, who, when a woman was brought unto him one evening,
demanded of her why she came so late: to whom she answered, that she stayed
until her husband was gone to bed. Which he no sooner heard, but he sent her
away, being very angry with his men, because they had almost caused him to
commit adultery. He would not so much as touch his friends Concubine, although
he loved her: and he took on wonderfully with Cassander, because he would by
force kiss a minstrels maid. So far off was he from being willing to suffer
his courtiers to force any wives or daughters of his subjects, or to induce
them to suborne any for him. But contrary wise, we see now adays, that they
are most esteemed of great Anthony duke of Venice.
men whose skill is greatest in corrupting of women. Antonius Venereus duke of
Venice may be unto them an example worthy to be followed, who caused his own
son to die in prison, because he had ravished a maid. But let us Testimonies
of Gods wrath against whoredom.
note a little the eye witnesses of Gods wrath, who never, or very seldom
suffers whoredom to go without present payment meet for such perverse
wickedness. The reading of holy Scriptures does furnish us with notable
examples, Numb. 25. 9. This sin of David was in numbering the people, as
appears, 2. Sam. 24. 1.
in the death of four and twenty thousands Israelites for whoredom: in the
punishment of the same sin committed by David, with the death of more than
threescore thousand men in Israel: in the punishment of the same sin in
Solomon upon his son, who was deprived of ten 1. King* 12.
parts of his kingdom: in the overthrow of the Cities of Genesis 19.
Sodomah and Gomorrah, and in many other places. When Satan seeks for a
ready way to cause men to fall, he commonly uses whoredom. When Balaam taught
Balaac that subtle practice to cause the Israelites to commit idolatry, it
was by means of the fair women of his country, thereby to cause them to fall
into the wrath and indignation of God. Concerning histories written by men, the
number of examples of Gods wrath upon whoremongers is infinite, of which we
will here allege some, making mention of violent punishments, and of the
deprivation and subversion of flourishing estates, which The danger that
depends upon the loosenes of a Prince.
have proceeded from the same cause of whoredom. And truly it is more dangerous
for a Prince in regard of his estate, than any other vice, yea than cruelty it
self. For cruelty makes men fearful, and strikes a terror in the
subjects, but whoredom draws with it hatred and contempt of the Prince:
because every one judges an effeminate man unworthy to command a whole
people. Tarquinius.
Tarquinius king of Rome, for his loftines surnamed the proud, was deprived of
his kingdom, because of the violence which one of his sons offered to
Lucretia, a Roman Lady. And although he gathered together great forces,
thinking thereby to reenter into his estate, yet he could never attain
thereunto. Since which time the name of a king has been so odious among the
Romans, that they would never suffer any to bear that title amongst them, but
from that time forward, changed the government of a Monarchy into a Democraty
or popular estate, abolishing all laws appertaining to a king. In place of
which they sent to the Athenians for Solons laws, which afterward were
observed by the Romans, and called the Appius Claudius.
laws of the twelve Tables. Appius Claudius, one of those ten that had all
authority in the government of the Roman estate, because he would have
ravished Virginia, daughter to Virginius a Citizen of Rome, who slew her to
save her honor, was banished with all his companions in that office, and their
manner of government changed into the authority of Consuls. What was like to
have befallen Caesar.
that mighty Caesar, after he had conquered France, Almaigne, England, Spain,
Italy, and Pompey himself, but a shameful death, by reason of a foolish love,
which caused him to go into Alexandria in disguised apparel to enjoy
Cleopatra, where an Eunuch and a child had almost slain him, if he had not
cast himself from a high tower into the sea, and so saved himself by swimming
to his Teundezillus.
camp under the galleys of his enemies? Teundezillus king of Spain was, for
committing violent adultery with a lady of a noble house, deprived both of
life and kingdom. Caracalla.
Marcus Antonius Caracalla Emperor, being carried away with intemperate lust,
married his mother in law: and within a while after he lost both his empire and
life. Childericus Childericus.
the first of that name, king of France, after he had reigned a long time, was
driven out of his kingdom for John Earl of Arminack.
his whoredom. John, County of Arminack, married one of his own sisters, and
being therefore excommunicated of the Church, was deprived of his estate and
life by the Emperor Charlemaigne. Rodoaldus king of Lumbardy being Rodoaldus.
taken in adultery, was slain by the woman's husband, Roderigo.
whom he abused. Roderigo king of Spain, was deprived of his kingdom and life
by the Sarrasins, who were called in by an earl named Julian, that he might be
avenged of Galeatius Duke of Millan.
his king, who had forced his daughter. Galeatius Maria Duke of Millan being at
mass, was slain by a Citizen, who stroke him into the stomach with a dagger,
faining that he would have spoken with him. The chief cause heerof was for a
suspicion which he had conceived, that this Prince entertained his wife. In the
time of Philip the Two brothers flaied alive.
fair, king of France, two knights that were brothers, named d'Aunoy, were
flaied alive for their whoredoms committed with a Queen of Navarre, and with
the Countess of March, daughter to the County of Burgundy, which twain also
were condemned to perpetual prison. Not long since, Peter Jews Duke of
Placentia, was murdered Peter Jews.
for his incests, and incredible whoredoms. Among other things, it is written of
him, that he forced Cosmes Chers bishop of Valentia, whom he caused to be held
by his men, and after poisoned him, least he should have accused him to the
Emperor. Also not long ago, the cities Almendine and Delmedin.
of Almendine and Delmedine, were cut off from the kingdom of Fez, and brought
under obedience to the Portingales, because a young woman was taken away by
force from her husband, by the Governor of them, who was afterward Abusahid.
slain. Abusahid also king of Fez, was murdered with six of his children by
his Secretary, whose wife he had abused. This is set down by Leon in the
description of Afric. In our time, and even amongst us, too many such
examples of the pernicious fruits of whoredom have fallen out. Nevertheless, it
bears such sway in this desolate The whoredom of Frenchmen.
France, that they are accounted the gallantest men, who are the greatest
pillars of whoredom. Yea, the greater sort, that ought to be paterns of
chastity to others, are bold in the practice thereof, thinking to cover their
shame, to cloak and disguise their whoredom with the mask of virtue,
accounting it a point of glory and honor to be the chiefest and most expert in
that school. But let us know that this visard is but to make them altogether
without excuse before him, from whom nothing can be hidden, and who abhors
all maliciousnes and shameless impudency, wherewith whoremongers set forth their
face. And seeing that he, whose mercy is endless, supplieth the want and
infirmity of his creatures, this vice of whoredom is without all color of
excuse before him, because he has given us a holy and honorable remedy
against it, which is marriage, permitted to every one, but yet despised of all
whoremongers, to their ruin and eternal confusion. And if they were not
wholly blinded The scourges hat France (...)
through continuance in vice, the scourges of civil war, of heresy, of
famine, and of rebellion, which France at this day suffers, would be more
than enough to vnseele their eyes, that they might acknowledge the wrath of the
Almighty, ready to destroy them both body and soul. Therefore let us that
are better instructed by our Academie, learn of Socrates, that a wise man
ought to pass by pleasures as by the Sirens, if he long to attain to virtue,
his most happy country and dwelling place. And for a Good counsel against
whoredom.
good help heerunto, let us take the counsel of Epictetus, saying: When thy
spirit is drawn with some desire of pleasure, beware thou tumble not into
some downfall: and meditate a little, considering diligently, that after thou
have been overcome of pleasure, there remains nothing but repentance, and
thy hatred against thy self. Where as if thou abstainest, a steadfast and
assured joy possesses thy heart, which wholly drives away sorrow. Thus let us
endeavor to deck our selves with purity, chastity, and vprightnes, hating in
such sort voluptuousnes and lechery (the dear and costly pleasure whereof
passes away as the wind, and leaves behind it a shameful remembrance) that
following the will of our lawmakers, we shun all dissolutenes tending that way,
whether it be immodest garments, unchaste gestures and countenances, or vile and
filthy words, which may induce others to evil. Let us remember in good time
what Archelaus, a Greek Philosopher said to a young man clothed with
superfluous apparel, that it was all one in what part soever of his body he
declared his unchasteness, and that it was evermore to be condemned. But above
all things let that divine sentence sound without ceasing in our ears, that no
whoremonger has any inheritance 1. Cor. 6. 9. Ephesians. 5. 5.
in the kingdom of Jesus Christ. And if, being naturally given to love
pleasure, and to fear grief, we would delight our soul with a joy that is
both profitable and pleasant: let us lift it up in the meditation of those
unspeakable and endless riches, which are promised unto it in that happy
immortality: and so we shall weaken and make fruitles that desire of worldly
pleasure, which is borne together with us.


Of glory, praise, honor, and of pride. Chap. 23.
ARAM. MEn having their eyes covered with ignorance, use commonly to say, that
he has a great lofty and noble mind, who aspireth to honors, estats, riches,
and other worldly vanities. The judgment of ignorant men touching noblenes of
mind.
Albeit truly, if we narrowly look unto the end wherefore they direct their
intents and actions that way, we shall see nothing else in them but a desire of
vainglory and praise, thereby to feed their pride and natural passions,
which are so pernicious in the soul, that if they be not ruled by temperance
and mediocritie, and grounded upon virtue, which is the fountain of honor, they
will bring forth very dangerous effects, clean contrary to men's desires.


ACHITOB. They (says Seneca) that would make How we should make choice of a
happy life.
choice of a happy life, must not follow the fashion and manner of life used by
the multitude and greatest part of men, but such a one as is altogether
contrary thereunto. And this we shall do, if we despise the glory, honor, praise
and pride of the world, and judge nothing worthy to be cared for of us, but
only virtue, which is able to bring us to the fullness of true glory, and of
everlasting felicity.


ASER. The glory (says Pindarus) that a man takes to see himself in honor
and credit, makes pains to seem pleasant, and travel tolerable. It is the
property of a stone (says Cicero) not to have any feeling of the difference
that is between praise and dispraise: but it belongs to a wise man not to be
so moved with all these things, as that they should cause him to draw back
from duty. Let us tha^ hear AMANA discourse more at large of the matter
which is here propounded unto us.


AMANA. The common down fall of the passions of the soul.
Most certain it is, that commonly nothing affects a man more than the
coveting of glory, of praise and of honor, whereof he is by nature desirous.
But as all the passions and diseases of the soul are for the most part followed
with those inconveniences, which men pretend most of all to eschew, so
oftentimes they that glaunce at honor, as if that were virtue it self, leaving
behind them the path of that virtue from whence honor ought to proceed, and
which is able of it self to adorn and deck men, fall into the same reckoning
that Ixion did, who (as the Poets say) had to do with a cloud, supposing it to
have been the goddess luno, whereupon the Centaures were engendered. Even so
worldly men embracing vainglory only, which is but a false shadow of true
virtue, all their doings deserve so small commendation, that if they were well
waied, they should rather be found worthy of blame and dishonor, than of that
honor, which they so greatly seek and ask after. For this cause the ancient
Romans built two Temples joined together, the one being dedicated The Romans
built two Temples, the one to Virtue, and the other to Honor.
to Virtue, and the other to Honor: but yet in such sort, that no man could
enter into that of Honor, except first he passed through the other of Virtue.
But seeing the way of virtue is so little frequented at this day, no marvel (as
Hesiodus says) if so great a heap of wickedness be dispersed through the
world, that all shame and honor have forsaken and abandoned the life of man.
Now if an honest man prefer the loss of his honor before his own life, to
the end he be none of those that content themselves with a deceitful Idea and
platform, in stead of the thing it self, let him learn above all things to
know wherein true glory and honor consist, and from whence he may deserve
praise: which first is in Goodness and Justice: Secondly, in guiding all humane
actions prudently according to duty, comelines, and honesty. These are the
only means to get durable and eternal honor, glory, and praise, which always
follow virtue as the shadow does the body, having this property to make men
wise, just, good and prudent, and to bring them to the best, excellentest, and
most divine habit that can be in men, which is the vprightnes of reason and
judgment, and to the perfection (next after God) of the reasonable nature,
which is such a disposition of the soul as consents and agrees with it
self. Therefore that goodness and excellency which proceeds of wisdom and
good instruction is the first step The first step to Honor.
to come to honor, because from that as from a lively fountain flows every
virtuous and praise-woorthie action, practiced by a prudent man. For (as Cicero
says) no man can be prudent, but he must needs be good. Now this is clean
contrary to the common opinion of those that run so swiftly now adays after
honor and reputation, who, being ignorant of every good cause and reason, and
having corrupt and wicked conditions, imagine in their minds, that so long as
they do some act well liked of great men, Wherein worldlings place honor.
and for which they may be noted out by them to be men of valor, making good
penywoorths of their skin, and of their conscience also, whether it be in
fight, or in the execution of some other commandment of theirs, they shall have
cause to think themselves worthy of great honor, and to be preferred before
other men. For they suppose that honor ought to be measured by that good will
and liking which men conceive of the^, although they themselves be most wicked,
and not by the trial of the work whether it be good or evil in it self. But
I wonder at their folly. For seeing they have no goodness in them, how can
they judge what ought to be done or left undone, according to equity and
justice? And what honor will they deserve in all their actions, being guided
only with a desire of worldly glory, which (as Quintilian says) is the chief
and principal evil? Do not they also propound to themselves as a recompense of
their pain and travel, advancement to high estates and dignities, that they
may the better enjoy worldly pleasures? Whereby they become slaves to mortal
goods and riches all their life time, and deprive themselves of that precious
liberty of the soul, for which a noble heart ought to fight and to suffer
death. But a good man adorned with goodness and justice, propounds unto The
White at which every good man ought to aim.
himself a far other end. For admiring nothing but virtue, he seeks not to
be honored but in obeying her, in following her steps, and in referring all his
doings to the infallible rule thereof. He knows (as Seneca says) that glory
is to be followed, not to be desired: that it is gotten by such a noble courage
as measures al things by conscience, not doing any thing for ostentation and
vanity. The price and reward which he expects in this life for every
laudable action, is to have done it: and yet he depriueth not himself of
glory, which remains immortal unto him among good men for his just and
virtuous deeds, neither cares he at all what the wicked or ignorant sort
think or speak of him. Having laid this ground and foundation of all his
intents and purposes, he looks not to the most beaten way, nor to the present
state of things, that he might apply himself to the time, as though he feared
that he should be left behind, but desires rather to abide unknown in his
simplicity, than with the hurt and detriment of his soul, to intrude himself
among the greatest. And if he undertake, or execute any thing, he has justice
and prudence always for his guids: and then neither fear nor danger is able
to drive him from his determinate purpose, which, how soever it falls out, is
always no less worthy of honor and praise, than their actions, who do
nothing but for worldly glory, deserve blame and dispraise, which they fear
most of all, and labor to avoid. True it is, that these men, who ambitiously
seek after vain glory and greatness, may say unto me, that things go far
otherwise than I speak of, and that their doings, who apply themselves to the
pleasure and liking of the greater sort, without sparing their lives, are as
much extolled, as the others that respect the vprightnes of causes, are set
light by and contemned. But I answer them again, that it is the duty of a
prudent man, The judgment of the best, not of the most, is to be preferred
always.
rather to fear the judgment and opinion of a few wise men, than of an
ignorant multitude. Neither ought he to leave his conceived purposes grounded
upon reason for the praise of men. For they that do otherwise, declare
evidently, that they live not but for the world, having no care of the
principal and chief end of their being. Bion compared such men very fitly to
vessels with two handles, which are easily carried by the ears whethersoeuer a
man will. So these men being praised and much made of, undertake all things
boldly: yea, the burning heat of glory oftentimes carries them so far, that
they praise and commend their own doings to no purpose. Which is so unseemly
a thing (as Aristotle says) that it is more blamewoorthie than lying, which
commonly goes with it, and is also a great argument of an inconstant mind. But
as Plutark says, the more reason a man has gotten by Philosophy, the more he
loses of his pride and arrogancy, and they that have nothing before their
eyes, whereunto they aspire, but virtue and duty only, use the occasion,
time, and sequel of their affairs, without caring for any other praise than
that which proceeds from the nature, judgment and consent of all good men.
It is true, that A good man may sometime praise himself.
sometime it is tolerable in good men, yea necessary for the benefit of
others, to commend themselves in some sort, by speaking of themselves to their
advantage. As if laboring to be believed, we rendered a reason of our virtue and
goodness by our former effects, that so having means to continue our virtuous
actions to the benefit of many, we may, as it were against their wills, work
their Themistocles did so.
safety, and compel those men to receive a good turn, who shun all occasions
thereof. This caused Themistocles to use those speeches in the Council of the
Athenians, whom he perceived to be weary of him. O poor men (quoth he to
them) why do ye oftentimes receive benefits of the same parties? And another
time he used these words. In rainie and stormy weather ye have recourse to me,
as to the shelter of a tree, but when fair weather returns, ye snatch every
one a And Nestor.
branch, as ye pass by. Homer brings in Nestor rehearsing his prowes and
valiant acts, to encourage Patroclus and the other nine knights to undertake
the combat against Hector man to man. Moreover, exhortation having the
testimony of works ready at hand, and examples joined with the prick of
emulation, are lively, and woonderfully whetteth men on: yea they bring
together with courage and affection, hope of ability to attain to the end of
that The effects of pride.
thing, which is perceived not to be impossible. But in this case, as in every
other action, let us above al eschew pride, hated of God and men, and the cause
of the corruption and transgression of man's nature. Yea, it causes that work
to become wicked, which of it self is good: so that humble submission is better
than the proud boasting of our good deeds, which causes a proud man
oftentimes to fall into more detestable vices than he was in before. Now in
requiring first and chiefly those praises that proceed of bounty and
justice, my meaning is not that we should contemn, but rather search
diligently after those that procure unto us immortal glory by noble and
courageous acts, provided always that they pass not the bounds of equity and
justice. For otherwise they cannot The works of fortitude must be grounded upon
equity and justice.
but falsely be called works of fortitude and generositie, as hereafter in our
discourses upon these virtues we may understand more at large. Therefore it is
the jealousy of glory gotten by virtue, after the examples of our predecessors
that lived well, which ought to prick forward every noble heart, to build for
himself an eternal monument through heroical deeds, when duty and reason
inuit us thereunto. Thus did that good and valiant captain Mattathias behave
himself, who, denying obedience to the tyrannical edicts of Antiochus, after
he had subjected and subverted Jerusalem, and taking arms with his five
sons, went into the fields out of a poor village where he dwelt, and called
unto him such as would follow him to recover again their liberty. And after
many victories obtained by him, when he perceived that he drew near to death,
he exhorted his sons to follow his just and holy deliberatio^ without fear
of any danger. True it is (quoth Mattathias exhortation to his sons.
he to them) that our bodies are mortal, and subject to the same decree that
others are, but the memory of excellent deeds procures to it self an
immortality, whereunto I would have you aspire in such sort, that ye think
not much to die in behauing your selves valiantly. Thus it is lawful for us to
be touched, and stirred up with the jealousy of a good glory, so that it be
without envying the How jealousy of glory is tolerable.
prosperity and preferment of others, but only so far forth as it may serve
for a spur unto us to undertake and to effect all virtuous and commendable
things. As for example: Themistocles hearing of the great victory that
Themistocles.
Miltiades had obtained in the plain of Marathon, said: that that news would
let him take no rest: meaning thereby, that he should never be quiet, until by
some other act of virtue he had deserved as much praise, as did T. Flaminius.
this excellent Captain Miltiades. Titus Flaminius a Roman Consul, who
delivered Grecia from bondage, and twice in battle ranged, overthrew Philip
king of Macedonia, showed himself likewise touched greatly with a desire of
glory and honor, not to be blamed, but to be practiced of all excellent and
noble natures, by putting too his helping hand whenever he could, with the
first, yea, sometimes alone, to every matter and exploit of importance. He kept
company oftener and more gladly with those that stood in need of his help,
than with such as were able to aid him in well doing, accounting these men to
be his competitors in the purchasing of honor and glory, and the others to be
matter whereupon he might exercise his virtue. It was an argument of young
years, which seemed to promise much, and to be borne to all great enterprises,
when Julius Caesar being yet very young, and beholding the image of Alexander
the Caesar wept at the sight of Alexanders image.
great at four and twenty years of age, fell to weeping, and said: Am not I
miserable that have done nothing worthy of memory, and yet this prince at
these years had executed so many notable things? Moreover, we may observe
among the Ancients infinite worthy examples quite contrary one to another, in
that many great and famous men have altogether despised the honor of
vaineglory, which is never without presumption and pride: and contrary wise,
others being led with pride and arrogancy, have fowly abused their authority
and greatness, purchasing to themselves more blame and dishonor, than praise
Cyrus.
and honor. That great Cyrus Monarch of the Persians, was of so meek and
gentle a nature, and so little desirous of vainglory, that he would never
provoke his equals in age to any exercise wherein he perceived himself the
stronger, but those rather, who were better practiced than himself, to the end
he might not displease them by bearing away the price from them, as also that
he might reap this benefit to learn that which he could not do so well as
others. O right noble heart, giving evident proof of the contempt of base and
vile things, to treasure up those that are great and excellent! But now adays
where about do we strive most? namely, who can most cunningly strike with the
sword, run at the ring, or ride and manage horses. And I would to God we did no
worse. But as for excelling others in virtue, these times require no such
matter. We read of an Indian, who being commanded by Alexander A notable
history of an Indian.
the Great to shoot before him, because he had heard that he was very excellent
in that art, would do nothing. Whereupon the Monarch being incensed, condemned
him to death, if he would not obey him. The Indian going to execution, told one
of those that led him, that he had been in deed heretofore a very good
Archer, but because he had of long time intermitted that exercise, he feared
that he had forgotten it: and therefore had rather die than loose the
reputation, which he had once obtained. To this fellow we may compare those of
whom we have already spoken, who glory in nothing but in this, that they are
taken of the greater sort for valiant men, and, as they use to say, for such as
make profession, that they carry about them a sharp sword for their service.
These men had rather die in a naughty quarrel, with the danger of loosing
their soul, than to fall from this their reputation, which they desire to carry
with them. But let us follow Examples of the contempt and desire of (...)
glory.
our examples of the contempt of vainglory, and of certain others led away
with an ouerweening pride. Pompey the Great, showed a notable argument that he
Pompeius.
was not touched with vainglory or pride, when, after he had utterly
vanquished Tigranes king of Pontus, and made him his prisoner, he chose rather
to set him again in his kingdom, and to make him an allie and confederate of
the Romans, than to reserve and lead him in manner of a triumph into Rome,
according as they used then to deal with enemies, and with their spoils:
saying like a virtuous Monarch, that he much more esteemed the glory
Tamberlane severity toward Bajazet the great Turk.
of a whole age, than of one day. The Great Tamberlane being puffed up
exceedingly, because of a Peasants son he attained to so great a Monarchy,
used far greater and more barbarous severity toward Bajazet Emperor of the
Turks, whom, after he had overcome him, and made him his prisoner, he caused
to be led about with him in a cage, wheresoever he went, feeding him only
with the crumbs that fell under his table: and whenever he took horse, he
used his body for an advantage. After Saphors toward Valerianus.
the same manner Valerianus the emperor was handled by Saphor king of Persia, by
whom he was discomfited in a battle, which this Barbarian had won of him. He
that Pope Alexanders toward Friderike.
trod upon the emperor Friderike Barbarossa his neck, and pusht him twice with
his foot when he had him at his devotion, showed himself more proud, cruel,
and arrogant, in that he used for a pretense and cloak of his pride and
wickedness, Psalm. 91. 13.
that text of Scripture, Thou shall walk upon the Lion and Aspe, the young Lion
and the Dragon shall thou tread under foot, as if it had been spoken to him.
That heathen man Agathocles.
Agathocles king of Sicilia, left behind him a far more notable example of
the contempt of glory, that we should not be lift up too much, nor forget our
selves by reason of the greatness of our estate. For being come to that estate
by his virtue, because he was borne of a poor Potter, he caused himself to be
served ordinarily at his table with earthen vessels, intermingled with his
cups of gold, saying thus to those that came to see him, thereby to inflame
them with a desire of weldoing: Behold what it is to persevere in travel and in
taking of pains to become virtuous and courageous. Heretofore we made these
pots of earth, and now we make these of gold. Further we must know, that when
fortune (if it be lawful for us under this word to understand the ordinance of
God) lifts up men of low degree unto great and honorable The honor of great
men depends of their virtue, not of their dignity.
places through their valor and desert, and exalts also many men that are
unworthy, letting us see how proudly and wickedly these men behave themselves
in abusing their authority, and contrariwise how the other sort use it well,
she does thereby so much the more honor, and recommend virtue unto us, as the
only thing whereof all the greatness, glory and honor of men depends, and not
of the dignity wherein they are placed. Now how greatly hautinesse of mind is
hated both of God and men, among infinite testimonies which we have, that of
Herodes.
Herod Agrippa king of the Jews, ought well to be marked. For being gone up
into the pulpit appointed for Orations, and rejoicing because the people cried
out to his praise, That it was the voice of God, and not of man, he was
suddenly stricken from heaven: so that when he perceived himself to consume away
with Vermin, he cried out to the people, saying: Behold how he dies now with
intolerable griefs, who^ not long since ye called God. Dioclesianus the
emperor Dioclesianus.
was so puffed up with pride, that he called himself brother to the Sun and
Moon, and made an Edict whereby he would have all men to kiss his feet,
whereas his predecessors gave their hands to the Nobility, and their knees to
the simpler sort: but God suffered him to die a mad man. Moreover we see daily,
that proud men become odious to every one, and are in the end contemned, yea,
that oftentimes it costeth them their life. The punishment that Philip king of
Macedonia laid upon Menecratus the Menecratus finely punished for his pride by
Philip.
Physician was more gentle, yet pleasant, and worth the noting. This fellow
because he was excellent in his Art, caused himself to be called Jupiter the
Savior. The good prince minding to correct him for his arrogancy, invited him
to a feast, and made a table to be provided for him by himself, whereof at
first he seemed to be very glad. But when he saw that in stead of meat they
gave him nothing but incense, he was greatly ashamed, and departed from the
feast in great anger. Now for the conclusion of our discourse, we say with
Solon, that to name a presumptuous Every vainglorious man is a fool.
and glorious man in right terms, is to call him a fool, as contrariwise,
courtesy and meekenes is the foundation of wisdom and of a quiet life.
Whereunto that we may attain, let us learn, that whosoever beholds with the
eyes of his mind the estate of man's nature, and considers the baseness of his
condition, together with the shortness of this present life, subject to an
infallible decree, and marketh also the foul pollutions that are joined with
the flesh, he shall never fall in that headlong downfall of arrogancy and
pride. And thus detesting all presumption and love of vanity, let us seek for
honor by the means of Virtue only, which as Euripides says, is always either
followed or prevented with glory and praise. And let us not greatly care for
the praises of men, but only do those things that are worthy of
commendation. Let us rather rejoice and glory that we excel and go beyond
others in all good duties toward them, than in any other advantage, either of
worldly glory, or of our private profit. Lastly let us rather love to abide
always as it were unknown to the world, than by serving vanities to turn
aside from one only jot of the duty of goodness and justice, which by the
grace of God may procure us a perpetual praise among good men, and make us
acceptable before him, who evermore lifts up the humble, and beats down
the proud.


Of Shame, Shamefastness, and of Dishonor. Chap. 24.
AMANA. HItherto we have briefly entreated of those principal points, which
respect the virtue of Temperancie, and the vice of Intemperance, contrary unto
it. Nevertheless for the finishing of our days work, I think we are to
consider what shame and shamefastnes are, which, as the Philosophers say, are
joined with this virtue of Temperance. For the more we love glory and honor,
the more we fear, and labor to eschew shame and dishonor. Now seeing we have
been taught where to seek for true glory and honor, we shall receive no Shame is
the keeper of all virtues.
less profit, if we learn wherein we ought to fear shame and dishonor.


ARAM. There is (says Cicero) a certain shame and bashfulnes in Temperance,
which is the guardian of all the virtues, and deserves great commendation,
being also a most goodly ornament to the whole life, as that which fashioneth
it according to the pattern of decency and honesty.


ACHITOB. Two things (says Plato) are very well able to direct his life that is
to live virtuously, namely, shame of dishonest things, and desire of those
things that are good and virtuous. Let us therefore hear ASER discourse more
amply of that which is here propounded unto us.


ASER. As we see that a good ground, although it be fat and fertile, brings
forth notwithstanding naughty and wild plants: so a good nature, although it
be endued with many great perfections, is yet never without some shame. And
this of it self seems to be a hurtful passion in the soul, albeit it may
easily by the means of virtue be dressed and made profitable, if we cure it of
all fear of How shame may be made profitable in a man.
reproach, by doing that which is good, decent and honest; and contrariwise
suffer it to augment, and to strengthen it self more and more, when occasion,
either of doing ill, or of speaking, approouing, and counsailing any thing that
is against the duty of a good man, shall be offered. Honest shame and
shamefastnes (says Quintilian) is the mother of all good counsel, the right
Guardian of duty, the mistress of innocence, well liked of her nearest
friends, in all places, and at all times courteously entertained of strangers,
as that which has a favorable countenance. Honest shame, being (as Cicero
says) the moderator of concupiscences, procures unto us a steadfast and
commendable authority amongst al men. Hesiodus calls it the hostess of
justice. Of this Socrates spoke, when he said, that virtuous shame beseemed
youth. I look for small goodness of a young man (says Seneca) except of such a
one as blusheth after he has offended. For he that blusheth (says Menander)
is not void of all good nature. Therefore shamefastnes is to be nourished and
much made of. For so long as it remains in any man's spirit, there is good
hope to be conceived of him. Many have shrunk through fear of shame, with
whom no reason or torment could in any sort prevail. A wicked man (says
Euripides) has no shame in him. Shamefastnes (says one of the Ancients) is
sister to continency, and companion of chastity, yea by means of her society
and fellowship, chastity is in greater safety. A fault is lessened through
shame, as it is made greater by contention: and shame mollifieth the heart of a
Judge, but impudency provoke him to anger. He that is touched to the quick
through a sharp reprehension for the reformation of his manners, and yet is
nothing restrained thereby, nor full of sweat and blushing for shame, which
causes heat to ascend into the face of every one well borne, but remains
inflexible and immovable, smiling and jesting thereat, such a one I say,
gives a great argument of a very blockish and senceles nature, which is
ashamed of nothing, by reason of his long custom and Sin is natural in man.
confirmation in doing of evil. To sin (says Diodorus the Athenian) is a
thing naturally ingrafted in men: neither was there ever any law so rigorous,
that could stay the course thereof, although new pains and punishments were
dailye added to offenses, to see if men might be drawn from vice through
fear of them. But some gather boldness through poverty; others because of
their riches become insolent, ambitious, and covetous; and others have other
passions and occasions which move and induce them to do ill. Now to turn
these aside, and to make them fruitles, there is no better way than deeply to
imprint How we must avoid and repress sin.
in our souls the fear of perpetual shame and infamy, which are the
inseparable companions of all wickedness and corrupt dealings. And as often as
we commit any fault through frailty, we must together with repentance imprint
in our memory a long remembrance thereof: yea we must lay it often before our
eyes, as also the shame and dishonor that might have ensued thereof unto us, to
this end, that afterward we may be the better kept back, and more advised in
the like matters. Heerin let us follow the example of wayfaring men, that have
stumbled against a stone, and of Pilots that have bruised their ships against a
rock, who, being mindful of their mishap, are all their life time greatly
afraid, not only of those stones and rocks, which were the causes of their
evils, but also of all such as resemble them. There was a prohibition (as A
notable custom among the Romans.
Aulus Gellius writes) that no young Roman should dare to enter into a
strumpets house, but with his face covered: and if it so fell out, that any man
was so shameless as to come out of that place uncovered, he was as severely
punished, as if he had committed some forced adultery. And truly when one is
ashamed that he has offended, we are to hope well of his amendment. Now, as
shame of evil, serving for a bridle to vice, is commendable, so that shame
wherein want of prudence and of wisdom bears sway, is evil and very
hurtful, not only to those that What kind of shame is very hurtful.
are touched therewith, but oftentimes procures great evils to Comminalties and
Commonwealths. Whereof those men have too great experience that live under
such Governors, Magistrates, and Judges, as of a foolish baseness and cowardlines
of mind, either for fear to displease the greatest, or to be blamed and
reproved of an ignorant multitude, bow and bend to another man's beck against
right and equity, as though they were ashamed to do well. Whereupon thinking to
eschew a light and small reproach, they fall into a perpetual note of infamy
and dishonor, not being able to declare more plainly the smalnes of their
courage (which fitly resembles a weak temperature of the body, unable to
resist heat and cold) than in consenting to evil, because they dare not
gainesay least they should be misliked. But Seneca says, that he is no meet
scholar of Philosophy, who cannot contemn a foolish shame. And this causes
far greater mischiefs, when the sovereign Princes of any estate are
entangled therewith. Which may be verified of them, if through over great
bounty and simplicity void of prudence, they wholly give over themselves to
their pleasure that have them as it were in possession, and dare not gainesay
or deny them in any matter. For here of it comes, that flatterers, brokers,
and such as are most wicked, carry away offices, charges, benefices, gifts, and
wastfully consume the public treasure: so that a man may behold an impunitie
and liberty of vices, and of execrable offenses, because a simple and bashful
king dare not deny a request. And thus under such a Prince publik welfare is
turned into private wealth, and all the charges fall upon the poor people. But
not to stray far from our purpose, having so nearly touched a matter worthy
of a large discourse, I think we shall reap no small profit, if we call to
mind here certain notable instructions, which Plutark gives us, to teach us
to repel How we must learn to resist all naughty shame.
far from us all foolish and dangerous shame: namely, that so soon as years
of discretion work in us any knowledge of goodness, we should exercise our
selves in those things, which of themselves are easy enough to practice, being
without fear that any thing can (as the proverb says) hang or take hold of
our gown. If at a feast (says that great Philosopher) thou art invited to
drink more than reason, or thy thirst requires, be not ashamed to refuse to
do it. If any babbler or ignorant fellow seek to stay and keep thee by
discoursing of vain and redious matters, be not afraid to rid thy self of
him, and to tell him freely that another time thou may come and visit him,
not having at that time any leisure to keep him company any longer. If thy
friend, or any other man, communicate with thee any act or purpose of his,
wherein thou know somewhat, though never so little, that is to be
reprehended, tell him thereof hardly. If any man be importunate with thee by
requests and entreaties, never promise more than thou art able to perform, and
blush not because thou can not do all things, but rather blush to take upon
thee things that are above thy ability. If any man ask thee a question of any
matter whatsoever, confess freely that which thou know not, to the end thou
may receive instruction. Now, if we exercise our selves in this sort,
honestly to refuse, to depart, to break off, to speak freely, and to submit
our selves after a comely manner, so that no man can lightly complain of us,
or blame us, but upon very slender occasion, we shall be in a ready way to
accustom our selves not to be ashamed in matters of greater weight, and such
as are necessary for the preservation of duty. For otherwise, if we are
afraid to put back a glass of wine, which some one of our acquaintance in
drinking does offer unto us, how will we resist the request of a Prince, which
is as much as a commandment, or the importunate suite of a whole people, in an
unjust and unreasonable matter? If we are ashamed to be rid of a babbler; if, as
flatterers use to do, we commend one contrary to our opinion, whom we hear
praised of many; or if we fear to tell our friend of some small fault of
his, how will we set our selves courageously against those slaunderers of the
truth, and maintainers of lies, that are placed in authority? Or how shall we
dare to reprove notorious faults boldly, being committed in the administration
of a magistrate, and in civil and political government? This is that which
Zeno Zeno.
very well taught us, when meeting with a familiar friend of his that walked
heavily by himself, he asked him the cause thereof: I shun (said the other) a
friend of mine, who requesteth me to bear falls witness for him. What (quoth
Zeno) act thou so foolish, that seeing him void of shame and fear to request
unjust and wicked things of thee, thou have not the heart to deny him and to put
him back upon just and reasonable considerations? Agesilaus may be unto us a
good Scholemaster in this Agesilaus.
matter. For being requested by his father to give sentence against right, he
was not ashamed to deny him graciously with this answer. You have taught me (O
Father) from my youth to obey the laws, and therefore I will now also obey you
therein by judging nothing against the laws. Pericles being likewise requested
Pericles.
by a friend of his to swear falsely for him, said, I am a friend to my friends
unto the aultars: as if he would have said, so far as I offend not God. The
same reason was the cause that Xenophanes being called a Coward at a feast
Xenophanes.
because he would not play at dice, answered without fear of being accounted
void of civility and good fellowship, I am in deed a coward and fearful in
dishonest things. Now besides all those pernicious effects of foolish and
naughty shame that are already touched by us, oftentimes it makes the senses
of a man so brutish through a long custom, that he neglects the care of that
which concerns Other pernicious effects of foolish shame.
his safety and private benefit, yea sometimes of his own life. I will not
here stand to speak of those that say they are ashamed to ask their due, or
by way of justice to pursue such as devour the substance of their poor
families, whereby they make it known, that they have neither virtue, heart nor
courage. To this agrees fitly that which we read of one named Perseus, who
being to lend money Perseus.
to a very friend of his, went with him to the common place of bargaining,
calling to mind that precept of Hesiodus, who says: Even when thou do
disport with thine own brother,
Let present be some witness one or other.
His friend thinking this somewhat strange, said: what, so orderly by law? Yea
quoth Perseus, that I may have it again of thee friendly, and not be compelled
to demand it again by order of law. But what shall we say of so many great
personages as are mentioned in histories, who under pretense of a foolish shame
badly grounded upon this conceit, that they would not distrust them whom they
took for their friends, offered themselves even to Dion.
the slaughter? Dion endued with great perfections, and one that delivered from
tyranny and freed from thraldom the city of Syracusa, although he was
advertised that Calippus whom he took for his Host and friend, watched
opportunity to slaie him, yet he went to that place whether he had invited
him, saying: that he had rather loose his life, than be compelled to distrust
his friends, and to keep himself as much from them as from his enemies. And in
deed it fell Antipater.
out so, that he was slain there. The like befell Antipater, being bidden to
supper by Demetrius. It seems also that I. Caesar.
Julius Caesar as well as they, was in some sort the cause of his ownemishap,
because having had many aduertisements, suspicions, and forewarnings of the
miserable death that was intended against him, yet he neglected them all, as
appears by that speech, which he used the evening before he was murdered,
being at supper with Marcus Lepidus. For a controversy arising amongst the
guests about this What death Caesar thought best.
proposition, What kind of death was best, even that said this Monarch, which is
least looked for. True it is which may be said, that destiny may possibly be
better foreseen than avoided. But this were an evil conclusion thereupon,
that we must let go all care of keeping those Goods, which God gives us as a
blessing proceeding from his grace. For it is the duty of a good and sound
judgment to confer that which is past, with the present time, to the end to
foresee in some sort, and to determine of that which is to come, which is
always doubtful and uncertain unto us. Moreover, to resume our former matter
of honest shame and shamefastnes, which is the guide of our life to decency
and virtue, we may see amongst the an ients infinite examples, how it has been
recommended and precisely observed, and what strength it has had in right
noble minds. The Persians brought up their youth in How the Persian youth was
instructed.
such sort, that they neither did nor spoke any thing that was dishonest,
putting him to death that stripped himself stark naked in the presence of
another. Yea they judged, every uncivil action how little soever, committed
before others, to be great wickedness. The Parthians would never suffer their
wives to come among their feasts, least wine should cause them to do or to
speak any dishonest thing in their presence. Hippocratides as he was walking,
Hippocratides saying to a young man that blushed.
met with a young man in a wicked man's company, and perceiving that he began to
blush, said thus unto him. My son thou must go with such as will not cause
thee to blush: but be of good cheer, for thou may yet repent thee. Blind
Eutichus was set without the array of the battle Eutichus.
by Leonidas, but being ashamed to leave his fellows in danger, he caused a
slave to lead him to the place where they fought, and there wonderfully doing
his endeavor, he was slain. The Romans were so shamefast amongst themselves, The
shamefastnes of the Romans.
that the father would not bathe himself with his son, nor the son in law
with the father in law. They so greatly esteemed honest shame and bashfulnes,
that when Philip king of Macedonia was accused before the Senate of many
crimes, the shamefastnes of young Demetrius his son, who blushed and held his
peace, stood him in greater stead than the shameless boldness of the
eloquentest Orator in the world could have done. The son of Marcus Cato his
son.
Cato the Censor, being at that battle wherein Perses was discomfited, and
fighting with a iaueline, his sword fell out of his scabberd, whereof he was so
ashamed, that alighting on foot in the midst of his enemies, and doubling his
courage and strength, he took it up and mounted again, fighting on horseback
as before. The son of Marcus Aemilius Scaurus, having abandoned and given
Scaurus his son.
over the keeping and defense of the country of Trenta committed to his charge,
was so ashamed thereof, that not daring to return again to his father, he
slew himself. Parmenides.
Parmenides taught his Disciples, that nothing was terrible to a noble mind but
dishonor, and that none but children and women, or at least, men having women's
hearts, are afraid of grief. When speech was ministered at the banquet of the
seven Sages, concerning that popular government which was happiest, wherein all
have equal Cleobulus.
authority, Cleobulus affirmed, that that city seemed unto him best guided by
policy, wherein the Citizens stood in A notable history of the shamefastnes
of the Milesian maidens.
greater awe of dishonor than of the law. Plutark rehearses a very noteable
history of the force of honest shamefastnes in the Milesian maidens, who were
fallen into such frenzy and perturbation of spirit, that without any apparent
cause to be seen, they were suddenly overtaken with a longing to die, and with
a furious desire to hang themselves. Which thing many of them had already put
in practice, so that neither reasons, nor tears of fathers and mothers, no
comfort of friends, no threatenings, policies, or devices whatsoever, could
prevail with them, until such time that a wise Citizen by his advice procured
an edict to be made by the Council, that if any hereafter hung her self, she
should be carried stark naked in the sight of all men, through the market
place. This edict being made and ratified by the Council, did not only
repress a little, but wholly stayed the fury of these maidens that longed to
die. Insomuch, that a simple imagination and conceit of shame and dishonor,
which yet could not light upon them before they were dead, did prevail more
with them than all other devised means could do, yea, than death it self, or
grief, which are two of the horriblest accidents which men commonly stand in
fear of. Honest shame is always commendable.
To conclude therefore our present discourse, that honest shame and
shamefastnes, are always commendable and beseeming all persons that purpose to
observe modesty in their words, gestures, countenances, and actions. We learn
also that spirits well brought up, are more easily won by shame, than by
fear, according to that saying of Quintilian, that shamefastnes is the
property of a free man, and fear of a bondsman. Further, we learn that every
temperate man ought to be more ashamed of himself, when occasion of doing ill
is offered, than of any other: that he must shun all evil, excessive and
pernicious shame, proceeding from the want of discretion, because it hinders
men from effecting all good, wholesome and honest things, insomuch that of it
self it is able to procure unto us loss, dishonor, and infamy.


The end of the sixth days work.
THE SEVENTH DAYS WORK.
Of Fortitude. Chap. 25.
ASER. MAN endued with reason, and seeking to imitate as much as lies in him
the author of his being: who, albeit simply and absolutely he stands not in
need of any thing whatsoever, yet does wonderful works without ceasing, for
the benefit of his creatures, feels himself touched to the quick in his
soul, with a desire to profit all those among whom he lives, by all high,
great, laudable, and laborious means, not fearing any peril, nor forcing any
pain. Moreover, meditating and weighing the dignity of the immortality of
his soul, he cares not for earthly and mortal goods, nor stands in fear of
the contrary: and whether it be for the having or not having of them, his
mind is nothing at all the less quiet, neither does he think that any good
upon earth can be taken from him. All which great and rare excellencies flow
into him from the third river of Fortitude is the third river of Honesty.
the fountain of Honesty, whereof we are now to speak: namely, of the virtue
of Fortitude, which (as Cicero says) cannot be forced by any force.


AMANA. This virtue (says Seneca) is very great, being able to resist and to
fight against extreme miseries. Which is the property of Fortitude, that
guides a noble nature through hard and difficult things, that he may attain
to the end of his just devices.


ARAM. Fortitude is the cause that neither for fear nor danger we turn aside
from the way of virtue and justice. And as Plato says, it lifts up our minds
to attend to that which is most excellent, laudable, best, and most profitable.
Therefore let us hear ACHITOB discourse of the wonderful effects of this
great and worthy virtue.


ACHITOB. Whatsoever is done manfully, and with Wherein the perfection of every
work consists.
a great courage, appears very decent, and beseeming a man. But the
perfection of every work consists in this, that it be done by a stayed and
constant reason, which reaches us, that there is nothing after God, but
honesty, which we are to admire, to make account of, and to desire: and that
we ought not in any sort to shrink and yield unto perturbations, or to any
other humane accident whatsoever. Which opinions being well imprinted in our
minds, prick us forward to enterprise those things that are most excellent,
difficult, and fullest of labors and perils. For being free from all earthly
care, and void of fear or sorrow, we contemn even death it self, and are in
such sort prepared against all griefs, that our contentation lies heerin,
that the greatest and most exceeding pains will not continue long, that the
least will vanish away of themselves, and that we shall be masters of the
middle sort. This is that which the Philosophers by infinite learned Fortitude
is a Good of the soul, not of the body.
writings required to be in the virtue of Fortitude, with which the force and
strength of the body has nothing common, as that which is a Good that
belongs to the body. But this is an immortal Good of the soul, consisting
in the power and direction of the spirit, being fortified and confirmed
through the study of Philosophy, and causing man of his own accord to make
choice of, and to perfect all honest things for their own sakes. Fortitude
then (as Cicero says) is that part of honesty, which is known by the
excellency, greatness, and dignity of the heart, which after advised counsel
and good consideration, causes man to undertake without fear, all perilous
matters, and constantly to endure all kind of travel. For constancy and
dignity are never far from Fortitude in greatest distresses: because it
adorneth him that possesses her with the contempt of grief and of death,
causing him to esteem nothing intolerable that can happen to man, neither any
thing evil that is necessary. And so it is the preservation of a firm and
settled judgment in things that seem terrible and full of danger, seeing it is
the knowledge of that which a man ought to endure. Plato also calls it the
knowledge of all good and evil: as though he would say, that nothing can come
to a valiant and noble minded man, against his expectation, although it may be
contrary to his will, because he is settled and prepared to undergo all events,
as if he had certainly foreseen them. Aristole says that Fortitude is a
mediocritie between fearing and enterprizing. Moreover, it makes a man fit
for all occasions of dangers and travels, and holds him between these two
extremities of cowardlines and rashness, which vices are very hurtful to a
happy and commendable life. The same Philosopher says, that whosoever The
Properties that are required in a valtant man.
will be strong and valiant, must be free from all fear of death, constant in
adversities, void of fear in perils, chosing rather to die honestly, than to
save himself vilan ously. He must endeavor to build noble enterprises, having
for his companions hardines, greatness of heart, good confidence and hope,
besides industry and patience. Then he comes to set down many kinds of
Fortitude. Cicero agreeing well with him, says: that Magnificence, Considence,
Patience, and Perseverance, are the parts of Fortitude. Magnificence shows it
doing great and excellent things: Confidence in this, that a valiant man
conceiueth good hope of the event of them: Patience in a voluntary and
continual suffering for the love of honesty and virtue: and Perseverance in a
perpetual constancy, and in a firm and steadfast abiding in his purposes and
resolutions undertaken with good consideration following reason. Fortitude
fights for justice only.
Moreover, Fortitude (as the Stoics said very well) is a virtue that fights
for equity and justice. And therefore neither they that suffer for unjust
matters, nor they that fight for their private commodities, not being led only
with zeal of public benefit, can boast (except falsely) that they are decked
with this precious virtue. For these latter sort of men are rather to be called
cruel, barbarous, mercenaries, and hired hangmen, destroying all humanity:
and the others impudents, shameless, and desperate, yea so much more worthy of
blame, as guilty of wilful madness, in that they show themselves constant in
doing evil. But those men are valiant and of great courage, who think that no
action whatsoever, no time or season ought to be void of justice, who deliver
the oppressed, and those that are wronged, who build all their devises upon
virtuous works. They (says Aristotle) are void of generositie, who fight
either for fear of reprehension, or by constraint, or being stirred up with
other men's speech, or of choler, or through ignorance of dangers. And this was
Platoes meaning, All hardy men are not valiant.
when he said that all strong and valiant men were hardy, but not all hardy
men, valiant: because hardines comes to men either by art, anger, or
policy: but Fortitude is engendered in the soul by nature and holy
education. And therefore this virtue stands not in need either of choler,
rancor, ambition, pride, or of any other evil passion, whereby to bring to
pass brave and glorious effects, but is rather an utter enemy unto them,
because it proceeds from a mature and ripe consideration and election of
reason, which causes a man boldly to put in execution whatsoever he knows to
belong to duty and honesty, according to that place whereunto he is called.
And this also is the cause that he never takes any thing in hand rashly, what
pretense soever it has, neither is he kept back by any fear in those matters
which offer him good occasion of putting to his hand, what hazard or imminent
danger soever seems to threaten him. But (according to that sentence of
Socrates, that the hardest things ought to be taken in hand and executed with
greater constancy and valor of heart) after he has well and prudently
grounded his enterprise upon a certain knowledge, and firm discourse of
reason, neither reproaches, nor praises, neither promises nor threatenings, or
torments, neither pleasures nor griefs, are able to cause him to break off, or
The resolution of valiant man is always commendable and unchangeable.
in any sort to alter and change his resolution, which remains always
praise-woorthie, and is never subject to repentance, the matter falls out:
because we are not to judge of enterprises by the events, which are altogether
out of our power, but by the groundwork and foundation whereupon they were
built. And further, when the greatest dangers are, then is the time wherein a
valiant man being nothing at all abashed, most of all shows his strength and
prowes, never taking himself to be overcome as long as his virtue is free and
at liberty to give him new supply of means to set forward again his
matters, otherwise in a desperate case. Briefly, to speak in a word, Fortitude
is the cause, that neither for fear nor danger we turn aside from the path
way of virtue and justice, neither yet repent us of well doing for any
torment. And thus it belongs properly to this virtue, to command chiefly over
these two perturbations grounded upon the opinion of evil, namely, Fear and
Grief: as before we saw that Temperance exercises her power over unbridled
desire, and excessive joy. Furthermore, because they that naturally have
greater stomachs, and more excellent spirits, are desirous and greedy of
honors, power, and glory, and seeing that an excessive desire to rule and to
excel others, commonly grows with the greatness of the heart, it is necessary
that this unruly affection should be moderated by the contempt of such things
as are common to all men by nature. And this also is a property belonging to
this virtue of Fortitude, which desiring the greatest and best things,
despises those that are base and abject, aspiring Fortitude contemns mortal
things.
to celestial and eternal things, shunneth humane and mortal things, and
judges honors, riches, and worldly goods, an unworthy recompense for his
valiant acts. Which is the who cause, that whosoever has this virtue of
Fortitude perfectly (if so great happiness could be among mortal wights) he
remains free from all perturbations of the soul to enjoy a blessed
tranquillity, which together with constancy, procures unto him dignity and
reputation. For this cause Cicero teaches us, that they which give themselves
to the government of affairs, Magistrates ought to make less account of
worldly goods than Philosophers.
ought (at least as much as Philosophers) to make light account of temporal
goods, from whence proceeds all the rest of our minds: yea, they ought to
strive to that end with greater care and labor than Philosophers do, because it
is easier for a Philosopher so to do, his life being less subject to Fortune,
and standing in less need of worldly Goods, than does that of Politics. And
if any mishap befall them, it touches the Philosopher a great deal less. But
whether it be in war, or in ruling a Commonwealth, or in the government of a
house, there are always means enough to exercise the works of Fortitude: and
many times this virtue is most necessary in things that seem to be of
smallest account. Besides, that honesty which we seek after, Of bodily force.
is perfected by the forces of the soul, of which every one has great need,
not by those of the body. I will not say, that the firm knitting together of
the members, and the good disposition of nature to sustain manfully the
injuries of wether, and al kind of pain and travel without sickness, is not a
good help toward the execution of noble enterprises: only I say, that it is
not so necessary, but that many being troubled with a thousand ill
dispositions in their persons, especially such as were placed in offices of
Captains and Conductors of armies, have executed infinite great and glorious
exploits, surmounting all weakness of their bodies, through the magnanimity of
their heart. Yea, oftentimes they have as it were constrained their bodies to
change their nature, that they might be made fit to execure whatsouer their
wise spirit judged to belong to duty. Was there ever any Captain among the
Romans greater than Julius Caesar? Yet was he of a Julius Caesar was sickly.
weak and tender complexion, subject to great headaches, and visited sometimes
with the falling sickness. But in steed of using the weakness of his body for a
cloak to live nicely and delicately, he took the labors for war for a fit
medicine to cure the untowardness of his body, fighting against his disease
with continual labor and exercise, living soberly, and lying for the most part
in the open air, which made him to be so much the more admired and loved of
his soldiers. As it may appear by that which is reported of him, that being
one day by reason of great storm and tempest greatly urged with want of
lodging in a plain, where there was but one little cottage belonging to a
Peasant, which had but one chamber, he commanded that Oppius, one of his
Captains, who was il at ease, should be lodged there: as for himself he lay
abroad with the rest, saying that the most honorable places were to be
appointed for the greatest, and the most necessary for such as were most
diseased. What shall we say of those, who being impotent in some part of their
members, did notwithstanding not diminish in any sort, but augment the glory
of their doings? Marcus Sergius, a Roman Captain, Marcus Sergius lacked his
right hand.
having lost his right hand in a battle, practiced so well with the left hand,
that afterward in an army he challenged four of his enemies, one after
another, and overcame them: such force has a good heart, that it can do more
in one only little member, than a man well made and fashioned in all points,
that has but a cowardly heart. We might here allege infinite examples,
whereof histories are full, of all those effects, which we said were brought
forth by the virtue of Fortitude in noble minds: but we will content our
selves to touch certain generals that were of notable and politic prowes and
valor, and constant in their resolutions, as well for shortness sake, as also
because hereafter we shall have further occasion to bring others in sight,
when we handle more at large the parts and branches that proceed from this
happy stalk Fabius the Greatest.
of Fortitude. Fabius the Greatest comes first to my remembrance, to prove
that the resolution of a courageous heart grounded upon knowledge and the
discourse of reason, is firm and immutable. This Captain of the Roman army
being sent into the field to resist the fury and violence of Hannibal, who
being Captain of the Carthaginians, was entered into Italy with great force,
determined for the public welfare and necessity to delay and prolong the
war, and not to hazard a battle but with great advantage. Whereupon certain
told him, that his own men called him Hannibals schoolemaister, and that he
was iested at with many other opprobrious speeches, as one that had small
valor and courage in him, and therefore they counseled him to fight, to the
end he might not incur any more such reprehensions and obloquies. I should be
(quoth he again to them) a greater Coward than now I am thought to be, if I
should forsake my deliberation necessary for the common welfare and safety,
for fear of their girding speeches and bolts of mockery, and obey those (to
the ruin of my country) whom I ought to command. And in deed afterward he
gave great tokens of his unspeakable valor, being sent with three hundred men
only to encounter with the said Hannibal, and seeing that he must of
necessity fight for the safety of the Commonwealth, after all his men were
slain, and himself hurt to death, he rushed against Hannibal with so great
violence and force of courage, that he took from him the diadem or frontlet,
which he had about his Pompey the Great.
head, and died with that about him. Pompey, who by the renown of his high
enterprises got to himself the surname of Great, being ready to sail by sea,
and to pass into Italy, whether he was to carry a certain quantity of wheat
to meet with a famine, according to the commission given him of the Senate,
there arose a very great tempest, insomuch that the mariners made great doubt
to weigh up their anchors. But his resolution being well made before, and
grounded upon the duty of a noble heart, he took shipping first of all, and
caused the sails to be spread in the wind, saying with a loud and clear
voice, It is necessary that I go, but not necessary that I live. Caius C.
Marius.
Marius, who was six times Consul, being in war against the Allies of the
Romans that were revolted, enclosed himself one day with trenches, and
suffered a thousand injuries and vaunting speeches, both of his enemies and of
his own men, but yet cared nothing at all for them, nor went from his
deliberation, which was that he would not fight at that time. And when Publius
Sillo, one of the chief captains of the enemy cried unto him, saying: If
thou art such a great Captain, Marius, as men report of thee, come out of thy
camp to battle: Nay, do thou, (quoth he again unto him) if thou art a great
Captain, compel me to come out to battle in despite of my teeth. Afterward
this Marius showed himself to be one of the most valiant and courageous men of
his time, as well in the discomfiture of the said enemies, as in two other
battles which he wan against the barbarous Cimbrians and Flemings, who were
entered into Italy to inhabit there: in one of which battles about a hundred
thousand fighting Agis.
men were slain in the field. Agis king of Lacedemonia, being resolved to fight
his Counselors told him, that there was no reason so to do, because his
enemies were ten against one. It must needs be (quoth this courageous Prince)
that he which will command many, must fight also against many. We are enough to
put naughty men to flight. The Lacedaemonians use not to ask what number there
is of the enemies, but only where they are. The answer which Dienecus Dienecus.
made to one that told the Council of Grecia, that the multitude of the
Barbarians was so great, that their arrows covered the sun, comes near to
the courageous saying of king Agis. For concluding with their opinion who
persuaded to fight, Dienecus made this answer: Thou tellest us very goodnewes.
For if the multitude of the Medes is such, that they are able to hide the
Sun, they will offer us the means how to fight in the shadow, and not in
the heat of the Sun. We may not here pass over with silence the testimony
of invincible Fortitude, which always finds means to effect her glorious
purposes, Themistocles.
given by Themistocles, when he saw the sundry opinions of the Chieftaines of
the Grecian army under the leading of Euribiades the Lacedemonian, touching
the place where they should fight with Xerxes fleet. The greatest part
determined to forsake Salamis, where they were at that time, and to retire to
Peloponnesus, fearing the great force of their enemies, who were about twelve
hundred vessels, whereas they themselves had but three hundred. But
Themistocles sent Sicinnus his childrens Schoolemaister secretly in a Sciffe
toward the Persians, aduertising them of the resolution which the Grecians had
taken to fly, faining (as he made Xerxes believe) that he favored their side.
Upon this watchword Xerxes sent part of his army to the other side of Salamis.
Whereupon the Grecians considering that they were environed, resolved and
settled themselves as men constrained to fight, and in deed the victory
remained on their side, to the confusion and overthrow of their enemies, who
departed out of Grecia, which otherwise would have been greatly shaken, had not
Themistocles used this notable stratageme, thereby to Damindas.
stay the shameful flight of his Countrymen. It was this virtue of Fortitude,
which caused Damindas the Lacedemonian to make this answer to one who told him,
that the Lacedaemonians were in danger to suffer much mischief, if they agreed
not with Philip, who was armed against the Grecians. O my friend (quoth he)
that art half a woman, what evil can he cause us to suffer, seeing we make
Dercyllides.
no account of death it self? Dercyllides being sent from Sparta toward king
Pyrrhus, to know wherefore he marched with his army upon their borders, and
understanding of him, that he commanded them to receive again their king
Cleonymus, whom they had banished, or else he would let them know, that they
were not more valiant than others already subdued by him, made this answer: If
thou art a God we fear thee not, because we have not offended thee: but if
thou art a man, thou art no better than we. The answer which certain Polonian
Ambassadors made to Alexander the Great, who threatened their A notable answer
of certain Polonians.
country, shows also the excellency of their courage. We are afraid (quoth
they to him) but of one only thing, namely: least the sky should fall upon us.
Thunder (as Plato says) terrifieth children, and threatenings fools.
Anaxarchus Anaxarchus.
being likewise threatened by the same Monarke that he should be hauged: Threaten
this (quoth he) to thy Courtiers, who fear death: for my part, I care not
whether I rot in the ground, or above ground. Socrates also answered thus to
Socrates.
one that asked him whether he were not ashamed to commit any thing that would
procure his death: My friend, thou do not well to think that a virtuous man
ought to make any account either of danger, or of death, or to consider any
other thing in all his actions, than this; whether they are just or unjust,
good or bad. If we desire to see farther what effects Fortitude brings forth
in the greatest and most sinister dangers, Marcus Crassus shall serve us for
sufficient proof. M. Crassus.
When he was three skore years of age, albeit he had received the foil in a
battle against the Parthians, wherein the greatest part of his army was
destroyed, and his son being Captain of a thousand men, was slain, whose
death seemed more to astonish the rest of his men, than any other danger, yet
he showed himself in this mishap more virtuous than ever before, and went
through all his bands crying aloud in this manner: It is I alone, A notable
oration.
my friends, whom the sorrow and grief of this loss ought to touch. But the
greatness of the fortune, and glory of Rome remains whole and invincible, as
long as ye stand on your feet. Notwithstanding, if ye have any compassion of
me, seeing me loose so valiant and virtuous a son, I pray you show the
same by changing it into wrath against your enemies, to take vengeance of their
cruelty, and be not abashed for any mishap befallen us: for great things are
not gotten without loss. Patience in travels, and Constancy in adversities,
have brought the Roman Empire to that greatness of power wherein it is now
placed. With such speeches he fought unto the death. Will we have other
examples of wonderful Judas Macchabeus.
prowes and courage? Judas Macchabeus, after many victories obtained by him
against the Lieutenants of Antiochus, and against those of Demetrius, was set
upon and assailed with two and twenty thousand men (others say two and thirty
thousand) having himself but eight hundred, or a thousand with him. And being
counseled to retire into some place of safety, God forbid (quoth he) that the
Sun should see me turn my back toward mine enemies. I had rather die, than
stain the glory which I have gotten by virtue with an ignomintous and
shameful flight. In this resolute persuasion he greatly weakened his enemies,
Leonides.
and yet died more through wearisomnes, than of blows or wounds which he had
received in fight. Leonides king of Sparta, having with him but three hundred
natural Lacedaemonians, fought and put to flight at the strait of Thermopylis,
three hundred thousand Persians: but L. Dentatus.
he and all his died of the wounds which they received in that fight. Lucius
Dentatus a Roman, was endued with such Fortitude and Generositie, that one
writes of him, that he was in six skore battles and skirmishes, and eight
times came away Conqueror from fighting hand to hand: that he had received of
his Captains by way of reward, and in token of his valor, eighteen
lances, twenty bards for horses, four skore and three bracelets, and six
and thirty crowns: and lastly, that by his means nine Emperors triumphed in
Rome. Eumenus.
Eumenus a Macedonian Captain, having been put to the woorst by Antigonus,
retired into a strong hold, where being besieged, and brought to parley through
necessity of victuals and munition, it was signified unto him from his enemy,
that reason would he should come and speak with him under his faith and
promise without Hostages, seeing he was both greater and stronger. But Eumenus
made him this answer, that he would never think any man greater than himself,
as long as he had his sword in his own power. And therefore demanding of him
no worse conditions, than as one that thought himself to be his equal, he
sailed forth upon his enemies with such valor and courage, that he saved
himself out of their hands, and afterward greatly troubled Antigonus.
Aristomenes Aristomenes.
the Messanian, being taken by the Lacedaemonians, and delivered fast bound to
two soldiers to be kept, he drew near to a fire, and burned asunder his bands
with a little of his flesh: afterward coming suddenly upon his keepers, he slew
them both, and saved himself. Lysimachus Lysimachus.
being cast to a Lion by Alexander, because he gave to Calisthenes the prisoner
that poison wherewith he killed himself, fought with it, and stretching forth
his arm and hand all armed into his throat, he took hold of his tongue and
strangled him. Whereupon the Monarch ever after greatly esteemed and honored
him. By this small number out of infinite examples, which I could here
mention, we see the great and wonderful effects of this virtue of Fortitude,
which are no less in every part thereof touched in our discourse, as
hereafter I hope we shall declare at large. Wherefore we may well say, that
this virtue is very necessary to live well and happily, and to lead us to the
end of our being, which is to refer both our life and death to the only
exercise of duty and honesty: that by it we enjoy the true rest of the soul,
which is nothing else (as Cicero says) than a peaceable, sweet, and
acceptable constancy, which undoubtedly always follows Fortitude, being
crowned with these two inestimable rewards, the contempt of grief, and of
death, whereby we forsake that which is mortal, that we may embrace heavenly
things in the hope and certain expectation of that happy immortality.


Of Timorousnes, Fear, and Cowardlines, and of Rashness. Chap. 26.
ACHITOB. WE may call to remembrance that saying of Plato before mentioned,
that a temperate man, not endued with the virtue of Fortitude, falls easily
into cowardlines and baseness of mind, which is the defect of that virtue, which
even now we described: and likewise, that a strong and valiant man without the
direction of Prudence and Temperance, is easily carried away with temeritie and
boldness, which is the excess of the same virtue. Which two vices are so
hurtful in the soul, that he which is infected with them, holds much more
of the nature of a beast, than of that essence wherein he was created. Let us
then consider what these imperfections are, that through the horror of that
infamy which follows them, we may be more zealous to follow that which is
decent and honest.


ASER. We must take good heed (says Cicero) least through fear of peril we
commit any thing that may justly argue us to be timorous and fearful. But
withal we must beware that we offer not our selves unto dangers without cause,
than which nothing is more foolish and blame-woorthie.


AMANA. It is not seemly for a man (says Plato) to commit any cowardly act to
avoid peril. Temeritie also sets forth it self with courage, and contempt
of dangers, but unadvisedly and to no purpose. But let us hear ARAM, who will
handle this matter more at large.


ARAM. Albeit there is no greater disgrace than to be justly reproched with a
cowardly and faint heart, especially for youth to be called effeminate, yet is
that fear good, which turns us away from dishonest things, and makes man
stayed and well advised. This is the cause why the Ancients Two kinds of fear.
speaking of fear, made it twofold, the one good and necessary, the other
evil and hurtful. The first, which they grounded upon a good discourse of
reason and judgment, was so esteemed and honored of them, that in the city of
Sparta, which for arms and arts flourished most among A Temple dedicated to
fear.
the Grecians, there was a temple dedicated and consecrated to this fear:
which, as they affirmed, better maintained and preserved the estate of
Commonwealths, than any other thing whatsoever, because thereby man was led
to stand more in awe of blame, reproach, and dishonor, than of death or grief.
Which thing makes him both apter and readier to undertake and to execute all
virtuous and laudable matters, whenever good and just occasion shall be
offered, and also more stayed against every rash and unjust enterprise that
might procure damage to the commonwealth. And this was the occasion of that
Proverb, Fear always accompanies shame. Another reason alleged by these
wise men, why they honored in such sort this The fear of neighbor enemies
is the safety of a Commonwealth.
fained goddess, was, because to doubt and fear nothing was more hurtful to
Commonwealths, than their very neighbor enemies, the fear of whom was
their safety and assurance. The other naughty and pernicious fear Two sorts
of pernicious fear.
stands of two kinds. The first being destitute of all good reason and
assured judgment, is that which we call Cowardlines and Pusillanimitie,
always followed of these two perturbations of the soul, Fear and Sadness, and
is the defect of the virtue of Fortitude, which we purpose chiefly to handle
at this present. The Grecians called it by these two words (...) and (...) the
one signifieng troble, the other a band; as if they would have said, that it
held the soul bound, and wholly troubled. They affirmed also, that this fear
was as it were a giddiness and alienation of the mind from the right sense,
making the soul idle, dead, void of every good exploit or effect whatsoever.
The last kind of fear is that which works in the wicked a fear of pain and
punishment appointed for offenses, whereby they are as it were with a bridle
kept back and restrained from presuming to commit their villainies and damnable
purposes. Now as the first kind of fear said to be good and necessary, is a
great token of a commendable and virtuous nature, as that which for good cause
is grounded upon the fear of reproach and infamy, and upon a desire to effect
whatsoever belongs to duty: so the one of these two last kinds testifies a
vile, contemptible, and abject nature; and the other a wicked and corrupt
disposition. Plutark speaking of this good Of the good fear.
fear calls it one of the Elements and grounds of virtue, saying, that it is
chiefly requisite and necessary for those that have authority over others,
who ought to fear rather to practice evil, than to receive punishment for the
same, because the first is the cause of the latter, not only to themselves,
but to so many as wallow in wickedness, which is never without recompense.
Therefore a prudent and well advised man ought to have this fear always It is
joined with the true love of God.
before his eyes, I mean this childlike fear, which is unseparably joined with
the true love we owe to our common father, and is the beginning of all
wisdom, whereby we are induced to honor him. And look how much the more the
ancient Pagans were kept in awe by this It causes us to respect the good of
our country.
good fear, so much the more shall our condemnation be doubled, if we despise
it. The duty also of this profitable fear is, to have an eye unto the good
and safety of our country, and to cause us faithfully to discharge every
charge committed unto us, to the end we incur not perpetual shame and
infamy among all good men. It causes us to fear only the dishonor of an
unadvised counsel or action, and to account it very seemly and honorable to
be blamed and evil spoken of for well doing, which Alexander the great said
did well become a king. This Phocion.
good fear made Phocion, who for his desert and valor was chosen general of
the Atheniens five and forty times, to say, that he would never counsel, but
hinder to the uttermost of his power that enterprise of war, which they would
have concluded against Alexander. For (said he) although the Athenians would
cast away themselves, yet I will not suffer them to do so, because I have for
that intent and purpose taken upon me the charge of a Captain. And when
Demosthenes, who persuaded this war, said unto him, the people will kill thee
if they enter into a fury: Phocion replied, Naie they will kill thee, if they
be Antigonus.
well in their wits. Antigonus the second, king of Macedonia, declared what
benefit comes of this good fear necessary for the foresight of a wise and
experienced captain in war, when retiring once from before his enemies who
came to assail him, and being told by certain that he fled, he answered, It
is clean contrary. For I look back to that profit which is behind me. As
touching the opinion of the ancients already mentioned, that to stand in fear
of nothing is more hurtful to Commonwealths than foraine enemies: it is that
which Scipio Scipio Nasica.
Nasica a Roman Senator meant to signify, when upon the hearing of some, who
said that Rome was in safety, if Carthage were laid wast; he replied, that it
was far otherwise. For (said he) we are in greater danger now than ever,
because we stand no more in awe of any: whereby he wisely inferred, that too
great and unlooked for prosperity The effects of too great prosperity in
Commonwealths.
of cities is commonly the cause of raising civil wars in them and secret
divisions, or else of bringing into them so great idleness, that by it a gate is
opened to all vices, as in truth it fell out with the Romans. For then being
in the top of their felicity and greatness, by reason of the destruction
as well of the Carthaginians by Scipio the younger, as of the Macedonians under
Perseus and Antiochus, the people began to abuse their authority, preferring
unto estates and places of honor, not the best and iustest citizens, but such
as flattered them most in their vices and dissolutenes, and wan their hearts
with prodigal and superfluous feasts and distributions, to whom they sold
their public voices. Whereupon in the end, those civil wars arose, which was
the cause of their final overthrow, and of the alteration of their popular
estate into a tyranny, afterward called a Monarchy. But this discourse being
the matter of another Subject, let us come to the defect of the virtue of
Fortitude, which is a fear void Of that fear which is the defect of
Fortitude.
of reason and assurance, and argues a faint and cowardly heart, causing a man
through want of sense and understanding to account this the surest way, to
doubt all things, and to distrust every one. Of this fear one of the ancients
said, Fear takes away memory and all good effects from every art and
industry. Yea sometimes some have been found so faint-harted, that as soon
as this fear seized upon them, they gave up the ghost, not being oppressed
with any other evil or violence. It is in this passion that Fear and Grief
fully practice their power, being grounded upon a false opinion of evil, and
sworn enemies to all rest and tranquillity, gnawing and consuming life as
rust does steel or iron. Neither is this fear without an unruly desire and
immoderate joy in things that are worldly, base, and contemptible, whereupon
the soul is continually carried hither and thither, with pernicious and
immoderate passions, which deprive her of the excellency of her immortality
to attend to the mortal and corruptible affections of the flesh. Alexander
spoke of such as are possessed with this fear, when he said, that no place is
so strong by nature and situation, which fearful men judge safe enough.
Therefore the Satyricall Poe^t said very well, that Fortune always makes
Timorous men are always little.
timorous men little. For although they be borne big of stature, yet the
small courage of their hearts makes them so much the more contemptible,
bringing forth worse and more dangerous effects, and making them unworthy of
all intermedling with matters of estate, of policy, or of war. In this
number, among many whom histories Claudius Caesar.
mention, we may here reckon Claudius the first of the Caesar's, who was so
faint-harted, base-minded, and blockish, that his mother said often of him,
that Nature had begun, but not finished him. And truly a hartles-fellow, or one
of litle-hart, is nothing else but a body without a soul. The memory of such
men (of whom we see but too many examples among us) ought to be buried in
oblivion, and during their life time they should remain unknown as well The
fears of faint-harts.
for their own honor, as for the good of the common society of men, to which
they could not but be offensive and hurtful. For the most part they are not
only afraid of men, of the hazards of wars, of troubles and seditions, of
the dangers of long voyages, of the loss of their goods, of diseases, of
dolors, yea, of the least discommodities and adversities that can befall men:
the event of all which, causes them usually to forget all reason and duty,
but they are also frighted with dreams, they tremble at sights and visions,
they credit false abusing spirits, and with a forlorn fear they stand in awe
of the celestial signs. Briefly, upon the least occasions that may be, and
such as are unworthy the care of a prudent and valiant mind, they fall
oftentimes into such vexation of spirit, that they loose it altogether, and
become mad and enraged: insomuch, that many have hastened forward with their
own hands, the end of their so miserable days. As we read of Mydas king of
Phrygia, who being troubled Mydas.
and vexed with certain dreams, grew to be desperate, and died voluntarily by
drinking the blood of a Bull. Aristodemus also, king of the Messenians, being
in war against his subjects, it happened that the dogs howled like woolnes,
which came to pass by reason of a certain herb called Dogsteeth, growing
about his altar at home: Whereupon understanding by the Southsayers that it was
an evil sign, he was stricken with such a fear and conceit thereof, that he
slew himself. Cassius the captain Cassius.
had a better heart when he answered a Chaldean Astrologian, who counseled him
not to fight with the Parthians until the Moon had passed Scorpio; I fear
not (quoth he) Scorpions, but Archers. This he spoke because the Roman army
had been put to the worst before in the plain of Chaldea by the Parthian
archers. Nevertheless that which we spoke of Midas and Aristodemus is seldom
Base minds stand in great fear of death and grief.
followed, yea is rarely found amongst cowards, and base minded fellows, who
commonly fly from temporal death as much as may be, as also from grief,
which they fear in such sort, that contemning all virtue and justice, they
labor for nothing more, than to preserve their lives together with their
carnal commodities, for the obtaining of which they seem to live clean
without all care of their soul, as if her portion were in this world, and
should end together with the body. The effects of this fear of death are
sufficiently felt of every one in particular, the number of them being very
small, who would not willingly make (as we say) a sluice to their consciences,
that they might be delivered thereof. Let us then confess our selves to be
fearful and faint-harted, and not boast of Fortitude and generositie of heart,
which will not suffer us to stand in fear, no not of certain death in an
holy and honest cause: so far is it from fearing and forsaking duty through
doubt of an uncertain death. That which Speron rehearses in his dialogues of
a gentleman of Padua sufficiently shows what marvelous force is in the
apprehension and conceit of death, which extends it self not only upon the
spirits of men, but also changes the nature of their bodies, who want
constancy to A strange alteration of a Gentleman's hair in one night.
bear and sustain a small and light grief for the inioieng of eternal goods.
This young gentleman being put in prison upon some accusation, it was told
him, that of a certainty his head should be cut off the day following. Which
news altered him in such sort, that in one only night he was all white and
greie-headed, whereof before there was no show or appearance, and so he lived
long time after. Besides, experience daily ministers unto us sufficient proof
of the mischiefs which proceed of want of courage and faint-hartednes,
especially in matters of estate, government, and public offices, wherein a
fearful and soft man, for every reproach, dislike, or evil opinion of the
world, yea of such as are most ignorant, and much more for the least dangers of
his person, and for fear and threatenings of the greater sort, yields easily
against all duty, and suffers himself to be drawn to the error of the
wicked and common sort. As for the middle and lesser sort, wherefore serve they
being void of Agamemnon dispensed with a rich coward.
reason and assurance? Homer says, that king Agamemnon dispensed with a rich
Coward for going to war personally, for a Mare which he gave him. Wherein
truly he had great reason, because a fearful man hurts much and profits
little, not only in war, but even in every good and virtuous action. This
caused that great captain Paulus Aemilius to say, that magnanimity and
courage were for the most part reverenced in every enemy of theirs, but that
cowardlines, although it had good success, yet was it always and of all men
despised. I might here mention sundry vices, which ordinarily grow and are
nourished of cowardlines and pusillanimitie, as namely, cruelty, treason,
breach of promise, impatiencie, idleness, sloth, covetousness, What vices
proceed of cowardlines.
envy, backbiting, and all injustice, were it not that I hope the sequel of
our discourses will offer us matter and occasion to handle these vices
particularly, our hour not affording us time and leisure to enter upon so many
things together. There remains yet a word to be Of servile fear
spoken of that fear which I said did accompany the froward and wicked many
times, being called by the Poet a servile fear, which through the only horror
of punishment holds them back from practicing their wicked purposes. Of them
spoke Pythagoras when he said that he which cares not for doing of evil in
any other respect, but only because he would not be punished is very wicked.
Now although such fear is accursed, and to be condemned in all, yet is it
necessary for the preservation of humane society. For otherwise, all things
would run to confusion through the shameless malice of the wicked, of whom the
earth is full. And it is a great deal better, that through such fear they
should be restrained from their wicked desires and wills, than that they should
without all fear abandon themselves to put them in execution: albeit they are
no way excusable before God, who requires to be served with heart and spirit.
Nevertheless, such fear does not always stay them from putting their malice
in effect, but the more they are retained, so much the more are they inflamed
and kindled with a desire to satisfy their corrupt will, which in the end is
constrained to burst forth, and evidently to show that mischief which they
kept secret a long time. But if the common sort (says Seneca) be stayed by
laws from committing evil, the Philosopher contrariwise has reason for all
laws, doing good not because the law commands it, and abstaining from evil
not because it forbids it, but because he knows the one to be honest, and
the other vile and wicked. Having now seen that vice which is clean contrary
to Fortitude, and knowing that every virtue has a counterfeit Of rashness and
of the effects thereof.
follower thereof, no doubt but rashness is that vice which falsely shrowdeth
it self under the title of Fortitude and valor. For this virtue easily
overthrows it self if it be not underpropped with good counsel, and the
greater ability it supposes to have in it self, the sooner it turns aside
to wickedness, if prudence govern it not. This is that which Isocrates says,
that Fortitude joined with Prudence is available, but otherwise it procures
more evil than good to the possessors thereof. If Fortitude (says Lactantius)
without necessary constraint, or for a dishonest matter hazardeth her self
into dangers, she changes into rashness. He that does any thing at all
adventures (says Aristotle) not considering Who is a virtuous man.
how well he does it, ought not to be called virtuous: but only if he put it
in execution, after knowledge, consultation and election. Therefore as it is a
noble act to make such account of virtue, as for the love thereof, not to
fear the loss of life, otherwise very dear; so is it a point of rashness
and folly to contemn life upon a small and light occasion. Rashness than is
that which causes a man with joy of heart, and for a vain and frivolous
matter, to cast himself into certain and undoubted dangers, and to desire
earnestly to fall into them, to undertake all things unadvisedly, and
unconstrained to expect those perils which he knows will fall upon Cato.
him. The Elder Cato hearing certain men to commend one openly who desperately
hazarded himself, and was bold without discretion in perils of war, said
unto them, That there was great difference between much esteeming of virtue,
and little waighing of life: as if he would have said, that it is a commendable
thing to desire life to be virtuous. And truly to live and die are not of
themselves good, but to do both of them rightly and in a good matter. So that
to shun death, if it proceed not from a faint heart, is not to be reprehended.
But rashness is especially to be condemned in Captains and Heads of Armies,
as that which procures great damage to kingdoms Iphicrates comparison of an
army to a man's body.
and monarchies, and to so many as march under their conduct. This is that
which Iphicrates an Athenian captain would have us learn, who compared in an
army the Scoutes lightly armed to the hands: the Horsemen to the Feet: the
battle of Footmen to the Stomach and breast: and the Captain to the Head
of a Man's body. For (said he) the Captain that hazardeth himself too much,
and throws himself into danger without cause, is not retchlesse of his own
life only, but also of all those whose safety depends upon him: and
contrariwise, in taking care for the safeguard of his own person, he cares
therewithal for all those that are under him. Isadas the Lacedemonian The
rashness of Isadas.
seeing Epaminondas with the Thebane army at hand against the Spartanes,
ready to force and take their City, unclothed himself stark naked, puttyng
off his Shirte and all, and taking a Partisane in one hand, and a sword in the
other, he went with might and main against his enemies, where he showed great
prowess and valor. For which behavior although he had a Crown given him by
the Seignorie according to the custom that was amongst them, yet he was fined,
because he hazarded his life so rashly. We see daily among us but too many
examples of great mischiefs which befall men through their rashness, led with
ambition and desire of vayne-glorie. Therefore to conclude, and to draw some
profit out of our present discourse, we say that we ought to fear the
incurring of blame and dishonor for filthy and dishonest matters, and for
evil deeds, and are to shun all fear proceeding of want of courage, of
pusillanimitie, and of a depraved and corrupted nature: this last, as proper
and peculiar to the wicked, and the other, as that which makes a man unapt to
all good and commendable things. And as it is an act of Prudence and
Fortitude to provide for a tempest and for storms to come, (when the ship is
still in the Haven) and yet not to be afraid in the midst of storms: so is
it a point of rashness for a man to throw himself wittingly into an evident
danger, which might be avoided without any breach of Virtue and Justice.
Therefore Plato says, that timorous and rash men fear and enterprise
unadvisedly, whatsoever they take in hand, How a man may be valiant.
but that noble minds do all things with prudence. This also is that which
Seneca says: thou may be valiant if thou cast not thy self into perils, nor
desire to fall into them as timorous men do: neither abhorrest or stand in
fear of them, as being timorous. But following the sage advice of Cicero,
before we enterprise any thing, we must not only consider whether it be honest
and commendable, but also whether there be any like mean to execute it, that
neither through cowardlines we give it over, nor through greedy desire and
presumption, we purchase to our selves the reputation of rash men: observing
moreover in every matter of importance this Maxim of estate, that before we
begin any thing, we must diligently prepare and foresee whatsoever is
necessary thereunto.


Of Magnanimity and Generositie. Chap. 27.
ARAM. WHen that saying of Aristotle comes to my remembrance, that Fortitude
isa mediocritie in fearing and enterprising, but that Magnanimity consists
in great things, I am somewhat troubled in the understanding of this sentence:
because it seems he would put a difference between Fortitude and
Magnanimity, as if this latter had more excellency and perfection in it than
the other. For this cause my Companions, having entreated this morning of the
virtue of Fortitude, I propound now unto you to discourse unto us what
Magnanimity is.


ACHITOB. Among mortal and perishing things, there is nothing (as the
Philosophers say) that ought to trouble the Magnanimity of a noble heart. But I
find that they propound unto us in this word such a wisdom, as cannot be in
him that remains all his life time subject to affections and perturbations.
For this they would not have in true Magnanimity, which notwithstanding is well
able to bring forth infinite wonderful effects out of a noble mind, causing
it to be never unprovided of a good resolution to be put in execution according
to the ouerthwarts that happen unto him.


ASER. The property of a noble spirit (says Cicero) is not to be turned aside
through ingratitude from the desire of doing good to all men, even to his
enemies, as also to leave carking for that which is mortal, that he may
embrace celestial things. But we shall understand more at large of thee AMANA,
how these marvelous effects are works of true magnanimity.


AMANA. Although the virtue of Fortitude be never perfected without
Magnanimity, (which is as much to What Magnanimity is.
say, as generositie or noblenes of heart) as that which undoubtedly is
comprehended under the first part of Fortitude, which Cicero calls
Magnificence, or a doing of great and excellent things, yet notwithstanding it
seems that this word Magnanimity carries with it some greater and more
particular Empasis, and that a man may say, that the wonderful effects thereof
appear principally in three points, whereof I purpose here to discourse. The
first concerning Magnanimity consists in three things.
extreme and desperate matters, as when a man is past all hope of saving his
life, wherein perfect magnanimity always knows how to find out a convenient
remedy and wise consolation, not suffering himself to be vexed therewith. The
second respects duty toward enemies, against whom generositie will in no
wise suffer a man to practice or to consent to any wickedness, under what
pretense so ever it be, nor for any advantage which may be reaped thereby. The
third causes a noble minded man to contemn and to account that thing unworthy
the care of his soul which others wonder at, and labor by all means to
obtain, namely, strength, health, beauty, which the Philosophers call the
goods of the body: and The goods of the body and of Fortune.
riches, honor, and glory, which they say are the goods of fortune: and likewise
not to stand in fear of their contraries. Amongst the worthy and famous men
of old time, whose names and glorious factes crowned with an immortal
Laurel, are engraven in the temple of Memory, we find no praise worthy of
greater admiration, or that ought to awaken and stir us up better in
Christian duty, than the effects of this virtue of Magnanimity, upon these
three occasions presently touched. Whereof one The first effect of Magnanimity.
effect is, that we yield not against reason, nor pass the limits of duty by
fainting under that heavy burden of extreme distresses, which the horror of
death brings with it: but that even in the midst of greatest agony which
seems intolerable in man's judgment, we show such gravity and woorthines,
that we depart not in any sort from the peace and quietness of our souls, but
with constancy and cheerefulnes of spirit, meditate upon the joy of that haven
of salvation, which we behold with the eyes of our soul, whereinto through a
happy death at hand, we shall The second effect.
shortly be received. Another effect is, that we accomplish (so far as our
frailty can approach to perfection) the commandment of the divine will by
loving our neighbors as our selves, and by abstaining, even in regard of our
greatest enemies, from doing, procuring or consenting, yea by hindering that no
treachery or treason should be wrought them, nor any other thing unbeseeming
that natural love, which ought to be in every one toward his like, and
further by procuring them all the good and profit The third effect.
that may be. The third effect of this great virtue, no les wonderful tha^ the
rest, is in that a noble minded man solong as he lives, wholly withdraws his
affection from worldly and corruptible things through a steadfast and constant
The common remedy of the Ancients in desperate cases.
reason, and lifts it up to the meditation and holy desire of heavenly and
eternal things. The remedy which these great personages destitute of the right
knowledge of the truth most commonly used when their affairs were past all
hope of man's help, was death, which they chose rather to bring upon themselves
by their own hands, than to fall into the mercy of their enemies, whereby
they supposed that they committed a noble act, worthy the greatness of their
invincible courage. And if peradventure they were surprised, and forced in such
sort by their enemies, that they were compelled to become their prisoners, they
never desired them to save their lives, saying, that it beseemed not a noble
heart, and that in so doing they should submit both heart and body to him, who
before Cato of Vtica.
had but the body in his power. Cato the yoonger being brought to such
extremity in the town of Vtica, that by the advice of all those that were with
him, he was to send Ambassadors to Caesar the Conqueror, to practice an
agreement after submission to his mercy, yielded thereunto in the behalf of
others, but forbad that any mention should be made of himself. It belongs
(quoth he) to those that are overcome, to make request, and to such as have
done amiss, to crave pardon. As for me I will account my self invincible so
long as in right and justice I shall be mightier than Caesar. He it is that is
now taken and overcome, because that which hitherto he denied to take in hand
against the Commonwealth, is at this present sufficiently testified against
him, and discovered. Neither will I be beholding or bound to a Tyrant for an
unjust matter. For it is a point of injustice in him to usurp the power of
saving their lives (like a Lord) over whom he has no right to command. After
many other speeches of Philosophy used by him, and standing much upon that
Stoicall opinion, that only a wise and The opinion of the Stoics.
good man is free, and that all wicked men are bond men and slaves, he went
alone into his chamber, and slew himself with his sword. Sylla the Dictator
having condemned to death all the inhabitants of Perouza, and pardoning none
but his Host, he also would needs die, saying: that he would not hold his life
of the murderer of his country. Brutus, Brutus.
after the battle lost against Augustus Caesar, was counseled by certain of
his friends to fly: I must fly in deed (said he) but with hands, not with
feet. And taking them all by the hand, he uttered these words with a very good
and cheerful countenance: I feel my heart greatly contented, because none of
my friends have for saken me in this business: neither complain I of fortune at
all, but only so far forth as touches my country. For I esteem my self
happier than they that have vanquished, as long as I leave behind me a glory
of virtue for hazarding all liberally, to free from bondage my brethren and
countrymen. Which praise our conquering enemies neither by might nor money can
obtain, and leave to posterity: but men will always say of them, that being
unjust and wicked, they have overthrown good men to usurp a tyrannous rule
and dominion, that belongs not unto them. After he had thus spoken, he took
his sword, and falling upon the point thereof, gave up the ghost. Cassius also
his companion, caused his own head to be cut off by one of his slaves, whom he
had made free, and kept A notable history of the Numantines.
with him long time before for such a necessity. The history which we read of
the Numantines, comes in fitly for this matter which we handle here. For
after they had sustained the siege of the Romans fourteen years together,
and were in the end enclosed by Scipio with a very great ditch of two and
forty foot in depth, and thirty in breadth, which compassed the city round
about, the Consul summoned them to commit themselves to the clemency of the
Romans, and to trust to their promise, seeing all means of sallying forth to
fight, and of recovering any victuals were taken from them. To whom they made
this only answer, that forasmuch as they had lived for the space of 338.
years in freedom, they would not die slaves in any sort. Whereupon, such as
were most valiant, assembled together and slew those that were most grown in
years, with women and children. Then they took all the riches of the city,
and of the temples, and brought it into the midst of a great hall, and setting
fire to all quarters of the city, each of them took the speediest poison they
could find: so that the temples, houses, riches, and people of Numantia ended
all in one day, leaving to Scipio, neither riches to spoil, neither man or
woman to triumph withal. For during the whole time wherein their city was
besieged, not one Numantine yielded himself prisoner to any Roman, but slew
himself rather than he would yield. Which Magnanimity caused Scipio to
bewail the desolation of such a people, in these words: O happy Numantia,
which the Gods had decreed should once end, but never be vanquished. Now albeit
these examples and infinite other like to these, are set forth unto us by
Historiographers, as testimonies of an excellent Magnanimity, whereby they
would teach us both to be never discouraged for the most tedious travels and
irksome miseries of man's life, and also to stand so little in awe of death,
that for fear thereof, much less for any other torment or grief, we never
commit any thing unbeseeming a noble heart: yet notwithstanding, no man that
fears No man ought to hasten forward the end of his days.
God, and is willing to obey him, ought to forget himself so much, as to hasten
forward the end of his days for any occasion whatsoever. This did Socrates
know very well, when he said, that we must not suffer our soul to depart from
the Sentinel wherein she is placed in this body, without the leave of her
Captain: and that so weighty a matter as death ought not (as Plato says) to
be in man's power. But if it be offered unto us by the will of God, then with a
magnanimious heart, void of al starting aside in any thing against duty, we
must set free this passage, being stayed and assuredly grounded upon that
consolation, which never forsakes a good conscience, not only through the
expectation of a naked and simple humane glory, which most of the Heathen
propounded to themselves, but of that life which abides for ever: following
therein the constancy of Alcibiades, a great Captain of Alcibiades constancy
and courage in death.
Grecia, who hearing the sentence of his condemnation to death pronounced, said:
It is I that leave the Athenians condemned to die, and not they me. For I go to
seek the Gods where I shall be immortal, but they shall remain still amongst
men, who are all subject to death. Socrates also having a capital accusation
Socrates speech at his arraignment.
laid against him wrongfully, directed his speech to the Judges, and said unto
them, that his accusers by their false depositions might well cause him to die,
but hurt him they could not: adding further, that he would never leave his
profession of Philosophy for fear of death. I ^m per swaded (quoth he in
Plato) that this my opinion is very good, namely: that every one ought to abide
constantly in that place and trade of life, which either he has chosen
himself, or is appointed him by his superior: that he must account that for
the best, and hazard himself therein to all dangers, without fear either of
death or of any other thing whatsoever. And therefore I should err greatly, if,
obeying the General of war which ye appointed unto me in Potidaea,
Amphipolis and Delos, and abiding in that place wherein he set me without fear
of death, I should now for fear of death, or of any other thing, forsake that
rank wherein God has placed me, and would have me remain in, as I always
believed and thought: namely, that I should live a student in Philosophy,
correcting mine own and other men's vices. Now, if I should do otherwise, I
might justly be accused for calling my self a wise man, not What it is to
fear death.
being so indeed: seeing to fear death, is to think that to be, which is not.
But neither I, nor any other man, ought to do all that we may either in
judgment or in war, to the end to avoid death. For it is very certain, that
he who would in time of battle cast down his armor and fly away, might by
that mean avoid death (and the like is to be understood in all dangers and
perils) if he were not afraid of infamy. But consider (O countrymen) that it
is no very hard matter to avoid death, but far more difficult to eschew
wickedness and the shame thereof, which are a great deal swifier of foot than
that is. O speech worthy of eternal praise, and such a one as instructs a
Christian notably in a great and noble resolution: namely, to run the race of
his short days in that vocation, whereunto God has called him, and that in the
midst of tortures, torments, and all agonies of death. From which, whilst we
expect a happy passage, we ought to be no more destitute of an apt remedy in
all those things, which according to the world are most irksome and desperate,
but sustain them with like constancy and woorthines, not departing from the
tranquillity and rest of our souls, which is a more noble act, than to hasten
forward the end of our days, that we may be delivered of them. But howsoever
it be, let us always prefer a virtuous and honest death, before any kind of
life, be it never so pleasant. And seeing that one and the same passage is
prepared as well for the coward as the courageous, (it being decreed, that all
men must once die) the lovers of virtue shall do well to reap to themselves
some honor of common necessity, and to depart out of this life with such a
comfort. Now to come to the second commendable effect of this virtue of
Magnanimity, whereof Heroical men Examples of the second effect of Magnanimity.
were so prodigal heretofore for the benefit and safety of their enemies, we
can bring no better testimony than Fabritius.
the courteous fact of Fabritius the Roman Consul toward Pyrrhus, who warred
against him, and whose Physician wrote unto him, that he offered himself to
murder his master by poison, and so to end their strife without danger. But
Fabritius sent the letter unto him, and signified withal, that he had made a
bad choice of friends, as well as of enemies, because he made war with upright
and good men, and trusted such as were disloiall and wicked: whereof he thought
good to let him understand, not so much to gratify him, as least the accident
of his death should procure blame to the Romans, as if they had sought or
consented to end the war by means of treason, not being able to obtain
their purpose by their virtue. Camillus a Roman Dictator, is no less to be
commended Camillus.
for that which he did during the siege of the city of the Fallerians. For he
that was Schoolemaister to the chiefest men's children amongst them, being gone
out of the city, under color to (...) his youth to walk, and to exercise
themselves along the walls, delivered them into the hands of this Roman
Captain, saying unto him, that he might be well assured the Citizens would
yield themselves to his devotion, for the safety and liberty of that which
was dearest unto them. But Camillus knowing this to be too vile and wicked a
practice, said to those that were with him, that although men used great
outrage and violence in war, yet among good men certain laws and points of
equity were to be observed. For victory was A good lesson for a General to
learn.
not so much to be desired, as that it should be gotten and kept by such cursed
and damnable means: but a General ought to war, trusting to his own
virtue, and not to the wickedness of others. Then stripping the said schole
master, and binding his hands behind him, he delivered him naked into the
hands of his scholars, and gave to each of them a bundle of rods, that so they
might carye him back again into the city. For which noble act the Citizens
yielded themselves to the Romans: saying, that in preferring justice before
victory, they had taught them to choose rather to submit themselves unto them,
than to retain still their liberty: confessing withal, that they were
overcome more by their virtue, than vanquished by their force and power. So
great power has Magnanimity, that it does not only advance Princes to the
highest degree of honor, but also abateth the heart of the puissant and warlike
enemy, and oftentimes procures victory without battle. Truly we may draw an
excellent doctrine out of these examples, which make all those without excuse,
that spare nothing to attain to the end of their intents and devices, making
no difficulty at the destruction of innocents, but exercising all kind of
cruelty, so they may overthrow their enemies by what means soever: using
commonly that saying of Lysander, Admiral of the Lacedaemonians, that if the
Lions skin will not suffice, the Fox Treason and cruelty never find place in
a noble heart.
his skin also is to be sewed on. But let us resolutely hold this, that treason
never finds place in a noble heart, no more than the body of a Fox is not
found in a Lions body. Further, it is notoriously (...) that the Ancients
striued to procure all good and profit to their enemies, using clemency and
humanity toward them, when they had greater occasion and means to be
revenged of them. Hereof we may allege good examples, when we discourse
hereafter particularly of those virtues that are proper to a noble minded man,
who ought to hate cruelty Of the third effect of Magnanimity.
no less than treason. We are therefore to look unto the last effect, and
sound proof of Magnanimity and Generositie here propounded by us, which we
said, consisted in the contempt of earthly and humane goods. Wherein truly
rests the very perfection of a Christian, who lifts up his desires to his
last and sovereign Good in heaven. Now, because there are but few that love
not themselves too much in those things that concern the commodities of this
life, and fewer that seek not after glory and honor, as a recompense of their
excellent deeds, and that desire not riches earnestly to satisfy their
pleasure, in these three points also a noble minded man causes his virtue to
appear more wonderful, because he does not judge the^ to be a worthy reward
for the same, but rather altogether unworthy the care of his soul, for which
principally he desires to live. This is that which Cicero says, that it is
not seemly that he should yield to covetousness and concupiscence, who could
not be subdued by fear, or that he should be overcome by pleasure, who has
resisted grief: but rather that these things ought to be shunned by all
possible means, together with the desire of money, seeing there is nothing more
vile and abject, than to love riches, nor more noble than to despise them. This
also is that which Plato says, that it belongs to the duty of a noble heart
not only to surmount fear, but also to moderate his desires and
concupiscences, especially when he has liberty to use them, whither it be in
the pleasure of the body, or in the ambitious desire of vain glory, honor and
power. In this sort then, he that has a right noble and worthy mind, will no
more weigh greatness among men and estimation of the common sort, than he does
grief and poverty, but depending wholly upon the will of God, and conte^ting
himself with his works wrought in him, he will not that any good thing upon
earth can be taken from him. And because he aspireth to those things that are
best, highest, and most difficult, he abides free from all earthly care and
grief, as being long before prepared for all dolors, through the contempt of
death, which bringing an end to the greatest and most excessive pangs, serves
him for an entrance into eternal rest. We have already alleged many examples
of ancient men fit for this matter which now we speak of, and the sequel of
our treatises will furnish us with mo when we shall come to entreat of riches
and worldly wealth, whereof we are to speak more at large. But here we will
propound Aristides only to be imitated, who was a worthy Aristides.
man among the Athenians, whose opinion was that a good citizen ought to be
always prepared alike to offer his body and mind unto the service of the
common wealth, without hope or expectation of any hired and mercenary reward
either of money, honor, or glory. And so with an unspeakable gravity and
constancy, he kept himself always upright in the service of his country, in
such sort, that no honor done unto him could cause him either to be puffed up
in heart, or to be more earnest in employing himself: (as it is the manner of
some to do service according as they are recompensed) neither could any repulse
or denial which he suffered, abate his courage or trouble him, or yet diminish
and lessen his affection and desire to profit his common wealth. Whereas now
adays we see that the most part of men with us upon a small coffeehouse,
labor to make public profit to serve their desires and passions, in stead of
giving themselves to the good and benefit of their country. Now concluding our
present Magnanimity is invincible.
discourse, we learn that true and perfect Magnanimity and Generositie is
invincible and inexpugnable, because upon this consideration, that death is the
common end of man's life, and that happy passage to life everlasting, she
despises it altogether, and makes less account thereof than of bondage and
vice: sustaining also with a great and unappalled heart, most cruel torments,
not being moved thereby to do any thing that may seem to proceed of the common
weakness and frailty of man's nature. Further we learn that this virtue makes
him that possesses her, good, gentle, and courteous, even toward his greatest
enemies, against whom it suffers him not to use any couin or malice, but
keeps him always within the limits of equity and justice: causing him
further to make choice of and to finish all honest matters of his own will,
and for their love, not caring at all for mortal and corruptible things, that
he may wholly apprehend and take hold of those things that are divine and
eternal.


Of Hope. Chap. 28.
AMANA. Wherein the perfection of a wise man's life consists.
COnsidering that the perfection of a wise man's life consists in the practice
of great and excellent things, he that is borne to virtue feels himself
touched to the quick with desire to bring them to pass. But the instabilitie
and small assurance which he knows to be in that which depends upon the
doubtful event of every high enterprise, oftentimes cools his virtuous
intents, if a certain confidence and good hope did not make easy unto him the
means of attaining thereunto. Likewise, when he feels the sharp pricking
that proceeds from the ouerthwarts and miseries of man, which sequester
themselves very little from his life, he is soon daunted with sorrow and care,
if he have not this hope that comfort him with expectation of speedy
redress. Of you therefore (my companions) we shall understand the excellency
of this Good that belongs to the soul and is so necessary for a happy life,
I mean Hope, which depends of the virtue of Fortitude, whereof we have
discoursed all this day.


ARAM. Learned men (says Bias) differ from the ignorant sort in the goodness of
hope, which truly is very profitable, sweet and acceptable to a prudent man.
But evil hope leads carnal men, as a naughty guide, unto sin.


ACHITOB. As good hope serves to increase strength in a man, so rash hope
oftentimes beguileth men. But it belongs to thee ASER to handle this matter.


ASER. Alexander the great being by the states of all Alexander reserved hope
only for himself.
Graecia chosen general captain to pass into Asia, and to make war with the
Persians, before he took ship he enquired after the estate of all his friends
to know what means they had to follow him. Then he distributed and gave to one
lands, to another a village, to this man the custom of some haven, to another
the profit of some Borough town, bestowing in this manner the most part of his
demeans and revenues. And when Perdicas one of his Lieutenants demanded of him
what he reserved for himself: he answered, Hope. So great confidence had this
noble monarch, not in the strength of his weapons, or multitude of good
warriors desirous of glory and honor, but Properties requisite in a General.
in his own virtue, being content and satisfied with a little, in his
continency, beneficence, contempt of death, magnanimity, courtesy, gracious
intertainment, being easy to be spoken with, having a free disposition by
nature, without dissimulation, constant in his counsels, ready and quick in
his executions, willing to be the first in glory, and always resolute to do
that which duty commanded. From this Hope thus surely grounded, he never
shrunk, until the last gasp of his life: which caused him to make this
answer to Parmenio, who counseled him to accept of the offers which Darius
made unto him for peace: namely, six thousand Talents, being in value six
Millions of gold, and the half of his kingdom, with a daughter of his in
marriage; If I were Parmenio, I would accept of his profers. Besides, he sent
word to Darius, that the earth could not bear two Suns, nor Asia two Kings.
Neither was he deceived of his good hope, which led him to such a perfection of
worldly glory and felicity, that he was the first and last that ever
approached near unto it. This Hope was that foundation whereupon so many great
and excellent Heathen men and Pagans built their high and noble enterprises.
The definition of confidence.
For proof heerof may be alleged that definition, which Cicero gives of
Confidence, being the second part of Hope, affirming it to be that virtue,
whereby the spirit of man puts great trust in weighty and honest matters,
having a certain and sure hope in himself. And elsewhere he says, that he
shall neither rejoice, nor be troubled out of measure, that trusts in
himself. But we Our hope must be grounded upon the grace of God.
know that this Hope is weak and uncertain, if it be not settled and grounded
upon a sure expectation of the help and grace of God, without which we can
never prosper. Now this is out of doubt, that we can not hope and wait for
that grace, unless our counsels and enterprises have reason for their guide, and
right and equity for their Of vain hope.
bounds. For (as an ancient man says) that man hops in vain that fears
not God, and they only are filled with good hope, whose consciences are clean
and pure. So that all they that are led with sundry evil passions, either of
ambition, of vainglory, or of any other unbridled desire, can never have that
happy and good hope, which never deceives men. And in deed they miss
oftentimes of their intent, yea, are deprived of that which was their own and
certain, because they are desirous to get unjustly another man's right, being
also uncertain. The self same thing falls out to those that trust and stay
in such sort upon their own strength, virtue and constancy, that fearing in
no respect (as they say) the greatest calamities that can come to man, assure
themselves in their prosperity Who are soonest thrown down with adversity.
to be invincible in their resolutions, and presume that nothing is able to
pull them down, or to cause them to change their opinion: and yet, so soon as
the wind of adversity blows, they are the first that are thrown to the
ground, and soonest show forth the inconstancy and imbecillitie of man's
nature left to it self. As contrariwise, they to whom God gives eyes to
acknowledge themselves, are then humbled, so that they reverence the ordinance
of God, who derideth all the enterprises of men. The practice hereof was well
known to Wencelaus king of Wencelaus.
Hungaria, being driven out of his kingdom, and forsaken of his own, who
oftentimes used to say, The hope I had in men hindered me from putting my trust
in God: but now that all my confidence is in him, I assure my self that he
will help me by his divine goodness. As in deed it fell out so unto him,
being reestablished again in all his estates and dignities. But to the end we
confound not together that which is simply divine, with that which is human,
I think we ought to make a double hope: the first, true, certain, and
infallible, The division of hope.
which concerns holy and sacred mysteries: the other doubtful, respecting
earthly things only. As touching the first, we know things to come by the
assurance thereof, as well as if they were already done. We are taught in the
holy scripture what is the undoubted certainty of Of the true and infallible
hope.
this hope, which through faith ought to be so imprinted in our hearts, that by
the strength, power, and virtue thereof, we should run the race of our short
days in all joy, happiness and peaceable tranquillity of our minds,
expecting without doubting the perfect and absolute enjoying of those goods
that are immortal, unutterable and endless in the second and eternal life.
Without this hope grounded upon the free goodness of the almighty, let us
assuredly persuade our selves, that man's estate is more miserable than that of
brute beasts, seeing this is the only way of his salvation. The other hope
which concerns this present life only in all such things as we propound to
our selves for the benefit and contentation thereof, has such Of earthly hope.
need to be ruled, guided, and referred to the happy end of the first
excellent and heavenly hope, that otherwise it cannot but be doubtful,
inconstant, and rash, what humane reason soever we can allege to persuade the
possibility of attaining to the end of our pretended devises, which in one
moment may be quite ouerthrown, the occasions whereof being for the most part
secret and hid from us. Moreover the imperfection of whatsoever men commonly
most esteem upon earth is so great that together with their continual
uncertainty, the perturbations which hinder the tranquillity of the soul
redouble and abound so much the more, as the enjoying of these earthly
commodities increase and augment, leaving in man a continual desire to
multiply them, and a fear to loose them. As touching this hope therefore of
humane things which we wish might always prosper with us, we may well hope what
we will, but withal we must prepare and settle our selves to support
constantly whatsoever falls out, that that which comes unto us against our
will, may not be altogether against our expectation: and that we never use such
repinings as these, unbeseeming a wise man, Speeches unbeseeming a wise man.
I would never have thought it: I looked for another matter: I would never have
supposed that such a thing could have happened. In the mean while we must not
omit to Hope the best always in our crosses and calamities, because nothing
lenifieth so much the sharpness of present adversities as the hope of future
benefit, the certain expectation whereof The fruit of hope.
as it were steals away our labors, and causes all fear of peril to
vanish away. This is that which Apollodorus says, that we must never be
discouraged for adversities, but always hope for better things. The calamities
of mortal men (says Euripides) in the end leave of themselves: and as the
winds do not always blow vehemently, so happy men are not ever fortunate. The
one flies from the other: but he is a good man, who is always full of good
hope* Pindarus calls it the nurse of old age. Thales said, that nothing in
all the world was more common than Hope, because it abides with them also that
have no other goods. The Elpistick Philosophers affirmed, that nothing better
maintained and preserved the life of man, than Hope. And truly without hope,
which eases the burden of man's miseries, the world were not able to sustain
Our life would be insupportable without hope.
life. For it greatly helps man to live contentedly and happily, if, as we
said, it have respect to the best end, unto which all our desires and
inclinations ought to be referred, and ought to be governed thereby according
to reason and justice. Otherwise it is certain that a man can never peaceably
and to his contentation, enjoy his present estate and condition, but always
some new hope of better things to come, will cause him to neglect that whereof he
is assured, and to run after an uncertainty, until in the end being often
deceived and missing of his purposes and enterprises, he be ouerthrown quite
through his great hopes. Therefore Plato writes, that fortune is more contrary
to that man who^ she suffers not to enjoy that which he has, than to him whom
she denies to grant that which he demands of her. This gave occasion to
Cineas Cineas talk with I'yrrhus concerning his great hope.
(a very wise man, and so excellent an Orator, that one writes of him, that he
brought more towns in subjection to his master Pyrrhus by his tongue, than
himself did by his valor) when he saw that although this king might enjoy a
happy peace and quietness, if he would be contented to reign peaceably over his
subjects, yet he burned with desire to undertake war against Italy; to enter
into talk with him, and to ask of him this question. If Sir, the gods show us
this favor, that we should remain Conquerors in this war, what good would
the victory do us? We might afterward (answered Pyrrhus) easily subdue the
Grecian and Barbarian cities bordering upon that Country. Well, when this is
done, replied Cineas, what shall we do afterward? Cicilia (answered Pyrrhus)
will of it self yield unto us. Shall Cicilia then (quoth Cineas) end our
war? What will stay us after (quoth this monarch) from passing into Afrike
and to Carthage, and from the recovery of the kingdom of Macedonia with ease,
that so we may command all Graecia without contradiction? Whereunto Cineas
replied, when all is in our power, what shall we do in the end? Pyrrhus
beginning to smile, said, we will rest us at our ease, my friend, living in all
pleasure, and as merrily as may be. Then Cineas having brought him to that point
which he desired, said unto him: And what sir, lets us from rest at this
present, and from living in joy and pleasure, seeing we have all things
requisite and necessary, without seeking it with so much effusion of man's
blood, besides infinite hazards and dangers, and that in such places where it
is uncertain whether we shall find it? These wise speeches sooner offended
Pyrrhus than caused him to change his mind. And although this Prince could not
doubt at all what happiness and great felicity he forsook, yet was it
impossible to take the hope of that which he desired out of his mind. Wherefore
Antigonus king of Pyrrhus compared to a Dice-plaier.
Macedonia compared him very fitly to a Dice-player, to whom the Dice speak
fair by giving unto him good chances, but yet so that he cannot cast the same
again to serve his turn. For he lost that by hope, which he had gotten in
deed, desiring so earnestly that which he had not, that he forgate to make
that sure which was already in his possession. And in deed it fell out very
unhappily with him in the end. For after he had fought prosperously a certain
time, he was discomfited by the Romans, and being after besieged, was slain
with a tile which a woman let fall upon his head. Was there ever monarch who
ought rather to have contented and delighted himself peaceably Caesar was led
continually with new hope.
in the enjoying of his unspeakable prosperities than Julius Caesar? And yet not
being satisfied with the Roman Empire, which he had obtained by so many
travels and innumerable dangers, he made preparation (whilst the conspirators
sought his death) to go himself in person to war against the Parthians. So
that as long as he lived, the hope of that which was to come, caused him to
contemn the glory gotten by his former deeds, and to deprive himself of that
commendation, which he should have no less deserved in preserving himself,
and in the good government of his great estate, than he did in conquering the
same: whereof he reaped no other benefit, but only a vain name and glory of
small continuance in his life time, which procured him the envy and hatred of
his countrymen, so that he was murdered with 23. blows of the sword on his
body, after he had ouerliued Pompey (who was vanquished by him) four years
only, or little more. Histories are full of sundry such alterations, which
commonly follow them that are not content with their estate: from whence wise
men and of good judgment may draw this instruction, to limit their thoughts
and desires. For as Diodorus the Athenian said, Two things hurtful to men.
these two things are very hurtful to men, Hope and Love, of which the one
leads, and the other accompanies them, the one seeks out the means to
execute their thoughts, and the other persuadeth them with good success. And
although these two things are not seen with the eye, yet are they mightier
than visible punishments. Heerof came that old proverb, that proud men fat
themselves with vain hope, which by little and little choaketh them, as
naughty fat does man's body. And if we be willing to keep our selves from so
dangerous a downfall, let us cure our souls of all hurtful hope, and let
reason and duty (as we have already said) lead and limit all our affections
and enterprises, considering wisely their beginning, namely, that we ground
them upon right and equity only, knowing We must not judge of enterprises by
the event.
that they ought not to be judged of by the event and end of them, which
oftentimes seem to favor unjust counsels and doings. And this offreth some
color and occasion to the wicked to prosecute their dealings, having no care
of violating right and justice. But how soever it be, a miserable end brings
them an over late repentance. Neither let us persuade our selves, that the
issue of our imaginations and enterprises, although they be well grounded,
shall certainly fall out according to our meaning, (for this is that hope,
which greatly hurts, and most of all troubles men) but let us know, that as
in all things which grow, there is always some corruption mingled in them (it
being necessary that all mortal seeds should presently Ill hap is more
common than good.
be partakers of the cause of death) so from the same fountain ill hap flows
unto us in great measure, yea sooner and more abundantly than good success.
Which thing Homer willing to give us to understand, fained that there were two
vessels at the entry of the great Olympus, the one being full of honey, the
other of gall, of which two mingled together, Jupiter causes all men to
drink. And Plutark says, that men can never purely and simply enjoy the ease
of any great prosperity, but whether it be fortune, or the envy of destiny,
or else the natural necessity of earthly things, there ease is always
intermingled in their life time with evil among the good, yea in the like
mishap that which is worse, surmounteth the better. All these things being
considered of us, they will make us more advised and stayed in all our counsels
and devises, and in such sort affected and prepared with true prudence,
fortitude, and magnanimity, that whatsoever happens unto us, we shall not be
troubled or further moved, but Seneca advises us to prepare our selves to all
cuents.
receive it, as having long before expected and looked for it. This does Seneca
very learnedly teach us, saying: that we ought not to be astonished or marvel
at unlooked for chances that light upon us, but prepare and conform our hearts
to all events that may come unto us, premeditating and thinking aforehand, that
we are borne to suffer, and that nothing comes to pass, which ought not to
be. Destiny (says he) leads those that are consenting, and draws
gainsayers by force. Neither ought we, through doubt of that which is to come,
to neglect good, heroical, and far removed hopes of excellent things,
having thus grounded them as we have said. For wise and famous personages,
desirous of honor and glory, were always of opinion, that they ought to be
entertained and kept in a sound and settled resolution of the mind, because of
the variety of accidents, which daily happen contrary to the common opinions
of men: wherein experience teaches us, that according to the direction of a
good spirit, and the good success that follows and accompanies it,
whatsoever concerns the managing of worldly affairs, is changed; and turns
about with the moving of fortune, What the author understands by the word
Fortune.
if it be lawful for us under this Heathen word to understand the ordinance of
God. Therefore to end our present discourse, we will note this, that first we
are to defend our selves by the grace of God, with that happy and certain
hope which can never deceive or confound any, being a certain guide to keep
us in this long and tedious pilgrimage from going astray out of the way of
salvation. Secondly from this, the prop, stay, and comfort of man's life
against all miseries and calamities will flow and issue. Thirdly and lastly, we
shall be stirred up to all great and noble works, for the good and common
profit of every one, referring the events of them to the wonderful counsel
of the providence of God, and receiving them as just, good, and profitable.


The end of the seventh days work.
THE EIGHT DAYS WORK.
Of Patience, and of Impatiencie: of Choler and Wrath. Chap. 29.
ASER. IF virtue consists in hard matters, if that which comes nearest to
the divine nature, and is most uneasy and least of all used of all men, better
beseems a valiant and noble minded man, than any other thing whatsoever; no
doubt but Romans 15. 5. Exodus 34. 6.
patience is the very same thing: whereof the Scripture teaches us, that God is
the author, and that he puts it in daily practice among his creatures,
deferring the full punishment of their faults by expecting their repentance.
Further, this virtue so much resembles Fortitude, whereof we discoursed
yesterday, that we may say with Cicero, that Fortitude is borne of her, or else
with her, seeing there is nothing so great and burdensome, which she can not
easily sustain and overcome, even the violentest and most common passions of
man's nature, as impatiencie, choler, and anger, which commonly procure the
utter ruin of the soul. Therefore let us (my Companions) begin our days
work with the handling of the effects of this great virtue of Patience, and of
the vices that are clean contrary unto it.


AMANA. Patience a salve for all sores.
Patience (says Plautus) is a remedy for all griefs. Endure patiently, and
blame not that which thou can not avoid. For he that is able to suffer well,
overcomes. But this virtue is so rarely found among men, that more will offer
themselves to death, than abide grief patiently. Nevertheless, it is the point
of a wise man (says Horace) to set a good face upon that which must needs be
done.


ARAM. By patience (says Cicero) we must seek after that, which we cannot
obtain by favor: and if we endure, all the inconvenience will turn to our
profit. But learned men, whilst they resist not their perturbations, trouble
and ouerturne with a sudden vehemency those things which they had begun with
a quiet spirit and mind, throwing down at one blow whatsoever they had builded
with long labor. But of thee ACHITOB we shall understand the praise and
property of this virtue of Patience, with the contrary effects thereof,
namely, Impatiencie, Choler and Anger, and the means to shun and avoid them.


ACHITOB. Among all the ancients, the Stoike Philosophers were most zealous and
precise obseruers of all points concerning this virtue of patience, which they
grounded upon the fatal cause of necessity, requiring Of the Stoicall
patience.
such exactnes and perfection thereof in men, that they would have a noble heart
to be no otherwise touched with adversity than with prosperity, nor with
sorrowful things than with joyful. For this cause Aristo said, that virtue
only was to be wished, and therefore that it was all one to be sick or sound,
poor or rich: briefly, that in all other humane and necessary uses of nature,
there was no more evil in one kind, than in another. Whereby it seems that
these Philosophers delighted in painting out a picture of such patience, as
never was, nor shall be among men, except first they should be unclothed of all
human nature, or become as blockish and senseless as a stone. For so long as
man remains in this life, he cannot be void of affections and perturbations
that draw the soul to care and to provide for the body, which continually
cries out against her for fear of grief and of wanting that which belongs
unto it. But it is the duty of a wise man to moderate all passions in such
sort, that in the end reason remain mistress. Moreover we say that virtue
Virtue is neither without affection nor subject to affections.
which is a habit of comelines and mediocritie in affections, ought neither to
be without her motions, nor yet too much subject to passions. For the
abolishing of desire makes the soul without motion, and without joy even in
honest things: as on the other side over vehement motions thereof altogether
trouble her, and cause her to be as it were beside her self. Further, we seek
after the common practice of men, not for that perfection which they wish for,
and whereunto they ought to aspire: and we desire that affection should show it
self no otherwise in virtue, than a little shadow of a hidden cloud, or a line
in a picture. Of true patience.
Therefore true patience which we ought to embrace in all things, not as
compelled and of necessity, but cheerfully and as resting in our welfare, is a
moderation and tolerance of our evils, which, albeit we sigh under the heavy
burden of them, clothe us in the mean while with a spiritual joy, that
strives so well and mastreth in such sort the sense of nature which shunneth
grief, that in the end it works in us an affection of piety and godliness,
joined with a free and cheerful mind, under the yoke and obedience of the just
and rightful will of God, through a certain expectation of things promised,
and causes us to judge impatiencie to be contumacie and rebellion to this
divine will, The definition of patience.
and sufficient of it self to make a man to be called wretched. Patience (says
Plato) is a habit that consists in sustaining stoutly all labors and
griefs for the love of honesty. The law says, that it is a very good thing
to keep the tranquillity of our spirit as much as may be in adversities, and
not to complain of that which is uncertain: because men know not whither that
which is light upon them be good or evil for them, as also because sorrow can
not help that which is to come, but rather hinders the curing of the evil:
and lastly, because there is nothing in humane matters, whereof any great
account is to be made. But if I must needs support them, my desire and labor
is to do it nobly, honestly, and courageously. It skilleth not what we endure,
but how we endure it. And then does patience preuail most, when we know that
whatsoever we have done, was executed of us for godliness sake. The conflict The
fruits of patience.
of Patience (says Euripides) is such, that the vanquished is better than the
vanquisher. And let us not think that there is any calamity which cannot be
sustained by the nature of man armed with patience, which is an invincible
tower. Patience (says Cicero) is a voluntary and long suffering of labors,
calamities, travels, and difficult matters, for the love of honesty and of
virtue. And when all things are overthrown, and counsel will do no more good,
there is but this one only remedy, to bear patiently whatsoever shall come
upon us. Patience serves us for a mean to attain to great matters, staying
men from fainting in dangers and travels. By patience whatsoever is disordred,
may be brought again to good order, as that wise emperor Marcus Aurelius would
give us to understand, when he said that patience had no less helped him in
the government of his estate than knowledge. Likewise it is for the most part
followed of courtesy and gentleness, which make him well liked of that is
adorned therewith, and sooner draw good will, the cause of men's obedience, then
force or violence does. He that is slow to anger (says the wise man) is
better than the mighty man, Prou. 16. 32.
and he that rules his own mind, is better than he that wins a city. True
patience loves the afflictions which she suffers, causing him that possesses
her to give praise to God in the midst of adversities, and to submit himself to
his judgment when he is pressed with diseases: neither can poverty keep him
back from commending highly his bounty and goodness. To be short, as a pearl
shows her beauty even in the midst of a puddle: so a patient man causes his
virtue to appear in all adversities. Moreover this patience which we show in
adversities, moves those to compassion and pity that see us suffer. Which
thing as it greatly comfort in affliction, so oftentimes it causes others
to reap inestimable benefit when they behold us to suffer unjustly. For it
serves to awaken and to strengthen the weak in the knowledge of their duty,
that they suffer not themselves to be deceived with the poisonfull sweetness of
worldly goods and commodities. In a word the virtue of patience is so
necessary for a good and happy life, that no part or action of man's life can
be guided to their proper end without her. And as she is a branch of
Magnanimity, Fortitude, and greatness of courage; so Impatiencie is a weakness
and imbecillitie of a Of impatiencie, choler, and wrath.
base, vile, and contemptible nature, wherein choler, and in the end wrath, are
easily engendered, which are two very pernicious passions in the soul, and
differ nothing from fury (as the elder Cato said) but only in this, that they
continue a less time, and this a longer. This is that which The definition of
anger.
Possidonius teaches us, saying: that Anger is nothing else but a short fury.
Aristides called it the inflammation of blood, and an alteration of the heart.
Cicero says, that that which the Latins call Anger, is named of the Grecians
desire of revenge. And Solon being demanded to whom a man fraught with Anger,
might be compared, answered: to him that makes no account of losing his
friends, and cares not although he procure enemies to himself. But besides
the sayings of all these Sages, experience sufficiently shows us, that Choler
and Anger are enemies to all reason: and (as Plutark says) are no less proud,
presumptuous, and uneasy to be guided by another, than a great and mighty
tyranny: Insomuch that a ship given over to the mercy of the winds and
storms, would sooner of it self receive a Pilot from without, than a man
carried headlong with wrath and choler, would yield to the reason and admonition
of another. For an angry man (like to those that burn themselves within their
own houses) fills his soul in such sort with trouble, chafing, and noise,
that he neither sees nor hears any thing that would profit him, unless he
make provision long time before to succor himself with reason through the
study of wisdom, whereby he may be able to overthrow his impatiency and
choler, which argue and accompany for the Who are most given to impatiencie
and choler.
most part a weak and effeminate heart. And that this is true, we see that women
are commonly sooner driven into choler than men: the sick than the sound: the
old than the young: all vicious, gluttonous, jealous, vaineglorious, and
ambitious men, than those that unfeignedly hate vice. Whereby it is evident
enough, that choler proceeds from the infirm and weak part of the soul,
and not from the Generositie thereof. Neither does it make against our saying,
to allege the opinion of Aristotle, and of all the Peripateticks, who
maintained that we ought to moderate the affections and passions of the soul:
but otherwise that they were necessary to prick men forward to virtue. Yea
Aristotle said, that choler was as a whetstone to sharpen and set an edge upon
Fortitude and Generositie. Aristotle contrary in opinion to the Stoics.
The Academicks and Stoics contend greatly against this opinion, and namely
Cicero and Seneca, who say, that forasmuch as choler is a vice, it cannot be
the cause of virtue, seeing they are two contrary things that have nothing
common together. And considering that Fortitude proceeds from an advised
consultation and election of reason, which perfecteth the work, whereas choler
hinders and troubles it in such sort, that an angry man cannot deliberate,
it is not possible that it should stand him in any steed in the performance of
excellent actions. And this is an invincible reason, because virtue comes not
of vice. Now, this being the end of all Philosophy for a man to know his
vices, and the means how to deliver himself from them, and seeing that the
infamy and discommoditie which accompany impatiencie and choler, cannot but
be known unto us, yea are notwithstanding so common amongst us, that the
perfectest are infected therewith, let us look for some help and mean to
cure How impatiencie and choler may be cured.
our selves thereof. First let us know, that although men may be moved to wrath
and choler for diverse causes, yet unto all of them, the opinion of being
contemned and despised is commonly joined. And therefore the true and
sovereign remedy for this, (that so we may avoid such a cold and slender
occasion of entering into choler against our neighbors, altogether unbeseeming
the love we owe them) will be to put from us as much as may be, all suspicion
of being despised and contemned, or of bravery and boldness, and to lay all the
fault either upon necessity or negligence, upon chance, untowardness, lack of
discretion, ignorance, or want of experience, which are oftentimes in them that
offend us. This will seem very strict counsel, and hard to practice, yea
hateful to many of our Frenchmen, chiefly to those of the Nobility, who are
so curious in the preservation of their honor, with which title they would
disguise the desire of worldly glory, whereunto What the wicked judge of
patience.
they show themselves so much affectionated. But they testify sufficiently,
that they never knew wherein true honor consists, which is no more separated
from virtue, than the shadow from the body: also that they know not what
patience is, accounting it rather to be fainthartednes, and cowardlines, than a
part and daughter of the virtue of Fortitude and Generositie, yea judging it a
dishonor to a man that is contumeliously handled, not to render the like
again. But contrariwise we are to know, that to support and endure wrong and
injury patiently, and even then when we have most means to revenge our
selves, is a note of a most absolute, noble, and excellent virtue. Yea, it
beseems a Christian most of all, and such a one as has those words of the
Scripture well Leuit. 19. 18. Deuteronomy. 32. 35.
engraven in his heart, Thou shall not avenge, nor be mindful of wrong against
the children of thy people, but shall love thy neighbor as thy self: I am the
Lord, vengeance and recompense are mine. But I hope that hereafter we shall
discourse of this subject by itself, which deserves to be handled more
Whereof choler is bred.
largely. Following therefore our matter, we must understand, that choler is
bred of a custom to be angry for small things, and afterward becomes
easily a fire of sudden wrath, a revenging bitterness, and an intractable
sharpenes, making a man froward and furious, disliking every thing. Wherefore a
wise man ought presently to oppose the judgment of reason to every little
anger, and to suppress it. This will help to make the soul firm and of
power to resist and beat back all fiercenes of choler in matters of greater
weight and consequence. For he that nourishes not his anger in the beginning,
nor inflameth it himself, may easily avoid, or at least scatter A good way to
remedy choler.
it. Moreover, this will be a great mean to overcome our choler if we obey it
not, nor give credit unto it from the very first instant wherein it begins
to appear, imitating Socrates therein, who, whenever he felt himself
somewhat more egerly moved against any man than he ought (like to a wise Pilote
that gets himself under the Lee of some rock) let fall his voice gently,
showing a smiling countenance and more courteous look, thereby setting himself
directly against his passion. Besides, it will greatly help us, if when we are
moved with anger, we stay our tongue a certain space, and delay a little while
our own revenge. For it is very certain that a man promises, speaks and
does many things in his anger, which afterward he wishes had never been in his
thought. Unto this fitly agrees that counsel which Athenodorus taking The
counsel that Athenodorus gave to Augustus.
his leave, gave to Augustus the emperor to stay the pernicious effects of
quick and ready choler. This Philosopher minding to teach some remedy to be
opposed at the very instant when this monarch should feel himself overtaken
with anger, whereunto he easily suffered himself to be carried; willed him to
rehearse the four and twenty letters of the Greek Alphabet before he did any
thing in his anger. But knowing this that it is a special property of man's
imbecillitie to be stirred up to anger and to be troubled, let us follow that
commandment of the Scripture, Not to sin in our anger, neither to let the
sun go down Ephesians. 4. 26.
upon our wrath, least we show our selves to have less virtue and courtesy,
than the Ethnike Pythagorian Philosophers, who albeit they were neither of
kin, nor allied, yet kept this custom inviolable, that if peradventure they
were entered A notable custom of the Pythagorians.
into some contention and choler one against another, before the sun went
down they appointed a meeting where they embraced and shook hands one with
another. Further we have carefully to avoid all occasions which we know might
induce and Cotis brake his glasses to avoid occasion of wrath.
provoke us to choler. As Cotis king of Thracia wisely behaved himself, when
one brought him a present of many goodly vessels curiously made and wrought,
but very brittle, and easy to break, because they were of glass. After he
had well recompensed the gift, he brake them all for fear least through
choler, whereunto he knew himself subject, he should be moved with wrath
against any of his servants that should break them, and so punish him too
severely. And of this matter we may also draw a good Magistrates ought not to
punish any in their choler.
instruction for all those that are placed in authority above others, namely,
that they beware least they correct or punish any body in their choler, but
only when they are void of all vehement passions, considering the fact in it
self advisedly, and with quiet and settled senses: knowing that as bodies seem
greater through a miste, so do faults through choler, which for the most part
carries Princes headlong to commit execrable and cursed cruelties. Among many
examples we may note that of the emperor As Theodosius did.
Theodosius, who being moved with anger against those of Thessalonica for a
commotion which they made, and for staying his lieutenant, sent his army
thither, with commandment that they should be utterly rooted out: whereupon
fifteen thousand were slain, neither women nor children being spared. Of
which fault repenting him, but too late, he made a law afterward whereby he
willed that the execution of his letters Patents and Commandments should be
held in suspense and deferred, thirty days after signification and knowledge
of them, namely, when any were to be punished more rigorously than of custom
he used. Neither is it less dangerous in an estate that the administration of
public charges should be committed to such as suffer themselves to be
ouer-ruled with wrath, seeing there are not in a manner fewer matters which are
to be winked at and dissembled, than to be punished and corrected. And although
Magistrates have authority and just cause to punish vices, yet have they no
license to show themselves to be passionated. But this being a matter of
Policy, let us continue our moral instructions, and note that which we read
of Plato, deserving to be considered of here, who being very angry with a
servant of his for a great fault committed by him, and seeing Xenocrates to
come Plato refused to correct his servant in his anger.
toward him, requested him if he were his friend to correct that servant of
his, because at this present (quoth he) anger surmounteth my reason. Whereby
this wise Philosopher declared sufficiently, that if the first motions are not
at all in our power through the imperfection of our nature, yet at the lest
reason may serve for a bridle to hinder every naughty execution: teaching us
likewise, that we ought to use and exercise our power and authority over
others without any extreme passion. Further, that we may have such
imperfections in greater hatred, we are to note that choler has been the
overthrow of many great men, as it was of the emperor Aurelianus, who was
endued Aurelianus anger was the cause of his death.
with notable virtues, but otherwise easily moved to anger, whose wrath was
such, that their death with whom he was displeased, was the only remedy to
appease it. For being one day incensed against Mnesteus his Secretary, he
knowing his masters disposition, for the safeguard of his life devised to write
(counterfaiting the emperors hand) in a little scroule the names of the
principal captains of his army, putting himself in the number of those whom
he had fully purposed to put to death, and bearing it unto them, said, that he
saw this bill fall out of the emperors sleeue. Whereat they being astonished,
and giving credit thereunto, resolved with themselves to prevent it, and so
falling upon him, slew him. Moreover it is well known to every one, that choler
may greatly hurt health, whereof men are for the most part desirous enough. It
was cause of the emperor Valentinians death, who through crying Valentinian in
his anger brake a vein, and died thereof.
out in his choler, brake a vein in his neck. From this vice proceeds
another detestable imperfection, which is swearing, a thing directly contrary
to a wise man's life, and condemned by the law both of God and man: whereof
Against the infamous vice of swearing.
we might easily be cured by custom, if first we destroyed Impatiencie and
Choler, which provoke blasphcmie. The Romans observed an ancient decree,
which expressly commanded, that when young men would swear by the name of some
God, they should first go out of the house wherein they were. Which was a
comme^dable mean A notable decree of the Romans.
both to retain and keep them from swearing lightly and upon the sudden, and
also that they might have good laisure and space to bethink themselves. This
would be very profitable for us toward the correction of this vice, the
unmeasurable license whereof ought to be kept back and chastised by some
better means. Yea, it were very expedient and necessary S. Jews his law
against swearing
to renew and put in practice that law of good king S. Jews, that all
blasphemers should be marked in the forehead with an hot iron, yea, punished
with death, if they would not be corrected otherwise. Such contemners of the
name of Carilaus.
God ought to learn their lesson of Carilaus the Ethnicke and Pagan, who being
demanded why the images of the Gods in Lacedemonia were armed, to the end
(quoth he) that men might fear to blaspheme the Gods, knowing that they are
armed to take reuengement. Concluding therefore our present discourse, let us
learn to deck our lives so well with patience, (which is so profitable and
necessary to salvation, 1. These. 5. 14.
and to a good and happy life) that we be patient toward all men in all
things, to the end we may obey the Heb. 10. 36.
will of God, and reap the fruit of his promises, as the end of patience is
the expectation of things promised. And let us know, that the learning and
virtue of a man is known by patience, and that he is to be accounted to have
less learning and virtue, that has less patience. Further, let us learn
that the office and duty of a prudent and noble minded man is to wink at many
things that befall him, to redress other things, to hold his peace at some
things, and to suffer much, so that he follow reason always, and fly opinion.
Lastly, we are to know, that he which endures evil patiently, shall know also
how afterward he may easily bear prosperity: and that every christian
offers an acceptable sacrifice to God, when he yields unto him daily
thanks in the midst of infinite troubles and vexations: which benefit will
work in us the utter overthrow of all impatience, choler, and wrath, sworn
enemies to all reason and virtue.


Of Meekenes, Clemeneie, Mildnes, Gentleness, and Humanity. Chap. 30.
ACHITOB. A Philosopher in a great assembly of people taking a lantern and a
candle lighted at midday, and going into an high place in all their sight, was
demanded what he meant to do with all: I seek (said he) for a man, but can see
none, no not one. And truly This word Man is in Latin H^mo, from whence is
derived hum^nitas, which signifies curte fie or gentleness.
it is a very rare and excellent thing to find one that in deed is a Man, which
is as much to say, as courteous, or made of meekenes and gentleness: for which
cause Plato calls him a civil creature, and sociable by nature. Now
therefore let us understand of you my companions, what worthy effects this
virtue of meekenes brings forth in man.


ASER. Mercy (said Plato,) ought no more to be taken away from the nature of
man, than the altar out of the Temple. And every noble heart ought to be so
courteous and gracious, that he be reverenced more than feared of his neighbors.


AMANA. There is no nation so barbarous, which loves not meekenes, courtesy,
benevolence, and a thankful No nation void of courtesy.
soul: and contrariwise, which hates and contemns not proud, wicked,
cruel, and ungrateful persons. But it belongs to thee ARAM to discourse of
this matter unto us.


ARAM. Sin having deprived man of the perfection of graces, wherewith the
image of God in him had enriched and beautified him: namely, with perfect
goodness and holy righteousness, there remained nothing in his soul but a weak
desire to aspire to that sovereign Good, of which she felt her self spoiled.
For further confirmation whereof, this incomparable beauty of the visible
shape of the body was left unto him, to the end that in this principal work,
as in a rich picture, he might find large matter to move him to contemplate
and to admire the excellency and greatness of his Creator, who is able to set
him again in his former glory and brightness. By means of this knowledge a man
feels himself effectually moved and touched with the love of his like,
imprinted in every nature, which desires usually to show forth the effects
thereof to the profit of many, if it be Reasons to move us to love our
neighbors.
not wholly depraved and accursed. This love ought to be so much the greater and
more perfect in man, by how much the nearer he approaches to the understanding
of the incomprehensible secrets of the divinity. For what thing ought more to
stir us up, and to move us with zeal to do good to our neighbors, than the
consideration both of their creation after the image of God, whereunto we owe
all honor, love, and obedience, and also of their roestablishment into the same
image by his pure grace and mercy: besides the contemplation of the excellent
composition and building of this frame of man? These things being well
considered in our minds, whom shall we take for our enemy, for a stranger, as
contemptible, unworthy, and of no account, seeing this brightness and grace of
God shines in every one, and especially in those whom the world despises?
Moreover, when we know by his word that Man is substituted of God in his place,
that we should acknowledge toward him the inestimable benefits which we have
and daily receive from the help and goodness of our common Father, who
promises to accept as done to himself, what good thing soever we procure to
his creatures, so that it be done with a gladsome and cheerful countenance,
and with a sweet and courteous kind of beneficence, void of arrogancy,
contumely, or reproach, shall any thing stay us from exercising toward every
one all duties of humanity? We read in Macrobius A Temple dedicated to Mercy.
that long sithence there was a Temple in Athens dedicated to Mercy, into which
none was suffered to enter except he were beneficial and helpful, and then
also with license from the Senate. In so much that through a desire which the
people had to have access into it, they studied earnestly to exercise works
of pity and piety. Yea, the greatest reproach which an Athenian could utter to
his neighbor, was to hit him in the teeth, that he was never in the Academie of
the Philosophers, nor in the Temple of Mercy, girding him by this only reproach
with two shameful things, the one of ignorance and want of prudence, the other
of cruelty and inhumanitie. Now if among those of old time the only natural
seed of the love of their like, which also is seen in beasts, was so strong
and powerful, that it brought forth in them (notwithstanding they were
destitute of the heavenly light) fruits worthy of perpetual memory, as they
that had nothing in greater estimation than to show themselves meek, gentle,
courteous, helpful and gracious toward others, even toward their enemies.
What ought they to do, that say they are all members of that one head, who
recommendeth so expressly unto them, meeknes, mildnes, gentleness, grace,
clemency, mercy, good will, compassion, and every good affection toward their
neighbor? All which things are comprehended under this only sacred word of
Charity, which What Charity is.
is the indissoluble band of God with us, whereby we are inflamed with the love
of him for that which we owe unto him, and thereby also are induced to love our
neighbors for the love of God. But let us consider how the ancients having but
the shadow of this perfect Charity, praised and esteemed this virtue of
Meeknes, from which they knew how to draw so many good commodities for the
profit and succor of every one, that after we may note here certain worthy
examples to stir us up so much the more unto our duty. Meeknes (says Plato)
is a virtue that belongs The definition and effects of Meekenes.
to the courageous part of the soul, whereby we are hardly moved to anger. Her
office and duty is to be able to support and endure patiently those crimes
that are laid upon her, not to suffer her self to be hastily carried to
revenge, nor to be too easily stirred to wrath, but to make him that possesses
her, mild, gracious, and of a stayed and settled mind. Meeknes and gentleness (as
he says elsewhere) is that virtue whereby a man easily appeaseth the motions
and instigations of the soul caused by choler, and it stands him in stead of
a moderate tempera^ce of the spirit, decking him with mildnes and courtesy,
which draws unto him the love of strangers, and good service of his own.
Whereby it appears, that whosoever is mild and courteous to others, receives
much more profit and honor than those whom he honoreth. They are not to be
credited (says Cicero) who say that a man must use cruelty toward his
enemies, esteeming that to be an act proper to a noble and courageous man. For
nothing is more commendable or worthy a great and excellent man, than
meekenes and clemency. It seems also that liberality, beneficence, justice,
fidelity, and many other good deeds, whereof many men taste, and which procure
to a man greater good will of every one, are proper to mildnes and meekenes,
called by an ancient man the characters of an holy soul, which never suffer
innocence to be oppressed, and as Chilo said, which lead noble hearts slowly to
the feasts of their friends, but speedily to the succouring of them in their
calamities. This virtue of meekenes is truly most necessary for a valiant man.
For without it he should be in danger to commit some actions which might be
judged cruel. And seeing that a noble minded man comes near to the divine
nature, he must also resemble it as much as may be in gentleness and clemency,
which adorneth and honoreth those especially that are lift up in dignity, and
have power to correct others. True it is also, that they are deceived that
commend, and as it A medioeritie must be kept between mildnes and cruelty.
were adore the bounty of great men and Magistrates, who of a certain simplicity
without prudence, show themselves gracious, gentle, and courteous toward all
men. Which is no less pernicious to an Estate, than is the severity and
cruelty of others. For of this ouer-great lenity, among many other
inconveniences, an impunitie of the wicked is bred, and the sufferance of one
fault quickly draws on another. Therefore the mildnes of those that have
power and authority, ought to be accompanied with severity, their clemency
mingled with rigor, and their facility with austeritie. This is that which
Plato learnedly teaches us, saying: that the noble and strong man must be
courageous and gracious, that he may both chastise the wicked, and also pardon
when time requires. And as for those offenses which may be healed, he must
think that no man is willingly unjust. Therefore Cicero says, that it is the
property of a noble minded man simply to punish those that are most in fault,
and the authors of evil, but to save the multitude. And thus the rigor of
discipline directing meekenes, and meekenes decking rigor, the one will set
forth and commend the other: so that neither rigor shall be rigorous, nor
gentleness dissolute. By the learned sentences of these Philosophers, it is very
evident, that the virtue of meekenes is not only a part of Fortitude, which
can not be perfect without it, but has also some particular conjunction with
all the other virtues, yea is as it were the seed of them, and induces men to
practice all duty toward their neighbors. But because the order of our
discourses will offer us matter and occasion to entreat particularly hereafter
as well of justice, and of revenge of wrongs and ininries which a man receives
of his enemy, as also of other virtues here briefly mentioned, we will now
come to certain notable examples of meekenes, gentleness, mildnes, and goodness
of nature. The first that Philip a Prince of a good and mild nature.
comes to my remembrance is Philip king of Macedonia, who gives place to none
in the perfection of these gifts and graces. When it was told this good Prince,
that one Nicanor did openly speak ill of his majesty, his counselors being
of opinion that he was to be punished with death: I suppose (quoth he to them)
that he is a good man. It were better to search whether the fault comes not
from us. And after he understood that the said Nicanor was a needy fellow, and
complained that the king never succored him in his necessity, he sent him a
rich present. Whereupon afterward it was told Philip, that this Nicanor went up
and down speaking much good of him. I see well (said he then to his
Counselors) that I am a better Physician for backbiting than you are, and that
it is in my power to cause either good or evil Antigonus.
to be spoken of me. The good disposition of Antigonus king of Macedonia,
comes in here not unfitly upon the like occasion. For hearing certain
soldiers speak ill of him hard by his tent, who thought not that the king
could ouerheare them, he showed himself, uttering these only words without
farther hurting of them: Good Lord, could you not go further off to speak ill
of me? And to say truth, such gifts and graces become a noble Prince very well:
yea, he cannot more woorthily and more beseeming himself give place to any
wrongs, than to those that are done to Oh that Princes would consider this.
his own person. As contrariwise those men are unworthy their scepters, who
cruelly revenge their own injuries, and pardon such as are done to others, yea
such faults as are directly against the honor of God. A Prince well instructed
in virtue (says Xenophon in his Cyropaedia) ought so to behave himself
toward his enemy, as to think and consider that at some time or other he may
be his friend. Was there ever Monarch more feared of his enemies than Alexander.
Alexander the Great, invincible in all things he took in hand, insomuch that
he would not only force al humane powers, but also times and places
themselves, and yet who has left greater proofs of meekenes and courtesy than
he? As he was on his voyage undertaken for the conquest of the Indians, Taxiles
a king of those countries came and desired him that they might not war one
against another. If thou (said this king unto him) art less than I, receive
benefits, if greater, I will take them of thee. Alexander greatly admiring and
commending the gravity and courteous speech of this Indian, answered thus: At
the least we must fight and contend for this: namely, whether of us twain
shall be A commendable combat.
most beneficial to his Companion: so loath was this noble Monarch to give
place to another in goodness, mildnes, and courtesy. Hereof he gave a great
argument, after he had vanquished Porus a very valiant Prince, of whom
demanding how he would be entertained of him, this king answered, Royally.
Neither would he give him any other answer, albeit Alexender urged him
thereunto. For he said that all was contained under that word. As in deed the
Monarch showed that he was nothing ignorant thereof. For he did not only
restore his kingdom unto him, but enlarged it also, wherein he surmounted his
victory, and procured to himself as much renown by his clemency, as by his
valor. Had he ever any greater enemy than Darius vanquished and subdued by
him? And yet when he saw himself let from using toward him any bounty
Bessus cruelly put to death for killing Darius.
worthy his greatness, because Bessus one of his captains had slain him, he was
so displeased therewith, that he caused the murderer to be punished (albeit he
was one of his familiar friends) with a most cruel death, causing him to be
torn asunder with two great trees bowed down by main strength one against
another, unto each of which a part of Bessus his body was fastened. Then the
trees being suffered to return back again to their first nature, with their
vehement force rent asunder the body of this poor and Julius Caesar.
miserable wretch. Julius Caesar was of such a courteous disposition, that having
conquered Pompey and all his enemies, he wrote to his friends in Rome, that the
greatest and most pleasant fruit which he gathered of his victory, consisted in
saving daily the lives of some of his countrymen who had borne arms against
him: as in truth he did so. And for a great proof of his meekenes and
gentleness, that speech may serve, which he vttred when he understood that Cato
retiring into the town of Vtica after the loss of the battle had killed
himself. O Cato (said this monarch being then very pensive) I envy thee this
thy death, seeing thou have envied me the glory of saving thy life. I never yet
denied clemency (said that good emperor M. Aurelius.
Marcus Aurelius) to him that demanded it of me, much less have I evil
entreated or offered dishonor to any that trusted in me. Neither can any victory
be called a true and perfect victory, but that which carries with it some
clemency. To overcome is a humane thing, but to pardon, is divine. Hereof it
is (said the same virtuous prince) that we esteem the greatness of the
immortal gods not so much for the punishment, as for the mercy which they
use. The clemency and bounty of Dion the Dion.
Syracusian is worthy of perpetual memory. For having brought to ruin the
tyranny of Dionysius the younger, and recovered the liberty of his country,
one of his greatest enemies named Heraclides, being a very pernicious fellow,
fell into his hands: whereupon all his friends gave him counsel to put him to
death. Unto which Dion wisely answered, that other captains and heads of armies
used commonly to employ most of their study in the exercise of arms and of
war, but as for himself he had long since studied and learned in the
schools of the University to overcome anger, envy and every evil affection
and will: the proof whereof consisted not only in behauing himself well
toward his friends, and toward good men, but also in pardoning, and in the
exercise of gentleness and humanity toward his enemies, so that he had rather
excel Heraclides in bounty and courtesy, than in power and worldly glory. And
although (quoth he) men's laws avouch it to be more just to revenge an injury
received, than to offer All private revenge comes of frailty.
it to another, yet nature teaches us, that both the one and the other proceed
of the same imbecillitie: and how soever that man is hardly altered, who has
gotten an habit of wickedness, yet are there few men of so brutish and
untamed a nature, or so savage in reclaiming, that their perverseness cannot in
the end be well overcome by beneficence, when they see that men return good
turns again and again into their bosom. By these learned discourses it
appears that Dion forgave Heraclides, and bestowed Lycurgus.
upon him great benefits. Lycurgus the reformer of the Lacedemonian estate, by
whose means that commonwealth so long time flourished, does yet pass all
those before alleged through the goodness and mildnes of his gentle nature.
This grave and gracious personage having received such a blow with a staff,
that one of his eyes was put out in a sedition stirred up against him in the
city, because of the rigor of those laws which he had established there,
after the sedition was appeased, had the offender delivered into his hands to
punish him as he thought good. But he not hurting or displeasing him at all,
kept him in his house, and instructed him in all virtue and good discipline,
and within the years end, he brought him forth into the public assembly,
being no less virtuous and well nurtured than before he was vicious: using
these words unto the people: Behold I restore him unto you, being mild,
gracious and fit to do you service, whom ye gave to me proud, outrageous and
dissolute. O act beseeming the soul of a christian rather than of an Ethnike!
which ought to make the^ greatly ashamed, who for the least wrong received of
another, would not stick to slay not one man only, but a thousand, yea ten
thousand rather than their worldly honor should be hurt or touched: which
pretense of honor they use very often to color their brutishness withal.
Now leaving here the ancients, of whom we have a million of testimonies in the
reading of histories, I think we shall do well to propound here unto our
princes being too much inclined to revenge injuries, the clemency of king
Jews the 12. who succeeding Charles the 8. in the Jews the 12.
kingdom, would never revenge himself of any outrage or injury done unto him,
even than when he was but duke of Orleance. In so much that being incited by
some to punish one that was his great enemy during the life of his
predecessor, he answered: That it would not beseem a king of France to go
about to revenge injuries offered to a duke of Orleance. Neither ought we to
let pass in silence the goodness and clemency of that great king Frances, who
going in person to chastise the rebellion of the Rochelers, forgave them, and
put not one to death, saying: That albeit he had no less occasion to revenge
this injury than the Emperor Charles, who punished very cruelly those of
Gaunt, yet he had rather increase his praises by preserving than by destroying
his subjects. After his example king Henry the 2. having given in Henry the 2.
commission to the duke of Montmorencie Constable, to chastise the rebellion of
the country of Guyen, and especially the inhabitants of Bordeaux, afterward
gave out a general absolution, and forgave the racing of the Townhouse, the
payment of two hundred thousand pounds, and the defraying of the charges of the
army wherein they were condemned. And truly as it belongs to the sun to
lighten the earth with his beams: so it appertains to the virtue of a prince
to have compassion upon the miserable. Yea so many as stand in need of mercy,
and being worthy thereof crave for it, ought to find harbor in the haven of
his excellency. Now to come to the end of our present discourse, if by so many
examples which we have touched, and innumerable others, of which histories are
plentiful, we may note amongst the famous, noble and courageous men of old
time, such effects of meekness, gentleness, bounty, mildnes, clemency and
humanity toward their enemies, no doubt but they endeavored to do much more
for their friends, brethren and countrymen, for whose safety they feared not
many times to die, as heretofore we have seen examples thereof, and may see
more hereafter. And how much less would they have failed to succor them in all
other duties and charitable offices? So that if we be men and not monsters in
nature, let us learn what are the fruits not only of true Christians, but
also of true humanity, and of nature not being wholly depraved and corrupted:
to the end that framing our manners, mild, gentle, and gracious, to the succor,
benefit, and profit of every one, and following the steps and traces of the
virtue of Fortitude and Magnanimity, which is never churlish, idle or proud,
we may live a happy life directed to her proper end, expecting our renewing in
that life which is immortal and everlasting.


Of Good and Ill hap. Chap. 31.
ARAM. THere has been always men of great human learning, but void of the
sincere knowledge of the truth, that have maintained one of these two opinions:
some, That all things were governed by nature: others, that they were ruled by
fortune. They that acknowledge nature for the first cause of all things The
Stoics.
did attribute unto her a constellation, which through the strength and
efficacy of the stars governed the counsel The Epicures.
and reason of men. The other sort acknowledging fortune, maintained that all
things were done at adventure and by chance. Now albeit there are too many at
this day that follow this error, yet is it so absurd a thing, that in the
writings of Ethnicks and Pagans, a thousand invincible reasons are found of
sufficient force to convince such opinions of mere lying and ouer-great
sottishnes, and to constrain those that are most impudent and shameless to
acknowledge an infinite almighty power to be the creator of nature, and of all
things moving therein, and to dispose and order them with an eternal and
everlasting providence. True it is that I would not absolutely deny the
marvelous effects which many have noted in heavenly bodies throughout nature:
nevertheless I hold this for certain, that as all their virtue depends of one
only God, so he withdraws from them his power when and as soon as it
pleases him. Of this I infer, that they greatly deceive themselves, who
think that the seeking out of the stars, and of their secret virtues
diminishes any thing from the greatness and power of God: seeing that
contrariwise his majesty is much more famous and woonderful in doing such
great things by his creatures, as if he did them himself without any mean.
Now that which I have touched here my companions, is not to offer any
occasion to discourse of the Mathematics, or of any part thereof, which would
be to depart out of those bounds which we appointed to our Academy. But seeing
nothing is so common amongst us as to use, or rather to abuse these words of
Good and Ill hap, by attributing unto them some power and virtue over our
doings: insomuch that we commonly say there is nothing but good or ill luck in
this world, I think it will not be without fruit to consider narowly what we
ought to think of these words, and wherein we are to seek and desire good
hap, and wherein to fear and fly ill luck. Now therefore let us be
instructed of you touching this matter.


ACHITOB. Good hap consists in that contentation which proceeds from the
perfection of the subject thereof, being adorned with a perfect habit and entire
possession Wherein good and ill hap consist.
of all kind of Goods, in the privation whereof all ill hap consists. This
cannot be verified of the passions and affections of men, nor of their worldly
affairs, which are always intermingled with diverse and sundry accidents,
turning one while on this manner, by and by after an other, and carrying the
soul continually up and down Who is happy in Socrates judgment.
with these two perturbations, Desire and Grief. Therefore if there be a happy
man in this world (said Socrates) it is he that has a pure and clean soul,
and a conscience defiled with nothing. For the mysteries of God may be seen
and beheld of him only.


ASER. A temperate and constant man that knows how to moderate fear, anger,
excessive joy, and unbridled Who is happy.
desire, is very happy, but he that places other vading Goods in his
felicity, shall never have a quiet mind. Let us then hear of AMANA, wherein
we ought to judge that happiness or unhappiness consists.


AMANA. The continual alteration and sudden chang of one estate into another
clean contrary, which might always be noted in the nature, disposition, and
events of men's actions, counsels and desires, gave occasion to some of the
ancient Philosophers to think the sick more happy than the sound: because
(said they) sick folks look for health, whereas the healthie expect sickness.
For this The cause why Amasis forfooke his alliance with Policrates.
very consideration it seems that Amasis, almost the last of those kings that
reigned peaceably in Egypt, shoke off the alliance and league with Policrates
king of Samos, who was so happy in worldly respects, that do what he could,
yet could he not know what sorrow meant, but all things fell out unto him better
than he desired. For proof whereof may serve that which happened unto him,
after he had cast into the sea a ring of great value, which he loved
exceedingly. Now, although he did so of purpose, to the end he might taste of
some sorrow and grief, yet he found it quickly again in the belly of a fish
taken by Fishermen, and bought for his kitchen. Whereupon this wise Egyptian
judged it a thing altogether impossible; but that some great misery was to
follow hard at the heels of so great happiness: and therefore he would not be
partaker thereof, as of necessity he should have been, if he had continued
still that league which before was betwixt them. Neither was Amasis any thing
deceived in his opinion. For within a while after Policrates was deprived of
his kingdom, and shamefully hanged, serving for a common and notable example
of the instabilitie and variablenes of man's estate, as also to show that it is
a very absurd thing to place happiness in so uncertain felicity. And yet among
infinite imperfections borne with man, this is common in An ordin arie
imperfection in man.
him to loose quickly the remembrance of a benefit received, but to retain a
long time the memory of a calamity fallen upon him. Which is the cause that
he always supposes his mishaps to be without comparison greater than all the
good hap that he can have: so that he complains continually of his miseries
and calamities, not remembering the innumerable benefits which are daily offered
and presented unto him from the grace and bountifulnes of God. Notwithstanding,
if all men (as Socrates said) as well rich as poor, brought their mishaps, and
laid them in common together, and if they were in such sort divided, that every
one might have an equal portion, then should it be seen, that many, who
think themselves ouercharged and oppressed, would with all their hearts take
again unto them their fortune, and be contented withal. Would thou (said
Democritus) avoid the grief of thy misery? Behold the life of the afflicted,
and by the comparison A mean to avoid the ^^^re of our (...).
thereof with thine thou shall see that thou have cause to think thy self very
happy. He that will measure his burden (says Martial) may well bear it.
Now, with this common complaint in men of their estate and condition, this
custom also is joined, to lay the cause of that which they suffer upon cruel
and intolerable destiny, accusing that, An other imperfection.
to excuse their own fault. Wherefore we cannot more aptly compare them than to
blind folks, who are angry, and oftentimes call them blind that unawares do
meet and iustle them. But if we desire to cure our souls of so many miserable
passions, which deprive us of true rest and tranquillity necessary for a
happy life, let us be careful to learn how to discern true happiness from
mishap, that we may rejoice in that which is good, and as readily give thanks
to the author thereof, as naturally, through a false opinion which we have of
evil, we sustain human miseries and crosses impatiently. First then let us
hear the Notable opinions of good and ill hap.
sundry and notable opinions of many ancient men touching good and ill hap. If
thou know all that ought to be known in all things (said Pythagoras) thou
art happy. Let them be accounted very happy (said Homer) to whom fortune has
equally wayed the good with the evil. The greatest misery of all (said Bias)
is not to be able to bear misery. That man is happy (said Dionysius the
elder) that has learned from his youth to be unhappy. For he will bear the
yoke better whereunto he has been subject and accustomed of long time.
Demetrius, surnamed the Besieger, said, That he judged none more unhappy than
he that never tasted of adversity: as if he would have said, that it was a
sure argument, that fortune judged him to be so base and abject, that he
deserved not that she should busy her self about him. That man (says Cicero)
is very happy, who thinks that no humane matters, how grievous soever they
may be, are intolerable, or ought to discourage him: judging also nothing so
excellent, whereby he should be moved to rejoice in such sort, that his heart be
puffed and lift up thereby. Yea, he is very happy, who fitly and conveniently
behaueth himself in all things necessary for him. Nothing is evil (says
Plutarke) that is necessary. By which word Necessary, both he and Cicero
understand whatsoever comes to a wise man by fatal destiny: because he
bears it patiently, as that which cannot be avoided, thereby increasing his
virtue so much the more: and so Solon said that happiness consisted in a good
life and death.
no evil can come to a good man. Solon drawing nearer to the truth of sincere
happiness, said, that it consisted in a good life and death: and that to judge
them happy that are alive, considering the danger of so many alterations
wherein they are, were all one, as if a man should before hand appoint the
reward of the victory for one that is yet fighting, not being sure that he
should overcome. Socrates speaking The doctrine of Socrates and of the papists
is all one touching the hope of eternal life.
rather with a divine than a humane spirit, said, that when we shall be
delivered from this body wherein our soul is enclosed as an Oyster in his
shell, we may than be happy, but not sooner: and that felicity cannot be
obtained in this life, but that we must hope to enjoy it perfectly in the other
life, as well for our virtues, as by the grace and mercy of God. Not the rich
(said Plato) but the wise and prudent avoid misery. They that think (says
Aristotle) that external goods are the cause of happiness, deceive themselves
no less than if they supposed, that cunning playing on the harp came from the
instrument, and not from Art: but we must seek for it in the good and quiet
estate of the soul. For as we say not that a body is perfect because it is
richly arrayed, but rather because it is well framed and healthful: so a soul
well instructed, is the cause that both her self and the body wherein she is
enclosed are happy: which cannot be verified of a man because he is rich in
gold and silver. When I consider all the above named wise opinions of these
Ethnikes and Pagans, I cannot sufficiently marvel at the ignorance and
blockishnes of many The common opinion of men concerning happiness and
unhappiness.
in our age touching Good and Ill hap, because they labor to make these words
private, and to tie them to the success of their affections in worldly
matters: which if they fall out according to their desire and liking, behold
presently they are ravished with extreme joy, boasting of themselves, that they
are most happy. But contrariwise, if they miss of their intents, by and by
they despair, and think themselves the unhappiest men in the world. Do we not
also see that most men judge them happy that possess riches, pleasure,
delight, glory and honor, and those men miserable that want, especially if
after they had abundance, they loose it by some mishap, the cause whereof they
commonly attribute either to good or ill luck, which Whereat Apollonius
marvelled most.
they say rules all human affairs? We read that Apollonius Thianaeus having
traveled over al Asia, Afrike and Europe, said that of two things whereat he
marvelled most in all the world: the first was, that he always saw the proud
man command the humble, the quarellous the quiet, the tyrant the just, the
cruel the pitiful, the coward the hardy, the ignorant the skillful, and the
greatest thieues hang the innocent. But in the mean while who may doubt
whether of these were the happiest? that the good were not rather than the
wicked? if happiness according to the ancients, and to the truth, be perfected
in good Notable reasons to show that no worldly thing can be called good, and
that happiness cannot be perfected by any such thing.
things, then it is certain, that whosoever enioieth al good things shall be
perfectly happy. Now nothing can be called good but that which is profitable,
and contrary to evil: so that whatsoever may as so one be evil as good, ought
not to be called good. Moreover it must be the possession of some firm,
steadfast and permanent Good that makes a man happy. For nothing ought to wax
old, to perish or decay of those things wherein a happy life consists, seeing
he that fears to loose them cannot be said to live quietly. Therefore neither
beauty, nor strength, and disposition of body, neither riches, glory, honor
or pleasure can be truly called Goods, seeing oftentimes they are the cause of
so many evils, wax old, and vanish away many times as soon as a man has
received them, and lastly, work in us an insatiable desire of them. How many
men are there to whom all these things have been the occasion of evil? And how
can we call that good, which being possessed, and that in abundance, cannot yet
keep the owner thereof from being unhappy and miserable? Wherefore we may say,
that happiness cannot be perfected by the possession of humane and mortal
things, neither unhappiness through the want of them: but that Wherein true
happiness consists.
the true felicity which we ought to desire in this world, consists in the
goods of the soul, nourished in the hope of that unspeakable and everlasting
happiness, which is promised and assured unto it in the second life. And so we
Who are unhappy.
say, that none are unhappy but they, who by reason of their perverseness, feel
in their conscience a doubting of the expectation of eternal promises: as also
they that give over themselves to vice, whose nature is to corrupt, destroy,
and infect with the venom that is always about it, all things whereof it
takes hold. As for the common miseries of man's life they cannot in any sort
make him unhappy, whose natural disposition and manners being framed and decked
with virtue, are able to give and to impart to every condition of his life,
whether it be poor or rich, prosperous or adverse, honorable or contemptible;
happiness, joy, pleasure and contentation, which flow in his soul
abundantly from that fountain and lively spring which Philosophy has
discovered unto him in the fertile field of Graces and Sciences, whereby he
enjoys true tranquillity and rest of spirit, as much as a man may have in
this mortal life, moderating the perturbations of his soul, and commanding
over the vnpure affections of the flesh. And than as the shoe turns with the
fashion of the foot, and not contrariwise, The happiness of man comes from
within him.
so the inward disposition of a wise and moderate man causes him to lead a life
like unto the same, that is, mild, peaceable and quiet, being never carried away
with unreasonable passions, because she never enjoys or rejoices
immoderately in that which she has, but uses well that which is put into her
hand, without fear or repining if it be taken away: following therein the
saying of Democritus, that whosoever minds to live always happily, must
propound to himself and desire things possible, and be content with things
present. Therefore seeing the fountain of all felicity and contentation in
this life is within us, let us cure and cleanse diligently all perturbations
which seek to hinder the tranquillity of our spirits, to the end that
external things which come from without us against our will and expectation,
may seem unto us friendly and familiar after we know how to use them well.
Plato compared our life to table-play, wherein both the Our life compared to
tableplay.
dice must chance well, and the plaier must use that well which the dice shall
cast. Now of these two points the event and lot of the Dice is not in our
power: but to receive mildly and moderatly that which falls unto us, and to
dispose every thing in that place where it may either profit most if it be
good, or do least hurt if it be bad, that is in our power, and belongs to our
duty if we be wise men. Fortune (says Plutarke) may well cast me into
sickness, take away my goods, bring me in disgrace with the people, but she
can not make him wicked, a coward, slothful, base-minded or envious, that is
honest, ^aliaunt, and nobleminded, nor take from him his settled and temperate
disposition of Prudence, which makes him to judge, that no tedious, grievous
or troublesome thing can befall him. For being grounded, not upon vanishing
goods, but upon Philosophical sentences, and firm discourses of reason, he
may say, I have prevented thee fortune, I have closed up all thy chances, and
stopped the ways of entrance in upon me: and so led a joyful life as long as
virtue, and that part which is proper to man are strongest. And if peradventure
some great inconvenience happen unto him against all hope, which human power
is not able to overcome, than with joy of spirit he considers that the haven
of safety is at hand, wherein he may save himself by swimming out of the body
as out of a Skiffe that leaketh, departing boldly and without fear from the
miseries of the world, that he may enjoy absolute and perfect Alexander and
Crates opposed one against an other.
happiness. Alexander the great having under his dominion more than half the
world, when he heard the Philosopher Anaxarchus dispute and maintain that
there were innumerable worlds, he began to weep, saying, Have I not good cause
to be sorrowful and to mourn, if there be an infinite number of worlds, seeing
as yet I have not been able to make my self Lord of one? But Crates the
Philosopher being brought up in the school of wisdom, and having in stead of
all wealth but an old cloak and a scrip, never wept in all his life, but was
always seen merry, and passing over his days cheerfully. By which two kinds of
life contrary one to an other, it appears sufficiently that it is within our
selves, and not in outward things, wherein we must seek for the foundation of
a certain joy which is watered and flourishes in strength by the remembrance
of good and virtuous actions proceeding from the soul guided by right
Agamemnon.
knowledge and reason. Homer brings in Agamemnon complaining greatly because
he was to command so great a part of the world, as if he had an intolerable
burden upon his shoulders. Whereas Diogenes when he was to be sold for a
slave, lying all along, mocked the Sergeant that cried him to sale, and would
not rise up when he commanded him* but scoffingly said unto him, If thou wart
to sell a fish, would thou make it arise? Cry this rather, that if any man
want a master, he should buy me: for I can serve his turn well. Whereby we may
fitly note this, that all the happiness, rest, and contentation of man depends
of virtue only, and not of worldly greatness and glory. For this reason the
self same Diogenes beholding a stranger come from Lacedemonia, more curiously
decked on a festival day than he was wont, said unto him: What? Does not an
honest man think that every day is festival unto him? And truly there is
nothing that ought to move us so much to show all outward signs of joy, or
that breeds such serenitie and calmenes against the tempestuous waves of
humane miseries and calamities, than to have the soul pure and clean from all
wicked deeds, wills, and counsels, and the manners undefiled, not troubled or
infected with any vice. For then acknowledging the estate of mortal and
corruptible things, we judge them unworthy the care of our souls, that we
may wholly lift them up to the contemplation of heavenly and eternal things,
wherein our happiness and perfect felicity consists. Hereby we learn, that
in the second life only we are to seek for and Where we must seek for true
happiness.
to expect the fruition of true happiness, which can never increase or be
diminished. For as no man can make a line straighter than that which is
straight, and as nothing is more just than that which is just: so he that is
happy can not be more happy. Otherwise until a man had gotten all that might
be had, his desires would never be settled, and so no man should be called
happy. But felicity is perfect of it self. Cicero knew it well enough, when
he said: that no man standing in fear of great things, could be happy: and in
that respect no man living can be so, but to speak in deed of a happy life,
that is it which is perfect and absolute. To the end therefore that we may
reap some profit by our present discourse, let us never think that any man
may be called happy or unhappy, because he is advanced or disgraced, with
honors, goods, and worldly commodities, or because he is partaker either of
prosperity or adversity throughout his whole life. But he only ought to Who
is happy in this world.
be esteemed happy in this world, that knows in rest and quietness of soul
how to use both estates, and never suffers himself to be carried away or
troubled with unclean desires, but with all his heart seeks for the
possession of a firm, steadfast, and abiding Good, being assured, as we said,
that not one of those things wherein a happy life consists shall wax old,
perish, or fall to decay. To conclude, he is happy that shows in all the
works and actions of his life a pattern of honesty and virtue, being
moderate in prosperity, and constant in adversity. A man thus affected and
disposed, will behave himself without reproof in the time present, will call
to mind with joy and pleasure the time past, and will boldly and without
distrust draw near to the time to come, even with a cheerful and ioifull
hope of better things, and with a steadfast expectation of that unspeakable and
endless happiness, which is prepared for the elect.


Of Prosperity and Adversity. Chap. 32.
AMANA. BEing in our former discourse entered into the diverse and contrary
effects which the nature and condition of worldly affairs draw with them,
whereof every one in his particular place may daily have good and sufficient
testimonies: and seeing through the malice and corruption of our age, all
things are at that point, as if they meant to lay more hard and difficult
crosses upon us to sustain, I think we shall not depart from our matter, if
we seek for some instruction whereby to govern our selves prudently in
prosperity and in adversity, considering the effects both of the one and the
other, to the end we may avoid those that are most pernicious, and retain
still with us that constancy and woorthines that is required in the virtue of
Fortitude, which A pretty comparison.
teaches a man how he ought to behave himself nobly in every estate and
condition of life. For as gold transfigured by the workman, now into one
fashion, and then into another, is transformed into sundry kinds of ornaments,
and yet remains always that which it is, without any alteration of
substance: so it behooves a wise and noble minded man to continue always the
same in things that are contrary and diverse, without any alteration and change
of his constancy and virtue. But I leave the discourse of this matter to you
my Companions.


ARAM. As a man (says Scipio) delivers over his horses (which because they
have been in many skirmishes, are become restie, furious, and intractable) to
the yeomen of his horses, to bring A similitude.
them into good order again: so men that are grown to be unruly through
prosperity, must be brought as it were to around circle, that they may consider
of the inconstancy of worldly things, and of the variablenes of wretched
fortune.


ACHITOB. In prosperity (says Euripides) be not lift up too much, and in
adversity hope the best always. And as in a fire A similitude.
(said Socrates) it is good to behold a clear brightness: so is a moderate
soul in felicity. But let us hear ASER, who will handle that which is here
propounded more at large.


ASER. As men provide bulwarks and banks against a river that uses to
ouerflow: so he that desires to live happily, must fortify himself with
powerful and convenient virtues, to resist the hurtful assaults which the
unlooked for success of humane affairs make upon him continually, both in
prosperity and in adversity. For Common effects of the frail nature of man.
questionles nothing is hardlier kept within compass, than he that has all
things according to his hearts desire: neither is any thing so much cast down,
or sooner discouraged than the same man, when he is afflicted and misseth of
his purpose. All minds are not resolute and constant enough from slipping
beside themselves, and beyond the limits of reason, neither in great
prosperity, which puffs and lifts up men's hearts, especially theirs that are
base by nature, nor yet in unlooked for adversity, which through the heavy
burden thereof oftentimes astonisheth and amazeth them that are thought to be
best settled and assured. But if we consider apart the pernicious effects which
issue from these two contraries, when reason does not guide and govern them,
we shall find nothing but pride in the one, and faintnes of heart, baseness of
mind, and oftentimes Prosperity more hurtful than adversity.
despair in the other. Notwithstanding we may well note this, that prosperity
has always been the cause of far greater evils to men than adversity, and
that it is easier for a man to bear this patiently, than not to forget
himself in the other. Whereof I think we may not unfitly allege for a reason
that which Menander says: that man of all other living creatures is aptest to
fall suddenly down from high to low, because he dares undertake the greatest
matters, although he be weakest. Whereupon being as it were naturally subject
to falling, it is not so strange unto him being better furnished for that,
(seeing he is or ought to be prepared thereto long before) then when against
his natural disposition he ascends to some greatness not hoped for. Now,
whether it be for this reason, or because vice is his proper inheritance, the
memory of the time past as well as of the present time, furnishes us with
sufficient testimonies, seeing few are found that forgot not themselves in
their prosperity, whereas many have behaved Plato was requested by the
Cyrenians to give them laws
themselves wisely, and taken occasion to be better in their adversity. Which
being understood of Plato, when he was requested by the Cyrenians a people of
Grecia, to write down laws for them, and to appoint them some good form of
government for their Commonwealth: he answered, that it was a very hard matter
to prescribe laws to so rich, happy, and wealthy a people as they were. For
commonly those cities which in short time come suddenly to great felicity,
grow to be insolent, arrogant, and uneasy to raunge in order: neither is there
any thing for the most part prouder, than a poor man made rich: as
contrariwise none are so ready to receive counsel and direction, as he whom
fortune has ouerrun. He that is pressed greatly with adversity, is seldom
puffed up with pride, or vanquished of lust, or drowned in covetousness, or
overtaken with gluttony, or lift up with desire and worldly glory: all which
imperfections happen commonly to those upon whom fortune too much fawneth.
That felicity (says Seneca) which has not been hurt, cannot endure one
blow: but when it has had a long and continual combat with discommodities,
and has hardued it self by suffering and bearing injuries, then does it not
suffer it self to be overcome with any evil. Now one of the greatest benefits
that a man may have in this life, is, neither to be changed by adversity, nor
lift up with prosperity, but to be as a well rooted tree, which, although it be
shaken with sundry winds, yet can not be overthrown by any of them. And truly
it is very ridiculous that that which comes to all worldly things by an
ordinary and natural course, even by the sequel of causes linked together
and depending one of another, changing the estate of mortal things, should
have power to alter or to make any mutation in reason and wisdom, which ought
to abide steadfast in the mind of man. For this cause Plato said, that there was
nothing but virtue could tame it, and that men furnished therewith behaved
themselves constantly and courageously in both kinds of fortune. Virtue (says
Cicero) abides calm and quiet in the greatest tempest, and although she be
driven into exile, yet she stirs not out of her place and country, but
shines so always of her self, that she cannot be soiled with the spots of an
other. This excellent Orator and Philosopher gives us also wholesome counsel
to oppose against Good counsel for those that are in prosperity.
the dangerous effects that are to be feared in prosperity. When we are (says
he) in best estate, we must use the counsel of our friends more than we do
commonly, and as long as it continues we are greatly to beware that we open
not our ears to flatterers, who are the plague and destruction of the greater
sort, because all their labor is to propound unto us occasions and means to
enjoy delights and pleasures, and to show out selves to be proud and arrogant,
during the time of our prosperity: to the end we should put good men far
from us, and reserve to them only that authority wherein they are settled.
Whereas on the contrary side our true friends would lead us back to consider
the inconstancy of humane things, to the end that we abuse not our felicity,
but behave our selves as a wise Pilote does, who always fears a smiling
calmnesse in the maine sea. Which consideration makes a man constant and
resolute to bear and endure all sinister chances, and not so ready and easy
to be deceived, because he always fears and distrusteth fortune. Let us now
come to examples of that which we have here alleged. As touching the
pernicious effects of over great prosperity, they Alexander.
may well be noted in Alexander the great, who although he was endued with
notable and rare virtues, yet could not use moderately the great good speed and
happy success of all his enterprises, but being conquered of the Persian
delights, gave himself over to commit many insolences, and then filled with
prefumption and pride, Julius Caesar.
would have been worshipped. Julius Caesar being ascended into the highest
degree of favorable fortune that he could desire, and lending his ear over
freely to flatterers, would be called and declared a king, (which name was most
odious to the Romans since the time that Tarquinius was banished, as we
mentioned before) and retained always to himself the authority and power of
a Dictator, which before continued but a certain time. He bestowed the public
offices and places of honor upon who^ he thought good, whereof proceeded the
ill will of his subjects, and in the end his destruction. The greatness of
Pompey.
Pompey was that which afterward overthrew him. For employing his credit to
favor others unjustly, it fell out to him as to cities that suffer their
enemies to enter even into their strongest places, diminishing so much of their
own forces, as they add to others that wish them no good. Which thing Sylla
the Dictator did very notably give him to understand, when he saw that Pompey
by his countenance and favor had brought Lepidus a wicked man to the dignity
of Confulship. I see well (quoth Sylla to him) thou art very glad because thou
have prevailed in this suit; and sure thou have great cause so to be. For it is
a goodly matter, and the point of a noble man to be so gracious with the
people, that through thy favor Lepidus the wickeddest man in the world has
carried away the Consulship before Catullus the honestest man in all the city.
But A wise foresight of Sylla.
I advise thee to beware of sleeping now, and to have a vigilant eye to thy
business, because thou have armed and made strong an adversary against thy
self. Whereof Pompey had experience afterward in those wars which Lepidus
raised, against whom he was sent by the Senate, and in the end obtained the
victory. But the favor he bare to Caesar, entering upon the government of
public affairs, came not to that pass. For he was afterward overthrown by
the same means wherewith he had strengthened Caesar against others. Out of
which we may draw an excellent doctrine for all that are placed in authority,
or that have the ears of great men at commandment, that they never cause the
wicked to be advanced. For as the worm that is bred at the foot of a tree,
grows with it, and in the end destroieth it: so a wicked man advanced by the
favor of one greater than himself, becomes afterward unthankful and
treacherous unto him. This moved Archidamides the Lacedemonian to answer in
this sort one that commended Charilaus king of Sparta, because he showed
himself alike courteous to all. But how deserves that man praise, who shows
himself courteous toward the wicked? Now to return to our speech touching
the effects of prosperity, not ruled by the reason of true prudence, what is
more hateful, or has at any time been more hurtful to men than pride? Which
(as Plato says) dwells with solitarines, that is to say, is so hated, that
in the end it is forsaken of all the world? And whereof is it bred sooner than
of prosperity? Which that wise man and excellent Roman captain Paulus
Aemilius knowing full well, after the victory gotten by him against Perses king
of Macedonia, being desirous to admonish the men of war that were in his
army, and to keep them within the compass of their duty, he used these or
the like speeches An excellent oration of P. Aemilius to his soldiers.
unto them. Is there any man now my friends and companions, that ought to wax
proud, and to glory in the profperitie of his affairs, if he has luck to
his liking, and not rather to fear the ficklenes of fortune, who even at this
present sets before our eyes such a notable example of the common frailty
of man, subject to the ordinary course of fatal destiny, which turns about
continually? You see how in the moment of an hour we have beaten down and put
under our feet the house of Alexander the Great, who was the mightiest and
most redoubted Prince in the world. You see a King not long since followed and
accompanied with so many thousands of fighting men brought to such misery,
that being prisoner he must receive his meat and drink at the hands of his
enemies. Ought we to trust more to our good hap, and to think it more firm
and assured? Truly no. And therefore let us learn to humble our selves, and to
restrain this foolish arrogancy and proud insolency, wherewith our youth
seems to be overcome by reason of the victory obtained by us: and let us
expect to what end and M. Aurelius.
issue fortune will guide the envy of this present prosperity. Marcus
Aurelius after he had vanquished Popilion, General of the Parthians, spoke
thus unto him: I tell thee of a truth that I stand in greater fear of fortune
at this present, than I did before the battle. For she cares not so much to
overtake the conquered, as to subdue and vanquish the Conquerors. This self
same consideration Philip king of Macedonia.
caused Philip king of Macedonia, after he received news of three great and
sundry prosperities in one day, to utter this speech: O fortune (said he)
(holding up his hands toward heaven) I pray thee send me for a counterbuffe
some mean adversity. Likewise after he had overcome in battle the Athenians
at Cherronesus, and by this victory obtained the Empire of Grecia, he
commanded a little Page to cry unto him thrice a day, Philip remember that
thou art a man: so greatly did he fear least through arrogancy arising of his
prosperity, he should commit any Archidamas.
thing that did not beseem him. The same thing did Archidamas the son of
Agesilaus very well and wisely teach him, to whom Philip after he was a
Conqueror had written a very sharp and rough letter: If thou measurest thy
shadow (answered Archidamas) thou shall find that it is not waxen greater since
thou did overcome. The prosperity which Cyrus Cyrus.
Monarch of the Persians always had in all his enterprises, was the cause that
trusting too much thereunto, he would not give ear to the counsel of Craesus,
when he dissuaded him from that war, which he purposed to undertake against
Tomyris Queen of the Scythians, (which fell out hardly for him) using these
words: Know that all worldly things have a certain course, which does not
suffer them to end happily that have always had fortune prosperous, which he
might well speak by experience in him self. But Cyrus having already subdued
all Asia, part of Grecia, the kingdom of Babylon, with infinite other places,
and beholding his army to consist of six score thousand men, thought he could
not be vanquished. Whereupon giving battle to Tomyris, he lost his life,
together with the renown of so many goodly victories, (being now overcome by
a woman) his whole army also being hewn in pieces. And truly as one puff of
wind causes the goodliest fruits, The instabilitie of humane things.
which beautify the whole Orchard, to fall from the tree: so a little disgrace,
a sudden mishap in one instant brings to nothing, and pulls down the
greatness, wealth, and prosperity of men. And when we think to lay a sure
foundation of prosperity, even then is all changed, and the order of our
conceits perverted and turned into an unlooked for disorder and confusion. Now
let us come to consider particularly of the effects of adversity. There are
The common effects of adversity.
few folks (if they be not destitute of all good judgment) that are ignorant
and understand not what belongs to their duty, so long as prosperity
lasts: but few there are, who in great ouerthwarts and shakings of fortune,
have hearts sufficiently stayed to practice and imitate that which they commend
and make account of, or to fly from that which they mislike and reprehend. Nay
rather they are carried away, and through custom of living at ease, together
with frailty and faintnes of heart, they start aside, and alter their first
discourses. This is that which Terence means, where he says, that when we
are in good health, we give a great deal better counsel to the diseased,
than we can take to our selves when we stand in need thereof. Notwithstanding
he that is beaten down and humbled by affliction, easily suffers himself
to be directed, gladly receives and harkeneth to the advice of good men, and
if there be any little seed of virtue in him, it increases daily, whereas
prosperity would soon choke it. And if he has profited well in the study
The fruits of the study of Philosophy.
of wisdom, he does as Bees do, which draw the best and driest honey out of
time, although it be a very bitter herb. So out of most troublesome Accidents
he knows how to reap benefit and commodity, resolving with himself and
taking counsel according to the mishaps that light upon him. He doubts not
of this, that it is the duty of wise and virtuous men not only to desire
prosperity in all things, but also to endure adversity with constancy and
modesty. He knows that as the fruition of prosperity is for the most part
full of sweetness, when it is not abused, so the constant suffering of
adversity is always replenished and accompanied with great honor. And such a
one may truly be called noble and courageous, yea, he shows himself a great
deal better to be so in deed when he yields not, nor faints in
afflictions, than if he were in prosperity, which puffing up the hearts of
cowards and base minds, causes them sometimes to seem courageous, when as they
are lift up by fortune into a high degree of honor and felicity, whereas in
truth there is no such Craesus.
matter in them. Craesus King of the Lydians being thrown from his estate and
made prisoner to Cyrus, showed greater virtue and generositie of heart at that
time, than he did all the while he enioied his great wealth, through which
being puffed up with pride, he would have had Solon judged him most happy. For
being upon a block ready to be burned, and both remembering and fitly applying
to himself those wise discourses which he heard Solon make unto him concerning
the small assurance that we have in worldly felicity, and how no man ought to
be called happy before the hour of his death, he resolved with himself to die
constantly and cheerfully. And calling to mind this benefit which he received
by the means of that wise man, whereupon he felt his soul filled with joy, he
repeated aloud three times the name of Solon, using no other words. Whereof
Cyrus asking the cause, he uttered unto him the self same discourses, which
touched the heart of this monarch in such sort, that presently changing the ill
will he bare to Craesus, he fully restored him to the fruition of his kingdom,
and kept him near unto himself The Romans were wise and constant in
adversity.
for one of his chief and principal counsailors. The Romans (as Polibius
says) never observed their laws more straightly, never caused the discipline
of war to be kept more severely, and were never so well advised and constant,
as after the Carthaginians had obtained of them the third victory at the
battle of Cannas. And contrariwise, there were nothing but part-takings and
factions in Carthage, laws were never less esteemed, magistrates never less
regarded, nor manners more corrupted than at that time. But within a little
while after, they fell from the highest degree of their felicity, into utter
ruin, and the Romans restored their own estate into greater glory than it
was in before. Virtue is always like to the Date tree. For the The property of
Virtue oppressed.
more she is oppressed and burdened, the higher she lifts up her self, and
shows her invincible power and strength, over which fortune can nothing
prevail. And although adversity somewhat troubles a virtuous man, yet is it
not able to alter his noble courage, but remaining firm and constant, he
knows how to take all things as exercises of his virtue, which, as an ancient
man said, withers and loses her vigor without adversity. It is evident
therefore that the effects of adversity are not so pernicious to a man, as
those which prosperity commonly brings unto him. For this latter is of a
proud and presumptuous nature, always envied, and as commonly it is not freely
admonished, so it gives ear unto and receives as little: but the other is
plain and simple, followed of compassion, and ready to receive counsel.
Besides, it awaketh a Christian and stirs him up to humble himself before
the majesty of God, to call upon him, and to trust wholly to his only grace and
virtue. Now if some (as I have said) are so faint hearted, that they suffer
themselves to be overwhelmed under the burden of turmoiles and calamities, let
us attribute the cause thereof to ignorance, and want of good judgment, which
depriueth them of learned and sound cogitations and discourses that tend to a
constant disposition, wherein the happiness of this life consists. As for us
if we desire to approach near to that perfection, which is required by the
Sages, let us propound to our selves their examples to follow, that we may be
temperate and constant in every estate and condition of life. We The wonderful
constancy of Socrates.
read of Socrates that one and the same countenance was noted in him all his
life time, that it was neither sadder nor pleasanter for any thing that
happened unto him. He changed it not when he heard the sentence of his death
pronounced, no not when he drank the poison, following P. Rutilus.
therein the contents of his condemnation, albeit he was then above three-skore
years of age. Publius Rutilus a Roman, being unjustly banished, never changed
his countenance or behavior, neither would put on any other gown than that he
used to wear, although it was the custom of such as were banished, to alter
the same. Neither would he leave off the marks of a Senator, nor request the
judges to absolve him, but led the rest of his days with the same greatness,
gravity and authority that he used before, not showing himself any thing
beaten down with Q. Metellus.
sorrow for the strange alteration of his first estate. Quintus Metellus surnamed
Numidicus, because he had subdued that country of Numidia, being driven into
exile through a popular faction and sedition, went into Asia, where, as he
beheld certain players, he received letters from the Senate, whereby he was
certified that the Senators and people with one common consent had called him
back again. Which good news he bare with the like modesty that he did his
banishment, not departing from the Theater before the sportes were ended, nor
showing his letters to any of his friends that were round about him before he
had assembled them together in his lodging to deliberate Diogenes.
of his return to Rome. The same gravity and constancy caused Diogenes when
he heard one hit him in the teeth with his banishment from Pontus by the
Synopians to make this answer: And I have bounded them within the country of
Pontus. We must account the whole scope of the firmament for the bonds of our
country as long as we live here. Neither ought any man within those limits to
esteem himself either banished, or a stranger: seeing God governs all
things by the same elements. Therefore Socrates took the whole world for his
country.
Socrates said, that he took not himself to be either an Athenian or a
Grecian, but a worldling. And how shall we think that they who sustained so
courageously their banishment from their country (which was so dear unto them
that they preferred the benefit thereof before the safety of their life)
their deprivation and absence from their families, friends and goods, would not
much more virtuously have suffered all less adversity? Therefore to end our
present discourse, let us learn that nothing belonging to this present life
has neither more evil nor good in it, than according to the end which
befalls it, and that it is our duty to keep our selves moderate, constant,
and upright, both in prosperity and in adversity, which is the property of
true magnanimity and greatness of courage. Let us not lift up our selves above
measure for any temporal felicity, nor be too much discouraged because we are
visited with adversity, but wisely expect what will be the end of both, which
a good and virtuous man shall always find to be happy when he changes his
mortal estate for a life that is certain and everlasting.


The end of the eight days work.
THE NINTH DAYS WORK.
Of Riches. Chap. 33.
ASER. YEsterday we bestowed the better part of the day in discoursing of good
and ill hap, of prosperity and adversity, which with a swift pace following
each other, seem to change, to turn, and to ouer-turne incessantly the
dealings and desires of men. Now forasmuch as we made mention of the ignorant
multitude which places happiness and felicity in the vading goods of the
world, and affirmed to the contrary, that this felicity was very miserable,
because it makes a man more insolent and arrogant, and gives him greater
occasion to bewail, than to rejoice in his fortune, I think we ought to
consider more nearly of the nature of such goods as are no goods, beginning
with Riches whereunto men are slaves, more than to any other thing, albeit they
procure them the greatest evils.


AMANA. Riches (says Epictetus) are not in the number of goods. For they
stir us up to superfluity, and pull us back from temperance. And therefore
it is a very hard matter for a rich man to be temperate, or for a temperate man
to be rich. As a man cannot use a horse (says Socrates) without a bridle, so
he cannot use Riches without reason.


ARAM. It is almost impossible (said Diogenes) that virtue should dwell in a
rich city or house. For riches The fruits of riches.
bring with them pride to him that possesses them, excessive desire in
gathering them, covetousness in keeping them, all filthiness and dissolutenes in
the enjoying of them. But let us hear ACHITOB, who will handle this matter
more at large.


ACHITOB. As children of three or four years of age have no other care or
thought, but how they may play and pass their time with the having of daily
food according to their appetite, not considering or taking any care for the
means which they might have, and which would be necessary for the nourishing
of their old age: so it seems to me that the men of our time behave
themselves, when through a more than childish ignorance they labor without
ceasing, to gather and to increase wealth, which will do them service but a
little while, not caring in the mean time for certain and immortal goods
which will nourish them for ever. And yet the soul created according to the
image of God, cannot better preserve and show forth her divine nature in this
mortal body, than by contemning all earthly, humane, and vading things. But
to the end we be not of the number of those that fill themselves with such
passions, to purchase their own destruction, let us consider by the
testimonies Of the nature, quality, and effects of riches.
of the ancient Sages, of the nature and quality of riches, and of the visible
effects which they daily bring forth in those that serve and possess them:
next, we will behold some examples of these famous personages, that we may be
induced thereby to contemn such pernicious goods. Men ought to make great
account of riches (said Socrates) if they were joined with true joy, but they
are wholly separated from it. For if rich men fall to using of them, they spoil
themselves with ouergreat pleasure, if they would keep them, care gnaweth and
consumes them within, and if they desire to get them, they become wicked and
unhappy. It cannot be (says Plato) that a man should be truly good, and very
rich both together, but he may well be happy and good at one time. And it is a
very miserable saying to affirm that a rich man is happy: yea it belongs to
children and fools to say so, making them unhappy that believe and approve
it. Sloth and slug gishnes grow of riches, and they that are addicted to heap
them up more and more, the greater account they make of them, the less they
esteem virtue. So that if riches and rich men are greatly set by in a
Commonwealth, virtue and good men will be much less regarded: and yet great
matters are brought to pass, and Commonwealths preserved by virtue, and not
by riches. Riches (says Isocrates) serve not so much for the practice of
honesty as of wickedness, seeing they draw the liberty of men to looseness
and idleness, and stir up young men to voluptuousnes. Men (said Thales) are
by nature borne to virtue, but riches draw them back unto them, having a
thousand sorts of sorceries to allure them to vices, and through a false
opinion of good to turn them from those things that are truly good. They
suffer not him that has them to be able to know any thing, but draw him to
external goods. They are passing arrogant and most fearful. If they use
themselves, they are riotous, if they abstain, miserable. They never content
their Owners, nor leave them void of sorrow and care: but as they that are sick
of the dropsy, the more they drink, become the thirstier, so the more that
men abound in wealth, the more they desire to have. Riches of themselves breed
flatterers, who help to undo rich men. They are the cause of infinite murders
and hired slaughters: they make covetous persons to contemn the goods of the
soul, thinking to become happy without them. They provoke them also to
delicacies and to gluttony, whereby their bodies are subject to diseases and
infirmities. Briefly, riches greatly hurt both body and soul. They stir up
domestical sedition, and that among brethren. They make children worse in
behavior toward their fathers, and cause fathers to deal more hardly with
their children. Through them it comes that friends suspect each other: for a
true friend is credited no more by reason of a flatterer. Besides, rich me^ are
angry with good men, saying, that they are arrogant because they will not
flatter them: and in like manner they hate such as flatter them, thinking that
they keep about them only to rob them, and to diminish their wealth. These
are the cuils, which may be said to be commonly in riches. But these also
accompany them, being execrable diseases, namely, presumption, pride,
arrogancy, vile and abject cares, which are altogether Riches of them selue,
are the good gifts of God, but the evils wrought for, or by the^, come from the
corrupt nature of man.
earthly, naughty desires, wicked pleasures, and an insatiable coveting.
Besides, if they were not pernicious of themselves, so many mischiefs would not
take their beginning from them. For men commit a thousand murders for gain.
They rob churches, fidelity is lost and broken, friendship is violated, men
betray their country, maidens are loosely given: briefly, no evils are left
unexecuted through the desire of riches. They that give them selves (said Bion)
to gather riches, are very ridiculous, seeing fortune gives them, covetousness
keeps them, and liberality casts them away. Men must have rich souls
(says Alexides) as for silver it is nothing but a show and veil of life. It
is a naughty thing (says Euripides) but common to all rich men, to live
wickedly. The cause thereof as I take it, is this, because they have nothing
but riches in their mind, which being blind, seele up likewise the eyes of
their understanding. I pray God never to send me a wealthy life, which has
always sorrow and care for her Companions: nor riches to gnaw my heart. Speak
not to me of Pluto, that is to say, of riches: for I make The Poets fained
Pluto to be the God of riches, appointing Hell for his kingdom.
no great reckoning of that God, who is always possessed of the most wicked
upon the earth. O riches, you are easy to bear, but infinite cares, miseries,
and griefs keep you company. He (says Democritus) that woondereth at such as
have great riches, and are esteemed of the ignorant multitude to be happy,
will surely through a desire of having, commit and undertake wicked things, and
those oftentimes against the laws. As drunkenness (says Aristotle) begets
rage and madness: so ignorance joined with power, breeds insolency and fury.
And to those whose minds are not well The evil disposition of the mind is the
true cause of the hurt that comes by riches.
disposed, neither riches, nor strength, nor beauty, can be judged good, but
the greater increase arises of them, the more harm they procure to him that
possesses them. Moreover, do we not see that the most part of rich men, either
use not their riches, because they are covetous, or abuse them, because they
are given over to their pleasures, and so they are all the servants either of
pleasures, or of traffic and gain, as long as they live. But he that would
be (as Plato says) truly rich, ought to labor not so much to augment his
wealth, as to diminish his desire of having, because he that appoints no
bounds to his desires, is always poor and needy. For this cause the liberty
of a wise man's soul, who knows the nature of external goods belonging to
this life, is never troubled with the care of them, being assured (as Plutark
says) that as it is not apparel which gives heat to a man, but only staieth
and keeps in natural heat that proceeds from the man himself, by
hindering it from dispersing in the air: so no man lives more happily or
contentedly, because he is compassed From whence happiness and contentation
comes.
about with much wealth, if tranquillity, joy, and rest, proceed not from
within his soul. Heap up (says the same Philosopher) store of gold, gather
silver together, build fair galleries, fill a whole house full of slaves, and
a whole town with thy debtors: yet if thou do not master the passions of
thy soul, if thou quenchest not thy insatiable desire, nor deliuerest thy
soul of all fear and carking care, thou do as much to procure thy quietness,
as if thou gave wine to one that had an ague. Life of it self (says Plato)
is not joyful, unless care be chased away, which causes us to wax grayheaded,
whilst we desire but mean store of riches. For the superfluous desire of
having, always gnaweth our heart. Whereupon it comes to pass, that
oftentimes amongst men we see Great madness in coveting money.
poverty to be better than riches, and death than life. And truly there is
great madness in the greedy coveting of money. For they that are touched with
this malady, follow after riches with such zeal, as if they supposed that
when they had gotten them, no more evil should come near them. And then also
they set so light by those which they have, that they burn with the desire of
having more. How then shall we call that good, which has no end or measure? Or
that which being gotten, is the beginning of a further desire to have more? A
horse (says Epictetus) is not said to be better, because he has eaten more
than another, or because he has a gilt harness, but because he is stronger,
swifter, and better made: for every beast is accounted of according to his
virtue. And shall a man be esteemed according to his riches, ancestors, and
beauty? If any man think that his old age shall be borne more easily by the
means of riches, he deceives himself. For they may well cause him to enjoy
the hurtful pleasures of the body, but cannot take from him sadness, horror,
and fear of death: nay rather they double his grief, when he thinks that he
must leave and forsake them. In this short discourse taken from ancient men,
the vanity of riches appears sufficiently unto us, as also the hurtful
effects that flow from them, if they be not ruled by the reason of true
prudence. Hereafter we are to see how we may use those riches well, which God
puts into our hands, being justly gotten by us: which is a part of justice,
whereof we are to entreat. In the mean time, that we fasten not our hearts to
so frivolous and vain a thing, let us call to mind some examples of Examples
of the contempt of riches.
wise and famous men, worthy of immortal renown, who have altogether
contemned, eschewed, and despised the covetous desire and hoording up of
riches, as the plague and unavoidable ruin of the soul. We read of Marcus
Curious a Roman Consul (the first of his time that M. Curious.
received thrice the dignity of triumphing for the notable victories which he
obtained in the honor of his country) that he made so small account of
worldly riches, that all his possession was but a little farm in the country
soryly built, wherein he continued for the most part when public affairs
suffered him, laboring and tilling himself that little ground which he had
there. And when certain Ambassadors upon a day came to visit him, they found
him in his chimney dressing of reddish for his supper. And when they presented
him with a great sum of money from their Comminaltie, he refused it, saying:
that they which contented themselves with such an ordinary as his was, had no
need of it: and that he thought it far more honorable to command them that
had gold, than to have it. Phocion the Athenian being visited with Ambassadors
from Alexander, they presented him with a hundred Talents (being in value three
score thousand crowns) which this Monarch sent unto him for a gift. Phocion
demanding the cause why, seeing Phocion.
there were so many Athenians besides him, they answered: because their master
judged him only among all the rest to be a virtuous and good man. Then (quoth
he) let him suffer me both to seem and to be so in deed, and carry his
present back again to him. Notwithstanding, he was needy, as may be proved
by the answer which he made to the Athenian Council, who demanded a voluntary
contribution of every one toward a sacrifice. And when there were no more left
to contribute but he, they were very importunate with him to give somewhat. It
were a shame for me (said he unto them) to give you money, before I have paid
this man: and therewithal he showed one unto them that had lent him a certain
sum of money. Philopaemen Philopaemen.
General of the Achaians, having procured a league of amity between the
city of Sparta, and his own, the Lacedaemonians sent him a present of six
score Talents, which were worth three score and twelve thousand crowns. But
refusing it, he went purposely to Sparta, where he declared to the Council,
that they ought not to corrupt and win honest men, or their friends with money,
seeing in their need they might be assured of the^, and use their virtue freely
without cost: but that they were to buy and gain with hired rewards, the
wicked, and such as by their seditious orations in the Senate house used to
raise mutinies, and to set the city on fire, to the end that their mouths
being stopped by gifts, they might procure less trouble to the government of
the Commonwealth. A great Lord of Persia coming from his country to Athens,
and perceiving that he stood in great Cimon.
need of the aid and favor of Cimon, who was one of the chief in the city,
he presented unto him two cups that were both full, the one of Dariques of
gold, the other of silver Dariques. This wise Grecian beginning to smile,
demanded of him whether of the twain he had rather have him to be, his friend,
or his hireling? The Persian answered, that he had a great deal rather have
him his friend. Then (said Cimon) carry back again thy gold and silver. For
if I be thy friend, it will be always at my commandment Anacreon.
to use as often as I shall need. Anacreon having received of Polycrates five
Talents for a gift, was so much troubled for the space of two nights with care
how he might keep them, and about what to employ them best, that he carried
them back again, saying: that they were not worth the Xenocrates.
pains, which he had alrcadie taken for them. Xenocrates refused thirty
thousand crowns of Alexander, sent unto him for a present, saying: that he had
no need of them. What (quoth Alexander) has he never a friend? For mine own
part, I am sure that all king Darius treasure will scarce suffice me to
distribute Socrates
among my friends. Socrates being sent for by king Archelaus to come unto him,
who promised him great riches, sent him word, that a measure of flower was sold
in Athens for a Double, and that water cost nothing. And although Five Doubles
in France make a penny of our coin.
it seems (quoth this Philosopher) that I have not goods enough, yet I have
enough, seeing I am contented therewith. What is necessary (said Menander) for
the use of our life besides these two things, Bread and Water? Bias flying out
of his city which he foresawe would be besieged without hope of rescue, would
not lode himself with his wealth as others did. And being demanded the cause
why, I carry (quoth he) all my goods with me: meaning the invisible gifts and
graces of his mind. Truly gold and silver are nothing but dust, and precious
stones but the gravel of the sea. And (as Pythagoras said) we ought to
persuade our selves, that those riches are not ours which are not enclosed in
our soul. According to which saying, Socrates when he saw that Alcibiades
waxed arrogant because of the great quantity of ground which he possessed,
showed him an universal Map of the world, and asked him whether he knew which
were his lands in the territory of Athens. Whereunto when Alcibiades answered,
that they were not described nor set down there. How is it then (quoth this
wise man) that thou braggest of that thing which is no part of the world? One
mean which Lycurgus used, and which helped him much in the Lycurgus abrogated
the use of gold and silver coin.
reforming of the Lacedemonian estate, was the disanulling of all gold and
silver coin, and the appointing of iron money only to be current, a pound
weight whereof was worth but six pence. For by this means he banished from
among them the desire of riches, which are no less cause of the overthrow of
Commonwealths than of private men. This moved Plato to say, that he would not
have the princes and governors of his Commonwealth, nor his men of war and
soldiers, to deal at all with gold and silver: but that they should have
allowed them out of the common treasury whatsoever was necessary for them. For
as long gowns hinder the body, so do much riches the soul. Therefore if we
desire to live happily in tranquillity and rest of soul, and with joy of
spirit, let us learn after the example of so many great men to withdraw our
affections wholly from the desire of worldly riches, not taking delight and
pleasure (as Diogenes said) in that which shall perish, and is not able to make
a man better, but oftentimes worse. Let us further know that Luke 16. 13.
(according to the Scripture) no man can serve God and riches together, but
that all they which desire them greedily, 1. Tim. 6. 9.
fall into temptations and snares, and into many foolish and noisome lusts
which drown men in perdition, whereof we have eyewitnesses daily before us.
This appears in that example which the self same word notes Luke 12. 16.
unto us of the rich man that abounded in all things, so that he willed his
soul to take her ease, and to make good cheer, because she had so much goods
laid up for many years: and yet the same night he was to pay tribute unto
nature, to his overthrow and confusion. Being therefore instructed by the
spirit of wisdom, let What riches we ought to treasure up.
us treasure up in Jesus Christ the permanent Riches of wisdom, piety, and
justice, which of themselves are sufficient through his grace to make us live
with him for ever.


Of Poverty. Chap. 34.
ACHITOB. NOw that we have seen the nature of riches with the most common
effects which flow from them, and seeing the chief and principal cause that
leads men so earnestly to desire them, is The chief cause why riches are so
earnestly desired.
the fear of falling into poverty, which through error of judgment they
account a very great evil, I am of opinion, that we are to enter into a
particular consideration thereof, to the end that such a false persuasion may
never deceive us, nor cause us to go astray out of the right pathe of Virtue.


ASER. Poverty (said Diogenes) is a help to Philosophy, and is learned of it
self. For that which Philosophy, seeks to make us know by words, poverty
persuades us in the things themselves.


AMANA. Rich men stand in need of many precepts, as, that they live thriftily
and soberly: that they exercise their bodies: that they delight not too much in
the decking of them: and infinite others, which poverty of her self teaches
us. But let us hear ARAM discourse more at large of that which is here
propounded unto us.


ARAM. If we consider how our common mother the earth, being prodigal in
giving unto us all things necessary for the life of man, has notwithstanding
cast all of us naked out of her bowels, and must receive us so again into her
womb, I see no great reason we have to call some rich, and others poor, seeing
the beginning, being, and end of the temporal life of all men are unlike in
nothing, but that some during this little moment of life have that in abundance
and superfluity, which others have only according to their necessity. But
this is much more absurd, and without all show of reason, that they whom we
Against those that think poor men less happy than the rich.
call poor according to the opinion of men, should be accounted, yea commonly
take themselves to be less happy than rich men, and as I may so say, bastard
children and not legitimate, because they are not equally and alike partakers
of their mothers goods, which are the wealth of the world, for the having
whereof we hear so many complaints and murmurings. For first we see none, no
not the neediest and poorest that is (except it be by some great and strange
mishap) to be so unprovided for, that with any labor and pains taking (which
is the reward of sin) he is able to get so much as is necessary for the
maintenance of his life, namely, food and raiment, neither yet any that for
want of these things, howsoever oftentimes he suffer and abide much, is
constrained to give up the Ghost. But further, as touching the true, eternal,
and incomparable goods of our common father, their part and portion is nothing
less tha^ that of the richest. Yea many times they are rewarded and enriched
above others, in that being withdrawn from the care and government of many
earthly things, they feel themselves so much the more ravished with special
and heavenly grace (if they hinder it not) in the meditation and contemplation
of celestial things: from whence they may easily draw a great and an assured
contentation in this life, through a certain hope that they shall enjoy them
perfectly, because they are prepared A pretty comparison.
for them in that blessed immortality of the second life. For nothing is more
certain than this, that as the Sun is a great deal better seen in clear
and clean water, than in that which is troubled, or in a miry and dirtie
puddle: so the brightness that comes from God shines more in minds not
subjected to worldly goods, than in them that are defiled and troubled with
those earthly affections which riches bring with them. This is that which
Jesus Christ himself has taught, speaking to him that demanded what he should
do to have eternal Matthew. 19. 21. 23.
life: If thouwilt be perfect (says he) sell that which thou have, and give it
to the poor, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: adding besides, that a
rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. If a father dividing
his substance among his children, should leave to one as to his eldest or best
beloved, the enjoying of his principal manor by inheritance, and to the rest
their mothers goods, which are of much less value, and that only for term of
life, what folly were it to judge that these last were more preferred, and No
comparison between worldly and heavenly treasures.
had better portions than the other? And I pray you what comparison is there
between the greatest worldly and transitory riches that can be, and the
permanent treasures of heaven, seeing those cannot be compared but to a thing
of naught, than which they are weaker, being moreover accompanied with
innumerable hurtful evils, as we have already showed? What happiness and
felicity can wealth add to rich men above the poorer sort, that these should
be accounted miserable and wretched? Take away (says Lactantius) insolency
and boasting from rich men, and there will be no difference between a poor
man and a rich. And if he that made the condition both of the one and the
other, and that provides nourishment for unreasonable creatures, does
distribute unto us as much as he knows in his eternal prescience and
foreknowledge to be needful for us, whereof shall we complain, except, as
inheritors, of that damnable vice of ingratitud from the first man, we forget
so many benefits received, as also those that are daily proffered and promised
unto us of his heavenly goodness and grace? In a feast (said Epictetus) we
content our selves with that which is set before us, thinking it an impudent
and vile part to ask any other thing of him that entertaineth us. And how can
we be so impudent and shameless in this world, as to ask those things of God,
which he will not give us, and not content our selves with the use of that
which he has liberally and freely bestowed upon us? But there is a further
matter. For if we would consider the great, yea unspeakable fruits which The
fruits of poverty.
poverty brings with her, and whereof she is able to make us partakers in
this life, without doubt she will be found to be a thousand times more happy
than riches. Poverty (says Aristophanes) is the mistres of manners. Poverty
(said Archesilaus) seems to be sharp, hard, and troublesome, but she is
nurse to a good lineage, as she that acquainteth her self with frugalitie and
abstinence. In a word she is a school of virtue. Wealth is full of wickedness
(says Euripides) but poverty is accompanied with wisdom, and all honest men
are contented with necessary things. And if they offer sacrifice to the Gods
with a little incense in the paulme of their hand, they are for the most part
sooner heard than they that kill many beasts for sacrifice. For (as Menander
says) the poor are under the protection of God, and it is better to possess
a little wealth with joy, than a great deal with fadnes. To desire but a
little (said Democritus) makes poverty equal with riches: and if thou
desire not many things, a little will seem to thee to be very great.
Poverty (said Anaximenus) makes the spirit more sharp, and men more
excellent in all things belonging to this life. For she is a very good mistres
of knowledge and skill. The life of poor men (said Aristonymus) is like to a
navigations made along the shore of some sea: but the life of rich men to that
which is in the maine sea. For the first sort may easily cast anchor, come a
shore, and save themselves, whereas the others cannot do so, because they are
no more in their own power, but in fortunes. Fly not from poverty (said
Hipsaeus) but from injustice and wrong. For no man was ever punished because he
was poor, but many because they were unjust. Neither is a man's life commended
because he is rich, but because he is just. Hunger (says Plutark) never
engenders adult erie, nor want of money, lust: so that poverty is a short
kind of temperance. If thou were borne among the Persians (said Epictetus) thou
would not wish to dwell in Grecia, but to live there in a happy estate. Art
thou not then a very fool, because thou seek not rather to live happily in
poverty, seeing thou art borne therein, than to strive with so great labor for
riches that thou may live? As it is better to lie down in a very little bed
with health, than in a great and large bed, being sick: so is it a great deal
better to live in rest with a little wealth, than in travel and care with
abundance. For neither poverty procures trouble, nor riches drives away
fear: but reason is that which causes men neither to desire riches, nor to
fear poverty. If other things (says Bion the wise) could speak as well as
we, and were licenced to dispute with us, might not poverty justly say unto us
after this manner? An excellent defense for poverty.
O man wherefore fightest thou against me? Why art thou become my enemy? Have
I robbed thee of any thing? Have I been the cause that thou have received any
injury, or have I deprived thee of any good thing? Have I taken from thee
either Prudence, Justice, or Fortitude? But thou fear least necessary
things should fail thee* What? Are not the ways full of herbs and fruits, and
the fountains of water? Have thou not as many beds as the earth is great, and
as many couerlets and mattresses as there are leaves? Have thou not a good
Cook by my means, that makes good sauce for thee in hunger? And he that is a
thirst, does he not take very great pleasure in drinking? Do thou think
that a man shall die for hunger, because he has no tart, or for thirst, if he
have not very delicate wine cooled with snow? All such things are but for
delicacie and nicenes. Do thou want a house, when there is so many goodly
Churches in cities? What answer could be made to poverty, if she should speak
thus? Truly he that has virtue possesses all goods, because that alone makes
men happy: which may be spoken as well of a poor man as of a rich. For they
(said Thales) that think poverty hinders Philosophy, and that riches are a
help unto it, greatly deceive themselves. For proof that it is not so, how
many more have withdrawn themselves from study through riches, tha^ through
poverty? Do we not see that the poorest study Philosophy best, which the
welthy because of their money and many matters cannot do? For this cause
Theognis said very well, that many mo have perished through surfeiting than
through hunger. And to let you know that poverty is more happy, and better
esteemed of than riches, consider the example of Aristides surnamed the Just,
who being very poor, was chosen to levy and to gather tribute before all the
rich men in Athens. And Callias the richest man of all the Athenians, sought by
Examples to show that poverty was more esteemed of than riches.
all means to have his friendship, whereas the other made no great account of
him. Epaminondas was not called half a God, nor Lycurgus a Savior because they
abounded in wealth, and were slaves to their passions, but because they
profited their country exceedingly, and were content with their poverty.
Therefore we may gather out of the sayings of so many great and virtuous men,
an assured testimony of the benefit and profit that commonly follows the
condition of poor men. And for invincible proofs, have we not the examples of
the lives of infinite Sages and learned Philosophers, who willingly forsaking,
and wholly contemning riches, went to the Academy, commonly called the School
of Poverty, there to enjoy the treasures of wisdom and virtue? Yea, which is
more, we find that poverty has been the only and principal cause of enriching
many with this unspeakable treasure, according to that saying of Aristotle,
that calamity is oftentimes the occasion of virtue. Zeno founder of the
Stoicall Zeno.
Academic, after he had possessed much wealth, and suffered many losses, had no
more left but one ship of merchandise, which being cast away, he vttred this
speech: thou do well Fortune to bring me to the study of Philosophy,
wherein he continued ever after. The exile and banishment of Diogenes Diogenes.
driven from his country, was the cause and beginning of his study of
Philosophy. And if any man think it a difficult and strange matter that a
poor man should be skillful, seeing that whilst he studieth, he must have
wherewith to nourish his body, let us see what Cleanthes Cleanthes.
answered to Antigonus king of Macedonia, who asked him if he turned the
millstone always: Yea sir (said he) I turn it yet about to get my living, but
forsake not Philosophy for all that. How great and noble was the mind of that
man, who after his labor wrote of the nature of god and of the heavens, with
the same hand wherewith he turned about the millstone? Others say, that he got
his living by drawing water for a gardener: about which he bestowed the night
only, that he might spend the day in hearing the Philosophers dispute. This
man calls to my Menedemus and Asclepiades.
remembrance two other Philosophers, named Menedemus and Asclepiades, who being
accused before the Areopagites the chief judges in Athens, as idle persons
having no goods in possession, and being willed to declare how they lived,
their answer was, that inquiry should be made of their Host who was a Baker.
This man being called, said, that they bestowed the whole day in the study of
letters, and the night in sifting and boulting his meal, for which he gave
each of them a piece of money whereof they lived. But what? These ancient Sages
wanted but few things to live withal, seeing the most of them contented
themselves with bread and water, and many times with Pythagoras kept a spare
diet.
herbs and fruits in stead of bread, and so Pythagoras always lived. And yet
they found so great contentation and Philoxenus.
felicity in such a life, that one Philoxenus having as yet but tasted of the
first fruits of this profession of study, and being of that number which was
sent by the Athenians to inhabit a new city in Sicilia, wherein a good house
with great commodities to live at ease, fell to him for his part, and seeing
that delicacie, pleasure and idleness, without any exercise of letters reigned
in those quarters, he forsook all and returned to Athens, saying, by the gods
these goods shall not destroy me, but I will rather destroy them. All these
fruits which are noted to be in poverty, gave occasion to an ancient man to
say, that it was a virtue of Fortitude to sustain poverty patiently, but to
desire it was the praise of wisdom. Now forasmuch as it will be very hard if
not altogether impossible, notwithstanding all reason that can be alleged to
men, to dispossess them of the hatred and fear of poverty, which naturally
they shun, let us learn of the ancients who ought to account himself poor,
that we abuse no more this word Poverty. Diogenes was upon a time visited by
Alexander, who said Who ought to be esteemed poor.
unto him, I see well Diogenes that thou art poor, and have need of many
things, therefore ask of me what thou will, and I will give it thee. Whereunto
this excellent Philosopher despising such offers of goods whereof he stood not
in need, answered: Whether of us twain Alexander, seems to thee to have most
need, and therefore poorest, either I that desire nothing but my pile Diogenes
supposed Alexander to be poorer than himself.
of wood and a little bread, or thou, who being king of Macedonta do hazard
thy self to so many dangers to enlarge thy kingdom, in so much, that the whole
world will hardly suffice to bound thy ambition, and to content thy
covetousness? The Monarch so greatly admired the magnanimity of this man, that
he uttered these words with a loud voice, If I were not Alexander, I would be
Diogenes. Marius a Consul of Rome distributing land among his countrymen, gave
to every one fourteen Acres only. And understanding that some were not
contented therewith but demanded more, I would to God (quoth he then) that no
Roman would care for any more land than would suffice to nourish him. So goodly
and commendable a matter was it esteemed of these wise men to be content with a
little, and with that which is sufficient, rather than to think those men only
rich that were furnished with store of wealth. And to say truth, seeing God
alone simply and absolutely stands not in need of any thing whatsoever, it
may easily be presupposed, that the most excellent virtue of man, and that
which comes nearest to the divine nature, consists in causing a man to
stand in need of fewest things. This is that which Socrates said, That to
desire nothing (meaning worldly things) is in some sort to resemble God. And
how can we call him poor whose soul is enriched with so many great and rare
perfections? Cicero writing to Atticus, said, That a friend was bound to wish
but three things unto his friend, namely, A friend is to wish 3 things to his
friend.
That he be healthie, that he be well accounted of, and that he be not needy.
Now that all these things are found in a temperate and noble minded man, we may
learn by the effects of Sobriety, whereof we have heretofore discoursed, and
by those of honor, which is never separated from virtue, no more than the
shadow is from the body. And as for the necessary use of food and raiment, it
is not wanting to them that stand most in need thereof, as we have already
touched it in our present speech: and so a virtuous man cannot be called poor.
But let us yield a little to the common opinion of worldlings, that poverty and
want of earthly riches is odious and contemptible, yet that poverty only,
What poverty is odious.
which proceeds of sloth, idleness, and ignorance, or otherwise of foolish
expenses, of riot and superfluity may be said to be full of reproach and shame,
and is to be shunned. For when poverty is found in an honest, painful,
diligent, just, valiant and wise man, it serves for a great proof of his
magnanimity and greatness of courage, because he has set his mind upon great
and high matters, and not upon such small and vile things as the riches of the
world are. Amongst many others of this number we Aristides.
may say, that Aristides was, being captain and governor of the Athenian
estate, as we have already mentioned, who after many excellent and great offices
which he bare to the good of his country, was so smally enriched thereby, that
being dead, all his goods would not suffice to bury him. He used to say that
none ought to be ashamed of poverty, but they that were poor against their
will: and that it was a rarer matter, and worthy of greater praise to sustain
poverty virtuously and with a noble mind, than to know how to use riches well.
And so poverty is never accompanied with shame, except it be to them that fall
into it through negligence, or misgouernment of those goods which God has put
into their hands, that they should be faithful keepers and disposers thereof
in charitable works. This is that which Thucidides says, that it is no shame
for a man to confess his poverty, but very great to fall into it by his own
default. Therefore to reap profit by that which has been here discoursed,
let us put off that old error which has continued so long in men's brains,
that poverty is such a great and troublesome evil, whereas it is rather the
cause of infinite benefits: and let us say with Pythagoras, that it is a great
deal better to have a quiet and settled mind, lying upon the ground, than to
have much trouble in a golden bed. Moreover, let us know, Where the fullness
of riches is to be sought.
that to possess small store of earthly goods, ought not to be called
poverty, because all fulness of wealth abounds in the knowledge and assurance
of the fatherly grace and goodness of the Author and Creator of all things,
which he offers liberally to all without accepting either of pomp or
greatness. And further, when as, continuing the care which it pleases him to
take of us, he gives us although in travel and sweat, wherewith to feed and
to cloth us in all simplicity and modesty, and that according to our
necessity, we should be unthankful and altogether unworthy the assistance
of his help and favor, and of his eternal promises, if not contented, nor
glorifieng him for our estate, we complained, or wondered at, and desired the
calling of other men, offering thereby in will and affection our birthrights
through a gluttonous desire, whereas we ought to preserve to our selves the
possession of that heavenly inheritance, wherein consists the perfection of
all glory, rest, and contentation.


Of Idleness, Sloth, and Gaming. Chap. 35.
ARAM. TWo things being the cause of all passions in men, namely, Grief and
Pleasure, they Grief and pleasure the causes of all passions in men.
always desire the one, but fly from and fear the other. But the occasion of
the greatest evil that befalls them, is, because these desires and affections
being borne with them from the beginning, do also grow and increase a long time
before they can have any judgment framed in them through the right
understanding of things. Whereupon as well by nature, which of it self is more
inclined to evil than to good, as through a long continuing in vice they are
easily drawn to follow the appetite and lust of their sensuality, wherein
they falsely judge that pleasure consists, and think it painful not to
please it. Being thus guided by ignorance, and walking like blindmen, they have
experience for the most part of such an end as is clean contrary to their
purposes. As we may see in those men, who purposing with themselves to live at
their ease in joy, rest, and pleasure, give over all intermedling in serious
matters, and such as beseem the excellency of virtue, that they may live in
idleness: wherewith being bewitched they are partakers of many false pleasures,
which procure them a greater number of griefs and miseries, all which they
thought to avoid very well. And this we may the better understand, if we
discourse of Idleness, the enemy of all virtue, and clean contrary to
Perseverance, which is a branch of Fortitude. Therefore I propound the handling
of this matter to you my Companions.


ACHITOB. Although we have not a singular excellency of spirit, yet we must
not suffer it to be idle, but constantly follow after that which we have wisely
hoped to obtain. For (as Erasmus says) that which is often done and
reiterated, and continually in hand, is finished at last.


ASER. They that do nothing (says Cicero) learn to do ill, and through
idleness the body and minds of men languish away: but by labor great things
are obtained, yea trauail is a work that continues after death. Let us then
give ear to AMANA, who will handle more at large for our instruction that
which is here propounded unto us.


AMANA. As we admire and honor them with very great commendation, in whom we
may note as we think, some excellent and singular virtues, so we contemn them
whom we judge to have neither virtue, courage, nor fortitude in them, and whom
we see to be profitable neither to themselves nor to others, because they are
not laborious, industrious, nor careful, but remain idle and slothful. And
to say truth, the manners, conditions, and natural disposition of such men, are
wholly corrupted, their conversation is odious, unprofitable, and to be avoided,
seeing Idleness is the mother and nurse of all vice.
that Idleness is the mother and nurse of vice, which destroieth and marreth all.
Therefore it was very well ordained in the primitive Church, that every one
should live of his own labor, that the idle and slothful might not consume
unprofitably the goods of the earth. Which reason brought in that ancient
Roman edict, mentioned by Cicero in his book of Laws, that no Roman should
go through the streets of the city, unless he carried about him the badge of
that trade whereby he lived. Insomuch that Marcus Aurelius speaking of the
diligence of the ancient Romans, writes: that all of them followed their
labor and travel so earnestly, that having necessary occasion one day to
send a letter two or three days journey from the town, he could not find one
idle body in all the city to carry it. That great Orator and Philosopher
Cicero, minding to teach us how we ought to hate Idleness, as being against
Idleness is against nature.
nature, shows that men are in deed borne to good works, whereof our soul
may serve for a sufficient and invincible proof, seeing it is never still, but
in continual motion and action. And for the same cause he greatly commends
Scipio was never idle.
Scipio, who used to say, that he was never less quiet than when he was quiet.
Whereby he gives us to understand, that when he was not busied with weighty
affairs of the Commonwealth, yet, his own private matters, and the searching
after knowledge, were no less troublesome unto him, so that even then in his
solitarines he took counsel with himself. It seems (says this father of
eloquence) that nature does more require of a man such actions as tend to the
profit of men, than she does the perfect knowledge of all things: seeing this
knowledge and contemplation of the works of nature should seem to be maimed
and imperfect, if no action followed it, whereas virtuous deeds are profitable
to all men, for which end nature has brought us forth, which shows
sufficiently that they are better and more excellent. So that unless the
knowledge of things be joined with that virtue, which preserves humane
society, it will seem to be dead and unprofitable. Therefore Chrysippus the
Philosopher said, that the life of those men that give To what end we must
study Philosophy.
themselves to idle studies, differed nothing from that of voluptuous men. So
that we must not study Philosophy by way of sport, but to the end we may
profit both our selves and others. Now, if action must of necessity be joined
to study and contemplation, to make a happy life, so that otherwise it is as
it were dead and idle: what shall we say of that life that is void both of
study and action, but that it is more beast-like than humane? And how many
millions of men are there in the world, who live in this sort, and more in
France than in any other nation? Yea, how many are more idle and less
careful than brute beasts, neglecting the provision even of things necessary
for this present life? Amongst the obscure precepts which Pythagoras precept
against Idleness.
Pythagoras gave to his Disciples, this was one: Take good heed that thou sit
not upon a bushel: meaning, that Idleness and Sloth were especially to be
eschewed. Likewise, when we shall enter into the consideration of those evils
that issue from idleness and sloth, no doubt but we will fly from them, as from
the plague of our souls. They are greatly to be feared in a Commonwealth,
because they open a gate to all injustice, and kindle the fire of sedition,
which sets a floate all kind of impiety. Furthermore, they are the cause of
the finding out of infinite false and pernicious inventions, for the rele^uing
of poverty, which for the most part flows from the same fountain of
idleness. This moved the wise and ancient kings of Egypt, to employ Notable
examples of the redress of Idleness.
their idle people in digging of the earth, and in the drawing forth and
building of those Pyramides, the chief of which is by the Historiographers
placed among the seven woonders of the world. It could not be perfectly
finished before the space of twenty years, albeit that three hundred and
three score thousand men wrought about it continually. The Captains and Heads
of the Roman armies fearing the dangerous effects of idleness, no less in
their host, than in their towns, caused their soldiers to travel in making
of trenches, when they were not urged of their enemies, as Marius did alongest
the river of Rhone. The Emperor Claudius enjoying an assured peace, Claudius.
caused the channel Fucinus to be made, that Rome might have the commodity of
good waters: about which work thirty thousand men were daily employed for the
space of twelve years. Adrianus seeing a general peace within his Adrianus.
Empire, continually undertook new and long iournies, one while into France,
another while into Germany, sometime into Asia, and into other strange
countries, causing his men of war to march with him: saying, that he did for
fear, least they being idle should be corrupted, and forget the discipline of
war, and so be the cause of novelties. Scipio Nasica.
And it seems that this was the cause why a wise Roman councelled the Senate
not to destroy Carthage, least the Romans being in safety by the utter
subversion thereof (which only at that time made head against them) should
become idle. But now we may justly say of them, that through a lazy and
cowardly idleness, they have lost the dignity and virtue of their forefathers.
The Ephoryes, who were Governors of the Lacedemonian estate, The Ephoryes of
Lacedemonia
being moved with the same reason with which the Roman Scipio Nasica was
touched, after intelligence had of the taking and sacking of a great town into
which their men were entered, said: that the army of their youth was lost.
Whereupon they sent word to the Captain of the army, that he should not after
the same manner destroy another town, which he had besieged, writing these
words unto him: Take not away the prick which stirs forward the hearts of
our young men. Gelon king of Syracusa Gelon.
led his people oftentimes into the fields, as well to labor the ground, and to
plant, as to fight, both that the earth might be better being well dressed, as
also because he feared least his people should wax worse for want of travel.
So greatly did these ancient wise men fear the pernicious effects of idleness
and sloth, which bring to nothing and corrupt the goodness of nature, whereas
diligence and exercise in good educatio^ corrects the naughtines thereof. For
as close waters (says Plutark) putrify A similitude.
quickly, because they are covered, shadowed, and standing: so they that busy
not themselves, but remain idle, albeit they have some good thing in them, yet
if they bring it not forth, neither exercise those natural faculties that
were borne with them, they corrupt and destroy them utterly. And which is
worse, as concupiscence (says Plato) and luxuriousnes are quenched with
great, sharp, and continual labor, so are they kindled through idleness.
Aretchles and slothful man can find out nothing that is easy. But there is
nothing (says Seneca) whereunto continual labor is not able to attain, and
through care and vigilancie men come to the end of most difficult matters.
Fortune (says a Poet) helps and favors them that boldly set their hand to
the work, but gives the repulse to fearful and base-minded men. Let us
believe (said Pythagoras) that laborious and painful things will sooner lead
us to virtue, than those Sweat is placed before virtue.
that are nice and delicate. And (as Hesiodus says) the Gods have placed
sweat before virtue: and the way that leads unto her is long, difficult, and
craggie. A good Pilot seeing a tempest at hand, calls upon the Gods, that
they would grant him grace to escape it: but in the mean while he takes the
helm into his hand, he vaileth the foresaile, and bringing about the maine
sail, labors to come out of the dark sea. Hesiodus commands the
Husbandman to make his vows to Jupiter, and to Ceres, before he either ploweth
or sows, but he must do it with his hand upon the plow tail. Plato writing
his laws, forbids a man to fetch water at his neighbors house, before he
has dug and delued in his own ground even to the clay, and that it be
perceived that no water springs there. In like sort, laws must provide for
necessity, and not favor sloth and idleness. By sloth we loose that which we
have already well gotten, but by diligence we attain to that which we have
not, and which may be necessary for us. I Proverb. 24. 30. 31.
passed (says the wise man) by the field of the slothful, and by the vineyard
of the man destitute of understanding: and lo it was all grown over with
thorns, and nettles had covered the face thereof, and the stone wall thereof
was broken down. It is sloth and negligence that causes a man through want of
good understanding and judgment not to care for the getting of that which is
needful for him, because he fears least he should loose it. Whereupon this
would follow (which is a very absurd thing) that nothing how dear and precious
soever it be ought to be sought for or desired, seeing all things are subject
to change, yea knowledge through great diseases, and other inconveniences may
be lessened and lost. Idleness and sloth do not hurt Idleness decaieth the
health of the body.
the soul only, but impair also the health of the body. Yea that rest which
a man takes by negligence, is much more hurtful unto him, than painful
exercise. And they which think that health needs necessarily a continual
rest to preserve it well, using that goodly pretense because they would not be
troubled with mo matters tha^ needs they must, especially with those which
concern public commodity, as also because they would not take pains in the
study of wisdom, they cannot be better compared than to such as will not use
their eyes in beholding any thing, that they might keep them the better,
neither will speak at all to preserve their voice well. Every kind of life
has both sickness and health, but a sound man cannot take a better course to
preserve his health, than to employ himself in the practice of many good and
honest duties of humanity. Yea, we must yet go farther, and say with Socrates,
that diseased men ought not to be so careful of their health, that they leave
the study and exercise of virtue, seeing we are to make but small account of
death it self. And therefore Plutarke is very earnest against this Epicurian
sentence, Hide thy life: which was No man ought to hide his life.
set down by Neocles brother to Epicurus, meaning thereby to persuade them
that would live happily, not to intermeddle with any public matter. But
contrariwise (says this Philosopher) it is dishonest to live so that no man
may know any thing. Art thou vicious? show thy self to those that are able to
admonish, to correct and to cure thee, that so thou may amend and repent. If
in the knowledge of nature thou have learned by songs to praise God, his
justice, and heavenly providence: or in moral knowledge to commend the law,
humane society, the government of the commonwealth, and therein to respect
honor, not profit, hide not this talent, but teach it others, and give thy
self an example unto them of well doing, and of profiting every one. O divine
counsel, proceeding out of the mouth of an Ethnike, as necessary to be
practiced at this day, as we see it contemned of so many wise worldings, who
say they have the absolute and sound reformation of our estates of France in
their head, but that as yet there is no time to speak of it. Thus some live
idly and like to Recluses because they will take no pain, and others do
worse in maintaining the corruption of the estate, and in cleaving wittingly to
the destruction thereof. But let us proceed to look upon the fruits of
idleness. It is of that fountain whereof cursed ignorance drinks and
maintains her self, and from thence flow all pleasures followed with
bitterness and grief, which withdraw us from all virtuous occupations, to
employ our selves about all kinds of trifles, that are neither good, honest,
nor profitable, but rather hurtful and very pernicious. Of gaming, and of the
effects thereof.
Of which number we may note gaming, which is as common amongst us, and as
blame-worthie, as any other imperfection, seeing her foundation is laid upon
lucre and covetousness, or else upon the loss of time. Those cursed effects
which it brings forth daily, as quarrels, murders, blasphemies, cogging,
overthrow of houses and families, do sufficiently testify unto us the infamous
nature thereof. Likewise it has bin so abhorred of the ancient Sages, Chilon
refused to make a league with dicers.
that Chilon being sent from Lacedemonia to Corinth, to entreat of a league
between those two peoples, and finding the rulers playing at dice, returned
back again, and would not speak of his commission, saying, that he would not
stain the glory of the Spartanes with so great an ignominy as to join the^
in society with dice-plaiers. How many happy ages have our forefathers passed
over, and yet never heard word of so unhappy an exercise? And some say that The
occasion that moved the Lydians to invent games.
the Lydia^s were the first inue^ters of games, but it was when their country
was brought into great necessity of victuals: to the end that by playing, they
might find some help and mean to sustain and to resist hunger the better, by
spending every other day in gaming without any meat. Which they continued for
the space of twenty and eight years, preserving their country by that means
from a general famine through the great sparing of their provision. But now a
days we see, that men are so far from recompencing the fault of so vile an
occupation by fasting, that contrary wise it is followed with all kind of
dissolutenes, gluttony, riot and superfluity. And this is seen too much in
these new faculties of careless men, who have taught us this goodly proverb,
That a man were better loose than be idle. But if they knew their inestimable
loss, not of money which they abuse, but of the richest and most precious thing
that may be spent, and which can never be recovered, I mean of time, they
would speak clean contrary, That to loose is worse than to be idle, because
it is joined with a naughty action, which of necessity turns to the
detriment of himself or of his neighbor, and oftentimes of both. Among many
goodly and holy ordinances, which Alphonsus son of Ferdinando king of Spain,
Alphonsus decree against play.
caused those knights to observe, which he made of the order of the band,
(himself and all his children being of the same order) this was straightly
kept, that no knight should presume to play for any money at cards or dice, or
give his consent to any such play in his house, upon pain of forfeiting his
wages for one month, and himself to be forbidden another month and a half
from entering into the kings palace. But because the nature of man is not able
to abide continual labor, and occasion of business is not always offered, it
shall be lawful for us, according to the precept of Plato his Academie, to
bestow our leisure How we may recreate our selves.
upon some honest pastime and game of moderate pleasure, that is not far
separated from study or virtue, which will not be blame-worthie in us, so we
use it as we do rest or sleep, after we have dispatched and ended grave and
serious affairs according to the gift and faculty of our spirits. Moreover
let us propound to our selves for example the lives of so many famous and grave
men, who both in youth and age labored to do good and to profit every one,
esteeming it great honor to end their days in such a commendable exercise:
according to that saying of Erasmus: Of perseverance
That in vain men follow that which is good, and strive to do well, if they
stand still before the end of their days. For that man loses his time in
running swiftly, who faints before he come to the end of his race. Nothing
will be impossible to thee (says the same author) so that thy heart faint not.
Not to go forward in the way of the Lord, is all one with turning backward:
yea, it were better never to begin, than not to persevere unto the end. This
also is that which Cicero teaches us, that it is not sufficient to know what
ought to be done, but we must abide firm and steadfast in that wherein upon
advised and good counsel we are once resolved. And though we are out of hope
of attaining to perfection, yet we must strive to come unto it. Many (says he)
that are weakened with despair, will not undertake that thing which they fear
they shall never be able to finish: but they that would obtain great things,
and such as are most to be desired, must try every way. And if any man has not
this excellency of spirit and greatness of heart by nature, neither yet the
knowledge of every good discipline, let him take that course which he is able
to attain unto. For it is great praise to him that follows after the
excellentest and best things, to stay in the second and third place, if he can
do no better. Those things are great, which are next to perfection. It is our
duty therefore to abide firm and constant in that good and commendable kind
of life, which we have chosen from the beginning, so that the end thereof be to
live well. And let us shun idleness in such sort, as to say with Cato, that this
is one thing whereof we ought to repent us most, if we know that we have spent
a whole day, wherein we have neither done nor learned some good An excellent
precept of Phocylides.
thing. Phocylides minding to instruct us in this matter, said that in the
evening we ought not to sleep, before we have thrice called to our remembrance
whatsoever we have done the same day, repenting us of the evil, and reioicing
in our well doing. Apelles the best painter that ever was, would not suffer one
day to pass without drawing of some line, meaning thereby (as he said) to
fight against Examples against idleness.
idleness, as with an arrow. Aeleas king of Scythia said, that he seemed to
himself to differ nothing from his horsekeeper, when he was idle. Dionysius the
elder being demanded if he were never idle, answered: God keep me from that:
for as a bow (according to the common proverb) is marred and breaks by
being too much bent: so is the soul through too much idleness. This is that
which Masinissa the Aphrican would learnedly teach us, of whom Polybius
writes, that he died when he was four score and ten years of age, leaving
behind him a son that was but four years old. A little before he died,
after he had discomfited the Carthaginians in a maine battle, he was seen the
next day eating of course brown bread, saying to some that marvelled thereat,
that as iron is bright and shines An excellent comparison.
so long as it is used by the hand of man, whereas a house falls into decay
when no man dwells therein, (as Scphocles says) so fares it with this
brightness and glistering light of the soul, whereby we discourse, understand,
and remember. The same reason moved Xerxes father to say to Darius, that in
perilous times and dangerous affairs, he increased in wisdom. Likewise
political knowledge, which is such a How political knowledge must be
preserved.
prudence, settled mind, justice, and experience, as knows full well how to
make choice of, and to take sit opportunity in all things that happen, cannot
be maintained but by the practice and managing of affairs, by discoursing and
judging. Now to conclude our present treatise, seeing we know that we are borne
to all virtuous actions, let us fly from idleness and sloth, the welsprings of
all injustice The fruits of idleness.
and poverty, the stirrers up of infinite passions in the soul, and the
procurers of sundry diseases in the body, even to the utter destruction of
them. And let us embrace diligence, care, travel, and study, which are sure
guides to lead The end of our life.
us to that end for which we ought to live, that is, in glorifieng God to
profit our selves in honest things, and also all those with whom we live,
wherein consists all the happiness and contentation of the life of good men.
And let us not doubt but that all time otherwise spent, is lost time: knowing
that all times in respect of themseluns are alike, but that which is employed
in virtue is good in regard of us, and that which is unprofitably wasted, and
in vices is naught. Further, let us learn never to give over the effecting and
finishing of that which we once know to Matthew. 10. 22.
belong to our duty, seeing that without perseverance neither he that fights
can obtain the victory, neither the conqueror the garland, but he that
continues to the end shall be saved. Therefore let us be careful to make
profit of that talent which is given us to keep, that we be Matthew. 12. 36.
not found evil and unprofitable servants before him, to whom we must yield
an account even of every idle and vain word.


Of an Enemy, of Injury, and of Revenge. Chap. 36.
AMANA. Having hitherto in three days works discoursed (according to our
judgment) of all the parts of the virtue of Fortitude, and of those
commendable effects that issue from it, to the correcting of many vices and
imperfections, which abound in man's nature, I think that to end this
afternoon, we are yet to resume and to continue the speech already begun by us
(as also we then promised) of one principal point concerning true
magnanimity, and greatness of courage, which respects our enemies, thereby to
know more particularly both our duty toward them, and also what good may come
to us from them, if we sustain and bear courageously their injuries,
forsaking all desire and lust to revenge.


ARAM. A pretty comparison.
As industrious Bees gather the driest and most pearcing honey of bitter time:
so a wise and virtuous man (says Xenophon) knows how to draw profit and
commodity from his enemies, upon whom we must beware of revenging our selves,
least (as Theophrastus says) we hurt our selves more than them.


ACHITOB. It is the property (says Cicero) of famous personages and noble
hearts to contemn injuries offered unto them by known wicked men, whose
commendation of a man imports some dishonestie in him. Now then ASER teach us
somewhat of this matter wherein we have so great need of instruction.


ASER. The Cynick Philosopher said, that if a man would be in safety and
partaker of happiness, he must of Good friends or sharp enemies are
necessarily required to a happy life.
necessity have good friends or sharp enemies, that the first sort by good
and wise admonitions, and these by notable injuries, might withdraw him from
doing of evil. And truly if we consider the profit and commodity which may
come unto us from him that voluntarily without occasion given him (as it is our
duty not to offend any) is become our enemy, by governing our selves therein
with the reason of a true Academical prudence, besides that we shall show
forth the effects of that title which we bear, and of the end of our being,
we must be so far off from hating an enemy, that we should rather think our
selves beholding and bound unto him for that great good which he procures unto
us. That this is so, is not this one property of vice to make us more ashamed
before our enemies when we have committed a fault, than before our Why men are
beholding to their enemies.
friends? Do we not take our enemy for a spy and enuier of our life? If any
imperfection reign in us, who will more freely give us to understand thereof
than he that hates us, who will not be slack to publish it every where? For
this reason Plutarke calls an enemy a Schoolmasters that costeth us
nothing, of whom we learn that which may greatly profit us, and which we know
not. To this effect he makes mention in his Apophthegmes of an Athenian
captain who complained to Aristo chief captain of the Lacedaemonians, that his
soldiers blazed abroad the manners of the Athenians. If the Athenians (said
Aristo unto him) did look well to their doings; they should not need to care
what the Spartanes could say of them. These things being well considered by us,
if we have enemies they will be a mean to make us more fearful and
restrained from offending, and more earnest and diligent to order well our
behauior, to direct our doings, and to How men behave themselves now adays
toward their enemies.
correct our imperfections. But let us mark a little how the noble and
courageous youths of the world behave themselves now adays. The reproves and
injuries of an enemy, may peradventure be tolerated in some sort by the
skilfuller sort of those that boast themselves to be so curious obseruers and
ready defenders of their honor, so that they be not vttred in their presence:
because they say that they cannot be offended at that which is spoken of them
in their absence, and that they which speak so, will not avouch that slander
before their faces, which they raised behind their backs. According to these
weak reasons they would have other men judge of reproach and injury, either to
credit or to discredit them according to their power, and not as the truth of
the fact it self requires: whereupon also they pass that over without
profit and amendment of their life, which they knew was misliked in them.
There are others, who upon a bare report made unto them, think themselves
greatly misused and harmed by those that spoke ill of them, so that presently
they purpose to be avenged of them. But herein they agree al, that if any man
voluntarily offers injury to another, they would have the sword presently to
decide the controversy. What say I, for an injury? Nay, for a yea or a nay,
they forthwith think that the lie is given them, and that they are out-faced:
so that nothing but the death of the one, or of both together, and oftentimes
of their dearest and best friends is able (as they think) to repair the
preiudicate and supposed offense, and all for this vain honor of the world. O
detestable fury, not to be found in most cruel beasts, which spare the blood
of their sex. It is not convenient, that any time should be lost in reproouing
the same, being of it self so odious, that it cannot so much as be once named
but with shame, trembling and horror. For no man is so dull of understanding,
but he knows Murder forbidden.
that effusion of blood is forbidden by God, and that outrage being in no sort
permitted, much less may a christian forget himself so far as to kill
another, except it be through necessity in defending his own body, or in the
service of his prince and country in a just war. Amongst all the sententious
sayings of Socrates the wise, and the wonderful works of Plato his scholar, I
find none more divine, or worthy of greater praise than that sentence so
often repeated by them, That revenge is not in any sort to be A notable
sentence.
used. It is not just (said the same Socrates) to offend any, although he had
offered us wrong. For a good man never ought to do euil^ yea, it is a great
deal better to suffer, than to offer contumely, to be slain than to slay,
because the one brings no detriment to man, who is the soul, but the other
procures the utter ruin and destruction thereof. This will sound very ill in
many men's ears. But if they will judge without passion, and had eyes to see,
and ears to understand the end of their being and calling, as also the reason
of true prudence and generositie taught us in the study of Philosophy, no
doubt but they would subscribe to the opinion of these wise Philosophers,
agreeing very well with that which is taught us by the spirit of God, who
condemns the murderer, and him that offers Leuit. 24. 17.
wrong and injury to another: but calls himself Psalm. 9. 9. 16.
the defender of innocence, and such a one as returns a Matthew. 5. 10.
double reward and recompense to those that suffer for righteousness and equity.
Who may therefore doubt but that it is far better to receive than to do evil,
to be killed than to kill, seeing by the one the good hour of our perpetual
rest and felicity is hastened forward, and by the other we are utterly
frustrated thereof, and thrown into a hell of eternal fire? So that if we
endeavor to show forth the effects of true magnanimity and greatness of heart,
there is no doubt but to bear and to endure with all modesty To suffer injury
patiently, is a badge of a most absolute virtue.
and patience the outrages and wrongs of our enemies, is the mark of that
virtue which is most absolute and perfect. That it is so, does it not appear
in this, that virtue consists in difficult things? And that virtue that
comes nearest to the divine nature, which is hardest to be obtained, and
least familiar with men, is it not more worthy and beseeming a noble and
valiant man, than all the rest? Unto which may we attribute better this mark
than to the virtue of patience, whereof we have already entreated? We see no
man upon earth of so base estate, no woman so feeble and weak, no living
creature so little, but if they be stricken, they will revenge themselves very
willingly as well as they can. How greatly then ought this virtue to be
accounted of, which forces this natural lust of revenge, bred in all living
creatures, and how noble must the mind of that man needs be, which is able to
master such a violent passion, so common to all men, thereby procuring to it
self the name of a mild and gracious spirit, and ready to forgive, which is
proper and peculiar to the divine nature? Therefore that great monarch Alexander
said, That a man wronged had need of a more noble heart to forgive his enemy,
tha^ to be reue^ged of him and to kill him. Behold the saying of as noble a
prince as ever the earth bare: What can the Courtiers of these times say to the
contrary? It is a great virtue (says Epictetus) not to hurt him of whom thou
A commendable kind of revenge.
art misused. It is a very commendable thing to pardon him whom thou might
hurt, and it is a praise-woorthie kind of revenge to let them go in peace that
are overcome. Therefore Pittacus the Sage having one in his power that had
dealt contumeliously with him, he suffered him to depart unharmed, saying, That
pardon was better than revenge, the one being proper to the spirit of a man,
the other of a cruel beast. But further, although it were only in respect of
our own benefit during our life, we ought to shun all motions of injury, and
all desire of revenge: forasmuch as we cannot either determine or execute the
same, but with a thousand perturbations, which cause us to want the rest and
tranquillity of our souls, wherein all our happiness and felicity
consists. Good counsel of Seneca.
And therefore Seneca says, If he that wronged thee be weaker than thou, forgive
him: if he be mightier, spare thy self. For whosoever nourishes his neighbors
anger, whosoever provoke and incenseth him more, when he sees him vehement
and importunate against him, he commits two faults. First he hates himself
by procuring his own trouble and grief: Secondly, his brother, because he
makes We must do nothing in choler.
him sad, and vexes him. Moreover prudent men (as Theophrastus says) ought to
do nothing in choler. For that unreasonable part of the soul being moved,
foreseeth nothing wisely, but being driven forward with a contentious desire,
suffers it self to be carried hither and thither, as if it were drunken. Also
we must take great heed, that we do not always put in execution whatsoever we
have a mind unto, but only that which moderate reason commands us. Wherein
we shall deserve the praise of true Magnanimity, if I say, we can command our
selves and all vehemency of choler, which drives men forward to be avenged on
their enemies, and is an act that sauoureth more of a vile and abject heart,
drawing near to brutish fiercenes, than of a noble mind, which despises
whatsoever is earthly, mortal, and vading, that it may think of nothing but
of heaven and immortality. This is that which the study of our Philosophy
teaches us: and even as expert Physicians know how to draw medicines apt for
the preservation of life out of serpents, poisons, and other deadly and
venomous things: so we ought to draw An apt similltu le.
from our enemies, not their life, which ought to be only in the power of God
and of his justice, but profit and commodity by their backbitings, reproaches,
and injuries. Which will easily be done, if we make small account of How a man
may profit by the backbiting of his enemies.
their intent, and consider narrowly the fact which they speak ill of, to the
end that if we be guilty of that which they condemn in us, we may purge and
correct our selves. And if so be they harm us wrongfully, their impudency
will cause their reproaches and injuries to be turned back, and sent against
themselves, together with that shame and damage, which they thought to procure
unto us, whereas we shall be no less honest and virtuous men than before. So
that the best revenge and most honorable victory, which we can carry away from
our enemies, will be to The best kind of reueng.
surpass them in diligence, bounty, magnanimity, goodturnes, and in all
virtuous actions: whereby they will sooner perceive and confess them selves
vanquished and constrained to stop their mouth, and to repress their tongue,
than by any other force, which we can oppose against them. Then may we say,
that as he who enterprised to kill Prometheus the Thessalien gave him so great
a blow with a sword upon an apostume which put him in danger of death, that by
lancing it he saved his life contrary to his meaning: so the injurious speeches
of our enemies vttred in wrath and of ill will to hurt us, have been the cause
of curing many evils in us whereof we made no account, and of making us much
better than we were before. But because injury seems so hard and uneasy to
be tolerated by the imbecillitie of man's nature, which is so soon offended,
and by the heart of man being full of revenge, let us yet see whether we can
find any remedy, if not to cure that which is incurable, at least wise to
purge and to cleanse How many ways a man may receive injury.
the Accidents of this evil. Injury is offered either to the goods, to the
honor or to the person of a man. As touching the first and last, namely, the
spoiling of our goods, and violence offered to our person, what other revenge
either by the law of God or of man can we have, than to repulse force with
force, I mean, when we are constrained thereunto, or else by way of the prince
his Justice, which is open to every one? If any have robbed thee, must thou
become a thief or satisfy thy self by thine own strength? Much less
ought thou to set thy self against him that is not faulty, as many do. If
thou being the weaker art overtaken, hurt and wronged, ought thou to use new
force, violence and murder to revenge thy self, and to repair thy injury
received? The sword is in the hands of the king and of the magistrate that
represents his person: and it belongs to him only to use it against them
that trouble public tranquillity and civil society: to the end there should
be no show, that any other either would or durst meddle with the sovereignty,
whose greatness and preservation consists in the administration of justice.
Yea the laws have always so abhorred violence and private force, that they
have restored Men must not take the law into their own hands, although it be
not rightly executed.
thieues and robbers into those places which they unjustly possessed, if they
had been driven from them by violence. But some man will say, that these things
ought in deed to be duly considered of if Justice were executed, and had not
forsaken the earth to dwell in heaven. And how then can thou execute it,
seeing thou art not called to do, but to demand justice? Tarry, and the just
Judge will return double that which has been unjustly taken from thee, which
thou have suffered, or which has been denied thee, even then when thou shall
have greater need than now that thy days are so short: and then thou shall
live for ever of that which thou have reaped in this poor and miserable life.
Concerning honor, the injury whereof we Of the offense done to honor.
fear more than of the other, let us know, that it cannot be hurt in a good
man, because virtue, which is invincible, protecteth and defends it. But now
a days we fetch it not so far off. For we will have our honor tied to the
vain opinion of the world, which rejects and contemns those men as cowards
and base-minded, that have but once put up the least injury offered by
another: but honoreth as noble and courageous those that can lustilie kill
their enemies. This is the cause why many, who would willingly forget an
injury received, dare not do it for love of their friends: as also because
they see, that it would rather be imputed unto them as a toke^ of a faint heart,
than of a desire to follow reason. But let all these blood-suckers, inclined
to revenge and to murder, cover their beastly The excuse of quarrellers.
cruelty as well as they can, yet have they no other reason to disguise it but
this, that it is a usual kind of behavior now a days amongst men, to the
end they may be welcomed, praised, and favored of Kings, Princes, and great
Lords, otherwise they must take a Cool, and shut up themselves in some
cloister. But they must needs affirm this withal, that they had rather undo
and condemn themselves with the multitude, so they may have worldly honor,
than be saved with the small number of honest men: except peradventure they
will say, that they know no other life but this, and that they live only for
the world, without belief or hope of a second and eternal life. And albeit
they confess a second life with their mouth, yet their deeds declare
sufficiently, that they are altogether ignorant of the nature and happiness of
the other life, and that they care not greatly to come unto it. But let us that
Socrates void of revenge.
are better instructed imitate Socrates, who, being counseled to reueng a wrong
received, made this answer: What? If a Mastie had bit me, or an Ass given me a
blow, would you have me serve writs upon them? So let us behave our selves
toward them that are froward and vicious, making a great deal less account
of their injuries, than of a blow that hurts: which they cannot do at all to
our honor. As for good men we shall never be hurt by them. Now, if we draw
near, although never so little, to the perfection We must not be moved with
mocks.
of such a nature, much less ought we to be provoked and stirred up through any
laughter or gibing, which cannot touch or offend any, but those that are
troubled and carried away with passions. Thus much did Socrates wisely give one
to understand, who told him that certain mocked him: I do not (quoth he)
think that I am mocked. Hereupon I remember a notable answer made by one
Ptolemaeus Ptolemaeus.
king of Egypt, who was counseled to punish a Grammarian. The king demanding of
him by way of gibing, who was father to Peleus, he made this answer, that he
desired first to know who was Lagus his father, noting thereby that the king
was borne of base parentage. If it be unseemly (quoth Ptolemaeus to his
friends) for a king to be mocked, it is also as indecent for him to mock
another. Now although it be our duty to tread under foot all desire of
revenge, and to make no account of injuries and mocks, yet is it lawful How a
man may repulse a mock
for us sometime, if we be disposed, and no greater offense arise thereof, to
stop the mouths of such as are injurious and impudent, with a little short
reply: not in wrath or choler, but with a certain meekenes and grave smiling,
and somewhat nippingly, so that it pass not the Cato.
bounds of modesty. Cato knew well how to behave himself after this sort, who
being injuriously dealt with all by one that had always lived wickedly, said
thus unto him: I am not able to deal with thee in this manner by contending
with injuries. For thou have thoroughly used thy self both to utter reproaches
freely, and to suffer with ease when any man offers thee wrong or injury.
But as for me, I delight neither in hearing, nor in uttering them. Likewise
Demosthenes answered another in Demosthenes.
this sort: I will not enter into this combat with thee, wherein the vanquished
is better than the vanquisher. Plato also being touched Plato.
with injurious speeches, said: Go on to speak ill, seeing thou did never
learn to speak well. Lysander, Admiral of the Lysander.
Lacedaemonians, being reviled with many bitter speeches, said to him that
offered the injury: Spue out boldly my friend, spue out boldly and often, and
spare not, to see if thou can empty thy soul of that evil and wickedness
wherewith it is replenished. Shall we think now, that these famous men, making
so small account of injuries and wrongs, had any other bound than right and
justice only in the hatred of the vices of The limits that are to be used in
hating the wicked.
wicked men, or that they would have sought by any other way for the satisfieng
of those wrongs, which they received? Let us consider how Scaurus behaved
himself toward Scaurus.
his enemy Domitius, against whom he was to put up a complaint by way of
justice. There was one of Domitius his servants, who before judgment was given
of their process, came to Scaurus, and said, that he would disclose unto him a
matter of great importance against his master, which undoubtedly would cause
him that was his adverse party to gain his suit. But he not minding to hear
him any further, took order that he should be straightly bound, and so sent
him to his master. The means which Agesilaus used to make his enemies his
friends, in steed of revenging himself upon them, are worthy of eternal
How Agesilaus made his enemies his friends
praise, and ought to move us greatly to correct our natural imperfections, so
much inclined to revenge. For when he could come to the knowledge of them
without any further show, he thrust them into public offices and charges. And
if it fell out so that they committed any offense whereby they were drawn into
judgment, he help them as much as he could, by that means winning the
friendship of every one. For although we commonly say, that as one and the same
sun softeneth the wax, and hardens the clay: so good deeds win the hearts
of good men, but provoke the wicked, yet there is no man of so perverse a
nature, whom a man cannot make his friend by plying him often with benefits,
and when occasion is offered, by binding him with some notable good turn.
Augustus.
For this cause Augustus, after the conspiracy of Cinna was discovered,
notwithstanding that he had him in his power, being convicted by his own
letter, yet he did not only forgive him, but taking him also by the hand,
swear friendship with him, and bestowed upon him great estates and dignities,
wherein Cinna afterward served him faithfully. The Venetians.
And it seems that for the same reason the Venetians having taken the Duke of
Mantua their deadly enemy, in steed of taking his estate from him, they made
him their General captain: so that ever after he abode their Pontinus.
faithful friend. Pontinus also an ancient captain of the Samnites, said, that
they were either freely to set at liberty the Roman army, which was
surprised in the straights of the mountain Apenninus, and so make them loyal
friends through the bond of so great a good turn, or else to put them all to
death, thereby to The prudence of Dionysius in punishing evil speakers.
take from the enemy a great part of his strength. Neither may we here let go
in silence the discretion of Dionysius the elder, king of Syracusa, in
punishing an injury. Which example ought to cause all them to blush, who in
fury and choler, after an injury received, or after some report thereof, seek
presently for some cruel revenge. This king being told that two young men as
they were drinking together, had spoken many outrageous words of him, he
invited them both to supper. And perceiving that one of them, after he had
taken a little wine into his head, uttered and committed much folly, and that
contrariwise the other was very stayed, and drunk but a little, he punished
this fellow as one that was malicious, and had been his enemy of set purpose,
but forgave the other, as being drunken, and moved by the wine to speak ill
of him. Concluding therefore our present discourse, let us learn that it is
the property of a great and noble mind to be mild, gracious, and ready to
forgive, and that it is a greater point of Magnanimity to surmount the common
nature of men by a wonderful divinity of the soul, than to follow after
that which beasts are able to do better than we. For many of them in this
earthly generositie, whereof many men make so great account, excel and
surpass the best of them all. In all debates and controversies with our
enemies, let us retain (as Cicero counsaileth us) gravity and constancy, and
chase away all choler: because nothing that is done through perturbation can
be done constantly, or be approved of any. Let us not be afraid Antisthene*
counsel.
(said Antisthenes) to wish all the good in the world to our enemies, except
valor, which may make them rash to venture upon our life: and let us give over
all will to procure them any hurt or displeasure, or any manner of revenge. Let
us rather desire not to be spared of them in those things which are
blame-woorthie in us, that so we may be more ready to amend and correct them.
Let us Math. 5. 44.
love our enemies, bless them that curse us, do good to them that hate and
persecute us, ouercomming evil with good, and leaving Romans 12. 19.
all vengeance to him that has reserved it to himself, who by his power
directs the nets, swords, hatchets, instruments and scourges of his wrath,
all which are our enemies for the amendment of our life: and then shall we show
forth those true effects of the virtue of Fortitude and Magnanimity, which
our heavenly Father requires of us.


The end of the ninth days work.
THE TENTH DAYS WORK.
Of Justice. Chap. 37.
ASER. TRue Philosophy (says Socrates) What true Philosophy is.
is to know and to practice both privately and publicly those things that are
honest and just. This is that Prudence which teaches us well and nobly to
govern both domestical and civil affairs, the name whereof is Temperance and
Justice. By which speech this wise Philosopher taught us the straight and
inseperable conjunction and knot of the four Moral virtues, being
nevertheless distinguished by their proper and particular effects. Which
having hitherto offered us matter wherein to rejoice our spirits about the
three first rivers flowing out of the fountain of Honestic, there remains
now for us to consider of the last of them, which although it be but one
particular, yet in truth it is the very perfection of all duty, and is called
Justice: the precepts whereof if we keep diligently, we shall truly become
images of God his essence, and be made according to his likeness. Let us then
begin my companions, to entreat of this great and heavenly virtue.


AMANA. Justice (says Cicero) is the mistress of all the The fruits and
effects of Justice
other virtues, and as it were their Queen. She is the groundworke of
everlasting glory and renown, and without her nothing can be praise-woorthie.
She puts a difference between the good and the bad, which being taken away
(says Seneca) nothing follows but confusion. For to reward the wicked and not
the good, to afflict the virtuous, and not to chastise the evil man, is to
make a gallimaufrey of vice and virtue.


ARAM. What Justice is.
What is Justice but godliness (says Lactantius) and what is godliness but
the knowledge of God our Father? Notwithstanding in respect of us, Justice is
commonly taken for an equal distribution of right and of laws. But of thee
(ACHITOB) we shall presently understand the greatness and riches of this
precious virtue, and the unspeakable fruits which she distributeth liberally
for the profit of all men.


ACHITOB. No kingdom, commonwealth, or city (says Plato) can be either well
ruled or instituted in the beginning, or Three things necessary in every
commonwealth.
preserved and kept in a happy estate without divine or humane Justice,
without the counsel of the aged, or without the favor of the heavenly
wisdom. Now that is divine justice (as Lactantius says) whereby we are joined
to God by devotion and good will: and humane Justice knitteth us unto men by
mercy and humanity. Whereby we see that the foundation The ground of all
Justice.
of all Justice is grounded upon that honor and service which we owe to God,
whereupon we are induced to be dutiful to our neighbors according to charity.
Therefore we must above all things love Justice, and apply all our study
thereunto, seeing it is the first and principal point that concerns the
direction of a Christian man's life, yea mo are partakers of the fruit thereof,
than of any other virtue. Justice (says Seneca) is the law of God, and the
bond of humane society. For avoiding therefore of confusion in this matter, we
say with Plato, that Justice observed and kept The distinction of Justice.
toward God, takes unto it the name of piety. But we will enter into the
handling of that Justice only, which has respect to our dealings with men,
being by the same Plato called an equal distribution toward all the world,
according to the deserts of every one, and a sure foundation of cities and
commonwealths. He says also, that Justice requires upright dealing
throughout a man's calling and charge, and that nothing is more like to the
greatness of God, than a man perfectly just. Aristotle calls Justice Whosoever
has Justice perfectly, has all the virtues.
a general virtue, because he that has her perfectly, may boast that he has
within him all the other virtues. For he could not know what were just and
unjust, nor make choice of the one and fly from the other, if he were not
prudent, to which virtue that thing does properly belong. Neither could he
exercise the precepts of Justice, if by temperance he knew not how to moderate
all his passions and private affections, not suffering himself to be overcome
either with wine, gluttony, lust, covetousness, or with any other desires and
motions, which hinder the use of reason. Besides, he could not practice one
principal and divine point of justice, which is to succor with all his might
the afflicted and oppressed, and to provide that no man be wronged, if it lie
in his power, notwithstanding any danger whereinto he may fall, although it be
certain loss of life, and of all earthly and transitory goods, I say he
could not practice this, if through Fortitude and Generositie he contemn not
death, the earth, and whatsoever sauoreth of the world, that he may be (so
far forth as his humane nature will suffer) a follower of the divinity.
Justice (says Cicero) is a constant and perpetual will and desire to give to
every one his right. She is the proper virtue of a noble minded man, because
she is profitable to others, but to her self fruitles, laborious, and
perilous. Yea that man only may be called just, that profits as many as he
can, but hurts none, that is always at agreement The praise of Justice.
within himself, and is a friend to God, to men, and to himself. Justice
(says Diogenes) works great tranquillity and perfect felicity in our
souls. For to be afraid of none, and not to blush at the sight of any man's
person, brings with it great contentation, and is as it were the perfection
of life, which is proper only to a just soul. Justice (says Hesiodus) is a
chaste and reverent virgin, not violated or defiled, but lodged always with
shamefastnes, chastity, and simplicity. Pindarus calls her the Queen of
all the world. Pythagoras teaching by his riddlelike precepts, how a man ought
to beware of transgressing Justice, says: Go not beyond the balance. If we
purpose Respect of persons is not to be used in the practice of Justice.
(says Plato) to exercise Justice perfectly, we must make no difference of men
in regard either of their friendship, kindred, wealth, poverty, or dignity.
This virtue (says Cicero) requires of us the forsaking of our pleasures and
private commodity, that we may procure the benefit of the Commonwealth,
although it be to our peril and loss. And those men command and govern very
well, who forbid us to do any thing whereof we doubt whether it be just or
unjust: because equity is so clear of it self, that when we doubt of any
thing, we may be assured that there is some injustice in it. Aristotle and
Cicero divide Justice The division of Justice. The difference between
Commutatiue and Distributive Justice.
into these two parts, Distributive and Commutatiue. Distributive Justice
consists in giving to every one according to his desert, whether it be honor
and dignity, or punishment. Commutatiue Justice is in keeping fidelity and in
causing it to be kept in promises and contracts, and in behauing our selves no
otherwise to another, than we would be dealt withal. Many parts and particular
duties are also attributed by the Philosophers to Justice, as Liberality and
sundry other, whereof we will particularly discourse hereafter. But we must
here learn, that the end of The end of Justice.
all Justice tends to the preservation of the common society of men. For the
preservation of the laws (which are the Guardian and Tutor of good men, and a
mortal enemy to the wicked) is so necessary for every estate and condition
of life, that (as Cicero says) the very Pirates, The necessity of Justice.
thieues and robbers could not live together without some part thereof. If we
desire to know more of her unspeakable fruits, let us consider that which
Paulus the Pythagorian has written, saying, Justice among men ought in my
opinion to be called the Mother and Nurse of all the other virtues. For without
her no man could be either temperate, valiant or prudent: the profit whereof
will be very evident if we consider all her effects. Diverse names agree to
Justice in diverse respects.
For the providence of God is that Justice which governs the world, and has
the principality over it. In cities and towns Justice is rightly called
Equity and Peace: in particular houses between the husband and the wife,
Unity and Concord: in respect of servants toward their masters, Good will: of
masters toward their servants, Humanity and Gentleness: and in men's bodies
Health and perfection of the members. Thus you see that Justice is the
beginning and perfection of all the virtues. By these short sayings of ancient
and grave personages, the excellency of this holy and sacred virtue Justice
appears sufficiently unto us. Yea it is so earnestly commanded by the spirit
of God unto Magistrates in these words Ierem. 21. 12. and 22. 3.
of exercising Judgment and Justice, so often repeated, that whosoever
infringeth and violateth it, can not avoid the curse and wrath of the
Almighty, which will both light upon their own heads, and also work the
destruction of them that are committed to their charge. It belongs to What
Justice and Judgment are.
Justice, to receive the innocent into protection and safeguard, to maintain,
defend, sustain, and deliver them, and to Judgment, to resist the boldness of
the wicked, to repress their violence, and to punish their offenses: because
Magistrates are therefore armed with the sword and with power, that public
peace should not be disturbed. This also is that which Solon meant to teach us,
when he said: that the greatness and preservation of all Commonwealths
consisted in two things, in the reward of the good, and in the punishment of
the wicked: which being taken away, the whole discipline of humane society
must needs be dissolved and come to nothing. For there are many that have no
great care to do well, if they see not virtue recompensed with some honor:
although this beseems not a noble-minded man, who ought to do nothing but
only for the love of virtue. And again, the malice of the wicked cannot be
brideled, if they see not vengeance and punishment prepared for offenders. All
these above specified considerations did so greatly recommend Justice to the
men of old time, and caused them to esteem so much of it, that whenever
occasion was offered to maintain and execute it, it was preferred before all
things: insomuch that the father did not pardon his own son. The Egyptians
were the The Egyptians were zealous of Justice. How they painted Judges.
ancientest Lawmakers, as Historiographers report, and were very careful and
diligent obseruers of Justice. In their cities they painted Judges without
hands, and the President or chief Justice with his eyes blind-folded: to
teach, that Justice ought not to be either a briber, or respecter of persons,
that is, she must neither take any thing, nor judge for any favor. The kings
of their country observed this order, to cause Judges when they were installed
by them in their offices, to swear, that albe^it they were commanded by them
to judge unjustly, yet they should not obey them. Since their time, the ancient
Grecians The Grecians and Romans.
and Romans showed themselves great, true, and zealous followers of this
virtue of Justice, and that toward their greatest enemies. They judged it a
very noble act to accuse the wicked, so it were not upon any private occasion
or passion: they delighted greatly to see young men by way of Justice to pursue
transgressors, as grayhounds well flesht follow after wild beasts. This caused
Solon being demanded what city seemed to him best What city is best governed.
governed, to answer: that city wherein they that are not wronged, do as egerly
follow after satisfaction in the behalf of another man wronged, as if
themselves had received the injury. For the truth is (quoth he) that they
which violate and break laws, do not offend one man alone, but the whole
City and Commonwealth: therefore every one ought to desire and seek after
just punishment. Moreover, the severity which the Lacedaemonians observed in
their judgments, procured such a public safety, that for a long time they
used not to put either locks to cofers, or bars to gates. Aristotle makes
mention of a certain country, where the inhabitants were to assure the
safety of the ways, and to repay unto passengers that loss, which they had
received by thieves and robbers. Neither is it long since the like statute was
observed in many places of Italy. But I stand greatly in doubt, that at this
day it is ilfauoredly kept. O happy, yea an hundred times happy was the golden
age of those famous men, full of heavenly spirit, because under their
government Justice was had in such honor and reverence. But let us rub up the
memory hereof by some notable examples. If any thing causes Examples of the
love of Justice.
Magistrates to commit injustice, it is chieflye the favor which they bear,
and the bond wherewith they are bound more to some than to others. Therefore
Cleon the Lacedemonian Cleon.
minding to deal in public affairs, gathered all his friends together, and
told them, that he renounced and discharged himself of all their friendship,
because friendship many times caused men to yield, and to step aside from their
good and right purposes in matters of judgment. True it is that when we have
none but good men to our friends, who are moved and possessed with the same
zeal to virtue that we are, as before was mentioned, we shall never fall into
these inconveniences. The example Aristides.
of Aristides the Athenian his love unto Justice, is worthy of special
remembrance. For calling into the law an enemy of his, after he had set down
his accusation, the Judges were so moved against the accused party, for the
impiety of the fact in controversy, that they would have condemned him
unheard: so greatly did they trust to the honesty of the accuser, that he had
set down nothing but the very truth. But Aristides, who for his great and rare
virtue had before deserved the surname of Just, went with the accused party
and cast himself at the Judges feet, beseeching them, that he might be heard,
to justify and to defend himself, according as the laws commanded. Further,
one writes of him, that when he was upon a time Judge between two parties
that pleaded before him, one of them said: my adversary has done thee great
wrong Aristides. But he forthwith interrupting his talk, made this answer: My
friend, declare only whether he has wronged thee. For I am here to do thee
right, and not my self: showing thereby, that Justice ought to be executed
without any private passion, revenge, or choler, I. Brutus.
wherewithal many at this day are overcome. Iunius Brutus Consul of Rome,
condemned his two sons Titus and Tiberius to be beheaded, being convicted for
conspiring the reentrie of Tarquinius race unto the kingdom of Rome, from
whence they had been vanquished for wickedness and whoredom. Truly a notable
example, and clean contrary to those that are favorers and accepters Phocion.
of persons. Phocion refused to help his son in law Charillus in judgment,
being accused for taking certain money unjustly, saying unto him: that he had
made him his Alexander.
Allie in all just and reasonable matters only. Alexander the Great used this
commendable custom as he sat in place of Justice to hear criminal causes
pleaded, that whilst the accuser declared his accusation, he stopped one of
his ears with his hand, to the end he might keep it pure and upright, not
admitting thereinto (as he gave them to understand) any preiudicate or false
impression, that so he might hear the accused party speak in his own defense
and justification. Truly an example meet for kings and princes, that they
should not lightly believe slaunderers, nor give sentence of execution
presently upon their report and persuasion: because they ought not to take
pleasure, or to glut themselves as it were, with some pleasant pastime, in the
corrections and punishments of men, which is the property of a tyrant. Neither
ought they, after the punishment is inflicted, to repent them thereof, which is
a token of ignorance, and baseness of mind: but Justice must see execution
done when reason and judgment require, and that without either grief or
pleasure. Augustus* Augustus.
Caesar knowing that Asprenas a very familiar friend of his, was accused in
judgment, and fearing that if he went to the place where the matter was to be
heard, he should offer wrong to Justice, as also that if he went not, he should
seem to abandon his friend, as judging him culpable: he asked counsel of the
Senate, with whom he resolved to be present at the judgment of his friend, but
to speak nothing, because in so doing he should neither do him wrong, nor
violate justice. Agesilaus king of Lacedemonia Agesilaus.
deserved likewise great praise for this virtue, albeit he were a very assured
friend to his friend, and of a gentle nature, ready to employ himself in the
behalf of all them that stood in need of him. Nevertheless, when a friend of
his contended with him about a matter, which he desired to obtain of this
prince, saying, that he had made him a promise thereof: If the thing (quoth he)
be just, I have promised it; but if it be unjust, I have not promised, but
only spoken it. He used also to say, that he esteemed Prowes without Justice
is worth nothing.
Justice as chief of all the virtues, and that valor was of no value if it
were not joined therewith, yea, would be needless if all men were just. And
when certain men who were sent unto him to confer about some agreement, said
one day unto him, that the great King would have it so: wherein (quoth he unto
them) is he greater than I, if he be not more just? Whereby he judged very
well, that the difference between a great and a little king The difference
between a great and a little king.
ought to be taken from justice, as from a kingly measure and rule, according
unto which they ought to govern their subjects, seeing they were at the first
established to do justice, as Herodotus speaking of the Medes, and Cicero of
the Romans, make mention. This is that which a poor Phillip.
old woman signified to Phillip king of Macedonia, when she came to him to have
her complaint heard. To whom when the king made answer that he had no leisure
at that time to hear her, she cried with a loud and clear voice, Be not then
king, Whereupon this meek prince (by which name he said he had rather be
called for a long time, than by the name of Lord for a little while) was so
touched at the heart with the consideration of his duty, that he returned
presently into his palace, where, setting aside al other affairs, he gave
himself many days to hear all their complaints and requests that would come
before him, beginning first with the said poor woman. Another time being
overtaken with sleep, and not well hearing the justification and defense of
one Machetas, he condemned him in a certain sum. Whereupon the said party
cried out aloud, that he appealed to Phillip after he should be thoroughly
awake. Which being noted by the said Prince, he would needs hear him again:
and afterward declared him not guilty, paying notwithstanding with his own
money that sum wherein he had before condemned him, that so he might keep
inviolable the authority of Traianus.
his sentence. The emperor Traian is justly commended of Historiographers,
because he alighted from his horse, as he was going to war, only to hear the
complaint which a poor woman was about to make unto him. And truly nothing
does so properly belong unto, or is so well beseeming a prince of a good and
gentle nature, as the practice and exercise of Justice. Therefore when the
Hebrews asked ^. ^am. 8. 5.
a king of Samuel, they added this, To judge us like all nations. Yea these
heads which had the sovereignty over the^ before were only in the nature of
Judges. It is Justice only, What causes kingdoms to flourish.
which through the grace of God causes kingdoms and monarchies to flourish: as
Archidamus did very well signify to one, who asked of him what were those
governors of the Lacedemonian commonwealth, by whose means it was maintained
in such and so great glory as was then to be seen. They are (said he) the laws
first, and next the magistrates observing the laws. Moreover the law must be
the rule of Justice, as Justice is the end of the law. In some other place we
shall understand more at large by the grace of God, what the law is, and how we
are to obey it, where also we will consider particularly of the duty of
magistrates, and of their dignity. In the mean time let us mark well for our
instruction the notable sayings and examples of ancient men here mentioned of
us, which do sufficiently testify unto us how greatly they recommended the
preservation of this virtue of Justice. Whereof if we believe (as the truth is)
that God is the author, that he does continually God is the author of Justice.
exercise the same amongst us by visible testimonies, and that he will bring it
to a full periode and perfection at the appointed time, which is only known to
him, let us take good heed that we neither contemn nor violate it. Let such as
are decked with diademes for the administration of Justice, who nevertheless
commit this duty to others under them, make choice of sufficient and able men
to bear so heavy a charge, I mean able, both What manner of men magistrates
ought to be.
for their learning, and also for their good example of life. Otherwise let them
be sure, that this great Judge will require at their hands the wrong that is
offered to innocency. One mean whereby the abuse of Justice may be taken away.
To meet with which inconvenience, and to take away the cause of so many abuses
and naughty dealings, which now a days are known to such as are most
ignorant, to the utter overthrow of a million of poor families, I think that
this is one of the best and surest means, not to leave Justice, which is so
precious a thing, to the license of any whosoever will take it upon him,
whereby it is set to open sale, as it were some merchandise of small account.
Which dealing (that I may speak my mind freely) gives occasion, The
inconvenience that comes by setting offices to sale. Exodus 18.
yea constrains those men to take bribes, and to be covetous, who (according
to the counsel of Iethro given to Moses) ought to be farthest from it. For so
long as the places of judgment shall be vendible, and bestowed upon him that
offreth most, we shall always see that for money, such as are most ignorant,
worst livers and unworthiest will be the first and chiefest. Now what justice
can be hoped for of such men? For after they are once placed therein, the
chiefest respect is to reap gain, profit and advantage, according to that
value and rate of money which they laid out upon it. Did my office cost me so
much? than it must be thus much worth unto me. For if I had employed my money
elsewhere, I might have had thus much of revenues and inheritance. Truly this
saying full of impiety never caused them to blush that have uttered it sundry
times, although it has wrought the same effect in many The saving of Alexander
and Jews the 12.
that have heard it. The Emperor Alexander, and after him Jews the 12. used
this speech long since by way of prophecy, That buyers of Offices would sell
by retaile as dear as they could that which they bought in gross. And for
this cause a wise Politician of our time has written very learnedly, that they
which set to sale estates, offices and benefices, sell withal the most sacred
thing in the world, which is Justice. They sell the commonwealth, they sell
the blood of the subjects, they sell the laws: and taking away the reward of
honor, of virtue, of knowledge, of godliness, of religion, they open a gate to
thefts, to bribes, to covetousness, to injustice, to ignorance, to impiety: in
a word, to Against buyers of offices.
all kind of vice and filthiness. Neither do I doubt but that they which buy
them are as greatly to be reproved and blamed, as those that sell them:
because they minister life and nourishment, as much as in them lies, to this
monstrous Hydra of covetousness and lucre, which sucketh up and deuoureth the
substance of the poor. But they will say, if we lay not out our money
hereupon, others will do it that are as well provided with coin, and yet
peradventure are not so zealous of Justice as we are. What? will thou do evil
for fear least another should do it before thee? Besides, if thou considerest
thy self well, what leads thee hereunto but ambition or covetousness? And if
peradventure some one among an hundred is touched with a good desire to profit
and to serve his country, what can he do alone amongst ten that are corrupted?
But let this be spoken without offense to good men, who for the most part
bewail their estate and condition being in such company. And let not such
buiers of offices think, that because of their bought estates they deserve any
honor, (if for other respects they are not worthy) which is the reward of
virtue only: but rather let them know, that they deceive themselves no less
than those men did, who thought to fly with the golden wings of Euripides:
making that thing of the heauiest matter that could be, which ought to be most
light. The Emperor Aurelianus was so Aurelianus.
fearful of placing an unworthy man in the seat of judgment, that he never
preferred any to the dignity of a Senator, but with the consent of the whole
Senate. But to end our speech, we will hold this, that nothing is more
necessary to guide and to order the life of man to her proper and happy end,
than the virtue of Justice: which being taken from amongst us, all other
virtues sequester themselves far from us, giving place to the perturbations of
our souls, which draw us into ruin and confusion. And A mean to preserve
policies.
when as the greater sort being well instructed in their duty, bestow the
administration of Justice upon those men only that deserve it, opening that
gate unto them only for their virtue, then do they put in ure the first point
requisite for the preservation of their estates, namely, the recompensing of
good men. This will cause every one to seek out the way that leads to
virtue, whose property it is to bring men to honor. And from this good
beginning will proceed the other point no less necessary, being the entire
ornament and preservation of Justice, namely, the punishment of the wicked: so
that all things shall be maintained in good order, to the benefit, rest, profit
and greatness of this French monarchy.


Of Injustice, and of Severity. Chap. 38.
ACHITOB. A pretty comparison.
AS there is but one only way to hitte the white, and many to miss it, by
shooting either higher or lower than is requisite: so fares it with our
actions, which cannot be good but after one sort, but are evil many ways.
This is that which Every virtue is in the midst of two vices.
we noted before in discoursing of three principal virtues, called Moral,
which consist in the midst of two vices, namely: too little and too much. And
this may also be noted in the fourth of those virtues, whereof we entreated
even now, whose defect and contrary vice is Injustice, and her excess and
counterfeit follower is Severity. Of which vices, according to the order begun
by us, we are now to discourse. This matter therefore I leave to you my
Companions.


ASER. They make themselves guilty of great Injustice, who being appointed of
God to persecute the wicked with the sword drawn, will (forsooth) keep their
hands clean from blood, whereas the wicked in the mean while commit murder,
and offer violence uncontrolled. But it is no less cruelty to punish no
offense, than not to forgive any in whomsoever it be: the one being an abuse of
clemency, the true ornament of a sovereign: and the other, to turn
authority into tyranny. Nevertheless Magistrates in the execution of Justice
ought to take great heed, least by ouer-great severity they hurt more than
they heal.


AMANA. As a Goldsmith can make what vessel he will, when the dross is taken
from the silver: so when the froward man is taken away from the kings presence,
his How the thrones of kings may be established in justice.
throne shall be established in Justice. Notwithstanding the seat of a Judge
that is too severe, seems to be a gibbet already erected. But we shall
understand of thee ARAM, the nature and effects of these vices, Injustice, and
Severity.


ARAM. None are so perverse, nor given over so much to the desires and
concupiscences of their flesh, that they can utterly deface through oblivion
the knowledge of good and evil, or the inward apprehension of some divine All
men have some knowledge of good and evil, and some inward sense of a divine
nature.
nature, both which are joined together in all men. Insomuch that by reason of
that which urges them within their souls, they are constrained to confess
themselves culpable for their unjust deeds before the judicial throne of this
Deity. Therefore with what impudency soever the wicked outwardly gloze their
corrupt dealings, as if they gloried in them, yet seeing they have, as well by
the testimony of their conscience, as by proof and experience, this knowledge
even against their wills, that Injustice is unfruitful, barren, and ungrateful,
bringing forth The fruits of Injustice in the wicked.
nothing worthy of any account, after many great labors and travels which it
affoordeth them, the remembrance of their vnpure deeds abateth their courage,
and makes it full of trouble and confusion. So that although a corrupt and
naughty man, during the sway of his vicious passion, persuades himself, that
by committing a wicked and execrable deed, he shall enjoy some great and assured
contentation, yet the heat, thirst, and fury of his passion being ouerpassed,
nothing remains but vile and perilous perturbations of Injustice, nothing
that is either profitable, necessary, or delectable. Moreover, this troubles
his mind, that through his dishonest desires he has filled his life with
shame, danger, distrust, and terror of the just judgment of God. For these
causes the Philosophers speaking of Injustice, said very well, that there was
no vice whereof a man ought to be more ashamed than of that, because it is a
malice and naughtines that has no excuse. For seeing men have this inward
sense and feeling, that their very thoughts do accuse or absolve them before
God, they ought to make account thereof, as of a watchman that watches and
prieth into them to discover all those things which they would gladly hide if
they could. This caused Cicero to say, that it is more against nature to spoil
another man, and to see one man to increase his riches by the hurt of another,
than either death, or poverty, or grief, or any loss of goods, belonging
either to the body or to fortune. And if a good man neither may nor ought for
Virtue is to be preferred before all worldly things.
profit sake, to slander, deceive, lie, or execute any such like thing: it is
certain, that there is nothing in this world of so great value, no treasure so
precious, which should move us to forgo the brightness and name of virtuous
Injustice is a general vice.
and just. Now, as we learned before, that Justice was a general virtue, so
Injustice also comprehends all those vices whereinto men commonly fall. For
this is Injustice, not to give to every one that which belongs unto him. In
respect of God it takes the name of Impiety, in regard of men, of denial of
rights and laws. Our discourse is of this latter, which brings forth
pernicious effects after diverse manners, destroying all duties of honesty. But
not to stay ouer-long in the kinds of Injustice, we will note How many ways a
man may be unjust.
this, that we are so many ways guilty of Injustice, as we deny to our
neighbors those duties which we owe unto them, and which our vocation
requires of us: as also when we seek to enrich our selves by their
hinderance, whether it be openly, or by sinister and subtle means against
christian sincerity, which ought to shine in all our dealings. Let us see how
the Ancients hated this vice, and spoke of the pernicious effects thereof. No
man (says Socrates) ought to commit any unjust act, how small soever it be,
for any treasure, wealth, or profit, which he may hope to reap thereby:
because all the treasures of the earth are not to be compared to the least
virtue of the soul. For this cause all men jointly ought to have this one end
and intent, that when they profit themselves, they should also be beneficial
to every one. For if all men should have respect but to their own, their
unity would soon be dissolved. And although it were so (said Cato) that
Injustice did procure no peril to him that does practice it, yet would it to
all others. Plato calls it a corruption of the soul, and a civil sedition
which never loses strength, no not in those that have it only within
themselves. For it causes a wicked man to be at variance within himself. It
urges, troubles, and turmoileth him continually, until it have plunged him
in the gulf of all vices: whereupon afterward he easily ouerfloweth in all
impiety, not caring for any thing but to satisfy his unbridled desires. And
if it fall out that they who have the sword in hand to correct Injustice, do
either authorize or practice it themselves, then is the gate of all miseries
opened upon every one, through the unruly license of the wicked, who wallow in
all kind of cruelty: from whence all disorder and confusion proceeds, to the
utter ruin and final subversion of most flourishing towns and cities, and in
the end, of empires, kingdoms and monarchies. Thus does Injustice disanull the
force of laws, which are the foundation of every estate: it is an enemy to
good men, and the Guardian and Tutor of the wicked. Briefly, it brings forth
all effects contrary to those which we mentioned to be the fruits of Justice,
and is the welspring of the other vices that hinder duty. Is it not Injustice
that The effects of Injustice.
gives authority to murders, robberies, violent dealings, and to other
damnable vices, which at this day are unpunished, and are the cause that of
many great, goodly, and welthy families, poor widows only and orphans quite
undone, do remain, crying for vengeance, and expecting it from above, for the
wrong that is offered to their innocence? How many such are set before our
eyes by histories, which are the light of truth? But alas the unhappiness of our
age is grown to greater measure. How many of the greater sort, I mean of the
Governors and Magistrates of this desolate kingdom, may justly challenge that
praise, whereby Pericles, Captain and Governor of the Pericles.
Athenians, thought himself more honored, than by all his brave exploits done
in his life time, either in war, or in politic government, wherein he was
the chiefest of his time, and which his friends laid before his eyes, being
ready to die, thereby to assure him, and to cause him to rejoice in a true
immortality of glory? O my friends (said he unto them) Fortune has had her
part in those exploits: but I make greater account of this, that I never caused
any of my Countrymen A notable example for every civil Magistrate
to lament, or to wear a mourning gown, which only thing ought to be
attributed to my virtue. O excellent and honorable praise, which every good man
ought to seek after, and to desire: namely, to be no cause of bringing sorrow
and grief to the commonwealth through any act of Injustice. Moreover this
virtuous Athenian died willingly and without repining, taking delight in an
acceptable remembrance of those good turns, which he had done to his
countrymen. But contrariwise it will be a very hard matter for others, who
have been the cause of many evils to their country, and for all those that
delight in committing injustice, not to die in great fear, horror, and
trembling, tormented with remorse of conscience for Why the life of the wicked
cannot be happy.
their life past. The whole course whereof cannot be much more happy, seeing
every wicked act ingendring it own torment from the very instant wherein it is
committed, through the continual remembrance thereof fills the soul of the
malefactor with shame and confusion, with freights and perturbations, with
repinings and terrible disquietnes of spirit. This is that which Plutarke
says, That every wicked man committing a trespass, is the prisoner of Justice
as soon as he has done it. This life is his prison, out of which he has no
mean to depart, or to fly, but is to receive the execution of that sentence
which is given against him by A comparison.
the sovereign Judge. And if in the mean time he feast it out, send presents
and gifts, yea if he solace himself with sundry sports, delights and
pleasures, it is all one as if condemned men that were prisoners should play at
dice and cards, and use other pastime, with the halter over their heads
wherewith they must be strangled. But there are many men that cannot be better
compared than to little children, who seeing men worth nothing, to dance and
play upon a Theater, apparelled with cloth of gold and silver, A comparison.
or with other rich garments, and crowned with precious ornaments, have them in
great estimation and admiration, and thinking them happy, until in the end
they see them pierced through with great thrusts of a spear, or hewn in
pieces with swords, or behold fire coming out The wrong conceit which men have
of the wicked that prosper.
of those goodly precious robes of gold, which consumes them. The self same
thing is done by them, who when they see many wicked men, either placed in
great authority and dignity, or descending of good and famous houses, they
honor, admire, and esteem them the happiest men and most at ease in the world:
never considering that they are chasticed and punished for their offenses,
before they see the^ either put to death, or else quite fallen from the height
of their fortune. Now seeing it is a thing flatly confessed of those that have
any knowledge of our Philosophy, and proved sufficiently by our former
discourse, that nothing can be called honorable or profitable which proceeds
of injustice, or of malice, that excuse, which men given over to vice, do
commonly allege to cloak their impiety withal, namely, that Injustice
brings with it very ripe and ready fruit, and that the punishment if there
be any, comes very late, and long time after the delight taken by the
offense, has no more any show of reason in it. For, as we have already
learned, the punishment of any sin is equal with it both for age and time.
Furthermore God The punishment of sin is equal with it both for age and time.
permits oftentimes his divine judgment to be publicly known and showed
upon the unjust: yea he declares himself so much the more openly, by how much
the less men exercise Justice and upright dealind. And yet in respect of his
majesty, we must not look unto time, which is always one and the same to him,
and not future or past: yea the whole continuance of man's life is as nothing
unto All things are present with God.
him, and less than the present instant. But if according to our carnal
senses, we desire examples of the greatness and swiftnes of his wrath, justly
kindled over our heads for our execrable impieties, contrary to the nature of
his gentleness and benignity, which moved him to wait for us a long time,
who can be ignorant of them in the unspeakable affliction of this poor France,
wherein it were very hard in man's judgment to discern, whether is most
lamentable, either injustice, or the misery and calamity, which by the
vengeance of God follows it, the horrible punishment whereof the fautors of
iniquity both have and daily do feel upon their heads? Those commonwealths
(says Cicero) which are ready to be overthrown, and have all things forlorn
and desperate in them, fall into this A sure token of a desperate common-welth.
miserable issue, that they whom the laws condemn are restored, and judgments
given are revoked and broken. And when such things come to pass, let none be
ignorant of this, that destruction is at hand, neither can any man justly
conceive hope of safety. What other thing can The miserable estate of France.
I say of France (I would to God I were deceived) seeing that all Justice is
turned topsie turuie therein, the wicked are placed in authority, and good men
driven away: suites in law are commenced against every one more upon knauerie
than equity, corruption than integrity, favor than vprightnes? But to the end
that the greater sort, and every particular man may open his eyes and behold
this shipwreck that threatens us: let us consider in our Ancestors, through
the reading of histories, the like causes of the ruin, alteration, and
subversion of many very flourishing Estates, proceeding from the reign of
Injustice, which being the daughter of tyranny (as Dionysius the elder said)
must needs be of the same nature: namely, that by usurping an unjust and
intolerable dominion, it must of necessity fall speedily into a miserable and
wretched end. We have in all our former discourses alleged sundry examples
of vices, which (as we said even now) take their beginning, or at least wise
are inseparably joined with Injustice, and hereafter we will make mention of
others, when we handle certain points, which properly depend of this self
same original. In the mean time we The denial of Justice dangerous. Phillip.
will here note that the denial of Justice has procured to many their death
or undoing. Phillip the first, king of Macedonia, was slain by Pausanias a
mean Gentleman, because he would not let him have Justice against Antipater,
Demetrius
who had offered him wrong. Demetrius the besieger, having received many
requests and supplications of his subjects, threw them all into the water, as
he went over the bridge of a river: whereupon his subjects conceived such
hatred against him, that within a while after his army forsook him, and
yielded themselves to Pyrrhus his enemy, who drove him out of his kingdom
without battle. Henry king of Sweathland.
In our time, Henry king of Sweathland, striking with a dagger a Gentleman
that asked Justice of him, stirred up the Nobility and people in such sort
against him, that putting him into prison, where he is at this present, they
elected his yoonger brother to be their king, who now reigns. But for a more
wonderful matter, we might here rehearse, how God, to show unto us his
detestation of Injustice, has sometimes suffered his judgment to fall out in
that very hour and time, which such as were unjustly condemned did assign to
their unjust Judges. In the lives of the kings of Castile, we find that
Ferdinando the A notable historic of the death of Ferdinando the 4.
fourth of that name, putting two knights to death more through anger than
justly, one of them cried aloud in this sort: O unjust king, we cite thee to
appear within thirty days before the tribunal seat of Jesus Christ to
receive judgment for thy Injustice, seeing there is no other Judge in earth to
whom we can appeal from thy unjust sentence. Upon the last of which days he
died likewise. True it is, some man may say, that death is so natural, and the
hour thereof so uncertain, although determined, that no other cause thereof
ought to be supposed, but only necessity. But yet when it follows so
nearly some notable wickedness committed, and some disquietnes and torment of
mind is mingled therewith in the soul, as it commonly falls out, we may take
such a death for a testimony and beginning of the Justice of God, who will not
suffer the unjust man to rule any longer, but exercises his judgments
diversely in due time and season, upon those that are not to give an account of
their doings to men like themselves. And as for such as are of meaner estate,
and lower in degree, God suffers also many times their punishment to be
notorious, and that sometime by such as are not much better than themselves.
Hereupon Apollonius that great Philosopher said, that in his peregrination
over three parts of the world, he marvelled most at two things, whereof the
first was, that he always saw the greater thieves hang the less, and
oftentimes the innocent. And thus it fell out in the time of king Phillip the
Notable Injustice committed by a Provost of Paris.
long, wherein a Provost of Paris, named Henry Lapperell, caused a poor man
that was prisoner in the Chastelet to be executed, by giving him the name of a
rich man, who being guilty and condemned, was set at liberty by him. But his
reward followed him hard at the heels: being for the same accused, convicted,
hanged, and strangled. Not long after a President of the Parliament, named
Hugues Hugues of Crecy.
of Crecy, met with the same fortune, for a certain corrupt judgment given by
him. Therefore let every one of us learn to fly from this pernicious vice of
Injustice: namely, from every action repugnant to the duty of christian
charity, and destroying the bond of humane society, through the utter
spoiling of the rivers that flow from the fountain of honesty. And let us be
afraid through such impiety to fall into the indignation and wrath of the
Almighty, to whom only (as to the author of Justice, and to whom all time
is as nothing) it belongs to define and to determine thereof, when, after
what sort, and how far it stands with reason, all which things are unknown
to us. If he defer sometime the punishment of Injustice, let us know, that it
is for their greater and more grievous condemnation, who multiply and heap up
daily upon their heads iniquity upon iniquity. And for an example, which
great men ought to follow, and not suffer Injustice to be practiced according
to every man's fancy, or under any other pretense whatsoever, we will propound
unto them the fact of a Pagan king, who shall rise up in Artaxerxes.
judgment against them, if they do otherwise. The Prince I mean is
Artaxerxes, surnamed Longhand, and king of the Persians, who being requested by
a Chamberlain of his whom he greatly favored, to do some unjust thing, and
having by his diligence found out, that he undertook this suit for another,
who had promised him thirty thousand Crowns, called of them Dariques, he
commanded his Treasurer to bring the like sum unto him, and then said unto
his Chamberlain, Take this money which I give thee. For in giving it unto thee,
I shall be never the poorer, whereas if I had done that which thou requiredst
of Alexander Seuerus.
me, I should have been more unjust. Alexander Seuerus the Emperor handeled
after another fashion, yea more justly, a servant of his, who used like a
horse-leech of the court to suck their blood that had to deal with his
master, by thrusting himself forward, and profering his means to fulfill their
request for a good reward, by reason of the favor which he bare him: which
turned to the great dishonor of his imperial majesty, because a Prince ought
not to make greater account of any thing, than of the grace and favor of his
gifts and benefits. This monarch caused him to be tied to a post and choked
with smoke, making this proclamation by sound of trumpet, The punishment of one
who sold his masters favor*
That they which sell smoke, should so perish with smoke. Now to enter into the
last point of that matter which is here propounded unto us, we must diligently
note, that as it is the duty of all Magistrates, and of such as have
authority over others to chastise and to punish every malefactor, so likewise
they must beware lest under pretense of exercising Justice they fall into
another kind of Injustice through overmuch rigor, which is as hurtful or
rather more than that vice whereof we discoursed even now, namely, into
Severity, which causes them to be misliked for cruelty, Of Severity.
and belongs rather to a beastly and savage nature, than to the nature of
man. For clemency and compassion never ought to be separated from a good and
just sentence, which is to hold small faults excused, or but lightly to punish
the^, provided always that Justice be not violated. Clemency Clemency
preserves a prince his throne. Prou. 20. 28.
(says the wise man) is the true preservation of the roial throne. And
therefore one of the ancients said, that it was ill to be subject to a prince
under whom nothing was tolerated, but worse when all things were left at
randon. We may allege here for an example of ouer-great severity, the fact of
Manlius Torquatus a Consul of Rome, who caused his M. Torquatus*
sons head to be cut off, because he fought against his enemy body to
body, contrary to the Edicts, and out of his rank, albeit he came away
victor. The act of Ausidius Ausidius.
the Roman was more cruel and barbarous than just, when he slew his son for
withdrawing himself to take part with Catiline: vttring this speech unto him:
I did not, wretch as thou art, beget thee for Catiline, but for thy country.
Such murders and cruelties deface all the commendation of Justice, whose ways
ought to be ordinary and usual, ruling rigor with gentleness, as the rigor of
discipline ought to moderate gentleness, that the one may be commended by the
other. Seneca rehearses a crueller fact than any of the former, committed by
Piso the Proconsul, who seeing a souldior return alone to the camp, condemned
him to Most cruel seucritie of Piso.
withstanding he affirmed that his fellow came after him. At the very instant
of the execution his companion came, whereupon the captain that had charge to
see the condemned party executed, returned to the Proconsul with both the
soldiers. But Piso being offended therewith, put them all three to death: the
first, because he was condemned: the second, because he was the cause of the
condemnation: and the captain, because he obeyed not: so that he put three to
death for the innocence of one man, abusing his authority and power in most
cruel manner, what soever rigor was used in those times in the ordinance of
warlike discipline. Now to take from us all taste of such Augustus Caesar.
barbarousnesse, let us call to mind an act of Augustus Caesar worthy of
eternal praise, who would not condemn one that was accused of seeking his
death, because the arguments and proofs were insufficient, but left him to the
judgment of God. Let us learn therefore for the conclusion of our discourse to
hate all kind of Injustice in such sort, that every one of us seek to profit
his neighbor, rating at an high price (as Euripi* says) the violating of
right, which is holy and sacred. And thus through the good order of
magistrates, and reformation of every one by himself, the wicked shall have no
means to rob, to spoil by force, to take bribes, and to deceive others, when
breakers of just laws shall be punished. Then will the effect of those two
sentences take place which are taken out of the holy scriptures, and written in
a table in the great chamber of the palace belonging to the head city of this
kingdom, and which ought to be well engraven in the hearts of all Judges: the
first sentence is contained in these words, Execute judgment and
righteousness: or otherwise I Ier. 22. 3. 5.
have sworn by my self (says the Lord) that this house shall be waste. The
other sentence is this: O ye Judges, take heed what 2. Chr. 19. 6.
ye do: for ye execute not the judgments of man, but of the Lord: Matthew. 7. 2.
and with what judgment ye judge, ye shall be judged. For truly the crown of
praise and immortal glory is kept and prepared for them that walk in truth
and righteousness, but shame and dishonor, with eternal fire for those that
persevere in unrighteousness.


Of Fidelity, Forswearing, and of Treason. Chap. 39.
ARAM. SVch is the corruption of our age, wherein impiety and malice are come
in place of ancient innocence, that virtue seems very unfit to be received
and employed in affairs, seeing the gate Of the corruption of our age.
is quite shut up against hit. So that a man might aptly say, that whosoever
should think to bring back again, amidst the perverse lives and corrupt
manners of this present time, the uprightness and integrity of ancient
behauior, he did as much as if he offered fruits out of season, When virtue
seems to be out of season.
which being fair in sight, were notwithstanding unfit to be used.
Nevertheless we must not doubt to bring her in sight, and to maintain her
with all our power, who knows how to cause her enemy Vice both to reverence
and fear her, and in the end also to triumph over him, mauger all the power
and vnder-propping, which he receives from the wicked. In the midst therefore
of so many trecheries and treasons, whereof men glory now adays, let us not be
afraid to paint them out in their colors, thereby giving honor to Fidelity,
which is a part of Justice, or rather Justice it self: which I leave to you my
companions to make plain unto us.


ACHITOB. It is impiety to violate faith. For God who is truth, detesteth all
lying: and is a terrible revenger of the contempt of his name. To love or to
hate openly (says Cicero) does better beseem a noble heart, than for a man to
hide and to dissemble his will and affection.


ASER. Guile and fraud (says Seneca) are meet weapons for a cowardly and
base-minded man. Therefore we must take good heed (as Pittacus said) That fame
speak not evil of us to them unto whom we have given our faith. But it
belongs to thee AMANA to handle this matter.


AMANA. Amongst the famous and great personages What Faith and Fidelity is.
of old time, no virtue was more commended, or straightlier kept and observed
than Faith and Fidelity, which they affirmed to be the foundation of Justice,
the indissoluble bond of friendship, and the sure supporter of humane society.
Of this Faith we mind now to speak, not touching at all that religious and
sacred faith, concerning the holy mysteries of true piety, which is a singular
gift of God his spirit, and peculiar to those that appertain to his eternal
election. This therefore which respects the mutual conversation and promises
of men, has been always kept unviolable of honorable men, and ought to be so
amongst us: because he that gives his faith, lays to pawn whatsoever is
most precious and divine in his soul. Of the violating of faith.
So that if he forget himself so much as to break and violate the same, he
commits manifest impiety, showing that he cares not to offend God by
abusing his name to Leuit. 19. 12. Deuteronomy. 5. 11.
color his lying. It were a great deal better never to take God to witness,
than to forswear him in mockery: seeing Matthew. 5. 34.
the Scripture so often forbids us to take his name in vain, to swear
falsely by it, or in any sort to defile the same. It is true that this question
has always been, and is at this day more than ever in controversy: namely,
whether a man is bound to perform that which he has Whether a forced promise
is to be kept.
promised and sworn to by compulsion, or no? And this sentence is received and
approved of many, that nothing but our Will binds us to perform those
things, which necessity forces us to promise. But to speak according to
truth, and without any particular passion, we say, that true and perfect
magnanimity suffers us not to promise any thing, and to pawn our faith
thereunto, except we were willing to perform it: because no virtuous and A
wise man must never promise any thing against duty.
wise man ought to forget himself so far, as to do or to promise any thing
contrary to his duty for any necessity, no not for death it self. Neither is
there any thing whereby a fool is sooner discerned from a wise man, than by
promises: forasmuch as an indiscreet man lightly promises whatsoever you
will, and oftentimes more than is required of him: but a man of good judgment
weighs his speech with sense and reason, before he gage it to any body, and
having once given his word, he reuoketh it not, what loss or damage soever
may ensue thereof, as he that esteems a great deal more of the honor of
truth and fidelitic, than of his own life, being touched Psalm. 15. 4.
with untruth and perjury. And if it were lawful for every one to allege
necessity or constraint, thereby to cloak the breach of faith, to whom might
a man trust in any matter? Who doubts but that all agreements made between
men, whether in time of war or of peace, or in any particular affairs
between party and party, are grounded upon a benefit, which every one
supposes to be necessary and profitable for himself, and so consequently
that they ought not to be kept? Who doubts but that the breach of them may
easily be colored with the like necessity, and so under this goodly pretense
of false right and equity should be allowed? But what? May we be judges for
our selves, and in our own cause? First our adverse parties to whom we are
bound must be called, and must agree with us of Judges to determine of our
promises, whether they were lawful or unlawful, forced and necessary or no:
according to the law, which releaseth a man of his promise if it be unjust or
unreasonable, or if it be too burdensome unto him, or if he were circumuented
by deceit, fraud, error, force, just fear, or grievous hurt. But when we are
both judge and party, and in stead of justice seek after force and violence,
it is soon seen, that all show of excusing the breach of faith given, is
only grounded upon malice and subtlety. This did Lysander Lysander a
forsworn and deceitful man.
admiral of the Lacedaemonians usually practice, who made no reckoning of
Justice but when it was profitable, accounting only profit to be honesty, and
saying, that children must be deceived with the play of cock-all, and men with
oaths. Which kind of dealing argues a man to be in truth worse in behauior
toward God, than toward his enemies: because he that beguileth his enemy
through the means of fidelity sworn unto him, does sufficiently testify,
that he fears him, and dares not discover unto him that which lies hid in
his heart: and yet in the mean time he has no reverence or fear of the divine
majesty from which nothing is hid, but uses that for a covering We must keep
promise with our enemy.
and mask of his wickedness. We must (says Cicero) keep that promise
unviolable, which we have made to our enemy, albeit the mishaps of war have
constrained us to yield unto it. How much less therefore ought we to break our
faith given to Of the neglect of fidelity comes a custom of lying.
our friends, and to those of whom we never received any thing but profit and
pleasure? Through this neglect of faith we fill our souls with lying,
nourishing and delighting them therein, and separating them far from the truth
(the fountain of all goodness) to lie unto our neighbors, to deceive and
beguile them in those things, which we are able to perform, thereby destroying
the bond of humane society, yea of nature it self, which binds us both to
will and to procure their good. This is that which Epenetus the Lacedemonian
would teach us, when he said, that liers were the cause of all the sins and
crimes in the world. And therefore Plutarke also says, That to lie is a servile
vice worthy to be hated of all, and not to be pardoned in any, no not in
slaves themselves. All they (says Cicero) that speak one thing, and mean
another, ought to be taken for faithless, wicked and malicious men: whereas a
good man will neither feign nor dissemble in any sort, either to buy better
cheap or to sell deerer. It is not the point of a plain, open and sincere
man, or of him that is just and virtuous, to conceal from the buyer the It is
wickedness to conceal the fault of that which a man sells.
fault of that thing which he sells, but rather of a malicious, deceitful,
crafty, subtle, and wicked man. And if this be a vice and sin, not to declare
the fault of that thing which is sold, how shall they be termed, who use a
thousand words and lies to set forth their merchandice? Whereas good men have
always been very scrupulous and precise in keeping the truth from all kind of
pollution, as that which ought to be as well in the heart as in the mouth, in the
works as in the words of every honest man. But if Lying in a prince is most
odious.
lying procure blame and dishonor to al men, it does much more to kings and
princes. For seeing they are placed in such authority, that they may do what
pleases them, what need they to lie? If Machiauell and his followers, favorers
of tyranny, had well waighed that which we read in infinite places of
scripture, that God will overthrow dissemblers and liers, with all their lies
and subtilties, hardly could they commend dissimulations, deceits, trecheries,
and such like pranks, wherewith they seek to poison the noble minds of good
princes, to cause the^ to degenerate both from their natural disposition, and
from the steps of such virtuous men as have gone before them. And to this
purpose I remember a decision of right concerning princes, which deserves to
be graven in letters of gold within their lodgings and palaces: namely, That if
the prince go against his promise, it ought to be reckoned amongst the cases
that fall out by chance, neither may any man suppose the contrary. For the
obligation is double: the one in respect of natural equity, which will have
covenants and promises kept: The promise of a prince is tied with a double bond.
the other in regard of the Prince his faith, which he must observe inviolable,
although he receive loss thereby, because he is the formal Warrantie unto all
his subjects, of that fidelity which is amongst themselves: so that no fault
is more detestable in a Prince than perjury. For if he that is debtor and
pledge for justice be disloiall, there is no more trust to be given to him in
all his oaths: but if he be upright, his bare word ought to be unto him for a
Of the word and faith of a prince
law, and his faith for an Oracle. God himself (says the master of the
sentences) is bound by his promise. Gather together (says he) all the nations
of the earth, that they may judge between me and my people, if there be any
thing which I ought to have done, and have not performed it. What is he then
that will call in question, whether a Prince is bound to that which he has
sworn to and promised, seeing all sovereign power is no less bound to the
laws of God and of nature, than the simplest that is subject thereunto? If
faith ought not to be kept with enemies, it is not to be given unto them: and
if it be lawful to capitulate with them, it is as necessary to keep promise.
Yea we may further add, that perjury is not to be revenged or called in
question, after that peace and agreement together is made: otherwise there
would never be any assurance of peace, or end of perjury. From the self same
fountain of the profanation of faith, and custom in lying (it being the
property of vice to engender another vice for a punishment of it self)
proceeds that pernicious Of Treason.
plague of kingdoms and Commonwealths, I mean Treason, hated of God and men,
wherewith perjured persons being bewitched, fear not to betray themselves, so
they may betray others also, and their country. Whereupon they become odious
to every one, even to those who used them to serve their own turns in
disloyal and wicked actions, and in the end they receive the reward due to
their execrable impieties. For this is the common affection that men bear
toward such people, so to seek them out (which notwithstanding is not the
property of a noble heart) when they stand in fear of them, as they that want
gall, or the poison of some venomous beasts: afterward to give them over and to
reject because of their wickedness. If a man be called slothful, he may become
diligent: if talkatiue, hold his peace: if a glutton, temperate himself: if an
adulterer, abstain: if furious, dissemble: if ambitious, stay himself: if a
sinner, amend: but he that is once called a traitor, there is no water to wash
him clean, nor mean to excuse himself. Notable examples.
Now, let us come to the examples of the Ancients, and know what zeal they
bare to fidelity and hatred, to perjury and treason, as also what recompense
commonly followed and accompanied such things, and with what reward
noble-minded men did requite those that were A. Regulus.
disloiall and traitorous. Attilius Regulus, a Roman of great credit, being
taken prisoner in the Carthaginian war, and sent to Rome upon his faith to
entreat about a peace and the exchange of captives, so soon as he arrived,
gave clean contrary advice in the Senate: showing that it was not for the
profit of the Commonwealth to make such an agreement. Afterward, having
resolved with himself to keep faith with the enemy, he returned to Carthage,
where he was put to death very cruelly. For his eie-lids being cut off, and
himself bound to an engine, he died with the force of waking. Demaratus king
of Sparta, Demaratus.
being in Persia with the king, against whom a great man of Persia had
rebelled, was the means of their reconciliation. Afterward this barbarian king
having his said Vassaile in his power, would have been revenged of him,
thinking to put him to death. But the virtuous Lacedemonian turned him from it,
declaring unto him, that it would redound to his great shame, not to know how
to punish him for his rebellion when he was his enemy, and now to put him to
death being his servant and friend. A reason truly well worthy to be marked,
but very slenderly put in ure at this day. Augustus having made proclamation
Augustus.
by sound of trumpet, that he would give 25000. Crowns to him that should take
Crocotas ringleader of the thieves in Spain, he offered himself to the
Emperor, and required the sum promised by him, which he caused to be paid
him, and pardoned him withal, to the end no man should think that he would
take his life from him, thereby to frustrate him of the promised recompense: as
also because he would have public faith and safety kept to every one that
came according to order of Justice: although in truth he might have proceeded
and given out process against him. Cato the elder being in war against Cato.
the Spaniards, was in great danger by reason of the multitude of enemies, who
sought to enclose him round about. And not being then in possibility to be
succored of any but of the Celtiberians, who demanded of him 200. Talents
(which are 120000. Crowns) in hand for their wages, the Council told him,
that it was not by any means to be gotten presently, but yet promised to
furnish them with such a sum, and that within any time which they would
appoint: otherwise that it was more expedient not to meddle with them. But this
wise and well advised captain used this occasion to very good purpose, by
resolving with himself and with his soldiers, either to overcome their
enemies, or else to die, (after they had agreed with the Celtiberians) that the
Roman glory should not be stained by the falsehood of their promises. For
(quoth he to his soldiers) if we get the battle, we will pay them, not of our
own, but at the charges of our enemies: but if we loose the victory, none
will be left alive either to pay, or to demand any payment. There was no talk
among the Council of these noble Romans, how they might deceive their
enemies, or those whose service they were urged to use, but they determined
rather to die, than to be wanting in their promise. Likewise we may note, that
as their enterprises Perjury and faithles persons have always had ill
success.
thus grounded had good success, so perjury and violating of right were
through the vengeance of God pursued for the most part with unhappy effects,
contrary to the platformes and desires of perjured and faithles men: or at
leastwife that themselves were speedily punished Tissaphernes.
for their wickedness. And therefore when Tissaphernes, Lieutena^t to the king
of Persia had broken a truce, which he had made with the Grecians, they gave
him thanks by his own Herald, because he had placed the Gods, in whose name
the truce was sworn, on their side. And in deed he smally prospered after
that in his enterprises. Cleomenes.
Cleomenes king of Lacedemonia, having taken a truce for seven days with the
Argians, assaulted them the third night after, knowing that they were in a
sound sleep, and discomfited them: which he did under this crafty subtletie,
because (forsooth) in the foresaid truce mention was made of the day only, and
not of the night. Whereupon the Grecians noted this as a just judgment of his
perjury and breach of faith, in that he was miraculously frustrated of his
principal intent, which was, by the means of that overthrow to have suddenly
taken the city of Argos. For the women being full of wrath and just grief for
the loss of their husbands, by the cowardly treachery of this Lacedemonian,
took those weapons that were in the said town, and drove him from the walls,
not without great murder and loss of the greatest part of his army. Whereupon
within a while after he became furious, and taking a knife he ripped his body in
smiling manner, and so died. Caracalla the Emperor, traveling with his army
toward Caracalla.
the Parthians, under pretense of marying the daughter of Artabanus their king,
who came for the same purpose to meet him, he set upon him contrary to his
faith, and put him to flight, with an incredible murder of his men. But within
a little after being come down from his horse to make water, he was slain of
his own men: which was noted as a just punishment sent from God for his
unfaithfulness. The Corinthians saw before their eyes The Corinthians.
their cities raced to the ground, because they had offered violence to the
Roman Ambassadors, contrary to the law of nations. The Emperor Justinian
received infinite Iustinianus the Emperor.
losses and damages for breaking his faith with the Barbarians, and for
violating the peace which he had made with the Bulgarians. Which thing procured
him so great hatred of his own subjects, by reason of the unlucky exploits of
war which followed after, that being returned to Constantinople, Leontius
usurped the kingdom upon him, sending him into banishment after he had cut off
his nosethrils. Rastrix Duke of Cleaueland, having falsified Rastrix Duke of
Cleaueland.
his faith with Jews king of Germanye, was put to the woorst and vanquished:
and being prisouer, his eyes were put out for a mark of his faithles dealing.
But what need we search in antiquity for testimonies of the fruits which
commonly proceed from the breach of faith, seeing examples are daily before
our eyes to our cost? What do we behold at this day but a doubling, yea a heap
of all miseries, The cause of the present misery of France.
because faith, which is so precious and exquisite a thing that it admits no
comparison, has so often been valued at so small a price? The history
hereof is but too common, and the truth too apparent (to the great hurt of
every one) to stand upon the proof thereof, whereas it ought rather to be
buried from all memory, if it were possible, as well to deface all spots of
infamy, for which we are blamed of nations farthest of, as to take away the
distrust that one has of an other, which is so great amongst us, that it has
been one principal cause of kindling the fire of division so often in this
desolate kingdom. But to leave such a pitiful matter subject, let us consider
Examples of the entertainment which the ancients gave to traitors. Lasthenes.
what honor and entertainment men in old time gave to traitors, who are now
adays so welcome to the greatest. Lasthenes having helped Phillip king of
Macedonia to become master of the city of Olynthum whereof he was an
inhabitant, and complaining to the king, that certain called him traitor, he
received this only answer: that the Macedonians were naturally rude and gross,
calling a spade a spade, and all things else by their proper name. When
Rymetalces.
Caesar Augustus heard Rymetalces king of Thracia (who had forsaken Antonius to
join with him) boast of his fact, the monarch drinking to others, said with a
loud voice: I love treason well, but I love not traitors. And in truth what man
of any good judgment will trust him? He that betraieth his prince, his
benefactor, his city, his country, his kinsfolks and friends into their hands
to whom he is nothing so much bound, how may not he betray them also another
Agis.
time? This did Agis, son of Archidamas king of Sparta very well signify to
the Ephories, who had commanded him to take the young men of the city with him,
and to go to the country of one whom they would make known unto him, who had
promised to guide and bring them within the castle of his city. What (quoth he
unto them) is it a reasonable matter to commit the safety and Pausanias.
life of so many valiant young men to one that betraieth his country?
Pausanias, captain of the Lacedaemonians having received 500. talents of gold
of king Xerxes, promised to betray the city of Sparta unto him. But his
enterprise being discovered, Agesilaus his father pursued him into a temple
where he thought to have saved himself, and causing the gates thereof to be
walled up, suffered him to die there of hunger: and afterward his mother cast
his body to the dogs, and would not bury it. The like befell to Cassius
Brutus, who would have sold Rome: his father handling him after the same sort.
Darius king of Persia, caused the head of his son Ariobarzanes to be cut off,
because Ariobarzanes.
he sought to betraie his army to Alexander. Brutus did the like to his
children, who had conspired against their country, that king Tarquinius might
reenter into Rome. Mahomet having taken Constantinople through the cowardlines
and treason of John Justinian of Genua, Justinian a Gen^an cause of the taking
of Constantinople.
after he had made him king according to promise, he cut off his head within
three days. A meet recompense for such a wretch, who was the cause of so
great a plague to Christendom, whereby the Emperor Constantius, the Patriarch,
and all the Christians were slain. The Empress with her daughters, and with
the noblest damsels she had, were led before Mahomet, and after a thousand
vilanies offered unto them, their bodies were cut in pieces. True it is that
Histories are diverse touching this fact of Justinian. For some say, that
perceiving himself to be hurt in fight, he fled: whereupon most of the men of
war were discouraged: and that after he had saved himself in the I Will of
Chios, he died, either of his wound, or for grief and sorrow, because he was
the chief cause of so great a mischief to Christendom. Neither may we pass
over in silence the heroical fact of Sultan Solomon the last that died, A
famous and heroical fact of Sultan Solomon.
but propound it to Princes as a pattern of the hatred and punishment of
perjury and treason. For sending a Bascha of his into Valona to pass into
Italy both by sea and land, this General landed at the haven of Castro, where
at the inhabitants being astonished, yielded themselves unto him under his oath
and fidelity, whereby he promised that they should depart, their lives saned,
with bag and baggage. Nevertheless this Barbarian slew them all, except those
whom he saw were fit to serve for slaves. But after his return to
Constantinople, the great Seignior being advertised of his disloialtie, caused
him to be strangled, and sent back all his prisoners with their goods into
Italy. Truly an act worthy such a Prince, who, if he had been endued with
the true knowledge of God and of his Church, deserved the first place amongst
the great ones of his time. Now to end our discourse, let us learn to know the
excellency of faith, which is such a thing, that whosoever lays it in pawn,
binds his safety, his honor, and his soul to him, unto whom he gives it,
and commits manifest impiety against God, when he breaks and violateth
the same: unless he had vowed it for the performance of some wicked deed, with
which both divine and humane law dispense. Let us know also, that it is the
beginning and foundation of a great and notable Cato commended for his truth
virtue to be given to truth, that it was of such credit amongst the Ancients,
that in Cato his time, when any man rehearsed a strange thing and hard to be
believed, this proverb went of him, (because he was known throughout the
whole course of his life to be a lover of truth) This is not credible, although
Cato himself should speak it. And thus by the examples of so many famous men,
let us in such sort be stirred to hate lying, whereof Satan is the father
Ephesians. 4. 25. Luke 10. 37.
and author, that following the counsel of S. Paul, we speak the truth every
one to his neighbor, who is every one that needs our help, and let all
faining and dissimulation be banished from us, and all roundnes and integrity
of heart and manners appear in all our actions: let us hate perjury and
treason, perjured and traitorous persons, knowing that faith being taken away,
the whole foundation of Justice is overthrown, al bonds of friendship broken,
and all humane society confounded.


Of Ingratitude. Chap. 40.
AMANA. AS the remembrance of an evil is kept a long time, because that which
offends is very The memory of evil things is fruitful, but of good things
barren.
hardly forgotten: so we commonly see, that the memory of benefits received is
as suddenly vanished and lost, as the fruit of the good turn is perceived.
Which thing does so ill beseem a man well brought up and instructed in virtue,
that there is no kind of Injustice, which he ought more to eschew. And
therefore my Companions, I think that according to the order of our discourse,
we are now to speak of the vice of Ingratitude, that knowing the ignominy
thereof, and the pernicious effects which flow from it, we may beware of
spotting our life therewithal.


ARAM. An ungrateful person can not be of a noble mind, nor yet just. And
therefore (as Sophocles said) a man is to remember him often of whom he has
received courtesy and pleasure. For one good turn begets another, and every
gentle heart easily pardons all injuries, except unthankfulness, which it
hardly forgets.


ACHITOB. Ingratitude makes men impudent, so that they dare join together to
hurt those that have been their friends, and them to whom they are bound both
by blood and nature. Let us then hear ASER discourse more amply of this
pernicious vice.


ASER. If man had not showed himself unthankful for the unspeakable benefits
which he had received of Ingratitude the cause of the sin and death of man.
his Creator, by eating of the fruit of the tree of life at the persuasion of
Satan, contrary to his express commandment to whom he owed all obedience,
it is certain that neither sin nor death, neither through them any kind of
misery and calamity should have had any power over him. But as by his
Ingratitude he neglected his obedience to his Lord and Creator, so it seems
also that his punishment was according to the manner of his offense. For his
own members, which before were in subjection to the will of his spirit,
rebelled against it, and that with such force, that they led him often captive
into the bondage of sin. Now although we are necessarily and justly made
inheritors of the same curse both of sin and death, yet how become we so dull
of understanding, as to desire with cheerefulnes of heart, and without
constraint, to succeed him in the cause thereof, I mean Ingratitude, which we
ought to hate in greater measure, and to sly from it more than from death it
self, by reason of the evils which No man's life void of Ingratitude.
it has brought upon us? Notwithstanding, if we look narrowly into the
iustest man's life that is, it will be a hard matter, yea altogether impossible,
to find it purged and exempted of this detestable vice, as well toward God as
toward his neighbors. But this is far worse, to behold the greatest part
of men to nourish and feed their souls with Ingratitude, as if they took
singular delight therein, by accustoming their minds to keep very diligently
the memory of the adversities and injuries which they suffer, and to let the
remembrance of those graces and benefits which they receive, slip away
incontinently, even as soon as the pleasure of them is past. Whereas duty
binds all persons to esteem as a great benefit, all favor, how little
soever it be, which the heavens or mer impart unto them, and to preserve it in
perpetual memory, as in a most safe Treasury, wherein they may keep and lay
up those good things which they receive. But contrariwise, unthankful men
suffer the remembrance of their greatest felicities to slide away suddenly:
which is the cause that they are always void of happiness, of rest, and
tranquillity, and full of unquietness and uncertain desires, which is an
argument of the imperfection of their reason, and of their ignorance of that
which is good. This is that The life of the ignorance is unthankful.
which Seneca says, that the life of the ignorant is unthankful, wavering, and
unstaid in things present, through the desire of things to come. And as it is
the property of an ignorant man to be always troublesome to himself, so from
Ingratitude and the forgetfulness of our prosperity, proceed cares and
melancholy passions to no purpose, which consume men, and pull on age upon
them more than years. For it is unthankfulness that causes us to be never
contented with our present estate, but to complain and murmr, in steed of
giving praise (as it becomes us) to him that sends us far better things
than we deserve. Upon the least touch of affliction, the Ingratitude for a
million of graces received before, causes us to cry out that we never had any
thing but mishap: whereas rather we ought to take adversity for a blessing and
testimony of the love of God toward us, being assured that by Justice God
disposes all things by Justice.
rightly ordained, he dispenses poverty and riches, health and sickness, honor
and contempt, according as he sees it expedient for every one of us. Yea, it
is necessary, by reason of the intemperancie of our flesh, which is ready to
cast off the yoke of the Lord when he handles us ouergently, that he should
reiue us in hard with the bridle, and keep us within the compass of some
discipline, least we wholly give over that service and obedience which we owe
unto him. But to vex our selves upon every occasion, and as often as things
fall out contrary to our inconstant and rebellious will, which for the most part
is ignorant of that which belongs unto it, is that which Pythagoras said, To
eat our heart, or to offend and wound our soul and spirit, by consuming them
with cares and griefs: as also not to know that one cause which most of all
troubles this miserable life, is the sudden entrance of sorrows and irksomnes
into the heart, which afterward will not depart out of it but by little and
little. These are melancholy passions void of reason, which (as Plato says)
proceed from naughty fumes and bitter vapors gathered together within us, and
which ascend and mingle themselves amidst the passages of the soul. Even as
our strange and unwonted dreams testify and signify, that there is within us
repletion of gross and gluish humors, and perturbations of the vital spirits:
so are those evil vapors which darken our senses, and dim the eyes of our The
vapors wherewith the eyes of the mind are dimmed.
soul: namely, ignorance, rebellion, arrogancy, murmuring, insatiable desires
and other inward corruptions which ingratitude stirs up and nourishes, and
which hinder us from acknowledging the benefits that God bestows upon us,
either toward him by thanksgiving, or toward his creatures by good deeds,
which he accepts as done to himself. For only God needs nothing, neither
asks any thing for himself, but only wills us not to be unthankful for that
which it pleases him to give us. And through this self same fountain of the
corruptions of our soul we are bewitched with unthankful forgetfulness of those
good turns which we receive from our like: yea upon the least dislike of them,
which either with, or without reason we forge in our brains, we say, that
never any did us good. The vassaile, for the least denial or hard countenance
which he receives of his lord, forgets all the good turns, furtherances
and favors, which before that time he had done unto him. The son complains
of the father, the brother of the brother, the friend of the friend, the
servant of the master. Alas we see but too many such ungrateful wretches in
France, who eue^ betray and sell daily them, of whom they hold all their
advancement and greatness. And if unthankfulness be familiar with the meaner
sort, let us not think that it is farther off from those of Of the ingratitude
of great men.
higher calling. For upon every light occasion, especially if a man frame not
himself to that vice which they have in greatest recommendation, they easily
forget all the service that has been done unto them by reason of some new-come
guest, who will show himself a serviceable minister of their pleasures. This
comes to pass soonest, when they grow up and increase in calling and
greatness, because commonly as they mount up in calling (not being well
instructed in virtue) they wax worse and worse in behauior. But let them
boldly take this for an infallible rule, that an unthankful prince cannot long
retain a good man in his service. For the hope of reward (says Plutarke) is
one of the elements and grounds of virtue, and of that honor, bounty and
humanity, wherewith the prince recompenceth virtuous men, thereby provoking
Reward and honor nourishes virtue and Arts.
and alluring them to seek the welfare of his estate. This also is that which
procures the proceedings of Arts and Sciences, and that which brings forth
notable wits: as contrariwise, all these things languish that are extinguished
by little and little through the ingratitude and covetousness of those that rule.
The ancients said not without Impudency and Ingratitude are companions.
cause, that impudency was the companion of ingratitude. For if no beast (as
they say) is so shameless as an The description of impudency.
impudent, who is he that may be said to have less shame, than an unthankful
body? Impudency (says Theophrastus) is a contempt of glory, wrought in a man
through the desire of vile and filthy gain: and that man is impudent that
boroweth some thing of him whom he purposes to deceive. Are not these the
proper effects of the vice of Ingratitude, which seeks nothing else but to
draw away the commodity and profit of every one, being unwilling to do good
to any, or to requite a pleasure received, neither caring for true glory and
immortal honor, which follows every virtuous action grounded upon duty and
honesty? And truly it is a very hard matter for them to be answerable to their
honor, who seek their own profit as much as may be. For we must know that in
equity and reason there is a difference between duty, and that which we
commonly call profit: yea they are distinct things, and separated Duty and
profit are two distinct things.
one from the other, as honesty is from such earthly commodity. This latter
makes men void of fear to break a sunder and to dissolve whatsoever was
ordained and joined together both by the law of God and man, so that they may
gain thereby. But the other clean contrary, causes them to employ liberally
their goods, travel, industry, and whatsoever else is in their power, that
they may profit every one, and that without hope of any recompense: albeit they
that receive good turns are bound to return again the like to their
benefactors according to their ability, and to acknowledge their kindness. For
this cause amongst the laws of Draco established among the Athenians, there
was a commandment, that if any man had received a benefit of his neighbor, and
it were proved against him long time after, that he had been unthankful for
it, and had ill acknowledged the good A law against unthankful persons.
turn received, I say, that such a one should be put to death. And although no
histories are able to show unto us any kings or princes, which surmounted, yea,
which matched Alexander the great in munificence and liberality, or Julius
Caesar in pardoning injuries, yet we read of them, that when they had knowledge
of an ungrateful person, Alexander never gave unto him, nor Caesar ever
forgave him: so greatly have virtuous men always hated The Storke a graceful
bird.
ingratitude. It is reported of the Storke, that as often as she has young, she
casts one out of the neast for the hire of the house, and reward of him that
lodged her. O barbarous ingratitude, to behold him that has been lodged,
served, and brought up in a house, and that with the sweat and labor of
another, to seek and to endeavor the spoil of all that is therein, even to the
honor, and oftentimes the life of his host! Is it not the same vice of
unthankfulness that sows dissentions and quarrels between the children The
fruits of ingratitude.
and the father, between brethren, kinffolks and friends, and all for want of
acknowledging one toward another, that bond of nature wherewith we ought to be
tied, and that secondary supply of good turns, which knit us unseparably, and
make us daily beholding unto them, if we consider exactly the nature of our
estate, which cannot stand without the succor and aid of many, how great so
ever we be? But what? We see by experience that which one of the Ancients said,
That all humane things grow to be old, and come to the end of their time,
except Ingratitude. For the greater the increase of mortal men is, the more
does unthankfulness Examples against ingratitude. Pyrrhus.
augment. And yet we may note many examples in histories against this vice,
which ought to awaken us in our duty. Pyrrhus is exceedingly commended by
Historiographers, because he was gentle, and familiar with his friends, ready
to pardon them when they had angered him, and very earnest and forward in
requiting and recompencing those good turns which he had received. Which
caused him to be grieved above measure for the death of a friend of his: not
(as he said) because he saw that befall him which is common and necessarily
incident to the nature of man, but because he had lost all means of
acknowledging unto him those benefits which he had received: whereupon he
reproved and blamed himself for delaying and deferring it ouer-long. For
truly money lent may well be restored to his heirs that did lend it: but it
goes to the heart of a man that is of a good, noble, and excellent nature, if
he cannot make the self same man that benefited him, to feel the recompense
of those pleasures which he received. This caused the ancients not only to
fear the note of ingratitude toward their friends, but also to contend with
their enemies which of them should do most good, and show greatest courtesy to
his companion, as the same Pyrrhus did behave himself toward the Romans, who
had given him intelligence of a treason that was in hand against him. For he to
acknowledge this good turn, sent back unto them a great number of prisoners
taken in war, which were then in his custody, and would not let them pay any
ransom. But the Romans, being unwilling that he should excel them in any
kind of beneficence, as also because they would not give occasion that any
should think they meant to receive occasion that any should think they meant
to receive a reward for not consenting unto a wicked act, sent him as many
prisoners of his for a counter-change. Circerius Circerius.
who had been secretary to the great Scipio, when he perceived that he was a
competitor, and ioint-suter for the Pretorship with the son of the same
Scipio, he feared so greatly least he should be noted with ingratitude toward
his son, unto whom he was so greatly bound, and of whom he had received his
advancement, that putting off the white garment which they used to wear that
sued for offices, he became a solicitor for Scipio, and procured him that
honorable estate wherewith himself might have been furnished, preferring
immortal renown before that, as one that would not show himself unthankful
toward them unto whom he was beholding. We read of a barbarous Turk, by
country an Arabian, A notable history of an Arabian Turk.
and Admiral of the Infidels in their war against Baldu in king of Jerusalem,
who not willing to suffer himself to be overcome in beneficence, much less to
bear the name of an unthankful body toward the said prince, who had once set
him and his wife at liberty when they were his prisoners, went by night unto
him into a town whither he was retired after the loss of a bartell, and
declared unto him the purpose of his companions: whereupon he led him out of the
town, and conducted him until he had brought him out of all danger. Moreover as
concerning that which we have already touched, that great men ought to have
special regard to this, that they be not unthankful, but reward liberally men
of desert, forasmuch as this point belongs principally to the virtue of
liberality, which subject is sufficient for a several discourse, we will
content our selves without any further addition, with the propounding Bajazet.
of a notable example of Bajazet, emperor of the Turks touching this matter.
This man being advertised at the taking of the town of Modona from the
Venetians of the valor of a young Ianitsarie of the age of 22. years, who was
the first that mounted upon the wall, whereupon 30000. Ianitsaries mo being
moved therewith were imboldned to do the like, gave him presently an office
of Sangeat, which is one of the greatest and richest estates next to the
Baschas, and is valued at 10000. ducats in yearly revenues. Now if we desire
to follow to the uttermost of our power, the noble courage of these famous
personages, that so we may not fall into the shameful vice of ingratitude,
this will help us greatly, if we alwais esteem the benefit which we receive
of another, greater than it A mean to keep us from ingratitude.
is: and contrariwise, repute that less than it is, which we give. For thereby
we shall feel our selves urged, and as it were bound voluntarily to continue
to do good to our like, and so preserve the bond of humane society
inviolable. Neither let us (as proud and vainglorious men do, who vaunt that
they stand in need of none) disdain to receive a pleasure of our friends,
although they be of less calling than we, when they desire our friendship. For
if it be an honest thing to do good to all, it cannot be dishonest to receive
likewise of all, because a receiver is as needful as a giver for the
accomplishing of a Another mean for the same.
good turn. Furthermore, this will be another great occasion of preserving the
common and mutual bond, whereby we stand bound one to another, and of banishing
all ingratitude from amongst men, if we observe this point Artaxerxes
thankfully accepted a little water.
alwais, to requite double if we can that good turn which we receive of
another. Artaxerxes king of Persia disdained not the water which a poor
handycraftsman, as he saw him pass by, brought from a river in his hands and
gave him, but received it with a smiling and cheerful countenance, measuring
the grace of the gift, not according to the value of the present, but according
to his good will that offered it. He thought it no less an act of
magnanimity and kingly bounty to take small presents in good part, and to
receive them with a good countenance, than to give greater. Again, we are to
know, that a good man must never give over to do good to all, notwithstanding
any pretense of Ingratitude wherewith they may be noted, whom he has already
bound unto him. For (as Plato says) that is true virtue, which sets it self
Virtue is a sufficient recompense to it self.
on work, in respect of no other end than of it self: yea virtue is a very
sufficient recompense unto it self. So although a man have occasion to be
grieved at an unthankful person, yet he has no liberty to repent him of the
good turn which he has done him. Yea the vnwoorthier he is that receives a
benefit, the more is he to be commended from whom it comes. And we may
assure our selves that that thing only is given, which is given without any
respect. For if there be hope of recompense, the benefactor deserves not at
all the name of a liberal man, but of one that gives out to usury. Therefore
Cicero misliketh the rehearsing of duties done one to another, saying: that
those men are odious which vpbraid the good turns they have done, the
remembrance of which the receiver ought to retain, and the giver must pass
them over in silence: seeing the greatest contentation, which an excellent and
noble-minded man can take in his glorious deeds and actions, is to see
himself adorned with that virtue which is profitable to others, but to it
self is fruitles, painful, and perilous. To the end therefore that we may
reap profit by all that has been here discoursed, seeing we know by
ouer-many experiences unto what mischief Ingratitude has made us subject, let
us awaken The sleep of the spirit is worse than death.
our spirits out of the deep sleep of ignorance, which has so long time
possessed them, considering that (as Pythagoras said) the sleep of the spirit
is worse than death. Therefore let us watch in spirit, that both with heart and
voice we may sing and set forth the unspeakable benefits that are daily
offered unto us by the goodness of God, whereof we shall be made partakers
through his grace, if our frowardnes be no let unto us. Let our joy,
contentation and pleasure be in them that destroy and drive far from us all
irkesomnes, and sad melancholy, and let us take singular delight in profiting
one another by good turns and benefits: yea let us show that we have such
noble minds, that no Ingratitude can turn us aside from the desire of doing
good to all. Lastly, let us recompense double, and reward withoutreckoning
those good turns, which we receive of others, rather fearing least we should
be overcome in beneficence, than in worldly reputation and glory.


The end of the tenth days work.
THE ELEVENTH DAYS WORK.
Of Liberality, and of the use of riches. Chap. 41.
ASER. Divine Plato handling good and evil things, says: That Prudence,
Temperance, Fortitude, and Justice, are good things, and that their contraries
are evil, namely: want of Prudence, Intemperance, Cowardlines, and Injustice.
As for the goods of Fortune, and of the body, as riches, glory, friends, and
honor, beauty, health, strength, and dexterity, he calls them mean or
indifferent things, which of themselves are neither good nor bad, but become
either the one or the other, as they are used with prudence, or abused by
imprudence and want of discretion. Now seeing we entered yesterday into those
points that depend of Justice, I thin ke the sequel of our matter requires of
us the handling What Liberality is.
of Liberality, which is nothing else but an excellent use of those means
which God puts into our hands for the succouring of many: which virtue (as
Cicero says) is altogether joined to Justice, and ought to be guided by
moderation and reason. Now my Companions, I leave the discourse of this matter
to you.


AMANA. The unstable riches of earthly treasure (as Agapetus wrote to
Iustinianus) imitate the course of the Riches (...) the waters.
floating waters. They abound for a little while to such as think they have
them, and suddenly they return back again and go to others: but the treasure
of Liberality and largess, only abides still with him that possesses it.


ARAM. The habit of Liberality is a garment that never waxes old, and
charity toward the poor is an incorruptible ornament. Diligence is
sufficient to make a man rich when means are offered, but nobility of mind is
requisite in the bestowing of great riches upon commendable things. To this
purpose Plato says, that a niggard sometime is not wicked, but never good. Now
then ACHITOB, instruct us sufficiently in this goodly matter.


ACHITOB. Seeing Liberality is a virtue between these two vices, Covetousness,
and Prodigality, and seeing the judgment of reason ought to be the director
and master of giving, and of free Liberality, that it be not abused in
delights, or favor of the wicked, but used with a prudent and ripe
deliberation; Where, When, and As Much as ought to be, I am of opinion that we
may not unfitly appropriate the effects of this virtue of Liberality, to the
good use of Riches, which of themselves are not able to make a man better or
more happy, as we were before sufficiently taught: but if they be joined with
the knowledge of true honesty, and perfect goodness, they offer How riches may
be well used.
means unto him whereby he may the better execute his good and honest
inclinations, to the profit and relief of all them that stand in need.
Hereupon we must bestow only whatsoever we have more than necessary: first
upon them that are of our blood and kindred, then upon all indifferently that
want our help. And this is such an excellent and commendable deed, that
Aristotle and all Aristotle's opinion concerning a happy life destitute of
bodily and outward goods.
the Peripatecians maintained this opinion, that a happy life which consists
in the perfect use of virtue, could not be in all respects absolute, if it
wanted the assistance of bodily and external goods, which are as instruments
to further a man in the good and virtuous execution of his honest desires. But
we showed heretofore by good reason, and according to the opinion of the
Academicks and Stoics, that virtue only is sufficient of it self to make a
man live happily, and that his virtue cannot be either more honored, or
disgraced through the abundant having or not having of the goods of fortune,
and of the body, seeing all other things receive their glory from virtue, and
are not able to add any thereunto. And therefore A poor man may be liberal.
a poor virtuous man is not kept from any perfect use of virtue, no not of
Liberality, which consists not in wasting much wealth, but in succouring the
afflicted willingly, and in helping every one according to ability. For this
cause the poor woman's mite was esteemed of God for a greater gift, than were
all the presents of the rich, because they gave of their abundance, and she of
that little which she had. In this manner then every good man may justly deserve
the name of liberal, neither may any man excuse himself for not practicing
liberality according to his ability. But chiefly rich and mighty men are
bound thereunto by that commandment given unto them in Luke 16. 9.
the scripture, to make them friends with the riches of iniquity. They must
take good heed that they pass not the bounds of this virtue of Liberality,
but strictly observe those three points already touched by me, namely: that
they be liberal, Where, When, and As Much as is requisite. For when Princes
bestow estates, offices, or money, upon unworthy persons, they give where,
and more than they How princes pass the limits of liberality.
ought. And if in time of war, or calamities of their people, they give to
flatterers, dancers, and ministers of their pleasures, and consume much upon
feasts, plays, Turneis, and Masks, they spend when and where they ought not,
deserving thereby the name of prodigal men, and lovers of riot and
superfluity, howsoever flattering courtiers labor to disguise such wastfull
spendings with the name of largess and liberality. But such superfluous
expenses bring forth effects contrary to the virtue and duty of a king,
causing princes to levy extraordinary taxes and tributes upon no just
necessity, which is wholly to overthrow the use of liberality. And this is
done also by men of meaner When the inferior sort pass the bounds of
liberality.
calling, when in their actions and expenses they propound to themselves an
other end than good works grounded upon the love of their neighbors according
to charity. Cicero gives us a very good precept against the opinion of many
in our time, who give out in speech, that they are borne to do great things,
namely, to practice liberality, and being poor of worldly goods, seek to
enrich themselves by unlawful and unjust means, that they may bring to pass
their lofty desires: thinking afterward through good-deeds and great
liberality to make amends for that fault which they have committed. But (as
that father of Philosophy says) our goods and patrimony must be justly
gotten, not by dishonest and hateful gain: secondly, we must profit as many
as we can, so that they be worthy thereof. Moreover a man may and ought to
increase it by reason, diligence, and sparing, but to maintain liberality
rather than to minister unto lust, voluptuousnes, or heaping up of treasures.
And yet now a days these are the principal occasions for which riches are
desired, which as they increase, so we will have our train augmented, and our
table to be answerable thereunto. Then although ouer-great abundance remain,
yet we exercise very coldly the true works of liberality, which are to succor
the needy. But this is to be far separated from the commendable end, and
good use of riches, whereof all that we have over and above our necessity ought
to About what we are to bestow the overplus of our wealth.
be employed in the service of the commonwealth, in relieuing the poor,
diseased, afflicted, and prisoners, in procuring the good bringing up of youth,
and generally in exercising all other deeds of piety: accounting it great
gain to help the poor, seeing God is the rewarder thereof. Amongst the
ancient Romans there was a law kept A notable law amongst the Romans.
inuiolably, That no man should presume to make a public feast, except before
he had provided for all the poor of his quarter. And they accounted it a great
shame and offense to the commonwealth to see any man beg in the streets.
Therefore Plato said, that where there are beggars in a town, there are also
thieues and church-robbers. Now if we that bear the name of Christians, and
acknowledge the poor to be members of Jesus Christ, are not ashamed to banquet
and feast, when as in the mean time the needy cry at our gates, and almost
die of hunger, do we not think that these Heathen men shall rise in judgment
before that great and just Judge, to accuse and condemn us as thieues and
church-robbers, and chiefly them that maintain their delights and pleasure
with the goods of the poor, toward whom the liberal distribution of our own
wealth especially ought to be extended both by the law of God and man? We must
feed the poor, and not kill them: but to deny them nourishment, or to How
Epaminondas compelled a rich man to be liberal.
drive them from us, is to kill them. For this cause Epaminondas captain
general of the Thebanes, having knowledge of a very rich man that had no care
of the poor in the town, sent a poor needy fellow unto him, and commanded
him under great penalty to give presently without fail 600. crowns to that
poor man. The citizen hearing this commandment, came unto him to know the
occasion and cause thereof: It is (quoth Epaminondas) because this man being
honest is poor, and thou which have robbed greatly the commonwealth, art
rich: compelling him thereupon to be liberal in despite of his teeth. So
careful were the ancients to help them that had need, and to show themselves
enemies unto them that made no account of the poor. But if we should
diligently search all histories and deeds of famous men, yet could we not find
a more notable example, Cimo^ a notable pattern of the true use of riches.
or worthy to be followed than that of Cimon the Athenian, who having gotten
great wealth honorably, both for himself and his country, by the taking and
overthrow of many Barbarians and towns belonging unto them, knew nevertheless
how to bestow it liberally with greater glory and honor, by relieuing all his
poor countrymen to whom his house was as an hospital wherein they were all
nourished and fed at an ordinary that was common to so many as would come
thither, which was furnished, not with dainty and delicate fare, thereby to
occasion rich folks to seek it out, but with many common sorts of victuals in
all plenty and abundance, and that for a great number of persons. This he did
chiefly, as he said, to the end that poor honest men might have the more
leisure to employ themselves about the affairs and service of the
commonwealth, and not be diuerted from that through travel and care to get
their living by the exercise of handicrafts. Besides, he caused all the
enclosures, hedges and ditches of his lands and inheritance to be taken away,
that strangers which passed by, and his own countrymen that wanted, might
take of the fruits that were there according to their necessity. Now if this
virtue of liberality be praise-woorthie in all persons that use it well
according to their ability, it is most of all necessary, honorable and
profitable for kings and princes, heads Liberality most necessary for princes
and great men.
and captains of armies, governors of estates and commonwealths, as that
which procures unto them, more than any other thing, the good will of every
one, wherein the chief strength and stay of their greatness consists. But
withal they have great need of prudence and justice, especially sovereign
princes, to distribute liberally and according to harmonicall proportion their
gifts, graces, and good turns, whether they be estates, offices, benefices,
knighthoods, exemptions, freedoms, and other recompenses due as rewards to
their subjects, according as every one deserves. It belongs principally to
them to The laws of liberality.
keep religiously and from point to point the laws of liberality, marking
well to whom they give, how much is given, at what time, in what place, to what
end, and their own ability that give. Moreover a sovereign must look that
recompense go before gift, by rewarding first those that have deserved, before
he give to the^ that have deserved nothing: and above all things he must
measure his largess at the foot of his power. But when the just rewards of
subjects and honest men are distributed amongst the vicious, strangers, and
unworthy persons, this is that which oftentimes sets flourishing estates on
A common mischief which follows the greater sort.
fire. There is never any want of flatterers and of impudent crauers about
kings, whose only drift is to sup up the blood, gnaw the bones, and suck the
marow of princes and their subjects, to satisfy their foolish and unprofitable
expenses, which are such and so great, that a man is well at ease to give them
any thing, they are alwais so needy and monylesse, and stick not to say that
they never receive good of their masters. In the mean while, they that have
best deserved of the commonwealth, are commonly removed furthest from their
majesty's: which comes to pass both by the ignorance of the greater sort,
who make but a bad choice of servants worthy their favor, as also because the
honor and credit of good men forbids them by flattery and begging to seek
after the rewards of virtue, which should be offered unto them. But not to
wander far from our matter subject, let us now consider of some notable
examples of the Ancients concerning this whereof we have here discoursed. It was
by his The liberality of Alexander,
magnificall and incomparable liberality, that Alexander the great made a way
for his noble plat-formes, whereby he became monarch of three parts of the
world, distributing To the Macedonians,
liberally all his demains amongst the Macedonians, as before we mentioned. But
what a notable testimony of this his liberality did he give a fresh, when
during the To all debtors in his army,
war he caused this to be published in his army, that all they that were
indebted upon any occasion whatsoever, should bring their creditors unto him,
and he would discharge all their debts? Which thing he likewise performed.
Moreover, who will not admire the liberality which all his life time he
exercised toward the learned men of his time? We read that he gave at one time
to his master To Aristotle.
Aristotle, 800. Talents, which amount to 480000. crowns, as a reward for his
pains, travels, and expenses which he had been at in describing the nature
and property of living To Anaxarchus.
creatures. He sent to Anaxarchus the Philosopher 50. Talents, which are 30000.
Crowns, but he refused them, saying: that he knew not what to do with so
great a sum. What (said Alexander then) has he no friends to pleasure,
seeing all king Darius wealth will not suffice me to distribute To Perillus.
amongst mine own? Perillus besought him to give him some money toward the
marriage of his daughters, whereupon he gave to him also 50 Talents. And when he
told him that it was too much by half, he replied thus: If half be enough for
thee to take, yet is it not enough for me to give. Likewise To an Egyptian.
he gave to a poor Egyptian asking his alms, a rich and populous city, and
when the other all astonished supposed that he mocked him: Take (quoth he to
him) that which I give thee: for if thou art Biace that demandest, I am
Alexander Caesar a liberal Prince.
that gives. The first Monarch of the Caesar's, is he not also exceedingly
praised of Historiographers for the liberallest Prince of his time, and for
such a one as showed in deed, that he loved not riches in war, that
afterward he might at his pleasure live in delight, or abuse them about his
own pleasures, but that they were the common price and reward of virtue, which
he laid up to recompense valiant and honest men withal? Of which reward he
said he would have no part, but only distribute it to every Antonius a
magnificall Prince, but voluptuous.
one according to his desert. Antonius one of his successors, sought to
imitate him in this bountiful liberality. For proof hereof may serve that
commandment, which he gave to his Treasorer to double the half of 2500.
Crowns, which he had given to one of his fauorits, whereas his Treasorer that
brought him the said sum, when he beheld it, thought that he should have
diminished the gift. But he stained this virtue with a perpetual blot and
infamy, which caused his destruction, in that he applied it to the service and
maintenance of his delights and pleasures, and abused it in the favor and
behalf of the wicked, which is al one in great men as if they Archelaus gave
not to the unworthy.
themselves were authors of vice and iniquity. Archelaus king of Macedonia,
may serve unto them for a notable example, whereby they may learn to keep
themselves in their estates from such a pernicious evil. This king being
requested by a Minion of his Court to give him a cup of gold wherein he drank,
delivered it to his Page, commanding him to bear and give the same to
Euripides, who was there present, and then said to the other: As for thee, thou
art worthy to ask, and to be denied also: but Euripides How Antigonus denied
one that was importunate.
is worthy of gifts, although he ask not. Antigonus the elder being
importunately desired by one that was good for nothing, and that counterfaited
the Cynick Philosopher, to give him a dram, which might be in value about
four pence halfepenie, made answer: that it was no meet gift for a king. And
when the other replied, that he should then give him a Talent, he answered: it
is Titus a good and liberal Prince.
no present for a Cynick. Titus the emperor was so greatly in love with
liberality all his life time, that remembering one evening with himself, that
he had given nothing the same day, he cried out: O my friends we have lost this
day. He used to bless those days wherein the poor came unto him, or when he
sought after them to do them good, A notable precept of Phocylides.
putting in practice that precept of Phocylides, which says: Sleep not at
night before thou have thrice called to mind thy works that day, and repent
thee of the evil, but rejoice in that which was well done. For this great good
nature Titus was loved whilst he lived, and bewailed after his death, and upon
his Tomb was written this Epitaph: The delights of mankind Ptolemaeus the
Thebane.
are ended. Ptolemaeus the Thebane, Captain over a great army, had so
acquainted himself not to deny any that stood in need of his liberality,
that when a poor souldior demanded his alms of him, he having at that present
nothing to bestow upon him, gave him his shoes, saying: My friend, make thy
profit of this, seeing I have no better thing to give thee. For I had rather go
bare-foote, than see thee suffer so much. Denis the elder, entering into his
sons lodging, and Denis the elder
beholding there great store of rich jewels of gold and silver, and of
incredible treasure, said unto him: My son, I did not give thee these riches
to use in this sort, but to impart of them unto thy friends. For thou must
know, that no man in all the world is so rich as he that is liberal, who with
his liberality preser^eth his friends, and mollifieth his enemies. This is
that which Cyrus by experience showed unto Croesus, and how smally Cyrus.
those gifts which he had bestowed upon worthy persons had impouerished him.
For sending to every one of them to succor him with money, they sent him
altogether as much as they had received by gift from him, bestowing moreover
great rewards upon the bearer of his message. So that the wealth which
proceeds from liberality is vnconsumeable, as that which is gotten by
giving, and by Pertinax.
scattering abroad is gathered together. Pertinax, who succeeded Commodus in
the Empire, surpassed all the Emperors that ever were for exceeding
liberality, which he used to the benefit and profit of all his subjects. For
first he gave freely all the waste and desolate ground in Italy, and in other
his provinces, to them that could and would till them, and to the laborers
thereof he gave freedom and exemption from al taxes and subsidies for ten
years, with perpetual assurance that they should not be troubled in their
possession. He forbad also that his name should be set in any castle or place
within his dominion, saying: that his lands were not proper to him only, but
common to all the people of Rome. He abolished all customs, tributes, and toles
laid upon the havens of rivers, at the entries into towns, ways and passages,
which he called inventions of tyranny to get money, and placed all such things
in their ancient liberties. Which actions beseemed rather a father of the
country, than a lord and master: and there are few Princes that use to do
so, but many to whom their own will seems to be a most just law. But
contrariwise let them know, that they ought to be subject to the eternal law,
namely, to right, reason, truth, and justice, which are the proper will of God
only, whose people they must rule with right and equity, by comforting them
through beneficence, and continual good turns. Let us learn then by our
present discourse to deck our selves with this virtue of Liberality, every
one according to those means that are given unto him from above, and are
justly gotten by him: taking good heed, that we abuse it not in any kind of
voluptuousnes or vice, neither yet upon the wicked, as though we purposed to
nourish and maintain their impieties. For this is utterly to destroy Justice,
and consequently the bond and preservative of humane society. But if we, being
well instructed by the Matthew. 25.
spirit of wisdom, feed the hungry, give drink to the thirsty, lodge them
that want harbor, and clothe the naked, sowing in this manner by the works of
piety that talent which is committed to our keeping, we shall reap abundantly
in heaven the permanent riches and treasures of eternal life.


Of Covetousness, and of Prodigality. Chap. 42.
ACHITOB. IF that diuiue rule of Cicero were as well written in our heart, as he
desired to have it settled in his son, that only that thing is to be judged
profitable No wicked thing ought to be judged profitable.
which is not wicked, and that nothing of that nature should seem profitable,
we should not behold amongst us so many cursed acts, as are daily committed
through the unbridled desire of the goods of this world. For that which most
of all troubles men, is when they think that the sin which they purpose to
practice is but small in respect of the gain, thereby craftily separating
profit from honesty, and so suffering themselves to be overcome of
covetousness, which is the defect of liberality, whereof we discoursed even
now, whose excess also is Prodigality, of which two vices we are now to
entreat.


ASER. Every one that coueteth treasures (said Anacharsis, one of the wise men
of Graecia) is hardly capable of good counsel and instruction. For the
covetous man commonly murmureth at that which God permits and nature does,
so that he will sooner take upon him to correct God, than to amend his life.


AMANA. It is a hard matter (said Socrates) for a man to bridle his desire, but
he that adds riches thereunto, is mad. For covetousness neither for shame of
the world, nor fear of death, will not repress or moderate it self. But it
belongs to thee ARAM, to instruct us in that which is here propounded.


ARAM. Since the greedy desire of heaping up gold and silver entered in amongst
men, with the possession of riches, covetousness followed, and with the use of
them pleasures and delights: whereupon they began to sail in a dangerous sea
of all vices, which has so overflowed in Covetousness has overflowed all.
this age of ours, that there are very few towers how high so ever seated, but
it has gone up a great deal above them. For this cause I see no reason why
men should esteem so much, or judge it such a happy thing to have much goodly
land, many great houses, and huge sums of ready money, seeing all this does
not teach them, not to be carried away with passions for riches, and seeing the
possession of them in that manner procures not a contentation void of the
desire of them, but rather inflameth us to desire them more through an
insatiable covetousness, which is such a poverty of the soul, that no worldly
goods can remedy the same. For it is the nature of this vice to make a man
poor all his life time, that he may find him self rich only at his death.
Moreover it is a desire that has this thing proper and peculiar to it self,
to resist and to refuse to be satisfied, whereas all other desires help
forward the same, and seek to content those that serve the^. Covetousness
(says Aristotle) is a vice of the soul, whereby a Covetousness will never be
satisfied.
man desires to have from all parts without reason, and unjustly withholds
that which belongs to another. It is sparing and skantie in giving, but
excessive in receiving. The Poet Lucretius calls it a blind desire of goods.
And it mightily hinders the light of the soul, causing the covetous man to
be never contented, but the more he has, the more to desire and wish for. The
medicine which he seeks, namely, gold and silver, increases his disease, as
water does the Conetousnes like to a dropsy.
dropsy: and the obtaining thereof is always unto him the beginning of the
desire of having. He is a Tantalus in hell, who between water and meat dies of
hunger. Now it is very sure, that to such as are wise and of sound judgment,
nature has limited certain bounds of wealth, which are traced out upon a
certain Center, and upon the circumference of their necessity. But
covetousness working clean contrary effects in the spirit of fools, carries
away the natural desire of necessary things, to a disordinate appetite of
such things as are full of danger, rare, and hard to be gotten. And which is
worse, compelling the auaritious to procure them with great pain and travel,
it forbids him to enjoy them, and stirring up his desire, depriueth him of
the pleasure. Stratonicus Stratonicus derided the superfluity of the Rhodians.
mocked in old ryme the superfluity of the Rhodians, saying, that they builded
as if they were immortal, and rushed into the kitchen as if they had but a
little while to live. But covetous men scrape together like great and mighty
men, and spend like mechanical and handy-craftesmen. They endure labor in
procuryng, Covetous men compared to Mules.
but want the pleasure of enjoying. They are like Mules that carry great
burdens of gold and silver on their backs, and yet eat but hay. They enjoy
neither rest nor liberty which are most precious, and most desired of a wise
man: but live always in disquietnesse, being servants and slaves to their
richesse. Their greatest The miserable life of covetous men.
misery is, that to increase and keep their wealth, they care neither for
equity or justice: they contemn all laws both divine and humane, and all
threatenings and punishments annexed unto them: they live without friendship
and charity, and lay hold of nothing but gain. When they are placed in
authority and power above others, they condemn the innocent, justify the
guilty, and find always some cleanly cloak and color of taking, and of
excusing (as they think) their corruption and briberie, making no difference
between duty and profit. Wherefore we may well say in a word, That
covetousness is the root of all evil. For what mischiefs are not 1. Tim. 6. 10.
procured through this vice? From whence proceed quarrels, The fruits of
covetousness.
strifes, suites, hatred and envy, theftes, pollings, sackings, wars,
murders, and poisonings, but from hence? God is forgotten, our neighbor hated,
and many times the son forgiueth not his father, neither the brother his
brother, nor the subject his Lord, for the desire of gain. In a word, there
is no kind of cruelty that covetousness puts not in practice. It causes
hired and wilful murders (O execrable impiety) to be well thought of amongst
us. It causes men to break their faith given, to violate all friendship, to
betray their country. It causes subjects to rebel against their princes,
governors and magistrates, when, not able to bear their insatiable desires,
nor their exactions and intolerable subsidies, they break forth into public
and open sedition, which troubles common tranquillity, whereupon the body
politic is changed, or for the most part utterly overthrown. Moreover, the
excess of the virtue of liberality, which is prodigality, may be joined to
covetousness, and than there is no kind of vice but reigns with all license
in that soul that has these two guestes lodged together. And because it is a
thing that may seem hard to conceive, how two vices so disagreeing by nature,
may be found to agree in the same subject, we will soon believe it, if we say
with the ancients, How prodigality and covetousness may in some sort be linked
together in one subject.
that it is the point of covetousness to gripe, and to take, Where and When it
ought not: and that this dealing is put in practice necessarily upon one of
these two occasions, either of niggardliness and sparing, or for prodigality,
as they do that unjustly seek for means to satisfy their fond desires, and
their unprofitable and superfluous expenses. The common opinion is, that they
who put to no use the richesse which they get so couetously, are more
miserable than those that abuse them after they have obtained them by ill
means: because many may reap profit by these, but of the other none, no
not their Covetous men compared to hogs.
only heirs receive more benefit than they do of hogs, which is after their
death. But it falls not out so altogether with kings and princes, whose
covetousness joined with prodigality is more hurtful to their subjects than
that which is joined with sparing. For this latter, although it makes them
commit much injustice, and polling of their people to fill their treasuries, yet
when any need happens to the commonwealth, either of foreign war, or of any
other calamity, a good groundwork is laid in the bottom of their cofers for
to redress the same. But the other maintained with the like injustice, leaves
nothing behind for prodigal princes, wherewith to help themselves in time of
necessity. Whereupon oftentimes proceeds the final subversion of their
estate, weakened by exactions, to the overthrow and undoing of many who would
have been the sinews of their strength: and all to enrich a few who then will
stand them in small stead, or else because they wasted it upon riot and
superfluities, whereby the warlike virtues both of themselves and of their
subjects become degenerate and bastardlike. Of this we note, that after a
prince grows to be prodigal and desirous of superfluity and foolish
expenses, no riches he has will ever suffice him: so that to satisfy his
spending, he must needs become covetous and unjust. The like happens many
times to the meaner sort, and to men of all estates, that they are covetous and
prodigal both together, namely, when they gather wealth by unlawful means,
and spare to spend it in the works of piety, that they may sow it
plentifully upon delights and pleasures. But the humor of Covetous men compared
to rats and cundit pipes.
niggardlines and neernesse is most common in covetous men, whom Plutarke
compares to rats and mice that are in gold mines, which eat the golden oar,
and yet nothing can be gotten from them but after their death. Likewise he
compares them to pipes through which water being conveyed into a cesterne
nothing remains for them. So covetous men heap up treasures to leave them to
their heirs, that they also may afterward leave them to their heirs as their
predecessors did: and so neither the one nor the other reap any good or
benefit by them, until in the end either some Tyrant take all away by violence
from that hold-fast, or else some one that is the worst of the race succeeds,
spending all dissolutely upon pleasures. This caused Diogenes, jesting at
covetous men, to say It is better to be the sheep than the son of a covetous
man.
that he had rather be their sheep than their son, because they are very
careful to give their cattle meet pasture, but in steed of feeding their
youth with convenient and profitable nourishment, through good and virtuous
education, they mar, spill, and corrupt them, by grafting covetousness in the
souls of their children, as if they meant to build within them a strong fort
wherein to keep their succession safely. Whereas contrariwise they should
learn of Cicero, that the glory of virtue, and of praisworthie and honorable
deeds, is the greatest riches which fathers can leave to their children, and
more excellent than any other patrimony whatsoever. Socrates called a young
man brought up in ignorance, and rich withal, a golden slave. And that servant
answered not unfitly, when, being demanded what his master did, (who was a
covetous man, and one that having great quantity of good wine, sold it to
others, and sought for sour wine in Tauernes for his own drinking) he said:
Albeit he has great store of good, yet he seeks for evil. But let us now
consider of some notable examples, showing forth the pernicious Examples of
the fruits of covetousness and of prodigality. Muleasses.
effects, which, as we said, proceed from these two vices, Covetousness, and
Prodigality. Muleasses king of Thunes, had his eyes put out by his son, that
he might seize upon his treasures. Priamus king of Troy, fearing the taking of
his city, sent Polydorus his yoongest son to his son in law Polymestor,
with a great quantity of gold and silver: but Polymester.
he being desirous to possess the same, slew the child his brother in law, for
which afterward he received his deserved hire. For Queen Hecuba coming unto
him, and taking him aside into a chamber, not showing countenance of any
coffeehouse, with the help of her women put out his eyes. The Emperor
Caligula was so much touched Caligula.
with covetousness, that there was no kind of lucre, or mean to get money by,
how unlawful and wicked soever it were, which he sought not out: insomuch that
he laid a tribute upon urine, and sold his sisters gowns, whom he had
violated and sent into banishment. And yet in one year of his ^aigne he spent
prodigally 67. Millions of gold, which Tiberius his predecessor had gathered
together. Nero.
Nero using great cruelty, polling, exaction, and confiscation toward his
subjects, gave to the ministers of his tyranny in those fifteen years
wherein he reigned, the value of 55. Millions of Crowns. He caused a very
stately gilt palace to be built, which took in compass a great part of Rome,
but it was ouerthrown after his death, that the memory of such a cruel tyrant
might be rooted out Against the superfluity of sumptuous buildings.
of the earth. A notable example for such as think to get a vain glory by
buildings that are more stately than necessary, and yet leave behind them a
notorious mark of their tyranny, and a perpetual testimony to posterity,
that they have raised their houses with the blood of their subjects. Henry the
seventh Emperor, a Prince indewed An Italian Monk.
with most excellent virtues, was poisoned with an Host, which an Italian Monk
corrupted with money caused him to take. But what need we seek for such
examples of ancient men to know the fruits of covetousness, when as the
unhappiness of our age daily affoordeth us new before our eyes, wherein we hear
nothing almost spoken of, but poisonings and murders hired with money, and all
committed to this end, that the authors of them may have their goods whom
they kill, for the satisfieng of A cruel murder of a Gentlewoman and of her
household.
their insatiable covetousness? Amongst many other, who has not heard of the
cruel wilful murder of a Gentlewoman of a good house, and of her men and
maids, by her own brethren in law, done a few days past? A cruelty
exceeding that of the Cannibals, who yet spare domestical blood. But God the
just Judge would not that such an execrable wickedness should be long concealed
and unpunished. For when it could not be found out by any inquiry of man, one
of the murderers touched with the hand of God, and taken with an extreme
sickness, being as it were mad, and as Cain was in times past, disclosed his
sin of himself, the hainousnes whereof so troubled him, that he said he
could hope for no mercy. Afterward recovering his health, he was taken upon
his own confession, and being convicted of the fact, accused all the authors
thereof, of whom some are executed, and the rest expect no better event. That
covetousness causes subjects to rebel against their covetous Princes, and that
oftentimes to their overthrow: we have an example in Mauritius the Emperor,
who was deprived of the Empire, Mauritius deprived of the Empire for his
couctousnes.
and had his head cut off, besides the death of his five children, and of his
wife, by reason of the ill will of his people and men of war, which he had
purchased, who could bear no longer his covetousness, whereby he was moved to
wink at spoils and murders, and to keep back the pay of his soldiers. In
the time of S. Jews the king, the people of five cities and five villages of
high Almaigne, which at this day we call Switserland, raised such a great The
Nobility of Switserland destroyed for the same cause.
tumult and sedition, that they put to the edge of the sword all their Princes,
Lords, and Noblemen, the chief cause thereof was their covetousness, which made
them oppress their subjects with unjust exactions. The niggardlye sparing of
king Jews the eleventh, moved strangers greatly Jews 11.
to contemn him, and was in part the cause of the rebellion of his subjects.
For having put away in a manner all the Gentlemen of his household, he used his
Tailor always for his Herald of Arms, his Barber for Ambassador, and his
Physician for his Chancellor: and in derision of other kings, he ware a
greasy hat of the coursest wool. We find in the chamber of accounts a bill of
his expenses, wherein is set down 20. souse for two new sleeves to his old
dublet, and an other clause of 15. deniers for grease to grease his boots. And
yet he increased the charges of his people three millions more than his
predecessor had done, and alienated a great part of his Demaine. Sparing may
well be used, (which at this day is more necessary than ever) and yet the
majesty of a king nothing diminished, neither the dignity of his house, and
without the abasing of his greatness. Likewise those men, who after they have
hoorded much treasure, are so besotted and blinded with a covetous love of
their wealth, that they will not upon any necessity employ it, can no more
avoid Calipha.
their destruction, than the other before mentioned. This does the history of
Calipha king of Persia, teach us, who having filled a Tower with gold, silver,
jewels, and precious stones, and being in war against Allan, king of the
Tartarians, was so ill succored of his own people, because he would not give
them their pay, that he was taken in his town, and by Allan committed prisoner
in the said Tower, with these words: If thou had not kept this treasure so
couetously, but distributed it amongst thy soldiers, thou might have
preserved thy self, and thy city. Now therefore enjoy it at thy ease, and
eat and drink thereof, seeing thou have loved it so much. And so he suffered
him to die there of hunger, in the midst of his riches. How Dionysius punished
a covetous wretch.
The punishment which Dionysius the elder, king of Syracusa, laid upon a rich
covetous subject of his, was more gentle, but worthy to be well noted, being
full of instruction. For being advertised that he had hid great store of
treasure in the ground, he commanded him upon pain of life to bring it unto
him: which he did, although not all of it, but retained part, which he took
with him, and went to dwell in another city, where he bestowed his money upon
inheritance. When Dionysius understood thereof, he sent for him, and restored
all his gold and silver, saying unto him* forasmuch as thou know now how to
use riches, not making that unprofitable, which was appointed for the use of
man, take that, which before thou wast unworthy to enjoy. And to speak the
truth, there is no reason wherewith the covetousness of such men may be
colored. For if they say, that they spend not because they care not for
spending, it is a point of great folly in them to labor to gather more wealth
than they want. But if they desire to spend, and yet dare not for niggardlines
do so, nor enjoy the fruit of their labor, they are a great deal more
miserable. Whereby it appears unto us what a goodly and commendable thing it
is to be content and satisfied with a little, which freeth us from the desire
of unnecessary things. Now if we are to take those things for superfluous,
which we will not use, we ought, for the reasons already set down, to make no
less account of those which we would abuse in riot and superfluity. The
covetousness of Darius, king of the Persians, was beguiled and laughed to scorn
through the subtle invention of Nitocris Queen of Babylon (some attribute it
to Semiramis) How Darius his couerousnesse was beguiled.
who, being desirous to welcome her successors that were touched with avarice,
which she abhorred above al things caused a high sepulcher to be erected over
those gates of the city through which there was most passage, with these words
engraven therein: If any king of Babylon that shall come after me find want in
his treasury, let him open this tomb and take as much as he will. Otherwise
let him not open it, for it will not be best for him. After many ages were
past, and none of the kings of Babylon had touched the said sepulcher, Darius
conquering the kingdom caused the coffin to be opened, thinking to find there
that which was promised. Nevertheless he found nothing there but a dead body,
with this writing: If thou were not insatiable and very covetous, thou would
not have opened the tomb of the dead. Moreover, that covetousness oftentimes
blinds men so far, as that it causes them to take away their own life
without fear of condemning their souls, many examples thereof are left in
memory: of whom some through grief for some great loss of goods, others to
leave their children rich, have voluntarily procured their own death. Cassius
Licinius C. Licinius strangled himself to leave his goods to his children.
was of this number, who being accused, attainted, and convicted of many thefts
and briberies, and beholding Cicero President at that time, about to put on the
purple gown to pronounce sentence of confiscation of goods, and of banishment,
he sent word to Cicero that he was dead during the process and before
condemnation: and presently in the field he smothered himself with a napkin,
having no other meaning therein but to save his goods for his children. For
then the laws concerning the punishment of such as had robbed the
commonwealth, or of such as being prevented slew themselves, were not made: so
that they that were accused might save their lives by forsaking their goods,
yea by paying so much only as their accusers demanded. But there are some of a
clean contrary disposition to Licinius, who being ready to give up the ghost,
would gladly carry their wealth with them, as we read of Hermocrates bequeathed
his goods to himself.
Hermocrates, who by his will made himself heir of his own goods. Athenaeus
makes mention of another, who at the hour of his death devoured many pieces
of his gold, and sewed the rest in his coat, commanding that they should be
all buried with him. Valerius Maximus tells of one, who being besieged within
the town of Cassilina by Hannibal, preferred the hope of gain before his own
life. For A ratte sold for 200. pence.
he chose rather to sell a ratte which he had taken, for 200. Roman pence,
than to satisfy his hunger, whereof he died quickly after: and the buier being
the wiser man, saved his life by that dear meat. Crassus Consul of Rome is
likewise noted by Historiographers to be extreme covetous, which caused him to
swim between two factions Covetousness caused Crassus to play on both sides.
divided for Caesar and Pompey, serving his own turn by them both, and
changing many times from one side to another in the administration of the
commonwealth. He showed himself neither a constant friend, nor a dangerous
enemy, but soon forsook both amity and enmity, when he saw it would be
profitable to him, whereof the increase of his substance gave great proof. For
when he first began to entermeddle in affairs, his riches amounted but to 300.
talents, which according to our money came to about 180000. crowns: but after
when he purposed to go from Rome to war with the Parthians, he would needs
know how much all his wealth came to. And first he offered to Hercules the tenth
of all his goods: secondly, he made a public feast for all the people of Rome
of a thousand tables: and thirdly, he gave to every Wonderful riches.
citizen as much wheat as would find him three months. Notwithstanding all
this, he found that he was worth 7100. talents, which amounted to four
millions, two hundred and threescore thousand crowns. He used to say, that he
accounted no man rich, except he were able of his own charges to hire and
maintain an army: because, as no man can set down a ready reckoning of the
expenses of war, as king Archidamas said, so the riches that is to sustain
it, may not be limited. But in the end his covetousness and ambition, which
commonly are not far separated one from another, led him to a violent death,
as we declared elsewhere. Now as Crassus was blamed for covetousness, so
Pompey was as much Pompey abhorred covetousness.
commended and well thought of, because he abhorred and contemned it. Whereof
he gave good proof, as also of great piety at the taking of the city of
Jerusalem from the Jews. For when he entered into the Temple, and beheld the
great riches thereof, the table of gold, the golden candlestick, a great
number of vessels of gold, with great abundance of good and exquisite spice for
smells, and knew moreover that there was in the treasury about two thousand
talents of sacred silver, yet he would not touch it in any wise, nor suffer any
thing to be taken from it. We that say we are christians, follow a far off
the pierie of these heathen men, when as both great and small watch for nothing
more than how to intrappe the goods of the Church to make them serve our
delights and pleasures. Moreover we see that this cursed plant of covetousness
grows as much in the house of prayer, as in the courts of kings and princes.
The corruption also that has followed the same, is known sufficiently in those
men, who to satisfy their insatiable desires call themselves protectors of
this Hydra Ignorance, to the destruction and perdition of their own souls, and
of ten thousand mo for whom they are to answer. Iouian Pontanus rehearses a
pleasant history of a cardinal The great covetousness of a cardinal.
named Angelot, who was well punished for his covetousness. This cardinal used
when his horse-keepers had in the evening given oats to his horses, to come
down all alone without light by a trap door into the stable, and so steal
their oats and carry it into his garner whereof he kept the key himself. He
continued his goings and commings so often, that one of his horse-keepers not
knowing who was this thief, hid himself in the stable, and taking him at the
deed doing, (being ignorant who it was) bestowed so many blows on him with a
pitchforke, that he left him half dead, so that he was feign to be carried by
four men into his chamber. John Maria Duke of Millan, The cruel punishment of
a covetous curate.
chasticed very justly, but ouer-seuerely, the covetousness of a Curate, who
denied the service of his office in the burying of a dead body, because his
widow had not wherewith to pay him the charges of the burial. For the Duke
himself going to the funerals of the dead, caused the priest to be taken and
bound to the corse, and so cast them both into one pit. A cruelty no less
detestable than the vice of those wretches that sell the gifts of God, and make
merchandise of that, which they ought to give freely to the people. Now to end
our matter, we maintain this, 1. Tim. 6. 10.
that covetousness and unlawful desire of riches, is the root of all evil,
misery and calamity. Moreover it is more to be misliked in great men when it
follows riot and prodigality, than if it be joined with niggardlines, as well
for the reasons before touched, as also because niggardly and covetous princes
use more carefully in their estates and dignities to provide such men as are
prudent and stayed, for the preservation of their subjects, knowing that their
own ruin depends of their undoing. Which thing voluptuous What magistrates
are best liked of covetous princes.
princes neglect, because they dream of nothing but of their pleasures, and so
provide none but such as will serve their humor therein, and flatterers, or
else such as will give them most money wherewith to maintain their delights.
And let us further know, that all covetous men go astray from the right way of
truth, and infold themselves in many griefs and miseries, and become odious to
every one. Besides, not being content with their daily bread, when contrariwise
their desire is infinite, they evidently mock God as often as they make that
petition: because they labor to conceal and to dissemble before him that
knows all things, their covetous and greedy affection, whereas true prayer
ought to declare and to open the inward meaning of the heart. Let us therefore 1.
Tim. 6. 6. Matthew. 6. 19.
that are better instructed learn, that godliness with contentation is great
gain: and let us not wearye our selves in the heaping up of treasure, which
the rust and moath may consume and eat, and the thief steal, but We must
renounce unjust riches.
let us renounce riches and the world, over which Satan bears rule, least in
that terrible day he accuse us before the great Judge, and convince us of
taking some thing of his, and then the Judge being upright and just, deliver us
into his hands to throw us into darkness, where there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth for evermore.


Of Envy, Hatred, and Backbiting. Chap. 43.
ARAM. THe mind of man, which of it own nature is created sociable, gracious,
and ready to help every one, yea, which by the force of charity working
together with it, feels it self as it were constrained to mourn with those
that weep, and to rejoice with them that laugh, is able to show nothing more
Nothing more unworthy the spirit of man than envy.
unworthy it self, than to be overcome of envy, which is a wild plant in the
soul, bringing forth clean contrary effects to that good will which we owe to
our neighbor, and comprehending in it all injustice generally, and all
wickedness of men: as we may see if you think good (my companio^s) to search
more narowly into the nature of this vice.


ACHITOB. Envy proceeds of a naughty disposition, and provoke light
brains (as Pindarus says) to rejoice in beholding the adversity of some, and
to be vexed The nature of Envy.
at the happy success of others: causing men also to delight in backbiting
honest men, especially such as are praised. But take heed (says Pittacus)
least, seeking to avoid envy, thou becommest miserable.


ASER. Hatred and Illwil are the companions of Envy.
Glory and virtue (says Virgil) are always envied: which vice is commonly
accompanied with Hatred and Ill Will, whereby men are driven forward to detract
and slander others. But he that keeps his mouth (says the wise man,)
keeps his soul. Let us then hear AMANA, who will instruct us more at large
in this which is here propounded unto us.


AMANA. That wicked and subtle enemy of mankind, not being able to abide the
glory whereunto God had called men, of which he deprived himself through What
execrable ruits envy has broughtf oorth.
his pride, was driven with envy to tempt our first parents: whose ingratitude
conceiving sin in the soul of man, the first fruit brought forth by this
cursed plant, seems likewise to have been envy, with which Adams eldest
son being moved, slew his only brother. Oh cursed and furious envy, oh
fruitful branch of execrable evils, seeing by thee man was first beguiled, and
induced afterward to admit murder into his heart, and to water the earth, being
yet virgine-like, with his brothers blood: whereby he began his chief work
upon innocence, to the end that wicked men might from father to son have this
prerogative to oppress the good! Is there any vice then amongst us which we
ought to hate and fly from more than from envy, which having nothing of her
first evil nature diminished, leads men to most unjust and detestable
actions? Nevertheless, to what passion are we more inclined, or do we nourish
more willingly than this? Let every one enter into himself, and undoubtedly he
shall find there a thousand enuies, which are never without hatred and rancor,
grafted in the secretest place of his soul. True it is, that envy according to
the subjects which it meets withal, brings forth more pernicious effects
in some, and less hurtful in others. But how soever it be, this passion is
always blame-woorthie, and ought to be eschewed of every good and virtuous
man, whose desire is, not to wander out of the path of duty and honesty. What
Envy is.
We say therefore that Envy is a grief arising of another man's prosperity,
and that malignitie is commonly Malignitie is defined of some to be the effect
of that malice which one man bears to another.
joined with it, whether it be the fountain thereof, as some say, or one part
thereof, as others will have it. This malignitie is a delight and pleasure
taken in another man's harm, although we receive no profit thereby: and it
seems to be accidental, that is, procured by hatred or ill will, arising of
some evil affection that one man bears to another. For this cause Plutark
distinguishes hatred from envy, saying: that hatred is bred in our hearts
through an imagination The difference between hatred and envy.
and conceit which we have, that he whom we hate behaueth himself wickedly,
either toward all men generally, or particularly toward us: but that men
envy only those whom they know to be in prosperity. And so it seems, that
envy is indefinite and not limited, much like to sore eyes, that are offended
at every cleernes and light, but that hatred is limited, being always grounded
and stayed upon some certain objects in regard of it self. Moreover, no man
has just cause to envy another man's prosperity. For he does no man wrong,
because he is happy: whereas on the contrary side many are justly hated for
their vices and impieties, and ought To hate the wicked is a property of a
good man.
to be shunned of good men: which hatred of the wicked is a property that
belongs to good men. But the hatred that is borne toward good men, is a
passion not much separated from envy. And thus may these two passions,
resembling two plants, be said to be nourished, preserved, and increased by the
self same means, albeit they succeed one another. The same Plutark being
desirous to teach us, Envy compared to sorcerie.
how we ought to abhor envy, calls it sorcerie: because through the poison
thereof, it does not only fill the envious body with a naughty and hurtful
disposition, but the infection disperseth it self also through the eyes, even
upon them that behold it, so that they are touched therewith, as it were by
some poisonfull influence. Likewise he compares it to the flies called
Cantharides. To Cantharides
For as they alight especially upon the fairest wheat, and most blown roses:
so envy commonly sets it self against the honestest men, and such as have
most glory and virtue. Power, honor, strength, riches, are but brands to The
firebrands of envy.
kindle the fire thereof. Therefore Thucidides says, that a wise man desires
to be envied, to the end he may do great things. Bias said, that envy and an
old house oftentimes light upon a man, and never knock at his gates. Envy
most of al hurtful to the envious person.
But if envy be hurtful to others, it is much more noisome to him that
possesses it, tormenting him within continually with a thousand turbulent
passions, which shorten his days, diminishes powers of his body, and are a
great deal more pernicious to his soul. For it will not suffer him to taste
or conceive any good speech, or sound instruction, from whomsoever it comes:
but causes him to reject and speak against it, as if he were jealous and
envious of his own good. The occasion whereof is the ill will which naturally
he bears against all them that deserve more than himself, whereupon he
strives rather to blame, or to wrest in ill part whatsoever was well meant,
than to reap any profit thereby. And if he hear a man commend other men's
devices, or any of his own doings contrary to his mind, he thinks that he
has so many blows given him with a cudgel. Thus we see, that envy wishing
well to none, does no less torment and hurt his soul that is infected
therewith. And to speak in a word, it comprehends the general injustice,
which is all kind of wickedness, and destroieth all duties of humanity, causing
men to hurt those whom they ought to love and succor. Of this wild plant of
envy, backbiting is a branch, which delights and feeds it self with
slandering and lying, whereupon good men commonly receive great plagues, when
they ouer-lightly give credit to backbiters. Of backbiting.
Therefore Diogenes the Cynick being demanded what What biting of beasts is most
dangerous.
biting of beasts was most dangerous, answered: of furious and wild beasts, the
backbiters; and of tame beasts, the flatterers. To the same purpose
Themistocles the Thebane said, that it was the greatest grief in the world, to
see the honor of a good man in the mercy of a venomous tongue, and wronged with
slanderous speeches. For seeing good fame and credit is more precious than any
treasure, a man has no less injury offered When backbiting hurts most.
him when his good name is taken away, than when he is spoiled of his
substance. But backbiting and slandering do then bring forth most pernicious
effects, when Princes are ready to hear slanderers, of whom they themselves
are in the end corrupted. For the envious and backbiting person does as a
naughty painter did, who having ilfauoredly painted certain cocks, commanded
his boy to drive the natural cocks far from his picture: so he labors as
much as may be to withdraw good men from those whom he would govern. But
because he cannot do it openly, fearing their virtue whom he hates from his
heart, he will seem to welcome, to honor, and to admire them, and yet under
hand, and behind their backs he will cast abroad and sow his slanders. And if
so be that his privy and secret reports, which prick behind, do not presently
bring forth the end of his intent, yet he keeps in memory that which Medius
vttred long since, who was as it were the master and captain of the whole
flock of flatterers, banded together about Alexander against all the honest men
in the court. This fellow taught, that they A pestilent precept of Medius given
to backbiters.
should not spare to nippe boldly and to bite with store of slanders. For
(quoth he) although he that is bitten should be cured of the wound, yet the
skarre at the least will still remain. And by such skars of lies and falf
accusations, or rather to give them a better name with Plutark, by such
fistuloes and cankers Alexander being gnawen, unjustly put to death
Callisthenes, Parmenion, and Philotas, giving himself over to the will and
possession of three of four flatterers, of whom he was clothed, decked, set
forth and adored as it were a barbarian image. Such is the force and efficacy
of lying joined with flattery over that soul, which has no sound judgment of
reason to discern truth from falsehood, or a good nature from a malicious. True
it is, that this comfort cannot be taken away from good men, The comfort which
cannot be taken away from good men.
namely, to be persuaded that the sleights of backbiters and slanderers are
able to prevail but little against the invincible tower of sacred virtue, and
of an assured hope well grounded, which, whatsoever comes to pass, triumph
always, and victoriously hold envy and backbiting under their feet. And
although these vices by reason of their force cause them to suffer sometimes,
yet patience keeps them from being overcome, so that they never sink down
under adversities, but even then lay hands upon the haven of their
deliverance. So that if princes would Good counsel for princes against
flatterers.
not fall into those inconveniences, nor be deceived as this great Macedonian
monarch was, they must, upon the reports of backbiters, thoroughly and with
reason weigh all things, and not suffer themselves to be persuaded by
slanderers, but discern their words with a sound judgment. Further let us
note, that they which lend their ears We must not lend our ears to slanderers.
to their lies and detractions, are no less to be blamed and reprehended, than
the slaunderers themselves, because they are both touched with the same
imperfection, I mean, of taking delight in the evil report of another. And as
the slanderer hurts by accusing those that are not present, so does he that
suffers himself to be persuaded before he has learned the truth of things.
Moreover, they that accustom themselves to hear willingly Who delight most in
reading of fables.
reports and lies, commonly also take more pleasure in reading and learning
fables and dreams, faults and vices noted in peoples and nations, than in true
narrations and goodly sentences made and written with good judgment and
diligent study, or in perusing the honors, heroical facts, and commendations
given to virtuous and famous men, which does touch and grieve them no less
than it does the envious and backbiter: whereas they ought to accept of those
things as of spurs to drive them forward unto virtue. Therefore whosoever
considers well all those pernicious effects that are procured through
backbiting, he shall know that it is a great point of modesty, and most
necessary for him that has profited well in Moral Philosophy, not to suffer
any man to be blamed and evil spoken of in his presence, although he were his
A subtle practice of envious men.
capital enemy. We see also that this crafty and subtle kind of wickedness is
usually practiced of backbiters and envious persons, when they perceive that
they cannot cause themselves to be accounted as honest me^ as they are who^
they purpose to slander, then they labor to prove that these men are not so
honest, as some others whom they comme^d and prefer, seeking by that means to
cover their hatred and il-will, and to get credit to their slander by that
praise, which they give indirectly to others. They spare not the dead many
times, neither is there any let in them why through their envy they draw them
not out of that rest wherein they are, which is detestable impiety. Now seeing
we know what evil proceeds from these wild and naughty plants of envy, hatred
and backbiting, and that naturally, as inheritors of the vice and sin of our
first parents, we carry in our hearts, I know not what envy, jealousy and
emulation against some one or other, let us beware that we norish not such
vicious passions, but weaken their force, and make the^ A mean to resist envy
and hatred.
altogether unable to cause us to depart from duty: let us accustom our
selves not to envy the prosperity of our enemies, neither to backbite them in
any sort. And if it be possible, let us not be sparing in giving unto them
their praise and honor, whenever they do any thing that deserves justly to
be commended: because that also brings greater praise to him that gives it.
For the^ if it fall out so that he reproves somewhat in his enemy, his
accusation carries more credit and force with it, as that which proceeds
Equity and Justice are the only bounds of a good man's hatred.
not from the hatred of his person, but from a dislike of his doings, thereby
declaring that equity and justice only are the bounds of his hatred. Besides
we shall reap a greater benefit than is hitherto rehearsed. For when we
accustom our selves to praise our enemies for well doing, and are not grieved
when any prosperity befalls them, we shall utterly drive from us the vice of
envy and jealousy over the good success of our friends and acquaintance, when
they attain to honor. Whereas on the contrary side if we acquaint our selves
and take delight in envying the welfare of our enemies, we shall do the like
many times to our friends: as we see experience thereof in many at this day,
who are so touched with this vice, that they rejoice at the evil which
happens to their wel-willers, and to such as are the occasion of their good
and preferment. But if we be desirous to discharge our duty toward our
neighbors for whose profit we are borne, let us seek to practice that
sentence of Cicero, that an honest man and good citizen never ought to be moved
with hatred or envy upon supposed crimes, no not toward his enemy, wishing to
die rather tha^ to offend against Justice, which is an utter enemy to that
vice. This also will be a good help and mean to keep us from backbiting, if
What scoffing is, and how it is to be avoided.
we eschew al kind of scoffing, which (as Theophrastus says) is nothing else
but a close and colored reproof of some fault, which by little and little
inureth him that mocketh to back bite another openly and untruly. This great
imperfection of gibing is very familiar amongst us, although it be as unseemly
for an honorable personage as some other more infamous vice. But to the end we
may have better occasion to keep us from it, let us know that many A scoff is
many times worse taken than any other injurious speech.
times a man is more moved with a gibing gird, than with an injury: because
this latter proceeds commonly from the vehemency of sudden choler, even
against his will that utters it, but the other is more taken to heart, as that
which seems to come from a settled will and purpose to offer wrong, and from a
voluntary malitiousnes without any necessity. If we be disposed to be merry,
How mirth is commendable.
as sometimes opportunity, place, and persons inuit us thereunto, let it be
done with a good grace, and without offense to any. Now although envy and
backbiting, by reason of their pernicious effects, are so odious to all
honorable and virtuous personages, yet no other revenge is to be sought or
desired, than that punishment which follows and grows with the vice it
self, which never suffers him that is touched therewith, to enjoy any rest
in his soul, as we have already learned. Neither is there any great care to be
had for the matter, seeing envious persons and backbiters are no ways able to
bite the deserts of good men. But if we would have their punishment A notable
way how to be revenged upon the envious.
augmented and doubled, there is no better way, than to study so much the more
to do well, as we see them labor more earnestly to envy and to condemn our
dealings. For as the Sun being directly over the top of any thing whatsoever,
if it leave any shadow at all, yet is it but short and little, because the
light thereof is dispersed round about the same: so the excellency of virtue,
glory, and honor, in the end constrains the venomous tongue to drink and to
swallow down her own poison, not daring to bring it again in sight, whereby
envy and blame are as it were wholly extinguished, and unable to hurt good men
any more. This reason caused Phillip king of Macedonia to make this answer to
certain, who told him, that the Graecians spoke ill of him behind his back,
notwithstanding he did them much good, and therefore willed him to chastise
them: What would they do then (quoth Phillip took occasion through backbiting
to do better.
this noble and gentle Prince) if we should do them any harm? But they make
me become a better man. For I strive daily both in my words and deeds to
prove them liars. And another time, as his friends counseled him to put to
death, or to banish a Gentleman of Macedonia, who continued in slandering him,
he would not do either of both, saying: that it was no sufficient cause to
condemn him to death: and as for banishing him, he said: that it was a great
deal better if he stirred not out of Macedonia, where all men knew that he
lied, than if he went amongst strangers to speak ill of him, who because they
knew him not well, might peradventure admit his slander as true. Whereby this
virtuous Prince at one time showed forth the effects of three excellent
virtues: first, of Clemency, in that he would not put him to death, of whom
he had received great injury: then of Magnanimity, in contemning injury: and
lastly, of wonderful Prudence, in that he did not banish him. And in deed he
was of such a gentle nature, that he would never punish them that gave him an
evil report, but rather took away the occasion thereof, as heretofore we
have in part mentioned it. And for a greater testimony of the goodness of this
Monarch, the answer he made to them that counseled him to destroy the city
of Athens, deserves well to be here set down. I do all things (quoth he to
them) for glory, how then should I destroy Athens, which by reason of
learning, is the Theater of glory? The example of Demetrius Phalerius, Athens
the Theater of glory.
a Prince of immortal renown, serves fitly to teach us what small account we
are to make of the dealings of envious men, so far ought we to be from caring
either for their doings or sayings. When word was brought to this Prince, that
the Athenians, moved with envy against him, had broken down those three
hundred images, which were before erected in their street of Ariopagus to his
honor, and thereupon was provoked by his Council to be revenged of them, he
said: The Athenians may well throw down my images, but they are not able to
abase my virtues, for whose sake my images were heretofore erected for a
public spectacle. And truly those acts of Princes, which, being done in
their life The best monument for a Prince.
time, are worthy of memory, may serve them for an everlasting monument, and
not Images and Tombs made with men's hands, which length of time, besides a
thousand other accidents may bring to powder. Neither are they deprived of the
same glory that live under the government of great men, when, according to
their places and callings, they direct their actions to the benefit and
safety of the Commonwealth. For whenever envy labors to hurt them with
supposed crimes, their innocence Innocence is a tower of brass against
slanderers.
(as Horace* says) will be unto them in place of an inexpugnable tower of
brass: so that being assured of that, they need not stand in any fear of the
cruel teeth of slanderers. Therefore Socrates being reproved by Hermogenes,
because he did not once dream of defending himself when he was accused, made
this answer: I have dreamed of that all my life time, by striving to live
well. To conclude then our present discourse, let us learn to unclothe our
hearts of all envy and hatred, which procure so many turbulent and hurtful
passions in the soul, and overthrow all that charity and love, which we
ought to bear toward every one. Let us fear 1. John 3. 15.
this sentence pronounced by the holy spirit, that whosoever hates his
brother is a man slayer. And if we see that vice and imperfections reign in
our like, let us hate their evil manners, and love the welfare of their
souls, by endeavoring to bring them back again into the path way of virtue,
until we see that all hope of remedy is taken away by reason of their long
settled habit and continuance in vice: for then we are to shun altogether the
hurtful conversation of such forlorn men. Let us take heed that we please
not our selves in detracting and backbiting, or in speaking rashly of any
without aduisement taken of whom, to whom, and what we speak. Let us not be
given to lying, or to harken to slanderers, but following the counsel of the
Scripture, let us lay aside 1. Pet. 2. 1. 2.
all malitiousnes, and all guile, and dissimulation, and envy, and all evil
speaking, and as new borne babes desire the milk of understanding, which we
may as it were boast that we have in the true and right knowledge of Justice,
which is to render to God that which is due to him, according to piety, and to
our neighbors whatsoever belongs to them, according to the duty of
charity, 1. Cor. 13. 4.
which is gentle, not easily provoked to anger, nor envious, nor rejoicing in
iniquity, but always in the truth.


Of Fortune. Chap. 44.
AMANA. IF I be not deceived (my Companions) we have hitherto sufficientlye
discoursed of the four Moral virtues, being rivers that flow from the
fountain of duty and honesty, as also of all the parts that belong unto
them, and of their contrary vices. Therefore from hence forth we are to make
choice of some other matter, and to apply that which we might have learned in
the discourses of our Moral Philosophy, unto Estates, charges, and conditions
of life, whereunto every one of us may be called during this life: yea, let us
assaie to give advice and council to superiors, according to the measure of
our judgment. But because, as I think, the entry to so high a matter,
requires some leisure to think upon it, I am of opinion, that we were best
to defer this point until the next days work: and in the mean time, for
the spendinge of the rest of this afternoon, look out some matter subject,
apt, and fit to recreate our spirits withal: which, because naturally they
delight in variety and diversity of things, cannot have a more convenient
matter, than to make sport with the diverse and sundry effects of Fortune,
which, according to Fortune is constant in her inconstancy.
the saying of the Ancients, is very constant in her inconstancy. Further, let
us consider how we may use this word of Fortune, which is so common amongst
us, and not abuse it.


ARAM. To him (says Cicero) whose hope, reason, and cogitation depends of
Fortune, nothing can be so certain or assured unto him, that he may persuade
himself it will abide by him, no not one day. But he is most happy that is of
himself sufficient in every respect, and that places the hope of all his
affairs in himself, in regard of men.


ACHITOB. I am she (says Virtue, speaking in Mantuan) that surmounteth
Fortune, and the scourge that punishes sins. Vice and Virtue (says Plutark)
have no masters to rule over them: and they are very blind, who, calling
Fortune blind, suffer themselves to be guided and led by her. But we must
learn of thee (ASER) what we are to think of this counterfeit Goddess.


ASER. If we are persuaded, that he who is Justice it self, and the essential
truth, makes Princes contemptible Psalm. 107. 40. 41.
(as it is said in the Scripture) and causes them to err in desert places out
of the way, raising up the poor out of misery, and making him families like a
flock of sheep, there is no doubt but that Fortune being an Epicurian word,
rather than an Heathenish, is nothing else What Fortune is.
but a feigned device of man's spirit, and an imagination without truth: upon
which (as Plutarke says) a man can not settle his judgment, nor yet
comprehend it by the discourse of reason. So that we must confess, that all
things are guided and governed by the providence of God, God orders casual
things necessarily.
who knows and orders casual things necessarily. Which albeit we easily
confess with the mouth, as also that prosperity and adversity depend only
of the will of God, yet we may daily note in many of us, effects clean
contrary to the word, in that, when we deliberate about our affairs, we
presently cast our eye upon humane Humane means are but second causes.
means, to come to the end of them, although they are but second causes,
casting behind our backs that help, which is from above. And when we want the
blessing of God, through his anger and just indignation, (which we care not to
appease) and so for the most part stumble upon the clean contrary of all our
platformes and goodly enterprises; then we accuse, not our ignorance and
ingratitude toward his Majesty, but the unfortunate mishap and chance of
humane things, which through the common error of men, we attribute to Fortune.
Now, Acts. 17. 28. Romans 11. 33.
knowing that we live, and move, and have our being in God only, that his
mysteries are great and wonderful, and such, that if we should go about to
sound the bottom of them, it were all one as if we sought to pearce the
heavens, after the manner of the Giants, set forth unto us by the Poets: that
our way is not in our power, and that Ier. 10. 23. Exodus 21. 13. Deuteronomy. 19. 4.
5. Prou. 16. 33.
of our selves we cannot direct our steps: that it is the Lord that offers a
man into his hands, who unwittingly kills him with the head of his Axe
slipped from the helue: that lots cast at adventure, fall out according to his
judgment, and that generally all things are done by the ordinance of God, I
say, knowing all these things, yet because the order, reason, end, and
necessity of those things which are so strange, uncertain, and mutable in
the world, are for the most part hidden in the counsel of God, and cannot be
comprehended by the How we may use these words of Fortune and Chance.
opinion and reach of man, we may well call them casual and chancing, in
respect of our selves. The like we may both conceive of all future events,
holding them in suspense, because they may fall out either of the one or the
other side, (and yet being resolved of this, that nothing shall come to pass
which God has not ordained) and also note them out by this word Fortune, not
attributing thereunto any power over the inconstancy and continual alteration
of humane things: especially seeing they are so changeable, that it would be a
very hard matter (speaking after the manner of men) to comprehend them under a
more proper and fit word. The definition also, which the Ancients gave of
Fortune, is very agreeable to the effect of the thing signified, and of that
whereof we have daily experience: namely, that there is no other final end of
chang and alteration in man, than that of The opinions of ancient Philosophers
touching Fortune.
his being. Plato says, that Fortune is an accidental cause, and a
consequence in those things which proceed from the counsel of man. Aristotle
says, that Fortune is a casual and accidental cause in things, which, being
purposely done for some certain end, have no apparent cause of their falling
out otherwise: so that a man may well say, that such a thing came to him by
Fortune, which falls out besides his thought, when he undertakes any work
with deliberation. Epicurus said, that Fortune was such a cause, as agreed
neither to persons, times, or manners. Theophrastus speaking of Fortune, says,
that she looks not whereat she shoots, that oftentimes she delights in
taking away that, which is gotten with very great pain, but especially in
ouerturning those felicities, which, as men think, are best stayed and assured.
Iuuenal says, that when it pleases her, she makes a Consul of a Rhetoritian:
and likewise clean contrary, having this property in her to rejoice greatly
in the variety of chances, and to deride all the devices of men, oftener
lifting up into the place of sovereign authority such as are unworthy
thereof, than those that The Romans gave great honor to Fortune.
deserve the same. Amongst the Ancients, the Romans honored Fortune more than
all the rest, esteeming of her (says Pindarus) as of the patron, nurse, and
vpholder of the city of Rome. They builded for her many sumptuous Temples,
wherein she was adored under sundry names, and honorable titles for a Goddess
of singular power: insomuch that they thought themselves more beholding to her
for the greatness and prosperity of their Empire, than to virtue. Sylla having
attained to the sovereign authority of a Monarch, and of Dictator, yielded
himself and all his actions to the favor of Fortune, saying, that he reputed
Sylla surnamed himself Happy.
himself to be Fortunes child, and thereupon took unto him the surname of
Happy. Which opinion seems to have prevailed greatly with him, in causing
him, after he had committed infinite proscriptions, murders, and cruelties,
voluntarily and without fear to give over the Dictatorship, to lead the rest
of his years in all assurance and quietness, and as a private man to pass and
repasse through all Italy without any guard, even in the midst of them whom he
had so much offended. We read also, that when Mithridates king of Pontus wrote
unto him concerning the war, which he had undertaken against him, saying, that
he marvelled how Sylla durst buckle with his great fortune, especially knowing
that she had not deceived him at any time, whereas she never knew Sylla Consul,
he returned this answer. For this self same reason thou shall now see, how
Fortune doing her duty, will take her leave of thee to come to me. Julius
Caesar gave a certain argument I. Caesar.
of the assurance he had in Fortune, when, entering upon the sea in a little
Fregate in a very tempestuous weather, and the Pilot making some doubt of
waighing up the Anchor, he said thus unto him: Be not afraid my friend, for
thou cariest Caesar and his Fortune. Augustus Augustus.
his successor sending his Nephew to the war, wished that he might be as
valiant as Scipio, as well beloved as Pompey, and as fortunate as himself:
attributing to Fortune, as a principal work, the honor of making him so
great as he was. To this purpose also it is reported, that great acquaintance
and familiarity growing between Augustus and Antonius his Companion in the
Empire, they often passed away the time together with sundry sorts of plays
and pastimes, wherein Antonius always went away vanquished. Whereupon one of
his familiar friends well seen in the art of Divination, A true foresight of
a Soothsayer.
took occasion many times to utter his mind unto him in these or the like
speeches. Sir, what do you so near this young man? Separate your self far
from him. Your fame is greater than his, you are elder than he, you command more
men than he, you are better exercised in feats of Arms, you have greater
experience: but your familiar spirit fears his, and your fortune, which of
it self is great, flattereth his, and if you sequester not your self far
from him, she will forsake you and go to him. Thus we see what great
estimation the Romans had of Fortune, yea they stood in so great awe of her
power, P. Aemilius.
that Paulus Aemilius that great Captain said, that amongst humane things, he
never feared any one of them, but amongst divine things he always stood in
great fear of Fortune, as of her in whom there was small trust to be placed,
because of her inconstancy and mutable variety, whereby she never uses to
gratify men so liberally, or to bestow such absolute prosperity upon them,
but that some envy is mingled withal. Oh deceitful Fortune (said Demetrius)
thou art easily found, but hardly avoided! They that have labored most in
painting The description of Fortune.
out this fained Goddess, say, that she has a swift pace, a lofty mind, and
a hawtie hope. They give her light wings, a globe under her feet, and in her
hand a horn of abundance, full of all such heavenly and earthly things as
are exquisite and precious, which she pours forth liberally, when and where
she pleases. Some put a wheel into her hands, which she turns about
continually, whereby that part which is above is presently turned downward:
What is meant by Fortunes wheel.
thereby giving us to understand, that from her highest preferment she throws
down in one instant such as are most happy, into the gulf of misery. In a
word, we may well compare her to a glass, which, the brighter it is, the
sooner it is broken and dashed in pieces. Histories, the treasury Examples of
the contrary effects of Fortune.
of antiquity, set before our eyes innumerable examples of common and contrary
effects, which are wrought by this inconstant Fortune, and those oftentimes
practiced upon the same persons, whom of small she has made very great, and
after taken them down lower, yea made them more miserable (if I may so speak)
than they were Hannibal.
at their beginning. Hannibal, that renowned Captain of the Carthaginians,
that redouted enemy of the Romans, after notable victories obtained sundry
times against the^, was in the end utterly overthrown and compelled to fly
hither and thither, and to have recourse to foreign princes, into whose arms
he cast himself for the safety of his person: and after long wandering, being
old and spent, Flaminius or^tion against Hannibal.
he settled himself with the king of Bithynia. But Titus Flaminius whom the
Romans had sent ambassador to that king, required to have him, that he might
put him to death. For (quoth he) as long as he lives he will be a fire for the
Roman empire, which wants but some one or other to kindle it. When he was in
the vigor and strength of his age, neither his hand nor his body had procured
so great damage to the Romans, as his good understanding and sufficiency in
the art of war had done, being joined with the hatred he bare them. Which is
nothing diminished through old age, neither yet through the alteration of his
estate and fortune: because the nature and quality of manners continues
always. Hannibal being advertised of this request of Titus, stieped poison in
a cup of drink which he had kept a long time against an extremity. But before
he drank thereof, he vttred these words. Go to, let us deliver the people of
Rome from this great What speech Hannibal used before he poisoned himself.
care, seeing it lies so heavy upon them, and the time seems unto them
ouer-long to stay for the natural death of this poor old man, whom they hate
so extremely. And yet Titus shall not obtain a victory greatly honorable, or
worthy the praise of the ancient Romans, who, even then when Pyrrhus their
enemy warred against them, and had won battles of them, sent him word to
beware of poison that was prepared for him. Thus did this great and virtuous
captain finish his days, being utterly overthrown, and trod under foot by
fortune, which for a time had placed him in the highest degree of honor that
could be. Eumenes a Thracian, one of Alexanders lieutenants, Eumenes.
and one that after Alexanders death had great wars and made his party good
against Antigonus king of Macedonia, came to that greatness and authority
from a poor Potters son: and afterward being overcome and taken prisoner,
he died of hunger. But such preferments of fortune will not seem very strange
unto us, if we consider Pertinax.
how Pertinax came to the Empire, ascending from a simple soldier to the
degree of a captain, and afterward of Governor of Rome, being borne of a
poor countrywoman. And having reigned only two months, Aurelianus.
he was slain by the soldiers of his guard. Aurelianus from Probus.
the same place obtained the self same dignity. Probus Maximianus.
was the son of a gardener, and Maximianus of a blacksmith. Justinius.
Justinius, for his virtue surnamed the Great, from a hogheard in Thracia,
attained to the empire. Will you have a worthy example agreeable to that saying
of Iuuenal which Gregory 7.
we alleged even now? Gregory the 7. from a poor monk was lift up to the
dignity of chief bishop of Rome: and Henry Henry 4.
the 4. emperor, was brought to that extreme misery by wars, that he asked the
said Gregory forgiveness, and cast him self down at his feet. And yet before
this miserable monarch could speak with him, he stood 3. days fasting and
barefoote at the popes palace gate, as a poor suppliant waiting when he might
have entrance and access to his holiness. Jews the Meek.
Jews the Meek, emperor, and king of France, was constrained to give over
his estate, and to shut himself up in a monastery, through the conspiracy of
his own children. Valerianus.
Valerianus had a harder change of his estate, ending his days whilst he was
prisoner in the hands of Sapor king of the Parthians, who used the throat of
this miserable emperor whenever he mounted upon his horse. But was not that a
wonderful effect of fortune, which happened not long since in Munster, principal
town in the country of Westphalia* John of Leiden.
wherein a silly botcher of Holland, being retired as a poor banished man from
his country, called John of Leiden, was proclaimed king, was served and obeyed
of all the people a long time, even until the taking and subversion of the said
town after he had born out the siege for the space Mahomet.
of 3. years. Mahomet the first of that name, of a very small and abject place,
being enriched by marying his mistres, and serving his own turn very fitly
with a mutiny raised by the Sarrasins against Heracleus the emperor, made
himself their captain, took Damascus, spoiled Egypt, and finally subdued
Arabia, discomfited the Persians, and became both a monarch and a prophet. Will
you see a most wonderful effect of fortune? Look upon the procedings of that
great Tamburlane, who being a pesants son and keeping cattle, corrupted
Tamburlane.
500. sheepheards his companions. These men selling their cattle, betook them
to arms, robbed the merchants of that country, and watched the high ways.
Which when the king of Persia understood of, he sent a captain with a 1000.
horse to discomfit them. But Tamburlane dealt so with him, that ioining both
together they wrought many incredible feats of arms. And when civil war
grew betwixt the king and his brother, Tamburlane entered into the brothers pay,
who obtained the victory by his means, and thereupon made him his lieutenant
general. But he not long after spoiled the new king, weakened and subdued the
whole kingdom of Persia. And when he saw himself captain of an army of 400000.
horsemen, and 600000. footme^, he made war with Bajazet emperor of the Turks,
overcame Bajazet.
him in battle, and took him prisoner. He obtained also a great victory
against the Souldan of Egypt, and the king of Arabia. This good success (which
is most to be marvelled at and very rare) accompanied him always until his
death, in so much that he ended his days amongst his children, as a peaceable
governor of innumerable countries. From him descended the great Sophy who
reigns at this day, and is greatly feared and redoubted of the Turk. But
that miserable Bajazet who had conquered before so many peoples, and subdued
innumerable cities, ended his days in an iron cage, wherein being prisoner,
and overcome with grief to see his wife shamefully handled, in waiting at
Tamburlanes table with her gown cut down to her Navel, so that her secret
parts were seen, this unfortunate Turk beat his head so often against the
Cage, that he ended his life. But what need we draw out this discourse
further to show the strange dealinges, and marvelous chaunges of fortune in
the particular estates and conditions of men, which are to be seen daily
amongst us, seeing the soueraign Of the four sovereign Empires.
Empires of Babylon, of Persia, of Graecia, and of Rome, which in man's
judgment seemed immutable and inexpugnable, are fallen from all their
glittering show and greatness, into utter ruin and subversion, so that of the
last of them, which surpassed the rest in power, there remains only a
commandment limited and restrained within the confines of Almaigne, which then
was not the tenth part of the rich provinces subject to this Empire? Is there
any cause then why we should be astonished, if little kingdoms, commonwealths
and other civil governments end, when they are come to the utmost, and full
point of their greatness? And much less if it fall out so with me^, who by
nature are subject to change, and of themselves desire and seek for nothing
else but alteration. Being assured therefore, that there is such uncertainty
in all humane things, let us wisely prepare our selves, and apply We must
prepare our selves for all events.
our will to all events, whose causes are altogether incomprehensible in
respect of our understandings, and quite out of our power. For he that is able
to say, I have prevented thee O fortune, I have stopped all thy passages, and
closed up all thy ways of entrance, that man puts not all his assurance in
bars or locked gates, nor yet in high walls, but staieth himself upon
Phylosophicall sentences and discourses of reason, whereof all they are capable
that employ their wills, travel and study thereupon. Neither may we doubt of
them or distrust our selves, but rather admire and greatly esteem of them,
being ravished with an affectionate spirit. He that takes least care for to
morrow (says Epicurus) comes thereunto Who takes greatest joy in outward
goods.
with greatest joy. And (as Plutarke says) riches, glory, authority and
credit, rejoice them most, that stand least in fear of their contraries. For
when a man seeks after any of them with an ouer-burning desire, whereby also
too great a fear of loosing them is imprinted in him, the pleasure which he
has by enjoying the same, is very weak and unstable, much like to a flame
blown up and down with the wind. But as for the power of fortune (says the
same Philosopher) it brings down those men that of their own nature are
cowards, fearful and of small courage. Neither must we attribute cowardlines
to Of the power of fortune.
misfortune, nor valor and prudence to fortune, who is not able to make a man
great without virtue. For what good will weapons do a man without experience,
riches without liberality, victory without bounty and clemency, fighting
without valor and boldness: briefly all fortunes goods without knowledge how
to use them well? Let us learn also that it is too great blockishnesse to
attribute the cause of the change of monarchies, commonwealths, estates, of
battles lost, and generally of all casual mishaps, both general and
particular, to certain second causes: one while accusing the ambition of some,
the ignorance or negligence of others, the small courage, want of money, of
men, or of munitions. But we must Whether we must look in the change and
success of things.
look higher, and turn toward him who uses such means in the execution of
his wonderful counsel, when he minds to chastise and to punish men for
their offenses. Example hereof we have in those great monarchies of Babylon, of
Persia, and of Graecia, whose marks are no more to be seen, than the pathe of
a ship in the water, or way of a bird flying in the air. And yet they were
overthrown and vanquished by such as had a thousand times less humane force
and chief sinews of war, as treasure, men, munition and other furniture,
than their monarchs and emperors had, who abounded every way. But God
purposed to punish their pride and iniquity. Let us therefore stand in awe,
not of the goddess fortune, which is but the dream of man, and cannot (as
Cicero says) greatly hurt him, that judges hope grounded upon virtue more
firm, than that which is built upon her forces, but let us fear him who
directs and disposes in wisdom all things created to their proper end, The
proper end of all things.
which is the glory of his name, and salvation of his elect: albeit the order
which he observes, the cause, reason, and necessity of them, are for the most
part hid in his secret counsel, and cannot be comprehended by the sense of
man. And yet not so hid, but that we ought prudently to consider of those means
which he offreth unto us for our use, after we have endeavored to mitigate and
to appease his wrath and anger through the amendment of our life, and have
called for aid and help of him in all our enterprises grounded by reason upon
duty.


The end of the eleventh days work.
THE TWELFTH DAYS WORK.
Of Marriage. Chap. 45.
ASER. IT is great perfection (as Seneca writes) for a man to take in hand
and desire to A wise man is not desirous of many things.
obtain but one only thing. But no man is one and the same, except a wise man:
all other men are of diverse forms. Who knows not with how great disquietnes
the mind of man is set on fire, with what lightness it is carried hither and
thither, and with what ambition and desire it is stirred up to take hold of
many sundry things at Distinctions of callings appointed from the beginning.
Genesis 4. 2.
once? Notwithstanding we must diligently mark, how the heavenly wisdom has
made a distinction of estates and kinds of life amongst men from the
beginning, appointing that of Adams two first children, the one should be a
husbandman, the other a shepherd. Since that, the Every one must abide in his
calling. 1. Cor. 7. 20.
self same providence has always commanded, that every one of us should
look unto his calling in all the actions of his life, accounting thereof as of
a station assigned unto us by his majesty, and as of a perpetual rule whereby
we must direct the end of our intents, and following the will of God, strive
to continue such men to the end of our days, as we once purposed with our
selves to be. For we may assure our selves, that there is no work so small and
contemptible, which does not shine and appear precious before the heavenly
throne, if we do it in All things done in faith are precious in Gods sight.
faith according to our calling, and give glory to the Eternal for our whole
condition and state of life. Now we know that after God had created man by his
almighty power and unspeakable goodness, to make him partaker of his glory,
and to rule over the earth, the sea, and all things contained in them, he gave
him presently the woman for a faithful companion, and sweet solace to his
life, and for the preservation of his kind, instituting and Genesis 2. 24.
sanctifying marriage from that time forward. Therefore I think my companions,
that we ought to handle this first, because it is the first calling of man,
most common, and most honorable: to the end that we may, as we said yesterday,
begin to apply the actions and practice of the virtues, of which we have
hitherto entreated, to estates and conditions of life, whereunto each of us may
be called.


AMANA. If we could (says Plato) behold with bodily eyes the beauty that
honesty has in her, we would Honesty is always beautiful.
be far in love with her: but she is to be seen only with the eyes of the
mind. And truly with the same eyes we may behold it in marriage, if we
consider narowly the honesty of the coupled life, when it is in every respect
absolute, than the holy bond whereof, the earth has nothing more beautiful or
honest.


ARAM. Marriage is honorable among all. Heb. 13. 4. Prou. 18. 22.
Marriage (as the scripture says) is honorable among all, and the bed
undefiled. He that finds a wife, finds a good thing, and receives favor
of the Lord. Therefore of thee (ACHITOB) we desire to understand more at large
what thou have learned concerning this matter discussed with so many contrary
opinions both old and new.


ACHITOB. Nature having brought us forth to Man borne to live in society.
live in society, and not alone, like to brute beasts, it must needs be
(says Aristotle) that he which lives solitarily, The definition of society.
is either a very beast, or more than a man. Now a society is an assembly and
agreement of many in one, seeking after some good thing that is profitable,
pleasant, and honest, atleast that seems to be so: or else laboring to The
end of society.
fly from and to eschew some evil. Every society respects the maintenance
and preservation of Monarchies, Kingdoms, and Commonwealths. But because no
one whole and general thing can be known (as the Philosophers say) except the
parts thereof be first known, it agrees very fitly with the cause of our
meeting together, and is also very necessary for us, to learn what the
society of wedlock is, which being the seminary and preservation The
definition of wedlock.
of all societies, is nothing else but a communion of life between the husband
and the wife, extending it self to all the parts that belong to their house,
of which The author and antiquity of marriage.
we are to consider hereafter. The original and antiquity of this society,
called Marriage, is especially worthy of memory, because God himself was the
author thereof. The end thereof.
For he had no sooner created the first man, but he purposed to give him a
wife, for a faithful companion, a comfortresse of his life, and a help like
unto himself. Which he performed, as soon as he thought upon it: forasmuch as
with him to will, is to be able, and to do: as likewise to Another end.
be able and to do, is to will. Furthermore, he instituted this divine mystery
for the general increase of mankind, and lawful propagation of nature, even
in the time of innocence before man had sinned, sanctifieng it at the same
time with his blessing. Unto which necessity of marriage, man had made himself
a great deal more subject through the curse of sin, which has given place
in his The necessity and third end of marriage.
soul to the concupiscences of the flesh. Whereby it appears that we have
need of this remedy in two respects, namely: in regard of the end and condition
of our first nature, as also by reason of sin, which came in afterward, except
in those to whom God has granted the special grace and gift of continency,
which is as rare a thing as Continency a rare gift.
any other whatsoever. Notwithstanding there has alwais been a thousand
contrary opinions as touching this matter, namely, whether marriage is to be
desired and sought after, or rather to be hated and eschewed, neither part
wanting reasons, oftentimes more glorious in show than forceable to conclude
for the defense of their saying. Among the Philosophers, Pythagoras the first
of them, was The variety of opinions touching marriage.
one of the greatest enemies of marriage, as may be proved by that which is
written of him. For being requested to be at the marriage of a friend of his, he
excused himself, saying: Pythagoras opinion of marriage.
that he was never desirous to go to such a feast, or to be at such a funeral:
judging that it was all one for a man to marry a wife, and to wed a coffin,
and to put himself into a tomb, or to take a sheet for the beginning of his
burial. Many other Philosophers were of his opinion, yea they said, that nature
appointing a contrary to every living creature, has also given to man (to whom
all other things are subject) the woman for his contrary, whose malice is a
sworn enemy to the reason of man. Secundus was of this sect, who Secundus
opinion of a wife.
being demanded what a wife was, the contrary (quoth he) of a husband. Moreover
they said, that a woman's nature was such, that although she had continued 30.
years with her husband, yet he should daily find in her new fancies, and
sundry sorts of behauior: so that nature seemed a stepmother to men rather than
to beasts, because these know and shun their contraries, but man is naturally
led to love and to seek after his enemy. His misery therefore is very great in
that so weak flesh is able to force a heart that is at liberty, causing a man
oftentimes to procure to himself that which does him hurt, and to make great
account of that which he conte^neth, as experience shows the same in regard
of women. Thales one of the Sages of Graecia, minding Thales judgment of
marriage.
to show that it was not good for a man to marry, when one asked him why he
married not being in the flower of his age, said, that it was not yet time.
Afterward, being grown to further age, and demanded the same question, he
answered, that the time was past. Marius the Roman asked Metellus would not
give away himself to a wife
Metellus, being a man also of great credit, why he would not take his daughter
to wife, seeing she was beautiful in body, stayed in countenance, eloquent in
speech, noble by race, rich in dowry, happy in good name, and adorned with
virtues? To whom he replied, That he knew all this to be true, yet (quoth he) I
had rather be mine own than hirs. They that follow this opinion now touched, and
abhor marriage, allege commonly these or the like reasons: that although the
name of husband be sweet and honorable, yet whosoever Reasons against marriage.
will well consider of it, shall find it full of great and intolerable burdens:
and that the time is yet to come, wherein many thorns are not found amidst the
roses of marriage, and wherein great store of hail falls not together with
that sweet rain. Who is able (say they) patiently to abide the charges of
marriage, the care of children, the want which is sometimes in the house, the
imperfections of servants, but especially the insolency and arrogancy of
Wives, and the yoke of so imperfect a sex? Who is able fully to satisfy,
Women compared to ships.
either their fleshly lust, or their insatiable pomp? Does not the old
proverb say, that women and ships are never so well rigged, but that still
there remains something to be amended? Whereupon I would conclude willingly,
that if a married man never loath his estate, yet he tireth himself at the
least. Riches breed care, poverty grief, sailing terrifieth, eating
hinders, walking wearieth. All these troubles are (we see) dispersed or
divided amongst many, but married men have them altogether. For if we mark a
married man, we shall seldom see him, but either pensive or sad, or weary, or
hindered, and sometime amazed or afraid of that which may befall him, or may
peradventure be committed by his wife. Concerning good advise and choice for
the obtaining How hard a matter it is to marry well.
of a good marriage. If thou take a poor wife, she will be contemned, and thy
self less esteemed: if thou take her rich, she will look to command thee,
and of a free man to make thee a slave. So that when thou think to take an
equal companion to wife, thou shall wed an intolerable mistres, I know not
whether I should say, a she devil. If thou mariest a fair woman, thou put
thy self in great danger, lest thy round head become forked, which would be a
fearful metamorphosis and alteration, if it were visible and apparent. Every
castle is hard to keep, how well soever it be watched, when it is assaulted by
many: and his victory is in a desperate case, who being alone, is compelled to
fight against many. What shall I say more? Wealth makes a woman proud, beauty
suspected, and hardness of favor lothsom. Is there any thing (as Plutarke says)
more light than the tongue of an unbridled woman? more nipping than her
injuries? more rash than her boldness? more execrable than her naughty
disposition? An unruly woman is full of all evil.
more dangerous than her fury? These evil speakers of women further enrich
their sayings with a thousand histories and examples, as testimonies of the
infinite miseries and inconveniences which have been procured by them First
they allege the deceiving of the first man by his wife, whereupon sin and
death, and through them all miseries entered into the world. Samson betrayed by
Dali^a, Solomon became Examples of miserable events procured by women.
brutish through his concubines, Achab rooted out through Iesabel, Marcus
Antonius slew himself for the love of Cleopatra, the destruction of Troy
because of Helena, the Pandora of Hesiodus, the pitiful death of Hercules by
Deianira, and many other miserable events procured chiefly by women, and
plentifully declared in histories. Neither do they Two good days in marriage.
forget the saying of Hipponactus, That of one marriage only two good days are
to be hoped for, namely, the marriage day, and the day of the wives death. They
say that the wedding day (according to Alexandreides speech) is the beginning
of many evils: that in no estate fortune shows her self more in constant, and
less faithful in performing her promise tha^ in marriage, as Polyhistor says:
because there is not one to be found, wherein there is not some deceit, or some
occasion of complaint given to the man. They say as Philemon said, That a wife
is a necessary and perpetual evil to her husband: that (as Diphilus said)
nothing is hardlier found in all the world than a good wife. Whereunto that old
proverb agrees, that a good wife, a good mule, and a good goat, are three
naughty Three evil beasts.
beasts. The answer also made by a noble Roman, is not forgotten of these
scuere Censorers of women, to whom when some of his acquaintance and friends
said, that he had great cause to hold himself happy and contented, because he
had a wife that was fair, rich, and come of noble parentage, he showed them
his foot, saying: My friends you see that my shoe is very new, fair and well
made, but none of you Alphonsus opinion of a perfect marriage.
can tell whereabout it pincheth me. Likewise the saying of Alphonsus king of
Arragon is alleged by them that blame marriage, namely, that if a man would see
a perfect and well agreeing marriage, the husband must be deaf, and the wife
blind, that he may not hear his wives brawling, nor she see her husbands
faults. He that trusts to a woman (said Hesiodus) is as safe as he that
hangs by the leaves of a tree in the end of Autumn when the leaves begin to
fall. I remember yet three things which I have heard uttered in contempt of
marriage: the saying of a merry conceited man, the deed of another, and the
answer of a good fellow that was in talk Three merry conceits.
of a certain marriage. They have reason (quoth the first) who say, that when a
young man is to be married, he must be arrested. For truly I think we should
fly up to heaven, if this arrest kept us not back. The second hearing this
preached, that whosoever will be saved, must bear his cross, ran to his wife
and laid her upon his neck. Thirdly, when one said to a good fellow that he
should tarry until his son were wise before he married him. Be not deceived my
friend (quoth he to him) for if he once grow to be wise he will never marry.
These and such like reasons are commonly Notable reasons in the defense of
marriage.
alleged by them that mislike marriage. But now mark what we say to the
contrary. First we have to consider the beginning and antiquity of marriage,
the place where it was instituted, and who was the Author thereof, and that in
the time of innocence, of which things we have already spoken. Moreover we
must remember, Christ honored a wedding with his presence, and with a miracle.
that the heavenly word honored with his presence, and set forth a wedding
feast with a miracle, even with the first which he wrought in this world. Can
any thing then be found more holy, than that which the holy of holies, the
father and creator of all things has established, honored and consecrated with
his presence? But what greater equity can we use tha^ to leave to our
successors that which we hold of our predecessors? By wedlock copulation we
came into the world, and by the same we must leave others behind us, to
continue that propagatio^ which has endured from our ancestors unto us. Can
there be any greater want of consideration than to seek to fly from that, as
profane which God has taken for holy? as evil, which he has reputed good?
As detestable, which he esteems holy? Is there any greater inhumanitie, than
to reject the fountain of humanity? Is there any greater ingratitude tha^ to
deny to those that are to come, that which we hold of the^ that are past? When
God created woman, not of the slime of the earth, as he did man, but Wherefore
the woman was created of the rib of man.
of his bone, did he not show thereby that he should have nothing faster
cleaving, nearer joining, or surer glued to him than his wife, especially when
he added these words, that it was not good for man to be alone, as though he
had said, Genesis 2 18.
that his life would be miserable, irksom and unpleasant, if he had not given
him a wife for a faithful companion? How dare we say, that we know better what
is meet for us, than he that made us, and knew all our life before we came out
of the bowels of our mother? then he that honored the bond of matrimony so
far as to say, that a man shall leave his father and mother, and cleave to his
wife? Is there any thing more holy than that honor which we owe to them that
have begotten us? And yet the fidelity of wedlock is preferred before fatherly
and motherly honor, that it The great pre-eminence of marriage.
should be kept and preserved even to the last gasp of life. Further we see
how the spirit of God speaking by his prophet Psalm. 45.
honoreth marriage so far, as to use it for a similitude and representation of
that holy and sacred unity, which he has with his church. What could any man
say more to extol the dignity thereof? That which God has begun, only death
ends: what God has conioined, death only separateth: what God has made
sure, man cannot shake: what he has established, man cannot abolish. Oh what
and Marriage ever used and received of all nations.
how great is the dignity, pre-eminence, and prerogative of marriage? Again, do
we not see how it has been continued throughout all ages past until this
present, received and approved of all nations, both Hebrews, Greeks, Latins and
Barbarians, so that there is no nation under the cope of heaven, how barbarous
soever it be, and far from civility, which shows not great joy and delight
at wedding feasts? Besides, who shall defend common-welths without armor and
weapons, and who shall wear armor if men be wanting? If that be not supplied
by generation which through death necessarily ends, how can the lineage and
race of mankind endure? The laws of the Romans (who were the pattern of virtue
to all nations) with rigor punished such as would not marry, forbidding the^
all public dignities, and depriving them of those which they had obtained. And
The Romans had laws in favor of marriage.
to inuit them the rather to marry, they appointed privileges for the^ that
had children, so that he was most benefited and preferred to public honors
that had most children. When Augustus Caesar was Censor, inquiry was made by
his authority of a Roman knight that had broken the law and would not marry,
whereupon he should have been punished, but that he proved that he had been
father of Augustus his care to repress the uncleanness of his subjects.
3. children. The same Augustus being come to the empire, and desirous to
correct the detestable uncleanness of his subjects, and to compel them to
contract matrimony, levied an impost by way of a fine, upon their legacies and
windfals coming by the death of others that did not marry after 25. years of
age, or that had no children. Whereby he greatly chastised whoredoms, adulteries
and sodomitrie: and furnished Rome with good citizens which then was greatly
destitute of them by reason of civil wars. What is the cause Why the dowries
of women have alwais had great privileges.
(says Vlpianus the lawyer) that women's dowries had such great privileges? It
was for no other reason, then because of the profit that comes to al
commonwealths by marriages. He that had 3. children amongst the Romans could
not be compelled to carry a message, or public embassage: he that had 5. was
exempted from personal charge: and he that had 13. from al charge. And in our
time in the common-welth of Florence (as Raphael Volaterani^ reherseth in his
Philologie) The privileges of them that had children.
Euery*citizen that is father of 5. children either males or females, is
exempted, freed, and discharged of all public tax, loan, and subsidy. If
nothing be more blessed, nor happiness more to be desired than immortality,
line all propagation makes us immortal through the continuing of kind.
Whereupon we may infer by way of conclusion, that no greater happiness can come
to man and wife in this world, than to leave issue as a testimony to
posterity, that once they were in the world, and have left behind them a token
of their life. It was enacted by Lycurgus laws, that no citizen preferring the
estate of continency before that of marriage, should be at public plays:
which at that time was a note of great ignominy. We account not him a good
gardener that painfully dresseth those fruitful trees which he has in his
garden or orchard, if he have no care to plant and graft new, A comparison
between a good gardener and a citizen.
thereby to substitute others in their place, which by succession of time wax
old and die. And how shall we take him for a good citizen, and such a one as
zealously seeks the good of the common-welth, that ^ontenteth himself with
those citizens that are alive, and neglects the ing endring of new in good
and lawful matrimony, whereby to supply the want of such as daily decay?
Further, if I should go about to rehearse here the happiness, pleasure and
contentatio^ which man and wife living holily together, and according to the
duty of their vocation, do mutually receive one of another, who doubts that a
whole day would not suffice me? What greater solace in the whole world can be
found than for a man to live with her unto whom he is coupled, The happiness,
pleasure and contentation in marriage.
not by good will only, but also by a mutual communication of bodies? If we
take great delight to confer with our friends and familiar acquaintance about
our secret affairs, shall we not receive greater joy without comparison to
disclose our thoughts to her unto whom we speak as safely as to our selves,
who is also partaker as well of our adversity as prosperity, and accounts our
weal or woe to be her own? We are joined to our friends by good will and
liking only, but to our wife we are conioined and linked by sovereign
charity, by bodily commixtion, by sacred confederacy, and by an inseparable
fellowship and society in all The near conjunction of married couples.
weathers. If the man abound in temporal goods, the wife will keep them
faithfully for him, and increase them by her industry and labor If he be poor
and persecuted by fortune, she will comfort him. If through fear, sickness, or
any other mishap he be constrained to shut up himself in his house, his wife
will take away that irkesomnes from him, which otherwise would seize upon him
being solitary. If he go abroad, he is glad that he has left that party in
his house which he most trusts. In youth she is a sweet and amiable
companion, and in old age a very convenient comforter Marriage increases
friends and kinsfolks.
and solace. Moreover, by marriage a man increases his friends, allies,
kinsfolks and neighbors, which is a very great benefit and invincible
strength. Brethren and sisters, nephews and nieces are doubled. Peace is many
times procured between monarchs and princes by marriages, and infinite quarrels
and dissentions appeased. But what unspeakable pleasure does every father take
to see his lively picture engraven in the face of his children, and that so
near the quick, as neither Lysippus, Mentor, Polycletus, Phidias, Praxiteles,
Zeuxis, Apelles, nor Parrhasius had ever the skill to grave or paint so well?
Again, what joy receives he by hoping, that when his children shall wax
great, they will be the staff of his age, the stay of his weakness, the pillar
of his house, and that ouerliuing him according to the course of nature, they
shall close up his eyes, and cause such funerals and ceremonies to be done for
him as are requisite in that case? For the conclusion therefore of this present
matter Motives to marriage.
we say, that no man can justly blame marriage, unto which all laws both divine
and humane exhort us, nature provoke us, honesty draws us, infinite
commodities inuit us, all nations show us the way thither, and lastly,
necessity of continuing our kind constrains us. And briefly to answer the
grounds alleged to the contrary, they may be overthrown by one only
dictinction, which is, that most of them that dispraised marriage were heathens,
and blinded in their vain wisdom, or to speak better, in their folly, wanting
then that knowledge of the truth, which God of his grace has since revealed
unto us. And no marvel if they erred in dispraising Marriage, seeing they could
never attain to the knowledge of the true and sovereign good of man, as we
have handled already. But yet it can never be found that Socrates, Plato, and
such The best Philosophers praised and used marriage.
as were most excellent among the Philosophers, blamed it, but rather honored
and commended it, the most of them also being married, as namely, Socrates,
Plato, Aristotle, Seneca, Plutarke, and others. As for their strongest reason
that mislike marriage, namely, the deceiving of men by women, the fault ought to
be imputed rather to the men, than to the women, because men, according to the
perfection of their sex, ought to be wiser than women, who are by nature more
changeable by will, and more frail in counsel, although all are not so. So
that if there be any imperfection, it ought not to be objected to them by way
of reproach, but rather to nature than to them. And they that vpbraid them
therewith, show that they wander out of the path of reason, are destitute of
all good sense, and are unworthy that women should have conceived them,
brought them into the world, given them suck, and nourished them.


Of a house and family, and of the kinds of marriage: of certain ancient
customs observed in marriage. Chap. 46.
ACHITOB. IN the beginning of my present speech of marriage, I noted this, that
the communion of the husband and wife extends it self unto all the parts
that depend of their house. Therefore I suppose (my Companions) that for the
sequel and understanding of that matter which we have propounded to our selves
to entreat of, I mean Oeconomie or government of a family, we must seek
after a more ample and large declaration of a house, which consists not in
many stones, and long pieces of timber joined together with A house consists
in living stones.
great cunning, but in stones that have life, and are partakers of reason,
tending to the benefit and profit of the house, as to their end. Also if you
think it good, and our hour give us leisure, we may enter into the
consideration of the sundry sorts of marriages, and of certain ancient customs
observed therein, which I touched not in my discourse, because I would not be
ouer-long.


ASER. First, it is necessary (says Aristotle) to join those together, which
can not be the one without the other, What asse^blies are most necessary for
the institution of a family.
as the male and female for generation. Next, he that is able to execute the
commandments of his master by the strength of his body, is a subject and
slave by nature. And of these two assemblies a house or family is first
instituted.


AMANA. The definition of a house.
A family or house is an assemblye framed by nature, to communicate daily
together: and they are called of the Grecians (...), such as live of the same
provision, or (...), such as use the same Chimney. But we shall understand of
thee ARAM the whole discourse of that which is here propounded unto us.


ARAM. When I consider of the excellency and greatness of Plato his skill, who
was greatly admired of the Grecians, as he that for virtue and honesty of life,
for eloquence Plato established a community of al things in his Commonwealth.
of speech, and persuasion by true and learned Philosophy, went far beyond all
other Philosophers, I cannot sufficiently wonder, how, amidst so many good
laws and profitable statuts for a commonwealth, which we have received from
him, he imagined to establish therein the community of goods, wives, and
children, amongst his Citizens, not suffering them to have any thing proper and
peculiar: to the end (as he said) to banish from his city these two words,
Thine and Mine, which in his opinion were the cause of all evils and
desolations that befall Commonwealths. The Nicholaites The Nicholaites revived
Platoes community.
revived the same error in the primitive Church, and many others have labored
by frivolous reasons to defend and maintain it, chiefly to root out (as they
say) utterly from within the soul, those humane affections, which commonly
carry men rather toward their wives, children, and goods, than to other things.
Which affections so long as they bear sway amongst the Citizens, cause them
oftentimes to turn aside from their duty toward the commonwealth, whereby it
is made weaker, and of less continuance. Now among many grounds confuting this
error, The confutation of this error.
(which being received, would fill all with disorder and confusion, to the
overthrow of humane society) this is most certain and cannot be impugned, that
forasmuch as the lawful distributio^ of goods, and manner of marriages, are the
ordinance of God (as it is manifest) and seeing the ordinance of God may not be
altered by any counsel of man, it follows, that as well the division of
goods, as of wives and children, are immutable, and consequently, that the
community of goods, wives, and children, is a thing flatly gainsaying the
institution of God, and therefore to be reproved. Moreover, if goods were
common, an infinite multitude of do-litles, of idle and negligent persons,
borne (as Horace says) only to devour and to consume the benefits of the
earth, being unwilling to labor, and resembling waspes that eat the honey of
the Bees, would feed and cloth themselves with their goods, who get their
living with great sweat of their bodies, and vexation of their minds. Which is
against the express commandment of God, who will have us eat our bread in
the sweat of our face. But what greater shame and offense, utterly defacing all
honesty of life, can there be amongst men, than the community of wives, whereby
all fornications and adulteries would be maintained by authority? This shows
plainly, that we are not to loose time in confuting such an opinion of theirs,
who seek to take away from amongst men all marks of a Commonwealth. For there
would not be any public thing, if nothing were private, nor common, if nothing
were peculiar. Yea Plato afterward did wisely leave that opinion, and quietly
renounced his first Commonwealth, to give place to a second. And the Heralds
of Gods word condemned this error, when it was raised up in the Apostles time
by an archheretik called Nicholas of Antioch, who maintained this opinion, that
goods, wives, and children, ought to be common among christians, and for
example to others, communicated his wife to whosoever would, albeit she was
young and very beautiful. Thus following the order established of God, and
continued always through so many ages, until our The definition of a house.
time, and having seen the first institution of marriage, we must also contain
it within the house, which is a society and communion of life between the
husband and the wife, the master and the servant, for daily profit. Hesiodus
puts the Ox in steed of the servant, so far forth (faith Aristotle) as
the Ox being fit to labor, is to poor men in the place of a slave. This
house thus described is simple, but when children are contained therein, it is
absolute The division thereof.
and complete. Therefore a house that is perfect and accomplished, may be
divided, according to the saying of Philosophers, into these four parts: into
Matrimonial, Parentall, Lordly or Maisterlie, and Possessorie part. The
Matrimonial part comprehe^deth the husband and the wife: the Parentall
contains the father, mother, and children: the Lordly has under it the
master, men-seruants, and maid-seruants: the Possessorie part includes within
it mooueables, immooueables, and chattels. Now to follow our matter already
begun, and to discourse of things in order, we have here to handle and to
observe diligently this first part of a house, called the conjugal or wedlock
part, and the sequel of our discourses shall instruct us in the other parts.
He that has tasted of learning, and ^oure kinds of marriage.
been well instructed in the study of wisdom, shall find that there are
four kinds of conjunctions and marriages, namely, the marriage of honor, the
marriage of love, the The marriage of honor is of three sorts.
marriage of labor, and the marriage of grief. The marriage of honor is divided
into the highest, middlemost, and lowest degree. The highest is that
supernatural marriage, whereby God and man's nature meet together, even by a
mystery, which ouerpasseth the understanding of all humane capacity. We saw
the effect and truth thereof in the incarnation and nativity of the eternal
son of God. The middlemost marriage of honor is, when God and the soul
meet, and are joined together by grace and glory. The lowest degree of the
marriage of honor is when God and the Church are coupled together, and are made
one mystical body. These three sorts of marriages are supernatural, and
appointed of God after an unspeakable manner: but the cause of our assembly
requires not that we should speak any more of them. Now to come to the other
kinds of conjunctions, which 2. The marriage of love.
respect only the estate of mankind: the marriage of love, is that which is
between an honest man and a virtuous woman, linked together by God for the
preservation of the lineage of man. It may be called a charitable conjunction,
unity, and society of them that are good, being made by grace, peace, and
concord. Of this marriage spoke that wise lewe, saying: that three things among
others, Ecclus. 25. 1.
were approved of God and men, the concord of brethren, the love of our
neighbor, and the husband and wife that agree well together. And to say truth,
it is one of the greatest benefits, yea one of the rarest felicities in the
world, when a marriage is well and duly kept, when both the husband and wife
fear God, and keep their promise one to another: according Ecclus. 26. 1.
to that saying of the wise man: Blessed is the man that has a virtuous wife:
the wife also being no less happy that has a good husband. The other kind of
marriage, The marriage of labor.
namely of labor, is that which is commonly practiced in our days, wherein
many, yea almost all, marie for covetousness, not for the virtue, chastity, or
good report, which Plautus would have a man choose his wife by the ears, not by
the fingers.
they hear of women and maidens. Plautus the comicall Poet said, that in
marriage a man must take his wife by the ears, and not by the fingers: that is
to say, for her good report, not for her dowry, which is told with hands.
Lycurgus being desirous that his Citizens should put the same in practice,
established a law, which forbad all giving Lycurgus forbad all dowries.
of dowries with maidens in marriage, to the end that every maid should labor
to endow her self with virtue: for love whereof, and not of riches, they should
be demanded in marriage. The same reason moved Themistocles, when Themistocles.
two men required his daughter in marriage, to prefer the honest man before
the wealthy: saying, that he had rather have a man to his son in law
without goods, Olympias.
than goods without a man. We read that Olympias the mother of Alexander,
hearing of one that had married a very fair woman, but scarce chaste, being
ravished with bir love, said, that he was a braineles man, otherwise he We must
not marie by the lust of our eyes, nor by the report of our fingers.
would not have married by hearsay, nor by the lust of his eyes. We may say
as much of them that marie by the report of their fingers, counting upon them
how much their wives bring to them by marriage, not considering before whether
they be so qualified, that they may live with them. But let us know, that
every marriage made through covetousness, especially where there is inequality
of riches, as namely, when the husband is poor, and the wife rich, will be
always riotous, and very hardly will there be Menander.
any peace between them. Which thing Menander desirous to teach us, said, that
when a poor man marieth a rich wife, he gives himself in marriage to the
woman which he weddeth, and not the woman to him. And the Satyricall Poet
says, that nothing is more intolerable Pittacus answer to a young man that
asked his advice in marriage.
than a rich wife. This caused a young man to go to Pittacus, one of the Sages
of Grecia, and to ask his counsel, saying: I have two wives offered me, the
one is equal to me in goods and parentage, the other goes far beyond me,
which of them shall I take? Mark (said this wise man) where children are ready
to play at fence, go to them, and they will counsel thee. He did so, and as he
drew near, they began to set themselves one against another to skirmish. And
when they saw this young man coming, who exceeded them in strength and bigness,
and supposed that he would make one amongst them, they said aloud, let every
Every one must marie his equal. Martia.
one go to his match. Whereby he learned what he was to do concerning his
marriage. Martia, a noble widow, being demanded why she married not again,
seeing she was rich, and as yet in the flower of her youth, made this answer. I
can find none (said she) that loves not my goods Venda Queen of Ruscia.
more than my person. The same reason moved Venda Queen of Ruscia to throw her
self into the water, thereby to revenge her self of them that made war with
her, to have her in marriage, seeing they could not win her by gentleness. For
she knew well, that they desired her for hit kingdom, and not of any good will
they bare unto her: as it is the custom of Princes to respect only their
alliance and profit, marying oftentimes by substitutes and proxies Against
marriage by substitutes and proxies. Elizabeth Q of England.
those whom they never saw but by picture. But I find that Elizabeth that
wise Queen of England, was of a better judgment, when she wrote to Henry
Prince, and since king of Sweathland, who demanded her in marriage, that he was
the only Prince in the world, whom she ought to love most, because he
required her when she was a prisoner: but she was resolved never to marie any
man before she had seen him. The like answer she sent to the Archduke of
Austria, which was in part the cause why neither of them would come unto her,
fearing belike, that if they were not well liked, they should be sent back
again into their country. Of this that has been hitherto discoursed,
together with the experience which is daily seen, we may infer, that marriages
made through covetousness, are in deed marriages of labor. And of this number may
those be reckoned, Of marriages made only for beauty.
wherein bodily beauty, and other outward graces, are only regarded. For it
seldom falls out, but that the spirit of dissension troubles all in those
houses, and that all love and liking vanishes together with age, which causes
the lively hue of color to wither away. Likewise amongst these marriages of
labor, we place those wherein there is disparitie of age, and especially of
manners. Therefore Of the disparitie of age and manners between married couples.
Dionysius the elder said to his mother, who being very old, would needs marie
a young man, that it was in her power to violate the laws of Syracusa, but not
the law of nature. Aristotle says, that men and women ought to marie together
in such an age, that both of them should leave of to beget and to conceive
children at the same time. According to this rule the husband must be At what
age men and women ought to marry.
twenty years, or there abouts, elder than his wife: because naturally women
conceive and beat children until fifty years, and men may beget children
until 70. Lycurgus also forbad that any man should marie before he were ^7*
years old, and a woman before 17. Whereof this reason may rather be rendered,
that the wife may more easily acquaint her self with her husbands manners, he
being then of ripe judgment, and she coming into his power from her tender
years. For (as the same Aristotle says) diversity of manners and callings
hinders friendship and true love. But because of the shortness of man's days,
I Why a man ought to have ten years more than his wife.
think it were good for him to marie at thirty years of age, taking a wife
of twenty years old, to the end that her age may not be too much unlike his:
that so living according to the common course of nature, they may leave their
children provided at the same years, and such as might be well able to live
without them. A maiden also of that age is able to judge a great deal better
what is meet for her, and what duty she owes to her husband, and of his
commandments, than if she were yoonger. Now, seeing we are about this matter,
I think I shall not Of the marriage of widows.
digress from the same, if I speak of the marriage of widows. It is certain
that those women that have already learned the disposition of their former
husbands, are oftentimes very hardly altered. Whereupon some allege the
example of Timotheus, the best plaier on the flute of his time, who, when he
took a scholar, used to demand of him whether he had made any entrance in
that play: Timotheus.
Which if he had, he took a greater reward by half than he did of them that
knew nothing: saying, that his pains were greater in taking away from his
scholars that which was naught and unskillful, than in teaching that which was
good to such as understood nothing at all thereof. Chilons opinion of second
marriages.
Chilon one of the wise men of Grecia, said, that he accounted him a very
fool, who having saved himself from a perilous shipwreck by painful
swimming, would return to sea again, as though a tempest had not power over
all barks. Platoes Androgyna teaches, that second marriages can never be fitly
made. Concerning this matter, we can 1. Cor. 7. 39.
have no better counsel than that of S. Paul, whether I refer the solution
of this matter. But experience daily The discommodities of second marriage.
teaches us what infinite miseries, quarrels, suites, and overthrow of houses,
proceed from such marriages, through the donations and profits which those young
men crave that marie widows, who forgetting all natural duty, doubt not to
enrich strangers with the goods of their own children. Valeria of Rome may
serve for a notable Valeria.
example to women, who said, that her husband died for others, but lived to her
for ever. S. Hierome rehearses a history quite contrary to this here spoken
of, auouching that he saw at Rome a woman that had been married Of a woman that
had been married to 22. husbands.
to 22. husbands, who afterward marying one that had had 20. wives, died in his
life time. Whereupon the Romans crowned him with Laurel, in token of
victory, and caused him to carry a branch of Palm in his hand at his wives
funeral. He makes mention also of another widow, who of alms brought up a
little child The notorious loosenes of a widow.
and abused it at the age of ten years, by whom she became great with child,
contrary to the order of nature, God so permitting it, to discover the vile
filthiness of that woman. Second marriages were a great deal more honorable for
such widows. The fourth kind of marriage remains yet, which we called the
marriage of Of the marriage of grief.
grief, which is nothing else but the assembly and conjunction of the wicked
and reprobate, of whom that common proverb is spoken, that it is better one
house be troubled with them than twain. Their life can not but be full of
wretchedness and misery, the grief whereof will abide by them for ever. But to
return to our first speech of the marriage of love, which is holy and lawful,
guided by good reason, and according to the ordinance of God, mortal men
beholding the holiness and necessity of this mystery, have enriched and set
forth the same with all kind of joy and delight, with the assembly of
kinsfolks, and calling together of friends and guests, Commendable ornaments
of marriages.
with bankets, feasts, ornaments, jewels, Tragedies, Comedies, and such like
pastimes, uttering joy, and not to be misliked: so that all dissolutenes and
ouer-great superfluity be set aside, and honesty and comelines observed. But
especially the wedding songs, used by the Wedding songs used in old time.
Ancients both Greeks and Latins, and made to beautify and enrich their
weddings, are worthy of eternal Diverse customs used at the celebration of
marriages.
praise. Moreover, they had amongst them infinite and sundry customs kept at
the knitting up and celebration of marriages, some being good, others bad, of
which we will here allege certain, because we may find instruction in
them. The Assyrians had certain Magistrates called Triumairs, and Presidents of
weddings, approved and grave men, whose office was once a year in every
Town and Village to bring all the young maidens that were to be married, into
one public place, and to cause them to be proclaimed one after another,
beginning The Assyrians custom.
with the fairest, who were given to them that offered most, and bad last. With
this money that came by them, they married those that were hard-fauoured, as
good cheap as they could: and otherwise than after this sort, it was not
lawful for any body to contract matrimony. Wherein they showed a marvelous
care in providing The custom of the Grecians.
equally for all their daughters. The ancient Grecians had a custom to burn
before the door of the new married wife, the Axletree of that chariot wherein
she was brought to her husbands house: giving her to understand thereby, that
she was to dwell there with him, whether she were willing or no, and never to
depart from thence. Lycurgus would not have the husband and wife to lie
together in the beginning of their marriage, nor to see one another, but by
stealth and secretly: to the end (said he) that amity and love might be the
better preserved between them, that they might be healthie, and that their
children which should come of them, The customs of the Romans.
might be stronger. The Romans passed all other nations in pomp, ceremonies,
and comlines of marriage. They observed this inuiolably, that their maidens and
widows should not be constrained to marry. On the wedding day they used that
fashion, which at this day is very common. The new married wife was richly
apparelled, with her hair hanging about her shoulders, and her head crowned
with a garland of flowers. The mother of the Bride went before her daughter,
bearing a cofer of trinkets, jewels, rings, and other little ornaments
belonging to women. The maidens that came of wealthy houses, had a chariot
prepared for them, drawn with two white horses, to declare the purity of
body, and innocence of mind, which the young woman ought to have. The new
married wife was led from her fathers house to her husbands house, along the
broadest streets in the city, to note thereby, that a wife ought always to
pass by the greatest way, and not be found at any time in suspected and secret
places, whereupon some suspicion of evil may arise. When she was come to the
entry of her husbands house, before she went over the threashold of the door,
he took her with both his arms by the wings, and lift her aloft in such sort,
that he stroke her head and the door post together, and so set her within the
door before ever her feet touched the ground. This was done, that the married
wife should remember through the grief of the blow, not to go often forth out
of her husbands house, if she would have the report and name of an honest
woman. Her garments, behavior, gesture and gate, were correspondent to all
modesty, honesty, and shamefastnes. She ware a jewel hanging by a riben
about her neck, to signify, that she was bound, and put in subjection to her
The Roman brides used to present fire and water to their husbands.
husband. She presented also to her husband water in one hand, and fire in the
other. Which some interpret thus, that as the communication of man's life
consists chiefly in the use of these two elements, of fire and water, so
there cannot be any fellowship more familiar or nearer linked together, than
that of the husband and the wife. Now, because fire and water signify
communication, others have thus understood it, that as fire and water are
clean contraries as well in the first as in the second qualities, so are man
and wife, the one being hot and dry, of the nature of fire, and the other cold
and moist, of the nature of water: which contrarieties being joined together,
make a harmony and temperature of love. Again, some would have the
dissentions, murmurings, and complaints, that are often in marriages signified
thereby: wherein laughter is not without weeping, nor rest without labor, nor
sweet without sower, according to the nature of all earthly things, in which
we cannot taste honey without gall, nor sugar without Aloes. Many other
ceremonies were used of the Ancients, which for breuity sake, as also because
there is small instruction in them, I omit for this present. Therefore to
conclude What is signified by the name of a house.
our discourse, we learn that the name of a house does not only signify the
walls and roof of a building, but that it ought to be taken for a family
gathered together to communicate one with another in all necessities. We learn
also that in every marriage we ought to have regard to the ordinance and
institution of God, and to those politic laws under which we live, to the
end we trouble not common tranquillity: that we must avoid all disparitie of
goods, of houses, of age, and especially of nature and manners. Let us not
suffer our selves to be carried away with any foolish passion, but look chiefly
to this, that under a gracious and honest behavior may shine forth clear and
evident steps of an upright and sincere soul, void of dissimulation: saying
with the Wise man, Prou. 31. 30.
Favor is deceitful, and beauty is vanity, but a woman that fears the
Lord, she shall be praised. We must also rid our wedding assemblies of all
dissolutenes, of all kind of allurements to voluptuousnes and nicenes, that
they may rather seem to be schools of honor and chastity, than of
intemperancie and loosenes. If we lay such foundations in marriages, no doubt
but God will bless them, and make them happy and prosperous, to the glory of
his name, and to the quietness and contentation of us all.


Of the particular duty of a husband toward his wife. Chap. 47.
ARAM. AS Physicians stand more in fear of feauers engendered of hid causes
gathered together by little and little of a long time, than of those which
proceed of very apparent causes: so the small iarres and daily quarrelings of
married folks, being unknown Small iarres must be avoided in a house^
to strangers, and drawing by little and little to an incurable hardness, do more
separate them one from another, than any other cause whatsoever. Therefore it
is necessary that all the roots of such naughty sprigs should be cut off, and
all occasions eschewed, which might provoke one another to the least and
lightest anger that may be. The industry of the man ought to aim especially
at this, being called to the honorable estate of Head of a family, looking
diligently that he perform such duty toward her, who is so straightly linked
unto him, that such dissentions never take their beginning through his default.
Let us then (my Companions) take occasion of this subject to be better
instructed in the duty of a husband toward his wife.


ACHITOB. Prou. 5. 18. 19. 20. 21.
Rejoice (says the Wise man) with the wife of thy youth. Let her be as the
loving Hind, and pleasant Roe: let her breasts satisfy thee at all times,
and delight in her Every man must content himself with his own wife.
love continually. For why should thou delight in a strange woman, or
embrace the bosom of a stranger? For the ways of man are before the eyes of
the Lord, and he pondereth all his paths.


ASER. Ephesians. 5. 25. 26. How husbands ought to love, their wives.
Husbands (says S. Paul) love your wives, even as Christ loved the Church,
and gave himself for it. So ought men to love their wives as their own
bodies: he that loves his wife, loves himself. But it belongs to thee
(AMANA) to handle us this point at large.


AMANA. Gorgias an excellent Orator, commended of Cicero in many places,
exhorted the Graecians long since to peace and concord, by an oration of
wonderful art. Which when he had ended, one Melanthus stood up before all
the company that was present, and said: My Lords, behold Gorgias, who by his
eloquent oration exhorts us that are in number infinite to concord, and yet
he cannot play the Orator so well as to cause his wife and her chamber-maide
to live quietly with him in his house, wherein there are but they three. For ye
shall daily see them at strife and continual dissension. Therefore, my Lords,
I think it great rashness in him to exhort us to concord, when he cannot have
it himself in his private house. And truly, besides the unspeakable torment
that is joined with such riots, ianglings, and controversies in a house, it is
a shameful offense when they are known to strangers. The Ancients Lar the
household God of the Heathen.
had a private and household God, whom they called the God Lar, which we may
translate into our language, the God of the Harth. He was had in such
veneration, that if any man withdrewe himself to the harth and house of his
deadly enemy, his enemy durst not offer him any violence as long as he was
there, the harth being unto him a sanctuary and place of immunitie. For so we
read Themistocles saved by flying to the harth of his enemy.
of Themistocles, that being banished from Athens, and pursued by some that
would have laid violent hands upon him, he fled to the Harth of his deadly
enemy, who for that cause durst not strike him, nor offer him any injury.
This Harth was dedicated and consecrated to the Goddess Vesta, and was placed
where the chief fire of the house was made. Now I pray you, if it were
prohibited, and accounted an unjust thing for a man to quarrel, to injury, or
to offer violence, even to his utter enemy, being fled to his Harth, how
infamous an act (think you) and unworthy the nature of man, did these men
judge it to be, to offer any violence to them that were of the same Harth, but
chiefly to the wife, who What place the wife has next to the man.
is a principal person belonging to the bed, table, Harth, yea to the whole
house of the husband, and is called by the law, a companion both of the divine
and humane house? At this day we commonly observe this, not to offend in any
sort those that come to see us: and if we have any occasion of quarrelling, it
shall not be showed as long as they are in our house, if we have any care not
to be accounted uncivil, and void of discretion. And how shall we not use the
same reason toward them that are unto us a second self, with whom we are to
live and die? Let us then have regard to those principal points that are to be
desired for the establishment and continuance of love, upon which every holy
marriage ought first to Love the first foundation of every holy marriage.
be grounded, as we have already said. Secondly, it must be grounded upon the
conformity and agreement of good and honest conditions: and lastly, it must
hold and depend of prudence, which breeds a continual, lively, and mutual
affection of one toward another, the true testimony whereof is a reverent
behavior of each to other. It is a Maxim and principle granted by wise men,
that no The best must command.
man is worthy and meet to command, unless he be better than they over whom
he commands. Therefore it seems that nature commonly gives more vigor,
strength, authority, gravity, and prudence, in deeds and words to men than
to women. The effects of which graces he cannot better show forth, than by
governing himself The husband must command over his wise as over a free person.
with reason, and according to duty toward his wife: first, in loving her,
then in governing her graciously, as being a free person, as Aristotle says,
persuading her more by reason than authority. He must not offer her any
injury, either in deed or word, but honor and make much of her. For the
husband that honors his wife, honors himself. The Lawyer says, that
married women are and ought to be set forth with the beams of their husbands,
and that the husband ought to give example to others to honor his wife:
whereby also he shall provoke his wife to honor him. But on the other side, by
offering her wrong, he shall incense her, and give her occasion to reply upon
him with bitter speeches, which in the end will provoke him to wrath, and to
behave himself The fruits of hard dealing with ones wife.
worse toward his wife, thereby constraining her, as it falls out
oftentimes, to invent some mischief against him and his honor. There are a
thousand examples heerof in good authors, and experience affoordeth too many
proofs of the same. We read of Clytemnestra the wife Clytemnestra.
of Agamemnon, that, to revenge an injury received from her husband, she
committed adultery, and afterward consented to his death. It is true that this
is but a simple revenge of women, and such a one as lights upon them selves.
But what? This sex is frail, spiteful, and given to revenge: and therefore
men are to use the greater prudence in the governing and managing of them. The
proverb is, that a man is bitten of his dog, by provoking him overmuch, and
that an Eele is oftentimes A husband must never beat his wife.
lost, when it is strained ouer-hard. Therefore let a wise husband know this,
that he must never deal injuriously with his wife, especially before others:
and that he must abstain most of all from laying violent hands upon her. If
the Ancients would have their slaves corrected, rather with words than blows,
much more ought the Marcus Aurelius precept to husbands.
wife to be so dealt withal, whom God calls a help like to us. To this
effect Marcus Aurelius said, that a wise husband and one that minds to live
peaceably with his wife, ought above all things to observe this rule, namely:
to admonish her often, to reprehend her seldom, but Jupiter.
never to lay hands upon her. Homer brings in Jupiter reproouing his wife,
and threatening her when she is rebellious, but never makes him go farther. We
read in the life of Cato.
Cato, of whom it was given out that he was a sworn enemy to women, that he
never struck his wife, accounting that sacrilege: and yet he knew well how
to use the place and dignity of a husband, which keeps his wife in
obedience. But above all that has been hitherto spoken, A husband must
especially avoid adultery.
a husband must observe this as an inviolable law, that he abstain from
touching any other woman but his own, as well in respect of the fear of God,
who excludes all whoremongers and adulterers from his heavenly mansion, as
also because his wife should have no knowledge or suspicion thereof. For
otherwise he will cast himself into a more dangerous Labyrinth, than was that
of king Porsenna or of Dedalus: yea, he shall hardly have a good countenance of
his wife at any time, except she dissemble the matter, that she may the better
be renenged of him, either by rendering like for like, thinking that she has
just occasion to break her faith made to her husband, seeing he has broken
his to her, or else by some other mean upon his person. Of this suspicion
which the wife has of her husbands incontinencie, or the husband of the wives,
is bred a great passion, or to speak better, What jealousy is.
fury and rage, which we call jealousy. Chrysippus calls it a disease of the
mind, proceeding from a fear which a man has, that that thing is
communicated to another, which he would not have common but private to
himself. Or otherwise we may say, that jealousy is bred of that love, which
will not suffer a partner in the thing beloved. Some write (says Plutarke)
that Cats are troubled with the smell of perfumes and sweet savors, in so much
that they wax mad withal. Likewise if it should so fall out that a woman
should be offended and have her brain troubled with the perfumes of her
husband, he were of a very strange nature if he would not abstain from it, but
for the enjoying of a little pleasure would suffer her to fall into so great an
inconvenience. Now seeing it is so that such accidents come upon them, not when
their husbands are perfumed, but when they give over themselves to the Whoredom
is great injustice.
love of harlots, it is great injustice in them to grieve, offend and trouble
their wives in such heinous sort. At least wise they should behave themselves
as they do that draw near to Bees, who abstain from touching even their own
wives. For it is reported of Bees, that they hate and make war more against
them than against others, because they have such false hearts, as to lie near
their wives, being defiled and polluted with the company of any other women.
The wild bore (says one of the Poets) pursued of dogs, the Lioness bitten
with hunger, the Tiger robbed of her young ones, or the Viper whose tail is
troad upon, are not more terrible than a woman that is offended: but nothing
will sooner cast her into a frenzy and fury, than ielousy. Ariadna buried
alive Zenon Isauricus the emperor, that she The cruel revenge of Ariadna.
might be revenged on him. He that takes to himself those pleasures which he
forbids his wife, does as much as if he commanded her to fight against
enemies, to whom he had already yielded himself. And if vice, whoredom,
curiosity, superfluity, choler and other imperfections reign among men, how
should they drive them away from women? So a husband must correct himself
first, and after use learned instructions toward his wife. Let him (as Bees
do) gather together and carry to his wife, so much of his studies as may serve
for her profit. For seeing Women are capable of Philosophy.
women (as Plato says) have a soul as well as we, and as quick a spirit,
yea oftentimes a more excellent spirit than we, we must not think them
incapable of the goodly reasons of Philosophy, wherein many of them have gone
beyond many Philosophers. Knowledge and skill will keep a woman from other
unmeet exercises, and being ravished with her husbands brave discourses, she
will contemn the loss of time in unprofitable matters. She will never fall
into that danger which oftentimes befalls women, who conceive and bring
forth by themselves strange counsels, and extrauagant passions, when they
receive not from elsewhere the seeds of good speeches, and when their
husbands impart not unto them any sound doctrine. The same (as fables feign)
prevailed more than the Northern wind. For the more the wind labored to get
away a man's gown, and to that end blew more violently, the harder did he
girde up and restrain A tale of the sun and the wind.
his garment. But when the Sun waxed hot after the wind, the man feeling
himself heated, cast off his gown, and afterward burning with heat, he put
off his coat and all. So if husbands go about to order their wives with their
bare authority and by force, they will strive against it, and be offended: but
contrarywife, being Women must be led more by reason and gentleness, than by
force.
admonished with reason they yield of themselves and take it patiently. The
fools of this world commonly gird and mock that man, who peradventure seems
to be led a little too much by his lawful wife and loyal spouse, using more
gentleness and courtesy toward her, than rigor and commanding: and yet you
shall see themselves so strangely bewitched by some strumpet, that they fear
not to hazard their life and honor in her service. But it beseems a man a
great deal better to be well liking, gentle and acceptable to an honest and
virtuous wife, than to abase himself to a common harlot. And those men deceive
themselves, who, having married rich wives and of noble houses, study not to
make them more honest The best way to bring an unruly wife into good order is
to make her more honest.
and better qualified, but to pull them down, persuading themselves that they
will come to better order when they have abased and brought them low. Whereas
every one ought to maintain the dignity of his wife as he would do the just
height of a horse, and be skilful both in the one and the other to use the
bridle well as it becomemeth him. Besides, a husband is not to rule his wife as
a lord or master does his slave, but as the soul does a wise man's body,
through a mutual love and joint affection, whereby he is bound unto her. And
as the soul may well be careful over the body, although it become not a slave
to the pleasures and inordinate affections thereof: so a wise husband will
behave himself by pleasing and gratifiyng his wife in honest things, and by
showing that he loves honor and virtue above all things. This will be a mean
to make her as wise, virtuous and honest, as otherwise: if himself be given to
voluptuousness, he shall cause her to like of curtisans conditions, and to
become slipperie and lascivious. No man (says Cleobulus) ought to chide or to
No man must chide or fawn upon his wife before others.
fawn upon his wife before others: for the one is the point of a fool, the
other of a mad man. Socrates practiced one of these points very well, when
Xantippa his wife reuiling and chiding him, in the end being carried headlong
with wrath, overthrew table and all. Whereupon Euthydemus whom he had brought
home to suppe with him, rose up to depart. But Socrates not showing himself
greatly Socrates patience in sustaining the infirmities of his wife.
moved or angry with his wife, stayed him, and said: What? do you not
remember my friend, that as we were at dinner with you the other day, a hen
lept upon the table and did as much to us, and yet we were not angry
therefore? Solon ordained that the husband should go see his wife thrice a
month at the least, not for pleasure, but to yield unto her, as it were by
obligation, the pledges and gages of friendship through honor, grace and
loialtie, which ought to increase daily. And as cities at sundry times renew
these alliaunces, which they have one with another: so this lawe-maker would
have the alliance of marriage, that I may so speak, renewed by the speeches
Husbands must be careful in looking to their families.
used at such greetings and visitations. We see daily what miseries and
offenses light upon houses, when the head of the family has no care to rule
and guide it: whereupon also the women think that they are despised and smally
beloved. And in truth they have occasion given them so to think, when their
husbands seldom keep them company. The Pilote that gives over his ship to the
mercy of the waves, declares evidently that he cares not for loosing that
which is in it. A wife without her husband is exposed to many ambushes and
assaults that are hardly sustained. Women married their servants in the absence
of their husbands.
To this purpose I remember a notable history written in the chronicles of
Russia, namely, that the inhabitants of Nouogradum, which at this day is the
chief and principal seat of that country, being gone into Graecia to
besiege the town of Corsun, where they continued for the space of seven
years, their wives in the mean while wearied with their long abode there,
married their servants. The husbands afterward returning conquerours, found
their slaves in the field, who gave them battle, and had the better of them.
Nevertheless in the end the slaves were vanquished, and the most part of the
women moved with indignation for that overthrow, hung themselves. Now as
touching that other point mentioned by that Men must not dally with their wives
in the presence of others.
wise man Cleobulus, namely, that a man must not dally with his wife in the
presence of others, Cato deprived a Senator of Rome from the Senatoriall
dignity, because he kissed his wife in his daughters presence. This was
somewhat too extreme. But howsoever it be, as Plato admonishes men grown in
years to show themselves shamefast before the younger sort, to the end that
they also should learn to behave themselves reverently and warily, so surely
this precept is especially to be kept between man and wife, that they may be
an example of honor and chastity unto all. What household affairs are to be
divided between the man and the wife.
Likewise the man must divide the offices and affairs of the house with his
wife, giving her authority over all things in his absence: and in his presence
also over household matters, and such things as are more proper and agreeable to
that sex: causing her to be feared, reverenced, and obeyed of the children,
men-seruants and maid-seruants, as himself. But as if one take two sounds that
agree well, the base is always more heard: so in a well ruled and ordered
house, all things are done by the consent of both parties, but yet so, that it
is always apparent, that things are done by the direction, counsel, and
invention of the husband. For a family will suffer but one head, one master
There must be but one head in a family.
and one lord: otherwise if there were many heads, the commandments would be
contrary, and the family in continual trouble. Now the foundation of all
duties here mentioned by us of the husband toward the wife, and of all others
which daily communication may require, is that true and unfeigned love that
ought to be the inseperable bond of every good marriage. We have handled Love
the band of marriage.
heretofore the great effects of friendship: which if they be required among
common friends, no doubt but they are much more between those, whom God,
nature, the laws, and love, have so straightly joined together. Also let
husbands know, that they ought to reverence their wines more than any other
person: and perceiving them to be wise and virtuous, (as they may make them if
they be not altogether forlorn and corrupted) let them never seem a hu band
must not distrust his wife.
to distrust them in any respect. The Romans when they returned from a voyage,
or from a far country, or only out of the country into the city, if their
wives were at home, they sent word before to give them intelligence of their
coming, to the end they should not conceive this opinion, that they meant to
deal craftily or maliciously with them. Forasmuch therefore as love and
friendship is the fountain of every good duty of the husband toward his wife,
and that which as it were steals away, and makes the will of his
half-partner to be wholly his own, let us consider for the conclusion of our
speech, of some notable Examples of the love of husbands toward their wives.
examples of great love in the behalf of men, to the end we may be drawn on
to love and to honor them that are in the same place toward us that the church
is toward God: which he so loved, that he sent his only son T. Gracchus.
to die for the redemption thereof. Tiberius Gracchus, a noble man of Rome,
finding two serpents in the chamber wherein he slept, inquired for the meaning
thereof by sooth-saying, whereunto he gave absolute credit. Answer was made
him, that if he slew the male first, he should die before his wife, but if the
female, his wife before him. As soon as he understood thereof he slew the male,
and within a little while after he died. Whereupon Historiographers doubt
whether his wife Cornelia were more happy in finding a husband that loved her
so well, than miserable in loosing him. Baptista Fregosa makes mention of a
Neapolitane, The great love of a Neapoli^ane toward his wife.
whose wife being taken on the sea coast by the Moors, he presently cast
himself after her into the sea, and following their foist besought the^ to take
him also. Which they did, so that both of them were brought before the king of
Thunis to whom the vessail belonged: who hearing the discourse of the fact, and
being moved with compassion over such perfect friendship, delivered them both.
Orpheus.
Orpheus (as the Poets write) loved his wife so entirely, that she dying on the
wedding day, he kept his love inviolable and would never set it upon any other.
Ninus king of the Assyrians, falling in love with Semiramis the wife of Menon a
vassaile of his, besought him to let him have her to wife, in recompense whereof
he offered him his daughter in marriage. Menon.
But Menon bare such great love toward her, that he would not yield thereunto.
Whereupon the king being moved with wrath, and threatening to pluck out his
eyes and to take her away by force, as he did in deed, Menon for Periander.
very grief and sorrow hung himself. Periander king of Corinth loved his wife
so tenderly, that after she was dead, he caused her to be laid by him certain
days. Marcus Lepidus M. Lepidus.
being driven into banishment, heard that his wife was married to another,
whereupon he died for sorrow. When P. Numidius.
word was brought to Plautius Numidius a Roman Senator, that his wife, whom he
loved as himself, was dead: he Sylanus.
thrust himself into the bosom with a dagger, whereof he died. Sylanus a
Roman slew himself after his wife, whom he singularly loved, was taken from
him, and given to Nero the Emperor. Dominicus Catalusius prince of Lesbos
Dominicus Catahusius.
loved his wife so well, that although she grew very leprous, yet he never
deprived her therefore of his board or bed. We read of a great lord of Spain,
called Roderigo Sarmiento, Roderigo Sarmiento.
that through grief which he received for the loss of his wife, he slept for
a years space in his clothes, did never eat upon a table cloth, nor sat him
down in any chair, but afflicted himself diversely. Therefore let us learn
by our present discourse to love our wives perfectly, yielding due benevolence
unto them and behauing our selves discretly toward the^, without offending
them, or going beyond the bounds of our duty. And as nature mingleth us
together by our bodies, to the end that taking part of the one and part of the
other, and putting All things must be common between the husband and the wife.
all together, she may make that which comes thereof common to both, and that
in such sort, that neither party can discern or distinguish that which is
proper to it self from that which belongs to the other: so let us have all
things common together, even our will, affection and authority. Nevertheless
this must be done in such sort, that as in one cup, although there be as much
or more water than wine, yet we call it wine, so in the authority of the wife
the husbands name must be written, as he that directs the same. But in the
mean while let these words Mine and Thine be banished far from them, unless
it be in this respect, that, according to the opinion of the Physicians, as
blows given on the left side are felt on the right, so the wife must through
compassion feel the harms of her husband, and the husband much more those of
his wife: to the end that as knots have their strength by interlacing the ends
one within another, so the society of marriage is preserved and strengthened
when both parties afford a mutual affection of good will, being assured, that
both together shall be made heirs of grace and life.


Of the duty of a Wife toward her Husband. Chap. 48.
AMANA. NAture having honored woman with a The natural gifts of women.
gracious alluring of the eyes, with a sweet speech, with a beautiful
countenance and modest behauior, has given her great means to win the good
liking and love of her husband, if she be honest and shamefast: as likewise she
may easily deceive man by offering him pleasure, if she be wickedly minded. This
did Olympias wife to king Phillip, know full well, when she took the
Thessalonian woman by the hand whom her husband loved so well, and by whom (as
they said) he was charmed and bewitched. But the Queen seeing her so fair,
and of so good a grace, and as her speech declared, a woman of a good house and
well brought up: Away (quoth she) with all slander, for I see well that your
charms are in your self. And let us not think that the power of a lawful
wedded wife is less, if, by taking all things unto her, her wealth, her
nobility, her charms, and the whole web of Venus, she study by meeknes, good
behavior and virtue to obtain her husbands love. Go to then, let us see if
we can give the wife some instructions touching this matter how she may keep
her self within the limits of her duty toward her husband.


ARAM. Ephesians. 5. 23. 24. Wives must be subject to their husbands.
As the Church is in subjection to Christ, even so (says the Scripture) let
the wives be to their husbands in every thing. For the husband is the wives
head, even as Christ is the head of the Church.


ACHITOB. Wives must be modest, wise, chaste, keepers at home, lovers of their
husbands, and subject unto them. But it belongs to thee ASER to be now unto
them in stead of a schoolmasters.


ASER. When kings and princes honor Philosophers and learned men, it is
certain that they honor themselves: but philosophers that court it, and become
servants to riches, are not thereby honored. We may say as much of wives. For
when they submit themselves to their husbands, It is an honor to a woman to
obey her husband
they are praised: but if they will become mistresses over them, it beseems
them as ill, as it does such as yield to that subjection: and both of them
reap more shame tha^ honor thereby. Therefore those women that make choice of
effeminate husbands, and delight in commanding them, are like to such as had
rather guide the blind, than follow the wise and cleare-sighted. So that if a
wife love, esteem, and honor her husband, I think that all honest duty will
flow from thence, to their common contentation and comfort, and to the benefit,
quietness, and honor of the whole family: I mean, if she love him as her
self, and esteem and honor him, as her nearest lord. A wise woman ought to
think that her husbands manners are the laws of her life, which (if they be
good) she is wholly to follow: but if they be bad, she must patiently bear with
them. For as a looking glass serves to no purpose, although it be gilt and A
wife compared to a looking glass.
decked with precious stones, if it does not lively represent his face that
looks into it: so a woman is not to be liked albeit she have store of goods,
if her life be not thereafter, and her behauior and conditions be not
conformable to her husbands. If a looking glass represent a sad and mourning
countenance to one that is joyful and merry, or contrariwise a smiling face to
him that is sorrowful, it is a false glass and worth nothing. So is she a bad
wife and unreasonable, which frowneth when her husband is desirous to be merry
with her, and to take some honest recreation: or contrariwise, which laugheth
and sporteth her self when she sees him full of business and greatly troubled.
For the one is a token of her froward disposition: and the other, that she
despises the affections of her husband. And as lines and superficial parts,
as the Geometricians say, move Notable similitudes.
not of themselves, but as the bodies move wherein they are: so a wife must
have no proper and peculiar passion or affection to her self, but must be
partaker of the pastimes, affairs, thoughts and laughters of her husband. The
farther the Moon is from the Sun, the cleerer it is, and shines so much the
more: and contrariwise, it has less light, and is Evil wives resembled to the
moon.
obscuved the more, as it comes nearer thereunto: so evil women deal with
their husbands when they love not their presence. For in their absence you
shall see them as iocund and frolic as may be, but when they are with their
husbands and at home, then are they sorrowful and pensive. Moreover, a wife must
not trust too much either to her wealth, or to the nobility of her race, or to
her beauty, but to that which sets nearest her husbands heart, that is, to
her behauior, manners and conversation, taking order that An ouerthwarting wife
makes her self odious.
these things be not hard, troublesome, or irksom to her husband every day, but
such as please him and agree with his conditions. For the troublesome
conversation of a wife that alwais iarreth, in the end makes even her honest
behauior odious, as her ouer-great pinching and niggardlines causes her
sparing and good huswiferie to become hateful. As this custom was observed
amongst the Persians, that when their enemies came rushing upon the^ with great
clamors, they received them with silence, and contrariwise, if they were set
upon with silence, they made head against How a wife must deal with her
cholerike husband.
them with open mouth: so discreet women hold their peace when their husbands
cry out with choler, and contrariwise if they utter not a word, they labor to
appease and pacify them with their comfortable speeches. A wise woman that
loves her husband as becomes her, sometime tollerateth and dissembleth an
evil entreaty, trusting so much to her constancy and virtue, that by
continuing in her duty she is able to bring him back again to his. She must
govern her self A woman must not disclose her husbands imperfections to any
body.
so discreetly, that neither her neighbors, nor other of her familiar friends
be made acquainted in any sort with her complaints and grieuances. For by
discovering them, either she shall make her self a laughing stock to others, or
else give occasion to the enemies of her honor, to provoke and solicit her to
naughtines. And if any one knowing the imperfections of her husband, under this
pretense of seeing her hardly dealt withal, persuade her to decline from her
duty, she must answer him after the example of king Phillip, who being wronged
by the Graecians entreated them courteously, what then would my husband do unto
me, if I begin to hate him, and to offer him injury? If she perceive that any
woman of her acquaintance laboreth by her talk either to sow or to increase
some domestical dissentio^, she may wisely say with her self: In what case
would this woman that seeks to make me jealous, desire rather to see me, tha^
maliciously to play the ill huswife with my husband, and to forsake my house
and marriage bed, whereupon it may be she would gladly take my place? Thus a
discreet woman will give small ear, and much less give place to the light
speeches and fained promises of such disturbers of domestical peace. Neither
will she admit and nourish those vain and sottish opinions, which commonly
busy the minds of such women as are ruled and governed only by passions, but
containing her desires through reason within a convenient compass, the
confidence which she has in her husbands virtue will breed perfect ease to her
soul, by taking from her all doubting and occasion of complaining. Now upon
this discourse we give this note by the way, that when any Married couples must
not make two beds for any jar between them.
displeasure falls out between married folks, they must have a special regard
then that they make not two beds. For by this mean their anger will indune the
lesser while. Also they must shun al occasions of quarelling in bed. For as a
great bellied woman ready to lie down, and even feeling the pangs of her
travel, said to those that willed her to lie down upon the bed, How can the
bed cure me of this evil which When is the best time and place to pacify
strife between man and wife.
came unto me upon the bed: so those quarrels, injuries, wrath, and choler that
are bred within the bed, can hardly be appeased and healed at any other time or
place. But to continue our matter of the duty of a wife, she must never suffer
any to enter into her husbands house without his expres commandment or
license. For every honest wife ought to fear that which is commonly spoken of
the losenes of women, and labor as much as may be to convince those slanderers
of lying, who know no other song than to speak of their inco^tinencie. A woman
must be free from all suspicion of incontinencie.
Caesar said, That a woman must not only be free from that fault, but also from
al suspicion thereof, which was the cause why he put away his own wife. And
seeing it is the duty of an honest woman She must not love to gad abroad or to
be seen.
to take upon her the care and ouerfight of household affairs, she must keep at
home, and not love to gad abroad, or be desirous of meetings, but so far
forth as her husband would have her do so. The greatest virtue of a woman
(said Euboides) is not to be known but of her husband: and her She must be
modest in her attire.
praise (said Argeus) in a strange mouth is nothing else but a secret blame. A
wife ought to be modest in her garments and ornaments of her body, and not use
such sumptuous apparel as the law or custom of the country permits: The
true ornaments of a woman.
because neither rich works of gold, nor precious attire, nor bodily beauty
make not a woman so praise-woorthy as her modesty does, which consists in
deeds, words, countenance and apparel. That is an ornament (said the
Philosopher Crates) that adorneth, and that thing adorneth a woman, which
marketh her more honorable. And this is not done by jewels of gold, emeralds,
precious stones, or purple garments, but by every thing that causes her to be
accounted honest, wise, humble and chaste. Those women that curiously prick up
themselves, and enrich their bodies with ornaments full of pomp, make men more
dissolute and inclined to loosenes, especially when they make great
window-works before their dugs, and give license to their eyes to wander and
gaze about. Whereas contrariwise a wise woman through her honest behauior,
together with her lowly and settled look, leads so many as cast their eyes
upon her to continency and chastity. But a discovered dug, a naked Certain
tokens of an adulterous heart.
breast, frisled locks, paintings, perfumes, and especially a rouling eye, and a
lascivious and unchaste look, are the fore-ru^ners of adultery. He that will not
credit me, let him read Tibullus, Propertius, and Ovid, who are of the same
opinion. It may well be said of such women, whose number is too great
Shamefastnes is the best dowry of a woman.
amongst us, that they have lost all shame: albeit the best dowry, the best
inheritance and most precious jewel which a woman can have, is to be
shamefast. Yea the fortress and defense that nature has given to a woman for
the preservation of her reputation, chastity, and honor, is shame, whereof
whenever she makes no account, she is undone for ever. Socrates used to
counsel those young men that beheld themselves in lookyng glasses, if they
were hard favored to correct their deformity with virtue, by making
themselves virtuous: and if they were fair, not to blot their beauty with
vice. In like manner it were very good, that when the married wife holds her
looking glass in her hand, she An excellent use of looking glasses.
would speak thus to her self if she be foul: what then should become of me
if I were also wicked? And if she be fair, how shall this be accounted of, if
I continue honest and wise? For if a hard favored woman be loved for her good
behavior and honest conditions, it is greater honor unto her than if it were
for beauty. Moreover a woman must have a special care to be silent, and to
speak A woman must be silent and secret.
as seldom as she may, unless it be to her husband, or at his bidding:
reserving household wantes and affairs secret to her self, and not publish
them abroad. Thus doing, if any evil, any reproach or dishonor come to the
house through any of them that are within it, the fault will be her husbands
and not hirs. Likewise a woman that respects her honor, ought to be ashamed
to utter any A woman must avoid silthie speeches and iestes.
dishonest speeches, floutes and jests, and no less ashamed to give ear unto
them. For if she once give her self to gibing, they that laughed at some little
word of hirs, will afterward mock the author thereof: seeing the honor of women
is such a nice and charie thing, that it is not lawful for the^ so much as to
think, much less to speak of many things, which men may freely both talk of
and put in practice. Therefore those dames that mind to preserve their gravity,
must be silent not only in unlawful, but even in necessary matters, unless it be
very requisite that they should speak of them. To be short, that woman that is
borne to virtue, and purposes A short sum of the ductie of a wife.
to perform her duty toward her husband, must please him in all honest
things, and in such as draw nearest to his inclination, she must love him
entirely, and esteem of him above all others, she must be patient and know how
to wink at, and to bear with many things done by him, she must be prudent to
govern her house, skilful in huswifrie to preserve her goods, careful to bring
up her children, faire-spoken and courteous to her neighbors, ple^tiful in
honorable works, a friend to honest company, A woman must be desirous of
knowledge.
and a very great enemy to the lightness of youth. Moreover she must bestow
as much time as she can steal from domestical affairs, in the study of
notable sayings, and of the moral sentences of ancient Sages and good men.
And it were a seemly and honorable thing to hear a woman speak to her
husband in this sort: Husband, you are my teacher, my governor and master in
Philosophy, and in the knowledge of most excellent and heavenly sciences. For
by such honest occupations, women are withdrawn and turned aside from other
unworthy exercises, Exercises unseemly for women.
whereunto we see them so apt and inclined now a days, which makes them very
offensive, as plays, dancing, masking, hunting, and discharging of
harquebuzes, with such other dealings very unmeet for their sex. Whereas if
in lieu of all these things a wife would embrace the love of knowledge, so far
forth as her wit and leisure require, and as her husband shall like of, she
should be partaker not only of the flowers and songs, but also of the fruits,
which the Muses bring forth and bestow upon them that love letters and
Philosophy: which will greatly help her toward the leading of a happy life
with her husband. Now considering that love is always the wel-spring of every
good duty, especially between those that are linked together What great love
the law of nations requires in a wife toward her husband.
by marriage, (which ought to be so great in regard of the wife, that the civil
law and law of nations, will have a woman follow her husband, although he have
neither fire nor place to resort unto, or be banished and driven from place to
place) let us here call to remembrance some notable examples of the great love
that has been in virtuous women toward their husbands, as well when they
Examples of the great love of women toward their husbands. Hipsicrates.
were alive, as after their death, by refusing to ouer-liue them. Queen
Hipsicrates the wife of king Mithridates comes first to mind, who bare such
love toward her husband, that polling her self for his sake (although she was
young and very fair) she acquainted her self with the wearing of armor, and
rode with him to the war. And when he was overcome by Pompey, she accompanied
him in his flight through all Asia, whereby she mollified the grief and sorrow
which he received by his loss. Triara, wife to Triara.
Lucius Vitellus brother to the emperor Vitellus, seeing her husband in a
dangerous battle, thrust her self amongst the soldiers to bear him
company, and to help him both in death and life, and fought as well as the
valiauntest amongst them. When king Admetus his wife saw her husband very
sick, and heard the answer of the oracle, which was, That he could not
recover except one of his best friends died for him, she slew her self. When
the wife of Ferdinando Goncales a prince of Italy, knew The wife of Ferdinando
Goncales.
that her husband was prisoner, and in danger of death, she went to visit
him, and putting on his apparel, abode in his place, whilst he being clothed
in her garments saved himself. Zenobia Queen of Armenia, Zenobia.
seeing her husband Radamisus fly from a battle, and not being able to follow
him because she was great with child, besought him to kill her. Which when he
thought to have done, she was stricken down with the blow of a sword: but
being taken of the enemy and thoroughly healed, Tyridates the king, who had
vanquished her husband, married her afterward for the great love that was in
her. The princess Panthea loved her husband Panthea.
Abradatus so well, that when he died in Cyrus camp, she slew her self upon
his body. Artemisia Queen of Artemisia.
Caria, for the great love she bare to her husband that was dead, drank all
the ashes of his body, meaning thereby to be his sepulcher. When Iulia the
wife of Pompey Iulia.
saw a gown of her husbands all bloody wherewith he had offered some
sacrifice, she imagined that he was slain, and so died presently after. When
Porcia the wife Porcia.
of Brutus heard of her husbands death, and perceived that her kinsfolks
took away all means of killing her self, she drew hot burning coals out of
the fire, and threw them into her mouth, which she closed so fast, that she
was choked thereby. Sulpitia being carefully restrained Sulpitia.
by her mother Iulia from seeking her husband Lentulus in Sicilia, whither he
was banished, she went thither being apparelled like a slave, banishing her
self voluntarily rather than she would forsake her husband. Octauia.
Octauia sister to Augustus, and wife to Antonius, notwithstanding the injury
that her husband offered unto her in preferring before her a Queen that was
nothing so young or fair as she, bare such great love toward him, that setting
aside al entreaty of her brother, she would never leave her husbands house,
but still brought up his children by his first marriage as carefully as if they
had been her own. Moreover she sought by all means to reconcile those two
emperors, saying, that it was an unworthy thing, that two so mighty princes,
the one for the evil entreaty of his sister, the other because he was
bewitched by a wicked woman, should war one against another. As this virtuous
princes had taken her journey as far as Athens, where she meant to take
shipping, and to seek out her husband being then in war with the Parthians,
bringing with her soldiers, money, furniture, and other munitions, he sent her
word that she should pass no farther, but stay for him at Rome. This she
performed, and sent him all the above named things, not seeming at all to be
offended with him. Whereas he in the mean while skorned her, sporting himself
with Cleopatra in the sight and knowledge of all men, and afterward dealt worse
with her when the war was begun between him and Augustus. For he sent a
commandment to Octauia at Rome to go out of his house, which she presently
obeyed, albeit she would not therefore forsake any of her husbands children,
but wept and bewailed her mishap which had brought her to be a principal cause
of that Aria.
civil war. Aria, the wife of Cecinna, followed in a little boat unto Rome
her husband, who was taken prisoner because he had borne arms against the
emperor Claudius. Being there condemned to die, she would have borne him
company, but that her son in law and her daughter stayed her. When she saw
that, she struck her head so hard against the wall, that she fell down amazed:
and being come to her self again, said unto them: You see that you can not
hinder me from dying cruelly, if ye stay me from a more gentle death. They
being astonished at the fact, and at her words, suffered her to do what she
would: who then ran to the place where her husband was, and slew her self
first, after she had spoken thus courageously unto him. I am not, Cecinna,
sorry for that which is done, but because the race of thy life must end. When
Seneca was condemned to die by Nero, The manner of Seneca his death. Paulina.
and had liberty to choose what kind of death he would, he caused his veins to
be opened in a bath. His wife Paulina of her own accord did the like to her
self in the same bath, mingling together their blood for a greater union and
coronation of their long and perfect love. Whereof Nero being advertised,
presently commanded that her veins should be stopped, constraining her thereby
to live a little longer in continual grief. Hipparchia, a very fair
Hipparchia.
and rich woman, was so far in love with the Philosopher Crates, who was
hard-fauoured and poor, that she married him against all her kinsfolks mind,
and followed him throughout all the country, being poorly apparelled and
barefoote, after the Cynick fashion. Pisca seeing her husband Pisca.
pine away daily through a great and strange discase, which he had concealed
from her of long time, having at the length knowledge thereof, and perceiving
it to be incurable, she was moved with pity for the evil which he suffered,
whom she loved better than her self: and thereupon counseled him with great
courage to assuage his grief by death, and the better to stir him up
thereunto, she offered to bear him company. Whereunto her husband agreeing,
they embraced each other, and cast themselves headlong into the sea from the
top of a rock. The king of Persia taking prisoner the wife of Pandoerus, whom
Pandoerus wife.
he had vanquished and slain, would have married her. But she slew her self
after she had uttered these words: God forbid, that to be a Queen, I should
ever wed him that has been the murderer of my dear husband Pandoerus. Camma,
a Greekish woman, of the country of Galatia, Camma.
bare such love to her husband, even after his death, that to be revenged of a
great Lord called Synorix, who had put her husband to death, that he might
marry her, she gently denied him at the first when he became a suter unto her,
but after, in process of time, she consented thereunto. When they were come to
the Temple of Diana to solemnize the marriage, before the altar she powered
forth a little of that drink, which she had prepared in a cup, and drinking
part thereof, she gave the residue to Synorix to drink. The liquor was made of
water, honey, and poison, mingled together. When she saw that he had drunk
all, she fetched a great and loud groan, and using reverence toward the
Goddess, said unto her: I call thee to witness, that I have not ouer-liued
Sinatus my husband, for any other intent than to see this day: neither have I
enjoyed any good or pleasure in all this time, wherein I have since lived, but
only in hope, that one day I should be able to revenge his death, which being
now performed by me, I go cheerfully and with joy unto my husband. But as
for thee most wicked man (quoth she to Synorix) take order now, that thy
friends and kinsfolks, in steed of a wedding bed, prepare a burial for thee.
And so within a little while after, both of them ended their Macrina.
days. Macrina, the wife of Torquatus, loved her husband so fervently, and was
so sorrowful for his absence, that for one years space, wherein he was gone
upon a voyage, she never went out of her house, nor looked out of her window.
We read that many women of Lacedemonia, when their husbands were condemned to
die for conspiring against their country, came one evening clothed in black
to the prison, under color to take their final farewell of them: and changing
their apparel, they covered their husbands with their vailes, who went out and
left their wives in their place, which sustaining the punishment due to others,
were beheaded, contrary to humanity, not without great patience showed on
their behalf. Histories are plentiful in showing the great love of women
toward their husbands. Yea, I will not be afraid Men are inferior to women in
perfecton of love.
to speak it, men are far inferior unto them in perfection of love.
Wherefore we will conclude that it is easier for them to be dutiful to their
husbands, whom, as we have already said, if they love, esteem, and honor,
no doubt but they are the chief cause of all peace and concord in their
families, and of the prosperous success of their household affairs, to the
quietness and contentation of their happy life, and to the immortal praise and
honor of their good name.


The end of the twelfth dates work.
THE THIRTEENTH DAYS WORK.
Of the duty of the Head of a family in other parts of the house, namely, in
the Parentall, Maisterlie, and Possessorie part. Chap. 49.
ASER. IT is not without great show of reason which many Philosophers
maintain, that The definition of Oeconomie and of Policy.
the Oeconomicall science, that is to say, the art of ruling a house well, is
one of the chiefest parts of policy, which is the art of skillful governing a
great multitude of men. The reason is, because a Town or City is nothing else
but an assembly of many families and houses together, which will be very
hard for one only man to order well and justly, if he know not how to set
that order in his family, which is necessary, and to guide it with sound
reason and true prudence. Moreover, when families are well governed, no doubt
but it goes well with the Commonwealth, as we see, that the whole body is in
good health, when every several member does his duty. Now that we have
considered particularly of that which concerns the first and principal part
of a house, and of the mutual duty of the husband and wife, I think (my
Companions) we are to begin this days work with instructing our selves in
that which the head of a family ought to keep and observe in other parts of
his house, mentioned before by us, namely, Every head of a family must provide
for his household. 1. Tim. 5. 8.
his children, servants, and possessions, seeing we are taught by the Apostle,
that he which provides not for his own, and namely for them of his household,
denies the faith, and is worse than an Infidel.


AMANA. Every house must be ruled by the eldest, as by a king, who by nature
commands over every part of the house, and they obey him for the good
preservation thereof.


ARAM. Every man by right (says Homer) has rule over his wife and children,
and he is not worthy to have any, that wants sufficient virtue and prudence
to govern them well. Go to then (ACHITOB) let us learn of thee what belongs
to the parts of a house now mentioned by us.


ACHITOB. Anacharsis, one of the wise men of Grecia, said, that a house is not
to be called good, because it is well built, and of good stuff, but men must
judge thereof by that which is within, and which belongs to the house, What
makes a house to be called good.
as namely, by the children, wife, and servants: with whom, being wise and
well qualified, if the father of a family communicates, and imparteth of that
which he has, whether it be in the bottom of a cave, or under the shade of a
bough, he may be said to dwell in a good and happy house. Therefore it is no
small happiness and felicity for them that are called to the government of a
family, when they see it wise and well nurtured in every part. But as nerves
and sinews, being the instruments of sense and motion, proceed and are
derived from the head, which by them infuseth into all parts of the body, the
Animal spirit, without which the body could not exercise any natural
function of sense and moving: so the parts of a house commonly receive the
habit of manners and conditions All good order in a house proceeds from the
head of the family.
from the father of a family, as from the head thereof: but then especially,
when he is prudent and wise, and imploieth his care, diligence, and industry
thereupon. Therefore a good householder must begin the right government Where
a householder must begin to rule his house well.
of his house at himself, by letting his household see, that he is prudent,
chaste, sober, peaceable, but chiefly religious and godly: as also by bringing
forth plentiful fruits of his duty toward those that are under his charge.
For as the anger and threatenings of the head of a family astonisheth his
children and servants, so his good works harteneth them on to do well. Now,
because there is variety of houses, whose difference is commonly taken from
the goods and ability of men, which abound to some, and are wanting to others,
I will propound here, as my purpose and meaning was before, a mean house, in
all points perfect, and as we use to say, neither poor nor rich, from which
notwithstanding both great and small may draw instruction for their government.
We have already seen, that a house is divided into four parts, whereof the
conjugal or wedlock part has been already handled by us. Now we must
consider of the other three, I mean of the Parentall, Maisterlie, and
Possessorie parts. And I think it will be best to follow that order which is
most usual in the perfection and progress of The progress of a family
before it come to perfection.
marriage, and in the accomplishment of a house, which, both before and after
the consummation of marriage, is first compounded of the goods and wealth of
men: next of men-seruants and maid-seruants: and lastly, it is made absolute
and perfect by those children which God sends. The Possessorie part then is
that which we call mooueable goods, immooueables, and such goods as What a
householder must first look unto.
move of themselves. This part of a house (as Aristotle says) belongs so to
Oeconomie, that it should go before it, and serve it, to the end that victuals,
and other necessary goods, might not be wanting in the house: wherein otherwise
(says the same Philosopher) a man can not live, much less live well. For as
in arts that have their limits determined, it is necessary that convenient and
proper instruments be had to finish their work: so must it Goods are
instruments tending to the maintenance of life.
be in Oeconomie, in which goods are instruments serving to maintain life: and
to possess goods, is nothing else but to have a multitude of instruments
serving that Two sorts of goods.
action wherein life consists. We may divide all these goods into two
principal kinds: namely, into those that come from the father to the son by
succession, which we call Patrimony, and those that are gotten by industry
and labor. It is the duty of the father of a family to preserve that for his,
which his predecessors left him, to have What interest a father of a family
has in his goods.
the use thereof only as they had, and to use them well, as a faithful guardian
and disposer of those goods which God gives for the succor and profit of his
creatures. Yea, from that day wherein he takes a wife, and much more when he
has children, he must think that he is no more Lord of his goods, but only a
Tutor: and that if they should be wasted or lost through his negligence, he
were no less faulty than he that should steal them. Secondly, he must
increase his patrimony by travel, care, and good husbandry: he must get goods
for his family, by just and civil means, observing decency and honesty in
all things. After the first functions of a holy and christian duty, which are
to go before, and to be joined inseparably to all the actions of life, Two sorts
of getting goods.
as elsewhere we have handled, and shall see more hereafter: we find two sorts
of getting, the one natural, the other artificial. The natural way consists
in pasturing, or feeding of cattle, in tillage, in hunting and fishing, unto
which we may say, that an honest pray and booty, agreeable to nature, is
joined, if it be practiced in just and lawful wars. Heerunto also is referred
the vent and sale of his increase, that those things which are sold, and
whereof we have abundance, may procure us from elsewhere such other things as
we want. The artificial kind of getting, consists in works, arts,
handicrafts, traffic, and merchandise, The end of arts, sciences, and
traffic.
exercised for gain. The end of which kind of getting ought to be as well
public profit as private: Therefore whatsoever is grounded upon domestical
profit only in this second sort of acquisition, is to be avoided and
misliked. For whereas it was first brought in of necessity to help men to
live, this were craftily to turn it to another end, and to apply it only to
one private man's gain, not without the oppressing and detriment of our
neighbor, for whose benefit a man must labor no less than for his own.
Amongst filthy gains, Usury Biting usury a detestable gain.
is most to be misliked and most detestable, which the Hebrews call biting,
and which does not only gnaw the debtor to the bones, but also sucketh out
all the blood and marrow from the bones, engendring money of money, contrary
to nature, and to that intent for which money was first brought in: namely,
that exchange might Why money was first invented and used.
be made of such things as are uneasy to be transported, and that the
commodity of traffic might be continued for public profit. Now a days
there is no trade so common, as that of usury: although it be altogether
reproved by the laws of God and men. And surely we have a goodly cloak to
cover the shame thereof, I mean the name of The question of interest has
weighty reasons on both sides.
interest, or profit of money, when as it has been always unpleasant in the
sight of God, who forbids all kind of usury whatsoever it be, and
therefore it ought not to have any place amongst men that live uprightly. There
was a law amongst the ancient An ancient law against usury.
Grecians and Romans, which forbadde all usury surmounting one penny for a
hundred by the year, and they called it Vnciarie Usury. If any Usurer took
greater profit, he was condemned to restore fourefold: because (as Cato
says) they judged, that a Usurer was a more wicked and vile man than a thief,
who was condemned but in double as much. Again, this law was since that
brought to a halfe-penie a year among the Romans, and not long after, Usury
was The law Genutia forbad all usury.
clean taken away by the law Genutia, because of usual seditions which
arose through the contempt of laws concerning Usury. Whereupon, we may note,
that what moderation soever is appointed in Usury, if men be suffered to take
never so little, they will ascend to the highest degree of all. Therefore we
must conform Exodus 22. 25. Deuteronomy. 23. 19.
our selves to the law of God, which takes away all liberty herein so
plainly from us, that it cannot be called into question. Concerning arts
exercised for gain, although there are some of them very vile and
contemptible, yet those also after a sort respect public profit. But those
arts wherein there is more prudence, or no small commodity, as Physic,
Architecture, and other points of knowledge in liberal arts and sciences, are
honest and seemly for them that exercise them according to their estate. Now
in all these diverse sorts of getting, and in many The praise of husbandry.
others about which men are but too diligent, husbandry is very commendable,
yea, nothing is more fruitful, nothing more pleasant, nothing more worthy
and beseeming a free man, and nothing more agreeable to nature. We will note
therefore touching this part of a house, called Possessorie, that it belongs
to the duty of the father of a family to attend diligently to his house,
carefully to provide for his family whatsoever is needful and necessary for
it, and to preserve for the same that which is already gotten, only by well
using the possession thereof. What good husbandry is.
This is that which is signified by the Greek word (...), or good husbandry:
which is as much to say, as industry in getting goods, and discreet
government in spending them to good purpose. And truly he that has no care
over his goods and household, will be easily persuaded to live unjustly, and to
take that which belongs to another. For sloth and unwillingness to do any
thing, is the beginning and wel-spring of all injustice. And so, whilst a good
father of a family laboreth to profit every one, he must also be careful for
himself and his. Let us now Of the Maisterlie part of a house.
come to the second part of a house, called the Maisterlie part, which
comprehends under it men-seruants and maid-seruants. If prudence and reason
are most necessary in all parts of housekeeping, their effects are well worth
the nothing, and to be desired in this part, of which we will now entreat. For
power and authority are of themselves too surly and imperious in him that
knows not how to repress them wisely: yea, they are easily turned into
intolerable arrogancy, if the bridle of reason restrain them not. Therefore
seeing we live in a free country, wherein the ancient absolute power of life
and death over slaves has no place, they, to whom God has granted this
favor Instructions touching the duty of a master toward his servants.
to excel, and to go before others, whether it be in gifts of nature, or in
graces of the soul, or otherwise in the goods of Fortune, they, I say, must in
no wise contemn those that seem to have been forgotten and stripped of all
these good things. Besides, a father of a family must consider, that he rules
not slaves, but free persons. Therefore he must use their service, although not
franckly for nothing, yet as that which comes from a willing and free mind,
not dealing roughly with them upon every occasion, but rather handling them
gently, as the creatures of God made after his image: seeing the poorest man is
The poor and rich are both created to one end.
created for the self same principal end that the mightiest and richest is.
Aristotle grants this, that although a Master is not bound in any respect
to his Vassaile, so far forth as he is a Vassaile, yet, because slaves are
men, he is of opinion, that all laws of humanity ought to be kept with them.
What then ought we to do to such as submit themselves freely unto us, to whom
also we are united and linked by christian charity, as to brethren and
inheritours of the same goods and promises? And yet we see that masters fall
into bitter anger, cry Against rigorous masters.
out, offer outrage, use violence, and lay hands of their servants upon small
or no occasion at all, as if they were unreasonable creatures, yea handling
them worse than they do their brute beasts. That this is true, we see not
one of them but he has great care that his horses be well fed, daily looked
unto, harnessed and decked. Besides, he takes great heed that they be not
tired, nor ouer-laboured: but as for their servants, they neither spare nor
comfort them one whit, nor have any respect to their ease and rest. For mine
own part, I think that such masters deserve rather to be seized upon, as mad
men, than admonished as sociable persons, I wish Two properties requisite in a
master.
therefore, that every master of a house had these two properties in him:
namely, that with all clemency and meekenes he would use the service and
obedience of them that are under him, by considering of them with reason, and
by looking rather to the good affection and desert of his servant, than to the
great and profitable service, which he draws from him. The other point is,
that the master using the sweat and service of his, should not seem to be
displeased, teastie, or hard to content, but rather always show forth a
gentle kind of favor and courtesy, or at least a severe familiarity,
seasoned with a cheerful and merry countenance. Whosoever show themselves
to be such men, besides the glory which they shall obtain by being taken
generally for gentle and courteous men, their household servants will love them
the more, and will reverence them as their fathers, not standing in such awe
and fear of them, as men commonly do of intolerable tyrants. Moreover, as
this assembly of a master and of servants tends, as every other society
also, unto some good end, the master having regard to that which concerns
him and his house, and his servants Servants must not be defrauded of their pay.
to the hope of profit and commodity; order must be taken, that they, which
have with all carefulnes discharged their duty, and yielded that fidelity and
diligence that is requisite to their superior, be not defrauded of the price,
reward, hire, and desert of their travels. For if we think it great villainy
to rob another man, let us esteem it nothing less to keep back the fruit
of life, and to defraud the labors, perils, watchings, and excessive cares of
our servants, in not recompencing them. Therefore concerning this part of a
house, called the Maisterlie part, we will note this, that as the Ancients made
their slaves free, thereby to draw from them voluntary and unconstrained
service, and to deliver themselves of that fear and distrust, which they
always had of their slaves, accounting that proverb true: As many enemies as
slaves: so ought we to bring up and to nourish our hired and mercenary
servants, which serve us in these days with a free and liberal kind of love,
by dealing graciously with them, by persuading them with reason, and by
rewarding them liberally: and this will induce them to serve, honor, and
esteem us, as if our weal and woe were wholly common with them. The last part
of the house remains now to be entreated of, which is the Of the Parentall
part of a house.
perfection thereof, and is called the Parentall part, comprehending under it,
the Father and Mother, or one of them, with the children. The head of a family
(says Aristotle) commands over wife and children, but over both, as free
persons, and yet not after one and the same The difference between commanding
over a wife and over children.
manner of commanding, but over the wife, according to government used in a
popular state, and over the children, royally or Prince-like. This commandment
over children, is called royal, because he that begets, commands The word
Father is a kingl^ and sacred title
by love, and by the prerogative of age, which is a kind of kingly commanding.
Therefore Homer calls Jupiter the father of Men and of the Gods, that is king
of all. For a king must excel by nature, and must be of the same kind, as it
is with the aged in respect of the yoonger sort, and with him that begets,
in regard of his child, over whom he ought to be as careful, as a king is
over his subjects. Unto this part of the house a Father of a family must have
a careful eye, because heereuppon chiefly depends the honor and quietness of
his house, and the discharge of his duty toward God and his country:
namely, by making his children honest and of good conditions. As the desire and
prick of nature (says Dion) drives us forward to beget children: so is it a
testimony of true love and charity, to bring them up, and to entreat them
after a free manner, and to instruct them well. Therefore a Father of a family
shall satisfy his duty concerning this part of a house, by the good
education and instruction of his children, and by exercising them in virtue.
For manners and conditions are qualities imprinted in us by long tracte of
time, and virtues are gotten by custom care, and diligence. Hereafter we are
to consider more amply and particularly of the instruction of youth, and
therefore at this time we will content our selves with the giving of certain
general precepts, worthy to be diligently observed of every good father of a
family toward his children. For in vain (says Plato) does he hope for a
harvest, that has been negligent in sowing. I say, he must be passing
careful, and imploie all possible Youth is the seede-corne of the
Commonwealth.
labor, that his children and youth may be well instructed, because they are
the seede-corne of the city: insomuch that careful heed is to be had even of
their words, gestures, sportes, and other actions, that nothing may lead them
unto vice. For otherwise if no reckoning be made of this age, a man shall
labor no less in vain to prescribe good laws for them afterward, than the
Physician does that ministers plenty of medicines to a diseased party that
keeps no diet at all. The best gifts The gifts of nature are soon
corrupted.
of nature, if they be not well trimmed and looked unto, become naught at the
first, and afterward passing evil. Therefore a father of a family ought not
to be more careful of any thing than of the bringing up of his children,
according to whose good or evil education, the whole house will be governed.
This first institution of their life from the first age, is called discipline,
which by little and little leads the spirit of the child to the love of
virtue, even of that virtue, whereby, being come to man's estate, he knows
both how to command, and how to obeie, and to follow after nothing but that
which the law commands and affirms to be good. The vices of children are
swords which pass through the hearts of their Fathers, who are for the most
part the cause of them through their negligence in correcting them, and
ouer-great liberty which they grant to this age that needs a stay and
bridle, yea spurs, whereby to be broken and made tractable, as men use to
deal with yoonge Coltes. Therefore PLATO said, that it is not in our own
power to cause our children to be borne such as we would have them, but yet
that it lies in us to make them good. Whereunto this will be a good mean, if
from their young A father must be loved, feared, and reverenced of his children.
years we imprint in their hearts a love, fear, and reverence of us. For if
these things concur not together in the childs heart, he will never yield
due obedience to his father. Pythagoras said, that a prudent father was better
to be liked than a cholerike, because prudence serves to procure love and good
will in those that ought to obey: whereas choler makes them odious that
command, and causes their admonitions to profit but little. For this cause
Aristotle requires perfection of Moral virtue in a father of a family,
saying: that his office is a kind of building, The office of a father resembled
to building.
and that reason is as it were the builder, by whom he guides and brings
that Oeconomical work to his perfection. And in deed the Ancients took great
pains in teaching their children themselves, not suffering them to be far
from their presence during their youth: because they judged (and that upon good
reason) that son-like respect and love were good pricks to drive them forward
to A child will learn better of his father than of any other.
the study of virtue. And no doubt but if a skillful father would execute this
duty of instructing his child in knowledge and learning, he would conceive and
take it a great deal better of him than of any other. Therefore Marcus Portius
Cato would needs beschoole-maister to his own M. Cato.
children, which institution did greatly avail them, not so much because he
was Cato, as because he was their father, I. Caesar.
whose virtue they imitated. Julius Caesar adopted his nephew Octauian, and
brought him up himself. Which did him so much good, that being come to the
empire, he was Augustus.
called Augustus for his goodness. He also performed as much afterward to his
nephews Lucius and Caius, whom in like manner he had adopted. Noah, Lot, Jacob,
and all the fathers, Noah, Lot, Jacob, etc. God commands fathers to instruct
their children.
instructed their children themselves: and God commanded the Israelites in the
wilderness to teach their children the law, which themselves had received from
their fathers. To this purpose an ancient man said, that it was the greatest
sloth that could be, for a man to be negligent toward his children, and to
teach them nothing. Great heed therefore must be taken, that they be not left
to the government of their own fantasy, considering that Prou. 23. 13. 14.
and 13. 24. Correction necessary for children. Ecclus. 30. 8. 9. 11. 12.
youth is very tender to resist vice, and of it self incapable of counsel.
Withold not (says the Wise man) correction from the child: for in smiting
with the rod, thou shall deliver his soul from hell. He that spares his rod,
hates his son, but he that loves him* chasteneth him betime. As an untamed
horse becomes fierce: so a child suffered to do what he list, waxes
rebellious. If thou bring up thy son delicately, he shall make thee afraid: and
if thou play with him, he shall bring thee to heaviness. Give him no liberty in
his youth, and wink not at his folly. Bow down his neck while he is young,
and beat him on the sides while he is a child, least he wax stubborn, and be
disobedient unto thee, and so bring sorrow to thine heart. And yet I would not
that fathers should be ouer-sharpe and hard to their children, not bearing
Severity must be mingled with elemencie in the correcting of children.
with any fault in them. But as Physicians mingling and steeping their bitter
drugs with some sweet juice, have found the means to make a passage for
profit through the midst of pleasure: so must fathers intermingle the
sharpnes of their reprehensions and corrections with the facility of
elemencie, and sometime let loose a little the bridle to the desires of their
children, so that they wander not far from that which becomes them. Again,
they must by and by let down the button, and hold them hard in with the
bridle, but yet supporting gently and patiently their faults committed through
youth, and not of malice. And if it be so that they cannot but be angry, at the
least let their anger be presently appeased. For it is better that a father
should be quickly angry (although that be an imperfection) so that he be soon
pacified, than slow to anger, and hardly brought to forgive. But if a father
be so severe that he will forget nothing, and be never reconciled, it is a great
argument, that he hates his children. And then he makes himself unworthy of
so excellent and divine a name, showing forth effects clean contrary
thereunto: whereas parents commonly love their children too much, and use toward
them rather too much lenity, than just severity. Oh how the father (says
Seneca, speaking of one that thrust his son out of his house) cutteth off his
lims with great grief, how many sighs he fetches in cutting them off, and
how earnestly he wishes to have the^ again in their place? Moreover, fathers
must have a special care, that they commit no fault, nor omit any thing
appertaining to their duty, to the end they The fathers life must be a mirror
of virtue to the child.
may be lively examples to their children, that looking into their life, as
into a clear glass, they may abstain after their example from speking any
thing that brings shame. Again we know, that all those fathers which lead an
evil life, leave not to themselves any courage so much as to reprove their
slaves only, so far off are they, that they can frankly chide their children.
And, which is woorst of al, by their naughty life they are unto them in steed
of masters and counselors of il-doing. For where old men are shameless, there
it must needs be, that young men become impudent and graceles. Fathers therefore
must strive to do whatsoever their duty requires, that their children may
wax wise and well qualified. This we may comprehend in few words: namely, if
they bring them up well in their infancy, and let them have due correction in
their youth. Which two When fathers may be justly charged with their childrens
faults. 1. Sam. 3. 13.
things being neglected of fathers, the faults of their children are for the
most part justly imputed unto them. Hely the Priest was not punished for any
sin which himself had committed, but because he winked at the sins of his
children. We read in the story of the Heluetians or Switzers, of the The
story of a father appointed to execute his own child.
judgment of a tyrant condemned to death, where order was taken that the
execution thereof should be done by the father, who was the cause of his evil
education: that he might come to his death by the author of his life, and that
the father might in some sort be punished for his negligence used toward his
child. Moreover, they that have many children, must be passing careful to bring
them up in mutual friendship, causing them to give each to other that honor
and duty, unto which nature binds them, and sharply chastising those that in
any respect offend therein. The Ephoryes of Lacedemonia long since condemned A
father must bring up his children in mutual love.
a notable citizen in a very great sum, when they understood that he suffered
two of his children to quarrel together. The best mean, which I find to avoid
so great an evil, is to love and entreat them all alike, and to accustom them
to give honor, duty, and obedience one to another according to their degrees
of age. They must remove from them al partialities, and not suffer them to have
any thing several or divided one from another, that as it were in one heart and
will all things may be common amongst them. Example heerof was that good father
of a family Aelius Tubero.
Aelius Tubero, who had sixteen children of his own body, all of them
married, and dwelling all in one house with their children, and living with him
in all peace and concord. For the conclusion therefore of our present
discourse, we learn, that a father of a family must begin the government of
his house with himself, and become an example to his of all honesty and
virtue. That he must not neglect the care of providing goods, and necessary
means for the maintenance of his family, remembering always that in nothing
he go beyond the bounds of that seemelines and decency, which duty has
limited and prescribed unto him. That he ought to love and to entreat his
servants courteously, putting away threatenings (as it is said in the Ephesians. 6. 9.
Scripture) and knowing that both their and his master is in heaven, with whom
there is no respect of persons. And for the last point, that it belongs to
his duty to bring up his children in the holy instruction and information of
the Lord, not provoking them to wrath, that God may be glorified, and he their
father may rejoice in the presence of his friends, and that his country
generally may receive benefit, profit, and commodity.


Of the duty of children toward their parents: of the mutual love that ought
to be among brethren: of the duty of servants toward their masters. Chap. 50.
ACHITOB. Upon a day when one said in the hearing of Theopompus king of Sparta,
that the estate of that city was preserved in such flourishing manner, because
the kings knew how to command well, the prince replied* that it was not so much
for that cause, as because the citizens knew how to obey well. And to speak
the truth, to obey well (as also the virtue of commanding) Obed great*
is a great virtue, and proceeds from a nature, which being noble of it
self, is helped by good education. Therefore Aristotle said, that it was
necessary that he which obeieth should be virtuous as well as he that
commands. Now seeing we have entreated of the duty of a father and head of a
family, exercising his office upon all the parts of his house, let us now
consider of the duty and obedience that is requisite in servant and
children, and of the mutual and reciprocal amity which ought to be between
brethren, desirous to preserve the bond of Oeconomical society in a happy
estate.


ASER. Col. 3. Ephesians. 6. 2.
Children (says the Scripture) obey your parents in all things: for that is
well pleasing unto the Lord Honor thy father and mother (which is the first
commandment with promise) Obedience to parents commanded of God
that it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on earth.


AMANA. Ecclus. 3. 4. 5.
Who so honoreth his father, his sins shall be forgiven him, and he shall
abstain from them, and shall have his daily desires. And he that honors his
mother, is like one that gathers treasure. 1. Pet. 2. 18.
And you servant be subject to your masters with Obedience to masters
commanded of God.
all fear, not only to the good and courteous, but also to the froward. Let us
then hear ARAM discourse more at large of that which is here propounded unto
us.


ARAM. Nature (says Plutark) and the law which preserves nature, have given
the first place of reverence and Reverence to parents placed next to the honor
due to God.
honor after God, unto the father and mother: and men can not do any service
more acceptable to God, than graciously and lovingly to pay to their parents
that begot the^, and to them that brought them up, the usury of new and old
graces which they have lent them: as contrariwise, there is no sign of an
Atheist more certain, than for a A token of an Atheist.
man to set light by, and to offend his parents. The father is the true image
of the great and sovereign God, the universal A father is the image of God.
father of all things, as Proclus the Academike said. Yea the child holds his
life of the father next after God, and whatsoever else he has in this world.
Therefore a man is forbidden to hurt others, but it is accounted great impiety
and sacrilege for a man not to show himself ready to do and to speak all
things, I will not say, whereby they can receive no displeasure, but whereby
they may not receive pleasure. And in deed one of the greatest good turns that
we can do to those of whom we are descended, is not to make them sad. Which
cannot possibly be done, if God the leader and guide to all knowledge disposes
not the mind to all honest things. The children of Ecclus. 3. 1. 2. etc.
wisdom are the Church of the righteous, and their offspring is obedience and
love. Children, hear the judgment of your father, and do thereafter, that you
may be safe. For the Lord will have the father honored of the children, and
has confirmed the authority of the mother over the children. He that
honors his father shall have joy of his own children, and when he makes
his prayer he shall be heard. He that honors his father shall have a long
life, and he that is obedient to the Lord, shall comfort his mother. He that
fears the Lord, honoreth his parents, and does service unto his parents, as
unto Lords. Honor thy father and mother in deeds and in word, and in all
patience, that thou may have the blessing of God, and that his blessing may
abide with thee in the end. For the blessing of the father establishes the
houses of the children, and the mothers curse rooteth out the foundations.
Help thy father in his age, and grieve him not as long as he lives. And if
his understanding fail, have patience with him, and despise him not when thou
art in thy full strength. For the good entreaty of thy father shall not be
forgotten, but it shall be a fortress for thee against sins. In the day of
trouble thou shall he remembered, thy sins also shall melt away, as the ice in
fair weather. He that for saketh his father shall come to shame, and he that
angreth his mother is cursed of God. By these holy speeches we see how we ought
The fist commandment only has a special promise annex ed unto it. Ephesians. 6. 2.
to love, honor, reverence, and fear our parents. This is comprehended under
the first commandment of the second table, and this only of all the ten
articles of the Decalogue bears his reward with him: albeit no recompense is
due to him that is bound to do any thing, namely by so straight a bond as this,
whereof all laws both divine and humane are full, and the law of nature also
does plentifully instruct us therein, as it has been diligently observed of
very Infidels, Ethnikes, and Pagans. Amongst the Lacedaemonians this custom
took place, that the younger sort rose up from their seats before the aged.
Whereof when one asked the cause of Teleucrus, It is (quoth he) to the end
that in doing this honor to whom it belongs not, they should learn to
yield greater honor to their parents. The arrogancy of a child was the
cause, that one of the Ephories published the law of Testaments, whereby it was
permitted to every one The law of Testaments to keep children in a^e.
from that time forward to appoint whom he would his heir. This law served
well to make children obedient and serviceable to their parents, and to cause
them to be afraid of displeasing them. Among the Romans the child was not
admitted to plead his fathers will after his death by way of action, but only
by way of request, using Children might not the out their liue^^es by way of
action but of request.
very humble, honorable, and reverent speech of his dead father, and leaving
the whole matter to the discretion and religion of the Judges. Contend not with
thy father (said Pittacus the wise) although thou have just cause of complaint.
And therefore Teleucrus answered aptly to one, who complained unto him, that
his father always spoke ill of him: If (quoth he) there were no cause to
speak ill of thee he would not do it. So that it belongs to the duty of a
child to believe that his father has always right, and that age and
experience has endued him with greater knowledge of that which is good, than
they have that are of yoonger years. Philelphus said, that although we could
not possibly render the like good turns to our parents, nor satisfy those
obligations by which we stand bound unto them, yet we must do the best we can
unto them: we must entreat them courteously and lovingly, and not go far from
them: we must harken unto their instructions, and be obedient The duty of
children toward their parents.
to their commandments: we must not gainsay their deliberations and wills,
no more than the will of God, whether it be that we are to depart from them, or
to tarry still, or to enter into some calling agreeable to the will of God: we
must not stand in contention with them when they are angry, but suffer and
bear patiently, if they threaten or correct us. And if they be offended with
us when we think there is no cause why, yet we must not lay us down to rest
before we have by all kind of honest submissions Humility toward parents most
commendable.
appeased them. Humility is always commendable, but especially toward our
parents. The more we abase our selves before them, the more we increase in
glory and honor before God and men. This is very badly put in ure at this day,
when the son does not only not honor his father, but even dishonoreth him,
and is ashamed of him. He is so far from loving him, that he rather hates
The description of a disobedient child.
him, so far from fearing him, that contrariwise he mocketh and contemns
him: and in stead of serving and obeying him, he rises up and conspireth
against him. If he be angry, he labors to anger him more: briefly, scarce
any duty of a child toward his father is seen now a days. And if some point
thereof be found in any toward his father, yet is it clean put out in regard
of the mother: as if he that commanded us to honor our father did not The
mother is no less to be honored than the father.
presently say, and thy mother, unto who^ in truth we owe no less honor,
respect, and obedience, than to our father, as well in regard of the
commandment of God, as of the unspeakable pains and travel which she
suffered in bearing and bringing us into the world, in giving us suck, and in
nourishing us. But alas, what shall we say of those that spoil their parents
of their goods, houses and commodities, and desire nothing more than their
death, that they may freely enjoy, even that which oftentimes their parents
have purchased for them? O execrable impiety! It is unworthy to be once
thought upon amongst us, and the judgment of God does of it self sufficiently
appear upon such cursed children. Whose behavior that it may be more odious
unto us, let us learn of Pittacus, that our children will be such toward us as
we have been toward our parents. But let us be more afraid to provoke our
fathers in such sort through our default unto wrath, that in stead of blessing
us, they fall to curse us. For (as Plato says) there is no prayer which God
hears more willingly than that of the father for the children. And therefore
special regard The blessings and cursings of parents toward their children is
of great weight.
is to be had unto the cursings and blessings, which fathers lay upon their
children. Which was the cause (as the scripture teaches us) that children in
old time were so jealous one of another, who should ^ary away the fathers
blessing, and that they stood in greater fear of their curse, than of death
it self. Torquatus the younger being banished Torquatus.
from his fathers house, slew himself for grief thereof. And to allege
another example out of the writings of ancient men, of the love which they
bare to their fathers, that of Antigonus the second son of Demetrius, is most
worthy to be noted. For when his father being prisoner sent him word by one
of his acquaintance to give no credit, nor to make account of any letters
from him, if it so fell out that Seleucus, whose prisoner he was, should
compel him thereunto, and therefore that he should not deliver up any of those
towns which he held, Antigonus contrariwise wrote to Seleucus, that he would
An example of great love in a child toward his father.
yield up unto him all the lands he had under his obedience, and would also
himself become his pledge, if he would deliver his father. We may not here
pass over with silence the rare example of daughter-like piety, with which
all the painters in the world have set forth their science, I mean of the
daughter that gave suck to her An other of a daughter toward her father.
father who was condemned to die of that ancient and usual punishment of
famine, which never suffers a sound man to pass the seventh day. The iailour
espying this act of piety gave notice thereof to the magistrates, which being
known to the people, the daughter obtained pardon for her fathers life.
Moreover, seeing we must labor to obey and to please our parents in all
things, it is certain that no action, gift or disposition in Children can not
please their parents better than to love one another.
us is more acceptable, or contenteth them better than to see good will, and an
assured and certain friendship among brethren. Which may easily be known by
these contrary signs. For if parents are offended when their children offer
wrong to a servant whom they love, and if hearty old men are grieved when no
account is made of a dog or horse bred in their house, and are vexed when they
see their children mock and despise those pastimes, stories, and other such
like things which they sometime loved, is it likely that they could patiently
abide to see their children whom they love best of all, to hate one another, to
be always quarelling one with another, to speak ill one of an other, and in
all their enterprises and actions to be divided, and set one against another,
and to seek to supplant and defeat each other? I think no man will affirm it.
Therefore contrariwise we may judge, that those brethren which love and cherish
one another, which join together in one bond of self-same wills, studies and
affections, that which nature had disioined and separated in bodies, and
lastly, which have all their talk, exercises, plays and pastimes common
amongst them, they I say undoubtedly give occasion to their parents of a sweet
and happy contentation in their old age for this brotherly love and friendship.
For no father (says Plutarke) ever loved learning, honor or silver so much as
he did his children. And therefore they never took so great pleasure to see
their children good orators, rich, or placed in great offices and dignities, as
to see the love one another. To this purpose one rehearses that Apollonida
Apollonida.
mother to king Eumenes and to three other of his brethren, accounted her self
happy as she said, and gave great thanks to God, not for her riches or
principality, but because she saw her three younger sons, as it were a guard to
their elder brother, who lived freely and most safely in the midst of them
with their swords by their sides, and their iauelins in their hands.
Contrariwise, when Xerxes.
king Xerxes perceived, that his son Ochus lay in wait for his brethren to
put them to death, he died for displeasure thereof. Therefore Euripides said,
that wars between brethren are grievous, but most of all to their He that
hates his brother, hates his parents.
parents: because he that hates his brother and cannot abide to look upon
him, must needs also be offended with him that begat him, and her that bare
him. Whereas good children that love one another for the love of their parents,
are so much the more provoked to love and honor them, saying and thinking
always with themselves, that they are bound unto them for many causes, but
chiefly in regard of their brethren, who are unto them as precious, pleasant
and gracious an inheritance as any they could receive from them. This meant
Homer to teach us when he brought in Telemachus reckoning Telemachus.
this amongst his calamities, that Jupiter had ended the race of his father in
him, and had not given him a brother. Let us not then doubt, but that this is a
certain demonstration to the parents that their child loves them, when he
loves his brethren. And this also serves for as great an example and
instruction to his children to love one an other, as any can be. Therefore let
us utterly banish away all hatred of our brethren, which is both condemned by
God who commends above all things concord unto us, and also a naughty nurse
for the old age of fathers and mothers, and a worse for the young years of
children. And seeing we are about this matter of brotherly love, so precious
and excellent, whereunto now adays men have so small regard, I think we ought
to insist and stand longer upon it, and allege some precepts and examples of
ancient men, whereby to confirm us in it more and more. First, nature has
bred from our birth in regard of us the beginning The beginning of brotherly
love is in our nativity.
and occasion of this amity, and has taken away from our judgment all former
motions to procure love. Therefore we must beware that we seek not too exactly
after the faults and imperfections one of another, but cover and bear with
them, because they are of our own blood: knowing that no man's life can be
sincere and clean from all vice, so that we were better to support the
domestical imperfectio^s of our brethren, tha^ to make trial of those that are
in strangers. That brother (says Plutark) that warreth with his brother, and
seeks to procure a stranger to friend, seems to me to cut off voluntarily a
member of his The benefit that comes to brethren by having common friends.
own flesh belonging to him, that he may apply and fasten to that place one
taken from another man's body. We note also, that nothing more preserves the
love of brethren, than to have the same common friends. For several
familiarity, conversation and company keeping turns aside and alienateth
them one from another, because thereby they acquaint themselves with diverse
natures, and take pleasure in things that are contrary. But there is a further
matter in it. For as tin does soder and join together broken copper, by
touching both ends of the broken pieces, because it agrees as well with the
one as with the other: so a common friend serves to confirm, to preserve, to
increase and to reunite their mutual friendship and good-wil, when upon light
occasion sometimes it is as it were in danger of breaking. Which is so much the
more to be feared, Enmity between brethren is prodigious and unnatural.
as it is certain, that all enmity breeds within our souls a thousand
passions that torment us, but especially that enmity which a man bears
toward his brother, as that which is most prodigious and against nature. And
as bodies that were once joined together, if the glue or band wax loose, may
be reioined and glewed again; but if a natural body break or rent asunder,
it is hard to find any soder that is able to reunite and knit them well
together again: so those mutual friendships, which we contract It is a hard
matter to reconcile brethren once fallen at variance.
voluntarily with such as are not of kin or allied unto us, if peradventure
they fall asunder sometimes, may easily be undertaken again, but when brethren
are once estranged and fallen from that love whereby nature does necessarily
link them one with another, they are hardly reconciled again together. And if
they be friends again, yet it is always with some distrust and suspicion.
Questionles it is impossible but that affairs should breed in these times
wherein we live many occasions of dissension and debate between brethren,
namely, for goods How brethren must behave themselves in the partition of lands
and goods.
and successions, as this word of Parting imports, and brings with it
division, every one being desirous to have his own. But herein also they must
suffer their matters to fight by themselves, without adding any headstrong
passion, covetousness, or choler, which are as a hook that takes hold of
them, and seeks to set them together by the ears. They must, as it were in a
balance, consider jointly together on which side right and equity declineth,
and as soon as they can possible, let them remit the judgment and deciding of
their controversies to the arbitrament of some good men. Yea, a good brother
ought rather to rejoice and to boast that he has overcome and gone beyond his
brother, in gracious behauior, in courtesy, in voluntarily giving of place, and
in every good duty toward him, than in the division of some goods. Now let us
consider of some notable examples amongst the ancients, of great brotherly
love. Although we had searched all histories, yet could we not find a more
memorable act, or woorthier to be set forth at this day, and to be rather
followed, especially of the greater sort, who Examples of brotherly love.
quarrel for their possessions and revenues, than that which fell out between
the children of Darius monarch of the Persians. Ariamenes the eldest, and
Xerxes the younger, being in great strife together for the succession of the
empire, the eldest alleged his birthright, the younger, that he was the son
of Atossa, daughter to Cyrus the great, and that he was borne since his father
was crowned king, and so next inheritour of the kingdom now that Cambises was
dead. Each of them had great confederates, and many Persian lords were divided
into factious about this matter. But Ariamenes came out of Media, not in
Ariamenes.
arms to make war, although he had great means thereunto, but only with
his ordinary train, as one that purposed to pursue his right by way of
justice. Xerxes Xerxes.
before his brothers coming, exercised in Persia all duties belonging to a
king: but as soon as his brother was arrived, he willingly put off his kingly
diadem and hat, and went out to meet him and to embrace him. After that he
sent presents unto him, with commandment given to those that bare them, to
say unto him in this manner: Xerxes thy brother honoreth thee now with these
presents, but if by the sentence and judgment of the princes and lords of
Persia he be declared king, his will is that thou should be the second
person in Persia after him. Ariamenes returned this answer: I receive my
brothers gifts with all my heart, and think that the kingdom of Persia
belongs to me: but as concerning my brethren, I will give them that dignity
and honor that is due unto them next to my self, and to Xerxes first of all.
Now after that by their common consent Artabanus their uncle had decided and
brought to an end their controversy, and adjudged the kingdom to Xerxes;
Ariamenes presently arose from his seat and went to do homage to his brother,
and taking him by the right hand, led him to his royal and kingly throne.
From that time forward he was always the greatest next unto him, and showed
himself so well affected toward his right, that in the Salamine battle by
Sea he died, fighting valiantly Antiochus.
in his service. Antiochus surnamed the Holy, making war with his Elder
brother for his part in the kingdom of Macedonia, declared even in his
ambition, that all brotherly love was not quite extinguished and clean put out
in him. For in the hottest time of their war, when his brother Seleucus had
lost the battle with great destruction of his men, and was supposed to have
been dead because no news was heard of him: Antiochus put off his purple robe,
and clothed himself in black, and shuttyng up his palace royal, mourned
and lamented very much for his brother. But being afterward advertised that
he was safe and sound, and preparing an other army, he went in open show
from his lodging, and sacrificed to the gods by way of thanksgiving,
commanding the Towns that were under his jurisdiction to offer the like
sacrifices, and to wear Hattes of flowers in token of public Athenodorus.
joy. Athenodorus the Grecian having a brother elder than himself, called
Zeno, who being convicted of a certain crime, had lost all his goods by
confiscation, parted again with him all his own goods, and gave unto him the
just half. When the king of Lydia demanded of Pittacus whether he had any
Pittacus.
goods, yea (quoth he) twice so much more than I would I had, being heir to
my brother that is dead. The love of that Persian woman, of whom Plutarke
Great love of a Persian woman toward hit brother.
makes mention, was very great, who being asked why she had rather save the
life of her brother than of her own son: because (quoth she) I may well have
mo children, but not more brethren, seeing my Father and Mother are both
dead. How much more then ought we to prefer our brethren before all other
our friends and acquaintance. For many may be gotten of this kind, and
others if these fail: but it is no more possible to get a new brother, than
to get an hand again that is cut off, or an eye that is plucked out.
Agrippa, brother in law to the Emperor Agrippa.
Augustus, used to say, that he was greatly beholding to that sentence of
Salust, Small things increase by concord, but perish through discord:
because it procured unto him all his wealth, by seeking to live in peace and
friendship with his brother, and with every one. This is that which Scilurus
leauyng Scilurus left 80. sons behind him.
behind him foure-score male-children, meant to teach them, and how they should
be invincible being joined and united together, by offering to each of them a
bundle of darts to break, which when they could not do, he brake them one
after another before their eyes. I would further enlarge this discourse with
examples of the love of brethren, shinyng greatly in ages past, were it not
that we must here speak somewhat of the ductie and obedience of servants
toward their masters, according to that order which was propounded unto us.
This we will briefly comprehend into four general points. The first is,
that they must The duty of servants comprehended in sour points.
be pressed and always ready to put in execution their masters will and
commandment, and to do their business most diligently, not being
slothful, slack and negligent, nor doing any thing grutchingly. The second
point is, that they must be faithful unto them, not beguiling nor defrauding
them of any thing, nor affirming that before their faces to flatter them, which
they will unsay behind their backs. The third thing is, that they must seek
their masters profit and commodity more than their own, and take good heed
that no harm, loss, or trouble come unto them. And if any go about to
procure any such thing, they must undertake the defense thereof diligently,
even to the hazarding of their lives if need be. The last point which good
servants are to keep, is to use a double silence: the first, that they
reply not again to their masters commandments, although sometimes they
suppose that they know better what is to be done than they that command them.
The second, that they reveal not to others their masters secrets, nor sow
them out of his house. To be short, we cannot give them better instruction than
that of Saint Paul, saying: Servants be obedient Col. 3. 22. 23. 24.
unto them that are your masters according to the flesh in all things, not
with eye-seruice as men-pleasers, but in singlenes of heart, fearing GOD. And
whatsoever ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men, knowing
that of the Lord ye shall receive the reward of the inheritance: for ye
serve the Lord Christ. And elsewhere he exhorts them again, Tit. 2. 9. 10.
to be subject to their masters, and to please them in all things not
aunswering again, neither pickers, but that they show all good faithfulness,
that they may adorn the doctrine of GOD our Savior in all things. Now for
examples to all Examples of the love of servants toward their masters.
servants that are desirous to effect their duty toward their masters, we
will propound two, the one old, the other of late years, which give
sufficient testimony of a sonne-like rather than of a servile affection.
Antonius being overcome of Augustus, and dispairing of his Eros the servant of
Antonius.
safety, urged the promise of Eros his servant in whom he trusted, because he
had given his faith long before that he would kill him when he required the
same at his hands. But the servant drawyng his sword, and holding it out as
though he would have killed him, turned his face on the one side, and thrust
it into himself clean through his body. Maurice duke of Saxony being in The
servant of Mauritius duke of Saxony.
Hungary against the Turk, and walking out of the camp only with his
servant, was set upon by certain Turks, and his horse being slain, he was
thrown to the ground. But his servant cast himself upon him, covered and
defended him with his body, sustained and kept back the enemies until
certain horsemen came and saved the Prince, but died himself not long after
being wounded on every side. Therefore to end our present discourse, let us
learn, that it is a great and commendable virtue, and beseeming every good and
gentle nature, to know how to obey well, and to give honor and service to
those that occupy the degree of fathers, lords, and masters over us: as also
to love our brethren with an indissoluble love, to reverence one an other, the
younger honoring the elder, and the elder yielding all duties of sincere love
to the younger. Let us not be less afraid of the curse repeated so often in
the Scripture against disobedient children, than the ancients were of that
law which condemned them to be stoned to death when they would not obey the
voice of their Parents, nor harken unto them when they instructed them: but let
us much more fear that punishment, which will continue for ever, where there
will be weepyng and gnashing of teeth.


Of the education and instruction of Children. Chap. 51.
ARAM. WHen we entreated of the duty of a father of a family toward his
children, we said, that the chief mark whereat he ought to aim, was to make
them honest and good of condition, which was to be performed by instruction and
good bringing up in the knowledge and exercise of virtue. Now because the
chief foundation of a The chief foundation of a happy life.
happy life, is good instruction begun in youth, so that if the infancy of any
be well brought up (as Plato says) the rest of his life cannot but be good,
we ought as I think (my Companions) to take this matter again in hand to
follow and handle it more at large, to the end to provoke Fathers and all such
as have authority over the younger sort, to be careful and diligent in the
well ordering of the seed of youth, which is the spring and root of all
prosperity both public and private.


ACHITOB. A father of a family must be most careful to bring up his youth.
We must not (says Plato) be more careful of any thing whatsoever, than of
the good education of children. For if upon their good bringing up they become
moderate and stayed men, they will easily discern every thing that is good.
And if good wits have like education, they will grow from better to better
every day.


ASER. The beginning, middle, and ending of a happy life (says Plutarke)
consists in good education and bringing up. But it belongs to thee AMANA to
instruct us in this so excellent a matter.


AMANA. As a man cannot reap good wheat if he A fit comparison.
has not sown good seed, nor gather good fruit of his trees, if he had no
care at the beginning to dress them well, nor to graft them with good sciences
afterward: so the corruption of man's nature, which of it self is more inclined
to evil than to good, hinders virtue from taking sure footing and root in
the souls of men, if they be not from their very youth well and diligently The
spring of corruptions in common-welths
instructed, stirred up, and pricked forward to that which is honest and
decent. And truly that commonwealth is most miserable, wherein this tillage
of infancy is neglected. For from this fountain proceed rebellions,
seditions, open murders, contempt of laws and commandments of princes,
pollings, briberies, heresies, and Atheism. Therefore nothing was more
esteemed from time to time among the ancients, than the institution of youth,
which Plato calls Discipline, whereby children are led to this reason, not to
follow any thing but that which the law commands and allows for good. The
monarchy of the Persians, the commonwealth of the Lacedaemonians, and since,
that also of the Romans Laws that constrained fathers to see to their children
instructed.
had certain laws compelling fathers to provide that their children might be
instructed, not suffering them to be cast away and corrupted to the detriment
of the commonwealth. Amongst other laws there was one called Falcidia,
whereby it was enacted, that the child should The law Falcidia
be admonished for the first offense, chastised for the second, and for the
third hanged, and his father banished, as if he had been partaker in the fault,
for want of good education and instruction of his son. Heretofore we heard
many testimonies of the care and travel which famous and worthy men took to
instruct their children themselves. Traian the emperor, and after him Adrian A
worthy act of Traian and Adrian.
at their own costs and charges caused five thousand noble men's children of
Rome to be brought up in learning, virtue and feats of arms. Our ancient
kings, knowing how necessary this education of youth was, builded long ago
and caused to be framed so many goodly Colleges as we see in the Universities
of France: yea, the monasteries were partly founded to this end. But how
careful are we at this day to imitate those ancients in this earnestness of
good bringing up of children in the study of sciences and good discipline?
Have we not very good occasion to say with Crates the Philosopher, that it is
most necessary that one should ascend up into the highest place of this
kingdom, and cry aloude: Oh ye men, whither do ye throw your selves Crates
proclamation most necessary for these times.
headlong in taking all the pains that may be to heap up goods and treasures
that perish, and in the mean while make no reckoning of your children, but
suffer them to continue long, and to grow old in ignorance which destroys
them both body and soul, and turns to the confusion and overthrow of your
country? For it is Evil education corrupts a good nature.
most certain, that a good nature ill brought up, waxes very pernicious, and
that the minds and hearts of men Evil education corrupts a good nature.
that are corruptly instructed, become most wicked. Do you think (says
Plato) that execrable villainies and horrible vices proceed rather of a
naughty nature, than of a noble nature corrupted with evil education? In like
manner a good nature well tilled will attain to the top of virtue, but if it
be negligently looked unto, it will be nothing but vice. But let us see what
goodly instructions the ancients have given concerning this matter. Of the
excellent education of children required by Plato.
The same Plato was so careful, and searched out so exactly the good education
of children, as that which is as precious and necessary a thing as any can be
in the life of man, that he takes them even from their mothers womb, yea
before they are begotten. First, he wills that the husband and wife that are
desirous of children should keep themselves from drunkenness, and from
entering into the bed when they are cholerike and full of trouble, because
that many times is the cause of vices in children. Next he requires that great
Women with child must walk much.
bellied women should give themselves to walking, and beware of living either
too delicately, or too sparingly: that they should have quiet minds, with many
other things, which he alleges to that purpose. He says also, that children
being in their mothers womb, receive good and ill, as the fruits of the earth
do. After they are borne, he carefully recommendeth their education. We will
not here stand upon many points to be observed Every mother ought to nurse
her own child.
therein, as namely upon the choice of Nurses, whereof few are ignorant,
seeing it belongs to the true and natural office of every mother to nourish
that with her teate, which she has brought into the world, except there be
some great and lawful impediment. But let us go on with the sayings of Plato.
He charge nurses to Of the bringing up of infants.
lead their children oftentimes on their feet until they be 3. years old,
because this moving is very profitable for them. He forbids much crying in
children, because it breeds in them a habit and custom of sadness. From
From 3. years.
3. years to six, he would have them moderately corrected when they commit a
fault, and forbidden above all things to accustom them from that time forward
unto daintines, or to ouer-great severity, saying, that delicatenes makes
them froward, hard to please, cholerike, and soon moved: and that severity
makes them hard-harted, cruel, abject, base-minded, very blocks and fools,
and From six years.
haters of men. At six years of age he would have them put apart from the
daughters, and begin to learn to ride a horse, to shoot, to practice all kind
of feats of Arms, both with the right hand and with the left: to put in ure
all other exercises of moderate labor, that they may wax strong, and be
acquainted with labor, and therefore to use such laborious pastimes. But he
expressly forbids to change every day for new, this age being very apt
thereunto: saying, that nothing is more pernicious than to acquaint youth to
despise antiquity. But above all things, he commands that children should be
so brought up, that they be not constrained to any thing whatsoever Youth must
be taught as it were in sport, and not by compulsion.
they shall take in hand, but as it were in sport, that so every ones nature
may be known. Neither would he have them beaten without great discretion,
because it is not seemly that a free man should learn liberal sciences by
servitude and compulsion. And in truth no science forced upon a man, will
continue steadfast with him. Moreover, A commendable end of Music.
he would have them apply themselves to Music, both to sing hymns and songs
to the praise of God, to laud and magnify him, and to hope for all good
success from him, as also to recreate their spirits. He greatly misliketh in
them sloth and too much sleep, saying, that much sound sleep is good neither
for the body nor for the soul: that it is nothing profitable for him that
desires to bring any good thing to pass, because as long as a man sleeps,
he does nothing more than if he lived not. Therefore whosoever desires to
live, and to come to knowledge, let him watch as much as he may, having regard
notwithstanding to his health, which is contented with a little, when a man is
once acquainted therewith. Now, because a child (as he says) is more unruly
than a savage beast, he would never have him left without a wise Great care is
to be taken in the choice of schole-maisters.
and virtuous master. It is no less necessary (says he) to consider what
teachers a man has, than what parents. For as children do in a manner carry
away the spirits of their forefathers: so the vices of teachers are derived
unto their scholars. Therefore let such be chosen as teach us their virtue by
their works, and not such as only utter From the tenth year.
and speak many goodly words studied out of it. At ten years, this divine
Philosopher would have children to learn letters until fifteen. But because
we are to learn languages that differ from ours, it were good to begin
sooner, and to end a little after. I think it were very profitable for youth
to begin at the above named age of six years, to teach him his moother tongue
perfectly, that he may read, pronounce, and write it well. After, at eight
years, to teach him the rudiments of the Latin tongue, and to let him follow
that until it be as familiar unto him, From the foureteenth year.
or little less, than his natural speech. At fourteen years, the same Plato
would have children learn Arithmetike, saying, that it is very necessary both
for a souldior, and for a Philosopher: next, Geometry, and that part of
Astronomy that is necessary for Cosinographie, which he would have likewise
learned. He commands also that Hunting animage of war.
youth should practice hunting, because it is as it were an image of war, and
an exercise that makes men apt to sustain all labor and travel. This
institution of youth is surely worthy of that divine spirit of Plato, and
that party were very unhappy, and of a froward and corrupt nature, who being
thus diligently brought up, would not grow to be a virtuous and good man. He
puts Of the education of daughters.
small difference between the education and bringing up of daughters, and that
of sons, not depriving women from public administrations and charges, but
only that he would have them employed about such things as require least
labor, and not to begin to meddle with public affairs, before they be
forty years of age. He Reasons why women may intermeddle with public
affairs.
alleges these reasons, because oftentimes many women have been more
excellent than all the men of their country, and such are daily to be seen.
And seeing they have a soul as well as we, as quick a spirit, and oftentimes
more quick than we, (whereof those women are witnesses, who having given
themselves wholly to any thing whatsoever, were not inferior, but rather went
beyond many men) it were great folly in men, seeing God has created man and
woman with the like spirit, to cut off as it were the one half of their
strength, and to help themselves but with a part thereof. Now, albeit these
reasons are of great weight, yet sure it is that men and women, both by divine
and humane policy, have their Against ignorance in women
distinct and several offices. It is very true, that I like not the opinion of
many, who say, that women ought to know nothing, but to spinne and sow: which
saying comes near to that of the Emperor, who would not have a woman to
have more wit than is needful for her to discern her husbands shirt from
his doublet. Such opinions are fit for ignorant persons, and proceed from a
dark brain. For it cannot but be very seemly Women must be able to give a
reason of their being.
and profitable for a woman to be able to render a reason of her being, as well
by the knowledge of the holy Scriptures, as by the precepts of good life,
which we have from the Ancients. This ought parents to teach their daughters,
that they may be withdrawn from all other foolish love, through the love of
virtue, and be desirous of all honesty and chastity: as also, that when they
are moothers in good and holy marriage, they may be a principal cause of the
good bringing up of their children. Yea histories reckon up unto us a great
many, that have Example of learned women.
been in steed of Schoole-maisters in excellent sciences. Aretia taught her
son Aristippus Philosophy. Aretia.
Zenobia Queen of the Palmyrians, being very well learned Zenobia.
in the Greek, Latin, and Egyptian toongs, taught them to her two sons,
and wrote an Epitomie of the Cornelia.
Eastern Histories. Cornelia taught the Gracchyes her two sons, the Latin
eloquence. But let us follow our discourse of the general instruction of
children. Of the institution of youth according to Aristotle.
Aristotle seems unto me to be a good teacher and Master, where he
says, that there are two ages, in which it is necessary to divide the
institution of those disciplines, which we would have our children learn:
namely, from seven years until fourteen, which he calls the age of
pubertie: and again from this age until Two things to be respected in the
institution of youth.
the one and twentieth year. He says, that in the institution of youth, two
things must be looked unto: the one, wherein children are to be instructed, the
other, how they ought to be instructed. For all men are not agreed of this,
what things children are to learn, neither yet is it decided, or resolved
upon, to what end their institution ought to be directed, whether to profit,
or to manners, or to understanding and contemplation, which proceeds from the
variable opinions of men, who place their end in diverse The end of all studies.
things. But how soever it is, we must, as we said before, refer all our
studies to the glory of God, and to the service of our neighbors, in living
well according to those charges and vocations whereunto we may be called. We
have already seen the division of sciences and arts, and spoken of those that
are most necessary for a happy life. Aristotle appointed that children should
learn four things. Of Grammar.
Aristotle following the custom then used in Grecia, appointed that children
should learn four things, Grammar, bodily exercise, Music, and painting:
for certain commodities meet for the life of a man. Grammar is the entire to
all sciences, whereby we learn to speak exactly, The commodity thereof.
also to read and to write. And this is necessary for all estates of life,
whether public or private, in peace or in war, in a quiet life, or in
multitude of business, for marchandice, for the guiding of a house, for the
obtaining of knowledge, for the continuance and perpetuity of the memory of
man. Briefly, as nature is the cause of our being, so the knowledge of letters,
which Grammar teaches us, works in us the knowledge how to live well. For
this cause Charondas the lawmakers, as Diodorus the Sicilian writes, preferred
Grammar before all other sciences, as that which is most necessary for man's
life, appointing A notable law for the common instruction of children.
that all the children of his city should learn their letters at the charges
of the commonwealth, which was to maintain public masters to teach both
poor and rich. Truly this law ought to be put in practice in all the towns of
this kingdom, to resist that pernicious Hydra of ignorance, which the richer
sort defend, making no account of knowledge, to the treading down and
oppression of the poor, who would gladly have the means whereby they might be
instructed. The Gymnastical part Of Gymnastick, or bodily exercise.
was that art, which, as the Ancients affirmed, did serve for health and
strength, preparing the bodies of children by honest and moderate exercises, as
fencing, shooting, throwing of a stone, riding, wrestling, running, leaping,
swimming, and such like. These according to Aristotle's opinion, are to be
moderately practiced by children, until they be fourteen years old,
exercising them lightly, and not with forced labors, that their growth be not
hindered thereby. This age being past, after they have bestowed three years in
other Moral disciplines, and followed their studies in deeper sciences, until
the one and twentieth year, then may they be exercised with more sharp The
end of Music.
and hard labors of the body. They must also be taught Music, for the
solacing and recreation of their minds after travels: and painting, that they
may the better consider The use of painning.
of the beauty of the body, and understand the symmetry and apt composition
of all things, to the end that they may be the better advised either in buying
or selling them. Let them also know how to draw platformes of public and
private buildings, to set forth countries, towns, and castles, their height,
breadth, and length for the war: living creatures of all sorts, with their
parts, herbs, trees, roots, leaves, flowers, fruits for medicine, and for the
knowledge of simples. In this institution of children, Aristotle had respect to
that which was convenient, and drew nearest to the form of a happy
Commonwealth established by him, and to that which was necessary for the
preservation and maintenance thereof. Now, let us apply to our use that which
we may learn both of him, and of the rest of the Ancients, for the framing of
young men to honesty and virtue: leaving to the liberty of Fathers to make
choice of those arts and sciences wherein they purpose to bring up their
children, having regard to that whereunto nature makes them most apt and
pliable. We shall take a good way in the institution of youth, Four things to
be used in the institution of youth. Instruction, which consists in six
precepts. 1. The first precept. The first thing that youth must learn, is to
worship God.
if we observe and use these four things, Instruction, Admonition, Promise,
Praises, and Threatenings. We will comprehend all Instruction under six
precepts. The first shall be to show unto children, that they must worship
God, and honor him chiefly and above all things, referring all their thoughts
and deeds to the glory of his name: that it is he that has created and
preserves all things, that he suffers no wickedness to pass unpunished, nor
good work unrewarded, but gives eternal happiness to good men, and
everlasting pain and punishment to them that We can do nothing without the
grace of God.
are evil. Let them know that without his grace and favor they can do
nothing, no not so much as live one moment: and therefore that they must
continually and before every work call upon him, and beware that they offend
him not by neglecting his commandments, which 2. The second precept.
for this cause they must diligently learn. The second instruction Youth must
not glory in transitoric goods.
which I find most necessary for youth, is to teach them not to glory in
earthly and worldly goods, but to learn rather to despise them, and to
transport the love of the body and of carnal goods, which it desires, to the
love of the soul and of eternal goods, which Nor in bodily beauty.
properly belong unto them. They must not make great account of the beauty of
the body, which having enclosed within it the soul that is defiled with vice
and sin, is nothing else but a precious and proud sepulcher, under which is
contained a stinking and putrified carrion. They must not put their hope and
confidence in riches, but be persuaded that they are rich and happy, if they
be wise, learned, and virtuous. And whilst their understanding is good and in
vigor, and themselves have time, they must put all their strength to the
obtaining of that which The fruits of true knowledge and virtue.
will be profitable unto them in their old age: namely of knowledge and
virtue, which will procure unto them, honor, safety, praise, happiness, rest,
and tranquillity in their life time, and will in the end guide them to
eternal life, to be made coheires of the kingdom of heaven with Jesus Christ.
Thirdly, they must be taught 3. The third precept.
to eschew and fly from all such things which they see are hurtful to
others, and learn to be wise by their dangers and perils. Now, that which
marreth and hurts The common diseases of youth.
others, is disobedience, lying, pride, infidelity, naughtines, hazarding
games, whoredom, drunkenness, prodigality, idleness, and evil company.
Against the contagion of which vices, no better preservative can be had, than
to ingraue modesty in their hearts, by the rule and Modesty is the best
remedy for them.
measure whereof they may easily be directed to behave themselves virtuously.
For this cause Plutarke says very elegantly, that the foolish opinion and
presumption, which young men commonly conceive of themselves, ought rather to
be emptied, than the air wherewith bottles and Kiddes skins are puffed up
when any good thing is to be put into them. Otherwise, being full of the wind
of ouer-weening, they receive none of that good instruction which men think to
power into them. For the fourth precept of their instruction, we will set 4 The
fourth precept has four branches.
down these four things, which will stand them in great steed toward the
attayning of a happy life. Let them not be delicate or superfluous in any
thing: Let them bridle their tongue, and not be full of words, nor utter
filthy and dishonest talk at any time, but be gracious and courteous in
speaking to all men, saluting every one gladly, and willingly giving place in
those things wherein the truth is not hurt. Let them master their choler by
cutting off impatience as much as may be, which is a singular virtue. Lastly,
let them have pure hands, seeing many great men by taking money unjustly, have
stilled all that honor which they had gathered together all the former time of
their life. Fifthly, the examples of good and bad men, 5. The fifth precept.
are to be laid before their eyes through the reading and understanding of
histories, that they may know that virtuous men have been well rewarded, and
the vicious received an evil and miserable end. For this cause we read that
the old men of Rome used at feasts to singe the famous acts of their
Ancestors before 6 The sixth precept.
their youth. For the sixth and last precept, we say, that it is needful for
youth to be used to labor and wearisomnes, to keep them from idleness, and from
falling into any dishonest pleasure. We have seen what exercises and pastimes
are meet for them, according to the opinion of the Ancients: and at this day
we know how to make choice of them, as shall be meetest for the nobility.
Now, to speak briefly of the other three general precepts given Of admonition.
by us for the institution of youth: Admonition is very necessary for that
age. For although youth be well borne and brought up, yet has it such active
and vehement prouocations, that it is easily brought to stumble. Wherefore young
men must be often admonished of their duty, and spoken unto of honesty, and
of virtuous men, because words move their minds. The steps of their honest
predecessors are to be laid before their eyes, to induce them Of promises.
Youth is to be drawn on with the promises of eternal life.
to follow their paths. And above all things, the promise of that life, which
is eternally happy for those that persevere in vprightnes and justice, is to
be propounded unto them. O man well affected (says Horace) go ioifully whither
thy virtue leads thee, and thou shall reap great rewards for thy deserts. O
ye young men (says Plautus) walk on in that way wherein virtue will direct
you, and ye shall be very well recompensed. For he that has virtue, has all
things necessary for him, and wants nothing. These are the promises which
ought to be beaten into the hearts of children: adding further to them that are
very young a promise to give them what they will, so that they learn well that
which is taught them. Last of Of praises and threatenings.
all, praises and threatenings must be added, by commending children when we see
them profit in virtue and honesty, to encourage them to go forward, and to do
better and better. Glory (says Ovid) gives no small strength to the mind,
and the desire and love of praise, causes the heart to be resolute and ready
to undertake all things. Quintilian would have young men praised, when they
profitte, and are willing to learn, as likewise they are to be threatened, if
they be slothful and negligent in the obtaining of virtue and honesty, and
will neither hear nor understand, nor yet put in practice those good
admonitions that are given them. And if they amend not with threatenings, they
must have good discipline and correction used toward them, and be chasticed
with discretion. To this purpose Plutark says, that the hope of reward, and
fear Hope and fear are the foundation of virtue.
of punishment, are as it were the two elements and foundation of virtue. For
hope makes young men prompt and ready to undertake all good and commendable
things, and fear makes them slow in presuming to commit such things as are
vile and full of reproach. So that if we practice diligently these precepts in
the education and instruction of our children: there is no doubt, but as seals
and signets do easily make a print in soft wax, so we may quickly cast in the
minds of little children, as it were in a mould, whatsoever we would have them
learn for the leading of a good and happy life, to the glory of God, the
profit of their neighbors, and discharge of our consciences which are bound
thereunto.


Of the division of the ages of man, and of the offices and duties that are to
be observed in them. Chap. 52.
AMANA. AMongst the most common and notorious faults, which fathers now a days
commit in the education and bringing up of their children, this deserves great
blame and reprehension, that in their first age they usually provide teachers
for them, sending them to Colleges, where they are kept in awe, when they
cannot commit any greater evil than that which comes from the young years
of their infancy, not very hurtful to any, being light faults, and soon
amended: but when the vehemency of adolescencie begins Adolescencie is the
age between 14. and 28
to tickle them with foul and infamous desires, and when they have greatest
need of a bridle, then they let loose the raines, and withdraw them from the
subjection of their guides, giving them liberty to make choice of their estate
of life, when their perturbations are most violent, and in danger to bring
forth most peruitious effects. Whereas on the contrary side then ought they
most diligently to look unto them, and to set a most careful watch over them,
that their first discipline and instruction may be framed in virtue, and in the
perfection of a most happy life. For this cause (my Companions) I think that
by continuing our former discourse (seeing all men enjoy not commonly this
benefit of the forenamed education and instruction, from their infancy unto
the end) we ought to search out some way whereby to amend the first faults, by
handling the division of the ages of man, according to the ancient writers, and
by setting down a brief instruction of that which is most necessarily
required, and to be observed in every of them, especially in adolescencie, for
the obtaining of true felicity through good behavior and instructions, which
are the means thereof.


ARAM. It is true (as Plato says) that virtue must be learned from the first
infancy. Yea, there is no part of our age, which ought to be employed in any
other study. But adolescencie especially must not only inquire and seek
after the decrees of honesty and virtue, but also have them already imprinted
and engraven in his heart.


ACHITOB. As no man ever saw a Be become a Beetle through age: so no part of
our life ought to leave the first election grounded upon virtue, if the end
thereof be to live well. But let us hear ASER discourse of this present matter.


ASER. It cannot be denied, that place and time are a great help to honesty
and virtue: insomuch, that if we consider not of them the knowledge and
practice of that which belongs to our duty, cannot greatly profit us. Place
and time are to be considered in all things.
For all things are to be applied in time and place, and some things are
decent and lawful upon one occasion, which would be very unseemly in another.
The proverb says, that the way to handle a sound man is diverse from the
guiding of him, to whom the diet is inioined. Even so, although virtue and
honesty are always requisite in a man, because it is the only ornament of his
life: yet in diverse ages diversity of honest behauior is required, and the
self same things are not decent in them, but some kind of behavior is proper
to All kind of behauior not convenient in all ages.
the age of childhood, some to youth, and another to old age, because as nature
alters with age, so it behooves that manners should chang. Now, among them
that have most diligently observed the secrets of man's nature, there has been
two sundry opinions concerning the division of the ages of man. Some have made
7. parts, adding decrepite Of the division of the ages of man.
or bed red-age after old age: and they would ground their principal reason of
this division upon this, that the The number of seven accounted a perfect
number.
number of 7. is an universal and absolute number. So we reckon 7. planets,
whose motion works all generations and corruptions in the earth. By a
stronger reason therefore this number of seven will be applied to the continuance
of time. Moreover, the growth of men according to age, increases at the
seventh number. For teeth are bred in the seventh month, and in the seventh
year they change and alter. Besides, in the same year doubled, that is in the
fourteenth year, man receives ability of seed, that is to say, of
engendring. True it is, that the number of six works alteration in females.
Yet the number of 7. in other things works augmentation, or else the rest and
quietness of men, and shows the difference or judgment of diseases. The whole
time of the creation of the world is comprehended therein, and likewise the
rest and ceasing of the worke-maister thereof. All the ancient writers have
also noted, that the number of 63. which is the multiplication of seven by
nine, carries with it commonly the end of old men: because that in the whole
course of our life we live under one only climate, which is either from seven,
or Of the climactericall year of 63.
from nine years, except in the year of 63. wherein two terminations or
climates end, that is to say, nine seven times seven, or seven nine times
nine: and therefore this year is called climactericall, wherein we may note
out of histories the death of many great men, and the change of estates and
kingdoms. As touching the other division The whole age of man divided into six
parts. Of Infaucie.
of the age of man into six parts only, of which opinion Isidorus is, we will
now enter into the particular handling thereof. The parts are these: Infancy,
Childhood, Youth, Adolescencie, Virilitie, and old age. Infancy is the first
age of man, beginning after his nativity: and it is so called, because at that
time he has no use of speech, and therefore Of Childhood.
cannot then learn manners and virtue, having no sense or understanding to
comprehend them. Childhood is, when children begin to speak; albeit as yet
they have not the full use of reason: in which estate a man may say they are
until the age of seven years, during which time fathers and mothers ought to
nourish and bring them up in the fear of God, and reverence of their parents,
and frame them gently unto all good manners, as we have already declared. This
age is called of the Latins Pueritia, as it were pure and neat from He
means not common and natural infirmities, but malicious offenses.
sin: forasmuch as children have then no use of discretion, so that judgment
cannot be attributed to their works, whereby they may be called good or evil.
Youth is reckoned from seven years of age until fourteen, at which time
children ought to be delivered unto skillful and honest masters and teachers,
to be instructed. Two things requisite in a Schoolemaister, skill, and bonestie
of life.
Then must parents look well whether those two things are in them, to whose
direction they commit the keeping of such a precious pledge: least that befall
them, which Hyperides an Orator of Grecia said to one who told him that he had
sent a slave with his son to govern him, you have (quoth he) done very well:
for in steed of one slave, you shall receive twain. Therefore it is very
necessary that such masters should be chosen for them, as are learned and of
The benefit that comes by good Schoolemaisters.
good life and conversation, that, as good Gardiners stick down certain props
hard by young plants to keep them upright: so wise teachers may plant good
instructions and precepts about young men, that their manners may be according
to virtue. Let fathers beware least being moved with covetousness, they make
choice of masters unworthy their charge, that they may pay the less stipe^d,
seking for good cheap ignorance: seeing that (as Plato says) as children
bear away as it were the minds of their progenitors, so the vices of the
Schole-maisters flow upon their scholars. At this age of youth the children of
Rome did hang A strange custom used by the children of Rome.
in the Temple a little collar or jewel which they ware about their necks,
during the time of their infancy, declaring thereby that they renounced all
childishnes, and that they were to chang their manners for the time to come. In
token whereof one gave them a white robe, and a purple coat, to teach them by
the white color to shun vices, which made the soul black, and by the
purple, to strive to make their life glister and shine with good manners and
virtue. And it seems that the Latins called this The reason o^ this word
Iuuentus.
age Iuuentus, because of the aid and help which men promised to themselves
through the virtuous inclination that appeered in young children. We saw before
sufficiently what is further required of this age, in regard of their
instruction. Adolescencie is the fourth age of man, beginning at the
foureteenth year, and continuing until Of adolescencie
the 28. and it is derived of this verb Adolesco, which signifies to grow.
For then do men grow in body, in strength, and reason, in vice, and virtue.
And at that age the nature of a man is known, and whereunto he bends his
mind, which before could not be discerned by reason of the ignorance of his
age. This is that which Cicero says, that the studies unto which we addict our
selves in the time of our adolescencie, like to herbs and fruits that are
come to their fashion, declare what virtue there will be in time of ripenes,
and what manner of harvest will follow. Therefore young men (says this Father
of eloquence) must make choice of one certain kind of life, whereunto they are
to give themselves all their life time without any manner of contradiction, and
being constant therein, they must draw all their actions to that only end, as
an arrow is drawn toward a white. But forasmuch The fruits of adolescencie
being left to it self.
as in the corruption of our time we see poor fruits of this age when it is
left to it self, we may well say, that in this season of adolescencie,
children have greatest need to be governed, ruled, and kept in great awe. For
the inclination to pleasures, and the eschewing of labor, which are natural
in man, commonly begin then to assault him with such violence, that if young
men be not well followed, they quickly turn to vice, hate those that give them
good instruction, become presumptuous, and ready to leave that which before
they loved: and taking no care for the time to come, like beasts seek for
nothing but to satisfy their lustful desires. For this cause that good
Emperor Aurelius exhortation to his sons governors.
Marcus Aurelius said to those unto whom he recommended his son after his
death. Beware that he bathe not himself in slipperie pleasures and desires,
seeing it is a hard matter to moderate and to stay the burning affections of a
young man, especially when he sees in his own hand a license not limited,
which offers unto him all kind of contentation. And truly this unbridled
license of not being in subjection to any, which young men desire and seek
after so earnestly, and for want of right understanding, falsely call and
imagine it to be liberty, brings them in bondage to seuerer and sharper
masters, than were those teachers and Schoole-maisters which they
Concupiscence reigns most in Adolescencie.
had in their infancy: namely, to their lusts and disordred desires, which are
then as it were unchained and let loose. But he which knows, that to follow
God, and to obey right reason, are reciprocal and necessarily following each
other, must think that to leave his infancy and first youth, and to enter
into the rank of men, is no freedom from subjection, but only a chang of
commandment: because our life in lieu of a hired master, who governed us
before, Who are to be accounted free.
has then a heavenly guide, that is, reason, to whom they only that obey,
are to be reputed and taken for free men. For after they have learned to will
that which they ought, they live as they will, whereas the freedom of the will
in disordred actions and affections is small, feeble, and weak, and mingled
with much repentance. These are those good reasons, which ought to sound often
in the ears of young men, and be supplied by little and little through the
study of good letters, and Moral Philosophy of ancient men, until they have
wholly in possession that place of manners, which is soonest moved, and most
easily led, and are lodged therein by knowledge and judgment, which will be as
a guard Knowledge and judgment are the guard of adolescencie.
to preserve and defend that age from corruption. Unto which things the
Ancients looked very diligently, both to repress boldness, which commonly is
the companion of adolescencie, and also to chastise their faults severely.
Catoes son banished for breaking an earthen pot. And Cinnaes son for
gathering fruit without leave.
We read that one of Cato his sons of the age of 15. years, was banished for
breaking a pot of earth in a maids hand that went for water: so was Cinna his
son, because he entered into a garden, and gathered fruit without leave.
Therefore if a young man be well guided with reason, he will choose and propound
to himself that kind of life, which he purposes to keep until death, and
begin some commendable life that is had in recommendation among virtuous men.
The ancient Romans minding to make declaration How the Romans taught their
young men to forsake the follies of their first age.
hereof, when their children were come to that age, they brought them to the
common market place clothed with a man's gown, and caused them to scatter nuts
here and there, and after that to forsake all play: signifieng thereby, that
they must leave the follies of their first age, to embrace more grave and
serious matters. It belongs to their duty (says Cicero) to honor their
Elders, and to mark The duty of young men.
who are the honestest men, and of best report, that by their counsel they may
learn to live according to virtue and good manners, and have honor always
before their eyes. And as in calm weather when a man is upon the sea, he must
provide such things as are necessary against a storm: so in time of
adolescencie, men must furnish themselves with temperance, sobriety, and
continency, laying up store of provision in due time, whereby to sustain old
age the better. This is that which Plato says, that a moderate youth makes an
A moderate youth makes a happy old age
easy old age: but that which is immoderate makes it grievous and irkesom.
The defect of our strength (says Cicero) comes rather of the vices of our
youth, than of old age. Now, because youth is at this day more than ever,
given over to all kind of dissolutenes, so that their greatest glory
consists in going one beyond an other in vice, let us here propound to those
that will make their profit thereof, some examples drawn from the ancients, of
rare virtue that shined Examples of virtuous young men.
in young men. Joseph, Daniel, Solomon, deserve the first place, who being very
young men, executed deeds of wonderful prudence. The holy Scriptures afford
us a sufficient number of testimonies, but we have some also amongst the
Heathens and Pagans, that ought to stir up youth Alexander a pattern of
virtue in his youth.
unto virtue. That great Monarch Alexander in his youth despised all kind of
pleasure and delight, eschewed women, contemned money, and all plays and
pastimes that were unprofitable, and to no good use, loving nothing but virtue
and glory gotten thereby. This was the cause why, being demanded whether he
would not be present at the feast of the Olympian games, to try if he could win
the price of running, seeing he was well made, and wonderful light of foot,
he answered. yes, if they were kings that ran. Whenever he heard news that
his father had taken any famous Town, or won some great battle, he showed
no token of joy, but said to his equals in years: My Father, Sirs, will take
all, and leave no goodly and great matter for me to do, and to conquer with
you. Among other his commendable gifts of nature, which men admired in him at
that age, he was greatly praised for a good horseman, which he showed full
well Bucephalus Alexanders horse.
when Bucephalus the horse was brought to his father, and was to be sold for
thirteen Talents, that is in value 7800. crowns: which the yeomen of the
kings horse perceived to be so skittish and wild, that they durst not undertake
to break him. But Alexander mounted on him, and handled him so cunningly, that
all those that were present, cried out by way of admiration: and Phillip
kissing him, said: Oh my son, thou must seek out a kingdom that is meet
for thee, for Macedonia is not able to contain thee. This horse always served
Alexander after that, and died in a battle against the Barbarians, when he was
thirty Pompey.
years old. Pompey from his very youth showed in his countenance (as
Historiographers write) a pleasant mildnes, joined with a manly gravity, and
in his conditions and behavior, a reverent excellency of kingly majesty.
When he was yet very young, he committed an act of a wise and advised
captain, being in the Roman army whereof Strabo his father was captain
against Cinna. For when the soldiers began to rebel and to conspire the death
of their captain, Pompey discovered the same, and took order for his fathers
safety. After, perceiving that the soldiers trussed up bag and baggage to go
yield themselves to Cinna, he thrust himself into the midst of them,
beseeching them most humbly with tears in his eyes, not to deal so grosely
with their captain. In the end when he saw that they persisted in their
opinion, he threw himself prostrate all along overthwart the gate of the
camp, saying unto the^, that if they were so desirous to depart, both they and
their horses should go over his body. Whereupon they were so ashamed, that
changing their minds, every one betook him again to his quarter, and
reconciled themselves unto their general. The prudence of Papyrius deserves
to be alleged here, who according Papyrius.
to the custom of the young gentlemen of Rome, was brought into the Senate,
after he had put on the gown wouen about with purple which they used to give
to young men, to the end to frame them by little and little to the managing of
affairs. In his return from the Senate, which was longer in breaking up than
usually they were wont to do, his mother asked him the cause thereof. And
after many threatenings and compulsions, Papyrius not willing to reveal the
secret of the council, as it had been expressly forbidden him, bethought
himself of a subtle lie, saying, that the Senators were in great contention
whether it were more expedient to agree that one man should have two wives, or
one woman two husbands: which (quoth he) shall be determined to morrow. His mother
believing it, told the same to the Roman ladies her companions, who met all
the next day at the entry of the Senate, beseeching the judges to give a
favorable sentence for them. The matter being known, procured great laughter,
and made the prudence of this young man to be greatly esteemed. But let us speak
of the other two ages of man. Man's Of (...) ma^s estate.
estate begins when a man is even now ripe and settled, and grows no more
in body. This only age is most apt and fit to attain to virtue and honesty.
For then is reason strong and power-full in him, then is his judgment sound,
and his bodily vigor of force and strength to labor and travel. Of the name of
this age, I mean of this Latin word Vir, did virtue first take her name, which
in Latin is Virtus: because this word Vir, signifies him that is in the age
of virilitie, or man's estate, as if you would say, apt to be a minister and
practitioner of virtue. It is true that Isidorus confounds Youth, (which he
places after Adolescencie) and virilitie together; saying, that this word vir
is a word of sex and not of age. But herein he agrees with us, that the
perfection of man's strength begins at 29. years, where we said that
adolescencie ended. In this strength a man continues until 50. years, and
then begins to grow weak, and to decline continually until The duty of a
man at the perfection of his age.
death. The whole age of virilitie ought to be full of honesty and virtue, and
to bring forth the effects of prudence, temperance, fortitude and justice,
whereof we have discoursed at large. And if any man before he came to this age,
had not that education and instruction which was necessary for him (whereof we
have already discoursed) by reason of his fathers negligence, or through the
licentiousnes of adolescencie, then especially is he to take the bridle between
his teeth in good earnest, because yet there is good time and season, yea
opportunity of great fruit, to profit in learning and virtue, so that he cannot
allege this Clitomachus.
excuse, that he was not instructed in youth. Clitomachus of Carthage, when he
was above 40. years of age, came to Athens to learn under Carneades, with
whom he profited so well, that after his death he succeeded in his place and
taught others. Lucius being at Rome, and meeting with M. Aurelius.
the emperor Marcus Aurelius in the street with one man after him, demanded of
him whether he went. It becomes even an old man (quoth he) to learn. I am
going (said he) to Sextus the Philosopher, to learn that which I know not.
Than Lucius lifting up his hands toward heaven, cried out, O good God, I see
an emperor even gray headed carrying his book as if he were a child to hear a
lecture and to be instructed thereby: and yet most kings of the earth will not
vouchsafe to look upon a book at eighteen years of age. Solon had Solon
learned to the hour of his death.
this sentence commonly in his mouth, that he waxed old as he learned. The same
day and hour that he died, being above 80. years old, and hearing some of
his friends disputing of a certain point of Philosophy, he lift up himself upon
his bed after his manner as well as he could. And being asked why he did so, To
the end (quoth he) that when I have learned that whereof you dispute, I might
end my days: and so in deed he did. For the disputation was no sooner ended
but he died. Socrates learned music when he was very old. Socrates learned
music being old. T. Varro, and M. Cato learned Greek when they were old.
Iulianus. Alphonsus.
Terentius Varro, and Marcus Portius Cato learned Greek when they were old.
Iulianus the great lawyer used to say when he was very old, that although he
had one foot in the grave, yet he was desirous to learn. Alphonsus king of
Arragon, when he was 50. years old, learned the Latin tongue, and translated
Titus Liuius out of Latin into Spanish. The sixth and last age of man is called
Old Age, which according to Marcus Varro, and other authors, begins at 50.
years, because at this age the natural power and strength of man begins to
decline and fade away. Isidorus Of old age.
calls this time Gravity, which he makes to last until 70. years, and
terms the ouer-plus of age beyond that, old age. But as neither the division
of ages here set down, nor the terms wherein we have enclosed them, could
agree to the ages of our first fathers, either in the first or second age,
wherein they lived commonly as many years as we do months, so considering the
shortness of our days, which the Psalmist limiteth within 80. years at Psalm.
90. 10.
the most, I think we are to follow the opinion of Varro, who calls old age
whatsoever is above 50. years. In which age prudence is a very meet and
necessary ornament, which Prudence is the ornament of old age.
those ancient men might attain unto through long use of life, through
knowledge, and through experience. Therefore it is their office to succor and
help the younger sort, their friends, and the commonwealth by their prudence
and counsel. For this cause Romulus the first founder of the city of Rome,
chose an hundred of the eldest in the city, by whose counsel he willed that
it should What Senate is, and from whence it came.
be governed. And of these old men called in Latin Senes, came that word
Senatus, which is as much to say, as an assembly or gathering together of old
men, whom we now call counsailors or Senators. And albeit that men now a days
greatly abuse those charges, yet surely they properly belong to old men, to
whom it appertains to govern towns, to administer justice, and to be a
pattern and example of honesty to the younger sort. For then have they no time
to take their ease, but (as Cicero says) they must increase the exercises of
the soul, as they diminish the labors of the body. Let them remember that
saying of the Lacedemonian, who being asked why he suffered What use is to be
made of a white beard.
his beard to grow so long: to the end (quoth he) that by looking upon my white
hair, I should be put in mind not to do any act unbeseeming this hoarie
whiteness. In this age that sentence of Plato ought especially to be well
Epaminondas salutation used to men according to their ages.
thought upon, That young men die very soon, but that old men cannot live
long. To which effect Epaminondas said, that until 30. years it may be thus
said to men, Ye are welcome: for until that time they seem still to be
coming into the world. From 30. until 50. years, they must be saluted in
this manner, Ye are in a good hour, because they are then to know what the
world is. And from 50. to the end a man must say unto them, Go in a good hour,
because then they go fair and softly, taking their leave of the world. Old
age Cato.
(said Cato to an old man that lived ill) has sufficient deformities of it
self, do not thou add such as proceed from What breeds authority in a man.
vice. For it is not grisled hair, nor a wrinckled visage that brings
authority, but a life that is honestly led and guided according to the best
end of our being whereunto every age is to be referred. To such old men (says
Sophocles) Sophocles.
as have their souls nourished with heavenly light, To whom old age is not
grievous.
old age is not grievous, and in such the desire of contemplation and knowledge
increases as much as the pleasures of their body decrease. Therefore when we
have passed over the greatest part of our days to the profit of many, if than
through weakness of extreme age we are constrained to leave the managing of
public affairs, it will be very great honor, comfort and contentation of
mind unto us, to run the rest of our race quietly and peaceably in the study
of letters, wherein delight is joined with honest contemplation.


The end of the thirteenth days work.
THE FOVRTEENTH DAYS WORK.
Of Policy, and of sundry sorts of Governments. Chap. 53.
ASER. IF we are able to discern between the body and the soul, between this
present transitory life and the life to come, which is eternal, we will not
think it strange, The soul is not subject to man's jurisdiction.
that one part of man's building should be created to remain free for ever, and
to be exempted from the yoke of humane power, acknowledging only the spiritual
jurisdiction, and the other part to be in servitude, and to receive
commandment from those humane and civil offices, which are to be kept
amongst men. In the kingdom of God (says Paul) there is neither Gal. 3. 18.
Jew nor Grecian, neither bond nor free, neither Barbarian nor Scythian, but
Jesus Christ is all in all. Stand fast in the liberty Col. 3. 11.
wherewith you are made free. And by and by after he adds: Only use not your
liberty as an occasion to the flesh, but by love Gal. 5. 1. 13.
serve one another. And elsewhere he says, Let every soul be Romans 13. 1. 2.
All power is of God.
subject to the higher powers: for there is no power but of God. Whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God. Whereby it
appears that they which think that the maintenance of civil policies are the
work of man only, are greatly deceived. For we must of necessity believe, The
beginning and preservation of policies is from God.
that it proceeds from the counsel of God, and from his eternal providence,
without which neither the round frame of the world, nor cities and towns could
in any sort abide steadfast: and so that it is very necessary for their
preservation, that certain laws should be appointed, according unto which men
may live honestly and justly one with another. As there are then two chief
regiments and governments in man, of which one respects the soul, and
acknowledges no temporal king or master, but holds of one only Jesus Christ
according to the ministry of his word, and the other is to ordain a civil
justice only, and to reform outward manners, whereunto the body during this life
is wholly subject, rescruing the first estate of man in his freedom according to
the divine rule of piety, we are diligently to look to this second estate of
subjection and servitude, which is most necessary for the maintenance of common
peace and tranquillity amongst men. Now forasmuch (my companions) as we have
hitherto according to our weak judgment noted the moral virtues of the soul,
for the better framing of men's actions to that which is decent and honest in
this life, and following the same order have also given rules and instructions
for the government of a family, we are now to enter into this large field of
humane policy, and to consider of the parts that belong unto it, referring the
chief scope of the handling of this matter, which otherwise would be infinite,
to the ruling and preserving of our French monarchy, for the instruction of al
estates that are therein. And first we will see what civil policy is, and
entreat briefly of the diverse kinds of governments among the ancients, that we
may so much the better attain to the knowledge of that under which we live.


AMANA. To command and to obey (says Aristotle) are not only necessary but
also profitable: yea some things Of commanding and obeying.
are borne to obey, and others to command, whose common end is public benefit
and civil justice, which are preserved by a well established policy, and right
government according to the laws of nature.


ARAM. Policy is the bond of all society.
Every civil society must be kept in order by some policy, which is a
necessary help to cause a man to walk in his vocation. But as the elements
cannot be intermingled one with another, except it be by an unequal proportion
and temperature: so I think that civil policies cannot well be preserved but by
a certain inequality which is to be seen in all countries by diverse sorts of
Governments. But let us hear ACHITOB discourse to this effect.


ACHITOB. There is show of commanding and obeying in all things,
In all things compounded of matter and form, commanding and obeying are so
natural, that there is some show thereof even in things without life: as we see
in that harmony which consists in voice, and in sounds, As in harmony.
wherein the contra-tenor seems to command over the base. This whole
inferior world obeys the superior, The superior part of the world rules
the inferior.
and is governed thereby, through a certain virtue accompanied with light and
heat, called of many Philosophers the spirit of the world, or as Plato says,
the soul of the world, which descending from the celestial nature, and
intermingling it self throughout the whole mass of this great body,
penetrateth, quickneth, nourishes and moderateth all chaungeable things under
the Moon. The The Sun is king and the Moon Queen among the stars. The
Moon rules over all moistures.
chief minister and disposer of this virtue is the Sun, whom we acknowledge
as king among the stars, lightning the universal frame with his beams. The
Moon is as it were the Queen, ruling over all moistures, and among other
maruails, showing her manifest power over the flowyng and ebbing of the Ocean
seas. We see among the Elements that the Fire and Air through The Fire and
Air chief among the elements.
their first qualities are Active, and that the water and earth are Passive, as
being more material. Amongst all kinds of birds the Eagle is president,
amongst beasts the Lion. In fresh and salt waters the mightiest fishes The
Eagle, Lion
whale and pike over their kinds
rule, as the Whale in the sea, and the Pike in pooles. Man rules over all
living creatures, and in man compounded of body, soul, and understanding, the
soul commands over the body, and the understanding over the desire. We have
also seen by proceeding from one particular man to a family made of many
persons, how the head commands diversely over the parts of his house. Even so
it is necessary, that every civil society, which is made one of many families
tending to a general good, should be kept in by some policy consisting in
commanding and obeying. In many places of the world there are countries where
the cities are not enclosed, where there is no use of learning, and where there
are no kings. Other people there are that dwell in no houses, that use no
money, that live with raw flesh: in a word, that seem to hold No people
without all policy.
more of the nature of beasts than of men. And yet there are none that have no
kind of policy established amongst them, or that use no laws or customs,
whereunto they willingly submit themselves. Neither are they without some
apprehension and reverence of the divine nature, using Divine justice and
humane policy always linked together.
prayers and sacrifices, although damnable: so straightly are these two things,
divine Justice and humane Policy joined together, that the one cannot in any
sort remain amongst men without the other. Therefore Plutarke says, that a
city will sooner stand without a foundation, than civil policy can be framed
and established without any religion and opinion of God, or without the
preservation thereof after it is once received. Moreover, the first agreement
of people forsaking their barbarous and rusticall life, to join in civil
society, was to this end, that they might have a place of religion to keep
them together. Religion is the foundation of all estates.
Religion surely is the foundation of all commonwealths, of the execution of
laws, of the obedience of subjects toward their magistrates, of their fear
toward princes, of mutual love among themselves, and of justice toward
others. Lycurgus reformed the estate of the Lacademonians, Numa Pompilius of
the Romans, Solon of the Athenians, and Deucalion of all the Graecians
generally, by making them devout and affectionate toward the gods in The
auncie^^ law makers established then ordinance, through the means of religion.
prayers, oaths, oracles, and prophesies, through the means of fear and hope
of the divine nature, which they imprinted in them. Polybius governor and
lieutenant to Scipio Africanus, and taken for the wisest Politician in his
time, says, That the Romans had never any greater means Religion the greatest
means of enlarging the Roman empire
than religion, to extend the borders of their empire, and the glory of their
famous acts over all the earth. Desiring therefore that religion, the truth, and
the law of God, all which are one, and published by the mouth of God, may
continue and dwell amongst us, let us see what Policy is, whereunto it ought
chiefly to tend, and what sundry sorts there are of establishing it, by the
contrary kinds of government used among the ancients. Policy is a word
derived of this Greek word (...), which signifies the What Policy is, and
from whence the word is derived.
regiment of a city or commonwealth: and that which the Graecians call
Political government, the Latins call the government of a commonwealth, or of
a civil society. This word Policy has been taken in many significations
amongst the ancients: sometime it signified a Burgesie, that is to say, the
participation and enjoying of the rights The diverse significations of this word
Policy
and privileges of a town: sometime the manner of life used by some political
person: as when one commends the policy of Pericles, or of Bias, that is,
their kind of government: sometime also when they would note some worthy deed
in the government of the commonwealth, they said, That man has wrought an act
of policy this day. But the chief signification of this word, and that which
answers to our present discourse, is the order and estate whereby one or
many towns are governed, and public affairs well managed and administered.
But before we begin to speak of the diverse sorts of Policies, that is to
say, of governments of towns, of which all Commonwealths and Monarchies are
compounded, let us speak a word of the end of policy, and of that mark
whereat it ought especially to aim. As all Cities and civil societies are
appointed for the obtaining of some Good, so all policy respects Of the end
of policy.
the same, and tends to no other thing, than to unite and frame us to the
company of men so long as we live amongst them: to conform our manners to a
civil justice, to set us at agreement one with another, and to maintain and
preserve common peace and tranquillity, by procuring that every one may have
his own. It is the cause that men to communicate together without fraud or
hurt, that the insolency of the wicked is brideled and punished: briefly, that
not only all duties of humanity are used amongst men, but also that some
public form of religion appears, and that blasphemies against the divine
nature, and other offenses which trouble common quietness are not openly
broched. For although it Civil ordinance ought to maintain the worship of God.
falls not within the compass of man's power, as we said, to prescribe and
appoint by their authority any regiment and government over souls, yet every
one is not to be suffered to forge at his pleasure laws concerning religion,
and the manner of serving God. But civil ordinance must carefully provide, that
the true service of God be not publicly violated and polluted through an
uncontrolled liberty, especially considering that the conservation of every
well ordered policy depends thereupon. But we shall understand this matter
more at large hereafter in the Every estate consists of 3. parts, of the
magistrate, the law, and the people.
particular handling of the parts of an estate, which we will divide into 3.
principal and general heads, following therein the ancient Politikes, namely,
into the Magistrate, the Law, and the people. Now to go on with that which was
propounded unto us, let us speak of those kinds of governments which were
amongst the ancients. The ordinance of a city, or order amongst magistrates,
especially amongst them that had the sovereign rule over all, was called of
the ancients, Common-welth, or as some others will have it Weale-publike, which
in her kind of government was named When commonwealths are right, and when
corrupt.
according to the quality of the chief rulers thereof. And those
commonwealths that tended to common benefit were said to be right, and simply
just: but if they respected the profit of the superiors only, they were said to
be corrupt, and were called transgressions of right commo^-wealths, these being
the cause of as much evil to the whole body of the city, as the others are of
Good. For as the good or evil of an house depends of the father of the
family, the safety or loss of a ship, of the Pilote or master, the The good
or evil estate of common wealths depends of the magistrates next under God.
good or ill success of an army, of the general thereof: so the happiness or
unhappiness of towns and peoples depends of the magistrates, and yet so that
God rules over all. Commonwealths then are either good or bad, The division
of common-welths in general.
right or corrupted. That is a good common-welth, wherein the governors seek
the public profit of the citizens, and the benefit of the whole civil
society. It is called right and just, because it has such an end, and seeks
after the same, taking no counsel about any thing, but only about the
preservation of justice. A corrupt commonwealth is that which repugneth and is
directly contrary to that which is good and just, and chiefly to the end
thereof. For it seeks only the increase of private commodity, having no care
of public profit. There are 3. kinds of good commonwealths, The subdiuision
of them.
and 3. of bad, whose government always consists in the superiors of the
estate, taking their appellation and name of them, as has been said. The first
kind of good commonwealths is a Monarchy, which takes Of a monarchy.
place when the sovereignty is in one alone. This respecting public profit
only, and preferring common benefit always before her own private and
particular commodity, takes upon her the name of a kingdom, or of kingly
power. But if she look unto his particular benefit that rules, seeking to
reign by an absolute will without any observation of just laws, then she has
the name of tira^nie, which is Of a tirannie.
the first bad kind of co^mon-welth. Now forasmuch as we live in this kingdom,
under this first kind of co^mon-welth, called a kingly monarchy, we will dilate
this matter, and consider thereof at large in a several treatise, that we may
the better know the excellency of it, when it is well and justly ordained. The
second kind of a right and good commo^-welth is of a Greek word called an
Aristocratie, which in our language Of an Aristocratie, and what it signifies.
we may interpret, the power of the best me^, who^ we call in latin optimates,
because they are accounted for the best and most virtuous men. This form of
government takes place when a few tried and approved men for manners and
learning have the sovereignty jointly together, and make laws for the rest of
the people, whither it be generally or particularly, directing their thoughts
to no other mark than to public utility and profit. This was seen most
excellently among the Lacedaemonians, The Lacedemonian estate was an excellent
pattern of this government.
whose commonwealth surpassed all others of her time, as well for her policy
and establishment, whereof there was never the like, and wherein she continued
about 500. years, as also for the glory of her warlike acts, whereby she
held the empire of Graecia a long time, under the laws of that happy
Aristocraticall government, which Lycurgus established there. This man seeing
their estate to incline one while to tirannie, when the kings had too much
power, and an other while to popular confusion, when the common people began
to usurp too great Why the Senate of Lacedemonia was first instituted.
authority, devised with himself to give them a counterpoize, that should be
healthful for the whole body of the Commonwealth, by establishing there a
Senate, which was as a strong bar, holding both the extremities in equal
balaunce, and giving firm and steadfast footing to their estate. For the 28.
Senators making the body of the Senate, sometimes took part with the two
kings who were deprived of all sovereignty, so far forth What power the kings
of Lademonia had.
as was thought needful to resist the rashness of the people: and
contrariwise, sometimes they strengthened the peoples side against the kings,
who had then but the voices of two Senatoures in the council, thereby to keep
them from usurping any tyrannical power. True it is that their estate was not
purely Aristocraticall, until one hundred years after the first establishment
thereof by Lycurgus, because he had left the confirmation and abrogation of
the advice and decrees of The policy of Polydorus and Theopompus to get the
power out of the peoples hands.
the Senate in the peoples power. But Polydorus and Theopompus being kings,
and seeing how hard a matter it was to assemble all the people together, and
how they overthrew many times the sacred decrees of the Senate, help
themselves with an oracle from Apollo, whereby it was signified that the
Senate of thirty should from thence-forth have all power in matters of estate,
in so much that of Senators they became sovereign lords. And to content the
people, they appointed five Ephories Why the Ephories were appointed in
Lacedemoni^.
who were chosen out of the people, as Tribunes to keep away tyranny. That
policy then is truly Aristocraticall, wherein virtue only is respected in the
distribution of magistracies, and the benefit of the subjects is chiefly
considered in the government thereof. Oligarchie is opposite Of an Oligarch^
and contrary to this, and is the second kind of a corrupted commonwealth.
This is when a few noble or rich men occupy the authority and administration
of the commonwealth, rejecting the poorer and baser sort, and aiming at
nothing but at their own private and particular profit, without all care of
public commodity. These men always use to take part with their like in
nobility or riches, to the treading down and oppression of the meaner sort of
people. Moreover, they rule all matters according to their affections, and
through ambition and covetousness take them into their own hands, until How an
Oligarchie is changed into a tirannie, with examples thereof.
some one that is mightiest amongst them, find the means to rule absolutely,
and to change the Oligarchie into a tyranny. Aristotle affirms that all the
ancient governments in Sicilia were Oligarchies, among which that of the
Leontines was translated into the tirannie of Panecus, that of Gela into the
tirannie of Cleander, that of Rhegium into the tirannie of Anaxilas, and so of
many others. The third kind of a good and right commonwealth is of a Greek
word called Timocratie, which we may call Of a Timocraty.
The power of mean or indifferent wealth. This kind of gonernment was after a
peculiar sort called of the Ancients by the name of Commonwealth: because
this policy tended most of all to public profit, and was guided by laws,
and His meaning is, that it is ruled by some laws taken from ccb of these.
compounded of an Oligarchie and a Democratie, which are two extremes, and of
themselves vicious and corrupt. For of their mediocrities this form of
commonwealth was instituted after 3. sorts. First, by taking the laws and
institutions of both: secondly, by holding the mediocritie of things commanded
by them: thirdly, by following the constitutions, partly of the one, and partly
of the other. Aristotle speaks of this kind of Commonwealth when he says,
That civil society consisting of mean persons is very good, and that those
cities are well governed wherein there are many of the middle sort, who have
more power than both the other parties, or at least than any one of them. For
where as many are passing rich, or extreme poor, there follows either an
extreme Democratie, or an intolerable Oligarchie, or else through their
excess, a tirannie. Now the last kind of corrupt commonwealth remains to
be seen, which is called Of a Democratie.
Democratie, where free and poor men being the greater number, are lords of
the estate. There were five Five kinds thereof, according to Aristotle in his 4.
book of Politi. ca. 4.
sorts of them: the first, where the government was equally communicated to
all: the second, where regard was had to wealth, although it was but small: the
third, where all the citizens were partakers of the government under the ruling
of the law: the fourth, where every one might attain to the magistracy, so
that he were a citizen, and the law ruled: the fifth, where other things being
equal, the multitude commanded and not the law: and then the people only
governed, according to their fancy by decrees and prouisoes, which they gave
out daily, oppressing the virtuous, rich and noble, that they might live in
all liberty. This kind is not to be called a Commonwealth, seeing the laws
bear no sway, but being aunswerable to a tirannie, it is passing ill, and
Athens a Democratical estate.
unworthy to be numbered among Commonwealths. Plato and Xenophon wrote, that
the Democratie of Athens was such a one, where the people was given over to all
licentiousness without either fear of Magistrates, or observation of laws.
Now of the three kinds of good Commonwealths mentioned by us, Aristotle,
Polybius, Dionysius Halicarnassaeus and Cicero, compound an other, that is
partaker of all three: saying, that every kind Of a mixed kind of commonwealth.
of Commonwealth established simply, and alone by it self, soon
degenerateth into the next vice, if it be not moderated and kept back by the
rest. Therefore they say that a Commonwealth erected with a right government
to continue long, must have the virtues and properties of the other
Commonwealths, joined together in her, to the end that nothing grow out of
proportion which may cause her to degenerate into her next evil, and so
consequently overthrow her. Likewise many ancient Examples hereof.
and late Politikes have maintained, that the Commonwealths of the
Lacedaemonians, Carthaginians, Romans and others that are famous, as that of the
Venitians, were compound and mildly intermingled with the royal,
Aristocraticall, and popular power. But this subject deserves well a several
discourse, which being needless for the understanding of the matter here
propounded unto us, we will not stay any longer in the curious searching out of
sundry other kinds of estates and policies, which the ancients have drawn out
of these already described. We will note therefore for the conclusion of our
speech that the reason why so many kinds of Commonwealths are mentioned by
the ancients is this, because every city is compounded of many parts, the
diversity of which, according as they were in greater number and power, caused
them to vary the names of governments. But to The perfectest distinction of
commonwealths.
avoid confusion and obscurity, we may say, that if the sovereignty
consists in one only prince, the estate is Monarchical: if all the people
have interest in it, the estate is popular: and if only the least part of
them have the chief power, the estate is Aristocraticall. But There is
difference between the estate and the government of a commonwealth.
if their form of government be contrary to their nature, they take an other
quality but change not their essence. Moreover we say, that the preservation
of every public society depends of the policy well ordained, without
which there can be nothing but disorder and confusion among men. We say, that
policy is the order of a city in the offices of magistracy, namely, in the
chief of all, in whose government the whole Commonwealth consists: which if
it be in the peoples hands, is called Examples of the popular estate.
Popular, as in the Cantons of Switzerland, and leagues of the Grisons, in many
free towns in Germany, and in old time was in Athens: if in the hands of
certain persons, as of the gentlemen of Venice, and of some families Of the
Aristocraticall,
in Genes, it is called Aristocraticall: if it depends of the will of one
alone, it is called a Monarchy, as in France, Of the Monarchical.
Spain, Portingale, England, Scotland, Sweathland, Polonia. Further we say,
that the diversity of government among cities and peoples, depends of their
end: if they tend to a good end, which is to public benefit, they are good
and just: but if to an ill end, namely, to the particular profit of such as
command, they are evil and unjust.


Of the sovereign Magistrate, and of his authority and office. Chap. 54.
ACHITOB. What right is.
WE commonly say that that thing is rightly done, which is done according to
the order and institution of The foundation of every estate is the sovereignty
thereof.
policy. Neither is right any other thing amongst us, than the order of that
estate under which we live, the sovereignty whereof is the sure foundation,
union and bond of all the particulars in one perfect body of a commo^-welth.
And when judgments are exercised by the magistrates, when the will of justice
is declared by the exposition of the laws and of right, and when we direct our
actions under justice, the^ is the order of civil society duly observed.
Hereupon Every estate consists of 3. parts
in our last discourse we said, that the estate of a commonwealth was
compounded of 3. general parts, of the magistrate, of the law, and of the
people. Thus followyng our purpose, let us entreat particularly of these parts,
whereof every common-welth consists: and first let us consider of the chief
magistrate, and of his authority and office.


ASER. All civil superiority is a holy and lawful vocation before God. And as
justice is the end of the law, and The magistrate is the image of God.
the law a work of the magistrate, so also the magistrate is the image of God,
who rules and governs all, according to which mould and pattern he must
fashion himself through the means of virtue.


AMANA. As in a man that is well disposed both in body and soul according to
nature not corrupted, the soul rules and commands with reason, being the
better part, and the body with the affections thereof serve and obey, as the
worse part: so is it in every humane assembly. It belongs to the wisest to
rule, and to such as are The wisest must rule.
less advised to obey. Therefore the Magistrate must above all things labor,
that he be not unworthy of that person which he sustaineth. But let us hear
ARAM discourse of this matter which is here propounded unto us.


ARAM. God being careful of all things, even of the very least, and
comprehending in himself the beginning, end, and midst of them, according to
his good pleasure, and making all in all by his only spirit, respecting the
common good of this whole frame, and preservation of Why God distributeth his
gifts diversely to diverse men.
humane society, has from time to time distributed to sundry persons distinct
and different graces, that in exercising diverse estats, charges,
administrations, offices, handicrafts, and occupations, they might through
mutual succor, and interchangable help preserve and maintain themselves.
This is that which we see in cities amongst civil companies, which is as much
to say, as a multitude of men unlike in qualities and conditions, as rich,
poor, free, bond, noble, vile, skillful, ignorant, artificers, laborers: some
obeying, others commanding, and all communicating together in one place their
arts, handicrafts, occupations, and exercises, to this end, that they may live
the better, and more commodiously. They obey also the same Magistrates, laws,
and sovereign council, which Plato calls the Anchor, head and soul of the
city: which naturally tends to some order and rule of dominion, as that
which took beginning and increase from persons A well governed family
resembles the kingly regiment.
acquainted with a government that resembles the royal regiment, as appears
in every well ordered family, and has already been touched of us. The first
soueraign government was established either by the violence of the mightiest,
as Thucidides, Caesar, Plutarke, and others write: and the holy history
testifies the same unto us, and puts this opinion out of doubt, where it is
said, that Nimrod Genesis 10. 10.
Chams nephewe, was the first that brought men into Of the original of
kingdoms.
subjection by force and violence, establishing his principality in the
kingdom of Assyria: Or if any will believe Demosthenes, Aristotle, and Cicero,
the first sovereignty was instituted upon their will and good liking, who for
their own commodity, rest, and security, submitted themselves to such as
excelled most in virtue in those times, which Cicero his opinion therein.
they called heroical. Who knows not (says Cicero) in his oration for
Sestius, that the nature of men was sometime such, that not having natural
equity as yet written, they wandered up and down being dispersed in the
fields, and had nothing but that which they could catch and keep forceably by
murders and wounds? Wherefore some excelling in virtue and counsel, and
knowing the docilitie and understanding of man, gathered the dispersed together
into one place, and brought them from that rudenes wherein they were, unto
justice and gentleness. Then they established those things that belonged to
common profit, which we call public, and appointed assemblies, afterward
called cities, and walled about their buildings joined together, which we call
towns, having first found out both divine and humane equity. At the same time
the authority of Magistrates took place, who were instituted by the consent of
the people, for that excellent heroical virtue, which they saw in those first
Rectors and Ordainers of civil society, to whom was committed the
jurisdiction of laws, or received customs, and the disposition of written
equity to rule and govern their people thereafter. But not to stay long
about the diversity of those opinions, which we have here alleged for the
establishment of the sovereignty, this is out of question, that the foundation
of every commonwealth depends thereupon, and that it is the absolute What
sovereignty is.
and perpetual power of the Commonwealth, and is not limited either in power,
or charge, or for a certain time. This sovereignty is in him or them that are
chief of the Estate: and a little king is as much a sovereign, as the greatest
A little king as much a Sovereign as the greatest Monarch.
Monarch of the earth. For a great kingdom (says Cassiodorus) is nothing else
but a great Commonwealth, under the keeping of one chief sovereign. But
before we entreat more amply of his authority and office, it behooves Of the
name of Magistrate.
us to render a reason of the name of Magistrate, which is here given unto
him. This word Magistrate, has been taken of the Ancients in diverse
significations: and Plato makes seventeen sorts of them, calling some
necessary Magistrates, others honorable. Aristotle said, that they ought
chiefly to be called Magistrates, that have power to take counsel, to judge,
and to command, but especially to command. And this does the Greek word (...)
and (...), sufficiently declare, as if he would say, Commanders: and the Latin
word Magistratus, being a word of commanding, signifies to master, and to
exercise dominion. Also the Dictator, who had the greatest power to command,
The Dictator of Rome was called Magister populi.
was called of the Ancients, Magister populi. Therefore albeit the name of
Magistrate has been heretofore, and is yet given to all that have public and
ordinary charge in the Estate, yet we will as it were abuse this name a
little, by transferring it to the Sovereign of all, of whom all Magistrates,
laws, and ordinances of the Commonwealth The calling of Magistrates proved
to be lawful.
depend. Now, let us see whether this vocation of the Magistrate be lawful and
approved of God. We have not only infinite testimonies in the Scripture,
that the estate of Magistrates is acceptable before God, but which is more, it
is adorned with honorable titles, that the dignity thereof might be singularly
recommended unto us. When we see that all men placed in authority Psalm. 82. 6.
are called Gods, we must not esteem this title to be of small importance,
seeing it appears thereby, that they are authorized by him, and represent his
majesty in the ruling and governing of us. If the Scripture (as that heavenly
John. 10 35.
word says) called them Gods, unto whom the word of God was given, what is
that else but that they have charge and commission from God to serve him in
their office, and (as Moses and Iosaphat said to their Judges, whom they
appointed 2. Chron. 19. 6.
over every city of Judah) to exercise justice, not in the name of men, but in
the name of God? By me (says Prou. 8. 15. 16.
the wisdom of God) kings reign, and princes decree justice. By me princes
rule, and the nobles, and all the judges of the earth. Moreover we see, that
many holy men have obtained kingdoms, as David, Josias, Ezechias: some
governments and great estates under kings, as Joseph, and Daniel: others the
guiding of a free people, as Moses, Joshua, and the Judges, whose calling and
estate was acceptable to God, as he has declared by his spirit. Wherefore The
calling of the Magistrate is most holy.
no man ought to doubt of this, that civil superiority is not only a holy
and lawful calling before God, but also the holiest and most honorable of all
other, whereunto all the people is subject, as well by the establishment of the
right of the estate, as by the holy and heavenly ordinance of God. And if the
Magistrate be persuaded (as it is certain, that many Estates have had that
foundation) that the cause of his first institution, and voluntary subjection
whereunto the people submitted themselves for their common benefit, was that
excellency of virtue, which appeered in some above the rest, ought he not to
think himself unworthy of so honorable a title, if he want the cause of the
beginning thereof? But further, if the Magistrate He is the minister of Gods
justice.
know that he is appointed the minister of Gods justice, unto what great
integrity, prudence, clemency, moderation, and innocence, ought he to
conform and frame Good counsel for Magistrates.
himself? With what confidence dare he suffer any iniquity to have entrance
into his seat, which he understands to be the throne of the living God? With
what boldness will he pronounce any unjust sentence out of his mouth, which he
knows is appointed to be an instrument of the truth of God? With what
conscience will he subscribe to, or seal any evil statute with his hand,
which he knows is ordained to write the decrees of God? To be short, if the
Magistrate call to mind, that as God has placed the Sun and Moon in the
heavens as a token of his divinity, so is he also appointed in earth for the
like representation and light, will he not think that he is to employ and
bestow all his care and study, that he may represent unto men in all his
doings, as it were an image of the providence, defense, goodness, clemency,
and justice of God? It is certain that the Magistrate is the same The
Magistrate compared to the heart of a living creature.
thing in the Commonwealth, which the heart is in the body of a living
creature. If the heart be sound and pure, it gives life unto the whole body,
because it is the fountain of the blood, and of the spirits: but being
corrupted, it brings death and destruction to all the members. So fares it
with the Magistrate, who is the soul of the people, their glass, and the
white whereat all his subjects aim. If he live under right, reason, truth and
Justice, which are the proper will of God only, he is not unlike to a line or
rule, And to a Carpenters rule.
which being first right it self, afterward corrects all other crooked
things that are applied unto it. For nothing is more natural, than that
subjects should conform them selves to the manners, deeds, and words of their
prince. The wise Hebrew, Plato, Cicero, and Titus Liuius, have left this Maxim
unto posterity as an infallible rule of Estate. And Theodoricus king of the
Goths, writing to the Senate of Rome, goes yet further, using these words, as
Cassiodorus rehearses them: That the course of nature would sooner fail, than
the people would leave off to be like their Princes. But further, as the heart
in the bodies of living creatures is last corrupted, insomuch that the last
relics of life seem to abide therein: so it is meet, that, if any disease
corrupt the people, the sovereign Magistrate should continue pure and sound
unto the end from all that pollution. If there be any evil in the soul, it
proceeds from the wickedness of the body, being subject to perverse
affections: and look what good thing soever is in the body, it sloweth from
the soul, as from the fountain thereof. Now as it would be against nature, if
the evils of the body should come from the soul, and the good gifts of the
body should be corrupted by the vices of the spirit: so would it be very
absurd, that corrupt manners, evil laws, vice, and ungodliness, should
proceed from the Magistrate unto the people, seeing (as Plato says) he
holds the same place The Magistrate is in the Common wealth that which reason
is in the soul.
in the Commonwealth, that reason does in the soul, which guides the other
parts by wisdom. And forasmuch as the whole Commonwealth represents but
one certain body compounded of diverse members, whereof the Magistrate is the
Head and most excellent of all, he must also use such equity, that he profit
every one of them, and beware that he be not contagious to the whole public
body through his evil example. The people The example of the Magistrate is the
best way to teach the people.
(says Seneca) give more credit to their eyes, than to their ears: that is
to say, they believe that which they see, sooner than that which they hear.
And to instruct the people by precepts, is a long and difficult way: but to
teach them by examples is very short, and of greater efficacy. Therefore the
Magistrate must be more careful of that which he does, than of that which he
speaks. And that which he prescribes his subjects for a rule, as it were by
law, must be confirmed of him by works and deeds. For as he is chiefly bound
to follow the laws of God and nature, so he must make all those laws and
statuts, which he establishes in his estate, according to that pattern. And
Whereunto the Prince is bound as well as his subject.
therefore one of the Ancients said very well, that the prince together with his
subjects, had one and the same God to serve, one law to keep, and one death to
fear. We will then briefly comprehend the duty of the Magistrate in The duty
of the Magistrate consists in three things.
these three things, in ruling, in teaching, and in judging his people: which
duties are so nearly knit and joined together, that the one cannot be well
exercised without the other, and he that faithfully discharges one, fulfilleth
The art Royal, Philosophical, and Political is all one.
them all. For this cause Plato says, that the art and science of the King,
of the Philosopher, and of the Politician, is one and the same, because they
consist all three in knowing how to rule, to teach, and to judge well. He says
also, that the only way to procure true quietness and most happy felicity in
Commonwealths, is when by some divine providence the sovereign authority of
Magistracy meets with the will of a wise Philosopher in one person, that
virtue may be superior, and vice suppressed. And if such a governor over
people is to be accounted very happy, they are no less happy, that may hear
the excellent discourses, and good instructions which proceed from his mouth.
Besides, when they see virtue after a lively sort imprinted in a visible
pattern, and that the Magistrates life is such an example, they become wise of
their own accord. Then is force, constraint, or threatening, needeles to bring
them to their duty, as they that conform themselves to an'vpright and good
life in friendship, charity, and concord, Who is most worthy of sovereign
authority.
one with another. So that we may boldly say, that he is by nature most worthy
of sovereign authority, who is able by his virtue to imprint in men's hearts the
like disposition and affection to live well and virtuously. But forasmuch as Why
there are so few virtuous Princes.
few virtuous men are found, and sovereign Magistrates are not commonly chosen
out of that small number, but come to that authority for the most part by
succession: it is no marvel if there be but few such Magistrates, as we have
here described: nay, it is rather greatly to be wondered at, if any one among
a great many become very excellent. Notwithstanding, as their soueraign is
nothing less over their subjects, who owe fidelity and obedience unto them:
so are they always bound to do their duty and office toward Wherein the duty
of the chief Magistrate consists.
them, which consists in ministering justice, counsel, comfort, aid, and
protection. Moreover, because insolency and rebellious wickedness is always to
be found in some corrupt persons, who neither by teaching, nor by example of
good life will be brought to virtue, but persevere in committing a thousand
impious and unjust actions, Why the sword is put into the Magistrates hand.
for the punishment of such, the sword is put into the Magistrates hand, both
by the law of God and man, that as the minister of God he should serve his
wrath, and take vengeance of them that do evil. This is that which is so
expressly commanded to Magistrates in infinite places of the scripture, Ier. 22. 3.
under these words: Do judgment and justice: Justice in delivering What is
meant by this precept. Do Judgment and Justice.
him that is oppressed by force, from the hand of the oppressor, in not
grieuing strangers, widows, and orphans, in offering no injury to any, in
shedding no innocent blood, and in dealing uprightly with every one: and
Judgment in resisting the boldness of the wicked, in repressing their
impudency and violence, and in punishing Prou. 16. 12. and 20. 8. 26.
their faults. It is an abomination to kings (says the wise man) to commit
wickedness: for the throne is stablished by justice. A king that sits in the
throne of judgment, chaseth away all evil with his cies. A wise king
scattereth-the wicked, and causes the wheel to turn over them. Take the
dross from the silver, and Prou. 25. 4. 5.
there shall proceed a vessel for the finer. Take away the wicked from the
king, and his throne shall be stablished in righteousness. As Well he that
justifies the wicked, as he that condemns the just, is an abomination unto
God. The people and nations curse him that He that suffers evil, is culpable
as well as he that commits it.
says to the wicked, thou art just. Yea, an offense is to be imputed as much or
more to him that suffers it to be done, when he may and is bound to stay it,
than to him that commits the same. And if it be a point of true justice in
Magistrates to persecute the wicked with drawn sword, let not them that will
needs (forsooth) abstain from all severity, and keep their hands pure from
blood, whilst the swords of the wicked are drawn out to commit murder and
violence: I say, let them not doubt but they them selves shall be judged
guilty of great injustice before the Severity and clemency are to be linked
together in a Magistrate.
divine Majesty. It is true, that gentleness and clemency most of all beseem
a great and excellent man, and is one principal virtue necessary for a
Magistrate. Notwithstanding it must so be ruled, that for the benefit of the
Commonwealth, severity and rigor be joined therewith: because it is
impossible to rule and govern a multitude without this. And yet it is not the
part either of a wise Physician, or of a good governor of an Estate, to set
hand to the iron, except in great necessity, when there is no other remedy.
For if they do otherwise, as there is want of discretion in both, so most of
all in the Magistrate, because injustice also is joined with cruelty. So that
it is necessary both in clemency and rigor to keep some honest mean by
right reason, and prudence, to the end that the inconveniences of both may be
eschewed. This is that which Isocrates, speaking of the manner of reigning well,
teaches, when he says, that a man must be severe in searching out of faults,
and merciful in imposing punishments that are less than the faults, governing
men more by clemency Civility and gravity must be joined both together in a
Magistrate.
and prudence, than by rigor and cruelty. And seeing it falls out so, that
an ouer-seuere Magistrate becomes odious, and that he is contemned and
despised who is too gracious, a wise man must be both civil and grave;
gravity being comely in commanding, and civility necessary for him that
conuerseth with men. For the conclusion therefore of our discourse, we learn,
that both by the establishment of every estate and policy, and by a holy and
heavenly decree, we are subject to the sovereign Magistrate, who is lawfully
ordained to rule, to teach, and to judge us in all things that respect this
present life, and the preservation of civil society. We learn, that seeing
he is The duty of the Magistrate.
the image of God upon earth, he must conform himself as much as he is able to
the perfection of all goodness and justice, that he may bring on them that are
committed to his charge to godliness and virtue by his example: and that it is
his duty to honor the good, and to punish the evil, declaring thereby that he
is the protector and preserver of public tranquillity, honesty, innocence,
and modesty, and appointed to maintain the common safety and peace of all
men.


Of the Law. Chap. 55.
ARAM. AS we note in the universal frame of the Al motions contained under
one, and all causes under the first.
world, that many unlike motions are contained within one heavenly motion,
which is always like to it self, and all causes by the first cause: and as in
every living creature many sundry members distinct in office, are comprised and
brought into union and agreement by the soul and heart: so in every
Commonwealth compounded of many differing parts, necessary for the
establishment thereof, the law is the blood that gives virtue The law is the
blood and bond of the Commonwealth.
and life unto it, the bond that reduces all the parts thereof to unity, and
the firm preserver of civil society. Therefore seeing (my Companions) we
have discoursed of the first part of every civil estate and government, which
is the chief Magistrate: let us consider now of the second, no less necessary
therein, which is the law, whereby he is joined and united to the rest of the
public body for the maintenance and preservation thereof.


ACHITOB. The law is the spirit and soul of the commonwealth.
The law is in the city, as the spirit is in the body. For as the body
without the spirit undoubtedly perishes: in like manner every city and
Commonwealth that has no law, falls into ruin and perdition. Therefore
Cicero calls laws the souls of Commonwealths.


ASER. As the soul guides the body, and indueth it with ability to work: so
the law is the direction and maintenance of every Estate. By the law is the
Magistrate obeyed, and the subjects kept in peace and quietness. But let us
hear AMANA handle this matter.


AMANA. All creatures are sociable by nature.
We see that naturally all living creatures, whether earthie, watery, aerie, or
flying, tame, or wild, seek after the companies and assemblies of their kinds,
to live with them, as Sheep by flocks: Kine, Oxen, Hearts, and Hindes, feeding
by herds: Horses, Asses, and Mules by companies: Choughs, Stares, Cranes, and
other birds by flights: Fishes both in fresh and salt waters following one
another in sholes: Bees dwelling in hiues: Pigeons in doouehouses: Ants in
little hollow places. No marvel therefore if men, singularly adorned with an
immortal soul, with reason, The prerogatives of men above other creatures.
and speech, and by these prerogatives more communicable than other creatures,
as borne to honor God, to love one another, to live together in a civil
policy with laws, Magistrates, and judgments, having proper to themselves
only the knowledge of good and evil, of honesty and dishonestie, of justice
and injustice, knowing the beginnings and causes of things, their proceedings,
antecedents, and consequents, their similitudes and co^trarieties, no marvel I
say, if they live more commodiously and happily together, and do that by right
and equity, which other living creatures do only by a natural instinct: seeing
also they may be assured (as Cicero says) that nothing here below is more
acceptable to god the governor of all the world, than the co^gregations and
assemblies of me^ linked together by right and equity, which we call cities. Now
we are to note, that all those which obey the same laws and Magistrates, What a
city is.
make jointly together but one city, which (as Aristotle says) is every
company assembled together for some benefit. The diverse ends of the three good
Commonwealths.
If a city be assembled in monarch-wise, it is to be defended against
strangers, and to live peaceably among themselves according to law: if
Aristocratically under certain chief lords, it is to be respected according
to their riches, nobility, and virtue: if in a popular co^munity, it is to
enjoy liberty and equality: and the better that the city is guided by policy,
the greater benefit they hope for thereby. Therefore as the Venetians make but
one city, living under an Aristocraticall government: the Bernians an other,
living under a Democraty, whether they live within or without the walls, or far
from the chief town: so all the natural subjects of this Monarchy,
acknowledging one king for their sovereign lord, and obeying his
commandments, and the decrees of his counsel, represent one city and political
communion, co^pounded of many villages, towns, and provinces, Prouostships,
Bailiweeks, Senshalships, governments, Parliaments, Barronies, Counties,
Marquesies, Dukedoms, Cures, Bishopriks, Archbishopriks, being in and of it
self sufficiently furnished with all necessary and honest things, for the
leading of a good and virtuous life, and obeying the statuts, laws, and
ordinances A king must line under a law, albeit he be not subject to the law.
established therein, according to which the Magistrate ought to rule and to
govern his subjects, showing thereby, that albeit he be not subject to the law,
yet he will (as it becomes him) live and govern himself under the law.
Therefore the Magistrate is very well called by some, a living law, and the law
a mute Magistrate. Moreover, the mark of a The mark of a sovereign.
soueraign Prince, of which depends whatsoever he does by his imperial
authority, is the power to prescribe laws unto all in general, and to every
one in particular: and not to receive any but of God, who is the Judge of
Princes (says Marcus Aurelius) as Princes are the judges of their subjects:
yea Wisd. 6. 3.
it is God (says the wise man) that will proceed with rigor against How far
Princes are subject to laws.
the^ for the contempt of his law. So that they which say generally, that
princes are no more subject to laws, tha^ to their own couena^ts, if they
except not the laws of god and of nature, and those just covenants and
bargains that are made with Wherein the absolute power of Princes consists.
them, they are injurious to God. And as for their power to abrogate such laws
by their absolute authority, it is no more permitted unto them than the other:
seeing the power of a soueraign is only over the civil or positive laws. But
that we may have some certain understanding of the matter here propounded
unto us to entreat of, we must first see what the law is, into how many
kinds it is divided, whereunto it ought to tend, the The definition of the law.
profit of it, and how we must obey it. The law is a singular reason
imprinted in nature, commanding those things that are to be done, and
forbidding the contrary. The division of it.
We have both the law of nature, and the law written. What the law of nature
is.
The law of nature is a sense and feeling, which every one has in himself,
and in his conscience, whereby he discerns between good and evil, as much as
suffices to take from him the cloak of ignorance, in that he is The division
of the written law. The division of the law of God.
reproved even by his own witness. The written law is double, divine, and
civil. The divine law is divided into three parts, that is, into Manners,
Ceremonies, Of the Moral law.
and Judgments. That of Manners was called of the ancient writers the Moral
law, being the true and eternal rule of Justice, appointed for all men, in
what country or time soever they live, if they will direct their life
according to the will of God. And as for the Ceremonies and Judgments,
although they have some relation to Manners, yet because both of them might be
altered and abolished without the corruption or diminution of good manners, the
Ancients did not comprehend those two parts under the word Moral, but
attributed this name particularly to the first part of the law, of which the
sincere integrity of Manners depends, which neither may nor ought in any sort
to be altered or changed, and whereunto the end of all other laws is to be
referred, in honoring God by a pure faith, and by godliness, Of the Ceremonial
law.
and in being joined unto our neighbor by true love. The Ceremonial law was a
Pedagogie of the Jews, that is to say, a doctrine of infancy given to that
people to exercise them under the obedience to God, until the manifestation of
those things which were then figured Of the Judicial law.
in shadows. The Judicial law given unto them for policy, taught them
certain rules of justice and equity, whereby they might live peaceably
together without hurting one another. Now, as the exercise of ceremonies
appertained to the doctrine of piety, which is the first part of the Moral
law (because it nourished the Jewish Church in the reverence of God) and yet
was distinct from true piety: in like manner, albeit their Judicial law tended
to no other end than to the preservation of the self same charity that is
commanded in the Moral law, yet it had a distinct property, which was not
expressly declared in the commandment of charity. As therefore the ceremonies
were abrogated, and true religion and piety, I mean Christian, substituted in
place of the Iudaicll law: so the Iudiciarie laws were cancelled and
abolished, without violating in any sort the duty of charity. So that all
nations Of civil or positive laws.
have liberty to make for themselves such laws as they shall think expedient
for them, called of us civil laws, which must be squared according to the
eternal rule of charity, and differing only in form, they must all have one
end, commanding always honest and virtuous things, and contrariwise forbidding
those that are dishonest and The division of civil laws.
vicious. Now of these civil laws, there are two chief kinds amongst us:
The first consists in laws that are ratified and established, upon which
every Monarchy and public government is first grounded, and has his
beginning, which ought not in any wise to be infringed or What civil laws may
not be changed.
changed: such are those which we call the laws of the Frenchmen: namely the
Salicke law, established by Pharamond, The Salick law immutable.
who was the first that took upon him the name of king over them. Such laws
also are annexed and united to the crown, and therefore the Prince cannot so
abrogate them, but that his successor may disanull whatsoever he has done in
prejudice of them: much less are subjects permitted to attempt any such
matter. Yea all those that go about it, seek nothing but to move sedition in
the estate, What civil laws may be changed.
and to cause subjects to revolt from their superiors. As for the other civil
laws, as constitutions, ordinances, edicts, and customs, which have been
made and received according to the condition and circumstaunce of times and
places, they are in the power of the sovereign Prince, to change and to
correct them as occasion shall serve. And yet in the general and particular
customs of this Realm, none have A Prince may deny the request of his three
Estates, having reason and justice on his side.
been commonly changed, but after the lawefull assembly of the three
general Estates of France, or else of the particular Estates of every
Province: not as if the king were necessarily bound to stand to their advice,
or might not do contrary to that which they demand, if natural reason and
justice stand with his will. And then whatsoever it pleases him to like or
dislike, to command or forbid, is held for a law, an edict, and decree, and
every subject is bound to obey it. But to speak generally of the laws of an
Estate, the changing and gainsaying of them is a very pernicious plague in
every Commonwealth. The change of laws in a well settled Estate is dangerous.
This ancient rule and Maxim of wise Politics, is well worth the marking:
That nothing is to be changed in the laws of a Commonwealth which has a long
time preserved it self in good estate, what apparent profit soever a man may
pretend. And for this cause in the popular government of the Romans under
Publius Philo the Dictator, that Athenian edict was received, and past by force
of law, whereby it was not lawful for any to present a request to the people,
without the advice of the Senate. But there was a far more strict and severe
decree amongst the Locrians. For it was to this effect (as Demosthenes
rehearses A severe decree of the Locrians against such as would bring in new
laws.
it) that every Citizen that was desirous to bring in a new law, should come
and declare it publicly before the people with a halter about his neck, to
the end that if his new law was not thought meet to be received, and very
profitable for the Commonwealth, he might presently be strangled, as a
worthy reward for his rashness. In every society (says Aristotle) that is
well instituted and ordained by laws, great care is to be taken that no part
of the law, although never so little, be diminished or changed: yea, most
heed is to be had of that which is done by little and little. For if
resistance be not then made, it falls out in the Commonwealth, Mischiefs in
a commonwealth must be resisted in the beginning
as in the diseased body of a man, wherein the disease, if speedy remedy be
not used in the beginning thereof, increases by little and little, and that
which might easily have been cured, through negligence is made incurable. Men
never begin (said Paulus Aemilius the Roman Consul) to alter and chang the
estate of a Commonwealth, by making their first entrance with some notorious
resisting of the laws. And therefore we must think that the preservation of
the principal foundations of a politic Estate is left at randon, when men
neglect the care of keeping diligently the constitutions thereof, how light,
or of small importance soever The law is the foundation of civil societies.
they seem to be. For seeing the law is the sure foundation of every civil
society, if that fail, it must needs be, that the whole political building
will fall to ruin. Therefore Bias the wise said, that the Estate Bias.
of that Commonwealth is happy, wherein all the inhabitants fear the law as
a severe Tyrant. For then whatsoever it requires, is undoubtedly performed.
After the law is once established and approved (says Isidorus) we must not
judge of it, but judge according We must not judge of the law but according to
the law.
unto it. That is the best policy (said Chilon one of the Sages of Graecia)
where the people hearken more to the laws, than to the Orators. This also was
the cause that Pausanias the Lacedemonian made this answer to one who
demanded of him, why it was not lawefull in their country to alter any of
their ancient laws. The reason is (quoth he) because the laws Why the
Lacedemonian laws might not be changed.
must be Mistresses over men, and not men Masters over the laws. Moreover,
the antiquity and profit of laws are so evident, that it is needeles to make
any long discourse thereof here. Moses was the first The ancient lawmakers.
lawe-maker of the Hebrews; Mercurius Trismegistus of the Egyptians; Phoroneus
the King, of the Graecians: Solon of the Athenians: Lycurgus of the
Lacedaemonians: Anacharsis of the Scythians: Numa Pompilius of the Romans. Ten
notable men were chosen by the Senate and people of Rome, to translate and to
expound the laws of the twelve tables. We have already declared how Pharamond
made ours. The greatest and best part of the laws of Germany was established
by Charles the great, Emperor and king of France. And so all regions have had
diverse lawmakers, according to the condition No law before the law of God.
and circumstance of time, place, and country. True it is, that before the
publishing of the law of God, there was no lawmakers of whom we have any
knowledge: and surely not so much as one word of a law is to be found in all
the works of Homer, or Orpheus, or of any before Moses. But Princes judged and
commanded all things by their sovereign power, which kind of government being
more tyrannical than kingly, could not be of any continuance or assurance,
because there was no bond to knit the great with the small, and so consequently
no agreement. The necessity and profit of a law.
Besides, this is out of doubt, that all the subjects of an Estate stand in
need of a law, as of a light to guide them in the darkness of humane actions:
especially it is necessary for the terrifieng of the wicked, who might pretend
some true cause of their ignorance, or some probable color of their wickedness,
or at least some show why they should escape the punishment, which is not The
upright and equal distribution of the law makes a good government.
imprinted in our hearts, as things forbidden by nature. Nevertheless it is not
the law that makes a right government, but upright justice, and the equal
distribution thereof, which ought to be surer engraven in the minds of good
kings and princes, than in tables of stone. And it is to small purpose to
multiply Edicts and Decrees, if they be not severely observed: yea the first
sign that a man To dispense with good statuts, and daily to make new, is a
token of the decay of a commonwealth.
may have of the loss of an estate, is when there appears an unbridled
license and a facility in dispensing with good statuts, and when new decrees
are daily consulted of. And if the estate be already troubled, the heaping up
of laws upon laws is no less dangerous for it, than a multitude of medicines
in a weak stomach, whereas contrariwise, new introductions and abuses are
then especially to be taken away, and things brought back again to their
first and ancient form. Histories teach us, that when edicts and decrees were
most of all multiplied, then did tyranny gather greatest strength. As it fell
out under the tyrant Caligula, who published decrees of al sorts Examples
thereof in Caligula, and in Claudius.
both good and bad, and those written in so small a letter, that men could not
read them, to the end that he might thereby snare those that were ignorant.
His successor Claudius made twenty edicts in one day, and yet tirannie was
never so cruel, nor men more wicked than at that time. Therefore let the laws
and good ordinances of an How laws may be kept inviolable.
estate be inviolable, straightly kept, not subject to dispensation, not
favorable to great men, but common and equal to all, and then shall the bond
of civil society be surely tied. Now where as I said, that all nations have
liberty to prescribe and frame civil laws for themselves, my meaning was not
to approve certain barbarous and beastly laws received of some people: as
those laws which allowed thieves a certain reward, which permitted the company
of men and women indifferently, and innumerable others more dishonest, which
are not only void of all justice, but even of all humanity. But these two
things must be kept inuiolably in all laws, namely, The Two things required in
the keeping of every law.
ordinance of the law, and the equity of it, upon the reason whereof the
ordinance is grouuded. Equity is always one and the same to all people,
because it is natural. Therefore all Equity is always one and the same to
all people.
the laws in the world, of what matter soever they are, must meet in the same
equity. Concerning the ordinance of the law, because it is joined with
circumstances, no inconuenie^ce lets but that it may de diverse among sundry
nations, provided always that they all tend a-like to the same mark of
equity. Now seeing the divine law which we call moral, is nothing else but a
testimony of the law of nature, and of the conscience that is imprinted in all
men's hearts, no doubt but this equity whereof we now speak, is wholly declared
and comprehended therein. The equity of the moral law ought to be the end and
rule of all other laws.
Therefore it is meet that this equity only should be the white, rule and
end of all laws. For (as S. Augustine says in his book of the city of God)
every law that bears not the image of the divine law, is a vain censure.
And justice is the end of every law well established, which is the cause why S.
Paul so greatly extolleth the vigor of the law, calling it the bond of
perfection. Those laws then which are squared out by this heavenly rule, which
tend to this end, and are limited out by this measure, ought to be received
and followed cheerfully, albeit they differ from the Mosaicall law, or
otherwise one from another. For many have denied (and some amongst us are yet
of that opinion) that no Commonwealth can be well and justly Their opinion
confuted, who would tie all nations to the policy of Moses.
instituted and ordained, if leaving the policy of Moses, it be governed by
the common laws of other nations: which is so absurd a thing, and would be the
cause of so great confusion in the policies of the world, that there needs no
great store of arguments to prove it vain and frivolous. Moreover, by that
distinction of the law which we have already set down in our discourse, it
appears sufficiently, that the opinion of these doters is grounded upon a
mere ignorance of the will of God. The law of God forbids stealing and
diverse pains Theft punished diversely in diverse nations.
and punishments are appointed for the same in the policy of the Jews,
according to the kind, time, and place of the theft. The ancientest laws of
other nations punished thieves by causing the^ to restore double that which
they had stolen. Those laws which followed made a distinction between open and
secret theft: others used banishment, How false witness was punished among the
Jews.
and some death. The law of God forbids false witnes-bearing, which was
punished amongst the Jews with the same punishment that the party falsely
accused should have incurred, if he had been found guilty. In some other
countries there was no punishment for it but public ignominy and shame: and
in some also the gibbet. Briefly, all the laws in the world with one common
consent, how different soever they be, tend to one and the same end,
pronouncing sentence of condemnation against those crimes that are condemned by
the eternal law of God: only they agree not in equality of punishment,
which is neither necessary nor expedient. There is some such country that
would speedily become desolate through murders and robberies, if it did not
exercise horrible and grievous punishments upon the offenders in those crimes.
There falls out some such time as requires increase of punishments. Some
such nation there is that stands in need of some grievous correction to be
appointed for some special vice, whereunto otherwise it would be more given than
other nations. He that should be offended at this diversity, which is most
meet to maintain the observation of the law of God, would he not be thought to
have a malicious mind, and to envy public benefit and quietness? For the
conclusion of our present speech, let us learn, that civil laws and
ordinances depend only of the Civil ordinances depend only of the soueraign
ruler.
sovereign ruler, and that he may change them according to the occurrence and
benefit of state affairs. Let us learn that all laws must be referred to the
infallible rule of the The end whereunto all laws are to be referred.
justice and will of God, and to the common profit of civil society: that he
which commands us to obey magistrates not only for fear of punishment, but
also for conscience sake, requires of us such obedience to their laws and
ordinances: so that he is accursed that infringeth or contemns them. Therefore
we must voluntarily submit our selves unto them, so that their general end be
to set an order and policy amongst us, and not dispute of their reason and
cause, as long as their jurisdiction extends not to our souls to lay upon
them a new rule of justice.


Of the People, and of their obedience due to the Magistrate, and to the Law.
Chap. 56.
AMANA. WE have hitherto seen, that the preservation of policies depends of
the observation of the law, that the sovereign magistrate rules thereby, and
uses it as a bond to reduce to unity and agreement all the citizens of one
Commonwealth, being unlike in calling, and living under his dominion: at which
mark every good politic governor ought chiefly to aim. Now (my companions)
we are to entreat of this third part of a city, which makes the politic body
perfect and absolute, namely, of the people, and of that obedience which they
ought to yield to the magistrate and to the law.


ARAM. The whole Commonwealth fares well or The magistrate is the head, the
law the soul, and the people the body of the common-welth.
ill, as all her parts, even to the least, are ruled, and contain themselves
within the compass of their duty. For all of them together make but one
body, whereof the magistrate is the head, and the law the soul that gives
life unto it. Wherefore it is needful that these should command, and the
other obey.


ACHITOB. Whatsoever profits the whole, profits the part, and that which is
commodious to the part, is also commodious to the whole: and so contrariwise.
Wherefore to obey well, which is necessarily required of the people, is greatly
available to the whole political body. Now let us hear ASER handle this
matter unto us more at large.


ASER. In every discipline the beginning is commonly taken from the least
parts thereof. Grammar takes his beginning from letters, which are the least
things in The Nowne and Verb are no parts of Logike, but of Grammar.
it: Logike, from the two least parts thereof, namely, the Nowne and the
Verb. Geometry from the point: Arithmetic from Unity: Music from the
Minnem and Sembrief, which are likewise the least parts thereof. Therefore
having seen that Policy is the order and life of the city, and that the
city is a multitude of citizens, before we speak of the whole body of them,
we must (as I think) entreat first of a citizen, who, although he differ
according The definition of a citizen in a popular state.
to the diversity of commonwealths, yet to take him properly, may be said to
be every one that has right to judge in his city, and has a deliberatiue
voice in the general or common council thereof. This definition of a citizen
cannot fitly be applied to all citizens of all Commonwealths, but only to
those that are ruled popularly, wherein they are all equal, and govern
themselves by assemblies, in which every one has liberty to speak his
advise. Other definitions of a citizen.
Some define a citizen to be he, whose parents are citizens: or else, to be a
free subject holding of the sovereignty of an other: wherein they add this
word Free, to distinguish him from slaves and strangers. But generally we may
say, that whosoever may bear offices or magistracy, A general definition of a
citizen.
in what form of government so ever, is reputed and taken for a citizen: and
such are all the natural Frenchmen in this monarchy, amongst whom there is
not one, how base soever he be that may not be made noble by virtue, or that
may not by skill and integrity of life attain to the greatest estates of
justice, of treasury, and of other public charges. This is not seen in all
commonwealths. For in the Seignorie of Venice it seems that none are truly
Of the state of Venice.
citizens, but the lords and nobles, who only enjoy the office of
magistracy, and may enter into the great council after they have attained the
age of five and twenty years. As for the people they intermeddle not with any
matter of government, this only excepted, that they may be Secretaries and
Chancellors, as Contarenus reports. The city of Rome having many times
sundry governments, Of the ancient estate in Rome.
the appellation of a citizen was likewise diverse therein. For as long as the
first kings rules, the common people were altogether excluded from public
honors and offices. But after when the regal power was changed into the
government of a certain number of men, chosen by suffrages and common voices,
the people were admitted to magistracies, and to the managing of affairs, being
present at the public assembly had in Mars his field, which was distributed
by tribes, wards, companies, and centuries, to deliberate of the common
estate, to create magistrates, and to decree new laws: where he was reputed
for a citizen in deed, that was a free man, that had both house and tribe, and
possibility to attain to honor, enjoying besides many other privileges and
prerogatives. But when the sovereignty came into the emperors hands, those
assemblies continued only under Julius and Octautus, and after were abrogated
by Tyberius and translated to the Senate, and to the absolute power of the
prince, taking away al authority from the people in public matters. Now to
return to our former assertion, we say, Who are truly citizens.
that all they are citizens to whom the gate that leads to the government of
the city lies open, I mean the whole company of them that live under the same
laws and sovereign magistrates. Such are all the subjects and natural
vassals of our king, of whom the people and the nobility The division of the
whole people into three orders or estates
are the two orders or estates, and of them is the estate of the church
compounded, which makes one part of the commonwealth of France. This
self-same distinction of citizens is observed almost throughout all Europe. The
division of citizens in Venice and Florence.
But besides this general division, there are some more special in many
common-welths, as at Venice, into the Gentlemen, Burgesses, and Common people:
at Florence before it was brought in subjection to a Prince, there were the
greater sort, the middle sort, and the vulgar or common sort of people. And our
ancient Gauls had the Druides, the Horsemen, and the inferior In Egypt and
among the ancient Gauls.
people. In Egypt were the Priests, the Soldiers, and the Artificers. And
although Plato labored to make all the citizens of his common-welth equal in
rights and prerogatives, yet he divided them into three estates, into Gardes,
Soldiers, These gardes were the Senate and council for state affairs,
consisting of 400. Burgesses.
and Laborers. Whereupon we must necessarily infer this conclusion, that
there never was, nor can be Commonwealth, wherein the citizens were equal in
all rights and prerogatives, but that some had more or less than others, and
yet so, that wise Politikes have carefully provided, that the meanest should
have no cause to complain Of the agreement that is to be kept between the
estates of a commonwealth.
of their estate. Moreover, the conueniencie and proportionable agreement of
our French estates, has been the cause why this kingdom (until this our
unfortunate age) has continued and prospered so long amongst other kingdoms
both of ancient and late times, namely, when Goods, Honors, and public
charges were ordinarily distributed, according to the condition of every
estate, and their rightes and privileges preserved: especially when it was
carefully provided, that one estate should not grow too great above the other,
I mean, that the nobility should not keep the people too much under, and
bring them to a desperate estate: and that the people through their traffike,
offices of judgments, and receipts for the prince which they exercised, and
benefices which they enjoyed, should not excessiuely enrich themselves, to the
prejudice of the nobility, nor get into their hands the lands of the nobles,
who being impouerished, could not sustain the charges of war, nor serve the
king in his armies. But One cause of the ^^serie of France at this present.
the neglect of this foresight, and the great inequality of riches among the
estates (that one part which was wont to be poorest, being now become richer
than both the other two) is the cause of great wounds in the body of this
monarchy. The poor people being oppressed by both the other estates, is
fallen under the burden like to Aesops ass. And the horse that would carry
nothing, I mean the nobility and clergy are constrained, some to bear their
tenths and extraordinary subsidies, and others to ^ell their living to go to
war at their own charges. But these things deserve a long discourse by it self,
and may hereafter be touched more fitly tha^ at this time. Let us then
generally consider of our proposition, namely, of the duty of al those subjects
which The office and duty of subjects.
live under one estate and policy. First it is necessary that they should have
the estate of the magistrate in great estimation, acknowledging it to be a
commission and charge given by God, and therefore they must honor and reverence
him, as one that represents unto them the heavenly empire over al creatures.
For as God has placed the Sun in the heavens as an image of his divine nature,
which lightneth, heateth, quickneth, and norisheth al things created for ma^s
use, either in heaven or earth: so the soueraign magistrate is The soueraign
magistrate compared to the Sun.
the like representatio^ and light in a city or kingdom, especially so long as
the fear of God, and observation of justice are imprinted in his heart. Some
are obedient enough to their magistrates, and would not but that there should
be some superior unto whom they might be subject, because they know Against
them that think the magistrate to be a necessary evil.
it to be expedient for common benefit: yet they have no other opinion of a
magistrate, but that he is a necessary evil for mankind. But when we know, that
we are commanded to honor the king, to fear God and the king, which we find
often in the scripture, we must understand that Prou. 24. 21.
What is meant by honoring the King.
this word to honor, comprehends under it a good opinion and estimation,
which we must have of the sovereign magistrate: and that the ioining of the
king with God, must cause us to attribute great dignity and reverence unto
him, in respect of that power which is given him from his majesty. Likewise
when it is said, that we must be subject Romans 13. 5.
to the higher powers, not because of wrath only, but also for conscience
Subjects must obey their prince for the fear of God.
sake, it is to honor them with an excellent title, and to bind us to obey
them for the fear of God, and as we will obey his ordinance, because their
power depends of him. Of this honor and reverence it follows, that we must
submit our selves unto them in all obedience, whether it be in yielding to
their ordinances or hestes, in the payment of impostes and subsidies, or in
receiving such public charges, as it shall please them to commit unto us. Of
the service due to the prince.
Briefly, every subject is bound to serve his prince with goods and life, which
is the personal service of a natural subject, not as a hireling that serves
at will, whereas the Romans 13. 1. 2.
other service is necessary. Leteuery soul (says S. Paul) be subject to the
higher powers. For whosoever resists the power, resists Tit. 3. 1.
the ordinance of God. He writes also to Titus in this manner. Put them in
remembrance that they be subject to the principalities and powers, and that
they be obedient and ready to every 1. Pet. 2. 13. 14.
good work. Submit your selves (says S. Peter) unto all manner ordinance of
man for the Lords sake, whether it be unto the king, as unto the superior, or
unto governors, as unto them that are sent of him for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of the^ that do well. Moreover, to the end that
subjects should testify, that they obey not dissemblingly, but of a free and
willing mind, S. Paul adds, that they must by prayers to God recommend their
preservation and prosperity under 1. Tim. 2. 1. 2.
whom they live. I exhort (says he) that first of all supplications, prayers,
intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, for kings, and for all
that are in authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable life in all
godliness and honesty. Neither let any man deceive himself herein. For seeing
no man can resist magistrates without resisting God, howsoever some may think,
that a weak and powerles magistrate may be contemned without punishment, yet
God is strong and mighty to revenge the contempt of his ordinance. Besides,
under Private men must not busy themselves in public affairs.
this obedience is contained that moderation which al private persons ought to
observe in public affairs, namely, that they must not of their own motion
intermeddle in the government or reformation of them, nor take upon them rashly
any part of the magistrates office, nor to attempt any public thing. If there
be any fault in the common policy that needs amendment, they must not
therefore stir at al therein, nor take to themselves authority to redres it, or
once to put too their helping hands, which in that respect are as it were bound
behind the^. But they are to show it to the superior, who only has his hand
unbound to dispose and order public matters, and if he then command them to
deal therein, they may put it in execution, as being furnished with public
authority. For as we use to call the counsailors The counsailors of a prince
are his eyes and ears: and his officers are his hands.
of a prince, his eyes and ears, because they must be vigilant for him, so we
may also call those me^ his hands, whom he has appointed to execute such things
as are to be don. And to these we owe honor and obedience, seeing the force of
the laws consists in their commandment. These are the magistrates and
officers established by the sovereign, and armed with power to co^pel the
subjects to obey his laws, or else to punish the^. Whereby we see two kinds of
commanding Two kinds of public power.
with public power, the one in chief, which is absolute, indefinite and above
the laws, above magistrates and private men: the other is lawful, subject to
the laws and to the sovereign, which power properly belongs to them that
have extraordinary power to command, as long as their commission lasts. The
soueraign prince acknowledges The difference between the prince, the
magistrate, and the private man.
(after God) none greater tha^ himself: the magistrate holds his power (after
God) of the soueraign prince, and is always subject to him and to his laws.
Private men acknowledge after God (who must always be first) their soueraign
prince, his laws and his magistrates, every one in his place of jurisdiction.
They are bound to obey them, even How far subjects are bound to obey their
prince and his laws.
then (which is repeated in many laws) when they command any thing contrary to
public profit, or against civil justice, so that it be not against the law of
God and of nature. Now forasmuch as when we entreated of the sovereign
magistrate, we described him such a one as he ought to be, answering The titles
of a good magistrate
truly to his title, that is to say, a father of the country which he
governs, a shepherd of his people, the guardian of peace, protector of
justice, and preserver of innocence, that man might well be judged to be beside
himself The behavior of evil princes.
that would reprehend such a government. But because it commonly falls out,
that most princes wander far out of the right way, and that some having no care
to do their duty, sleep in their delights and pleasures, others fixing their
hearts upon coueto^snes, set to sale all laws, privileges, rights and
judgments: some spoil the poor people by ouercharging them with impostes and
exactions to furnish their prodigality and unmeasurable dissolutenes: others
exercise open robberies, in sacking of houses, violating of virgins and married
women, in murdring innocents, or suffering such violence to be done under the^
by the ministers and baudes of their pleasures: some also oppres the nobility,
even the princes of their blood, to show favor to base persons, and those
strangers, despising worthy me^ that are their natural subjects and vassals: I
say considering these things, it will be very hard, yea altogether impossible,
to persuade a great many, that such are to be acknowledged for princes and true
superiors, and that we must of necessity obey the^ so far as we may without
offending our consciences confecrated Tirants are naturally hated.
to God only. For this affection is rooted in the hearts of men, to hate and
detest tirants no less than they love and reverence just kings. So that when
amongst such lothsom vices, so far estranged not only from the duty of a
magistrate, but also from all humanity, they see in their soueraign no form of
the image of God, which ought to shine in him, no show of a minister given from
above for the praise of good men, and execution of vengeance upon the wicked,
they are easily driven forward to hate and to contemn him, and finally, to
rebel against him. But if we direct our sight to the word of God, it will lead
us a great deal farther. For it will make us obedient, not only to the rule of
those princes which execute their office according to justice, but to them also
that do nothing less than their duty. It tells us, that whatsoever they
are, they have their authority from God only: the good, as mirrors of his
goodness; the bad, as scourges of his wrath to punish the iniquity of We must
obey and reverence unjust princes a* well as just.
the people: but both the one and the other, authorized from him with the same
dignity and majesty in regard of their subjects. Therefore in respect of
obedience and reverence, we owe as much to the unjust, as to the just prince.
Which thing because it is so hardly believed amongst me^, and less practiced
now than ever, I will insist a little longer in the proof of my saying by
testimonies of the scripture, than we have used to do in our other discourses.
First, I desire every one diligently to consider and mark the providence of
God, and that special working whereby he uses to distribute kingdoms, and to
establish such kings as he thinks good, whereof mention is often made in the
scripture. As it is written in Daniel: He changes the times and seasons: he
takes Dan. 1. 21. and 4. 14.
away kings: he sets up kings, that living men may know, that the most high
has power over the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and
appoints over it the most abject among me^. It is well known what manner of
king Nebuchadnezzer was, Nebuchadnezzer.
eue^ he that took Jerusalem, namely, a great thief, and a robber.
Notwithstanding God affirms by the prophet Ezechiel, Eze. 29. 18. 19.
That he gave him the la^d of Egypt for the reward of his work* and for the
wages of his army wherewith he had served him, in spotling and sacking Tyrus*
And Daniel said unto him: O king thou art a king of Dan. 2. 37.
kings; for the god of heaven has given thee a kingdom power, strength, and
glory. When we hear that he was appointed king by god, we must withal call to
mind the heavenly ordinance, which commands us* to feat and honor the king,
and then we will not doubt to yield to a wicked tyrant that honor which God
has thought him meet for. When Samuel declared to the people of Israel what
they should suffer of their kings, not only according to the rights and
privileges of his majesty, but by tyrannical customs and fashions, namely,
that they would 1. Sam. 3.
take their sons and daughters to serve him, their lands, vines and gardens,
to give them to their servants, contrary to the commandment of the law of God:
yet he inioined them all obedience, leaving them no lawful occasion to resist
their king. I have Iere. 27. 5. etc.
(says the Lord in Jeremy) made the earth, the man, and the beast that are
upon the ground, by my great power, and by my outstretched arm, and have
given it unto whom it pleased me. But now I have given al these lands into the
hand of Nebuchadnezzar the king of A tyrant called the servant of God.
Babel my servant, and the beasts of the fields have I also given him to serve
him. And all nations shall serve him, and his son, and his sons son until
the very time of his land come also. And the nation and kingdom which will not
serve the same Nebuchadnezzar king of Babel, and that will not put their neck
under the yoke of the king of Babel, the same nation will I visit, (says the
Lord) with the sword, famine, and pestilence. Wherefore serve the king of Babel
and live. We know by these words with what great obedience God would have this
perverse and cruel tyrant to be honored, only for this reason, because he was
lift up by his hand unto that roial majesty. Now if we are bound to believe as
much of all the kings of the earth, these foolish and seditious thoughts should
never come into our minds, that a king must be handled according as he
deserves, and that it stands not with reason, that we should account our
selves his subjects, who for his part behaueth not himself toward us as a
king. There is in the same prophet a commandment of god to his people to
desire the prosperity of Babylon, wherein they were held captives, and to pray
for it, because Ier. 29. 7.
in the peace thereof they should have peace. Behold how the Israelits were
commanded to pray for his prosperity, who had spoiled the^ of their goods and
possessions, carried the^ into exile, and brought the^ into miserable bondage:
so far off is it, that they were permitted to rebel against him. Although David
already elected king by the will of God, and anointed 1. Sam. 24. 7. and 26. 9.
10.
with holy oil, was unjustly pursued of Saul, yet he said, The lord keep me
from doing that thing to my master the lords anointed, to lay my hand upon him.
For who can lay his hand on the Lords David would not lay viosent hands upon
Saul's person.
anointed and be guiltles? As the Lord lives, either the Lord shall smite him,
or his day shall come to die, or he shall descend into battle, and perish. The
Lord keep me from laying my hand upon the Lords anointed. This word is
directed to us all, and it ought to teach us not to sift out the life of our
soueraign prince, but to content our selves with this knowledge, that by the
will of God he is established and set in an estate, that is full of an inviolable
majesty. Moreover, we read in Josephus, that the holiest men that ever were
among the Hebrews, called Essaei, that is to say, true practisers of the law
of God, These Essaei or Esseni, were a superstitious sect among the Jews, that
pretended to lead a most perfect kind of life.
maintained this, that sovereign princes, whatsoever they were, ought to be
inviolable to their subjects, as they that were sacred and sent of God.
Neither is there any thing more usual in all the holy scriptures than the
prohibition to kill or to seek the life or honor, not only of the prince,
but also of inferior magistrates, although (says the scripture) they be
wicked. And it is said in Exodus, Exodus 22. 28.
Thou shall not rail upon the judges, neither speak evil of the ruler of thy
people. Now, if he that does so is guilty of treason, both against the divine
and humane majesty, what punishment is sufficient for him that seeks after
their life? According to men's laws, not only that subject is guilty of high
treason that has killed his sovereign prince, but he also that attempted it,
that gave counsel, that consented to it, that thought it. Yea, he that was
never prevented nor taken in the manner, in this point of the sovereign the law
accounts him as condemned already: and judges him culpable of death that
thought once in times past to have seized upon the life of his prince,
notwithstanding any repentance that followed. And truly there was a gentleman of
Normandy, who confessed to a Franciscan friar, that he once minded to have
killed king A gentleman judged to die, because he once thought to have killed
his prince
Francis the first, but repented him of that evil thought. The friar gave him
absolution, but yet afterward told the king thereof, who sent the gentleman to
the parliament of Paris there to be tried, where he was by common consent
condemned to die, and after executed. Amongst the A s^u^r^ law against treason.
Macedonians there was a law that condemned to death five of their next
kinsfolks that were convicted of conspiracy against their prince. We see then
the straight obligation whereby we are bound unto our princes both by divine and
humane right. Wherefore if it so fall out that we are cruelly vexed by a prince
void of humanity, or else polled and burdened with exactions by one that is
covetous or prodigal: or despised and ill defended by a careless prince, yea
afflicted for true piety by a sacrilegious and unbelieving sovereign, or
otherwise most unjustly and cruelly entreated, first let us call to mind our
offenses How we must behave our selves under a tyrant.
committed against God, which undoubtedly he corrects by such scourges.
Secondly, let us think thus with our selves, that it belongs not to us to
remedy such evils, being permitted only to call upon God for help, in whose
hands are the hearts of kings, and alterations of Psalm. 82. 1. and 2. 12.
kingdoms. It is God, who (as David says) sits among the gods, that shall
judge them: at whose only look all those kings and judges of the earth, shall
fall and be confounded, who have not kissed his son Jesus Christ, but have
decreed unjust laws, to oppress the poor in judgment, and to scatter the
lawful right of the weak, that Esaias 10. 1.
they may pray upon the widows, and poll the orphans. Thus let all people
learn, that it is their duty above all things to beware of contemning or
violating the authority of their superiors, which ought to be full of
majesty unto them, seeing it is confirmed by God with so many sentences and
testimonies, yea although it be in the hands of most unworthy persons, who by
their wickedness make it odious (as much as in them lies) and contemptible.
Moreover, they must learn that they must obey their laws and ordinances, and
take nothing in hand that is against the privileges and marks of sovereignty.
Then shall we be most happy, if we consecrate our souls to God only, and
dedicate our bodies, lives and goods, to the service of our prince.


The end of the fourteenth days work.
THE FIFTEENTH DAYS WORK.
Of a Monarchy, or a Regal power. Chap. 57.
ASER. WHen we began yesterday to entreat of the sundry kinds of estates and
governments that have been in force amongst men, and of the excellency or
deformity of them, we reserved to a further consideration the monarchy or
kingly power, under which we live in France. This form of regiment by the
common consent of the woorthiest philosophers and most excellent men, has been
always taken for the best, happiest, and most assured commonwealth of all
others, The laws of nature lead us to a monarchy.
as that wherein all the laws of nature guide us: whether we look to this
little world, which has but one body, and over all the members one only head,
of which the will, motion and sense depend; or whether we take this great world,
which has but one sovereign God; whether we cast up our eyes to heaven, we
shall see but one sun, or look but upon these sociable creatures below, we
see that they cannot abide the rule of many amongst them. But I leave to you
(my Companions) the discourse of this matter.


AMANA. Among all creatures, both with and without life, we alwais find one
that has the pre-eminence above the rest of his kind. Among al reasonable
creatures, In every kind of thing one excels.
Man: among beasts, the Lion is taken for chief: among birds, the Eagle: among
grain, wheat: among drinks, wine: among spices, baulme: among all metals,
gold: among all the elements, the fire. By which natural demonstrations we may
judge, that the kingly and monarchical government draws nearest to nature of
all others.


ARAM. The principality of one alone is more conformable, A monarchy most
significantly represents the divine regiment.
and more significant to represent the divine and ineffable principality of
God, who alone rules al things, than the power of many over a political body.
Notwithstanding there has been many notable men that have judged a monarchy,
not to be the best form of government that may be among men. But it is your
duty (ACHITOB) to handle us this matter.


ACHITOB. This controversy has always been very great among those that have
entreated of the forms of policies and governments of estates, namely, whether
it be more agreeable to nature, and more profitable for mankind to live under
the rule of one alone, than of many, neither side wanting arguments to prove
their opinion. Now although it be but a vain occupation for private men, who
have no authority to ordain public matters, to dispute which is the best
estate of policy: and a greater point of rashness to determine thereof simply,
seeing the chiefest thing consists in circumstances, yet to content curious
minds, and to make them more willing to bear that yoke unto which both divine
and humane nature and equity has subjected them, I purpose here to weigh
their strongest reasons that have misliked a monarchy, to the end that by
contrary concluding arguments, which maintain and defend it, both they and we
may be so much the more stirred up, to range our selves willingly under the
happy and lawful rule of our king, considering the agreement and participation
which it has, with all the good policies that can be named, as also the
happiness and certain benefit that comes to us, as well in respect of this our
private life, as of the common prosperity of the whole public body, unto
which we owe our selves. First, we will note that a monarchy, a kingdom, or
royal power; signify one and the same thing: namely, one kind of
Commonwealth, What a Monarchy or kingly power is.
wherein the absolute sovereignty consists in one only Prince, who may not
be commanded by any, but may command all. If there be two Princes of equal
power in one estate, neither the one nor the other is sovereign. But a man may
well say, that both together have the sovereignty of the Estate, which is
comprehended under this word Oligarchye, and is properly called a Duarchy, Of a
Duarchy, that is, of the rule of two.
which may continue so long as those two Princes agree, otherwise it must
needs be that the one will overthrow the other. Therefore to avoid discord,
the Emperors divided the Estate into two parts, the one taking himself for
Emperor of the East, the other of the West: The division of the Empire.
and yet the edicts and ordinances were published by the common consent of both
Princes, to serve both their empires. But as soon as they fell in debate, both
the Empires were in deed divided, both for power, for laws, and for estate.
He therefore may be called a Monarch, that of himself alone has power to
prescribe laws to all in general, and to every one in particular. And under
this power are comprehended all the other rights and marks of sovereignty,
which the Lawyers call regal rights, and handle them severally, which
nevertheless we may comprehend under eight sovereign marks: namely, to make 8.
Marks of sovereignty.
and to abrogate a law: to proclaim war, or to make peace: to take
knowledge in the last appeal of the judgments of all Magistrates: to appoint
or to disappoint the greatest officers: to charge or to discharge the subjects
of taxes and subsidies: to grant tollerations and dispensations against the
rigor of laws: to inhaunce or to pull down the title, value, and constant
rate of money: to cause subjects and liege people to swear, that they will be
faithful without exception, to him unto whom the oath is due. Now, to enter
into that matter, which we purposed especially to handle: namely, whether a
Monarchy be more profitable, than any other form of estate: many Their
reasons who mislike a Monarchy.
have maintained that it is a dangerous thing to live under the rule of one
only king or prince, because it is a very hard matter to find one perfect in
all points, as every King or Prince must of necessity be, if he will deserve
that name: according to that which Cyrus Monarch of the What excellency is
required in him that rules others.
Persians said: That it belonged to none to command, if he were not better than
all those over whom he commanded. Moreover, although it were possible to find
one of that perfection which is required, yet were it a thing always to be
greatly feared, that by reason of humane frailty, and of the great license
that kings have to execute their wills, he would change both condition and
nature, and of a King become a Tyrant, of which there are infinite examples set
down in histories. Yea it is certain, and granted by the greatest part of
them that have written of state matters, that every kind of Commonwealth that
is established simply, and alone by it self, quickly degenerateth into the
next vice, if it be not moderated and held back by the rest: As a kingdom is
soon changed into a tyranny, an Aristocraty into an Oligarchy, and so of the
other. But this danger is greater in a Monarchy, (as they say that mislike it)
than under the rule of many, because it is unlikely, that all of them should be
wicked, and if any one be so, the good men may bridle him. And so they
conclude, that it is not so dangerous a matter to live under the government of
many, as of one, who may more easily corrupt his nature, being a Monarch, than
many can do that are elected in an Aristocraty, as the Areopagiticall Lords
in Athens, the Ephoryes in Lacedemonia, and the Senate in Rome. After the death
of Cambyses, Monarch of the Persians, when the chief Lords The Persian
Council held for the establishing of their Estate.
of the kingdom had slain that Magus, who under the name of Smerdis had
usurped the rule of the Estate, they deliberated of the affairs, and held a
general Council, wherein (as Herodotus writes) many very worthy Otanes
oration.
and memorable speeches were uttered. Otanes moved this, that the affairs
might be governed in common by the Persians, speaking unto them in this manner.
I am not of opinion, that one of us from hence forward should be sole Monarch
over all, because it is neither pleasant nor good to have it so. For ye know to
what insolency Cambyses was grown, ye have also thoroughly seen the boldness
of the Magus: and ye may think with your selves how perilous a thing it is to
have a Monarchy, which may do what it list, not being subject to correction.
The best man in the world placed in this estate, will soon be carried away with
his woonted thoughts. Insolency possesses him, because of present
prosperity, and hatred is soon bred in such a man. Now having these two
vices, he abounds in all iniquity, and commits great injustice, one while
through insolency, another while of hatred. Although a Tyrant, having abundance
of all good The effects of a Tyrant.
things, should be far from envy, yet the contrary falls out in him toward
his subjects. For he hates good men that live and prosper well, he delights
in the wicked, and gladly hears evil reports of other men. And which
becomes him very il, if you admire and praise him moderately, he is angry
that you do it not excessiuely: and yet if you do so, he will mislike it,
thinking that you flatter him. Besides, which is woorst of all, he changes the
laws and customs of the country, forces women, kills good men, not taking
knowledge of their cause. Thus did this Persian Lord conclude, that a Monarchy
was to be left, and a Democraty to be chosen. Megabyses, one of his companions,
Megabyses oration for an Aristocraty.
liked well the abolishing of a Monarchy, but persuaded the Oligarchical
government, saying, that nothing was more ignorant, or more insolent, than an
unprofitable multitude. Therefore it was in no wise tolerable, that eschewing
the insolency of a Tyrant, they should fall into the hands of an unbridled
and disordered people. Many others have noted great dangers and discommodities
The dangers of a Monarchy.
in a Monarchy, especially in the change of the Monarch, whether it be from ill
to good, or from good to better. For we commonly see at the changing of
Princes, new devices, new laws, new officers, new friends, new form of
living: because Princes ordinarilye take delight in changing, and in remoouing
almost all things, that men might speak of them: which many times brings
great discommodities to their subjects. But if this were not so, and the Prince
as wise as heart could wish, yet the alliances and leagues made by a man's
predecessor, end with him: which is the cause that the alliances ending, the
neighbors betake them to arms, and the strongest assaulteth the weakest, or
else prescribes him laws. For many maintain, that the successors of Princes
are not bound to the treaties and obligations of their predecessors, if they be
not their heirs. An other inconvenience to be feared in a Monarchy, is the
danger of falling into civil war, through the division of those that aspire
to the crown, and namely, if there be right of election, which oftentimes
draws after it the ruin of the estate. But put the case there were no strife
for the Monarchy, yet if the Monarch be a child, there will be division for
the government of him, between the moother and the A child Prince is a token
of Gods wrath.
Princes, or betwixt the Princes themselves. Also when God purposes to be
revenged upon nations, he threatens to give them children for Princes. And
although the child has a Tutor, by the appointment of the predecessor, or by
custom, yet is there danger of making himself sovereign Lord, of which thing
histories set down many examples before our eyes. If a young Prince freed from
Tutors, come to the crown, his government is no less to be feared. For being
then set at liberty when his lusts are most violent, you shall see nothing in
his Court but fooleries, maskings, and loose behavior. If he be warly, he will
hazard his subjects, his estate, and his person, to make trial of his valor.
Briefly, a crafty and wicked Monarch will establish a tyranny: a cruel man
will make a slaughterhouse of the Commonwealth: a whore-maister will make it
a stews: a covetous wretch will pull off both hair and skin from his
subjects: a prodigal Prince will suck the blood and marrow, to glut a dozen
of horseleaches about his person: a foolish and ignorant Prince will do worse,
falling easily into the most of these vices, for want of judgment to know and
to make choice of counsel, necessary for the government of his estate. These
are the chief reasons of them that mislike a Monarchy. Now we will allege
the other reasons in the defense of it, and begin with Darius his declaration
upon the speeches Darius oration for a Monarchy.
of his companions, rehearsed by us in the general Council of the Persians:
because it is well worthy to be remembered, according unto which the Monarchy
was concluded of in the Council. In my judgment (said he to the assembly)
Megabyses said well concerning the multitude, but ill in that which belongs
to an Oligarchy. For although there be three kinds of Policies, a Democraty, an
Oligarchy, and a Monarchy, and all good, yet I say this last is far better
than the other, because there is nothing so good as the government of one
virtuous man alone, who judging thereafter, governs his people without
reprehension. I will not speak of the councels which he takes in like manner
against his enemies and ill-willers. But in an Oligarchy, where many busy them
Against an Oligarchy.
selves with public affairs, great enmities arise between them, from whence
proceed seditions, and from seditions murders, and by murders some one
attaineth to a Monarchye. Whereby you may easily know how much better a
Monarchy is. As touching the people, it is impossible but that where they rule,
there should be much wickedness, which increasing in the evil governors of the
Commonwealth, breeds not hatred between them, but great friendship. For
they that are evil affected toward the Commonwealth, hide one another
counsel, until some one man being set over the people, cause them to give
over. Then is that man admired, and therewithal made a Monarch: whereby also
it is evident, that a Monarchy is best. Wherefore my advice is, that, seeing we
have been set at liberty by one only man, we should maintain that Estate:
otherwise we shall disanull the laws of our country, that are already well
established, which will not turn to the best for us. Dionysius Halicarnassaeus
in his antiquities of Rome, affirms that the like speech was used before
Romulus, when he first established the government in Rome: where Amulius
concluded for A Monarchy concluded upon in the Council of the Persians, of
Romulus, and of Augustus.
the Monarchy, as Darius did among the Persians. The same question was
deliberated of by Augustus amongst his friends, because he desired nothing more
than to live in rest, and to give over the Estate: but it was then concluded,
that a Monarchy was best for the Commonwealth, and the cuent proved the same.
For before the Romans could not live ten years without civil war or
sedition: whereas Augustus preserved them almost 50* years in perfect peace,
which continued also long time after his death. Demosthenes in his first
Olynthiacke oration, shows the Athenians what advantage a Monarch has in the
deliberation and execution of great enterprises, speaking in this manner. It is
greatly available for the speedy and commodious execution of warlike
exploits, when one man alone has the ouer-sight of all enterprises, both
secret and open, and withal is Captain, Lord, and Treasurer, and always The
commodities of a Monarchy.
present at the affairs. But who can deny, that it is not a great deal better
for great and mighty nations to be governed Monarchically, to the end that they
may maintain themselves in unity at home, and abroad in reputation? Especially
those nations where there are Princes, Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, Barons, and
other gentlemen, who possess in the highest, lowest, and middle sort of
justice; Villages, Boroughs, Towns, Castles, with vassals holding and relying
of them by fealtic and homage: as namely in France, Spain, and other
countries, wherein the Monarch by absolute power, and force when need is,
holds in the greater sort with the less, staying the insolency of the one,
and releeuing others from oppression. Otherwise, if they were divided into many
heads, disagreeing among themselves, and acknowledging no sovereign Lord, who
doubts but that they would be continually troubled with civil wars, set
upon by strangers, and spoiled of all sides? Italy proves this sufficiently
unto us, which commanded the greatest part of the world, when it was united in
on^* but being now divided into many Potentats and Seignories, after
unspeakable calamities of civil wars, which it has suffered a long time, it
is yet without doubt exposed for a pray to all the neighbors, if they were
not stayed with other Italy a pray to all her neighbors, and ^^y.
wars. If we consider the antiquity of the royal government, and how it has
been practiced of all nations almost, either wholly, or in part, to their great
honor and felicity, we shall be constrained to prefer it before all others,
and to account all those happy that live under a Monarchy. As men lived in old
time (says Aristotle) under Kings, so they Of the antiquity of a kingdom.
thought that the gods had a king. All nations (says Cicero) obeyed kings in
old time, which kind of rule was at the first bestowed upon most inst men. And
it has greatly profited our commonwealth, that from the beginning thereof it
has been ruled by a kingly government. The first name of Empire and rule,
known in the earth (says Salust) was the royal Estate: but then men lived
without covetousness, every one being content with his own. From the beginning
(as Trogus Pompeius writes) of countries and nations, the government was in
the hands of kings, who were not lift up to that high degree of maies^ie by
popular ambition* but for their modesty, which was known and approved of
good men. Then the people were not kept in awe by any laws, but the pleasure
and will of Princes stood for all laws. They were more given to keep the
frontiers of their Empire, than to enlarge them. Kingdoms were bounded by his
country that reigned therein. Ninus king of the Assyrians, Ninus was the first
that extended the limits of his kingdom.
whom the Scripture calls Nimrod, (that is a rebel) and a mighty hunter,
was the first that changed the ancient custom of the nations, through greedy
desire of ruling, and that began to war upon his neighbors. For finding
that the people knew not as yet how to resist, he subdued them al, from his
kingdom to the end of Lybia. Almost all the ancient nations of greatest
renown lived What Estates were ruled Mona^chically.
under the royal government, as the Scythians, Ethiopians, Indians, Assyrians,
Medes, Egyptians, Bactrians, Armenians, Macedonians, Jews, and Romans, after
they were weary of other gouernements. Those also that are most famous at
this day, live after the same sort, as the Frenchmen, Spaniards, Englishmen,
Polonians, Danes, Moscouites, Tartares, Turks, Abissines, Moors, Agiamesques,
Zagathians, Cathains. Yea the savage people newly discovered, are in a manner
all under kings. And they that live in other kinds of Commonwealths, as the
Venetians, do retain an outward show of The Dukedom of Venice is elective.
a king, whom they call a Duke, who is elective, and to continue his estate as
long as he lives. In other places they have Gonfalonners, as at Lucques; the
like whereof they were wont to have at Florence, and at Sienna. In some places
they have Aduoyers, or Bourg-maisters, as in the Cantons of Switzerland, and in
the free towns of What this word Emperor imports.
Germany, which acknowledge an Emperor. Upon which name we will note by the
way, that it imports no more than the name of a king, although amongst the
Lawyers and others, there have been infinite questions as touching the
authority and pre-eminence of both: namely, that the Emperors have usurped
over other kings until this present, albeit the power and majesty of the
Empire is greatly diminished, so that nothing else remains in a manner but
the name and shadow of it within Germany. Upon what occasion the name of
Emperor was first given to a Monarch.
As for this title of Emperor, which the Roman Monarks took to themselves,
and before used to call their Generals in war by that name, it was upon this
occasion taken up. After they had deprived Tarquine of the kingdom of Rome, by
reason of his pride and insolency, this name of king became so odious amongst
the Romans, that it was forbidden to be used, by an edict and solemn oath.
Whereupon when their popular Estate was changed into a Monarchy, they would not
call their Monarch by the name of King, by reason of their ancient oath, but
called him Emperor, as Appian writes. But to continue the discourse of our
principal matter, and to answer briefly to The reasons alleged against a
Monarchy answered.
the reasons alleged against a Monarchye, we have first to note, that the
most part of the dangers mentioned do cease, where the Monarchy goes by
succession, as it does in ours. For there is no cause of fear in regard of any
that might aspire to the Crown, or of the treaties and alliances, which are
not broken by the Prince his death, but renewed and confirmed by his successor
and heir, unless before they were greatly prejudicial to the Estate. That new
Princes seek after novelties, it may be said of some: but it is much more
usual in Aristocraticall and Popular Estates. For Magistrates that are renewed
so often, would be very sorrowful that their year should run out before they
had done something that might cause men to speak either good or evil of them.
As for the troubles about the government of a young king, peradventure it
falls not out once in a hundredth years: whereas if a Gonfalonner of Genes be
chosen but only for two years, and the Commonwealth will be all on fire. To
put into the balance the cruelties and robberies of a tyrant, whereby to
counterpeaze many good Princes, there is no show of reason in so doing. For we
know well enough, that a peaceable Aristocratie wisely guided, if it may be so,
is better than a cruel tyranny. But the chief matter subject of our
discourse, is to know whether it be not better to have one One just Princ:
better than many good Lords* and many Tyrants worse than one.
just and perfect king, than many good Lords: and by the contrary argument,
whether the tyranny of 50. tyrants is not more perilous, than of one only
tyrant. Now, if many Masters, Pilots, how wise soever they are, hinder one
another, when every one desires to hold the Rudder: then surely many Lords will
do the like, when they seek al together to govern the Commonwealth, albeit
they are wise and virtuous. And truly no Aristocratical or Popular Estate
Monarchies have continu*longest.
can be named, that has lasted above 600. years together, and few have
endured so long: but many Monarchies have continued 1000. and 1200. years in
the same estate. Moreover, they are agreeable to the upright laws of nature,
which (as we have before discoursed) do al lead us to a Monarchy. But there is
more to be considered of in our French kingdom, which ought to move all
French hearts very much to desire the preservation thereof, and to think
themselves happy, that they may live under it: I mean that which we touched in
the beginning of our speech: namely, the agreement and participation, which it
has with all good policies. Many Politics have given The opinion of many
Politics touching a mixed estate of a Common wealth.
this out, that no Commonwealth instituted to continue long, ought to be
simple or of one only kind: but that the virtues and properties of the other
Estates must meet together in it, to the end that nothing grow out of
proportion, which might cause it to degenerate to the next evil, and so
consequently overthrow it. This was first observed The Lacedemonian estate
mingled.
by Lycurgus, who in ordaining the Lacedemonian Commonwealth, mingled the
Senate with the Kings, and after the Ephories were established above the Kings,
insomuch that they were mingled and weighed so equally together, that a man
could not well discern under what kind of government The Carthaginian
Commonwealth was mixed.
it was erected. The Carthaginian commonwealth also, most flourishing for a long
time, was so instituted in the beginning thereof. It had kings, the
Aristocratical power of Senators, and the common people, who had their
pre-eminence The Roman estate mingled.
in things belonging unto them. The Roman Commonwealth, during the time of
her greatest glory, had these 3. parts so equally and proportionably tempered,
that a man could not tell, whether it were altogether Aristocratical, or
Democratical, or Monarchical. In looking to the power of the Consuls, a man
would have judged it Monarchical and Roial: to the Senators, Aristocratical: to
The estate of Venice compounded.
the Tribunes and common sort, Democratical. The Venetians in their
Commonwealth represent al these estates. Their great Council having soueraign
power, whereof the Senate and the authority of al their Magistrates depends,
does represent the Popular estate. The Duke, who is President as long as he
lives, represents the roial power, because he especially retains the
gravity and dignity thereof. And the College of ten men, with the College of
ancients, commonly called Sages, represents the Aristocraty, as Contarenus
What agreement the French Monarchy has with every good policy.
writes. As for our French Monarchy, it may well be said also to be partaker of
all 3. in regard of the government thereof, albeit in truth the estate thereof is
a simple and pure Monarchy. For the king is the Monarch, beloved, obeyed, and
reverenced: who although he have all power and sovereign authority to command,
and to do what he will, yet this great and sovereign liberty seems in some
sort to be ruled and limited by good laws and ordinances: and by the multitude
and great authority of Officers, and Counselors, who are as well near his
person, as in sundry places of his kingdom. The 12. Peers, the secret and
privy councels, the Parliament and great Council, the Chambers of accounts, the
Treasorers, and Generals of charges resemble in some sort the Aristocraty. The
States yearly held in the Provinces, the Mairalties of towns, Shreeualties,
Consulships Capitolats, and Churchwardens, are as it were the form of a
Democraty, as Siessel declares more at large. Moreover the general Estates of
the Realm, which are wont to be gathered together to deliberate (the king
being President) of all matters concerning the Estate, do they not
sufficiently testify the happy order thereof, drawing near to the government
of a good Oeconomist, when the king (as Aristotle says) commands in his
kingdom, as a good father of a family rules over his children, with love,
and according to right and justice? Wherefore although all the authority of
Officers, Counselors, Parliaments, and Estates, depends (as rivers of a
fountain) of the only power of their king and Prince, yet of his fatherly and
royal goodness he grants them such authority, that hardly could he do any
thing that were very violent, or too prejudicial to his subjects. And if some
such actions may be noted, they come rather through the fault of his
Counselors, than from his Majesty. Thus let us conclude with Plato, that the
royal government and authority ought to be preferred before all others
policies, as that which draws nearest to the divinity. But it must have a
Senate of good men joined unto it, after the form of an Aristocratie, as our
kings have always used to have, of their natural benignity, which makes them
inclinable to all exercises of virtue, piety, and justice.


Of diverse kinds of Monarchies, and of a Tyranny. Chap. 58.
ACHITOB. Why men are diueisly affected unto diverse forms of governments.
THe variety of manners, and inclinations to diverse things, which is (we see)
particularly in every one from his birth, and generally throughout all nations
of the world, disposes without doubt the people as they grow in age and
judgment, and according to their bringing up, to like one kind of The praise
of the French nation for their love to a Monarchy.
government rather than another. But Frenchmen have even to these last times,
carried away the praise of a more natural and constant disposition, love,
obedience, and fidelity toward the majesty of a king, than other nations
ever showed to their form of estate and government. For amongst them all,
there is not one nation to be found, that has so constantly continued in their
laws and ancient customs without any alteration and change, as this
flourishing Monarchy, which has also gone beyond them all in goodness and
mildnes of government, as we may see better (my Companions) if we compare with
it those sundry sorts of Monarchies, which have been heretofore, and do at
this day flourish, of which many come as near to a tyranny, as ours is far
distant from it. And to make a tyranny appear more odious, we will consider
the pernicious and miserable estate thereof.


ASER. The difference between the rule of a king, and of a tyrant.
As it properly belongs to a royal estate to govern and to rule subjects,
not according to the sensual appetite, and disordered will of the Prince, but
by maturitie of counsel, and by observation of laws and of justice: so it
agrees with a tyrant to reign by his absolute will, without all regard either
of laws, or of the precepts of justice.


AMANA. A tyrant (says Seneca) differs from a king in effect, not in name.
The one seeks his own profit only, and the other, the profit of the
Commonwealth. Now let us hear ARAM, who will teach us to discern them well
by their works.


ARAM. Amongst all the Monarchies that ever were, or are at this day among
men, most of the ancient authors Five kinds of Monarchies.
and great Politics have noted out five sundric sorts, of which I purpose
here to discourse particularly with brief examples, that the excellency of
ours may the better appear over others, especially over those that decline
much unto tyranny, whose shame and infamy I will here display. The first and
most ancient How the first Monarchy came up.
kind of Monarchy was that, which was voluntarily offered by the people for
some heroical virtue appeering in those men whom they judged worthy to
govern them justly and uprightly. And when they continued in this sort to
declare themselves benefactors of the multitude, in gathering them together, in
giving unto them territories, and in distributing lands among them, in finding
out of arts, in making of war, and in the administration of justice unto
them, their authority and power did lawfully descend to their successors, who
had sovereign power in time of war, and were chief in certain solemn
ceremonies of their sacrifices. Herodotus, Demosthenes, Aristotle, Cicero, and
many others, make mention of this kind of Monarchy. After the flood, when the
number of men increased, Noah persuaded his children, and others of his
posterity, to disperse themselves in diverse countries, to till the ground, and
to build towns, and to this end he assigned to every one his Province by lot.
Nimrod the son of Cush, whose grandfather Noah was, abode Genesis 10. 8. of the
reign of Nimrod.
with his men in the land of the Chaldeans, and was their first king, and the
first king of Babylon. He was Nimrod was the first king that warred upon his
neighbors.
the first that began to extend his bounds by force upon his neighbors,
sending whole companies of people into many and diverse countries, to lay the
foundations of other kingdoms, as histories do give us certain knowledge
thereof. This is the cause why many establish the first Monarchy in Assyria
under him. We read also in good authors, that the first and ancient kings of
Egypt kept themselves a long time in this heroical virtue, which Of the happy
reign of the king* of Egypt.
had procured unto them their dignity. They lived not disorderedly, as those
do, who because of their dominion, judge their own will to be a just law for
them, but they followed the constitutions of laws, as well in the gathering of
their duties and tributes, as in their manner of life. They used the service of
Noble men's and of They used the service only of Noble men's children, and they
well learned
Princes children only, who were of the age of twenty years, and were
instructed in all sciences. The reason whereof was, that the king being pricked
forward with the sight of the^ that were about him, might beware how he
committed any thing worthy of reproach. And truly there is nothing that
corrupts Princes so much as vicious servants, who seek to please their
sensual desires and affections. When the king arose in the morning, he was
bound first to take and receive all the letters and requests that were brought
unto him, that answering necessary matters first, all his affairs might be
guided by order and reason. Then he went to the Temple to offer sacrifice to
the gods, where the Prelate and chief Priest, after The Priests of Egypt used
to praise their Princes in the Temple before the people.
the sacrifice and prayers were ended, rehearsed with a loud voice in the
presence of the people, what virtues were in the king, what reverence and
religion toward the gods was in him, and what clemency and humanity toward
men. Moreover, he told that he was continent, just, noble-minded, true,
liberal, one that brideled his desires, and punished malefactors with a more
mild and light punishment than the greatness of their sin and offense
required, rewarding also his subjects with graces and gifts that were greater
than their deserts. This done, he exhorted the king to a happy life agreeable
to the gods, and likewise to good manners, by following after honor and virtue,
and therewithal propounded unto him certain examples of the excellent deeds
of ancient kings, The diet of the ancient kings of Egypt.
thereby to provoke him the rather thereunto. These kings lived with simple
meats, as with veale and birds for all dishes: they kept very exactly all the
laws and ordinances of their country in every point of their life, which was
no less directed even in the least things, than the simplest of their
subjects. And truly so long as the kings of Egypt were such zealous obseruers
of their laws, and of justice, and reigned peaceably among their subjects,
they brought many strange nations into their subjection, and gathered together
infinite riches, whereby they adorned their country with great buildings and
sumptuous works, and decked Of the second kind of Monarchy.
their towns with many gifts and benefits. The Barbarian kingdoms were the
second kind of Monarchy: namely, the ancient Monarchies of the Assyrians,
Medes, and Persians, whose Princes usurped Lordly rule over their goods and
persons, and governed their subjects as a father of a family does his slaves.
Which kind of government sauoureth more of a tyranny, than of a kingdom:
besides, it is directly against the law of nature, which keeps every one in
his liberty, and in the possession of his own goods. Notwithstanding when by
the law of Arms, and of just war, a Prince is made Lord over any people, they
properly belong to him that conquereth, and they that are overcome, are made
his slaves by the ancient The difference between a Lord-like Monarchy and a
tyranny.
consent of all nations: and this makes the difference between the Lord-like
Monarchy, and a tyrannic, which abuses free subjects as slaves. Of this second
kind of Monarchy was the kingdom of Persia (as Plato writes) under Cambyses,
Xerxes, and other kings, until the last Darius. For usurping more absolute
authority to rule, than Marks of a tyrannical government.
was convenient, they began to contemn their Vassals, and to account of them
as of slaves: and putting no more confidence in them, they entertained into
their service mercenarie soldiers and strangers, whereby they made their own
subjects unfit for war, and so in the end lost their estate, when it seemed
to have attained to the top of worldly prosperity. Such is the estate of the
Turk at this Of the estate of the Turk.
day, wherein he is sole Lord, commanding over his subjects in rigorous manner,
as well over the Musulmans, as Christians, and Jews. He uses in his principal
affairs, which concern peace and war, and matters of government, the
service of runnagate slaves, whom he places in authority, changes or
deposes as he thinks good, without peril and envy: yea he strangleth them
upon the least suspicion or dislike conceived of them, not sparing his own
children and others of his blood, if they anger him. So did Sultan Solomon
deal with Hibrahim Bascha, who was The death of Hibrahim Bascha.
almost of equal authority with him: insomuch that he was there called the
Seignour, king of the Ianitzaries, the Bascha, and king of the men of Arms.
Nevertheless in one night, wherein he made him stay and sup with him, and lie in
his own chamber, he caused him to be slain, and his body to be cast into the
sea. The morrow after he seized upon his goods, as confiscate, and carried them
away: and yet no man ever knew the cause of his death, except it were this,
that he was grown too great, and consequently suspected of his master, who
was a Tyrant, rather than a The Turk disposes of all Lordships at his
pleasure.
King. Likewise he keeps in his hands all the Lordships of his kingdom,
which he distributeth to men of war, who are charged to maintain a certain
number of men of Arms, and of horses, according to the rate of their reuenew:
and when it pleases him he takes them away again. Neither is there any man
in all the countries under his obedience, that possesses Towns, Castles, and
Villages, or dwells in strong houses, or that dare build higher than one
story, or than a Dooue-house. The great Of the Estate of Moscouia.
Knes, or Duke of Moscouia, exceeds for severity and rigor of commanding,
all the Monarchs in the world, having obtained such authority over his
subjects both Ecclesiastical and secular, that he may dispose of their goods
and lives at his pleasure, so that none dare gainesay him in any thing. They
confess publicly, that the will of their prince is the will of God, and that
whatsoever Of the king of Ethiopia.
he does, is done by the will of God. The king of Ethiopia is also a Lordlike
Monarch, having (as Paulus Iouius affirms) 50. kings no less subject unto
him than slaves. The king of Ethiopia whipped his Lords like slaves.
And Frauncis Aluarez writes, that he has seen the great Chancellor of that
country scourged stark naked with other Lords, as the very slaves of the
prince, wherein they think themselves greatly honored. The Of the kingdom of
Peru.
Emperor Charles the fifth, having brought under his obedience the kingdom of
Peru, made himself sovereign Lord thereof in regard of goods, which the
subjects have not, but as they farm them, or for term of life at the Of the
third kind of Monarchy.
most. The third kind of Monarchy, whereof the Ancients made mention, was that
of Lacedemonia, wherein the king had not absolute power, but in time of war
out of the country, and a certain pre-eminence over the sacrifices. We made
mention of their government before. The first kings in Rome were sacrificers
also, and afterward, the emperors called themselves Pontifices, that is, chief
bishops: and those of Constantinople were consecrated, as What kings took upon
them sovereignty in religion.
our kings of France are. In like manner the Caliphaes of the Sarasins were
kings and chief bishops in their religion: the one in Bagdet, the other in
Cayre. The king of Calecuth is chief of his religion, and for this cause goes
before the other kings of India in dignity, and is called Samory, that is to
say, God on earth. The Pope commands over the temporalties of the church,
called S. Peter's patrimony, as king: and is reast of the latin christian
churches, as head of the religion, I mean in those places, and of those
persons, where he is so taken and acknowledged. The king of England certain
years past took upon him the title of king and supreme governor of the
Church. The fourth Of the 4. kind of monarchy which is elective
kind of monarchy is elective, not hereditarie: in some places for term of
life, as the empire of Almaigne, the kingdom of Polonia, of Bohemia, and of
Hungaria: in other places for a certain time, as was the Dictatorship at Rome.
These estates are not commonly so sure and durable as those that are
hereditarie, because of the practices and forestalling of voices, which are for
the most part used, whereupon seditions arise, to the great detriment of those
kingdoms. For the prince being dead, the estate remains The dangerous state
of an elective kingdom when the prince is dead.
in a pure Anarchie, without king, without lord, without government, and in
danger of ruin, like to a ship without a Pilote, which is ready to be cast
away with the first wind that blows. Also a gate is set open to thieves and
murderers, who kill and slay at their pleasure upon hope of impunitie: as it is
commonly to be seen (as histories rehearse) after the death of the kings of
Thunes, of the Examples thereof in the kingdoms of Thu^es, of Eg^pt. The great
disorder in Rome vp^n the death of the Pope.
Souldans of Egypt, and of the Popes of Rome: where the seat being vacant, the
first thing that is commonly done, is the breaking open of prisons, the killing
of iailers, the letting out of guilty persons, and the revenging of injuries
by all possible means: and this continues until the college of cardinals
have agreed upon a successor. And in deed, in the year 1522. two were
executed, against whom it was proved, that at sundry tumults moved at this
election, they had slain an hundredth and sixteen men. In the empire of
Germany.
As touching the Empire of Almaigne, their histories are full of
impouerishmentes fallen upon them through the election of their Emperors, as
well by civil wars, as by murders and poisonings. So that within three
hundredth In the Popedom.
and threescore years since the Empire fell under the election of seven
princes, eight or nine Emperors have been slain or poisoned, besides those
that have been shamefully thrust out of their imperial seat. Ecclesiastical
persons also have not wanted civil wars about their elections, wherein no
such provision could be made, but that two and twenty Popes were cut off, All
elective princes are either taken indefinitely, or out of certain estates.
and many thrust out of their seat: as may be seen in the Registers of the
Vatican. Now we must note further, that among the elective estates, every
election is either of such persons as the Electours like of, as in Germany
they do not only choose for emperoures the princes of Almaigne out of diverse
families, but sometime strangers have been chosen, as Alphonsus king of
Spain, and Richard Duke of Cornwall, and brother to king Henry the third: or
else it is out of certain inferior estates, as The Souldans of Cayre chosen
out of the Mammelucks.
the Pope out of the College of Cardinals, and not long since the Souldan of
Cayre out of the Mammeluckes: unto which degree of honor none could ascend,
except before he had been a slave and a runnagate Christian: so that afterward
he commanded absolutely in Egypt and Soria. This estate having continued about
three hundredth years, was not long since quite overthrown by Sultan Selym
king of the Turks, who took the last Souldane, and caused him to be carried
upon an old The great mastership of Malta elective, and that also of Prussia.
Cammell all a-long Cayre, and then to be hanged upon one of the gates of that
City. The great master of Malta is chosen by the chief Priors of his
religion: as that also of Prussia was before the agreement made with the king
of Polonia, by which composition his estate was Of the fifth kind of Monarchy
turned into a Duchy, subject to the crown of Poland, and of elective made
hereditarie. The fifth kind of Monarchy is hereditarie, and is properly called
royal and which is hereditarie.
lawful: whether the king come to the estate by right of succession, as
Thucidides writes of the ancient kings: or whether the kingdom be given by
virtue of the law, without regard had to daughters, or to males descending The
Salick law excludes daughters and their sons.
of them, as it is in this kingdom, by the Salicke law: or whether it be
given as a mere gift, as the kingdoms of Naples and Sicill were given to
Charles of France, and since given again to Jews of France, first Duke of
Aniow: whether it be left by will, as the kings of Thunis, Fez, and Marocke
used to do, and as it was practiced also by Henry the eight, king of England,
Kingdoms left by will.
who left his kingdom to his son Edward, appointing Mary after him, and
after her Elizabeth, or by what other means so ever the Prince becomes lord
of the estate, his monarchy is always royal and lawful, if he in like manner
be obedient to the laws of nature, as he desires that his subjects should
be toward him, leauyng to every one his natural liberty and propriety of
his goods, and looking to the profit and commodity of the Commonwealth.
This kingly government Aristotle compares to Oeconomie. For although a father
of a family govern his house after his pleasure, yet he respects the
commodity of his family. Under this happy form of government, being Of
the happy government of the estate of France.
the best of all, we may boast that we live in France, through the goodness
of our kings, who neither ordain, nor put any thing in execution, but by
mature deliberation and counsel, which they take with the princes of their
blood, and with other notable and grave persons whom they call near unto
them, as though their sovereign power were ruled and moderated. For first the
king commands nothing that takes effect, if it be not signed by his
Secretaries, and sealed with his great seal: that is to say, seen The
Chancellor of France must approve all matters before they can pass.
and approved by the Chancellor, who is a severe Controuler of all matters
that pass. All the kings letters must always of necessity be approved by
the judges to whom they are directed, and examined not only whether they were
obtained by privy insinuation or fraudulent dealing, but also whether they be
lawful or unlawful. Yea in criminal matters, the re-inabling of such as
before were not capable of offices or dignities, writs of repeal from
banishment, pardons and remissions, are skanned with such rigor by them, that
the procurers of such letters are compelled to deliver them bare-headed and
kneeling, and to offer themselves prisoners, of what estate soever they be: in
so much that oftentimes men are condemned and executed with their pardons about
them. As for the gifts and expenses of the king, whether they be Officers in
France sworn to let nothing pass that is hurtful to the realm,
notwithstanding the king his commandment.
ordinary or extraordinary, the chamber of accounts examineth them narowly,
and many times cutteth off such as have no good ground: by reason that the
officers are sworn to let nothing pass to the detriment of the realm,
notwithstanding any letters of commandment whatsoever. Among other things the
king may not alienate his crown revenues, without some cause known to the
said officers of accounts, and to the parliaments. And which is more, public
treaties with neighbor states, edicts and decrees have no authority before
they are published in the high courts. By which moderation his power is not
lessened, but made surer, more durable, and less burdensome to his subjects,
being wholly separated from tyranny, which is hated of God and men, as we may
have further knowledge by discoursing thereof particularly. So that over and
besides those five kinds of monarchies mentioned of us, tyranny may be put for
the sixth, which we may call that, wherein the monarch treading under foot the
laws of nature, abuses the liberty of free subjects, as if they were slaves,
and other men's goods as his own. Among Of a tyranny, and of the name of a
tirant.
the ancients the name of tyrant was honorable, and signified nothing else
(being a Greek word) but a prince that had gotten the government of the
estate with out the consent of his subjects, and of a companion had made
himself a master, whether he were a wise and just prince, or cruel and unjust.
And in deed most of them became wicked to make sure their estate, life and
goods, knowing that they were fallen into many men's hatred, because they had
invaded the sovereignty. In this respect therefore was this dominion and rule
called tyrannical, because it governed in lord-like manner without right over
free men, compelled and forced to obey. But generally we may call that a
tirannie, when the prince accounts all his will as a just law, and has no
care either of piety, justice, or faith, but does all things for his own
private profit, revenge, or pleasure. And as a good king conformeth himself
to The difference between a good king and a tyrant.
the laws of God and nature, so a tyrant treads them under foot: the one
strives to enriche his subjects, the other to destroy them: the one takes
revenge of public injuries, and pardons his own, the other cruelly
reuengeth injuries done to himself, and forgiueth those that are offered to
others: the one spares the honor of chaste women, the other triumphs in
their shame: the one takes pleasure to be freely admonished, and wisely
reproved when he has done amiss, the other misliketh nothing so much, as a
grave, free, and virtuous man: the one makes great account of the love of his
people, the other of their fear: the one is never in fear but for his
subjects, the other stands in awe of none more than of them: the one
burtheneth his as little as may be, and then upon public necessity, the other
suppeth up their blood, gnaweth their bones, and sucketh the marrow of his
subjects to satisfy his desires: the one gives estates and offices to meet
with briberie and oppression of the people, the other sells them as dear as
may be, and cares not for the oppression of his subjects: the one in time of
war has no recourse but to his subjects, the other warreth against none but
them: the one has no guard or garrison but of his own people, the other none
but of strangers: the one rejoices in assured rest, the other languisheth in
perpetual fear: the one is honored in his life time, and longed for after
his death, the other is defamed in his life, and rent in pieces after his
death. Examples hereof are Diogenes girdeth Dionysius.
in every man's sight. And therefore Diogenes the Sinopian meeting one day in
the city of Corinth with Dionysius the younger, tyrant of Syracusa, who was
then brought into the estate of a private man, banished from his country, and
fallen from his dignity, spoke thus unto him: Truly Dionysius thou art now
in an estate unworthy of thee. The tyrant standing still withal, made him
this answer: I like thee well Diogenes, because thou have compassion of my
miserable fortune. What? (replied the Philosopher) do thou think that I
pity thee? I am rather grieved to see such a slave as thou, who deseruest to
grow old and to die in that cursed estate of a tyrant, as thy father did, to
take thy pleasure in such safety, and to pass away thy time freely amongst
us without fear. And to say truth, tirannie is such a miserable condition,
that even they that practice it and glory therein, are constrained many times
to confess with their own mouth, that no Of the miserable condition of
tyrants.
kind of life is so wretched as theirs. This self tyrant Dionysius, when he
was in the greatest glory of his estate, declared as much to Democles, one of
his familiar friends, who had said that he was most happy. Will thou (quoth
Dionysius to him) enjoy my felicity but for one day only? Whereunto when
Democles agreed, Democles was quickly weary of the estate of Dionysius.
he caused him to be served at the table as himself was wont to be, with all
the magnificence that could be devised, hanging in the mean while a sword
right over his head, which was tied to the roof aloft only by one hair of a
horse tail. When Democles perceived that, he was well contented to make a
short dinner, and to pass away the rest of the day in his former estate. Lo,
(quoth the tyrant then unto him) how happy our life is, which A tyrant cannot
long continue.
with all our armed guard hangs but by a little thread. Moreover, the reign
of tyraunts being without measure and reason, and guided only by violence
cannot be of any long continuance. This is that which Thales the wise man
said, that there was nothing so strange or rare, as an old tyrant. And
albeit they live miserably in perpetual distrust of every one, yea, of their
nearest kindred, yet their end is more wretched. For there Tyrants have
commonly an evil end.
were few of them that died not a cruel and extraordinary death, most of
them being slain and murdered: and others persecuted with strange griefs,
died like mad and desperate men, through the remembrance of their corrupt
life, and of the cruelties which they had committed. In ancient time tyranny
was so detestable, Examples of the extraordinary deaths of tyrants.
that even scholars and women sought to win the reward of honor by killing
tyraunts: as Aristotle the Logitian did, who slew a tyrant of Sycionia, and as
Thebe, who killed her husband Alexander, tyrannt of the Phereans. Thirty
tyraunts were slain in one day in the City of Athens, by Theramenes,
Thrasibulus, and Archippus, who had but threescore and ten men to execute
that enterprise. Leander tyrant of Cyrena, was taken alive, and being sewed
into a leather bag, was cast into the sea. Aristodemus tyrant of Cumes,
took Xenocrita by force, being a wealthy citizens daughter whom he had
banished, and keeping her with him as his wife, she stirred up Thymoteles and
others to recover the liberty of their country, who being safely let into
the tyrants chamber by her, slew Aristodemus. Besides, the auncientes had
appointed great rewards and recompenses Rewards appointed for murderers of
tyrants.
for the murderers of tyrauntes: namely, titles of Nobility, of Prowess, of
Chivalry, images, and honorable titles: to be short, the goods of the
tyrauntes were given unto them, as to the true deliuerers of their Country.
Now albeit we said, that this word tyrant was taken amongst them for him
that made himself sovereign Prince of his own authority, without
election, or right of succession, or lotte, or just war, or special calling
of GOD, yet we must not infer this consequent, that therefore it is lawful
to kill every Prince that exercises It is not lawful for any to kill his
Prince, although a tyrant.
tyranny. For it belongs in no wise either to any particular subject, or to
all in general, to seek the honor or life of the Prince, that is absolutely
and lawfully sovereign, as we have already discoursed. Now to conclude our
present speech, we may see how far the establishment of this French Monarchy
is from any inclination, and from all things that may seem to give any
entrance, life and preservation to a tirannie: nay it is clean contrary
thereunto, and goes beyond all monarchies that ever were or are amongst the
sundry nations of men, for goodness and mildness of government: which
ought wonderfully to stir up Frenchmen to persevere in love, obedience, and
fidelity toward their king, for which strangers have always praised them.


Of the Education of a Prince in good manners and conditions. Chap. 59.
ARAM. THe effect of custom is wonderful, yea it is so power-full, that it
passes nature, especially Custom goes beyond nature in that which is evil.
in vice and dissolutenes. Wherein if men be once plunged, it is a very hard
matter, especially if they be young, to draw them out of it. But further when
they know that they have in their hands an unbridled license, and a
sovereign authority to enjoy their lusts and desires at their pleasure, a
man may then say, that all hope of amendment is utterly perished in them, and
that it is altogether impossible to gain any thing of them by counsel,
instruction or reason. Therefore it is very certain, that the principal hope
and expectation of a Prince (after request made to God, that by nature he may
be of a good and teach-able disposition) ought to be grounded always in his
education The chief hope of a prince depends (next to God) of his
institution.
and first institution, which being either good or badde, will bring forth
like effects, to the great good or hurt of his subjects. Now then (my
Companions) let us discourse of that which we think ought to be observed in
the right instruction of a Prince in all kind of good manners, and commendable
conditions, as well for his own profit, as for the common utility of all
those over whom he is to command.


ACHITOB. Men are commonly careful to strengthen with rampires the banks of
rivers, which receine into them great quantity of waters. But it is needful
A notable comparison.
that more diligence be used in preserving and fortifying the mind of a young
prince with strong reasons, grave sentences, and most learned precepts of
wisdom, against the greatness of his fortune, the great abundance of
wealth, riote, delights, and flattery, disguised with fidelity and liberty,
which, like to a mighty stream, fall from some rock to ouer-whelme and to
drown the weak seeds of Virtue naturally in a Prince.


ASER. Why great care is to be had in the institution of a prince.
Men must be so much the more careful in the dressing and tillage of that
spirit and soul, which they know ought to be vigilant, wise, prudent, and
just for the benefit of many. Such a one is the king or magistrate, or any
other man that is to deal in government, and in public affairs. For to fill
that soul with virtue and goodness, is to profit an infinite number by the
meaues of one. Now let us hear AMANA discourse upon this matter.


AMANA. All kingdoms under which men do live at this day, are either
hereditarie, or given by election. The kingdom of France goes only from male
to male.
Some that are hereditarie go by succession from male to male only, as this
kingdom of France. And this did the Frenchmen wisely ordain in the
beginning of their Monarchy by the Salicke law, by which providence and
foresight, they have continued in the same kind of government almost one
thousand and two hundredth years, so that the crown never went out of their
nation, neither has the royal lineage changed oftener than thrice in so long
continuance: which thing never happened to any other Monarchy or Seignorie to
any man's knowledge. In other kingdoms, when males are wanting daughters
succeed, as in Spain, England, and Scotland. Moreover in hereditarie
kingdoms, where males succeed, in some places that honor is always reserved
for the eldest, who gives an honest pension to his younger brethren, as it is
in France: or if no regard be had to birthright, either he is preferred that
is fittest to govern, or he that is most warlike, and in greatest favor The
barbarous cruelty of Selim.
with the soldiers, as in Turkey, Selim the first of that name, being the
third and youngest son of Bajazet the second, usurped the Empire by the aid
of the Ianitzaries upon his father, whom he caused to be poisoned, and slew
Achmat and Corcuth his two elder brothers, with all his nephews, and others of
Ottomans race, saying that nothing was pleasaunter than to rule when all fear
of kindred was taken away. In some places they kill not their brethren and
kindred, but shut them up in some The custom of electing of a king in Ethiopia.
most sure and safe place of custody, as they use or are accustomed to do in
Ethiopia, where he that must bear rule, is kept alone, the rest are sent to a
very high and strong mountain, called the mountain of the Israelites; from
whence none of the male kind may ever come forth, except Prester John die
without heir of his body to succeed him in the crown: for then he that is
next unto it, and known to be woorthiest and fittest, is taken forth. By this
means that great kingdom has continued very long without civil war or
murder, and never The custom of succession in Calecuth.
wanted offspring of the royal race. In Calecuth, when the king dies,
although he have male children, or nephews by his brother, yet none of them
succeed in the kingdom, but his sisters son: and if they fail, the next of
the blood royal comes to the crown. They ground this upon a foolish and fond
superstition which they have in causing the Queen to be defloured by some
young priest called Bramin, in whose custody she remains ever after, so long
as the King is abroad. Whereupon they presume, and peradventure not without
good cause, that the children which descend or are borne of that Lady, hold
more of the priest than of the prince. Concerning kingdoms that go by
election, we have spoken of them already. Now because it is a very hard
matter to change him that is once chosen in such a kingdom, greater
consideration must be had in making the election, lest the ouer-sight of one
hour procure a perpetual repentance. But where the prince is by nature and
not by election, men must labor by careful industry and diligence to bring
him up, and to instruct him well by replenishing his mind with sound opinions
from his infancy, and by casting upon his new ground seeds of virtue and
honesty, which by little and little may grow and wax ripe with age, and
having once taken root, may abide steadfast and firm to his lives end. For
there is no time When a prince may best be corrected.
better and fitter to frame and to correct a prince in, than when he knows not
that he is a prince. For if he learn to obey from his infancy, when he
comes to the degree of commanding, he applies and behaueth himself a great
deal better with his subjects, than they that from their youth have been
always free and exempted from subjection. For by such education or bringing
up, a Prince adds to his royal greatness, and to those fashions which great
men have by nature, courtesy and gentle behavior, which cannot but be very
acceptable to his people, and contain them more willingly in their duty of
obedience. Therefore the prince in his young and tender years must be
diligently employed, not only in withdrawing him from dishonest things, but
also in causing him to taste of virtue, and to have some precepts thereof
engraven in his brain, until in the end he understand all that belongs to
his duty, and whatsoever else may help him forward to lead a good and
happy life. If wise fathers with great care bring up, and instruct their
children, who shall succeed them but in the government of some little house in
the country, how much greater care and labor ought to be taken in teaching him
well and wisely, who is to succeed in the Empire over much people, and whose
life ought to be the discipline of their manners and conditions? For this cause
a good and prudent prince must take pains in causing his children to be brought
up, that he remember he has begotten them for the Commonwealth, The best
token of remembrance that a Prince can leave behind him.
not to serve his private affections. Let him know, that although he erect a
great number of images, build sumptuous houses, establish good and wholesome
Ordinances, yet he cannot leave a more excellent mark of his, than a son,
who degenerating in nothing, represents the goodness of his father by
virtuous actions. For he dies not that leaves behind him a lively image of
himself. And truly it is the perfection of an excellent prince to rule in
such sort, as if he would strive, that his like for goodness and justice How
a prince ought to live himself, and to bring up his children.
could not succeed him, and so to bring up his children, as if he desired
that they should surmount him in virtue. To this end therefore let him make
choice of all his subjects, yea from what place so ever, and gather together
virtuous and sincere men, uncorrupted, grave, and such as are learned not only
through precepts, but also through the experience of many things, to whom
their age breeds reverence, their good life authority, and their mildness
and gentle behavior What teachers a young prince must have.
love, and good will: that the tender spirit of the young prince, offended with
the rough dealyng of his teachers, may not begin to hate virtue before he
know it, nor yet corrupted through their ouer-great gentleness, degenerate and
starte aside where it ought not. Wherefore Seneca said, that a Prince his
teacher must have these two properties, He must know how to chide without Two
properties requisite in him that teaches a prince.
shaming of him, and how to praise him without flattery. Moreover, great care
must be had in making choice of all such persons, whether they are men,
women, children, or servants, as come near about him, either to govern, or
to serve him, or to keep him company. For seeing the most part of men's minds
incline to evil, and no child is so happily borne, but he may What manner of
persons must be about the prince.
be corrupted through wicked education, what may a man look for but very
great evils from that Prince, who, of what nature and spirit soever he be,
presently after he is out of his cradle, is stuffed with foolish and false
opinions, nourished among fond women, brought up in the midst of lascivious
maidens, of lost children, vile and abject flatterers, of iuglers and plaiers,
of drunkards, of dice-plaiers and inuenters of pleasures? briefly, in the midst
of such caitifes, amongst whom he hears and learneth nothing but pleasure,
delight, pride, arrogancy, covetousness, choler and tirannie, and so
departing from this school, takes unto him the scepter and government of his
Empire? Now he that is elected and chosen to undertake The duty of him that is
chosen to bring up the prince.
such a great and difficult charge, as is the education and instruction of the
prince, must bring with him a will worthy the same, considering with
himself, not how many benefices and bishoprikes he may get into his hands, but
how he may deliver up a virtuous prince unto his country, which puts all
her trust and confidence in him. Let him know that they do good to all the
people, To make a good prince is to do good to all his people.
who make them good me^ whom the people cannot want: as contrariwise, they that
mar and corrupt princes and kings, ought to be an abomination to all men, and
punished no less than they that put poison, not into a cup, but into a common
fountain, of which they see every body drink. First then he that has taken
this charge upon him, must narowly note whereunto the nature of the prince is
inclined, seeing it may be known by some signs even in his young years: as
whether he be not given to anger, to The inclination of a young prince must
first be known.
ambition, to desire of renown, to riot, to play, to covetousness, to revenge,
to war, or to tyranny. After, when he knows to what vice he is inclined, he
must fortify his mind against the same with good opinions and with holy
resolutions, and labor to change his heart, which is yet tender, into a habit
that is contrary to his nature. And when he perceives that his tender nature
inclines to honest and commendable things, or to such vices as will easily
change into virtues in princes well brought up, as to ambition and
prodigality, he must prick him forward, and help his good nature by diligent
travel. Neither must he use precepts only to withdraw the prince from
dishonest How a young prince must be taught.
things, and to procure in him a longing desire to do those things that are
virtuous, but he must labor to imprint and to root them in his memory by
diverse forms, now by sentences, another while by fables, after by comparisons,
then by examples, or by some notable sayings, engraven in rings, and painted in
tables. Briefly, if there be any other thing wherein this age takes pleasure,
let that be a mean to work in him a taste of virtue. Above al things special
regard is to be had, what opinions are engraven in the prince his brain. For
the whole order of his life proceeds from that fountain. And therefore he
must labor immediately to imprint in his mind holy and good opinions, which may
serve for a counter-poison against the common errors of the ignorant people:
but chiefly to instruct him thoroughly in gods truth, and in that which
concerns his salvation. He must persuade him, that whatsoever is Deu. 17. 18.
19 The law of God belongs to the prince.
taught in the law of God, belongs to none so much as to the prince, and that
as he is to reign by him, so likewise it belongs to his office to reign
according to his will, that he may enjoy prosperity in this world, and
eternal felicity in the blessed life to come. Let him be taught to love
virtue as the only good, and to hate vice as the only evil: let him know that
the one is followed no less with shame and dishonor, than the other with glory
and honor, especially in a prince, in whom if virtue take place, as it were in
a high watchtower, it shines so clearly, that the brightness thereof
remains long after his death. As for all worldly pomp, antiquity of
petigree, images and riches, they are but mere vanity and folly, not worthy
to be cared for, or to be admired by a virtuous prince. Let him be persuaded
that dignity, greatness and majesty are not to be sought after by the help of
fortune, or by humane means, but by wisdom, integrity of life and manners, and
by virtuous and noble deeds. Plato says not without When a Commonwealth is
happy.
cause, that a Commonwealth will never be happy until princes play the
Philosophers, or Philosophers take the rudder of the Empire in hand. Now his
meaning is not to call him a Philosopher, that is learned in Logike, in natural
Philosophy, and in the Mathematics, but him, who with an untamed heart
despises the vain shadows of things, and follows after true goods. A
philosopher and The agreement between a Philosopher and a Christian.
a Christian differ but in name: and a prince well instructed in piety, is truly
both the one and the other. Therefore he ought to learn nothing sooner (next
to the law of God) than the moral philosophy of the ancients, which teaches
all virtue. Is there any thing more foolish than to esteem highly of a prince
if he vaute well, if he play well at tennise, if he be stout and strong:
briefly, if he be cunning in some things, which peradventure a peasant would
do better than he, and in the mean while he is puffed up with pride, he
polleth his people, and sporteth himself in all kind of dissoluteness and
pleasure? What honor is it for a prince to go far beyond the common sort in
precious stones, gold, purple, train of servants, and in other ornaments of
the body, and in every thing that is falsely called good, and in the mean while
to be far inferior in the true goods of the soul to many of his people, and
those of lowest calling? These opinions, as holy and inviolable laws, must be
engraven in the heart of a young prince, and must be, as it were the first
lines that are to be drawn in the void table of his soul, namely, that he
must strive that none excel him in the goods of the soul, in wisdom,
magnanimity, temperance and justice. Wherein a prince ought to excel others.
Frugalitie, modesty, and sobriety in other men may be attributed either to
poverty or to niggardlines, but in a prince they cannot but be a note of
te^perance, I mean, when he uses goods modestly, who has as much as he will.
Ancient men called that prudence miserable, which was gotten by the experience
of things, because it is bought with public loss and calamity. But such kind
of experience ought to be farthest off from a Prince, because the longer it is
a learning, the greater cause is it of many evils unto al his people. If Scipio
Africanus had reason to say, that this speech, I had not thought it, did not
beseem a wise man, how much more unseemly is it for a Prince, who cannot utter
the same without his great harm, and greater to the Commonwealth? For as in a
voyage the fault of a common Mariner (said Agapetus) does but little hurt,
The fault of a Prince is much more hurtful than that of a private man.
whereas the slip of a Pilot brings shipwreck: so in monarchies the offense
of a private man is more hurtful to himself than to the Commonwealth, but if
the prince begin to fail, he hurts every one. This is the cause why the mind
of a prince must especially be instructed with good resolutions and sentences,
to the end he may be skillful A prince ought to be skillful by reason and not
by use.
by reason and not by use. For then the counsel of aged men will supply that
experience of things which is wanting in him. He must be given to understand,
that his life is in the face of all the world, that he can do nothing that will
be hid, and therefore if he be good, it must needs turn to the great benefit of
many; if wicked, to their hurt likewise: because the prince is always the very
portrature after which subjects conform themselves. He must know that the
greater honor is given unto him, the more he is to strive that he may be
worthy of it, looking more to his own doyngs and actions, than to the
praises that men give him, which he must believe and receive, according How a
prince is to receive the praises that are given him.
as he behaueth himself. For if he rule well, they are due unto him; if ill,
he is honored and praised, either through constraint, or of flattery: or else
it is to show him under hand what he ought to be. Let him know that as God
has placed the Sun and the Moon in the heavens for a resemblaunce of his
divinity: so a prince is the like representation and light in a kingdom, as
long as he has the fear of GOD, and the observation of justice imprinted in
him. For these two things make their life divine and celestial, that are
placed in high degree of power and authority: as contrariwise, the contempt of
piety and justice, makes it beast-like and savage. As God the giver of all
things stands not in need of any man's service to receive a good turn of
him: so it is the duty of a worthy prince, who represents the figure of the
eternal Good precepts for princes set out by comparisons.
king, to profit every one without respect of his own commodity and glory.
As God is not touched with any affections or passions, but rules and governs
all things perfectly by his providence: so after his example a prince laying
aside the perturbations of his soul must follow reason only in all his
doings. As there is nothing more common than the sun, which imparteth of her
light to all the celestial bodies: so a Prince must be always ready to
profit the Commonwealth, and have within him the light of wisdom, to the
end that if others loose their brightness, yet he may never be overtaken with
darkness. As the Sun when it is highest in the Zodiac moves slowest: so
the higher that a Prince is lift up in greatness and authority, the more gentle
and gracious he ought to be, keeping himself from doing any thing that
beseems not a Prince. Therefore let him think, that nothing is more vile and
abject, than for him that is called a king and Prince of free men, to become a
slave to riot, choler, covetousness, ambition, and other vices of like quality,
which are most vile and cruel masters. He must be so affected toward his
subjects, as a good father of a family is toward those of his household:
because a kingdom is nothing else but a great family, and A kingdom is but a
great family.
a king the father of a great many. For although he pass them in greatness and
authority, yet he is of one and the same kind with them, a man commanding men,
and free over those that are free, not over beasts or slaves, as Aristotle
says very well. And if he would have that excellent title, which we give to
God the Prince of all men, calling him Our father, he must procure it not by
threatenings and fear, but by good deeds, by meekenes and humanity, which
will stand him in steed of a sure Guard to preserve his estate. For the love
and loialtie of his subjects will The safety of Monarchies depends of the
love and loialtie of subjects.
greatly increase thereby, of which the assurance of Monarchies depends. When
the nobility and common people use to fear, not him, but for his sake that
commands them, then he sees with many eyes, hears with many ears, and
perceives a far off whatsoever is done. Let the Prince have this saying of
Plutarke always engraven in his soul: That nothing here below pleases God
more, or draws nearer to his divine nature, than to rule well in all justice
and equity, which is the chiefest charge of his vocation, and that unto which
he is straightly bound in respect The mutual duties of the Prince and his
subjects.
of his subjects. For as the subject owes obedience, aid, and reverence to
his Lord: so the Prince owes justice, defense, and protection, to his
subjects. When a Prince shows himself upright, indifferent, and true of his
word to all, it is the greatest felicity that can happen to a Commonwealth,
and that which crowns the Monarch What praise a Prince is to seek after.
thereof with greater glory and honor. And truly a Prince ought to be more
careful to obtain that praise and reputation which proceeds of goodness and
virtue, than that which comes of strength and power. For as the divine
nature, unto which kings must endeavor to conform their woorks and actions,
excels all other essences and natures chiefly in three things, that is, in
immortality, power, and goodness: so a Prince must strive to excel his
subjects, not so much in the immortality of his name, or in power, as in
goodness, which virtue is certainly much more venerable, and draws The whole
world is immortal in respect of substance, but not of qualities.
nearest to the divinity. For to be incorruptible and immortal, the four
Elements, and the whole frame are endued with that quality, as natural
Philosophers maintain. And as for strength and power, earthquakes, lightnings,
tempestuous whirlewinds, floods and inundations of waters, are full of force
and might: but nothing is partaker of justice, vprightnes, and equity, except
it be divine, and that by the means of reason and understanding. So that (as
the same Plutark says) we only are capeable of that Good of virtue that
comes from God. To be short, let the Prince be diligently taught whilst he
is young, and labor to know how he may adorn his name with works answerable
to those excellent Epithits and titles, wherewith Julius Pollux, who was
governor to the Emperor Commodus in his young years, Excellent titles of a
good Prince.
sets forth a good king. He calls him Father, gentle, acceptable,
merciful, prudent, just, curteouus, noble-minded, free, a contemner of money,
not subject to passions, but commanding over himself, one that overcomes
pleasures, and uses reason, quick of judgment, sharp, provident, good in
counselling, just, sober, godly, and full of good religion, careful over the
welfare of men, constant, firm, no deceiuer, minding great things, decked with
authority, industrious, a quick dispatcher of affairs, careful over those
whom he commands, a Savior, ready to do good, slow to revenge, always one
and the same without turning aside, inclining greatly to justice, easy to have
access unto, courteous in speech gentle to them that have to deal with him,
plain, a lover of virtuous and valiant men, who nevertheless are not desirous
of war, a lover of peace, a peacemaker, a precise obseruer thereof, borne to
correct the manners of people, skillful in discharging the duty of a king and
Prince, having knowledge to make good laws, borne to profit every one, and of
a divine form. A Prince of noble birth shall feel himself greatly provoked
to desire and seek after these excellent gifts and graces, through the
consideration of examples propounded unto him, concerning the lives and
Examples of former ages must be propounded to Princes.
deeds of so many famous and worthy men, as are at this day after innumerable
ages revived again by means of histories. And it cannot be but he will be
greatly pricked forward to conform himself unto them, thereby to give like
occasion to good wits, to write, singe, and publish his praises. What Prince
will not burn with a jealous desire of virtue, when he hears that the only
fame thereof in the person of Scipio Africanus allured and ravished thieves
Scipio Africanus.
and robbers with such an admiration, that when they understood that he was in
a house far from any town, they did beset it round, and as he stood in his
defense to drive them away, they threw down their weapons, assuring him, that
they came thither only to see and to reverence him, as in deed they did? What
prince will not be possessed with joy, when he hears, that Menander king of
the Menander.
Bactrians was so beloved of his subjects for his justice and virtue, that
after his death the cities were in great contention, which of them should have
the honor of his burial, for the appeasing of which strife, order was taken
that each of them should make a tomb? Who will not be moved with love toward
the goodness of Traian Emperor Traian.
of the Romans, when he hears his Panegyricall Oration, wherein Pliny,
after he had extolled him to heaven, concludes thus: That the greatest
happiness, which could come to the Empire, was, that the Gods took example by
the life of Traian? Who will not desire the honor that Agesilaus.
king Agesilaus received, when he was fined by the Ephoryes, because he had
stolen away the hearts, and won the love of all his Citizens to himself
alone? Who will not Aristides.
wish to have the surname of Aristides the just, as divine and royal a title
as ever king could obtain, rather than as many use to be called Conquerours,
Besiegers, Thunderers? Briefly, unto these examples oppose the reprehension and
mark of perpetual infamy, which histories set upon evil Princes, and it
cannot be but that a Prince well brought up, and exercised in the love and
study of virtue, will be very desirous to show forth the fruits and effects
thereof, especially if he be well instructed in the fear of God, and knowledge
of his duty, whereof he shall have perfect understanding in the law of God,
which he is commanded Deuteronomy. 17. 19.
by the sovereign king of all to have with him, to read in it all the days of
his life, and to obey it, to the end he may reign happily in earth, and
finally in heaven.


Of the office and duty of a King. Chap. 60.
AMANA. AVgustus Caesar hearing some rehearse, that Alexander the great, after
he had finished most of his conquests at two and thirty years of age, said,
that he took great care to know what he should do afterward: I wonder (said
this wise Monarch) at the It is as hard a matter to govern well, as to get an
Empire.
speech of that great Prince, whereby it seems he thought that there was
less to do in well ordering, ruling, and preserving a great Empire once
entirely gotten, than in conquering the same. And surely to speak truth, there
is nothing more difficult than to reign well. Moreover, it is better for a
Prince to govern prudently, and to rule according to his estate, than to
invade and possess another man's country: namely, if he consider, that God,
being so gracious unto him as Why Princes are placed in their thrones.
to bring innumerable persons under his obedience, has chiefly established him
to keep them in the knowledge and observation of true religion, to rule them
by good laws, to defend them by arms, and in all things to be so careful of
their good, that they may esteem of him, as of their father and sheepeheard.
Now seeing we have summarily entreated of the education and institution of a
prince under the charge of a teacher and governor, let us in this place (my
Companions) consider of his office and duty, when he reigns with full
authority over his subsubiects.


ARAM. The good will of the people depends of the integrity of religion.
Forasmuch as integrity of religion, and the good will of the people are two
principal pillars upon which the safety of every Estate stands, the king
ought to procure the first, being therefore appointed by God over so many
millions of men: and the second without doubt depends of the former, which is
the only difference between a king and a tyrant, who rules by constraint.


ACHITOB. In a king is seen the ordinance of God, who is the author and
preserver of policies, and of good order. Therefore his fear and reason, must
never depart out of his mind, to the end that serving God, he may profit all
those that live under his dominion. But from thee ASER we look for the
discourse of this matter.


ASER. The seven Sages of Grecia being invited to a feast by Periander prince
of Corinth, were requested by him to enter into the discourse of the estate of
great men. The sayings of the seven wise men of Grecia touching the estate of
Princes.
Solon speaking first, said: That a sovereign king or prince cannot any way
procure greater glory to himself than by making a popular Estate of his
Monarchy: that is to say, by communicating his sovereign authority with his
subjects. Bias speaking next, said: By submitting himself first of all to the
laws of his country. Thalcs: I account that Lord happy that attaineth to old
age, and dies a natural death. Anacharsis: If he be the only wise man.
Cleobulus: If he trust none of those that are about him. Pittacus: If he be
able to preuatle so much, that his subjects fear, not him, but for him.
Chilon: A Prince must not set his mind upon any transitory or mortal thing,
but upon that which is eternal and immortal. Periander concluding upon these
opinions, said, that all these sentences seemed to him to dissuade a man of
good judgment, from desiring at any time to command over others. The Emperor
Traian writing Traians letter to the Senate, touching the careful estate of
Princes.
to the Senate of Rome, among other things, used these very words: I freely
confess unto you, that since I began to taste of the travels and cares which
this Imperial Estate brings with it, I have repented me a thousand times
that I took it upon me. For if there be great honor in having an Empire, there
is also very great pain and travel in governing the same. But over To what
false surmises a Prince is subject.
and besides, to what envy is he exposed, and to how many mislikings is he
subject that has others to govern? If he be just, he is called cruel: if
pitiful, he is despised: if liberal, he is thought to be prodigal: if he
lay up money, he is taken for covetous: if he be addicted to peace, he is
supposed to be a coward: if he be courageous, he is judged ambitious: if grave,
they will call him proud: if affable and courteous, he is termed simple: if
solitary, an hypocrite: and if he be merry, they will say he is dissolute.
After many other speeches, this good Emperor concluded, that although he
willingly accepted of his estate at the first, yet he was very sorrowful
afterward that he had so great a charge: because the sea and the Empire were
two pleasant things to look upon, but perilous to taste. Who is fittest to tule.
Divine Plato wrote also, that none was fit to govern an Empire, and to be a
Prince, but he that comes unto it through constraint, and against his will.
For whosoever desires the charge of a Prince, it must needs be, that he is
either a fool, not knowing how dangerous and full of care the charge of a King
is: or if he be a wicked man, that he minds nothing but how he may reign to
satisfy his pleasure and private profit, to the great hurt of the
Commonwealth: or else if he be ignorant, that he considers not how heavy
the burden is which he takes upon him. Therefore a wise Prince will not
think himself the happier, because he succeeds in a greater Empire and
kingdom, but remember rather, that he lays so much the more care and pain
upon his shoulders, and that he begins then to have less leisure, less
rest and happiness in passing away his time. In other persons, a fault is
pardoned in youth, and growing old, they are suffered to take their ease. But
he that is Head of a Commonwealth, because he is to travel for all, must be
neither young nor old. For he can-not commit a fault how small soever it be,
without the hurt of many men, nor yet rest from his duty, but it will turn to
the misery of his subjects. This caused the Philosophers to say, that a Prince
ought not to dedicate the Commonwealth to himself, but to addict himself to
the Commonwealth, and for the profit thereof always to be diligent, virtuous,
and wise, and so to govern his Empire, that he may be able easily to give a
reason of his charge. And because no man asks an The Prince must give account
to none but to God.
account of him in this life, he ought to be so much the more stirred up to
demand a straighter reckoning of himself, being assured that the time will
come, and that speedily, wherein he must yield it up before him, with whom
there is no respect of Princes, except in this, that they shall have the Judge
more rigorous against them, that have abused greater power and authority. To
begin therefore to handle the duty and office of a Prince: first, he must have
The first and principal duty of a Prince is to have the law of God before his
eyes. Psalm. 119.
the law of God continually before his eyes: he must engraue it in his soul,
and meditate upon the words and ordinances thereof, all the days of his life,
desiring of God to grant him the spirit of understanding to conceive them
well, and according to that divine rule to direct all his intents and actions
to the glory of that great, eternal, and Almightye King of Kings: as well
for the salvation of his own soul, which he ought to prefer before the rule
of the whole world: as for the good of those that are committed to his charge
to govern, teach and judge them. For it is most certain, that of the
knowledge of the truth in the Prince his heart, all good order of his Estate
depends: and that his piety is of The piety of the prince is of great force
with his subjects to stir them up to their duty.
great force to awaken his subjects in their duty: namely, when they see him
follow and cleave to true religion without faining and dissimulation.
Therefore he must carefully provide, that false doctrines, heresies,
blasphemies against the name of GOD and his truth, with other offenses in
matters of religion, be not openly broached and sown amongst the people, but
that some public form of Christian religion may always be seen in his
kingdom, which is the sure foundation of every well established Monarchy. But
herein that which I said before, is diligently to be noted: namely, that the
Prince through wisdom craved before at the hands of God, The Prince must be
sure that the religion he maintains is the just will of God.
must be well assured of his divine, just, and eternal will, and according to
that, take order that true piety may not be publicly violated and polluted by
an uncorrected liberty. Next, we will briefly comprehend all those points,
which ancient men both Philosophers and Christians The duties of a Prince
comprehended in three points.
have required in an absolute and perfect Prince, in three principal duties
and actions: that is, in ruling, judging and in defending. He must rule by good
laws, and by good example; judge by wisdom, providence, and justice; and
defend by prowes, care, and vigilancie. These duties, that excellent greek
Orator and Philosopher Isocrates seems to have covertly contained in these
words, Isocrates argument, whoreby he proves the good reign of a Prince.
which he wrote to Nicocles the Prince: This may prove unto thee that thou
have reigned well, if thou see^st that the people, which is subject unto thee,
increase in modesty and wealth under thy government. For good laws, justice,
and good example of life, make subjects better, and prudence joined with
fortitude and prowes, richer. Now that a good Prince (I call him good and just
that imploieth all his power to be such a one, being ready to spend his blood
and life for his people) may attain to these excellent qualities, his love,
and affection toward A Prince must love his subjects.
his subjects, is very necessary, as that which is able to preserve the
indissoluble bond of mutual good will between them and him, which is one of
the surest means He must begin reformation at himself.
to maintain great Estates and Monarchies. Next, he is to begin the good
ordering of his Estate at himself, and reform first of all, all disorder in
his own life and manners, and correct those things that are most secret in his
court: knowing that from thence forward he must live as it were in an open
Theater, where he is seen on every side, so that his life will be a discipline
and instruction of good or ill living unto others. Therefore let him strive to
excel those whom he rules, and to surmount them as far in virtues, as he
surpasses them in riches and honor. Amongst al those that follow him, he must
always have the wisest He must have the wisest next his person.
next his person, and call others from al parts near unto him, not refusing or
contemning any man of skill and reputation. He must often hear them, learn of
them, and being a Judge amongst such as are less skillful, strive to go beyond
the best learned through diligence and study. By which kind of exercises he
shall know how to govern the estate of his kingdom uprightly, and cannot but
do such things as are praise-woorthy. And forasmuch as common tranquillity and
public quietness is one principal end of civil society, The first duty of a
king toward his subjects.
the first duty of a good king toward his subjects, is to maintain them in
peace and concord. For it is impossible that a Commonwealth should flourish in
religion, justice, charity, integrity of life: briefly, in all things
necessary for the preservation thereof, if the subjects enjoy not an exceeding
great and assured peace. Let the Prince then without intermission, seek after
the safest means to keep his kingdom in quietness and rest: let him deliver
his subjects from calamity: let him be careful of al things which may Good
precepts for a Prince.
be profitable and commodious unto them, and let him command them with mildnes,
and teach them obedience by the vprightnes of his commandments. Let him not
suffer his people to be over insolent, nor yet to be trodden under foot and
oppressed: but let him take order, that such as are most honest may be
preferred to honors and offices, and that the rest may not any way be wronged.
He must alter those civil laws and customs of living, which being ill
established, are prejudicial to his subjects, and ordain all What manner of
laws are to be established in a Commonwealth.
just and profitable laws, agreeing with themselves, and such as breeding but
few suites among his people, may briefly judge and decide them according to
right and equity. In this point a good Prince must use great care and
diligence that justice may be well administered, to the preservation of every
man's right, and to the punishment of the wicked. This is that which the spirit
of God so often commands: namely, to execute judgment and righteousness,
Ierem. 22. 3.
to deliver the oppressed from the hands of the oppressor, not to vex the
stranger, the fatherles, nor the widow, to do no violence, nor shed innocent
blood. And these self same things must he cause to be observed by them that
are appointed to exercise justice in his name. Which because it was neglected
by many kings, they lost both life and kingdom, as we Philip lost his life
because he delaied justice.
read of Phillip king of Macedonia, a very mild Prince, and of an excellent
nature, who was nevertheless slain by Pausanias, because he delaied a long time
to let him have right and justice, concerning an injury which an other
Demetrius threw the supplications of his subjects into a water.
had offered him. Demetrius also lost his kingdom, because he could not abide
to hear his subjects, but especially for this matter. One day when many
supplications were presented unto him, he put them into the plaites of his
cloak, and passing over a bridge he threw them all into the water, and would
not once vouchsafe to read them: whereupon the people being filled with
indignation, rebelled against him. On the other side, a good Prince ought
freely, and at all hours of the day, to hear the complaints of his subjects,
and to provide thereafter, as one that is truly zealous of justice, clemency,
and goodness, which are rather divine than humane qualities, and most proper to
him that will conform himself as much as may be (as it becomes him) to that
heavenly virtue, which is always just and merciful, and (as Plutarke says)
rules all things without compulsion, mollifieng the necessity of obeying by
admonition and persuasion of reason. Nothing is more convenient for a
Sovereign than gentleness, for a Prince than clemency, for a King than mercy:
and yet severity and rigor of justice are no less necessary ornaments, for
the discharge of his duty, A prince must execute justice upon the
transgressors of the law of God and of nature.
and the good of his subjects. Therefore in that which concerns divine and
natural right, and the punishment established for the transgression thereof, he
must always use justice, and beware least his facility in granting favor and
dispensations, make him a promoter of evil, which (as Seneca says) if he
leave unpunished, is transferred unto his posterity. But when the Prince only
is offended through some light contempt, or excusable breach of his Edicts, it
cannot but be commendable in him to use pardon and pity. When it is
commendable in him to show mercy.
These are those strong and mighty chains, which (as Dion said to Dionysius
the king of Syracusa) will preserve his kingdom in a happy, flourishing and
peaceable estate, I mean goodness and justice. For force, fear, and the
multitude of his guard, assure not the estate of a Prince so well, as the good
will, affection, favor, and love of his subjects, which he may obtain by
goodness and justice. They only How a Prince may preserve his kingdom a great
while without danger.
(said Marcus Aurelius instructing his son) are to hold a kingdom long time
without danger, who by good behavior and just dealing imprint in the hearts of
their subjects, not a fear of their power, but a mutual love of their virtue.
For those subjects are to be suspected that serve through constraint and
extremity, not they that obey being moved with reason and gentleness. These
holy precepts were so well put in practice by this Marcus Aurelius stood not
in fear of his subjects.
good Emperor Marcus Aurelius, that all his subjects had very easy access
unto him: insomuch that albeit he were a great Monarch, yet he never had any
guard, no not so much as a Porter to his Palace. Likewise king Numa put Numa
refused the guard of three hundred archers which Romulus had.
from him those three hundred Archers, which Romulus used to have for his guard:
saying, that he would not distrust that people which put their trust in him,
nor command over that people that distrusted him. To this purpose, when Plato
saw the aboue-named Dionysius compassed Plato his speech to Dionysius
concerning his guard.
about with many soldiers of his Guard, he said unto him, What? Have thou
committed so many evils, that thou stand in need of such a Guard of armed
fellows? Now it is most certain, that the obedience of the subject springs
and proceeds from the love of his Lord, as also that the love of the Lord
increases through the obedience of the subject. But because the wickedness of
men is so great at this day, that they which strive to be very gracious, are
contemned and despised, it is very necessary that the Prince should show forth
a certain kind of gravity and severity, and according to the times, places,
Gravity and severity requisite in a prince.
persons, and occasions that are offered, cause his power and the majesty of
his commandments to be perceived, A principle in state matters.
being always the stronger: because in matter of Estate a man may hold this
for an undoubted principle, that he is master of the estate, who is master of
the forces. Thus the gentleness of the Prince accompanied with severity, his
bounty mingled with rigor, and his facility The effects of harmonicall
justice.
with austeritie will be the means that his virtue shall attain to a
harmonical justice, which distributeth uprightly that which appertains to
every one: reward to whom reward, and punishment to whom punishment
belongs. From these duties and offices of a good Prince toward his subjects,
already mentioned, proceeds the fatherly care which he has of their
prosperity in the preservation and increase of their commodities and riches,
so far off is he from all headlong desire to invade and spoil them. He
considers What authority a Prince has over his subjects goods.
wisely, that although he has authority and power over the goods of his
subjects, yet not in such sort as he has over his own demaine, or as if the
propriety thereof belonged to him, but only to this end to demand aid and
succor for the good and profit of the Commonwealth. Homer bringing in Achilles
offering great injuries to Agamemnon, against whom he was sore incensed, says
that he called him Deuourer of the people: and contrariwise, when he would in
other places praise the king, he terms him Shepherd of the people. And
truly they are unworthy of the title of Prince, that lending their ears to
such as invent new subsidies, impose them daily on their subjects: and having
against all humanity spoiled them of their goods and riches, consume them
miserably upon pleasures, or cruelly in war, when they might as well suffer
their poor subjects to live in peace. When Marcus Antonius was in Asia, he
doubled the tax, and laid a second charge upon them, that he might have
wherewith to furnish his immoderate Hebreas freedom of speech in reproouing
Antonius.
expenses. The Estates of the Country sent Hebreas to show him how the case
stood with them, who using a marvelous freedom of speech, spoke unto him in
this manner. If thou will have power to lay upon us two taxes in one year,
thou must also have power to give us two Summers and two Autumns, two Haruests
and two Vintages. Further, he added this; Asia has paid thee 200000. Talents
(that was six score millions of gold) if all this sum came not into thy
cofers, call them to account that have received it. But if thou have received
it, and yet have nothing left, we are cast away and undone. These words ought
to be well noted of a prudent Prince, that he may thoroughly consider with
himself, and keep a register of all that is leauied of the poor people in
his name, least some few about him fat themselves with the oppression and
overthrow of many, as it commonly falls out: and let him be so careful of
the blood and substance of that body whereof he is head, that he profit all the
members equally. Ezechiel cries out against such Princes as devour the
substance of their Vassals by loanes and taxes. Apollonius says, that the
gold Some gold more vile and base than iron.
which is taken from subjects by tyranny, is more vile than iron, because it
is wet with the tears of their poor subjects. Artaxerxes said, that it was a
great deal more seemelier for the Majesty of a king to give, than to take by
polling, and to cloth than to unclothe; the one belonging to thieves, and not
to Princes and Kings, unless they will falsify stain their name. King Darius
sent for all the governors of the Provinces under his subjection, and Darius
diminished his tributs.
enquired of them among other things, whether the taxes and tributes were not
too excessive: whereunto when they made answer that they thought them
moderate, he presently commanded that they should raise but the one half
thereof: esteeming the love of his subjects a richer treasure, than all the
heaps of gold, which he might have gathered. We may not here forget to
propound to kings the example of that good king S. Jews the ninth of that
Jews the 9. was the first that raised a tax in France.
name, who was the first that raised a tax in his kingdom, but it was only by
way of a necessary subside during the war, not using it as an ordinary
receite. Directing his speech to Philip his eldest son, and successor, he
uttered these words in his Testament, which is yet to be found in the treasorie
of France, and is registered in the Chamber His exhortation to his eldest son.
of accounts. Be devout in the service of God, have a pitiful and charitable
heart toward the poor, and comfort them with thy good decdes. Observe the good
laws of thy kingdom: take no taxes nor beneuolences of thy subjects, unless
urgent necessity, and evident commodity force thee unto it, and then upon a
just cause, and not usually: if thou do otherwise, thou shall not be
accounted a king, but a tyrant, etc. I leave the rest of the clauses in his
Testament. Moreover, liberality well used, as we have els-where handled the
same, is a very comely ornament for a Prince. Liberality necessary in a
Prince.
Socrates said, that it was the duty of a good king to be beneficial to his
friends, and of his enemies to make good friends, to which purpose nothing will
help him more than liberality. Neither must he be only liberal, but
magnifical also and sumptuous, provided always that of magnifical, he become
not prodigal, which would soon make him an exactor, and in the end a tyrant.
But a sovereign Prince must especially have an eye to this, that the rewards
of virtue due to worthy men be preferred before all his gifts and good turns,
and that he recompense such as have deserved any thing, before he give to them
that have deserved nothing. For an ungrateful Prince will hardly retain an
honorable and virtuous man any The difference between a reward and a benefit.
A king must be as good as his word.
long time in his service. Neither is the estimation of a reward, and of a
good-turne all one: because a reward is given for desert, and a benefit by
grace. Besides, a Prince must be always true, and as good as his promise, that
men may give greater credit to his bare word, than to another man's oath. For
it ought to be as an Oracle, which loses his dignity, when men have
conceived such an evil opinion of him, that he may not be believed unless he
swear. And if he pawn his faith at any time, he must account it sacred and
inviolable: because faith is the foundation and stay of justice, upon which
the estate of great men is grounded* as we discoursed elsewhere. The saying of
Theopompus.
That saying of Theopompus King of Sparta, is also to be well noted by the
Prince. When a friend of his asked him how a king might keep his kingdom in
safety, he answered: By granting liberty to his friends freely to tell him
the truth. He must take their advice in doubfull matters, that he may govern
his estate more assuredly, waighing and judging of their opinions with great
prudence. Neither must he think them his best servants that praise A Prince
must discern wisely between faithful servants and flatterers.
all his sayings and doings, but those that with modesty reprove his faults:
he must discern wisely between them that cunningly flatter him, and those
that love and serve him faithfully, that wicked men may not be in greater
credit with him than good men. For this cause also he must carefully enquire
after his household servants and familiar friends, that he may know them well:
because all other men will take him to be such a one as they are with whom he
conuerseth ordinarily. Osiris King of Egypt had for his Arms a Scepter with an
eye in the top of it: noting thereby the wisdom that ought to Wisdom
necessary in a King.
be in a king: namely, that it belongs not to one that wandereth out of his
way to direct others, that sees not, to guide, that knows nothing, to teach,
and that will not obey reason, to command. Likewise in all his actions he must
use reason as a heavenly guide, having chased away the perturbations of his
soul, and esteem it a greater and more royal matter to command himself,
than others. He must think that it is the true and proper office of a king not
to submit himself to his pleasures, Temperance requisite in a Prince.
but to contain his own affections rather than his subjects. Further, he must
use to take pleasure in those exercises, which may procure him honor, and
cause What manner of exercises a Prince must use.
him to appear better to the world. He must not seek for reputation in vile
things, which men of base estate and naughty behauior commonly practice, but
follow after virtue only, wherein wicked persons have no part. Let him
remember always that he is a King, and therefore that he must strive to do
nothing unworthy so high a dignity, but continue his memory by valiant and
noble acts. This is that wherein one of the wise Interpreters knew well how to
instruct K. Ptolemy, who demanded of him how he might behave himself, that
neither idleness nor pleasures might distract him. It is (said he) in thine own
power, as long as thou command over a great kingdom, and have so many great
affairs to manage continually, which will not suffer thee to distract thy mind
upon other matters. If private men, borne to virtue, are willing many times to
die, that they may purchase honor: much more ought kings to do those things
which will procure them honor, fear, and estimation every where, during their
life, and also through their brightness A Prince must be skillful in war, and
yet love peace.
shine a great while after their death. Moreover, a prince must be warlike, and
skillful in warfare, providing carefully all things necessary for war, and
yet he must love peace, and usurp nothing that belongs to another man
contrary to right, nor enter into war, but to repel violence in extreme
necessity. Above all things A Prince must carefully avoid civil dissension.
he must fear civil dissentions, as most pernicious to his Estate, and take
advice prudently concerning the means whereby all occasions of their entrance
may be taken from his people. Herein learning will help him well, and the
knowledge of histories, which set before his eyes the adventures that have
befallen both small and great, and call to his remembrance the times past,
whereby he may better provide for the time to come. Unto which if he add the
counsel of wise men, as we have already touched, he shall know more perfectly
whatsoever concerns the good of his estate. But above all he must know how
to What Counselors a Prince must choose.
make choice of men, and not think them wise that dispute curiously of small
things, but those that speak very aptly of great matters. Neither let him
account those men best, and worthiest of credit, that have gotten most
authority, but try and indge them by their profitable works: namely, if he
see that they give him wise and free counsel, according as occasions concur,
and affairs require: and then let him always with speed execute those things,
which by their counsel he finds good and necessary. For the conclusion
therefore of our present discourse, The sum of the duty of a Prince.
we will comprehend the office and duty of a good Prince in few words:
namely, if he serve God in sincerity and purity of heart, if he inquire
diligently after the truth of his word, and cause his subjects to live
thereafter: if he provide for their profit, redress their miseries, and ease
them of oppression, exaction and polling. If he be pliable to hear the
requests and complaints of the lest, indifferent and moderate in answering
them, ready to distribute right to every one, by propounding reward for virtue
and punishment for vice. If he be prudent in his enterprises, bold in his
exploits, modest in prosperity, constant in adversity, steadfast in word, wise
in counsel: briefly, if he govern in such sort, and reign so well, that all
his subjects may have what to imitate, and strangers to commend.


The end of the fifteenth days work.
THE SIXTEENTH DAYS WORK.
Of a Council, and Counsailors of estate. Chap. 61.
ASER. DIoclesian the Emperor said, That the condition of Princes was miserable
and dangerous, A common misery incident (...) the estate of princes.
because they were commonly deceived by them whom they trusted most, being
themselves almost always shut up in their palaces, and understanding no more
of their affairs, tha^ their ministers would declare unto them, who consult
many times together how they may disguise the truth of their estate. For this
Counselors are the eyes and ears of a Prince.
cause although it be necessary for a prince to have many eyes and ears, for
which intent we say that his counselors serve, yet he must look himself as
much as he can even to the depth of his affairs. And truly it belongs to the
dombe, blind and deaf, to speak, see and hear nothing, but by the mouth,
eyes, and ears of other men. But in those things wherein the prince is
constrained to rely upon an other man's report, he must use great prudence to
discern flatterers and disguisers of matters, who What counselors are to be
used by Princes.
are not touched but only with their private profit, from those that are
moved with the zeal of public benefit, and of his service, and use these
men in matters of counsel, which is most necessary for the sound preservation
of al estates. And in deed there was never any estate but used counsel and
counselors in the establishing and government thereof, as we may understand
more of you my companions, if you think good to discourse of this matter.


AMANA. Counsel is the anchor of the city.
Counsel (said Socrates) is a sacred thing, and as Plato calls it, the
anchor of the whole city, whereby it is fastened and stayed, as a ship in the
water. Yea, all the great and goodly exploites of arms and laws, are nothing
else but the execution of a wise council.


ARAM. The excellency of counsel.
Counsel (says the same Plato) has the selfsame place in a commonwealth
that the soul and head has in living creatures. For the understanding is
infused into the soul, and sight and hearing are placed in the head: so that
the understanding being joined to these two goodly senses, and reduced into
one, preserves every thing. But of thee (ACHITOB.) we expect a whole discourse
upon this matter.


ACHITOB. All commonwealths consist chiefly of two things.
All Commonwealths consist chiefly of two things, of counsel and of
judgment, according to the disposition of which, the affairs of the estate
are well or ill handled. Therefore to enter into this matter here propounded,
and to leave judgments to be considered of hereafter, we must first know that
the ordinary Council of an estate, which the Ancients commonly called a
Senate, is the lawful assembly of counselors of estate, to What a council is.
give advise to them that have sovereign power in every Commonwealth. When we
say a lawful assembly, it is to be understood of that power which is given
unto them by the sovereign to meet together in time and place appointed. And
where as we call them counselors of estate, it is to distinguish them from
other counselors and officers, who are often called to give advise to Princes,
every one according to his vocation and quality, and yet are neither
counselors of estate, nor ordinary counselors. Of this council all the
rest of the public government The profit of a council.
depends, and by this all the parts of the Commonwealth are tied, united,
and knitte together, through that direction of religion, justice, war,
treasures, laws, magistrates and manners which proceeds from it. Therefore
the Senate is very well called by Cicero, A council or Senate is the soul of
the common-welth.
the soul, reason, and understanding of a Commonwealth: whereby he means,
that it can no more be maintained without a council, than a body without a
soul, or a man without reason. The Hebrews likewise The Hebrews compared it
to a foundation.
called the council a foundation where-upon all goodly and commendable actions
are built, and without which all enterprises are overthrown. Now forasmuch as
there has been, and are at this day among sundry nations, sundry sorts of
governments and policies, so there is no less difference in the establishment
of a council in them, as also many alterations in the institution and power
thereof. And namely, among the ancient Graecians, beside the several council
of every Commonwealth, there was the sacred council of the Amphictions, so
called, because it was instituted by Amphiction the son of The council of
the Amphictions.
Deucalion. This council was as it were the general assembly of the estates
of all Graecia, and was held twice a year, in Spring time, and in Autumn, at
Delphos in the Temple of Apollo, for the commodity of the seat thereof, being
as it were in the midst of all Graecia. The authority thereof was so great,
that whatsoever was concluded upon there, the Graecians observed and kept it
inviolable, whether it were in matters concerning religion and piety toward
their gods, or peace and unity among themselves. The Lacedaemonians and
Messenians met together certain days in the year at the temple of Diana upon
the borders of Laconia, and there after sacrifice, consulted of their
waightiest affairs. And yet both they and the rest of Graecia had certain
general councels concerning the government of their estate, besides those The
Senate of the Lacedaemonians.
that were particular, which they used daily. The Senate of thirty counsailors
established by Lycurgus when he reformed the Lacedemonian estate, obtained the
sovereignty not long after, and of Senators became absolute lords. The Senate
of the Athenians.
Solon ordained amongst the Athenians, besides the Senate of 400. which was
changeable every year, a privy and perpetual council of the Areopagites,
compounded of three score of the wisest, and of such as were blameles, who had
the managing of those affairs that were most secret. Romulus The Senate of the
Romans.
the first founder of Rome, compounded the Senate of 100. of the notablest
citizens: and having received the Sabines into his protection, he doubled the
number of Senators, which afterward Brutus increased with an other The power of
the Consuls of Rome.
hundred. As long as the happy popular government of the Romans lasted, the
Consuls, albeit in dignity they represented a royal person, yet they had no
other power but to lead the armies, to assemble the Senate, to receive the
letters of captains, and of their allies, and to present them to the Senate, to
hear ambassadors before the people, or before the Senate, to assemble the
great estates, and to ask the people advise concerning the creation of
officers, The power of the Senate of Rome.
or publishing of laws. But the Senate disposed the revenues of the Empire,
and the common expenses: appointed lieutenants to all governors of provinces,
determined of the triumphs, ordered religion, received and licenced ambassadors
of kings and nations, and took order for such as were sent to them. The
punishment of all offenses committed throughout Italy, which deserved public
execution, as treason, conspiracy, poisoning, wilful murder, belonged to the
Senate. If any private person or any city stood in need of some special
favor, or of reprehension, or of succor and protection, the Senate had all
the charge thereof. It was forbidden under pain of high treason to present any
request to the people without advise taken of the Senate. Nevertheless, the
sovereignty always belonged to the people, who might confirm The power of the
people of Rome.
or infringe the decrees of the Senate. Since that time according to the sundry
alterations of their estate and government, the council varied in form.
Augustus established a particular council of the wisest Senators, and those
but few in number: and after that another strict council of Mecaenas and
Agrippa, with whom he decided the chiefest matters. In Turkey the council is
kept four days in Of the council of the Turk.
a week by the Bassaes wheresoever the prince soiourneth. If it be in time of
peace at Constantinople, or in some other town within his dominion: if in
war, it is kept within his pauilion. In this council called Diuan, where
audience is open to every one, they consult of embassages and of answers to be
made unto them, of matters of estate, and of sovereignty, of the means how to
provide for decayed provinces, of murders and condemnations. The suppliant,
complainant or suter speaks without an advocate, and is forced to answer
presently to the objection of his adversary if he be present, or to prove his
sayings by witnesses: and forthwith the definitive sentence is given, which
may not be revoked. When the council has continued 7. or 8. hours, the Bassa
Visir makes true relation to the prince of all that has been handled: if he
lie it is present death. For the prince oftentimes listeneth at a window,
called dangerous, right against the Diuan, which is made in such sort, that he
may hear and see, and not be perceived: and although he were never there, yet
they think that he is always there. After he has heard the discourse and
advise of his council, he seldom gainsaieth, but confirms or moderateth the
same. These things being thus ordered, they are written and registered by
officers appointed thereunto. Concerning his treasure the Bassaes meddle not
therewith, but two general treasurers are ouer-seers and chief dealers
therein, the one being of Romania, the other of Anatolia. Two Cade lisquers
have the administration of all justice, who sit with the Bassaes in the Diuan:
neither does any other sit there but the twelve Bellerbeis, the Prince his
children being Presidents in their fathers absence. The Muphtie is chief of the
religion, and looks unto matters of conscience. Of the council of the
Venetians.
At Venice the general assembly of Lords and gentlemen is called the great
council, which has the sovereign power of the estate, and of which the
Senate and the authority of all their magistrates depends. Besides this
great council and Senate compounded of threeskore persons, there are four
other councels, that is, the council of Sages for sea matters, the council of
Sages for land matters, the council of ten, and the council of seven, where
the Duke makes the seventh, and this is called the Seignorie. If there arise
any hard matter among the Sages, it is referred to the council of ten, and
if they be divided, the council of seven is joined to the council of ten.
But if the matter be of great weight, the Senate is called, and sometime also
(albeit rarely) the great council of all the Venetian Gentlemen, in which Of
the council of Rhagusium.
the last resolution is made. At Rhagusium they create a President from month
to month, who dwells in the palace, and has twelve counsailors, which
assembly is called the little*councell. There is also an other council called
the council de Pregadie, into which a hundredth of Of the council of Genes.
the ancientest citizens may enter. Next, there is the great council, at which
all the nobility above twenty years of age are present. At Genes the whole
commonwealth is governed by them that are borne of eight and twenty families:
neither is any man called to bear any office whatsoever, unless he be of this
assembly, which they call an Aggregation. Out of this are taken four
hundredth, which make the great council, that has all the power and authority
of the estate, and is chosen from year to year. They create the Duke and the
eight governors of the Commonwealth, who are renewed from two years to two
years. In Switzerland there are two The council of Switzerland.
councels in every Canton, a little one and a great one. But if any great
matter fall out, that is common to all the leagues, they hold their general
council, called a Journey, or a Diet. The like is used in Almaigne, where The
council of Germany.
the Emperor can ordain nothing that concerns the common benefit of
Germany, or the authority and preservation of the Empire, without the
counsel and consent of all the estates, especially of the seven Electors. He
may not of himself undertake any war at his pleasure, neither levy
tributes, nor raise souldioures of that nation, nor call in any foreign
souldioures. They have also a council established at Spira, which is called
the Imperial chamber being as it were a Parliament of Almaignes for the
administration of justice among them. The assembly of estates in Polonia.
In Polonia there is an assembly of estates every year, especially for these
two causes: the one, to administer justice in sovereignty, unto which are
brought appeals from all the judges of the country: the other, to provide for
the defense and safety of the Country against their next enemies, namely,
the Tartares, who make often incursions upon them. None is received for a
Senator amongst them, if he be no Palatine, Bishop, Governor of some Forte,
or other Captain, or has not been Ambassador. In Spain there are seven Of
the council of Spain.
councels, besides the privy council, which are always near the King in
several Chambers under one roof, that the king may be the better infourmed of
all affairs. Their names are these, the council of Spain, of Seven several
councels in Spain.
the Indies, of Italy, of the low Countries, of War, of the Order of Saint
John, and of the Inquisition. In the Realm of England there is a privy
Council, Of the council of England.
which never exceeded the number of twenty persons. The first establishment
thereof was but of fifteen: although it appears by the conclusion of a peace
made between Jews the ninth, and Henry king of England, that seventeen of
the privy Council swear unto it, namely, one Archbishop Chancellor, one
Bishop, six earls, and six other lords, besides the high Treasurer, and the
two magistrates, whom they call the chief justices of England. From three
years to three years they hold a parliament, where all the estates are called
together to deliberate about the affairs of the kingdom. But enough of
strangers. Let us now come to the establishment and institution of the council
in this French Monarchy, where we shall see that it is not inferior (if it go
not beyond them) in excellency and good order to all that are already set Of
the secret council of France.
down, or that ever were. First we know, that the king has all sovereignty
by right of the estate, as heretofore we have discoursed. The first council
near about him is the strict or secret council, called the council of state
affairs, which is commonly held in the morning after his majesty is up. None
have entrance into this, but a few whom the king judges wisest, of greatest
experience, and most trusty to his majesty, with whom he communicates his
waightiest affairs as they fall out, and determines with them of such
principal matters as were deliberated of before in the privy council, and in
the council of the treasury, if they be such as deserve to be brought
thither. In the secret council the letters of princes, of ambassadors, of
governors and captains are opened: resolutions and matters agreed upon are
commended to the Secretaries of the estate: gifts and rewards granted with the
rolls and records thereof, letters and commandments Of the privy council
of France.
signed with the kings hand. The privy council is compounded of diverse great
personages called thereunto by his majesty, either for the nobility of their
blood and greatness of their house, or for their woorthines, wisdom, knowledge
and experience, who have places and deliberatiue voices in the council as long
as it pleases him. Sometime the king sits among them when any great matter
is in question: in his absence the first prince of the blood is President. The
Constable and Chancellor, two chief officers of the crown, have great
authority therein, the one being principal of war, the other of justice:
They sit on each side in equal degree, being always one right before another.
This council is held either for matters What matters are handled therein.
belonging to the treasury, or for other things concerning state-affaires of
the kingdom, and then none enter therein but the Secretaries of the estate, the
Treasurer of the privy treasure, the Ouer-seers of the treasures, appointed to
take knowledge of the leuying and laying out of money, and the Secretaries
belonging to the same: or else it is held for parties, that is, for the
affairs of justice depending of the sovereignty. Then the masters of the
Requests serving in their turns enter therein, who bring in requests,
informations, suites called thither by Iniunctio^s, and other weighty matters
which the king has reserved to his own knowledge, or such as cannot be
decided else where. Sometimes also the parties themselves are heard, or else
they speak by Advocates. This is greatly to be commended A commendable custom
used in the privy council of France.
therein, that every one that has entry into the council (although
peradventure he has neither deliberatiue voice, nor place) may bring in any
man's request, and advertise the council of that which is profitable for the
Commonwealth, that order may be taken for the same. And many times their
counsel is first demanded, then the advice of the counselors of estate, so
that the greatest lords give their opinion last, to the end that freedom of
speech may not be taken away by the authority of the princes, especially of
factious and ambitious men, who never suffer any contradictions but against
their wills. By this means also they that have consulting voices only, prepare
the way and make it easy for them that have deliberatiue voices to conclude of
matters, and many times furnish the council with good and forceable reasons;
and if they err at any time, they are brought back again by the residue
without jealousy. This privy council deliberateth and finally determines
(under the sovereign will of the king) of the complaints of private men in
matters concerning the estate, of the suites of towns and provinces, judges of
the appeals made from Parliaments, considers upon extraordinary days of the
decrees of Parliaments, concerning their order and discipline how it is kept:
deals with the transporting of wheat and of wines: also with all
marchandises either brought in or carried out of the realm, and with the
impostes laid upon them: takes order for the current and finenesse of money:
has regard to the demaines of the crown, to lones and taxes, and other
revenues of the king, and to the chief customs, prolonging their years,
abating the rentes of Farmers, or discharging the^ altogether, taking knowledge
of their cause and of former informations, joining therewith the advice of the
Treasurers, and of the Generals of those charges. All matters whatsoever being
agreed upon and appointed to take effect, must be signed by one Secretary at
the least, and sometimes also by one of the masters of Requests before it be
sealed by the Chauncellor, who ouerlooketh and examineth narrowly all matters
concluded upon: which makes his authority very great, and sometimes odious. Of
the great council.
The great council, which at the first institution thereof was seldom employed
but about state affairs, was made an ordinary court of 17. counselors by
Charles the 8. and Jews the 12. made it up 20. besides the Chancellor, who
was President of that court: but under king Francis another President was
appointed. This counsel had the knowledge of extraordinary causes by way of
commission sent from the privy council, and ordinarily of appellations made
from the Marshal of the kings house. The court of Of the court of Parliament.
Parliament was the Senate of France in old time, and erected by Jews the young
according to the truest opinion, to give advise to the king: in which twelve
Peers were established, so that the name of the court of Peers remains with
it to this day. But Phillip the fair made it an ordinary court, and granted
unto it jurisdiction and seat at Paris, but took from it the knowledge of
state-affaires. For, as we have already declared, there are no counselors of
estate amongst all the magistrates of France, but those that are ordinary of
the privy council. But besides the councels specified by us, Princes have
always had a Of the strict council.
strict council of two or three of the dearest and trustiest about them, wherein
the resolution of the aduises and deliberations of other councels is had, yea
many times of the greatest affairs of the estate, before others have
deliberated of them. Nevertheless, this ancient custom of calling the general
estates of the realm together when they saw it necessary, has been always
observed by kings and princes. Our first progenitors the Gauls, before either
Romans or kings ruled over them, assembled together out of Aquitane, out of
the province of Narbone, of Lions, and of other quarters, about the number of
threeskore nations, to take advise and counsel of their general affairs.
Since that time our ancient kings of France have used oftentimes to hold the
estates, which is the assembly of all their subjects, or of their deputies.
For to What it is to hold the estates.
hold the estates is nothing else, but when the king communicates his greatest
affairs with his subjects, takes advise and counsel of them, hears their
complaints and griefs, and provides for them according to reason. This was
called in old time the holding of a Parliament, which name it retains yet in
England and Scotland. But at this day the name of Parliament belongs The name
of parliament belongs to private courts in France.
only to private and particular courts of Audience, consisting of a certain
number of Judges established by the king in sundry of his Provinces, and the
public and general courts of Audience have taken the name of estates. The
estates were assembled for diverse causes, according as matters were offered:
either to demand succor and money of the people, or to take order for
justice, and Causes of the assembly of estates.
for men of war: or for the revenues of the children of France, or to
provide for the government of the kingdom, or for other matters. The kings
sat amongst them, and were Presidentes, except at one assembly, wherein was
debated the noblest cause that ever was, namely, to whom the kingdom of
France belonged after the death of Charles the fair, whether to his cousin
Phillip de Valois, or to Edward king of England his brother in law. King
Phillip was not President, not being at that time king, and besides a party.
No doubt but the people receive great benefit by this assembly of estates. For
this good comes unto them, that they may draw near to the kings person, to
make their complaints unto him, to present him their requests, and to obtain
remedy and necessary provision for redress. Whereby we may easily judge, that
many, who have written of the duty of magistrates and such like treatises,
are greatly deceived in The assembly of estates is not above the prince.
maintaining this, That the estates of the people are above the prince: which
lays open a gappe to the rebellions of subjects against their soueraign, so
that this opinion can have no reason or good ground to lean upon. For if this
were true, the commo^-wealth would not be a kingdom or monarchy, but a pure
Aristocratie, as we have declared heretofore. Yea, what show of reason is there
to maintain this error, seeing every one in particular, and al in general bow
their knees before the king, use humbly requests and supplications, which his
majesty receives or rejects, as it seems best unto him? But in this case
we except a king that is captive, beside himself, or in his infancy. For that
which is the^ decreed by the estates, is authorized as from the soueraign power
of the prince. Moreover we may see what great good comes to the king by the
assembly of his estates, in the first speech, which master Michael de l'
Hospital Chauncellor of France made at the last assembly of estates at
Orleans. Where he confuteth at large their opinion that say, that the king
after a sort diminishes his power by taking advise and counsel of his
subjects, seeing he is not bound so to do: as also that he makes himself too
familiar with them, which breeds contempt, and abaseth his royal dignity.
But we may answer them Theopompus answer to his wife.
as Theopompus king of Sparta did his wife, who objected this unto him by way
of reproach, that by bringing in the Ephories, and minglyng their government
with his, he would leave his authority and power less to his children than
he received it from his predecessors* Nay (said this Prince unto her) I will
leave it greater, because it shall be more assured. The Emperor Aurelius said
as much to his mother, because he freely heard every one. Besides, as we see
that in any great peril of sea, or fire kindled to the danger of public
profit, no An excellent comparison.
man's service or succor is rejected, how base soever his calling is: so it
cannot but be profitable for the Estate, when it is threatened with ruin, and
the affairs thereof are of greatest importance, to receive the counsel of all
that have interest therein, laying the opinions in the balance, rather than the
persons from whom they come. And hereby the sovereign majesty and prudence of
a Prince is known, when he has both power and skill to weigh and to judge of
their advice that give him counsel, and to conclude with the soundest, not the
greatest side. But to go forward with that which remains, let so many as have
this honor to be ordinary counselors to Princes, remember the saying of
Solon the wise, That they are not called The duty and qualities of counselors
of estate.
thither to please, and to speak to their liking, but to utter the truth, and
to give them good counsel for common safety: that they must bring with them
for an assured and certain foundation of their conference about
state-affaires, a good intent moved with reason and judgment to profit him,
not with passions, or desires of vainglory, of covetousness, of emulation, of
any other imperfection that leads them to their private profit: that they
must at the entry of the council chamber, unclothe themselves of favor
toward some, of hatred toward others, and of ambition in themselves, and
aim at no other mark, than at the honor of God, and safety of the
Commonwealth. To this end they must necessarily be furnished with wisdom,
justice and loyalty. Three things necessary in a counselor of estate.
As for skill and knowledge, although it be requisite in counselors of estate,
namely, the knowledge of the laws, of histories, and of the estate of
Commonwealths, yet sound judgment, integrity and prudence are much more
necessary. Above all things they must hold nothing Counselors may not be
Pensioners to foreign princes.
of other Princes and Seignories, that may bind them to their service. And yet
now a days to receive a pension of them is so common a matter (but very
pernicious in any estate) that it is grown to a custom. Agesilaus Example
hereof in Agesilaus.
would not so much as receive a letter, which the king of Persia wrote unto
him, but said to his messenger, that if the king were friend to the
Lacedaemonians, he need not write particularly to him, because he would also
remain his friend: but if he were their enemy, neither letter nor any thing
else, should make him for his part otherwise affected. To be short, let
counselors of estate learn of Plutarch, that it is necessary for them to be
free from all passions and affections, because in giving of counsel the mind
has most force toward that whereunto the Counselors must not through fear
shrink from their duty.
will is most inclined. As for fear, danger, or threatenings, they must never
stay them from doing their duty, but let them constantly propound and
maintain that which they judge to be good and profitable for the
Commonwealth. We read that the Thasiens making war with great vehemency
against the Athenians, published a decree, that whosoever counseled or spoke
at any time of concluding a peace between them, should die the death. Examples
hereof.
Within a while after one of the citizens considering what great hurt his
country received by that war, came one day into the assembly of the people
with a halter about his neck, and cried with a loud voice, that he was come
thither to deliver the Commonwealth by his death, that they should put him to
death when they would, and that for his part he gave them counsel to abrogate
that law, and to make peace: which was done, and he pardoned. Considius answer
to Caesar.
Considius a Roman Senator would never be from the Senate, no not when Caesar
ruled all by violence, and did what pleased him, and when none of the other
Senators came any more through fear of his force. And when Caesar asked him
how he durst be there alone to stand against him: because (quoth he) my age
takes all fear from me. For having from hence forward such a short time to
live in, I am not greatly careful to save my life. If kings did correct all
those that give them ill counsel, Solomon hanged a wicked counselor.
as Solomon did one of his Bassaes, who was his kinsman, they would not so
readily consent to the passions of great men. This Infidel caused him to be
hanged, because he counseled him to put a Gentleman to death unjustly (which
he had done) that he might enjoy his wife more casilie. Now for the conclusion
of our discourse, we will here set down the answer of one of the Hebrew
interpreters to king Ptolemie, who asked him, To whom a Prince should trust,
or commit himself. To those (said this wise man) that love him so entirely,
that they cannot be drawn from him neither through fear, gifts or gain:
because he that aspireth to riches, is naturally a traitor. Let us learn that
a counsel well instituted and compounded of good men is a most necessary point
in the establishment and preservation of every estate: and as the Good counsel
better than many hands.
old Proverb says, Good council is better than many hands. Let us learn,
that all those that are called thereunto, ought to aim at nothing but at
public profit, of which the happiness and greatness of the Prince
depends, who must not contemn the counsel and service of the least when
they can profit the Commonwealth, but hear them willingly, and satisfy
their just requests.


Of Judgments, and of Judges. Chap. 62.
ACHITOB. WE are now (my companions) according as the sequel of our speech
requires, to consider of Judgments, which I affirmed in the beginning to be
one of those two things whereof every Commonwealth consists, and that
according as they are ordained, the affairs of the estate proceed well or ill.
Therefore I leave the discourse of this matter to you.


ASER. No city (says Plato) can truly be called a city if it want judgments
well instituted, and consequently judges to exercise them.


AMANA. Judgments are lawful to such as use them aright, and Judges are to us
the ministers of God for our good, as Saint Paul says. Now let us hear ARAM
upon Romans 13. 4.
this matter.


ARAM. As it is a very dangerous matter for an estate to waver daily in
deliberations, and not to be well resolved touching the affairs thereof, or
after resolution to leave The common breach of laws breeds contempt of the
magistrate.
them without speedy execution: so the establishment of many good laws and
ordinances, brings greater peril tha^ profit to the same estate, if they be
not severely observed and kept. For the authority of the soueraign magistrate,
in whose name they are made, is so much the more co^temptible amongst his
subjects, as they know that they are less obeyed: as though the fault
proceeded from his insufficiency of skill to command. He that leads well
before, is the cause why he is well followed: and the perfection of the art of a
good Querie of the stable, consists in making the horse obedient, and in
bringing him to good order: so the principal effect of the knowledge of a king
is to iustruct well his subjects in obedience. To this purpose the establishment
of good judges over the^ will help well, that they may take knowledge of such as
gainsay and resist the public Judgments are the sinews of an estate.
laws and ordinances of his majesty, who is to authorize their judgments, as
the chief sinews of the whole body of his estate. For nothing ever caused
Commonwealths to flourish so much as the constant keeping of their country
laws, and the strict execution of judgments agreeable unto them. And (as
Cicero says) those estates that are near their overthrow, all things being in
a desperate case, fall into this miserable issue, that men condemned by the A
certain token of the ruin of an estate.
laws, are restored, and judgments given are cancelled: which things when
they come to pass, every one knows, that their ruin is at hand without all
hope of safety. Moreover, forasmuch as the Prince knows that he is as it
were bound and indebted for justice, he ought to be so much the more careful
that it may be rightly administered The prince stands bound for justice, and
must answer before God for the breach thereof.
by those to whom he commits that office: especially, seeing he must answer
for it himself before god, to whom he may not say, that he charged the
consciences of his judges therewith, and so discharged his own. Wherefore if he
adorn his estate with resolute and prudent officers, who will exactly preserve
the bond of the common-welth, by the severity of their judgments, and upright
holding of the balance, no doubt but all kind of public felicity will issue
from the same. But let us briefly consider what judgment is, the division of
judgments, their administration, and what manner of Judges ought to exercise
them. Judgment is What iudgementis.
properly that which is ordained by the Magistrate, observing the tenor of the
law. But forasmuch as through the infinite variety of causes, times, places,
and persons, which cannot be comprehended in any laws or statuts whatsoever,
punishments were referred to the will and power of the Magistrates, and the
damages of civil matters to the conscience and religion of the Judges; that
which they determine by resolute sentences according to their opinion, is also
called Judgment, although more properly it may be called a Decree. For this
cause we say, that as there are two principal points in every Commonwealth,
which Magistrates must have before their eyes, that is, the Magistrates must
always have the law and equity before their eyes.
law and equity: so also there is the execution of the law and the duty of the
Magistrate, which consists either in commanding, in decreeing, or in
executing. Of Judgments, some are called private, some public, some
criminal, The division of judgments.
others civil. Private judgments are of bondages, prescriptions,
Gardianships, Wardships, contracts, testaments, successions, marriages. Public
judgments concern heinous offenses against God and man, as sacrilege,
treason, restitution of money, or other bribes taken by Magistrates, robbery of
the kings treasure, forgeries, theft, wilful and constrained murders. Plato
speaks at large of these in his book of laws, and it would be an infinite
matter, and smally to our instruction, to seek out the diverse kinds of
judgments, which either have been, or are among men. But this is well worth
the noting, that amongst the ancient Grecians and Romans, all judgments both
private and public, were from point to point followed, and with all rigor
observed, and they that stood against them were prosecuted and set upon with
fire and sword. Among other examples Diodorus rehearsech a story of the
Phocians, a people of Grecia, condemned by the judgment of the Amphyctions in
a certain sum A rigorous judgment of the Phocians.
of money, because they had tilled a great deal of ground that was consecrated
to the gods. Which sum when they refused to pay, they pronounced their
country as confiscate and consecrated to the gods: whereupon arose a war,
called the holy war, made by the rest of the Grecians against them, and in
the end their utter ruin and subversion. Whosoever was once accused of any
crime before the Judges in Lacedemonia, although he were absolved, yet he abode
a certain time after in that estate of a criminal person, during which time
inquiry might be made again of him, and new judgment given according to his
desert. If the Ephories condemned their kings in any sum, yea if it were to
death, their judgments Of the judgments of the Romans.
were executed with all rigor. The judgments of the Romans were for a long
time in the hands of three Orders or Estates: namely, of Senators, Knights, and
Tribunes Who were Judges amongst them, and how they were chosen.
of the treasure. Nevertheless, the same persons did not always judge, but the
Pretors, who were annual Judges, and chief amongst them, took a certain
number of Judges by lot out of those three Estates. And if they that were first
taken were refused by any one of the parties, others were chosen by an
after-lot, who being agreed upon and Three kinds of Pretors in Rome.
sworn, were distributed by decuries or tens. There were three sorts of
Pretors, the Praetor of the City, who took knowledge of particular causes:
namely, of civil and criminal matters amongst the citizens of Rome: the Praetor
established for matters between strangers and citizens: and the Pretors
appointed for public causes. The Senators were once the only Judges of all
processes: but Tiberius and Caius Gracchus being popular persons, to diminish
the authority of the Senate, and to increase the peoples power, joined unto
them 300. Knights, according to the number of the Senators, and brought it so
about, that the judgments of al causes were divided between these 600. men.
Under Sylla all authority of judging was restored again to the Senate: but
Pompey after that brought in the Knights again, and all judgments were
equally communicated unto the three Orders above mentioned. Afterward, when
Caesar was Dictator, he reduced them to two Orders only, that is, to Senators,
and to Knights. Buda in his annotations upon the Pandects, has observed many
good things belonging to the Roman judgments, which curious spirits may look
into: among the rest, of the great respect and honor that was given to
Magistrates. Concerning which matter we may use as a good testimony, that which
we read in Of the reverence and honor which was given to Magistrates.
Plutark, of Fabius Maximus his son, who seeing a far off his father come
toward him on horseback, and that his sergeants in regard of fatherly
reverence had not caused him to alight, commanded him to set foot on ground.
Which the father presently obeyed, and embracing his son, made greater
account of him, than if he had done otherwise. The same author writes, that
one Vectius was presently slain, because he arose not when the Tribune of the
people passed before him. And Valerius Maximus says, that the Censors did note
with ignominy, and withal disfranchised a citizen of Rome, because he breathed
and yawned a little too loud in their presence. But what? Estats and dignities
were then given to virtue, and not to him that offered most. And often times the
places of judgment were necessarily, and as it were by force laid upon Judges,
being more honorable than profitable, yea very incommodious to such as would
An excellent way to decide all controversies between parties at discord.
discharge themselves uprightly therein. I remember an excellent judgment
given by Archidamus the Lacedemonian, when he was chosen Arbitrator to decide a
certain contention between two friends. After he had brought them both into
the Temple of Diana, and made them swear upon the altar, that they should
observe precisely whatsoever he determined, whereunto they yielded. I judge then
(quoth he) that none of you depart out of this Temple, before you have ended
your strife. Thus were they both constrained to agree among themselves, and
Archidamus freed from peril of loosing one of their friendships, against whom
he must needs have given judgment. By this means he put in practice that
saying of Pittacus, That a man must not be ludge or Arbitrator in the
controversy of two friends, least by judging profitably for one, he loose the
friendship of the other. But let us speak of our Of the ancient reputation of
judgments in France.
own Estate. In old time (as many histories report) judgments were so well
administered in France, that strangers did willingly submit themselves unto
them. Frederick the 2. submitted to the judgment of the king and his
Parliament, the deciding of many contentions and controversies between him and
Pope Innocent the fourth. In the time of Phillip the Fair, the Earl of Namure
did the like, albeit that Charles of Valoys the kings brother, was his adverse
party: so great confidence had he in the equity of those Judges. At the same
time Phillip Prince of Tatentum willingly accepted for Judge, the king sitting
in his Parliament, about the controversy that he had with the Duke of
Burgundye, for certain charges which he should defraye toward the recovery
of the Empire of Constantinople. The like did the Duke of Lorraine in the suite
which he had against Guy of Castillon his brother in law, for their division of
lands. And in the year 1402. the Kings of Castile and of Portingale sent an
agreement made and past between them, that it might be published and
proclaimed in the Court of Parliament, to have greater authority thereby.
Truly these testimonies are as famous for the glory of justice used in France,
as any that can be alleged by the Grecians or Romans, for the proof of
their just judgments, of the reputation of their laws, and renown of their
Magistrates. But let us consider The justice of France fallen from the ancient
glory.
how far justice is fallen at this day from that ancient opinion and credit,
judgments being now brought to that length, and entangled in so many
formalities, that it is a thing greatly to be pitied, and full of calamity, to
see this Realm so infected, as it were with a general contagious disease,
wherein such an innumerable company of men live by that miserable exercise of
pleading, called Tokens of a corrupted Estate.
Practice. Plato says, that it is an evident token of a corrupted Estate,
where there are many Judges and Physicians: because the multitude of Judges is
maintained by the unfaithfulness and contention of men, and the great number of
Physicians by idleness, dainty fare, and gluttony. There was never any nation
of which this might be more truly spoken than of ours, as it is notoriously
known to every one. Paulus Aemilius writes, that in the beginning, French The
proceeding of justice in France from time to time.
men behaved themselves simply and plainly in matters of judgment, resting in
the determinations given by the Bailiffs and Seneshals, who had the
administration almost of al right and jurisdiction, and thinking it unseemly
and void of honesty, to seek a far off for right by means of appeal. But
after that slanders arose amongst them, and suites were multiplied, sovereign
justice began to be exercised once a year, and that for a few days together:
afterward, twice a year, always changing the place. In the end it was
determined, that the chief judgments should be held in a certain place, and
that a house should be built for that purpose at Paris, the principal city of
the kingdom. Whereupon, in the reign of Phillip the Fair, the Palace was
erected according to that greatness and magnificence wherein you now see it,
with hals and chambers, into which were distributed by certain companies those
Judges that gave the last sentence from which no appeal might be made, both in
civil and criminal matters. The erection of this Parliament into an ordinary
Court, does give us to understand that there should be one or The officers of
the Court of Parliament in Paris.
two Presidents. The first President was the Earl of Burgundy, a Prince of the
blood: as in the Imperial Chamber, the President is always one of the Princes
of the Empire. And it was a custom for a certain time, that the chief
President should be a man of war, as in deed to this day he takes upon him
the estate of knight. Besides, there were eight Clearks, and twelve Lay men,
four Princes of the blood for Requests, two Chambers of Inquiries, where there
were eight Lay men, and eight Clearks Judges, and four and twenty Relators.
They were called Clearks that wore long gowns, whether married or unmarried,
and the others Lay men. At this day there is the The pre^^^te* state of the
Paeliament.
great Chamber, which is the first and chiefest, and is called the Pleading
place, where first of all, matters belonging to the Peers and to the King, are
decided, and ordinarily those verbal appellations that are made upon the Pleas
of the Aduocats, or if they cannot be readily determined, they are remitted to
the Council, for which there is a Chamber appointed. Next, there are five
Chambers of Inquiries, wherein processes in writing are examined and
determined. There also is the Tournel, or place where criminal actions are
judged, and the Treasure-chamber for causes touching the kings revenues. There
is the court of Requests, wherein chiefly matters of privileges belonging to
the kings train and to others, are judged. There is the Auditorie of the
masters of Requests for the household, who judge of the titles of offices: the
Chamber of the Generals, of the justice of the Releefs, and the Chancery. On
the other side is the Chamber of accounts, and that of the general Receivers.
Some of the counselors are married, others are Ecclesiastical persons, and
are divided by Chambers according as the Court is furnished. In the great
Chamber there are for the most part four Presidents, unto whom the necessity
of times have added two others, who may be suppressed when there is no need of
them. In the other Chambers there are but two Presidents. Moreover, there is
one Procurator for the king, and two Aduocats, to look to the kings
prerogatives, and to all such matters: two Scribes to collect, inroll, and to
deliver both civil and criminal deeds: four Notaries and Secretaries to
ease them, besides a great number of other writers. Budaeus, a very skillful
man, and a diligent Of the ancient estate of the Parliament.
searcher out of all antiquity, has observed in his first annotations upon
the Pandects, that there were three sorts of Judges in the time of Phillip the
Long. In the first bench, which was properly called the Parliament of Prelates
and Barons, unto whom certain Lawyers were assistants, or other learned men,
called Clearks and Lay men, three Prelates and three Barons were Presidents, and
judgment was not given so much by the plurality of voices, as by the
sufficiency of those that gave their verdicts. He says also, that the
Lay-counsellors were taken from amongst Gentlemen and others, of whom it was
not required that they should be Graduats in the law, but it was sufficient if
they had indifferent skill in other learning, as we see that some short gowned
men have. They did not then study the Roman laws, as they have done since:
whereupon they have erected at this day Universities of the law in the best
Towns of France: from whence many think that the multitude of suites have
proceeded, because they learn by this means the occupation or craft of
pleading, as the Lord Chancellor de l'Hospital declared in his second Oration
which he made Ferdinando forbad that any Lawyers should go into the West
Indians.
to the Estates at Orleans. We read that when Ferdinando king of Spain, sent
Pedrarias as governor into the West Islands newly discovered, he forbad him to
take any Lawyer or Advocate with him, that he might not carry the seed of
suites thither where there were none at all. Cicero complained of his time,
that many notable decrees of laws were corrupted and depraved by the curious
heads of the Lawyers. What would he do if he were now alive, and saw the great
heaps and piles of books, with our practice in the law? If he saw that
holy Temple of laws so vilely polluted, and miserably profaned? Where a
thousand cauils and quiddities are continually coined by such writings,
according to the saying of that Comicall Poet: That through craft and subtlety
one mischief is begotten upon another? Moreover, in those happy days, of
which we made mention, there were few statuts and edicts, because me^ thought
that good manners were the best laws, and that natural sense helped with an
upright conscience, and joined with due experience, was the ^^ghtest rule to
judge by. But after that men became so skillful in suites, The springs of all
corruptions of justice.
and that offices of justice, from honorable but finally profitable, being
freely given to those that deserved them, came to be gainefull, free from
yielding any account of their doings, and set forth to sale, as marchandice,
for them that bad most, and offered last: after that men began to spice their
suits with great sums of money, and to forsake that ancient plainnes, which
consisted in giving of a few iunckets to the Judges: after that profit began
to grow by determining of by-matters, and such as happen before the maine
cause, and by deciding of suites by Commissioners: after that Presidents and
Counselors began to take delight in this, that they were followed, The
Areopagites judged by night, and in the dark.
solicited, and sought to by suitors, contrary to the custom of the
Areopagites, who judged by night, and in the dark, and contrary to the opinion
of Marcus Cato, who said, that it was not seemly for a man to recommend his
right to the Judges, or to pray them to commit no injustice, because these two
things ought to be deerer to the Judges than to the parties, who can loose but
mortal and vading goods, whereas the others pawn their souls to hell fire
that lasts for ever: after that, gifts were received of both sides against
express prohibitions given out The Switzers forbid their Judges to take any
thing for judging.
by public laws and statutes, wherein the Switzers may serve unto us for a
notable example, amongst whom it is forbidden under pain of life, to take any
thing either directly or indirectly for judging: after that Aduocats began to
consider slightly of causes, not having so much patience to end one matter,
because they would speedily to another: whereby they give occasion many times
to their Clients to say, as a Peasant said not long since to The saying of a
Peasant to three Lawyers.
three famous Aduocats, whose counsel he had used: Truly (quoth he) ye have
labored fair: for ye have left me in greater doubting than I was in before:
after they began to write in sheets with seven or eight lines on a side, and
to disguise matters with frivolous answers that lay open their griefs, with
contradictions, replications, admonitions: after that (...) who in former times
were to be had for nothing, and appointed for certain causes* became hirelings
and perpetual, yea at this day their offices are set to sale: after that
Sollicitors were suffered in midst of them all, to be, as it were the
skum-gatherers of suites, with all that rablement of practitioners, who devour
the substance of poor men, as Drones eat up the honey of Bees: lastly, after
the Chancery did let loose the bridle to all sorts of expeditions, and went
about to teach the Judges, I say, after these things began to be practiced, we
fell into this misery of long suits, gainefull to wicked and Of the misery
which length of suits bring with it.
faithles men, who seek nothing but delays, and very prejudicial to good
men, who many-times had rather loose their right, than undo themselves by
following it so long time by way of justice. For they commonly see the rightest
cause frustrated by delays, which are granted at their pleasure that are
favored, and by infinite other unjust means. Sometimes many judgments are
given upon one matter, and yet nothing concluded: or if there be any definitive
sentence, it is by and by suspended from execution, upon the least objection
that is made, or else it is called into doubt by some civil request, or by a
writ of error. Thrice happy were we, if we might continue in that ancient
simplicity and natural goodness, rather than after this manner to infold our
selves in so many proceedings and captious subtleties, which have corrupted and
extinguished the light of justice, imprinted in the hearts and minds of all
men well borne. We see The great abuse of justice in France.
that suites are heaped up one upon another, and made immortal: that nothing
is so certain which is not made uncertain: that no controversy is so clear,
which is not obscured: no contract so sure, which is not undone: no sentence or
judgment so advisedly given, which is not made void: all men's actions open to
the slanders, craft, malice, redemptions, and pollings of Lawyers: the majesty
and integrity of ancient justice lost: and last of all, that in the dealings
of men now a days, no show of upright justice, but only a shadow thereof
remains. This evil being so great, and grown to such extremity, it is
impossible but that, according to the course of worldly things, the ruin
thereof should be at hand, or at least it is to receive some notable change
within short space. For (as Plato says) in a corrupt Commonwealth How a
corrupt Commonwealth must be corrected.
defiled with many vices, if a man should think to bring it back again to
her first brightness and dignity, by correcting small faults, and by curing the
contagion thereof by little and little, it were all one as if he should cut off
one of Hydras heads, in whose place seven more did spring up: but that
alteration and disorder whereby all evil and vice was brought into the
Commonwealth, must be plucked up by the roots. Therefore let us not think it
strange, if they that have the raines of the government of this Estate in their
hands, find so many difficulties and so small means, in the reformation
thereof. For, as Demades said, they govern nothing but the shipwreck of the
Commonwealth. Nevertheless honest men, endued with some gifts, and with good
judgment, ought not to be discouraged in so great a storm, but the more that
the tempestuous rage thereof seems to torment the Vessel of our
Commonwealth, and that with such violence, that the Patron himself and the
Pilotes are in a manner tired, and faint with continual travel, so much the
more diligently ought the passengers to lend their hands, some to the sails,
some to the tackling, and some to the anchor* yea now is the time (following
the counsel of Cicero in the like case) that all that are endued with singular
gifts of nature, fit for the managing of affairs, ought boldly to When it is
lawful to seek after public offices.
take upon them public Offices and Estates without fear, to the end that all
entrance may be shut up against the wicked, who are the nourishers of this
present corruption. Now, if those three things, which Aristotle requires in
all good Judges and Magistrates, did abound in them that should hereafter be
called to administer justice and judgment: namely, a love to the present
Estate, a sufficiency to exercise those duties that are required in their
office, with virtue and justice, we might yet see some Idea and form of that
golden age, wherein our Predecessors lived, we might see piety and justice
flourish, to the great benefit and felicity of this French Monarchy.
Concerning that which may be further required in the duties, qualities, and
conditions of good Judges, we may be instructed by our other treatise, wherein
we entreated of Counselors of Estate, and also by calling to mind the former
discourses of virtue and justice. I only will add here, that it were very
commendable and full of profit, yea necessary for the Estate, that all the
companies of Judges should be compounded of such notable old men Judges ought
to be such old men as have experience joined with their knowledge.
, as with their knowledge have experience of many things. And in deed this
title of Senator, which was given them in ancient time, signifies an old man:
neither did the Grecians or Romans call any to that degree, but old men. But
how can we desire a more heavenly ordinance than that which God himself
appointed, when he established a Senate? Gather together (said he) three score
and ten of the ancientest of the people, wise men, and such as fear God.
Surely in this election of Judges, it behooves Kings to use great prudence,
and (as Isocrates said) to take trial of them, to know whether they are of
good judgment, whether they have a sharp sight in affairs, and whether they
are not troubled with the change of their life, but behave themselves wisely in
every estate, both in prosperity and in adversity: especially Magistrates must
not be covetous
to take good order that they be not such as are subject to lucre, from whence
all injustice proceeds. Therefore Cicero would have the contempt of temporal
goods, from whence all quietness of our minds comes, to be no less in
Magistrates, than in true Philosophers. Yea, he says, that they ought to be
more careful and laborious to attain unto it, than the others, because
worldly affairs touches them nearer, so that they have greater cause to
stand in fear of the alteration of fortune, of adversity, and of poverty.
Unto which agrees fitly that saying of Pliny the yoonger: That no point of
Philosophy The chiefest point of Philosophy.
is more excellent than to deal in public affairs, and to do justice,
whereby they practice that which philosophers teach. But out of question, the
form and manner, which of late time has been used in calling Judges and
Officers to their charges, is so far from that which we desire here, that in
this respect a man may call it the mother of all corruption and injustice. For
when a Judge is made, his knowledge is not A corrupt making of Judges.
examined, his integrity and vprightnes of life is not weighed his long
experience is not considered, his age and virtue is not regarded, but only his
crowns are viewed to see whether they are weight. Now since that such men grew
rich, although they are found insufficient, yet they obtain so many letters of
commandment, so many Mandatums one in another neck, that in the end they are
received whatsoever they are, to the great prejudice of the whole
Commonwealth. We are therefore to wish that all valuing and sale of offices,
especially of judgment and justice may be abolished and disanulled, that all
means of favor and ambition may be taken away, that the ancient and The
statute of S. Jews concerning the election of officers.
happy ordinances of our kings may be restored: especially that decree of S.
Jews the king, whereby he enacted, that all public offices should be bestowed
upon the election of three persons, chosen by the Officers and Citizens of
those places, to one of which so elected, the king was to give freely without
money, the office then void. This holy ordinance has since that time been
often renewed by king Phillip the Fair, Charles the Wise, Charles the 7. Jews
the 11. and Charles the ninth that dead is, when his Estates were held at
Orleans. So that if the King and his Council would advisedly consider of these
things in the establishing of Judges and Magistrates in his kingdom, and would
strengthen them in the execution of their judgments, the obedience of his
subjects; would be greater, and the foundation of all good order and policy
more sure.


Of Seditions. Chap. 63.
ARAM. AS it is necessary that all things which have a beginning should end,
and which increase should diminish and wax old, some sooner, others later,
according to the disposition of that No earthly thing perpetual.
matter whereof they are compounded, and through the influence of the heavenly
bodies, from which (nature woorking in them by her author) this continual and
mutual succession of generation and corruption proceeds: so are public
estates first instituted, increased, maintained, lessened, changed, destroyed,
turned and returned one from another by the disposition of God. Those that are
best grounded in religion and justice, have their power most assured, and are
of longest continuance, but none No Commonwealth perpetual.
are perpetual, although their policy and manner of government be never so
good. For we see them al corrupt in process of time, and in the end perish
through their own vices that follow and accompany them, being first moved and
stirred up by nothing so much as by sedition, and civil war. This brings
to light all evil that lurketh in those members of the politic body that are
most pernicious, until the infection be wholly spread, and has taken hold of
the noblest parts thereof, whereby it is brought to extreme misery without
hope of remedy. Now, although every one of us have sufficient feeling hereof
in himself by his own harm, yet we may know it better by taking occasion
upon this subject to discourse of the nature of seditions, and of their common
effects, that we may have them in greater detestation, and bring every one of
us his heart and mind to help this Estate, if there remain never so little
show or means whereby the subversion thereof may yet be kept back. But I
leave the discourse of this matter to you my Companions.


ACHITOB. All sedition is evil and pernicious, although it seems to have a
good and honest cause. For it No injury is a sufficient cause for any man to
moon sedition.
were better for him that is author of sedition, to suffer any loss or
injury, than to be the occasion of so great an evil, as to raise civil war
in his country.


ASER. Nature (says Empedocles) uses no other means to destroy and to
overthrow her creatures, than discord and disjunction: and sedition (as
Thucydides says) comprehends in it all kind of evils. Let us then hear
AMANA, who will prove this sufficiently unto us.


AMANA. If we consider, how God minding to punish Adam for his ingratitude and
disobedience, made his own members rebel against the spirit, unto which they
obeyed before, whereby he became captive under The original of all sedition.
the law of sin, no doubt but we may say, that after the same manner he
chastises Kings, Princes, and Heads of Commonwealths, that have no care to
obey his commandments, and to cause others to keep them, by the rebellion of
their own subjects, not without great danger of deprivation from all
authority by them, and of receiving the law at their hands to whom they
should give it, as it has been seen practiced in many Estates and The cause
of union and concord in kingdoms.
governments. Religion and the love of God brings with it all union and
concord, preserves Kingdoms and Monarchies in their integrity, and is the
nursing mother The fruits of the contempt of religion.
of peace and amity amongst them. But the contempt of religion brings
discord and confusion, ouerturneth all order, treads virtue under foot,
gives authority to vice, and sows quarrels and dissentions amongst men, from
whence seditions and private murders proceed, and in the end civil and open
wars, which are as flaming fires to take hold of, and to consume most
flourishing Estates. For without doubt, if men had in them the true love and
fear of God, which cannot be without the love of our neighbor, no such
effects would ever proceed from their works and actions. Politics have labored
infinite ways to maintain the people in peace, and to cause civil justice to
flourish. They have made many Laws and Edicts, many Statutes, appointed many
punishments, to bridle the boldness of seditious fellows, to repress
extorsions, wrongs, and murders: but because they built without a Peace and
concord effects of the fear of God. Isaias. 2. 4. Micah. 4. 3.
foundation, that is, without the fear of God, all their labor taken therein
was fruitles. It is the fear of God only that causes swords to be broken and
turned into mattocks, and spears into siethes, as Isaias and Micah speak:
that is to say, which breeds humanity and gentleness, mollifieth men's hearts,
and causes them to suffer much to avoid strife and debate; in a word, which
is able to unite in one with us most strange and barbarous nations. Besides, it
is the profession of godliness to suffer, and not to offer violence, neither can
it bring forth evil effects contrary to their cause. This deserves to be
handled at large, but our present subject leads us to discourse of the nature
of seditions, and to set before our eyes the evils that proceed thereof, both
by reasons and examples, referring the consideration of their causes unto some
other time hereafter. Sedition then being taken generally, is nothing What
sedition is.
else but civil war, so hurtful to all Estates and Monarchies, that it is
the seed of all kind of evils in them, even of those that are most execrable.
It engenders The fruits of sedition.
and nourishes want of reverence toward God, disobedience to Magistrates,
corruption of manners, change of laws, contempt of justice, and base
estimation of learning and sciences. It causes horrible revenging,
forgetfulness of consanguinitie, parentage, and friendship, extorsions,
violence, robberies, wasting of countries, sacking of towns, burning of
buildings, confiscations, flights, banishments, cruel proscriptions, savage
murders, alterations and overthrows of Policies, with other infinite excesses
and intolerable miseries, pitiful to behold, and sorrowful to rehearse.
Sedition armeth the father against the son, the brother against the brother,
kinsman against kinsman, men of the same nation, province, and city, one
against another. Heerupon the fields, which before were fertile, are left
untilled, sumptuous and rich houses remain empty and forsaken, famous and
wealthy towns stand desolate, by reason of the loss of their ancient
ornaments, I mean their private and public buildings, and their notable
Inhabitants and Citizens. And, which is woorst of all, no man will acknowledge
a Sovereign, but every Province will seek to withdraw it self, and to be
made a Canton. In the end, the body thus dismembered, and the parts thereof
infected with the same poison of discord, destroy themselves: that the
prophecy of Jesus Christ, who is the truth it self, might be fulfilled, where
he says: That every kingdom divided in Matthew. 12. 25. 2. Sam. 24. 14.
it self, shall be desolate. Therefore David did rather choose a plague
amongst his subjects, than war or tumults. And Pythagoras said, that three
things were by all means to be removed: a disease from the body, ignorance
from the soul, and sedition from the City. Plato also affirms, that no
evil is worse in a City than that which divides it, and of one makes it
two: and that nothing is better than that thing which tieth and unites it
together. What community Plato required in his Common-welth
Whereupon he wished, that there might be a communion, not only of all goods,
but also of that which nature has appropriated to every one, as of eyes,
ears, and hands, to the end that whosoever saw, heard, or did any thing, he
might employ all to common profit and use, thereby to maintain better the
mutual love of Citizens, who having nothing private, would by this means be
always touched with the same joy and grief, praising and disliking all
jointly together the same things. There are Two kinds of war.
two sorts of war mentioned also by Plato, who calls the one sedition,
which is the woorst, and the other which is more gentle, is that against
strangers. Nestor, a wise and prudent counselor among the Grecians, said in a
Council (as Homer reports) that he which loves civil war, is a most
wretched, cruel, and detestable man, and unworthy to live. And truly if we
look to the examples of those fruits, which have always proceeded of civil
wars, we shall see that they have been guided after a most cruel and horrible
kind of hostility, and that their issue has been the loss and overthrow of
many flourishing Commonwealths. The fruits of civil war among the Grecians.
Thucydides speaking of the general dissension amongst the Grecians for
diversity of governments, which they sought to bring in amongst themselves,
some desiring to be governed in a Democraty, others is an Oligarchy, rehearses
incredible evils which arose of that war. As soon (says he) as any
insolency was known to be committed in one place, others were encouraged to
do worse, to enterprise some new thing, and to show that they were more
diligent than others, or more insolent and hot in revenging themselves. They
disguised all the evils which they committed with commendable titles, calling
rashness Magnanimity, and modesty Baseness of mind: headlong indignation
Manlines and Hardines, prudent counsel and deliberation Colored backsliding.
Whereby it came to pass that whosoever always showed himself furious, was
accounted a loial friend, and he that gainsaid, was suspected. If any one of
the contrary faction gave any good and honest counsel, it was not accepted:
but if they could withstand it by any notorious deed, they had rather be
revenged so, then they would not give occasion to others to offer the like
wrong to them. When any agreement was made and confirmed with a solemn oath,
it lasted until one of the parties grew to be the stronger, that he might
break and violate the same, and by extreme wickedness overcome the other, which
proceeded of covetousness and desire of other men's goods. Hereupon those
factions and part-takings were kindled, which procured infinite evils to the
whole country of Graecia, wherein there was no quietness, until it was quite
overthrown by seditions and civil wars. This is that which Demades objected
to the Athenians by way of reproach, Demades reprocheth the Athenians.
that they never entreated of peace but in mournyng gowns, namely, after they
had lost many of their kinsfolks and friends in battles and skirmishes.
Agesilaus king of Lacedemonia bewailed this misery when he saw such cruel
wars between the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, people of one country, and
although he had won a great battle near unto Corinth with great loss to
his enemies, and small hurt to his own men, yet not reioicing, but rather
being very sorrowful, he uttered these words with a loud voice: O poor
Graecia, how miserable art Agesilaus bewaileth the civil dissension of Graecia.
thou to slay with thine own hands so many of thy valiant men, as would have
sufficed to discomfite in one battle all the Barbarians joined together.
Histories tell us, that the Romans came to that great Empire more by
dissentions and civil wars, which they sowed amongst their neighbors, than
by force of arms. For after they had kindled the fire in one nation, they
maintained one side a certain time, until in the end they overwhelmed both
the one and the other. Thus they deceived the Carthaginians, the Asians, the
Gauls, and Graecia. Only England was not quite subdued, because The prudence
of Englishmen.
it knew their practices, and turned all domestical choler against the enemy
when the danger was common. Traian the emperor writing to the Senate of Rome
amongst Traians letter to the Senate of Rome.
other things sent these words: I recommend unto you above all things,
friendship and brotherhood among your selves: because ye know that in great
Commonwealths home-warres are more hurtful than those that are made against
strangers. For if kinsmen and neighbors had never begun to hate one another,
and to war one upon another, Demetrius had never overthrown Rhodes, nor
Alexander Tyrus, nor Marcellus Syracusa, nor Scipio Numantium. The Roman
Empire decayed through seditions.
And in deed the Roman Empire fell from her greatness by the same means of
civil war which they had long time nourished among others. Yea it is
certain, that in no place part-takings full of all kind of cruelty, were so
usual and so long time practiced, or factions and seditions were more cruel
than in Rome. The first The original of the Roman seditions.
occasion thereof was their government, wherein the people always set
themselves against the Senate and the Nobility, the Senate seeking to rule
without measure, and the people to increase their liberty. During these
dissentions, it came to pass that at one time four thousand and five hundredth
slaves and banished men invaded the Capitol, and wanted little of making
themselves lords of Rome. Appian has written at large of their seditions and
partialities, and says that through ambition and covetousness one side daily
sought to diminish the authority M. Coriolanus being banished contrary to
right, took arms against his country.
of the other. He says that Martius Coriolanus being upon this occasion, and
in these dissentions driven out of the city contrary to right and reason, went
to the Volsci, and warred on their side against his country, being the first
banished person that took arms against Rome. And in deed, neither in the
council, nor in the city, there was no sword drawn, nor man slain in civil
sedition, until T. Gracchus the first that was slain in Rome by sedition.
Tyberius Gracchus favoring the people, and making laws in their behalf, was
killed, and many others that were with him in the Capitol near the Temple.
Whereupon hatred and rancor increasing openly amongst them, infinite murders
followed, and many of the chiefest even the Consuls were slain, the contempt
of laws and judgments ensued, and in the end open war, armies and troops one
against another with incredible thefts and cruelties. At last Cornelius Sylla,
one of the seditious persons, seeking to redress one evil with another, (after
these dissentions had continued about 50. years) made himself prince over the
rest in many things, taking upon him the office of a Dictator, who was wont in
former time to be created in the greatest dangers of the commonwealth only for
six months. But Sylla was chosen perpetual Dictator, because necessity Sylla
made himself perpetual Dictator.
so required, as he said himself. After he had practiced much violence, he
continued in quietness like a conqueror, and was thereupon surnamed the Happy.
After his death seditions began a fresh, and revenging of those cruelties which
he had committed, until Caius Caesar laid hold of the Seignorie and
principaltie, having discomfited and overcome Pompey, to whom he was before
allied. For when they twain sought by their plat-formes and devises to
command all, they could not abide one another within a while after, Pompey
being unwilling to have an equal, and Caesar a superior. Afterward Brutus and
Cassius being moved with desire either of rule, or of public liberty, slew
Caesar: whereupou the seditions grew greater than they were before, and the
triumuirate war was opened against them, which prevailing for a time, was it
self dissolved and brought to nothing. For Octanius only of the three remained
a peaceable possessor of the Roman Empire, being happy in all things, and
feared of all men, leaving heirs of his race to rule the Monarchy after him.
Augustus being dead, the estate began under The Roman Empire began first to
decline under Tiberius.
Tyberius his successor, a voluptuous prince, to decline by little and little
from the periode of her greatness, until in the end there remained no more
than that which we see enclosed within the limits of Germany. Alexanders
Division overthrew Alexanders Empire.
Empire being the greatest that ever was, vanished away as a fire of Towe,
through the division and disorder that was amongst his successoures. The Empire
of The cause of the ruin of Constantinople.
Constantinople through the part-takings of Princes, is brought under the
tyrannous and miserable power of an Ethnike and barbarous Turk. We read in
Josephus that The cause of the subjection of Iudaea to the Romans.
the kingdom of Iudaea became subject and tributarie to the Romans, through
the civil wars between Hircanus and Aristobulus, who were brothers. For
Pompey being of Hircanus side, took the city of Jerusalem, and led away
Aristobulus and his children prisoners with him, after the country had suffered
infinite calamities by their domestical divisions. Which when Onias a holy man
did well foresee, he withdrew himself into a secret place, and would not take
part either with the one or the other side. And being taken by Hircanus his
men, they required him, that as once he obtained rain by his prayers in the
time of a drought, so he would now curse Aristobulus and all those of his
faction: but he contrariwise lifting up his hands to Onias prayer.
heaven, vttred these words. O God, king of the whole world, seeing these men
among whom I stand, are thy people, and they that are assailed, thy Priests, I
beseech thee humbly, that thou would harken neither to these men against the
other, nor to the other against these: for which holy prayer he was stoned to
death, such was the poisoned rage of this people one against an Civil wars in
Italy between the Guelphes and the Gybellines.
other. Was there ever any folly, or rather fury like to that of the Guelphes
and Gybellines in Italy, of whom the one side held with the Pope, and the
other with the Emperor? The Italians upon no other occasion but only in favor
of these two names, entered into so extreme a quarrel throughout the whole
country, that greater cruelty could not be wrought between the Infidels and
Christians, than was committed amongst them. This contention continues yet,
insomuch that murders are every where committed in the towns, even between
natural brethren, yea between the father and his sons, without all regard
The great cruelty of the Guelphes and Gybellines.
either of blood or parentage. Their goods are spoiled, their houses razed,
some banished, others slain: and whilst every one fears least any revenge
should be laid up in store for him, or for some other of his side, they kill
many times little infants, whom the most barbarous men in the world would spare.
These two factions fought continually together through mortal hatred, so that
they could not dwell together in one city, but the stronger always drove By
what tokens they know one another.
out and expelled the other. They knew one another by feathers, by the fashion
of their hose, by cutting of bread, slicing of orenges, and by other marks*
which is a very pernicious thing, and has procured great destruction of
people, and overthrow of towns. The Italians say, that this fire was first
kindled at Pistoya between two brethren, The original of this contention.
the one called Guelph, and the other Gibellin, who quarelling together,
divided the town between them, whereupon the Gibellins were driven out. This
separation, like to a contagious disease, upon no other occasion was spread
over all Italy, insomuch that afterward all that were at contention any where,
were divided into Guelphs and Gibellines. The Germains think that these names
came from their country and language: and that the emperor Frederike the
second, in whose time this division began, called his friends Gibellines,
because he leaned upon them, as a house does upon two strong walls that keep
it from falling: and those that were against him of the faction of Pope
Gregory the ninth, he called Guelphs, that is to say, Wolves. What did England
suffer by the division of the The division of the houses of York and Lancaster.
houses of York and Lancaster, that gave the white and red Roses in their
arms? Which contention although it began when Henry the 4. who was duke of
Lancaster and earl of Darbie, usurped the kingdom upon his cousin Richard the
second, whom he caused to be slaiue in prison, after he had compelled him to
resign his kingly power and crown of England, yet it was hottest in the
reign of king Henry the 6. who succeeding his father and grandfather, was at
Paris crowned king of England and France. Afterward favoring the house of
Lancaster against the Henry the 6. deprived of his Kingdom by the house of
York.
house of York, they that held with the red Rose took arms against him, so
that in the end he was deprived of his estate, and shut up as prisoner in the
Tower of London, where he was after that put to death. These factions and
civil wars (as Phillip Cominaeus writes) endured about 28. years, wherein
there died at sundry battles and skirmishes above 80. persons of the blood
royal, with the flower of the nobility of England, besides an infinite number
of the valiauntest men and best warriors among the people. Many lords were
put in prison, or banished, leading the rest of their lives miserably in
strange countries: the ancient policy of the kingdom corrupted, justice
contemned, and the Island impouerished, until in the end the The union of the
houses of Lancaster and York.
earl of Richmond overcame king Richard, enjoyed the kingdom quietly, and was
called Henry the seventh: having married Elizabeth daughter to Edward the
fourth, both of them being the sole heirs of the families of Lancaster and
York. By means of this marriage the dissension ceased in England, and the red
and white Roses were joined together in one arms. There was no Country Of
civil wars in Spain.
more afflicted than Spain, both by civil wars and by Neighbour-states,
when it was divided into many kingdoms. The Moors ouer-ranne it on the one
side, the French and Englishmen devoured it on the other, taking part at the
first with the dissentions that were in Castile between Don Peter and Don
Henry; next with the contentions that arose betwixt Castile and Portingale,
which caused much evil to both the kingdoms. But since that Spain has been
united, it has extended her dominion The great jurisdiction of Spain.
into Afrike, and into the New found Islands, borne arms in Germany, and in
Hungary, commanded over the chief Islands of the Mediterranean sea, over Naples
and Sicilia, over Millan and Flanders. Contrariwise, Italy having in former
times her forces knit together, obtained the Empire Of civil dissension in
Italy.
of the world, but being now divided into many Seignories and Potentates that
agree badly together, and having suffered all the calamities in the world by
civil wars, lies open to the injuries of strangers. Through the same cause
the power of Germany is greatly diminished, wherein not long since the princes
of Saxony were banded one Germany vexed with civil war.
against an other: John Frederick, Phillip Lantgraue of Hesse, the Duke of
Wittemburg, with many free cities, rebelled against the Emperor: the
peasauntes rose against the Nobility to set themselves at liberty: the
Anabaptists possessed Munster, made a botcher their king, Hungaria lost by
civil dissension.
and held out the siege for the space of two years. Hungaria, which had
valiauntly resisted the Turks almost two hundredth years together, was at
length subdued by them, through the divisions that were in the country, as
Polonia is greatly threatened by the Moscouite. In Persia, after the death of
king lacob his two sons strove for the government of the country, but the
Sophie Ismael Persia was subdued by the dissension of two brethren.
coming in the mean time upon them with his new religion slew one of them in
battle, and compelled the other to fly into Arabia, and so possessed the
kingdom, which he left to his children. Phillip the eleventh, Duke of
Burgundy, easily subdued Dinan and Bouines in the Dinan and Bouines subdued
through dissension.
country of Liege, which were separated only by a river, after they had
overthrown themselves by their dissentions, whereas before he could not
obtain his purpose. And whilst the kings of Marrocke warred one with another
for the estate, the Governor of Thunis and of Telensin made himself king,
renting a sunder his two provinces from the rest to erect a kingdom.
Concerning Frenchmen, they have been often and many times molested with
seditions and civil wars as well as others. France much troubled with civil
wars.
The nobility of France was almost all slain at the battle of Fountenay
near to Auxerre, by the civil wars between Lotharius, Jews, and Charles
the balde. And Champagnie lost so many of the nobility in war, that the
Gentlewomen had this special privilege granted Women in Champagnie made
their husbands noble.
them, to make their husbands noble. When king John was prisoner in England,
Charles his son Regent of France, being at Paris to gather money for his
ransom, there fell such a division between the king of Navarre, who took
part with the Parisians, and the Regent, that the people under the guiding of
Marcel, Provost of the merchauntes, ran to Charles his lodgyng, where the
Marshalles of Cleremount and Champagnie were slain, even in his chaumber and
presence, and their bodies drawn over the marble stones. The like was done to
Reignold Dacy the kings Attorney, besides many other murders, so that the
Regent had much ado to save himself without Paris. But the forest factions
that ever Cruel war between the house of Burgundy and of Orleans.
were in France, were those of Burgundy and of Orleans, which caused a most
grievous and cruel civil war, that lasted 70. years, with murders, robberies,
and unspeakable cruelties. Both of them, one after another, called in the
Englishmen to succor them, who afterward seized upon the crown. It was a
pitiful thing to see France cruelly tormented both by her own subjects and by
strangers, to see it void of right and equity, without magistrates, without
judgments, without laws, which had no abiding place amongst fire and force,
where violence only reigned. All this was procured by the ambition of these
two houses, each of them seeking to obtain the government The cause thereof.
of the kingdom under Charles the sixth, whose wits failed him. By the means
of these divisions Henry the fifth king of England, taking to wife Katherine the
youngest daughter of king Charles was put in possession of Paris by Henry the
5. proclaimed king of France.
the duke of Burgundy, and proclaimed heir and Regent of France by the
consent of three estates held at Troy. But the death of this Henry and the duke
of Burgundy forsaking the alliance of the Englishmen, with the valor and good
behavior of king Charles the 7. as also the love and fidelity of the
Frenchmen, restored the kingdom to that estate wherein it is at this present.
Now if France has heretofore suffered so much by civil wars, and domestical
seditions, if all foreign estates have received so many sundry alterations,
and incredible wounds by the same means, how can we look for less, nay rather
have we not already seen the like or greater calamities amongst us, through
our dissentio^s and private quarrels between certain Ambition and desire of
government the chief cause of the troubles in France.
houses contending one with another, being chiefly moved with ambition and
desire to govern? Why do we not acknowledge this first cause of our miseries,
that we may lay aside all hatred crept in amongst us under pretense of
diversity of religion, that we may reunite our minds so much divided, to the
good and common quietness of us all, and live under the obedience of our Prince
with that fidelity for which Frenchmen have been alwais praised above other
nations? Do not so many examples, both of ancient and later times make us see
thus much, that if we redress not this contention, this goodly and flourishing
kingdom, which heretofore has grown great by the concord and obedience of our
ancestors is ready to fall into utter ruin and subversion, through our
factions, divisions, and part-takings? Shall this little that remains of the
French monarchy, which in former The ancients limits of the French monarchy.
times has had all the empire of Germany, the kingdoms of Hungary, Spain and
Italy, and all the bounds of the Gauls to the river of Rhine, under the
obedience of her laws, shall it I say, be thus laid open as a pray, and that
by her own subjects, carried headlong with such passions, that they make the
way plain and ready for strangers to bring them under their miserable
bondage? Shall it be said among our posterity, that our selves have encouraged
them to undertake that, which not long since, Spain, Italy, England, the Low
countries, the Pope, the Venitians, being all joined together against the house
of France, durst not take in hand after the taking of Frauncis the first, and
the loss of that famous battle? Not one of them durst enter into France to
conquer it, knowing the laws and nature of this Monarchy. For as a building
laid upon deep foundations, and made of A comparison.
lasting stuff, well knit and joined together in every part, fears neither
winds nor storms, but easily resists all assaults and violence: so this
kingdom will not easily admit any alteration and change, as long as all the
members continue united and joined together upon the foundation of their laws.
Therefore let the king, princes, their council, great and small, every one in
his place take order, Good counsel for all kings and sovereign princes.
that God may be truly known, and sincerely served according to his just and
righteous will: that honest behavior may be maintained, the authority of
laws kept, justice administered, magistracy duly exercised, rewards and
punishments distributed equally, that virtuous men may be honored, and the
wicked corrected. Otherwise, if we continue long divided into companies, with
defiances passing and repassing, if we persist in our wonted inuectiues and
riots, and refer not all our actions to some good end, let us not look for
less than for a general desolation and pitiful overthrow of our country,
appeering already in many places thereof, or at least for some horrible
mutation and change of the estate.


Of the causes that breed the change, corruption and final ruin of Monarchies
and Policies. Chap. 64.
AMANA. AS long as the Physician knows not the cause of his Patients disease,
it is impossible for him to remedy the same, and to prescribe A disease known
is almost cured.
a medicine to the sick party. A disease known (says the Proverb) is in a
manner cured. So fares it with Estates and Monarchies that are changed, marred,
and in the end brought to ruin by diverse causes: which if they were well known
to their princes and governors, might easily be prevented by prudence and
reason, and fit remedies then applied to those evils that dispose and lead the^
to mutation, when the natural corruption that is in them (as every thing has
his proper and inward corruption of which it is eaten and consumed) begins
to spread it self to the best parts to mar all. Go to then (my companions)
having seen the nature of seditions, let us seek out the causes that stir
them up, whereby Estates and Monarchies are changed, marred, and in the end
overthrown.


ARAM. The causes of division between subjects.
The division that is between subjects of one and the same prince, arises for
the most part of coffeehouse, wherewith some are moved upon injury or
contempt, or else of fear that men have of the light, or to avoid some evil,
or of great idleness, poverty and need.


ACHITOB. Two causes of the frantic fever of French divisions.
There are (as I take it) two causes intermingled, which breed this frantic
Fever of our France, the one proceeding from the Estate, the other from
religion. But let us hear ASER to whom the handling of this subject offered
now unto us, belongs.


ASER. There is no beginning of any thing whatsoever so small, which through
continuance and perseverance is not soon made great and strong, if upon slight
account thereof it be not stayed. Every evil (as Cicero says) in the first
sproute thereof may be easily stopped, but being inueterate, is more strong and
uneasy to be suppressed. So that if it be met withal before it appear and
break forth, the danger is less, although it proceed first from the
necessity of natural corruption, which is in all things that are created, and
is to be seen even in things without Corruption is natural in all things.
sense, as Mil-dew in wheat, rottenness in wood, rust in brass and iron: yea
every thing is corrupted by it own evil, howsoever it escapes all outward
harms. Therefore as a good Physician preuenteth diseases, and if one part be
suddenly touched with raging pain, asswageth the present evil, and then
applies remedies to the causes of the disease: so a wise prince or governor of
a Commonwealth A Prince compared to a Physician.
ought to prevent as much as is possible the ordinary changes of all estates,
which ouer-take them either by outward force, or by inward diseases. When they
begin, he must stay them whatsoever it cost him, and then look what the
causes are of those diseases that are farthest from effect, and apply
convenient and apt remedies unto them. Now it is certain, that if a man would
To know the causes of evils is the readiest way to cure them.
thoroughly meet with all hurtful things, or otherwise cure any such evil when
it happens, he must know their causes whereof the effect depends, which is
the very entrance to all good helps and remedies what so-euer. Foreseen
mischiefs (as the Poet says) hurt not so much as those that come unlooked
for. A wise man premeditateth all that may happen, but it falls out contrary
to fools. And if we have never so small an in-sight into the condition and
state of worldly things, we can When Commonwealths begin to alter.
not in any wise doubt of this, that every Commonwealth, after it is come to
the top of persection, which is the flourishing estate thereof, has but a
short time of continuance: whether her overthrow proceeds from the violence
of her enemies, when she thinks her self safest: or whether she wax old
through long tract of time, and so end by her inward diseases: or whether she
suddenly decay and fall down with her own weight by reason of some other
hidden cause. Which chaunges of Commonwealths being matter sufficient to make
a great book, we are, according to the sequel of our discourse, to consider
chiefly of the causes that for the most part stir up sedition, and breed the
alteration and final overthrow of Estates and Monarchies. The Philosophers
propound four causes of every thing, the efficient, Four causes of all things.
the material, the formal, and the final cause. The efficient cause of
seditions is double; the one near, the other removed a far off. The near
or next cause, are The efficient causes of seditions.
the authors of seditions, by whose counsel, direction and help they are
stirred up and brought to pass. By the cause removed a far off, I mean those
things for which men are provoked to raise seditions, and of which we are
chiefly to entreat in this place. They are the matter of The material cause of
seditions.
seditions against whom they are raised, as princes and magistrates, who are
superiors, and sometime their subjects, being inferiors. The form of
sedition is the The formal cause.
stirring up of the people, noise, outcries, batteries, murders, civil war,
the taking of towns, spoiling of The difference between a rebellion and a
faction.
countries, burning and banishment. If it be of subjects toward their
lords and superiors, it is called rebellion: if between subjects or equals,
it is called a faction. The end of seditions is that for which they are Four
final causes of seditions.
first moved and stirred up. Aristotle sets down four ends of seditions,
namely, profit, and honor, with their contraries, loss and dishonor. For men
are commonly moved to sedition either through hope of profit and honor, or
else through fear of loss and dishonor toward themselves or their friends,
so that they desire the one and shun the other. Unto profit we refer riches:
to honor, magistracy, public offices and charges: to loss, poverty: to
dishonor, continual injury, contempt, and such like means. Which things
although they are reckoned among the motives, or efficient causes of seditions,
so far forth as they provoke men to stir up seditions, yet they may be
ends also, because men conspire together, either to obtain or to eschew them.
Thereore let us handle the causes which move the people to murmr, and lead
them from private and secret grudging, to public and open sedition, from which
the changes, alterations, and final ruins of estates and monarchies proceed.
The covetousness of magistrates Covetousness a principal cause of sedition.
and governors seems to be a chief cause thereof, when they lay upon their
subjects great exactions, taxes, loanes, and other intolerable subsides,
whereby their patience is oftentimes turned into fury, and their hearts set
upon reuolting, are driven forward to imitate them 1. King. 12. 14, 16.
that forsook Roboam for the same cause as the scripture rehearses. But
forasmuch as all civil society is appointed to the end that men might keep
their goods safely under the protection and guiding of good governors, they
that bear chief rule in estates ought especially to provide that not only
public goods may be distributed and employed according to common necessity
and profit, but also that every man's private goods may be in safeti^. Public
goods are the revenues of Seignories, kingdoms and Which are public goods.
empires, demeans, taxes, tributes, confiscations, exchetes, subsidies,
graunts, and impositions brought in for the supply of public necessity. A man
may say that covetousness, which is a wrongful desire of another man's goods, is
When covetousness is committed in public goods.
committed in these public revenues, when the money that comes of them, is
converted rather to private than to public use, by those that have the
disposing thereof: which fault the Romans called peculatus, and the judgment
given against it, Repetundarum. Now when such goods are wasted unprofitably, or
superfluously, princes and magistrates use to lay immoderate and strange
exactions upon their subjects. Covetousness also is used in private goods, when
the poorer or weaker sort are spoiled of their own by the mightier. The people
will hardly bear this kind of usurping, when they consider that they are
tormented by those that should defend them: and this dealing is subject to
restitution God requires restitution of oppressors.
before God. Histories are full of changes, seditions and destructions of
commo^-wealths, arising of these causes of covetousness, whereof we have alleged
many examples in our discourses. Under Charles the 6. king of France Great
seditions began upon a small occasion.
great seditions and robberies were practiced by the Parisians, by reason of
imposts and subsidies that were levied of the subjects. The occasion of these
commotions was because the farmers exacted a halfpeny of a poor woman that
sold Water cressets. The covetousness, briberie, and Covetousness cause of the
death of the nobility in Switzerland.
polling used by the lords and nobles of Switzerland caused the common people
to fall to mutiny, and to deliver themselves out of their slavery and bondage
by horrible massacres, which they made of them. Under Joel and Abiah the 1.
Sam. 8. 5.
sons of Samuel and judges over the Israelites, the people oppressed through
their covetousness, asked a king, whereupon the estate of their government was
changed. The second cause that breeds the alteration and ruin of
Commonwealths, Ambition the second cause of seditions.
is ambition, or desire of honor, which then especially moves men to murmr,
when the unworthy are advanced and preferred before men of desert. Honor is
Honor the only reward of virtue.
the only reward of virtue, and that which is more esteemed of every lofty and
noble heart, than all worldly goods. Therefore it is meet that in the
distribution of public charges, rewards, and honors, regard be had to the
quality, merit and sufficiency of men, that they may be given to worthy
persons, and that such as are unfit may be put back. Only virtue ought to
open the gates of honor.
Let virtue only and diligence open the gates of honor, and not money or favor.
We saw before many examples of the fruits of ambition, and we taste daily of
some that are very bitter. The third cause that changes and ouer-turneth
estates Injury the third cause of sedition
and monarchies, is injury: which happens when they that are highest in
authority, through too much insole^cie and pride offer wrong to the honor or
person of their inferiors. A kingdom (says the wife man) is translated from
one nation to another through the injustice, injuries and contumelies Why Cvrus
revolted from his grandfather Astyages.
offered by superiors. Cyrus the great revolted from his grandfather Astyages,
overcame him in battle, and translated the monarchy of the Medes unto the
Persia^s, because of that injury which he offered unto him, in casting him out
into the fields as soon as he was borne. Coriolanus being Coriolanus.
unjustly banished his country, took arms, conquered a great part of the
Roman dominion, and burned all to the gates of Rome, bringing their estate to
such an extremity, that it was ready to be destroyed, had not the women come
toward him to pacify him. Childeric king Childeric slain by Bodilus.
of France, caused Bodilus to be whipped with rods, whereupon he slew him and
his wife great with child. Iustine the Iustine 3.
third emperor, was slain by Atelius general of his army, whose son he
had murdered, and abused his wife to despite him therewith. Fear also is many
times the Fear the fourth cause of seditions.
cause of alteration and danger to a Commonwealth, when guilty and convicted
persons move sedition, and rebel against the Magistrates to prevent and
avoid the Catiline.
punishment that is due to their faults. Catiline urged with the consideration
of his manifold wicked prankes, and with the fear of judgment conspired
against his country, being assisted by Lentulus, Cethegus, with many
sacrilegious persons, murderers, adulterers, bankrupts and other naughty
livers that stood in fear of justice by reason of their misbehauiour. Neither
may any man doubt but wicked men will rather trouble the estate than stand in
danger of their lives, or hazard their goods. For besides the assurance
which they have conceived to escape the judgment of men by this means, they
have What manner of men are afraid of peace.
this further advantage to fish in troubled waters: so that they are no less
afraid of peace than of the plague, having in all euentes the same resolution
before their eyes that Catiline had, who said that he could not quench the
Fear was one cause that moved Caesar to seek the empire.
fire begun in his house with water, and therefore would pull it down and so
quench it. This was one reason that moved Caesar to lay hold of the estate,
because his enemies threatened, that as soon as he was out of his offices they
would cause him to give an account how he had discharged the^. I would to god
we had not bought as deerly the same causes of our civil wars. Likewise too
much authority Excess in authority and power is the fist cause of seditie^s
and power both for wealth and friendship, is dangerous in every kind of
government, so that great heed is to be taken, that none grow to be
unmeasurable great. For men are subject to corruption, neither can every one
sustain wisely the prosperity of fortune: which causes some to seek the
alteration of popular and Aristocraticall Commonwealths into monarchies, and
others to usurp kingdoms What the Ostracisme among the Athenians was.
and empires. This reason brought in the Ostracisme amongst the Athenia^s,
which was a banishment for a time, whereby they brought down them that seemed
to exceed in greatness. This they used (as Plutarke reherseth) against
Themistocles, Aristides, and other excellent men, fearing least their
authority, credit, and good will of all men, should procure them a kingly
power with the change of Many kings overthrown by suffering their servants
grow too great.
their popular government. Many kings and princes that had some of their
friends and servant too great, were themselves or their children overthrown
by them afterward. Tyberius making Seian too mighty: Commodus, Perennius:
Theodosius the second, Eutropus: Justinian, Bellisarius: Xerxes, Artaban, were
in danger of their estate. The unmeasurable authority of the Majors of the
palace, and of the Constables, changed the crown of France from the race of
Clouts to that of Charles Martel: and upon the same occasion it was afterward
taken from that Contempt is the sixth cause of seditions.
line, and transferred to another. Contempt also is another cause greatly to be
feared in every estate and Monarchy, as that which oftentimes breeds their
change and overthrow. It is very dangerous in two considerations especially:
first when some are contemned and excluded from public offices and dignities
which they deserve, and yet see them wholly in the power and disposition of some
particular men. Whereupon both the one and the other are moved to sedition,
the contemned persons through envy and desire of revenge; they that have the
great charges in their hands, through contempt of the others, whom they seek
utterly to exclude, and to drive them further off from all public honors and
authorities. Secondly, contempt is very Who are most subject to contempt.
pernicious, when inferiors contemn their superiors. They are commonly
despised that have neither virtue, courage, nor fortitude, that are not able to
profit themselves or others, that are not laborious, painful, nor any manner
of way careful. Where contempt is, there no obedience is to be had. This
makes the son disobedient Contempt brecdeth disobedience.
to the father, the wife to the husband, the learner to the teacher, the
servant to the master. The opinion of prudence, justice, constancy,
knowledge, goodness, modesty, and of other virtues, nourishes and preserves
the obedience of subjects toward their Princes, and the contrary vices
provoke them to rebellion. Therefore as policies prosper when they are governed
by prudent, just, constant, valiant, and moderate men: so they are troubled
Causes that move subjects to contemue their Princes.
with seditions through the ignorance, cowardlines, and intemperancie of
Princes, or else when they are too familiar with their inferiors, or when they
are suddenly lift up from base estate, or seem too aged, or too young, or poor,
or miserable, all which things breed contempt. Wherefore this is set down as
a good rule to preserve the estate A rule of Estate.
of a Monarchy: That the Prince must procure to himself love, without the
contempt or hatred of any, if it may be. For the obtaining whereof, there is no
better way, than the just distribution of rewards. The Princes and Lords of
France, Jews the 11. fought withal by his Nobles, because he contemned them.
because they were contemned by king Jews the 11. who had none about him, nor
favored any but men of low and base estate, gave him battle at Montlhery
(whereof the battle has ever since retained the name) to the great peril of
the Estate, and danger of the kings life, if he had not appeased the
indignation and fury of the said Princes and Lords, by his great prudence and
policy. Moreover, Ouer-great inequality between Estates in a Commonwealth
is the s^uenth cause of* seditions.
too much increase and unproportionable growth is one cause that procures the
change and ruin of Commonwealths. For as the body is made and compounded of
parts, and ought to grow by proportion, that it may keep a just measure: so
every Commonwealth being compounded of orders or estates, as it were of
parts, they must be maintained in concord one with another, by equal and due
proportion observed between each of them. For if one Estate be advanced too
much above another, dissension arises. As long as the three Orders and Estats
at Rome, namely, the Senators, the Knights, and the people, were carried
proportionably, their policy flourished: but after they dealt one against
another through envy, ambition, and covetousness; divisions, and part-takings
began. This caused many to commend equality so much, Equality the mother of
peace.
calling it the nursing mother of peace and amity between subjects: and
contrariwise inequality, the beginning of all enmities, factions, hatred, and
part-taking. But seeing it is meet that in every well established policy
there should be a difference of rights and privileges betwixt every estate,
equality may continue, if careful provision be made, that one Estate go not
too much before the other. Impunitie of offenses the eight cause of seditions.
The impunitie of offenses is one cause also from whence seditions and civil
wars proceed, yea it is a matter of very great weight, and yet men make
least account thereof. We spoke of it before, but we must of necessity often
rub up the remembrance thereof, as the wise Hebrew The meaning of this precept,
Be not surety for another.
does by repeating so many times that admonition, that we should not be surety
for another: not that he forbids charity toward the poor, but that none
should be a means to let the wicked escape, unless he will bear the punishment
himself. This is that word which God sent to 1. King. 20. 42.
king Achab, after he had saved the life of Benhadad king of Syria, that he
made himself a pledge for another man, by suffering the wicked to live, and
therefore that it should cost him his life. Hitherto we have seen how the
covetousness of Princes, the ambition or desire of honor in private men,
injury, and reproach, fear in the guilty, excess of authority and wealth,
contempt, ouer-great increase, or advancement without proportion: and lastly,
impunitie of offenses, procure commonly seditions in Estates and Other
causes-of sedition.
Monarchies. Besides all these, extreme poverty and excess of wealth,
idleness, and want of fear of the foreign enemy, as we have elsewhere
declared, change of Princes and laws, too great license of seditious Orators
and Preachers, the natural disposition of places where men are borne, which
makes them more inclined to commotions and seditions, as Historiographers have
noted of Genes, Florence, and Flanders, with many other things may be said to
be causes of civil wars, of alterations, changes, and ruin of Estats and
Policies. Among which we note that shame is sometime a cause of change Shame is
sometime cause of alteration of Estates.
in the government of Commonwealths, but it is without tumult or sedition.
Thus it fell out in Herea, a town of Arcadia, which was governed popularly,
where men of no account were elected Magistrates by others like themselves:
whereupon being mocked, they changed their manner of election into choosing by
lot, that so they might have a more lawefull excuse. There was seen not long
since in the Council of France such a number of Masters of Requests, and of
Secretaries of the Treasure, that very shame caused them to be sent away,
because it was not meet to entreat of great and weighty matters before such a
multitude. Negligence likewise breeds the Negligence a cause of chang. Two
sorts of negligence.
change and overthrow of a politic Estate. There are two sorts of negligence,
the one in those that call, choose, or receive into any great office, such men
as are unworthy, and care not for their charges; or that suffer such persons
to ascend to the chiefest places of Magistracy, that are enemies to that form
of Commonwealth, as if the chief men in Bearne should choose an Auoyer, which
office is contrary to their manner of living: or if the Venetians should choose
a Duke, or the Cardinals a Pope, that were not of their religion: or if the
King of France should create a Constable or Chancellor, that liked not a
Royal and Monarchical Estate. The other kind of negligence, which is much
more common, is in them that are called to a dignity, office, or Magistracy,
and show themselves retchles in that administration and exercise, as we see
that most Bishops and Bishops neglecting their charg to deal in worldly
affairs, bring themselves into contempt.
Prelates neglect the duty of their charges, to imploie or bestow their time
in worldly affairs, for which cause they grow into misliking and contempt.
From hence have proceeded great offenses, and marvelous troubles, which may
more easilye be lamented, than taken away, or reformed, being such abuses as
have taken deep root. Moreover, the alteration of policy is bred by other
means by little and little, as when through dissimulation or otherwise, men
suffer some part, albeit never so little, of the law or politic Estate to be
cut off. An Estate is not changed all at one time, but by little and little.
Changes seldom fall out all at one time, if they are not very violent, but
for the most part go on by little and little, as the seasons of the year slide
away softly from great heates to hard frosts, and from the frost and cold of
winter, to the heat of summer. A lingering fever afflicts the patient so
easily, that he hardly perceives himself therein: but if it be suffered to
continue, without redress in due time, it will turn to a hectic fever, and
so consequently become incurable. So fares it with an Estate and Policy,
whose authority waxes contemptible, and is lost by little and little, when
men are negligent in preventing the same in due time. He that will consider the
alteration happened in France within these thirty years, shall find it to be
very great, as well in regard of religion, as of manners and laws, which
nevertheless came by little and little, and so continues still, greatly
threatening a change of the estate. Here therefore I will distinguish between
the chance of laws, customs, religion, and place, which is properly but an
alteration, and the change of an estate, which is when the sovereignty goes
from one into Dissimilitude a cause of chang.
the power of another. Dissimilitude also is the cause many times of sedition,
and of change in the Commonwealth, which comes to pass when the Inhabitants
of a place are not of the same nation, but many strangers are received into it,
who perceiving themselves to be the stronger part, have many times thrust the
natural Citizens out of their town: whereof Aristotle alleges many
examples that fell so out in the Grecian cities. At Sienna, Examples of
strangers that have expelled natural Citizens out of their towns.
at Genes, at Zurick, at Cullen, the strangers being multiplied drove out the
Lords of those places, and slew most of them, because they were ouer-charged
with exactions, evil entreated, and excluded from bearing of offices. They of
Lindauia slew the Lords of the country, and changed the Aristocraty into a
popular Estate: and so did the Inhabitants of Strausborough, who hated the
Nobility in such sort, that they would not suffer any of them to enjoy the
great estates and public charges, unless he proved that his grandfather was
one of the baser sort of the people. These examples move natural Inhabitants
many times to overrun strangers, when they see the number of them wax
ouer-great amongst them. One example The Inhabitants of Geneua conspired
against strangers in their city.
hereof we may note in the city of Geneua, into which when many strangers,
as well Frenchmen as others retired for religion, the natural Citizens could
never brook them, although they were very profitable to the city, making it
rich and populous, whereas before it was poor, and smally inhabited: but
conspired many times to drive them out, as namely that conspiracy of one
Perin, in the year 1556. which began to be put in execution, Calvin hazarded
his life to appease a tumult in Geneua.
when Calvin ran into the midst of their naked swords to appease the tumult,
as Beza writes in his life. The same fear moved Pharaoh, when he saw the
Hebrews increase ouer-fast amongst his subjects, to decree, that the Midwiues
should from that time forward, kill the male Exodus 1. 16.
children at their birth. Now in receiving of strangers regard must be had to
the number, that it be not ouergreat, and that their authority be not
unmeasurable. For otherwise it is necessary for traffic sake, and for many
other public commodities, that some be received of others. Many other kinds of
dissimilitude are found in commonwealths, Diverse kinds of dissimilitudes in
Commonwealths.
as dissimilitude of lineage between the Nobility and Common People: of
offices, between Judges, Treasurers, Soldiers, Priests: of professions,
between Lawyers, Physicians, Divines, and Philosophers: of occupations,
between Bakers, Butchers, Shooemakers, Painters, Smithes, Carpenters: without
which dissimilitudes no Commonwealth can consist. Therefore they are not to be
taken quite away, but only the disorder that grows amongst them, that so
they may be reduced to a convenient agreement, like to that which is between
the diverse parts that are in the constitution of the world and of man. We may
also call a dissimilitude, that difference which is of religions, as of the
Jews, Christians, Mahomists, Caphrans, Armenians, Grecians, Latins,
Iacobites, Ethiopians: then between the Christians themselves, as Catholics,
Whether diversity of religion be a cause of civil war.
Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Caluinists. Many have said, and are yet of this
opinion, that the chief cause of civil wars in France proceeds from this
diversity of religion. And to say truth, there is nothing that carries men
away with such vehement passions, as zeal of religion, for which they fight
more willingly tha^ for their lives, goods, wives, and children. Through the
diversity hereof they that are nearest of kin loose their natural love,
they that are of the same country and language, persecute one another as
mortal enemies, and sundry nations abhor one another for the same. These
things are too well known amongst us to require proofs thereof. And truly
Diversity of opinion among subjects, dangerous in an Estate.
in respect of sedition and tumult, nothing is more dangerous, than for
subjects to be divided in opinion, whether it be in matters of estate, or of
laws and customs, or for religion. For if they be of diverse opinions, some
labor for peace, and seek to make others agree unto it, who will never agree
amongst themselves. And in truth it is a very hard matter to maintain public
exercises of any religion whatsoever, when it is contrary to the religion of
the people, or of the most of them, who many times cannot be kept within
compass neither by laws nor Magistrates, unless the force appointed to keep
them in be very Thomas Emperor of Constantinople slain for pulling down of
Images.
great. For we saw that Thomas, Emperor of Constantinople, was cruelly slain
by the people amidst a great congregation in the Church, because he went about
to pull down Images. But I am of this opinion (yet ready to yield to a better
judgment) that if men were honest and upright, and walked in their calling
holily, they would never fight among themselves for religion. And if there had
been no other cause mingled therewith in our civil wars, we should not have
had experience of those miseries which daily ouer-whelme us. The authority of
a holy and free Council may by the grace of God end all these dissentious: in
the mean time let every one seek by good life and amendment of manners, to
serve for a light to those that are out of the way, laying aside all
part-takings, forgetting all injuries, and taking up again our first unity,
concord, and friendship. Yea I doubt not, but that a Prince embracing with a
true zeal the opinion of his religion, and neglecting the contrary, would
abolish it without force or constraint, if God maintain it not. For the minds
of men resolved in a religion, are more confirmed therein if they be resisted,
but shrink of themselves if compulsion be not used. Now for the end and
conclusion of our discourse, laying a part the causes of seditions and civil
wars, which bring alteration, and overthrow many times to Estates and
Monarchies, whereof we have particularly entreated, we will here comprehend,
and reduce to a certain number the causes of the changes of all
Commonwealths: The causes that brcede the change of all Commonwealths.
namely, when the posterity of Princes fails, and the greatest amongst them
enter into civil war for the Estate: when most of the subjects are extreme
poor, and a few exceeding rich: when the division of offices and honors are
unequal: or else through extreme ambition and desire of commanding: through
the revenge of injuries: through the cruelty and oppression of tyrants:
through the fear of chasticement, which some have that deserve it: through the
change of laws and religion: through the greedy desire that some have to
enjoy at will those pleasures which they seek after: lastly, through the
expulsion of such as defile the places of honor with excessive and beastly
pleasures. All these things breed the change, corruption, and final ouetthrow
of flourishing Estates and great Monarchies, and therefore all Princes,
Governors, and politic Rulers ought carefully to look unto them.


The end of the sixteenth days work.
THE SEVENTEENTH DAYS WORK.
Of the preservation of Estats and Monarchies, and of remedies to keep them
from sedition. Chap. 65.
ASER. Why Wisdom is given of God.
Wisdom (says Lactantius) is given of God to all men, that every one
according to his ability and capacity might seek after things unknown, and
examine that which he knows. And we must not think, that such as have gone
before us many years and ages, did so possess and use her, that she is now
less forceable in us. She cannot be wholly possessed, no more than the light of
the Sun: and as the Sun is the light of our eyes, so is wisdom the light
of man's heart* Wisd. 6. 21.
If your delight the^ (says the wise man) be in thrones and scepters, O kings
of the people, honor wisdom, that ye The praise of wisdom.
may reign for ever. Truly she is necessary provision for them that would
reign, that they may do it woorthily, and safely maintain their estate: yea
she is no less requisite in every calling. For she illuminateth and sharpneth
the discourse of reason by the knowledge of things, she rules and conducteth
the will to that which is the true and only Good. Therefore seeing that
wisdom, which is as much to say in regard of us, as the searching out of the
truth, is both offered, and needful for all men, every one ought to be
stirred up to embrace it with a burning zeal and affection, that he may bring
forth the fruits of perfect charity, by applying it (next after the service
of God) to the common profit of men. Which thing, seeing it has provoked our
young and unexperienced years to utter our former Moral and Political
discourses, and to handle yesterday the causes that breed change and ruin to
Estates and Monarchies, although such high matters surpasses the capacity of
our understanding, yet let us (my Companions) follow with the same zeal our
venturous enterprise, and as we have profited in the school of this self same
wisdom, let us enter into the consideration of those means and remedies that
are contrary to the causes of corruption in policies, and that may serve to
their preservation. Albeit they may be known by the same causes that corrupt
them, seeing contrary effects Contrary causes bring forth contrary effects.
proceed from contrary causes, and corruption is contrary to preservation. But
the understanding of this matter will be more clear and profitable hereby, to
them that will take the benefit thereof.


AMANA. If all callings were content with their own fortune and goods, if they
would abstain from other men's goods, and from offering them wrong, if they
would be more intentive to amend their own life, than to reprehend others, and
submit themselves willingly to the obedience of their Magistrates, laws, and
ordinances, I think it would be a mean to cause every Monarchy to flourishe
and to continue happy a long time.


ARAM. Equality (said Solon) never breeds sedition in the government of a
Commonwealth, but is the nursing mother of peace and concord, and the
maintainer of love, whereby the unity of subjects is preserved. But as the
grave and destruction are never glutted (according Prou. 27. 20.
to the saying of the wise man) so men's eyes are never satisfied. But the
discourse of this matter here propounded belongs to thee ACHITOB.


ACHITOB. That great lover of knowledge and virtue, Ptolomy king of Egypt, as
he feasted one day seven Ambassadors of the best and most flourishing
Commonwealths in his time, reasoned with them about their governments, that
he might know which of them had the best policy, and was furnished with the
best laws and most commendable customs. The disputation was long, and the
matter thoroughly debated among them with many reasons. But Ptolomy being
desirous to be instructed by them in the best and rarest points, necessary
for the preservation of an Estate, prayed them to propounde every one three of
those customs and laws that were most perfect in his Choice customs of seven
flourishing Estates.
Commonwealth. The Ambassador of the Romans began, and said: We have the
Temples in great respect and reverence: we are very obedient to our
Governors: and we punish wicked men and evil livers severely. The
Carthaginian Ambassador said: In the Commonwealth of Carthage, the Nobles
never cease fighting, nor the Common People and Artificers laboring, nor the
Philosophers teaching. The Sicilian said: In our Commonwealth justice is
exactly kept, merchandise exercised with truth, and all men account themselves
equal. The Rhodian said: At Rhodes old men are honest, young men shamefast,
and women solitary, and of few words. The Athenian said: In our
Commonwealth rich men are not suffered to be divided into factions, nor poor
men to be idle, nor the Governors to be ignorant. The Lacedemonian said: In
Sparta envy reigns not, for all are equal, nor covetousness, for all goods
are common, nor sloth, for all labor. In our Commonwealth (said the
Ambassador of the Sicyonians) voyages are not permitted, that they should not
bring home new fashions at their return: Physicians are not suffered, least
they should kill the sound: nor Orators to take upon them the defense of causes
and suites. If all these good customs were jointly kept in any one Estate, I
doubt not but the greatness of it might be continued long, and all causes of
seditions cut off. But to speak more plainly and particularly, and to handle
the preservation of Monarchies and Commonwealths, with the remedies that keep
them from sedition, I say first that Horace, that most learned Poet, had
reason to begin his Satyrs or profitable speeches with those men that are
never Coffeehouse is the spring of all vices.
contented, considering that the coffeehouse of mortal men is the fountain
and spring of all vices. For I pray you, what vice is not grounded upon an
insatiable desire of having, as may appear in all them that can-not content
themselves with their present estate, nor appoint an end in that which they
have, but place it always in that which they would have. Covetousness
commits robberies, executes murders, The effects of covetousness.
exercises spoiling, causes battles, breeds schisms, hinders
reformation, and the general Council, cloaketh abuses, nourishes ignorance,
asks unjustly, receives dishonestlie, dissolueth bargains, breaks faith,
peruerteth judgments, and to conclude, it ouer-turneth and confounds all
right, both divine and humane. Therefore covetousness is very fitly called an
unquenchable fire, an insatiable desire, a bottomless gulf. So that the
contentation both of The contented mind of Magistrates is the first mean to
preserve an Estate.
sovereign Magistrates, and of such as are underneath them, and their moderate
affections whereby they seek not to invade and to possess other men's right,
nor to heap up treasures and riches, but direct their leauell to common
profit only, to govern prudently, and to order as it becomes them
whatsoever is under their authority: this I say is a strong bond to keep
every Commonwealth in a flourishing Estate, and an unconquerable bulwark
against all sedition. Many Princes being desirous to extend their limits
unjustly, and to conquer new Estates, have oftentimes lost or diminished
their own dominion, besides the burdensome calamities, which they have
brought upon their people. And when they placed under them covetous Governors
and Magistrates, that were slaves to their purses, the ruin, or great trouble
at least of their Estates followed after. Therefore Iethro said to Moses:
Provide thou among all the Exodus 18. 21.
people, men of courage, fearing God, men dealing truly, hating covetousness:
and appoint such over them to be Rulers over thousands, over hundreds, over
fifties, over tennes, to judge the people at all times. Tiberius Nero knowing
that his subjects were naturally given to tender greatly their own profit,
Why Tiberius would not change his Lieutenants.
would not send any to succeed (as the custom was before) and to take the
place of the Governors and Lieutenants of his Provinces, unless the other were
dead. For (said he) when they perceive that they draw near the end of their
office, the double their polling, and a new Governor does as much: whereas
other-wise, when they are once full gorged and satisfied, they are at the least
occasioned thereby to cease from ravening, and to ease their people: namely,
when they know that they shall always enjoy their power and authority. The
custom that A notable custom used by Seuerus in making vnder-gouernors.
Aurelius Seuerus used, is much more praise-woorthie. For when he sent
Governors into the Provinces, he caused their names to be published many days
before, to the end that whosoever knew any thing in them worthy of
reprehension, he should give notice thereof: and they that reported truly, were
promoted to honor by him, and slanderers grievously punished. He gave to all
Magistrates gold, silver, servants, and all necessary things, yea Concubines
also, to the end that in their charges they should not be constrained by
necessity to commit injustice, The second mean to preserve an Estate.
or to extort upon the people. Moreover, the modesty of Magistrates in
commanding, serves for a good remedy to retain their subjects within their
duty, especially if to bring the^ forward the better, they add to their
commandments gentle persuasions grounded upon lively reasons, and holy
admonitions, whereby they seem willing rather to instruct their people, than
by force to compel them to obedience. Thou shall govern thy kingdom very
well (said one of the Interpreters of Ptolemy) if imitating the gentleness of
God in all things, thou use The third mean.
patience and long suffering. That is also one point that greatly staieth the
alteration and change of Commonwealths, when both great and small are
contented with that estate whereunto they are called, and are not carried away
with ambition, to desire higher degrees of honor than their condition
deserves. Again, they ought not to respect their own valor and desert so
much, as to think that great estats and honors are a due and necessary reward
for their virtue: and that upon their denial, they have just cause to make
some commotion in the Commonwealth. But let them rather consider that Of whom
a Prince holds his sovereignty.
the Prince holds his sovereignty of God, and of the ancient laws of the
Estate, and that al his subjects in respect of him are but as a set of
counters, whereof he makes Subjects compared to a set of counters.
one to be one in value now, then to stand for a thousand, by and by for a
hundred thousand, and afterward for nothing. If we have less fanour and grace,
we shall be less envied, which always takes hold of the greatest. Exact and
precise observation of justice is no less necessary The fourth mean.
for the preservation of Estates and Monarchies, as we have elsewhere
discoursed: and it ought to be exercised Magistrates must be punished aswelt as
the Common people.
not only upon the simple people, but also upon Magistrates when they abuse
their calling and dignity. For when their faults are unpunished and winked at
to the oppression of the meaner sort, they are easily induced to murmr and to
move sedition. Aristotle approved not this custom in Lacedemonia, that the
power of the Senators was perpetual during their life, and that they were
exempted from correction, and from yielding an account Aristotle misliked
perpetual Magistrates.
of their doings, because (as he said) to appoint perpetual Magistrates, is to
kindle the fire of sedition in the Commonwealth. But this is contrary to the
opinion of Plato, and of many Politics, albeit there is no want of arguments
and excellent reasons, as well on their side who would have Magistrates annual,
as on theirs that would have them perpetual. But as contrary Estates ought to
be governed by contrary means, so it is necessary that in a Monarchy some
offices should be perpetual, and other mutable. And if need be, general
Commissioners may be appointed, as it was practiced in the time of Jews the
ninth, and of Phillip the Fair. To this purpose Buda General Commissioners
requisite in a Monarchy.
complains, because the Commissioners had no authority over the Magistrates
of France, especially over the Parliaments, as also because they were not
perpetual. He makes a goodly discourse of them, and shows what manner of
men ought to be chosen thereunto. The The sift mean.
speedy punishment of wicked and condemned persons, all delaie set aside, is a
good remedy to preserve policies. Delay in punishing the wicked, is dangerous.
For when they see that for their offenses and mischievous dealings they are
daily taken, examined, put to the torture, condemned, and executed, according
to their deserts, if before their execution they have any leisure and respit
through the negligence of Magistrates, they seek by all means to move
sedition and trouble in the Commonwealth, hoping thereby to save their lives,
The sixth mean.
and to avoid that punishment unto which their consciences judge them to be
indebted. The equal proportion and measure of all and every particular part in
a Politic body, according to the degrees of callings and persons, is
necessary for the preservation of Estates and Monarchies, that there may be
equality not of things, but of proportions, and that degrees may be kept. As
for example, albeit the Divine, Lawyer, Captain, Counselor, Treasurer, differ
one from another, yet they must of necessity agree, and be made equal, not in
their calling, but by a like proportion, that every one may execute his office
without the hinderaunce of another. Geometrical proportion ought to be
obse^ued in Commonwealths.
Therefore Plato said, that the public Estate is in good case, if it be
instituted according to Geometrical proportion, and all benefits bestowed
accordingly. If the King give the office of Chauncellourship to a wise and
learned man that loves justice and public quietness: Upon what men public
charges are to be bestowed.
the office of Constableshippe, or of the Marshalshippe of France, to good
Captains, and such as are experienced in State affairs: the government of the
Church to a Divine of good life and manners, and one that is well skild in
Ecclesiastical government: the office of justice to an honest Lawyer: the
keeping of the treasure to a Treasurer of an upright conscience. Then if every
one keep his own place, and perfourmeth his duty without encroching upon
another, or hindering of him, to the end that public conueniencie and
agreement may not be troubled, this order will make an equality between unlike
persons. For we find Two sorts of equality.
two sorts of equality: namely equality of quantity, and of proportion.
Equality of quantity is requisite in commutatiue justice, that every one may
take as much as he ought. Equality of proportion is requisite in distributive
justice, and in rewarding men according to their desert. This equality (says
Plato) gives the greatest honors to them that excel most in virtue, and the
lesser places of dignity to such as are inferior in virtue and learning,
distributing to both that which belongs unto them by reason. Besides, the
means alleged already by us for the preservation of Estates and Monarchies,
Aristotle sets down these that follow. Let The seuen^h mean.
nothing (says he) be done against the laws and customs, which, as before
we discoursed, are the chains and bonds of all Empires, Powers, and
Commonwealths. Let remedy be used against the beginning of The eight.
an evil, how small soever it be. For oftentimes of a small occasion, as it
were of one sparkle, a great fire of troubles is kindeled in the Commonwealth.
And as The beginning of evils must be stayed.
great storms and tempests proceed from exhalations and vapors that are not
seen: so seditions and civil wars begin for the most part of very light
matters, which a man would never think should have such an issue. Let no
credit be given to crafty and subtle devices, invented to deceive
Commonwealths withal. These are means commonly practiced by foreign and
The ^inth.
domestical enemies to Estates, who thereby disguise the truth of matters:
whereof we have had good experience in France, when in the Council of our
Princes information has been given clean contrary to the truth: insomuch
that we have felt the cruel hand of strangers before ever we would have
believed that they had taken horse in their own country. And therefore
amongst such nourishers of our miseries, this proverb is rife: That a lie is
always good how little a while soever it be believed. Let The tenth.
those that are placed in the offices of Magistracy, behave themselves
modestly both toward those that deal not at all in public affairs, and
toward them that meddle therewith: offering no injury to the one sort, and
living The eleventh.
friendly with the other. Let them that are to care for the safety of the
Estate, watch always, and stand upon their guard, and often times propound
causes of fear, to make the subjects more attentive and heedefull to that
which The twelfth.
they should do. Let there be no contentions or quarrels between the Nobles,
and let others be prevented that are not yet joined to those dissentions,
before they enter into them. This is the chiefest thing at this day, whereunto
our kings and Princes ought especially to look. For amongst their trains
there is nothing but leagues and part-takings, from which nothing will proceed
in the end but trouble and hurt to their Estate. Therefore they Contentious
persons must be removed from the Court.
must take away all occasions of hatred and quarrelling, and remove such far
from their Court that love contentions: because that as quarrellers of
themselves tarry not long in service, so by their means Princes loose other
good servants. And if they will not, or are afraid to put them from the Court,
at leastwise let them take knowledge of all their enmities, factions, and
discontentments Princes must labor by all means to end the contentions of
their subjects.
that are amongst them, and labor to end them, not in outward show only, but
by some good effect. Let them content such as are not well pleased, if they can
justly do it: let them grant means of safety to them that say they have
cause to distrust others: and let them reconcile professed enemies. But above
all things, let not the Prince They must not be parties in their subjects
quarrels.
make himself a party in the contentions of his subjects, if the occasion of
their strife be not grounded upon the Estate. For in steed of keeping to
himself the place of sovereign Judge, he shall be only the chief of a
faction, and so bring his estate and life into danger. The punishment The
thirteenth.
of rebels is one mean also to preserve Estates and Commonwealths, and to
prevent seditions, whereby they are altered and changed. But regard must be had
(according to the counsel of Hippocrates) that medicines be not applied to
incurable diseases. For when all the people, or the most of them are culpable,
to punish all, is as much as to overthrow the commonwealth. It is also a good
mean and most usual for the avoiding of seditions, to take from The fourteenth.
the people their armor, and to have fortresses fensed and furnished with all
things necessary for them. For the neglecting of this gives occasion to
troublesome heads, and to such as desire novelties to execute their wicked
purposes, and to trouble the estate: and the liberty of armor makes them
more fierce and insolent therein. Moreover we may comprehend that which is
requisite and necessary Five necessary things for the preservation of every
commonwealth.
for the preservation of every good Commonwealth under five things: namely,
let it be loved faithfully, defended manfully, adorned with nobility, ordered
profitably, and governed prudently. It is naturally ingrafted into every living
creature, to love that place where it took beginning. The savage beasts
(says Cassiodorus) love woods and forests: birds love the air: fishes the sea
and All living creatures love the place of their birth.
rivers: men love the original place of their birth and being: in a word,
both men and beasts love those places where they purpose to live and to
continue long. He that is more in love (says Aristotle) with his private
profit, than with public wealth, loses the name of a good citizen, and
takes unto him the name of a wicked subject. Therefore every one both great and
small ought to dedicate all good gifts in them to the benefit of their country,
loving their fellow-subiects, and exercising their charges and callings
faithfully. It is their duty also manfully to defend the commonwealth against
all foreign incursions: and he that defends his country, defends himself
and his: He that refuses to die (as Cicero says) in the defense of his
country, dies together with it: which being overthrown, It is the duty of
every subject to defend his country.
the inhabitants are therewithal destroyed. No man therefore ought to fear
danger in defense of his country: and it is better to die for many than with
many. They that die (said Justinian the emperor) in the defense of their
Commonwealth, live always by glory. Therefore every one ought to arm
himself with manhood, which is one kind of Heroical fortitude, as the moral
Philosophers say, that he may be serviceable for the safeguard of his country
in time of need, and of a just war. The nobility is the ornament of a
Commonwealth.
The nobility is the ornament of every Commonwealth. For commonly the nobles
are of greater ability, of better behauior and more civil than the common
people, than artificers, and men of base estate, because they have been
brought up from their infancy in all civility and amongst men of honor.
Moreover to have a noble heart and invincible to resist the enemy, great to
exercise liberality, courteous and honest in talk, bold to execute, gentle to
forgive, are graces and virtues proceeding from honesty, which are not so
commonly found among men of base condition, as among those that come of good
and ancient stocks. For this Of the law prosapia.
cause there was in Rome a law called prosapia, that is to say, the law of
lineage, whereby it was ordained, that they which descended from the race of the
Fuluians, Torquates, and Fabritians, should have the Consulship, when it so
fell out, that the Senate disagreed about the election of Consuls. In like
manner they that came of Lycurgus in Lacedaemon, of Cato in Vtica, of Thucidides
in Galatia, were not only privileged in their own Provinces, but also greatly
honored of To whom the defense of a country chiefly belongs.
all nations. The defense and preservation of the country belongs chiefly to
the nobles, as they that have greater use and practice of weapons, than the
common people have, whom God and nature have subjected to them, that they
should be their defendors and protectors. In this sort then is the
Commonwealth decked and adorned of the nobility, and by their means honored
of neighbor-friends, and feared of her enemies. Next it must be ordered
profitably. Where no order is, there is all confusion. And therefore as a good
father of a family takes order in his house, and a Pilote in his ship: so the
magistrate must appoint an order in his city and commonwealth. For all
community is confusion, if by order it be not brought to unity. Order What
order is.
is the due disposition of all things. The order of the heavens, times and
seasons teaches us among other things the wisdom of the Creator, who has
appointed all divine, celestial and earthly things by a wonderful dispositie^.
Neither does any thing make magistrates of common-welths more admired and
commended, than the good order which they establish in them. The end of all
good order tends The end of order.
to profit, as the end of confusion to loss and destruction. And if profit be
to be considered in any thing, it is chiefly to be thought upon in a politic
body. The more common and general a good thing is (says Aristotle) so much
the more is it to be esteemed above another. Therefore if it be a good thing
and commendable to appoint a profitable order in a house or ship: it is a great
deal better, yea most excellent, to order a Commonwealth profitably. Last of
all a Commonwealth must be governed prudently. Government presupposes order,
because no man can rightly and duly govern without order. Government is a
right disposition What government is.
of those things of which a man takes charge upon him to bring them to a
convenient end. Every Monarch, Emperor, King, Prince, Lord, Magistrate,
Prelate, Judge and such like, may be called a Governor: in whom wisdom,
patience, and diligence are necessarily required for the discharge of their
duties. Neither may ignorance or any error be received for sufficient
Ignorance is no sufficient excuse for a magistrate.
excuse of him that has taken upon him a public charge, and much less if he
required and sought for it himself. Yea he may be charged with the least
fault, especially when it concerns the estate, or some great matter wherein
the Commonwealth has interest. For this cause we said, that the
Commonwealth must be governed with Prudence. But Prudence (says Aristotle)
presupposes wisdom, and is the right reason of What prudence is.
things that are to be done. Without Prudence (says Xenophon) we can have
no use at all of virtue. For in the administration either of private or
public matters, we can come to no good end, without the direction of
Prudence, which teaches us to provide for things to come, to order things
present, and to call to mind things past. We have heretofore discoursed more
at large both of that virtue, and also of others requisite in every magistrate
for the faithful execution of his charge. Whereunto we will add this thing
only, that every governor must remember, that lordship, empire, kingdom,
majesty, dominion and power are rather heathen than christian words: and that
the empire of a What a christian empire is.
christian prince is nothing else but a just administration, protection and
mean to do good. Therefore when he beholds an innumerable multitude of his
subjects, he is to think that so many millions of men depend of his
carefulnes, not to do with them what pleases him, but to labor and travel to
make them better than when he received them. And in all things wherein the
safety of the commonwealth consists, whether it be in preventing the causes
of change therein, or in redressing seditions which trouble it, he must always
resolve with himself to bring his purpose to pass, how difficult soever the
way be, releasing rather somewhat of the extremity of right, (as Lucius
Papinius said) seeing the quietness and safety of the people is the chiefest,
and most upright law among men that can be. So that when the Commonwealth is
in danger or in necessity, we must freely bestow upon that blood and name,
which is common to us with all the members of the politic body, whatsoever
cannot be kept back without violating that common kindred, and the estate of
the commonwealth. So that if he hinder public benefit, and hurt the estate,
it is not to be called right any longer, as Appius Claudius said, speaking of
the authority We must spare no cost to help the commonwealth.
of the Tribunes among the people of Rome. And it is a point of true and
natural prudence sometime to give place to the times, but to necessity
always. A good Pilote never opposes himself wilfully against a tempest, but
strikes sail and keeps himself still: then waighing his anchors, he
floteth safely upon the waves, which not long before were swollen and lift up
to drown him. If a man strive against a tempest and against heaven, does he
not even blindfold cast himself down headlong, and as it were desperately
seek his own destruction? Now if all these things hitherto mentioned by us be
diligently observed, there is no doubt (God prospering all) but that the
preservation of Estates and Monarchies, with good remedies to keep them from
trouble and sedition will follow after.


Of the Harmony and agreement that ought to be in the dissimilitude or unlike
callings of subjects, by reason of the duty and office of every estate. Chap.
66.
ACHITOB. WE saw before (my companions) that a city or civil company is
nothing else but a multitude of men unlike in estates or conditions, which
communicate together in one place their arts, occupations, works and
exercises, that they may live the better, and are obedient to the same laws
and magistrates. We learned also, that of such a dissimilitude an harmonicall
agreement arises by due proportion of one toward another in their diverse
orders and estates, even as the harmony in music consists of unequal
voices or sounds agreeing equally together. I am of opinion therefore, that to
provoke every one particularly to seek after and to practice this apt
agreement, we are to consider severally of all the principal parts that are
in a politic body well ordered, and to handle the several duty and office of
every one of them. But I leave the discourse of this matter to you.


ASER. As there is but one Lord, one faith, one Baptism, one God and father of
all, which is above all and Ephe. 4. 5. 6.
through all, and in us all: so all that believe in him ought to be one, and to
have but one heart and one soul, every one referring his gifts and graces to
the exercise of perfect charity.


AMANA. Oh how happy a thing is it to see one flock guided under one God and
one king in one religion and policy? Although they be many members, yet they
make but one body, of which every one has a like care. But let us hear ARAM
discourse at large upon that which is here propounded unto us.


ARAM. As we see that in the body of this universal frame, there is (as the
Philosophers say) matter, form, privation, simplicity, mixture, substance,
quantity, action and passion, and that the whole world being compounded All
things stand by proportion.
of unlike elements, of earth, water, air and fire, is notwithstanding
preserved by an Analogy and proportion, which they have together: and as we
see in a man's body, head, hands, feet, eyes, nose, ears: in a house, the
husband, wife, children, master, servant: in a politic body, magistrates,
nobles, common people, artificers; and that every body mingled with heat,
cold, dry and moist, is preserved by the same reason of analogy and
proportion which they have together: So is it in every commonwealth well
appointed and ordered, which consisting of many and sundry subjects, is
maintained by their unity, being brought to be of one consent and will, and to
communicate their works, arts and exercises together for common benefit and
profit. For every one is best in his own art, neither can all men do all
things. And if it be a very hard matter to be excellent in any one vocation,
it is impossible to excel in all, and to exercise them duly. Now we say that
six things are necessarily required to frame a happy city and civil society,
namely, sacrifices, judgments, arms, riches, arts, and Aliments: unto which
six things Six sundry callings of men necessary in every good commonwealth.
and works, six sorts of men are answerable, Pastors, magistrates, nobles,
burgesses, artificers, and husbandmen. Therefore to begin the particular
handling of the duty and office of these callings, and that as briefly as I
can, we are first to note, that never any nation in all the world was so
barbarous, or so far estranged from civility, that did not acknowledge and
adore some divine nature, and use No nation but adoreth some divinity.
some kind of sacrifices and so consequently that had not some priests to
exercise them, and some proper ceremonies. The sacrifices of Christians.
Aristotle in his Politikes says expressly, that it is a necessary thing to
have priests in every city, to take care of the worship of the gods and of
sacrifices. Every work that we do (says Augustine) to be joined nearer to God
by a holy society, is a sacrifice. There are three general sorts of
sacrifices: Three sorts of sacrifices.
the first is the sacrifice of the soul, which we offer to God by contrition,
devotion, contemplation and prayer: the second is of the body, which we offer
to God by fasting, abstinence, or by suffering martyrdom to maintain his law,
justice and truth. The third sacrifice is of outward goods, when we offer them
unto him in the works of charity according to his holy ordinance. So that if
sacrifices and priests always took place among the Barbarians, much more
careful ought they to be to maintain this divine mystery, that adore and
perfectly know God. And as men have lived under three laws, the law of Nature,
the written law, and the law of Grace, so there were sacrifices and priests
under every one of them. Melchizedech lived Of priests and pastors.
under the law of Nature, Aaron under the written law, and under the law of
Grace, under which we live at this present, Jesus Christ that great and
eternal Priest and Sacrificer, who has offered himself a sacrifice for our
redemption, and has left us his disciples and Apostles, and their successors
to be our pastors in the guiding of our souls under his Testament and new
covenant, which is the infallible rule of his holy and just will. Therefore
let them that boast, that they are called of God to such an excellent charge,
look to discharge themselves faithfully, Wherein the office of true pastors
consists.
by teaching the truth and leading a life agreeable to their doctrine.
Otherwise, if they sit in the chair of pestilence (as David speaks) let them
look for a horrible judgment of God upon their souls, when he shall say unto
them by way of reproach; that in this world they sat in their po^tificall
seats, as the Scribes and Pharisees did long since in the chair of Moses.
Their watchmen (says Esaias speaking Esa. 56. 10. 11.
of evil pastors) are all blind: they have no knowledge, they are dumb dogs:
they cannot bark: they lie and sleep, and delight in Against dumb dogs and
covetous sheep-heards.
sleeping. These greedy dogs can never have enough, and these sheep-heards
cannot understand: for they all look to their own way, every one for his
advantage, and for his own purpose. But contrariwise, A Pastor (says Saint
Paul) must be unreprovable, Tit. 1. 7. 8. 9.
The qualities of a good pastor.
as Gods steward, not froward, not angry, not given to wine, no striker, not
given to filthy lucre, but harberous, one that loves goodness: wise,
righteous, holy, temperate, holding fast the faithful word according to
doctrine, that he also may be able to exhort with wholesome doctrine, and
improoue them that say against it. 1. Pet. 5. 2. 3.
Feed the flock of Christ, which depends upon you (says Saint Peter)
caring for it, not by constraint, but willingly, not for filthy lucre, but of
a ready mind: not as though ye were lords over Gods heritage, but that ye
may be ensamples to the flock. Therefore if Pastors preach the Gospel, give
example of good life by their works, fight against the enemies of the truth
with the weapons of charity, prayers, persuasions, testimonies of the holy
scripture: if they remove Vices to be avoided in a pastor.
from them covetousness, pride, dissoluteness, and superfluity of expenses,
and walk in this sort in their vocation, the first place of honor is due to
them amongst men, and a greater and unspeakable prepared for them in heaven.
The second thing that is necessary in every Commonwealth and city, are
judgments, and consequently magistrates to execute them. But because we
discoursed at large of this matter before, we will not stand long upon it, but
comprehend in few words the whole duty and office of a good magistrate,
which consists in four The duty of a good magistrate consists in four
things.
things: In taking nothing unjustly from any body, in giving to every one his
own, in despising his own profit, and in preserving public profit. He
performs these Justice distributed into 7. parts.
duties perfectly by the distribution of justice into seven parts: by
procuring that God may be worshipped, that reverence be given to superiors,
that concord be amongst equals, that discipline be used toward inferiors,
patience toward enemies, mercy toward the poor, and that integrity of life
proceed from himself. Now let us consider of Arms, and of Nobles. Of arms
and of the necessity of them.
Arms (as Varro says) are all warlike instruments, serving both to set upon
our enemies, and to defend our selves from their assaults and enterprises.
They are necessary in a Commonwealth and city for these three causes, to
resist the outward force of enemies, and to keep them in fear: to repress
naughty citizens, both by compelling them to obey magistrates and laws, and
by punishing the guilty: and last of all, to defend the liberty of subjects.
The exercise and use of arms, wars and battles, has from all antiquity
been committed to the noble men. Nobility (as Aristotle says) is a glittering
What nobility is.
excellency proceeding from ancestors, and an honor that comes from an
ancient lineage and stock. Or, (according to Boethius Seuerinus) nobility is a
praise that proceeds from the deserts of our Elders, and forefathers. Many
make three kinds of Nobility: one that Three kinds of nobility.
is bred of virtue and of excellent deeds: the second that proceeds from the
knowledge of honest disciplines and true sciences: and the third that comes
from the scutchions and arms of our ancestors, or from riches. But to speak
truly, there is no right Nobility, but that Which is right nobility.
which springs of virtue, and good conditions. For as he is a thief that
steals, and he unjust that does unjustly: so he is a vile and base person,
that deals vilanously. He boasts in vain of his great lineage, and seeks
to be esteemed for the nobility and virtue of his ancestors, that has no
goodness in him, nor commendable qualitic of his own to join with those of
his predecessors. Let no man please himself too much (says Agapetus) in the
nobility of his ancestors, for all men have dung for their stock from whence
they come: both they that are pricked up in purple and fine linen, and they
that are afflicted with poverty and sickness: as well they that are decked
with crowns, as they that lie naked upon the straw. Let us not therefore brag
of our earthly race, but let us glory in the integrity of manners. Although
vice be in one that comes of noble blood, yet is it always loathsome and
infamous: yea it does so much the more appear shameful and odious, as it is
joined with greater nobility. But virtue is the very lively color and
ornament of nobility, and causes it to be honored for love of it self only.
All kings and princes (says Plato) came of slaves, and all slaves of kings.
What profit is there Macrines letter to the Senate of Rome touching nobility.
(says Macrine the Emperor writing to the Senate of Rome) in nobility, if
the heart of a prince be not replenished with bounty and gentleness toward his
subjects? The goods of fortune come oftentimes to the unworthy, but the
virtue of the soul always makes a man worthy of the greatest praise.
Nobility, riches and such like, come from without a man, and are subject to
corruption: but justice, bounty, and other virtues, are not only wonderful
because they come from the soul, but procure also to him that has them and
uses them virtuously, a perfection of all felicity. Yea it is far better and
more commendable in a man, to leave to his posterity a good beginning of
nobility by virtue, than to defame by villainy and wicked behauior that praise
which he has received from his predecessors. Therefore we ought not to be puffed
up with pride because we come of a great race, seeing that honor belongs
more to our progenitors tha^ to us, if we be not Malach. 2. 10.
noble by our own virtue. Is not one God (as Malachie says) father of us all?
He made the first kings of a poor and base stock, to teach us, that men ought
not through arrogancy, and vain boasting of their nobility, esteem
themselves better than others, but so far forth only as his holy gifts and
graces are more abundantly in them. Saul was chosen king as he was seeking his
fathers asses: David, when he was a shepherd, and the youngest of his
brethren. The brier and the rose came of one and the same root: so noblemen
and vile persons came of one mass and lump. The brier is rejected because it
pricketh, and the rose for her good smell is esteemed and held in men's hands. So
he that makes himself vile through vice, ought to be rejected, and he that is
odoriferous and smells sweetly by good virtues and noble actions, ought to
be esteemed, honored and accounted noble of what race and stock soever he
When nobility of birth is to be esteemed.
comes. True it is, that ancient nobility joined with excellent virtue, is
very commendable among men, especially in every monarchy well established, of
which the nobility is the chiefest pillar, being appointed by God, and
approved by the law of man, for their fidelity toward their kings, and
defense of their subjects, wherein the true Of riches and burgeises.
duty and office of noblemen consists. Riches are the fourth thing
necessary in every common-welth, and consequently citizens, who commonly
possess them, and are settled from all antiquity in towns, having rents,
revenues and possessions, and being as it were the strong pillars of cities,
and of the whole political body. Cicero says, that riches are the sinews of
battles. For as the whole body of a Riches are the sinews of war.
man feels and moves by the sinews: so the body of the commonwealth
receives strength and power by riches, to gather men of war together in
defense of her liberty. For this cause Aristotle in his plat-forme of a happy
common-welth They are necessary in a Commonwealth.
requires abundance of wealth and money to help public affairs at home, and
warlike matters abroad. And in another place he says, that a happy life
consists in the perfect use of virtue, assisted with bodily and external
goods, as with instruments that serve to execute honest actions well and
virtuously. It is certain that gold and silver in respect of the soul, are
neither good nor ill, but by good usage they are made profitable for this life,
and the abuse of them is hurtful both to the body and soul. And in deed riches
of their own nature are not to be condemned. Abraham, Lot, Jacob, and Job were
rich and holy men. Josephus writes that never The exceeding riches that David
left to Solomon.
any king, either of the Hebrews, or of any other nation, left so great riches
to his successor, as David did to Solomon. For he left him to build the temple
withal, 10000. talents of gold, and 100000. of silver, beside infinite store of
stuff, of wonderful cost and value, which he had caused to be prepared and
made ready. The sumptuousness of that Temple, as it is described by this
Historiographer, is wonderful. He says that it was made and finished in seven
The number of workmen about Salomons temple.
years by 80000. Masons, 3200. Overseers, and 30000. Hebrews that hewed wood
in the forest, and 70000. others that brought stones and such like matter for
the work. If the riches of the Roman Empire had not been great, I mean both
the public and private wealth, it is certain, that it had not so long time
maintained it self in such a glorious and flourishing estate, as the like was
never before, causing the farthest and most unknown nations to stand in fear
of her weapons. Hereof we have Augustus maintained yearly 44. legions of
soldiers.
good proof by that which we read of Augustus Caesar, who ordinarily defrayed
the charges of 44. Legions, which amounted yearly to twelve millions of gold.
But the Roman The limits of the Roman Empire in the time of Augustus.
empire was then come to the top of her greatness, having for her bounds the
river of Euphrates on the East side, the Ocea^ sea on the West, on the South
side the fruitful region of Africa, and on the North side the rivers of Rhine
and Danubius. At this day 50. kingdoms and estates are divided out of that
monarchy. Therefore if the citizens of the commonwealth possess riches, if
they employ the^ upon good works, and that liberally for the tuition, defense
and setting forth of their country, they behave Of Arts and Artificers.
themselves like good citizens, borne to do good, and to profit the
Commonwealth. The fifth thing necessary in every good Commonwealth and city,
are occupations What an Art or occupatio^ is.
and consequently crafts-men. An art is a habit of working according to right
reason, as Aristotle says. Or else an art is the knowledge of some certain
thing gotten by use, instruction or reason, tending to necessary uses for man's
life. Some arts consist in Speculation, and others in practice. We call
Speculation Theoricall, that is to say, Speculatiue: and Action practical,
that is to say, Active. This word Artificer is derived of the word Art. Now
because that nature is most perfect next to God, the nearer that art
approaches to nature, the better and perfecter it is, as appears in images
and pictures: so that art Art is an imitation of nature.
is nothing else but an imitation of nature. Those Arts that are commonly
called Mechanical, or handy-craftes, whereby they differ from liberal Arts,
of which we have already discoursed, are of diverse sorts. For the better
understanding of them we will presuppose that man has Three things necessary
for the life of man.
need of three temporal things for the maintenance of this life, namely, of
Alimentes, Houses, and Clothing. He stands in need of Alimentes to restore
the consumption of radical moisture, wasted away by natural heat, The use of
Aliments.
(as the week consumes the oil in the Lamp) I say to restore it again by
moist nourishment, as by bread, wine, flesh, and other aliments, without which
a man could not live. These nutrimentes are provided and prepared by men of
Occupations, as by Butchers, Fishmongers, Bakers, Cooks, Vintners, and other
handycrafts-men, which serve and look to the provision of victuals. Next, me^
have need of houses, that every one may have his private place of refuge to
keep his body, family, and goods under covert: and these are edifices and
frames erected by the The use of houses.
art of building, and made by Masons, Carpenters, Geometricians, Sawyers,
Ioiners, and other handycrafts that are occupied in caruing. Likewise a city,
in respect both of ornament and of defense, stands in need of walls, towers,
bulwarks, rampires, andother things of defense, as also of temples and other
common places: all which cannot be made without the arts of building and of
Masonry. The third thing which men stand in need of, are garments to The use of
garments.
clothe themselves withal, to preserve natural heat, and to keep out external
cold: and these are provided by Mercers, Drapers, Tailors, Hosiers, and such
like. Besides the abouenamed things we stand in need of armor and of horses to
defend our liberty, and for our greater commodity: and so consequently
Armorers, Glazers, Sadlers, Spur-makers, Smithes and such like, are necessary.
Likewise for the preservation and recovery of our health, we must honor the
Physician, Surgeon, Apothecarie, Drug-seller and such like. The duty and
office of all artificers, is to avoid idleness, The duty of all artificers.
slooth, and negligence, and especially to use no deceit in their arts, but to
refer the end of their labors more to common profit than to their private
gain. And for the avoiding of Ingrossers, it is very expedient that the
crafts-men should be divided into diverse parts of the city, Artificers of one
Science, ought not to dwell all together.
and not placed all on a row in one quarter thereof, as they do in the towns
of Afrike, and in many cities of Europe. For besides the discommodities in
great towns, when every quarter has not in it such artificers as are commonly
necessary, it is to be feared that there will be amongst the^ Ingrossers to
fore-stall the merchandise and wares: or else jealousy and quarrels are to be
feared, if one sell better cheap than another, even before his eyes that
refused to take that money. It is true, that such artificers as are least
required, as men that live by the hammer, may be ranged in one quarter, that
thereby they may be separated from men of learning and quietness. The sixth and
last thing necessary in a Commonwealth remains to be considered Of Aliments
and laborers.
of, namely, Aliments, and consequently laborers. We have already spoken of
Aliments: but as for that which The praise of husbandry.
concerns husbandry especially, there is no other art, that does more awaken
the mind of man, that rauisheth his senses more, that affoordeth greater
pleasure, or is more necessary and profitable for the life of man, than
husbandry. Moreover nothing sauoureth of greater antiquity, nothing does
better discover the greatness of the The antiquity thereof.
works of God, nothing does cast forth more lively marks and beams of a
wonderful divinity, than husbandry. For most of other arts were invented long
time after man was created of God, and augmented since by the industry of
many. Only husbandry gave sufficient testimony of it self, and of the
incomprehensible power of God, when presently after the creation of the
elements there came out of the bowels of the earth all kinds of herbs and
plants garnished with their proper virtues for the service and commodity Men
have been always more inclined to husbandry than to any other vocation.
of man. Man himself also by a divine and natural instinct has been from the
beginning more inclined and disposed to the tillage of the earth, than to any
other study and vocation whatsoever: as we read of our first fathers who
commonly called themselves Laborers of the earth, and feeders of cattle.
Husbandry and the country life were so much commended and esteemed of the
ancients, that many of them have written sundry books thereof in Princes have
forsaken their diademes to fall to husbandry. Cyrus.
Greek and Latin: and many monarchs have heretofore left their great palaces,
and contemned their purple robes and diademes, that they might give themselves
to the manuring of country commodities. Cyrus was never better pleased and
contented, than when he might be dressing of some goodly piece of ground, and
setting of a certain number Dioclesian.
of trees checker-wise. Dioclesian forsook the scepter of his empire, that he
might withdraw himself into the fields, and trim with his own hands, trees,
graffs, several plots of ground, and gardens. Besides in husbandry and the
country life, profit abounds with pleasure and gain Profit and pleasure
are joined together in husbandry.
with delight. As for profit it is very evident. For a good husbandman is
alwais provided of bread, wine, flesh, fruit, wood, and other Aliments. And
concerning pleasure, it is incredible to one that has skill and will to
consider of the maruels of nature, besides a thousand delights, with exercises
as pleasant and profitable for his health as can be. And that benefit which is
most excellent and chiefest of all, I mean tranquillity of mind may more
easily be obtained by the Muses darlings, and lovers of knowledge The country
fitter for students than the city.
in the midst of the open fields and pleasant sound of waters, than amongst
the noise of suites and dissentions wherewith cities are replenished. It
belongs to the duty of laborers to live in their simplicity, and to do
their endeavor The duty of husband men.
in tilling the fields. For the performing hereof they stand in need of 3.
things: of skill to know the nature of Three things necessary for them.
the soil, and the seasons of sowing and gathering: of will to be diligent and
careful to continue in their country labor: and lastly, of ability to
provide oxen, horses, cattle, and other instruments of husbandry. By this
discourse therefore we may see what things are most requisite and necessary
for the institution of a happy commonwealth, and that no man is so
industrious, witty or prudent, that of himself without the help of another
he can live without society, and minister to himself all necessary things.
For this cause the fellowship of many together was found out, that by teaching,
judging, defending, giving, taking, changing, serving and communicating their
works and exercises one with an other, they might live well and commodiously
together. Which thing will undoubtedly come to pass in every Commonwealth,
when every one walking in his vocation, directs his will and work to the
service of God, his prince and country.


Of Peace, and of War. Chap. 67.
ARAM. Justinian the Emperor in the Preface of his Institutions says: That it
is necessary for the Every commonwealth must be always provided against all
events both of peace and war.
imperial majesty to have respect to two times, namely, of peace and of war,
that it may be provided against all events either of the one or the other.
Laws and good politic statutes are necessary for it in time of peace, that
the Provinces may be quietly governed: but in time of war it must always
have armor ready and couenient forces, to help friends, to resist enemies,
and to contain disobedient subjects within compass. Now having hitherto
entreated of that policy, which chiefly respects the time of peace, we must
hereafter (my companions) refer to our discourses that small knowledge which
we have of warlike discipline. And first I think we must oppose these times of
peace and war one against the other, and consider of their clean contrary
effects, that we may be so much the more easily led and persuaded to desire
and procure that which is best and most profitable for every estate and
monarchy. Therefore I propounde unto you this matter to discourse upon.


ACHITOB. Romans 12. 18. Col. 3. 15.
If it be possible, as much as in you is (says the Apostle) have peace with
all men: and let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which ye are
called in one body. For truly without peace all riches is but poverty, all
mirth but mourning, all life but death. But no man can perfectly know the
benefit of peace, that has had no trial of the burden of war.


ASER. Leuit. 26. 3. 6. 14. 15. 25.
If ye walk in my ordinances (says the eternal God) I will send peace in
the land: but if ye will not obey me, but despise mine ordinances, I will send
a sword upon you, that shall avenge the quarrel of my covenant, and ye shall
be delivered into the hand of the enemy. Now let us hear AMANA discourse upon
that which is here propounded unto us.


AMANA. Lycurgus entering into the government of the Lacedaemonians, and finding
their Estate greatly corrupted, determined with himself to change their whole
Policy. For he thought that if he should only make some particular laws and
ordinances, it would do no more good, than a slender medicine would profit a
corrupt body full of many diseases, before order were taken for the purging,
resolving, and consuming of the evil humors, that a new form and rule of life
might afterward be prescribed. His enterprise although great and difficult, yet
fell out very well, and his laws were received and approved of the people,
after a little force and fear wherewith Lycurgus referred all his laws to
war, appointing the Ilotes only to deal with occupations.
at first they were restrained. But this lawmakers referred all his laws to
war and to victory, and kept his subjects in continual exercise of Arms,
not suffering them to learn any other science or handi-craft, unto which he
appointed the Ilotes only, who were men brought in subjection by the right of
war. Whereby Lycurgus seems to have been of this mind, that force ought to
be mistres in all worldly matters, and that other things serve to no purpose if
they want Arms, which by a certain right of war that shall always continue
amongst men, bring in subjection to Conquerours the persons and goods of those
whom they overcome. It seems also he thought, that there was never any true
peace amongst men, but only in name, and that all Princes and people live in
continual distrust one of another, and do nothing else for the most part but
watch how to surprise each other, (as Plutark elegantly sets it out)
notwithstanding all leagues and goodly agreements that pass between them.
Numa Numa referred all his laws to peace.
Pompilius, second king of the Romans, clean contrary to Lycurgus, was so
far in love with peace, and referred all his laws in such sort thereunto,
that during his reign, there was neither war, nor civil dissension, nor any
motion of novelty in the government of the Commonwealth. Much less was there
any enmity or envy conceived against him particularly, or conspiracy against
his person through desire of ruling, but all occasions of war being
extinguished and removed, the Temple of Ianus The keeping of Ianus Temple
shut, was a sign of peace among the Romans.
was continually kept shut for the space of forty years, which was a sign of
peace amongst the Romans. For not only at Rome the people were tractable
through the example of the justice, clemency, and goodness of king Numa, but
also in the towns round about there was a marvelous alteration of manners:
insomuch that as the beams of a clear Sun are dispersed abroad, so there
was shed in the hearts of men a secret desire to live in peace, to labor
the ground, to bring up their children quietly, and to serve and honor
their gods. And Plutarke writes in his life, that in his time there was
nothing but feasts, plays, sacrifices, and bankets throughout all Italy: so
that a man might say, that the wisdom of Numa was a lively fountain of all
goodness and honesty, out of which many rivers issued to water all Italy, and
that his peaceable prudence was communicated as it were from hand to hand
unto the whole world. Now, although these two men have been greatly praised
and commended for sundry rare virtues, yet all men approve not the
extremities which they followed in this form of government. For as he is
pernitions that moves and continues war only to subdue his neighbors, to
enlarge the borders of his country, and to usurp The discommodities of a long
peace.
other men's right, which sauoureth more of brutishnes, than of humanity: so a
long peace brings with it many discommodities, making men insolent commonly
through too great prosperity, as also nice, lavish, and effeminate, through
abundance of wealth and idleness. Therefore Plato, Aristotle and Polybius
reprove Lycurgus, because he propounded only the exercise of the virtue of
war to his Citizens, which is the least of those four, that are necessary
for the establishment and preservation of every Empire: saying, that all his
laws were well ordained to make men valiant, but not just, temperat, and
prudent. On the other side, they that are too much affected to peace and
quietness, weaken themselves by little and little before they be aware, and by
their example mollify the courage of youth, whereby they lie open to the
injuries of those that will invade them, and so loose their liberty, not being
able to defend their persons and goods. But as the world is compounded of 4.
elements, by Excellent comparisons between the composition of the world, and
of every happy Commonwealth.
whose mixture it is so made, that it is both seen and touched, and withal is
preserved in such love and concord, that it cannot be dissolved by any other
tha^ by him that made it: so every public Estate must be established by 4.
virtues, by whose harmony and agreement it is preserved. And as the fire and
the earth were first created to make the whole frame subject to sight and
feeling, and then the water and the air mingled with them, that the
dissimilitude of those extremes might be tempered according to proportion: so
fortitude and justice are first required in the ordaining of Commonwealths,
because they cannot continue without law and strength, and next prudence and
temperance being joined with them, moderate the rigor and remisnes of both.
Again, as by these natures of which all things are made, being dispersed above
and beneath, and on all sides, the world is preserved and continued, so that
light things are kept from ascending through the weight of heavy things, and
contrariwise heavy things held aloft, that they fall not: so by these 4. virtues
dispersed amongst men, a Commonwealth well instituted and guided by discipline,
is maintained. And although by reason of the variety and change of humane
affairs it cannot continue so long, and so adorned as the world, yet it will
abide many years. Moreover, as the elements are bred one of another, and alter
to and fro, going into, and returning continually from the first matter, which
receives them into it self, for which cause they cannot be seen simple, but
mixed: whereupon arises such a te^perature of al things, that they wither not
by drougth, nor burn with heat, neither are ouer-whelmed with too great
moisture, nor grow stiff with excessive cold: so these virtues whereby cities
are instituted, must be mingled one with another, and agree together for their
mutual preservation, wisdom being President over them in which they are all
contained. For they cannot maintain themselves one without another, nor keep
How the virtues are knit together and depend one of another.
their vigor and dignity. Justice without temperance is rigor: fortitude
separated from justice is rashness and cruelty, and without prudence justice is
but craft and suttletie. To conclude, temperance without fortitude ought rather
to be called cowardlines and nicenes: whereby we see that they are so
interlaced, and depend in such sort one of another, that they cannot be
separated. If it fall out otherwise, that estate wherein such disorder takes
place, must of necessity be utterly overthrown or changed. Out of these
learned Philosophical discourses we will draw a very good lesson: namely, that
in every Estate well instituted for continuance, this temperature of the four
virtues must necessarily be kept, that men may be instructed how to govern
themselves well both in time of peace and of war, and observe such a
moderation therein, that knowing how to deal in both times, they may be ready
and fit for war when necessity urges, having this Peace is to be preferred
before war.
end before them to attain to peace, which must always be preferred, as rest
is before travel, and good before evil, as we shall easily understand by
considering their contrary effects. It is certain that Philosophy is best
exercised The effects of peace.
in time of peace. For when there is no trouble of war, the spirit is quiet,
and fit for every honest kind of rest, so that arts and sciences go well
forward, laws are in force, justice flourishes, virtue shows her effects
better, vice languisheth, the zeal of piety increases, the discipline of the
Church is authorized, both the noble and mean man preserves and augmenteth
his wealth, trade and traffic is free: briefly, every one receives good and
commodity, The effects of war.
and so consequently the whole body of the Commonwealth. But if we look to
those effects, which the time of war commonly brings forth, the desire of
having is awakened, covetousness increases, justice falls to the ground,
force and violence bears sway, spoiling reigns, riot is set at liberty,
wicked men are in authority, good men oppressed, innocence trodden under
foot, maidens and wives defloured, countries wasted, houses burnt, Churches
destroyed, tombs broken down, goods spoiled, murders committed, all virtue
banished from among men, vice honored, the laws contemned and broken, the
service of God forsaken, the estate of the Church derided, the nobility and
people burdened with infinite charges and costs, all kind of trade hindered:
briefly, there is no calamity or misery that abounds not in the
Commonwealth in time of war. We may What kingdom is happy.
judge that kingdom happy, wherein the Prince is obedient to the law of God
and nature, Magistrates to the Prince, private men to Magistrates, children to
their fathers, servants to their masters, and subjects being linked in love
one with another, and all of them with their Prince, enjoy the sweetenes of
peace, and true quietness of mind. But war is clean contrary thereunto, and
soldiers are sworn enemies to that kind of life. For war makes men War
makes men cruel, and peace gentle.
barbarous, mutinous, and cruel, as peace makes them courteous, and tractable.
We read that Englishmen were in times past so seditious and untameable, that
not only their Princes could not do what they would, but also the English
merchants were of necessity lodged apart by them selves. For so the town of
Antwarpe was constrained to do, where there was one house common for all
merchant strangers, except Englishmen, who had a house by themselves, because
they could not abide to be joined with others. The chief cause of that strange
quality was because their country bordered upon two Estates and Nations that
were their enemies: namely, upon the Frenchmen and Scots, with whom they had
continual war: but since they concluded a peace, and joined in league with
France and Scotland, they became very mild and civil. And contrariwise the
Frenchmen, who were inferior to no nation whatsoever, in courtesy and
humanity, are greatly changed from their natural disposition, and become
savage since the civil wars began. The like (as Plutarke says) happened to
the Inhabitants of Sicilia, who by means of continual war grew to be like
brute beasts. Archidamus king of Lacedemonia, knowing well the effects of
peace and war here briefly touched by us, and hearing that the Elians sent
succors to the Archadians to Archidamus letter to the Elians.
war against him, took occasion to write unto them after the Laconicall
manner, in steed of a long discourse. Archidamus to the Elians: Peace is a
goodly thing. And another time he gave a notable testimony how far he
preferred peace before war, when he made this answer to one that commended
him, because he had obtained a battle against the foresaid Archadians: It
had been better if we had overcome them by prudence rather than by force. The
self same reason of loving peace, and of abhorring Cato misliked Caesar for
breaking of peace.
the breakers thereof, was the cause why Cato in a full Senate opposed himself
against the request which Caesar's friends made, that the people should offer
sacrifices by way of thanksgiving to the gods, for the notable victories which
he had gotten against the Germans, of whom he had surprised and discomfited
300000. I am (said Cato) rather of this opinion, that he should be delivered
into their hands whom he has wronged without cause by violating the peace,
which they had with the people of Rome, that they may punish him as they think
good, to the end that the whole fault of breaking faith and promise with them,
may be cast upon him alone, and not be laid upon the city, which is no cause
at all thereof. And to say truth, wise men are greatly to fear all beginnings
of war. For being in the end grown to some ripenes, after that some men
wanting experience in worldly affairs, have rashly and unskillfully sown the
seed thereof, hardly can the greatest and wisest kings pluck it up again
without great labor and peril. Therefore they that are too desirous and
hasty to begin war, pervert the order of reason: because they begin by
execution and force, which ought to be last, after due consultation. But he
deserves greater honor and praise that procures peace, and wins the
enemies hearts by love, than he that obtains victory by shedding their blood
cruelly. For this Wherefore and when we must begin war.
only reason (says Cicero) we must begin war, that we may live in peace,
and not receive wrong: but this must be done after we have required
satisfaction for the injury offered. It was for these considerations that
Phocion, that great Athenian Captain labored to stop the war, which the
people of Athens had determined to make against the Macedonians, at the
persuasion of Leosthenes. Phocion dissuaded the Athenians from war.
And being demanded when he would counsel the Athenians to make war, when I
see (quoth he) that the young men are fully resolved not to leave their ranks,
that rich men contribute money willingly, and Orators abstain from robbing
the Commonwealth. Nevertheless the army was leauied against his counsel, and
many woondering at the greatness and beauty thereof, asked him how he liked
that preparation. It is fair for one brunt said Phocion, but I fear the
return and continuance of the war: because I see not that the city has any
other means to get money, or other Vessels and men of war, beside these. And
his foresight was approved by the event. For although Leosthenes prospered in
the beginning of his enterprise (whereupon Phocion being demanded whether he
would not gladly have done all those great and excellent things, answered
that he would, but not have omitted that counsel which he gave) yet in the end
he was slain in that voyage, the Grecian army overthrown by Antipater and
Craterus two Macedonians, and the city of Athens brought to that extremity,
that it was constrained to send a blanke for capitulations of peace, and to
receive within it a garrison of strangers. Thus it falls out commonly to
those that seek for war by all means, either by right or wrong. Every Prince
The fruits of unjust war.
that desires it in that manner, stirs up against himself both the
hatred and weapons of his neighbors, he vexes and greeueth his subjects
unworthily, seeking rather to rule over them by violence, than to gain their
good will by justice: he quite ouer-throweth his Country, preferring dominion,
and greatness of his own glory, before the benefit, quietness, and safety
thereof: and oftentimes he diminishes his own authority, and is brought in
subjection to his enemies, whilst he laboreth to possess another man's right by
force. Augustus the Emperor When a war is lawful.
said, that to have a good and lawful war, it must be commended by the Gods,
and justified by the Philosophers. Traian never undertook unjust war.
And Aelius Spartianus affirms, that Traian only of all the Roman Emperors
was never overcome in battle, because he undertook no war, except the cause
thereof was very just. But we may say, that no war between Christians is so
justified, but that still there remains Antigonus testimony of the injustice
of war.
some cause of scruple. The testimony of Antigonus the elder, wherein he
accuses himself, is very notable to show what great wickedness and injustice
is in war, when he used this speech to a Philosopher that offered and
dedicated unto him a treatise, which he had made of justice. Thou art a fool,
my friend, to come and tell me of justice, when thou Caesar.
see me beat down other men's towns. Caesar answered little less to
Metellus a Tribune of the people, who being desirous to keep him from taking
the money that was in the common treasury, alleged unto him the laws that
forbad it: to whom this Monarch replied, that the time of Famine and the
plague follow war.
war, and the time of laws were twain. Moreover, we see that famine and the
pestilence commonly follow war. For the abundance of all things being wasted,
want of victuals must of necessity succeed, whereupon many diseases grow.
Briefly, it brings with it nothing but a heap of all evils and miseries, and
easily draws and allureth the violence and evil disposition of many to
follow the Malcontents are glad of war.
state of the time. For they that desire a change, are very glad of such an
occasion to ground their plat-formes upon: which they could not do in time of
peace, because men are then of a better judgment and affection, as well Causes
why the exercise of arms must always continue.
in public as in private matters. But whatsoever we have spoken of the
miseries that follow war, warlike discipline must not be suffered to
degenerate in a Commonwealth well established: seeing there is never want of
evil neighbors that are desirous to incroach upon other men's borders, and
seeing the laws, justice, subjects, and the whole state, are under the
protection of Arms, as it were under a mighty buckler. And forasmuch as the
defense of our life, and pursuit of thieves is warranted both by the law of
God, of nature, and of man, it follows that the subjects must needs be
trained up in feats of Arms, both defensive and offensive, that they may be a
buckler to the good, and a bar to the bad. Wherein the Augustus kept 40.
legions in continual exercise of warlike discipline.
example of Augustus is very notable, who in time of an assured peace would not
dissolve and dismiss the forty legions, but sent them to the Provinces and
borders of those nations that were most barbarous to keep them in warlike
discipline, and withal to take away as near as he Constantine the Great.
could all occasion of civil war. Whereof Constantine the Great had
sorrowful experience, when he discharged his bands of soldiers, whereby he
opened the gates unto his enemies, who after that invaded the Roman Empire on
all sides. For the conclusion therefore of our discourse, let us learn to desire
peace rather than war, the one being a certain sign of the blessing of God
upon his people, and the other of his wrath and malediction. Good
considerations for a Prince.
Let the Prince think with himself (as Traian wrote to the Senate) that he is
called not to war, but to govern: not to kill his enemies, but to root out
vices: not so much to go forth to war, as to tarry in the Commonwealth: not
to take another man's goods from him, but to do justice to every one,
especially considering, that in war a Prince can fight but in the place of
one, at which time he is wanting to many in the Commonwealth. And yet because
the sword is put into the Magistrates hand, for the preservation of public
peace, he cannot imploie or use it better than in resisting, breaking, and
beating down their attempts, that tyrannically seek to trouble it, being
led with ambition and desire to enlarge their bounds with other men's right.
Now, because the greater part of Potentates and neighbor Princes direct their
purposes to this mark, it is very expedient and necessary in every well
ordered Estate, that the youth, especially the Nobility should be trained up
and exercised in feats of Arms, to the end that in time of necessity, and
for common profit, they may be apt and ready to serve their Prince and
Country.


Of the ancient Discipline and order of War. Chap. 68.
AMANA. But following our purpose, which is to discourse of the state of war,
according to the small experience that our age affoordeth, and our study has
gathered, we are now to speak (my Companions) of warlike discipline, which
for the excellent order thereof used in ancient time, is so much the more
worthy to be noted, as ours is to be contemned, for the great disorder that
is seen in it. Therefore I leave the handeling of this matter to you.


ARAM. Discipline among soldiers is the cause that order is kept in all
matters of war, which procures in armies obedience and victory.


ACHITOB. The unbridled license that is used now adays among soldiers,
breeds such boldness in them, that all warlike discipline is supplanted
thereby. But let us hear ASER discourse of this matter.


ASER. If we appoint to every one (says Socrates in Plato) his several art
whereunto he is aptest by nature, and which he must use all his life time,
forsaking all other trades, to the end that observing opportunities, he may
discharge it the better, there is no doubt but that in warlike discipline,
which is great deal more excellent than any other trade, greater leisure,
greater cunning and It is not the weapon that makes a warrior.
practice is necessarily required. For if a man take a target, or some other
warrelike weapon and instrument in his hand, he is not by and by fit to fight,
much less of sufficient courage to serve manfully, if he be not long before
prepared thereunto by sound reasons and resolutions. It is no work of an
hour, or of a day, to persuade men, that if they will get praise, they must
settle themselves to sustain all travels, to assaie all perils, and to hold
this opinion constantly, that it is more to be desired to die fighting in a
good and just quarrel, than to escape with life by flying away. But that which
From whence valor proceeds.
breeds and nourishes such thoughts in men's hearts, is the good education and
institution of youth in the discipline of virtue, and in the knowledge of
Fortitude and Magnanimity, which are inseparably followed of honor and
immortal glory: whereby all fear of enemies is taken away, and watching,
traveling, suffering, obeying, well liked of, that they may bring to pass
their noble enterprises. The Assyrians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans, whose
deeds of Arms are almost incredible, had always in singular recomme^dation
the maintenance of warlike discipline: but their chief desire was to imprint
Three things necessarily required in men of war. Good will comes from good
institution.
these three things in the hearts of their soldiers, Willingness, Reverence,
and Obedience, of which things the happy conduct of all war depends. They
that were well brought up and instructed in virtue, could not want good will to
execute virtuous actions. Those Heads and Reverence from the wisdom and
experience of Captains.
Leaders of armies that were well chosen, and had wisdom and experience, did
by their wonderful virtue provoke every one to reverence them. Moreover, this
Maxim of war was diligently practiced of the Heads: Obedience is wrought in
them by the diligence of the Heads.
namely, to make their soldiers more devout and obedient to their
commandments, than affectionated to any other thing, how gainefull soever it
were. At this day, as the former education and instruction is wanting, so the
Heads and Captains are insufficient. And from thence proceeds the disorder
and disobedience of men of war, whereupon loss of the battle, and
destruction of the army follows in steed of victory. But that we may
begin to consider of this ancient warrelike discipline, we will here only
weigh the order of the Roman armies and battles, who excelled all Nations in
feats of Arms: and then we will look into that great obedience and severe
rule of living, that was observed among the men of war. We shall not find in
all the Romayne Histories any battle of greater or more importance between
the people of Rome, and any other nation, than that which they had with the
Latins, when Torquatus and Decius were Consuls. For as the Latins by loosing
the battle were brought The virtue of the Captains is much in war.
into bondage, so should the Romans have been, if they had not woonne it.
Titus Liuius is of this opinion, who makes both the armies in all respects
alike, both for number, virtue, resolution and order, and puts the
difference only in the virtue of the Captains, which he supposes was greater
on the Romans side, and so consequently cause of their victory. The likeness
and equality of these two hosts proceeded of this, because they had long time
followed and practiced feats of arms together, using the same order,
language, and weapons; and keeping the self same manner of ordring their
battles, insomuch that both The ancient order of the Roman army.
their orders and their Captains had the same names. Now this was the order of
the Roman army. Their whole host was divided into three principal parts,
whereof the first consisted of pike-men, the second of the chief gentlemen and
Lords, the third was called the rereward, and every part was chiefly
compounded of footmen, being accompanied The Romans divided their army into
three parts.
with a certain number of horsemen. Their battles being ordered in this sort,
they placed pike-men in the foreward, right behind them were the noblemen, and
in the third place behind they appointed their rereward, which they called by
the name of Triari. They had also certain troops of horsemen, both on the
right and left side of every part of their army, whom they called wings, in
respect of the place which they had, because they seemed to be the wings of
that body. They set the foreward close together in the forefront, that it
might both break in upon the enemy, and sustain the onset. The battle,
because it was not to fight first, but to succor the fore-ward when it was
either put to the woorst or driven back, was not joined so close, but kept
their ranks wider asunder, so that it might without disorder to it self
receive the foreward within it, if by any mishap or breach of array, it should
be constrained to retire. The rereward had their ranks farther distant one from
another than the battle, that it might be able to receive within it both the
foreward and the battle when need required. Their battles then being thus
ranged, they began the skirmish, and if their pikemen were driven back and
vanquished, they retired into the distances and void spaces of the noblemen.
Then both of them being knit together in one, made one body of two battles,
and so began the fight again. But if they both being joined together were put
to the worst, they gathered themselves together in the wide and large ranks
that were left for them in the rereward of the Triari. And then these three
parts joined in one renewed the fight, and so either lost or woonne the battle,
being unable to repair themselves again. Therefore when the rereward entered
into the conflict, the army was in danger: whereupon arose that proverb, Res
redacta est ad Triarios, which is as much to say in English, as the matter is
brought to the Rereward, and to the extremity. Now the Captains of these our
times, having The benefit of this Roman order.
forsaken all order of ancient discipline, make no account of this ordinance of
war, although if it be well considered, it will be found a matter of great
importance. For he that ordreth his host so that he may repair himself thrice
in one battle, must have fortune his enemy three sundry times before he can
loose it, and be utterly overthrown. Whereas he that trusts only to the
first encounter, as the most do at this day, offers himself rashly unto
danger and loss. For one only disorder, one small virtue may carry the victory
from him. Now that which hinders our armies from repairing themselves thrice,
is the lack of skill to gather one battle into another. We also appoint only a
foreward and a maine battle for the most part, and lay the hope and strength of
the army upon the horsemen: whereas the Ancients made most account of the
footmen. So that if the horsemen receiving the onset should have the repulse,
and their array broken, the rest were easy to be dealt withal: beside, that
commonly the foote-men are disordred by their own horsemen, being compelled to
retire. For this cause the Switzers, called by some masters of these late
wars, when they purpose to fight, especially The wisdom of the Switzers
fighting on the Frenchmens side.
on the Frenchmens side, are very careful to have the horsemen on the one
side, and not to follow next after them, to the end that being wide of them,
if by mishap they should be repulsed, yet they might not overrun Frenchmen
loosing the first encounter, loose also the victory.
and disorder them. And this has been oftentimes noted, that the Frenchmen
according to the advantage or discommoditie of the first brunt given by their
foreward or battle, have been partakers of the like issue and event afterward:
so that if they were put to the woorst in the first encounter, their enemy was
in a manner assured of the victory. This caused Titus Liuius to write in many
places, that Frenchmen in the beginning of a battle Some armies are furious,
and yet keep good order.
are more than men, but in the end less than women. But that which causes
them to break their order so quickly, may be better known, if we set down
here two kinds of armies, the one where there is fury and order, as there
was in the Roman army, in which, according to the testimony of all
histories, good order through continuance of time had planted such a warlike
discipline, that nothing was done among them but by rule. They did neither
eat, nor sleep, nor deal in any other warlike or private action, without the
appointment of the Consul, or Head of the army. So that all virtue being thus
settled amongst them, they exercised their fury by means, and as time and
occasion served: neither could any difficulty arise, that could quail their
resolution well begun, or cause them to be discouraged, Good order in armies
is never without hope of victory.
by reason of their good order, which refreshed them and strengthened their
courage that was nourished with the hope of victory, which is never wanting as
long as good orders are truly observed. But in the other kind of army In the
French armies is fury without order.
where fury bears sway, and not order, as it falls out often in the French
armies, if victory does not follow their first assaie. For their fury,
wherein their hope consisted, is not succored with settled virtue, neither have
they any other confidence but in their fury, so that as soon as they are
somewhat cooled, and see never so little disorder and breach of array, they are
presently discomfited. Contrariwise, the Romans being less afraid of perils,
because of their good order, fought firmly and resolutely together without any
distrust of the victory, being as courageous and virtuous in the end as in
the beginning: yea the harder they were charged with weapons, the more were
they inflamed and set on fire. Moreover, concerning their warlike discipline,
it may easily be known by that speech which Titus Liuius rehearses of
Papirius Cursor, who complained of the corruption that began to grow in their
army, for the which he would have punished The ancient warlike discipline of
the Romans.
Fabius General of the horsemen. No man (says he) bears any reverence
either to men, or to the gods. The Edicts of the Captain, of the Coronell, and
of the Soothsaiers, are not observed. The soldiers go wandering up and
down like vagabonds, both in countries that are at peace with us, and also in
our enemies lands: they discharge themselves at their pleasure, and forget
their oath. The Ensigns are desolate, and not followed. Besides, they join
not together as they are commanded, nor consider whether it be by day or by
night, whether in a place of advantage, or of disadvantage. They fight without
the Captains commandment; they keep not their ranks and signs. Briefly,
whereas war was wont to be solemn and sacred, it is disordered,
inconsiderate, and guided at all adventure, after the manner of theeury. But as
What manner of camp the ancient Romans had.
long as warlike discipline took place among the ancient Romans, their camp
was a schole of honor, of sobriety, of chastity, of justice, and of all virtue,
so that no man might revenge his own injuries, or proceed of himself
peremptorily. They knew not what it was to live at discretion, much less to go
a foraging, to rob, steal, beat or murder, Of the ancient obedience of
soldiers to their captains.
as men do now a days. And as touching obedience toward their Captains, it
was very wonderful. For they feared not to prefer it before the safety of
their own lives, and before all victory. At the battle of Cannas the Roman
knights seeing the Consul alight and certain others with him because he was
hurt, and thinking that he had commanded them all to do so, they presently
left their horses, which was the cause of their overthrow. And this did
Hannibal then declare with a loud voice, saying: I would not desire rather to
have them delivered to me bound, than as they be. The executions that were
showed upon the disobedient and offenders were full of rigor, Of the execution
that was showed upon soldiers that offended.
and the quality of their punishments marvelous strange. For the Heads of
armies sometime sticked not to cause a whole legion to pass through the pikes,
(which consisted of 6000. footmen, and 500. horsemen) for some The tithing of
armies was most severe.
notable fault committed by them. But among all their terrible executions, the
tithing of armies was most severe, when every tenth man throughout a whole
host was by lot put to death. No kind of punishment could be found that was
more fearful for the correcting of a multitude than this, which they
practiced especially when the chief author, and they that were the procurers
of some notorious fact, were not known. For then it had been too much to have
chasticed the whole company: and if some had been corrected, and others left
unpunished, innocents peradventure should have suffered, and the guilty
escaped scot-free. Whereas by tithing they that were punished, could not
complain but of the lot: and the rest were kept in fear, least the like
faults should fall out again amongst them. Whereupon they observed one
another, that as many as did not their duty might be How Captains were
punished if they offended
known and chasticed. The Captains and Heads of armies were no less
rigorously handeled by them that had the sovereignty of the Estate, if they
did capitulate, or make any agreement with the enemies, to the detriment and
disadvantage of the Commonwealth. For they sent them back again naked, and
not the Heads only, but also all that had any charge in the army, and
consented to the composition, that the enemies might return upon their Heads
all the sin of breaking that oath which they had taken, and that appointment
which they had sworn to. The Emperor Aurelius labored earnestly to bring in
again the ancient discipline of war, and to Aurelius letter to a Tribune
touching warlike discipline.
cause it to be strictly observed: whereof his letter is a sufficient
testimony, being written by him to a Tribune of war, in these words. If thou will be a Tribune, or rather if thou will live, restrain the soldiers hands,
that none steal another man's hen, or touch his sheep. Let no man take a
grape, or spoil and tread down the corn. Let no man exact of his Oast oil,
salt, or wood: but let every one be content with his allowance. Let them enrich
themselves with the pray of their enemies, and not with the tears of our
subjects. Let their armor be glazed and clean: their hose and shoes good
and strong. Let new apparel drive away the old: and let them keep their
wages in their purse, and not spend it in tauernes. Let them lay aside
bracelets and rings. Let every one dress his own horse, and one help
another. Let the Physicians and Chirurgions look to them without money, and
let Soothsayers have nothing given them. Let them live chastely in their Oasts
houses: and let such as are mutinous and given to quarelling, be punished and
corrected. Let the^ trench their camp every day as if they were near their
enemy. Behold surely an excellent form of warlike discipline expressed in The
corruption of warlike discipline in these days.
few words, which is so far from our behavior, that the people in these
days would think they were favorably dealt withal, if the soldiers took
no more from them, but that which this emperor forbids his to take upon
pain of life. And truly the unmeasurable license that is granted them,
causes the souldior to enter into the field only to spoil and rob, and to
eschew the ^ight. And in stead of helping one another, and taking care every
one of his own horse, there is not a soldier so begger-like, but will have
his four Lackeis: so that a thousand soldiers in these days will be more
chargeable to the people, than twenty thousand that are well ordered would
Aurelius punished adultery and theft committed by his soldiers, with death.
be. If a Roman soldier had committed adultery with his Oasts wife,
Aurelius caused him to be torn in sunder with two trees bowed down one
against another. It was death also to take an egg. If he went out of his
rank whilst the army marched, he had the bastonnado. Oftentimes for one
simple fault a whole Legion was discharged and the captain severely punished:
and yet for all this rigor, the soldiers loved the Emperor as their father.
He also gave them their pay well and truly, and rewarded liberally such as did
their duty. This is the way True payment of soldiers redresseth many
disorders amongst them.
to redress so many disorders and calamities as are seen in our armies, and
to restore in some sort that warrelike discipline which is abolished. For
soldiers allege this as an excuse for all their wicked deeds, that they are
not paid, and many would not be paid, that so they might cloak their
robberies. When the small tax, and since that the payment of fifty thousand
footmen, was laid upon the subjects, the king promised to employ that money
upon no other use, than upon the payment of his men of war, as also to keep
that money apart from his ordinary receipts. But because this is not duly
observed, the people are doubly vexed: for they pay their money, and yet are
polled on all sides. Notwithstanding all these ordinary charges, the poor
pesants would think themselves happy if they were discharged by erecting
victualing tents for the men of war, as they have been forced to do of late
years. Now what good issue can be hoped for, when the soldiers through an
unbridled license, sack, spoil, and burn the poor subjects? This has
always been seen, that houses, families, kingdoms and Empires, have come to
ruin and poverty, because the poor were contemned and the subjects given
over to the robberies of soldiers. The unruliness of the Pretorian soldiers.
The immoderate license of the Pretorian soldiers (who were to the emperors
as the Ianitzaries are to the Turk) and of other men of war was no small
help to overthrow the Roman Empire. For taking upon them to elect Emperors
at their pleasure, one was chosen in one army and an other elsewhere, and
presently murdered by those that had elected them. Their insolency also caused
seditions and civil wars, whereupon those kingdoms and countries that were
under the Roman obedience, revolted. And it comes to pass oftentimes, that
their unruly behavior incenseth the people in such sort against them, that
their destruction follows. As it happened to all the Frenchmen that were in the
I Will of Sicilia, in the year 1281. upon Easter day, at the first peale to
Euensong, at what time they were all put to death by a secret conspiracy for
their insolences and whoredoms: whereupon this proverb does yet remain
amongst us, The Sicilian The Sicilian Euensong.
Euensong. There is no corner of this kingdom where the people being half mad
through the injuries received from the men of war, have not committed
infinite and cruel massacres. We may not here forget to propound the wise and
warlike discipline of Bellizarius, lieutenaunt Bellizarius.
general to the Emperor Justinian, who for valor and temperance was equal to
the ancient Romans (as histories testify of him) which was the cause that he
reconquered all Italy possessed by the Barbaria^s. Not long since during the
war of Piemont (which was a very school of virtue, The mild wane of Piemont.
and of warrelike knowledge) the pesaunt, husbandman, and artificer, were
suffered quietly at their work, the war continuing between warriors only
for the possession, and not the ruin of the country. And as the people were
then glad to receive amongst them such armies, so they despair no less at
this day, because all warlike discipline, all policy both divine and humane,
is in such sort extinguished, yea all kind of humanity and society The
cruelty of these late French wars.
which is to be seen amongst barbarous people, that it is lawful for Frenchmen
to sack, spoil, and put to ransom Frenchmen that are many times of the same
side, faith and condition, and that without punishment. But let us not look
for prosperity and good success in our enterprises, before there be some
other order and discipline observed.


The end of the seventeenth days work.
THE EIGHTEENTH DAYS WORK.
Of the office and duty of a General. Chap. 69.
ASER. THose men commonly prosper in their affairs that understand them
thoroughly, and manage them well and diligently: considering advisedly what has
been heretofore, that they may in some sort judge of that which is to come,
because all worldly things have evermore some agreement with the ages past.
Which comes of this, that being the works of men, they have had, and will
always have like forms, and therefore must of necessity have like effects.
But the cause of the good or evil success of men (in respect of man's nature)
consists in this, that the means Time and occasion are diligently to be
waighed in all matters.
and manner of proceeding iumpe with the time, wherein the very condition
thereof, and the occasion offered, is diligently to be observed. And if this
consideration takes place in all private affairs, it is much more necessary
in war, wherein a light fault oftentimes procures loss and The good or ill
success of an army depends of the captain.
overthrow to a whole army, whose good or ill hap depends of the head and
leader thereof, according as he is either worthy or unworthy of his charge. My
opinion therefore is (my companions) that we allege in this place whatsoever we
know belongs to his duty and office. I propound now the discourse of this
matter to you.


AMANA. Men disdain commonly to obey such as know not how to command well.
Therefore every General of an army ought to labor carefully, that men may
behold and see a certain greatness, magnanimity and constancy in all his
doings.


ARAM. A General must be had in estimation of his soldiers, and of that
reputation, that they may give credit to his prudence: otherwise an army does
quickly become rebellious, and troublesome to be guided. But let us learn more
amply of ACHITOB whatsoever concerns this matter.


ACHITOB. A captain must not offend twice in war.
Lamachus a great Athenian captain said, that no man must offend twice in
war, because the faults are of so great weight, that for the most part they
bring with the^ the overthrow of the state, or loss of life to those that
commit them, and therefore that it was a hard and dangerous matter to have
experience thereof. So that Prudence gotten by use must be hastened forward by
knowledge.
Prudence gotten by use ought to be hastened forward, because it is deerly
bought, and so long a coming, that oftentimes death preuenteth it. It must be
hastened forward by the diligent inquiry of those things that have fallen out
both before and since our time, that we may become wise by other men's perils.
For this cause it is very necessary, that whosoever takes upon him the honor
of guiding an army, should exercise his mind as much in science, and in the
knowledge of histories, as he does his body in all martial acts, that so he
may diligently observe the deeds of famous personages, see how they governed
themselves in wars, and examine the causes of their victory, thereby to fly
the one and to follow the other. And because it is against reason, that a well
armed man should obey him that is unarmed, or that they should take the rudder
out of the Pilots hand to save the ship in a storm, that have no skill in
seafaring matters; it is very requisite that whosoever No man ought to be
general before he have obtained the renown of a valiant man.
undertakes to command an army, should first have gotten a good report of all
men for his valor and greatness of courage, whereby his authority will be
reverenced, as being bestowed upon one that is worthy of it: forasmuch as
titles of dignity do not honor men, but men are an ornament to titles. Now if
soldiers have conceived a good opinion of the desert and valor of their
captain, it will be as a sharp spur to prick them forward in well doing, and
cause them to honor and to love his commandments. For true zeal of virtue,
that is to say, the desire to imitate it, is not imprinted in men's hearts, but
through a singular good will and reverence toward that party that works the
impression. It was not then without good cause, that the ancie^ts greatly
esteemed the dignity of a General, being joined with prowes, knowledge and
experience: seeing the happy or unhappy events of war ordinarily depend
thereof (next to the chief cause proceeding from God) as we showed yesterday
what Titus Liuius wrote of the battle between Cimon preferred an army of Hearts
before an army of Lions.
the Romans and the Latins. For this reason Cimon a great man of Athens said,
that he had rather have an army of Hearts guided by a Lion, than an army of
Lions having a Heart for their captain. Now if we desire to understand in few
words what manner of me^ are most worthy of such charges, we may learn it by
the answer that one of the wise Interpreters made to Ptolomie concerning this
matter: What captains are woorthiest of their charge.
They (said he) that excel in prowess and justice, and prefer the safety
of men's lives before victory. But to discourse more particularly of the duty
and office of the head of an army, Valerius Coruinus General of the Romans
against the Samnites, to whom he was ready to give battle, encouraged his
soldiers to do well in few words, and taught every one how he should proceed
to obtain the place and Coruinus Oration to his soldiers.
degree of a captain. A man must consider well (quoth he unto them) under
whose conduction he enters into battle: whether under one that can cause
himself to be heard as if he were some goodly Orator, that has a brave
tongue, but otherwise is a Nouice and unskillful in all points of war, or
under such a one as has skill himself to handle his weapon, to march first
before the ensigns, and to do his duty in the hottest of the fight. I would
not, Soldiers, that ye should follow my words, but my deeds. I set before
you an example joined with instruction and discipline, as he that has gotten
three Consulships with this arm, not without exceeding praise. Hereby we
learn, that the ancient captains and Heads of armies had this laudable
custom Captains used in old time to make Orations to their soldiers.
to make Orations to their men of war, thereby to make them more courageous,
as appears in all histories both Greek and Latin. This fashion is now lost
together with the rest of warlike discipline: at least wise there is no account
made of it in France, whereupon it comes to pass, that many great men are
but badly followed and served in war. For as he that stands in need of the
faithful service of men ought to win them rather by gentleness and good
turns, than by authority and rigor: Captains ought to make much of their
soldiers.
so he that would have prompt and resolute soldiers for war, that he may
use their service in time of need, must make much of them, and allure them to
his obedience by liberality, and by good and gracious speeches. For in truth
they must be good friends and affectionate seruitours unto a man, that setting
all excuses aside (of which there is never any want) are to fight for him: they
must neither be envious at his prosperity, nor traitorous in his adversity.
And there is no doubt but that in a matter of great importance, the grave
exhortations The benefit of making Oratio^s to soldiers.
of a General, grounded upon good reasons and examples greatly encourage and
harten a whole army, in so much that it will make them as hardy as Lions,
that before were as fearful as sheep. Moreover, if he that is esteemed and
judged to be valiant and noble-minded, shows forth effects aunswerable
thereunto, he doubts the courage and strength of his army: as contrariwise,
the least show of cowardlinesse, discouragement or astonishment showed by him,
draws after it the utter ruin of his soldiers. But to return to the
duty and office of a good Captain of an army, as the best work that a man
can do, is first to be honest and virtuous: and than to take order that
himself and his family may have abundantly all things necessary for this
life: so every wise and well advised leader of men of war, must A good
captain must be always furnished with munitions and victuals.
dispose and prepare himself to the same end, and foresee that nothing be
wanting unto them, neither munitio^s of war, nor victuals. He must not think
to make new provision when necessity urges him, but even than when he is best
furnished, he must be careful for the time to come. Whereby taking away all
occasion of co^plaining from the souldior, he shall be better beloved and
obeyed, and more feared and redoubted of his enemies. To this purpose Cyrus
Oration to his captains.
Cyrus said to his chief men of war: My friends I rejoice greatly that you
and your men are contented that ye have abundance of all things, and that we
have wherewith to do good to every one according to his virtue. Notwithstanding
we must consider what were the principal causes of these good things, and if
ye look narowly ye shall find, that watching, travel, continuance in labor,
and diligence have given us these riches. Therefore ye must show your selves
virtuous also hereafter, holding this for certain, that ye shall obtain great
store of riches and contentation of mind by obedience, constancy, virtue,
sustaining of travel, and by courage in A good captain must never suffer his
army to be idle.
virtuous and perilous enterprises. Moreover a good captain of an army must
be very careful, that he never suffer his host to be idle, but cause his
soldiers either to annoy the enemy, or to do themselves good. It is a
burdensome thing to nourish an idle body, much more a whole family, but
especially an army, and not to keep them occupied. His meaning that warreth
of necessity, or through ambition, is to get or to keep that which is gotten,
and to proceed in such sort, that he may in-rich, and not impouerish his
country. Therefore both for conquering, and for the maintenance and
preservation of that which is his own already, he must necessarily beware of
unprofitable expenses, and do all things for common commodity. So that who so
ever would thoroughly put in practice these two War ought to be speedily ended.
points, he had need to follow that custom, which the ancient Romans used,
namely, at the beginning to make them short and terrible, as we use to say. For
entering into the field with great power and strength, they dispatched their
war speedily within few days: insomuch that all their iourneis made against
the Latins, Samnites, and Tuscans were ended, some in six, others in ten, and
the longest in twenty days. And although afterward they were constrained to
keep the fields a longer time, by reason of the distance of places and
countries, yet they did not therefore give over the following of their first
purpose, but ended as soon as they could, their enterprises of war by quick
battles, according as place and time suffered. True it is, that a prudent
captain must be skillful to take the enemy at advantage: but if it be so that
he cannot, the better A good captain must not be over venturous.
and more virtuous man he thinks himself and those that follow him to be, so
much the more pains is required of him for his own and their preservation, as
men use to keep safely those things which they account dearest, and to lay them
up in a sure place. The dignity of a Head of an army, is in truth greatly to
be accounted of, especially when it is joined with prowess and experience, the
chief point whereof is to save him that must save all the rest. Therefore
Timotheus an Athenian captain, (and Chares A General must not rashly hazard
himself.
also an other captain) showed one day openly unto the Athenians, the skarres
of many wounds which he had received in his body, and his shield also that was
spoiled and thrust through with many pushes of a pike: but now (quoth he) I am
of another mind. For when I besieged the city of Samos I was very much
ashamed that an arrowe shot from the walls fell hard by me, being then too
venturous a young man, and hazarding my self more rashly than became the Head
of so great an army. And yet when it greatly profits the whole enterprise,
and is When he ought to venture himself.
a matter of no small importance, that the General of the army should put his
life in danger, then he must yield, and employ his person, not sparing
himself, or giving place to their words who say, that a good and wise
captain ought to die of age, or at least to be old. But where small benefit
arises if he prosper well, and contrariwise, an universal loss and general
hurt to all, if any thing but well betide him, no wise man will require it, or
be of the opinion, that he should venture himself as a common soldier does,
whereby he being the General should be in danger of destruction. And yet in
the mean while he must not be less careful over the safety of those
valiant men that follow him, or thrust them into danger but very Antoninus
preferred the life of one citizen before the death of a thousand enemies.
warily, remembering the saying of that good emperor Antoninus, that he had
rather save one citizen, tha^ put a thousand enemies to death. The answer of
Scipio was very like it, when he was earnestly requested by the soldiers at
the siege of Numantia to gine an assault. I had rather (quoth he) have Scipio
would have all ways tried before the sword were used in war.
the life of one Roman, than the death of all the Numantines. He used also to
say, that all things ought to be assaied in war before the sword be taken in
hand. And in deed there is no greater victory than that which is gotten without
sheding of blood. Sylla, Tiberius, Caligula and Nero had no skill, but to
command and to kill: but that good Augustus, Titus and Traian, were always
ready to solicit, to When Augustus would have battle given.
request, and to agree by forgiving. Augustus also said, that although a prince
were mighty, yet if he were wise, he would never give battle unless there
were more apparent profit in the victory, than loss if the enemy should
overcome. And in deed he never gave battle but upon Narses always wept the
night before he gave battle.
necessity. We read of that great captain Narses, who subdued the Goths,
vanquished the Bactrians, and overcame the Germans, that he never gave his
enemies battle, but he wept in the Temple the night before. Theodosius the
Emperor suffered not his men to assault any town, nor to lay siege unto it
before ten days were past, causing this proclamation to be made unto them,
that he granted these ten days to the end they might accept and taste of
his clemency before they had experience of his power. It is a common saying,
that it is not enough for a Captain to know how to lead his men well to the
fight, unless he foresee also the means to retire and to Two faults to be
eschewed of every captain.
save them in time of need. And it is no less fault in a Captain to fall
into an inconvenience unlooked for, than through too much mistrust to let
slip an occasion of doing some great exploite when it is offered. For want of
experience breeds rashness in the one, and takes away boldness from the
other. Neither must a good captain A good General must always sear the worst.
only use present occasion well, but he must also judge wisely of that which
is to come, distrusting always the doubtful issue of all enterprises of
war. For this cause the ancient Generals of armies, both Greeks and Latins
never marched but in armor, nor encamped, although they were far from their
enemies, but they closed their camp round about with a trench. And when
Leonidas was demanded the reason hereof, he answered, because as the sea has
his sands, gulfes, and rocks, so has war his, I had not thought it, a
dangerous speech in a captain.
among which none is more perilous and hurtful than this of, I had not thought
it. Among other things necessary in a captain, the knowledge of nature, and of
the situation of places is very requisite: which is to know how the mountains
are lift up, how the valleis hang, how the Champian fields are A good captain
must have skill to discern the situation of places.
couched together, and to know the nature and course of rivers, and the breadth
of marshes. This is profitable in two respects. First a man learneth thereby
to know his own country, and so to be more skilful to defend it. Secondly,
having by that means had good practice of the seat of that country, he may
easily conceive the situation of another place, of which sometime he must
necessarily consider. So that if a General be wanting herein, he is destitute
of the chief virtue which a good captain ought to have. For it is that which
teaches him to find out the enemy, to encamp The benefit of Geometry in a
General.
himself, to guide an host, to set his men in array for the battle, and to take
the advantage at the siege of a town. Among other great praises that authors
give to Philopaemenus* Philopaemenus in time of peace studied the discipline of
war.
prince of the Acheans, they forget not this, that in time of peace he studied
diligently how he might war more skilfully. And when he was in the fields with
his friends, he would stand still many times and confer with them, using such
like speeches: If the enemy were in this mountain and we here with our camp,
who should have the advantage, and how might we seek him out, marching on in
battle? If we would retire, how should we do? If they retired, how should we
follow the^? Thus in the way he set before them all the chances that might
happen to a camp: then he would hear their opinions, and after set down his
own, confirming it with reasons. This he did so well, that by reason of these
continual disputations and cogitations, no hinderance could befall him when he
guided an army, which he could not redress* Xenopho^ shows in Cyrus his
life, that being ready to set forward in that Cyrus resembles his going to
war to hunting.
voyage which he undertook against the king of Armenia he said familiarly to
his men, that this iourny was but one of those huntings which they had so often
practiced with him. He willed those whom he sent to lie in ambush upon the
mountains, to remember when and how they went to pitch their nets upon the
small hills: and to those that went to begin the skirmish, he said, that they
resembled such as went to rouse a beast out of his den, to drive him to their
nets. This noble Prince showed well that his Hunting is an image of war.
exercise of hunting was not unprofitable unto him (as in deed it is a true
pattern of war) but that it did help him greatly to judge of the nature and
seat of those places which he frequented in his countries. And because all
lands are like in some things, the perfect knowledge of one country (which
often use of hunting brings) may P. Decius.
help one to judge well of an other. Publius Decius Tribune of the souldioures
in the army which Cornelius the Consul led against the Samnites, beholding
the Roman host brought into a valley where they might easily be enclosed of
the enemies, went to the Consul and said, Do you mark, O Cornelius, the
top of this mountain above our enemy? It is the fortress of our hope and
safety if we make haste to take it, seeing the blind Samnites have forsaken
it. We see then how profitable, yea how necessary it is for a captain to know
the being and nature of countries, which helps a man much in that principal
point touched before by me, namely, to compel his enemies to fight when he
perceives that he is the stronger, and has the advantage of them: and if he
be the weaker, to keep himself from such places where he may be compelled C.
Marius never gave his enemies occasion to force him to fight.
thereunto. This is that whereby Caius Marius, who was six times Consul, got
the renown to be one of the greatest captains in his time. For although he
were General of many armies, and fought three great battles, yet was he so
wary in all his enterprises, that he never gave his enemies occasion to set
upon him, and to force him to fight. And that was a notable answer which he
made to the General of his enemies, who willed him to come out of his camp to
battle, if he were such a great captain as men reported him to be. Not so
(quoth he) but if thou art the great captain compel me to it whether I will
or no. This is one thing also wherein the Head of an army The captains of an
army must be very secret.
must be very vigilant, that all secrecies be closely kept among the captains
of his host. For great affairs never have good success when they are
discovered before they take effect. To this purpose Suetonius says, that no
man ever heard Julius Caesar say, To morrow we will do that, and to I. Caesar
very secret in time of war.
day this thing: but, we will do this now, and as for to morrow we will
consider what is then to be done. And Plutarke says in his treatise of
Policy, that Lucius Metellus being demanded L. Metellus.
by a Captain of his when he would give battle, said, If I were sure that
my shirte knew the least thought in my heart, I would presently burn it, and
never wear any other. Therefore affairs of war may be handled and debated
Affairs of war must be debated by many, but concluded by few.
of by many, but the resolution of them must be done secretly, and known of
few men: otherwise they would be sooner disclosed and published, than
concluded. Notwithstanding it is very necessary, that the General should
oftentimes call a council, so that it be of expert and ancient men, and of
such as are prudent and void of rashness. Urgent occasions in war require
short deliberation.
But in all cases of necessity a man must not stand long in seeking for
reason, but suddenly set upon them. For many times sundry captains have undone
themselves in wars upon no other occasion, but because they lingered in taking
counsel, when they should without loss of time have wrought some notable
enterprise. Moreover, for the instruction and pattern of the duty and office
of a good Head and captain of an army, we can allege Cato a notable pattern
for all captains to follow.
none more worthy to be imitated than Cato of Vtica, a Consul of Rome, who had
the guiding of a legion when he first took charge upon him. For from that time
forward he thought, that it was not roial or magnificall to be virtuous alone,
being but one body: and therefore he studied to make all that were under his
charge like himself. Which that he might bring to pass, he took not from them
the fear of his authority, but added reason thereunto, showing and teaching
them their duty in every point, and always joining to his exhortations reward,
for those that did well, and punishment for such as did evil. So that it was
hard to say, whether he had made them more apt for peace or for war, more
valiant or more just, because they were so stout and eger against their
enemies, and so gentle and gracious to their friends, so fearful to do evil,
and so Pompey.
ready to obtain honor. The virtue of Pompey is also worthy to be followed of
every great captain, f or the temperance that was in him, for his skill in
arms, eloquence in speech, fidelity in word, as also because he was to be
spoken with, and so lovingly entertained every one. And if How Cato divided the
spoils.
with these things the example of the same Cato be followed in his prudent
liberality, and division of the spoils and riches of the enemies, that
captain that so behaueth himself shall deserve eternal praise, and please all
those that follow him. For when this virtuous captain had taken many towns in
Spain, he never reserved more for himself than what he did eat and drink
there. He delivered to every one of his soldiers a pound weight of silver,
saying that it was better that many should return to their houses from the
war with silver, than a few with gold: and as for the captains he said, that
during their charges and gouernements they should not grow and increase in any
thing but in honor and glory. For the conclusion therefore of our speech, we
note, that a General of an army desirous to be obeyed (which is necessary)
must behave himself so, that his soldiers may think him worthy to provide
and care for their necessary affairs. Which thing will come to pass, when
they see that he is courageous and careful, that he keeps his place and the
majesty of his degree well, that he punishes offenders, and labors not his
men in vain, but is liberal, and performs his promises made unto them.


Of the choice of Soldiers, of the manner how to exhort them to fight, and how
victory is to be used. Chap. 70.
ACHITOB. A Gamemnon general Captain of the Graecians before Troy, speaking
of Achilles, and being grieved because he refused to succor them, having been
offended by him, said, That a One godly man in a camp is in place of many.
man beloved of God, is in the place of many men in a camp, and far better
than a whole company that is unruly, and cannot be governed but with great
pain and care. This reason was the cause that good men heretofore were greatly
honored in war, and much sought after by great captains, because they were
very religious, and undertook nothing before they had prayed to their gods,
and offered sacrifices after the manner of their country. Also after they had
done some Soldiers ought to begin their war with prayer* and end with praise
and thanksgiving.
great exploite, they were not slouthful to give the^ thanks, by offerings and
hymns song to their praise. But all these good considerations have no more
place amongst us, than the rest of their warlike discipline, principally in
that no regard is had what manner of men are to be used in service, but only
how a great number may be had. And many times he that is known to be a bold
murderer, and given over to all wickedness, shall be preferred to an office
before an honest man: and which is more, we despise our own contrymen,
whom the welfare of our country concerns as well as our selves, and rather
trust strangers and hirelings, who seek nothing but destruction, so that we
our selves also bewail, but too late, the mischiefs that have light upon us.
For this cause I propound unto you (my companions) to discourse upon, the
election and choice which is to be considered of, in taking such men of war to
whom a man may safely commit himself: and if you think good, you may speak
somewhat also of the manner of exhortation to fight used by the ancients, because
I touched it by the way in my former discourse: and lastly how victory ought to
be used, which commonly follows good order and discipline of war, whereof we
have hitherto discoursed.


ASER. Why a man must use his own subjects in war.
Forasmuch as the chief force of an army consists in the sincere and
constant good will of the soldiers toward him for whom they fight, it is not
to be sought for elsewhere than in his own natural subjects, to whom
prosperity and good success is common with the Prince.


AMANA. My friends (quoth Cyrus to his men of war) I have chosen you, not
because I have had proof heretofore of your manhood, but because from my young
years I have known you ready to do those things, which we in this country
account honest, and to eschew all dishonestie. This cannot be truly said of
strangers never seen before, who come out of their country to enrich
themselves with the overthrow of their neighbors. But it belongs to thee
ARAM to handle this matter here propounded unto us.


ARAM. If we consider diligently of the causes, from whence came the ruin of
the Roman Empire, we shall find, that those means which the wisest Emperors
invented for the safety and preservation thereof, turned in the end to the
destruction of it. First the ordinary armies placed by Augustus near to Rome,
and in the borders of his estate, Three causes from whence proceeded the ruin
of the Roman empire.
overthrew many of his successors, and even the empire it self, which they
would sometimes set to sale, and deliver up to him that gave most for it. Next,
the translation of the empire, which Constantine the great made from Rome to
Bizantiu^, afterward called by his name Constantinople, thereby to make it more
sure against the Persians and other people of Asia, greatly hastened forward the
overthrow of the same. For when he carried thither the chief strength and The
division of the empire weakened the same.
wealth of Rome, and divided the empire into the East and West, ^e weakened it
very much, so that the West was first destroyed, and then the East: which if
they had continued united and knit together, might for a long time, and in a
manner for ever, have resisted all invasions. Thirdly, when the Emperors
thought to strengthen themselves with strange, hired, and foreign power, called
to their succor, as namely the Goths, thereby weakening their own forces and
natural strength of the Empire, they put ere they were aware, Rome and Italy,
and consequently the other Provinces into the hands of the Barbarians. Yea we
find, that the greatest calamities that ever happened to Commonwealths
divided, was when the Citizens were severed Dangerous to an Estate to call in
foreign succors.
among themselves, and called in strangers to help them, who using often to
go that way, at the last made themselves masters over them. The Germans
called by As appears by the Sequani.
the Sequani to their succor against those of Autun, compelled them to deliver
half their land unto them: and at length they drooue away all the natural
people of the country, and became Lords of the greatest part of the Gauls
territory. But not to go so far off, it is high time for us to grow wise by
our own peril. The factions of the By the Frenchmen.
houses of Orleans and of Burgundy, called in the Englishmen into France, who
by this mean set such footing therein, that they possessed a great part
thereof a long time after. What lacked in our time why the Frenchmen blinded and
carried away with partialities (and God grant they may thoroughly know it) did
not bring their country to that extremity of miseries, as to submit it to the
service and slavery of a strange yoke, under the color of begging help at
their hands? What let why there was not played among us, of us, and by us,
the cruellest and most sorrowful tragedy that ever was, when men came hither
from all quarters to behold the sight? Would not a man have thought, that both
great and small had wittingly purposed to ouer-throw the goodliest and most
noble kingdom of the world, and themselves withal, and so in the end have
shamefully lost the glory and renown, which their Ancestors had woorthily
gotten for them? Now, if any good hap has turned this tempest from us against
our wills, at the least let us call to mind the danger whereinto we had
willingly cast our selves, and let us not forget the admonition that was given
us by those barbarous fellows, whose Captains and Counselors asked us why we
called them in, when a little before their departure out of this kingdom, they
were complained unto for the extorsions The end that foreign soldiers
propound to themselves.
and cruelties which their men practiced. What think you (said they) is the
intent and purpose of our men in following us, but to enrich themselves with
your overthrow? Agree among your selves, and never call us more, except ye
mind to taste of that which shall be worse. But let us enter into the
particular consideration of the peril and hurt that comes by foreign and
mercenarie soldiers, that we may know whom we ought rather to use. The
arms wherewith a Prince defends his Country, are either his own, or hired
of strangers, or sent to his succor by some Prince his friend, or else mingled
of both together. They that maintain, that it is necessary for the
prosperity and preservation of every happy Commonwealth, not to use Reasons
why foreign force is worth nothing.
foreign help, say, that hired force and succor of strangers is worth
nothing, but rather dangerous, and that if a Prince think to ground the
assurance of his Estate upon foreign force, he cannot safely do it. For they
agree not easily together, they do all for profit, and will be neither well
ordered nor obedient. On the other side, they are not ouer-faithfull, they are
all in their bravery among friends, but hartlesse among enemies. They
neither fear God, nor are faithful to men. The reason hereof is this,
because no love, nor any other occasion holds them but pay, and hope of
spoil. Which is no sufficient cause to move them to die willingly in his
service, whose subjects they are not, and The cause of the last destruction of
Italy.
whose ruin they desire, rather than his increase. The last destruction of
Italy came by no other thing, than because it trusted a long time to foreign
and hired forces, which brought some things to pass for some men, but as
soon as another stranger came, they showed what they were. Heereuppon it came,
that King Charles the eight easily ouer-ranne all Italy with chalk, as we use
to speak, that is to say, that without resistance he sent before to take up
his lodging, because they that should have withstoode him, and were called in
to keep the Country, did of their own accord take his part. But there is a
further matter. Strange hired Captains either are excellent men, or have
nothing in them. If they be The discommoditie of bringing in hired Captains.
valiant, the Prince is not to trust them. For out of doubt they will seek to
make themselves great, either by his overthrow that is their Master, or by
destroying others against his will. And if the Captains have no valor in
them, he cannot hope for any thing but for the cause of his own perdition.
Succor is most hurtful to an Estate, when some Potentate is called in with
his forces for aid and defense. Those soldiers may well be good and
profitable for themselves, but are always hurtful to such as call them in.
For if a man loose the field, he is ouer-throwne: if he win it, he is their
prisoner. Such succor is a great deal more to be feared, than hired
strength, which obeieth the Prince that calls them, and requires their
help. But when a man receives in an army united, and accustomed to obey the
Captain that conducteth and brings them in, his destruction Dangerous for a
Prince to call in a Potentate to succor him.
is already prepared, and cannot be avoided, who opens the door of his own
house to let in an enemy stronger than himself. Therefore it were expedient
for every Prince to try all ways before he have recourse to such men for
help and succor. And whosoever shall read and consider well the times that
are past, and run over the present state of things, he shall see, that
whereas one prospered well, an infinite number were deceived and abused. For a
Commonwealth, or an ambitious Prince, could not wish to have a better
occasion whereby to get the possession of a City, Seignorie, or Province, than
when he is required to send his army to defend it. But what? The ambition,
desire of revenge, or some other affection of men is so great, that to
accomplish once their present will, they forget all duty, and cast behind them
the care of all danger and inconvenience whatsoever, that may light upon them.
The Herules, Goths, and Lumbards by these Examples of the change of Estats by
means of foreign succor.
means became Lords of Italy: the Frenchmen of the Gauls Country, the
Englishmen of great Britain, the Scots of Scotland after they had driven out
the Britons and Picts, who called them in for succor. The Turks made
themselves Lords of the East Empire, and of the kingdom of Hungary, being
likewise required of help by the Emperors of Constantinople, and by the States
of Hungary. Not long since Cairadin a Pirate, being called by the Inhabitants
of Alger to drive the Spaniards out of the fortress, after he had vanquished
them, he slew Selim Prince of the town, and made himself king, leaving the
Estate to his brother Arradin Barberossa. And Saladine a Tartarian Captain,
being called by the Calipha and Inhabitants of Caire to drive the Christians
out of Soria, after the victory slew the Calipha, and became absolute Lord
thereof. The foresight which the Princes of Germany had Charles the fifth, bound
by oath not to bring any foreign soldiers into Germany.
of the peril and hurt that all strangers bring to an Estate, caused them to
bind the Emperor Charles the fifth, by the twelfth article of conditions, unto
which he swear before he received the Imperial crown, that he should not bring
in any foreign soldiers into Germany. And yet through the great number of
Spaniards, Italians, and Flemmings that came into the country, being called
in against the Protestants, there wanted little of changing the Estate of
Almaigne into an hereditarie kingdom. Which had been soon done if king Henry
the second had not stayed it by his French power, for which cause he was called
by books published, and arches erected in their country, Protector of the
Empire, and deliverer of the Princes, who since have concluded among
themselves, that they will never choose a Charles 7. made decrees for French
soldiers.
foreign Prince. Charles the seventh king of France, having by his great good
success and virtue, delivered France of Englishmen, and knowing well that it
was necessary for him to be furnished with his own forces, instituted the
decrees of horsemen, and of the companies of footmen. After that, king Jews
his son abolished his footmen, and began to leauy Switzers: which being What
inconveniences France is fallen into by hiring Switzers.
likewise practiced by other kings his successors, many men have noted, that by
countenancing the Switzers, they have caused their own forces to degenerate
and grow out of use, disanulled the footmen, and tied their horsemen to other
footmen: insomuch that since they have been used to fight in company of the
Switzers, they think that they cannot obtain the victory, nor yet fight
without them. Therefore the prudence of king Francis the first, Francis 1.
established seven legions of footmen.
must needs be honored with exceeding great praise, in that he established
seven legions of footmen, accounting 6000. men to a legion: so that there could
be no better device for the maintenance of warrelike discipline, nor more
necessary for the preservation of this kingdom, if those good ordinances that
were made to this end be well marked. Nevertheless they were abolished in his
reign, established again by Henry the second his successor, and after that
abrogated. I am of opinion, that if these ancient institutions both of horsemen
and footmen were reuined, they would be a good mean, whereby we might always
have men of war to defend this kingdom, to conquer that which is taken from
it, and to help our friends: whereas now we are feign to use the service of
unskillful men that are made Captains before ever they were soldiers, or else
of necessity compelled to beg and to buy very dear the succor offorraine
nations. My meaning is not, that a Prince should never use the help of others,
but always take his own forces collected among his subjects. Nay I say to the
contrary, that it must needs be profitable How a Prince may use the succors of
his Allies.
for him to use the succors of his Allies, so that they be joined with him in
league offensive and defensive. For by this means, he does not only make
himself stronger, but withal takes away both that aid from his enemy,
which he might otherwise have drawn from thence, and occasion also from all
men to make war with the one, except they will have the other also their
enemy. But above all things, let no Prince trust so much to the succors of
his Allies, except himself with his subjects be of greater strength. And if
Allies are to be feared when they are stronger in another country, what
assurance may a man have of foreign soldiers, that are at no league either
offensive or defensive with us? Now if upon the due consideration of these
things, soldiers be carefully trained up in good discipline of war, which
may be collected out of many institutions that are extant, and if the guiding
of them be given to good, virtuous, and expert Captains, led only with a
desire to do their duty to their King and Country, this kingdom will be
feared of strangers, and without fear it self of their assaults and
enterprises. Especially if in the Prince his absence, the sovereign authority
of commanding absolutely in the army, be committed into the hands of a
Captain worthy his charge, as we have discoursed, who is able to win the How
a Captain should exhort his soldiers.
hearts of men, and to provoke them to their duty by lively and learned
reasons: as namely, That all men must die, and therefore that it were too great
folly in a man to refuse to die for public profit, which brings unto us
immortal glory, seeing he must once of necessity yield up his life: that a
glorious death is always to be preferred before a shameful life stained with
reproach: briefly, if he can ground his exhortations upon the occasion of taking
arms, of time, place, estate and condition of the enemies, and of the good
that will come to them, if they obtain the victory. But in all these things
the justice and equity of the cause of war, is that which most of all makes
good men courageous, who otherwise never ought to fight. We may read a million
of goodly Orations made in time of war, and set forth in one volume, with
which every wise and prudent Captain may help himself according as occasion
is offered. Now, if that ancient order and discipline, of which we have hitherto
discoursed, and which may be learned more at large in their excellent writings,
were renewed and imitated by our armies, as the late use and practice of Arms
exercised at this day, is apt and fit for the same, being more terrible than
that of the Ancients, who had no gunpowder, no doubt but great obedience of
soldiers toward their Captains would arise of it, whereas now a days in
steed of commanding, they have nothing left but an humble request to be used
toward their soldiers, who nevertheless turn it into contempt and want of
courage. But if true obedience were joined with good order, the hope of
prosperous success in our enterprises would be far greater. Now, when our
affairs succeed happily, How victory is to be used.
so that we have our enemies at advantage, or have gotten some victory, we
must beware least insolency blind us in such sort, that trusting to our good
hap, we go beyond our bounds, and loose the occasion of a certain and sure
benefit, through hope of some greater good as yet uncertain. Hannibal after
the discomfiture of Examples of such as knew not how to use victory wisely,
and to take opportunity offered.
the Romans at Cannas, sent men to Carthage to carry news of his victory,
and withal to demand a new supply. Whereupon the Senate was long in
deliberating what was to be done. Hannon, a prudent old man was of opinion,
that they were to use the victory wisely, and to make peace with the Romans,
which they might obtain of them with honest conditions, and not to expect the
hazard of another battle. He said that the Carthaginians ought to be
satisfied with this declaration already made to the Romans, that they were
such men as could stand against them: and therefore seeing they had woonne one
victory of them, they should not venture the loss of it, in hope of a
greater. This prudent counsel was not followed, although afterward the Senate
did acknowledge it for the best, when that occasion was lost. Alexander the
Great had already conquered all the East, when the Commonwealth of Tyrus,
being great and mighty, because the City was situated in the water, (as
Venice is) and astonished at the greatness and fame of that Monarchs power,
sent their Ambassadors unto him to offer what obedience and subjection he would
require, upon condition that neither he nor his men would enter into the City.
Alexander disdaining that one city would shut their gates against him, to who^
the whole world was open, sent them back again without accepting their offer,
and went thither to pitch his Camp against it. After he had continued the The
Tyrians besieged and subdued by Alexander.
siege 4. months, he thought with himself, that one only Town would shorten
his glory more than all his other conquests had done before: whereupon he
purposed to try an agreement by offering that unto them which themselves had
required before. But then the Tyrians were waxen so lusty and bold, that they
did not only refuse his proffers, but also executed as many as came to conclude
with them. Whereupon Alexander being moved with indignation, caused an assault
to be made with such heat and violence, that he took and sacked the town,
put some of the Inhabitants to the edge of the sword, and made the residue
servants and slaves. Agreement and composition is always to be preferred
before continuance of war. And howsoever a man may seem to be assured, and
as it were certain of the victory, yet ought he to doubt the uncertainty of
humane things. That courageous and valiant Hannibal, being called out of Italy
by his Countriemen to succor them against the Romans, by whom they were
besieged, when his army was yet whole, demanded peace of them before he would
enter into battle, because he saw that if he lost it, he brought his Country
into bondage. What then ought another to do, that has less virtue and
experience than he? But men fall into the error of unmeasurable hope, upon
which staying them selves without further consideration, they are overthrown.
It is not good to fight with desperate men.
Sometimes when we contemn our enemy too much, and bring him into a desperate
estate, we make him more venturous to undertake, and violent to execute any
dangerous matter. Despair (said Tubero) is the last but the strongest assault,
and a most invincible tower. For this cause the ancient Roman Captains were
very diligent and careful to lay all kind of necessity to fight upon their
men, and to take it from their enemies by opening unto them passages to escape,
which they might have shut up against John king of France taken by the
Englishment.
them. K. John, because he would not make peace with the English host, which
desired to escape only with life, was taken and carried prisoner into England,
and his army consisting of forty or fifty thousand men, was discomfited by
ten thousand Englishmen, some say more, Gaston de Foix.
some less. Gaston de Foix, having woonne the battle at Rauenna, and
following after a squadron of Spaniards that fled, lost his life, and made all
that a pray unto the enemy, which he had conquered before in Italy. Ancient
histories are full of such examples, and namely of small armies Small armies
that overcame great.
that overcame those that were great and mighty. Darius against Alexander,
Pompey against Casar, Hannibal against Scipio, Marcus Antonius against
Augustus, Mithridates against Sylla, had greater forces without comparison than
their enemies. Therefore good Traian said, that to accept of war, to gather a
great number of men, to put them Victory comes only from God.
in order, to give battle, appertains to men, but to give victory was the
work of God only: so that great armies prevail but little against the wrath
of the Highest. If then we would know a good way how we shall never be
vanquished, we must not trust to our armor or force, but always call upon God
to direct our counsels for the best. By this also we shall be Valiant men are
full of compassion.
persuaded to use victory mildly, seeing it is the property of valiant men to
be gentle and gracious, ready to forgive, and to have compassion of them that
suffer and endure affliction. There is no true victory (as Marcus Aurelius
wrote to Popilion Captain of the Parthians) but that No true victory without
clemency.
which carries with it some clemency: so that a rigorous and cruel man may
not in reason be called victorious. And it is most true, that to overcome is
humane, but the action of pardoning is divine. As touching the sacking and
overthrow of towns taken in war, careful heed (says Cicero) must be
taken, that nothing be done rashly or cruelly. For it is the property of a
noble heart to punish Ringleaders of evil are to be punished, and the multitude
to be pardoned.
such only as are most guilty, and the authors of evil, and to save the
multitude. Briefly, to observe in all things whatsoever is right and honest,
to be valiant and gentle, to be an enemy to those that do unjustly,
favorable to the afflicted, severe to quarrellers, and full of equity to
suppliants, are those praise-woorthie qualities for which Alexander, Julius
Casar, Scipio, Hannibal, Cyrus, and many other both Greek and Roman Captains
are most commended, who ought to be imitated in the art of war by all
excellent men.


Of a happy Life. Chap. 71.
ARAM. WE have hitherto discoursed (my Companions) of virtues and vices, for
which the life of man is praised or dispraised in all Estats and conditions,
whereunto the variety of manners, and inclinations to sundry studies and works
call men, and make them fit. Wherein we have chiefly followed the ends and bounds
of honesty and equity propounded by Moral Philosophers, from whence they draw
particular duties, and all actions of virtue, using a very commendable and
excellent order and disposition. Now seeing we are come to the end of the cause
of our assembly, as we began it with the true and Christian knowledge of the
creation of man, and of the end of his being, unknown to so many great
personages in the world, who are lightened Humane sciences are but darkness in
regard of the word of God.
only with humane sciences, which are but darkness in regard of that heavenly
light, the eternal word of God, that guides the souls of the believers; I
think that we ought also to end and break up this our meeting together with
the manner of a happy life and death, according to those ends that are
propounded unto us by the infallible rule of all virtue and truth, which if
they be not so subtly set down and disputed, as the Philosophy of the
Ancients is, yet at the least they are without comparison better and more
certain. Go to then, let us hear you discourse first of a happy life.


ACHITOB. Psalm. 84. 4. 5. 11.
Blessed are they (says the Prophet) that dwell in the house of God, and that
evermore praise him, having his ways in their hearts. He will give them grace
and glory, and will withold no good thing from them that walk uprightly.


ASER. What happier life can we require, than that John 17. 3.
which S. John calls eternal life: namely, to know one only true God, and
Jesus Christ who^ he has sent? But it belongs to thee AMANA to feed our
spirits with this excellent subject.


AMANA. Although the spirit of God, teaching his just and holy will by a
doctrine that is simple and void of all vain show of words, has not always
observed and kept so strictly such a certain order and method, to prepare and
to direct their lives that shall believe in him, as the Philosophers did, who
affected the greatest show outwardly that they could, thereby to make manifest
the sharpnes of their wit, and the greatness of their humane understanding, yet
may we easily gather out of this divine doctrine, (which does more deface all
glittering show and beauty of humane sciences, than the Sun excels darkness)
a most excellent order, teaching us to frame a happy life according to the
mould and pattern of true and heavenly virtue. This order consists of two
parts, the one imprinting in our hearts the love of justice, the other giving
unto us a certain rule, that will not suffer us to wander hither and thither,
nor to slip aside in the framing of our life. Concerning Of the love of
righteousness.
the first point, the Scripture is full of very good reasons to incline our
hearts to love that Good, which in deed is to be desired, I mean perfect
righteousness. With what foundation could it begin better, than by admonishing
us to be sanctified, because our God is holy? Whereunto Leuit. 19. 2.
the reason is added, that although we were gone astray as sheep 1. Pet. 1.
15. 16.
scattered and dispersed in the Labyrinth of this world, yet he has gathered
us together, to join us to himself. When we hear mention made of the
conjunction of god with us, we must remember, that the bond thereof is holiness,
and that we Holiness is the end of our calling.
must direct our steps thither, as to the end of our calling, that we may be
transformed into the true image of God, which through sin was defaced in the
first man, and consequently in us. Moreover, to move us the more to embrace
that only and true God, the spirit of God teaches us, that as he has
reconciled us unto himself in his son Jesus Christ, so he has appointed him
to be unto us an example Christ is a pattern of righteousness unto us.
and pattern, unto which we must conform our selves. This heavenly word also
takes occasion to exhort us thereunto in infinite places, drawing his reasons
from all the benefits of God, and from all the parts of our salvation. As when
it is said: That seeing God has Malach. 1. 6.
given himself to be our Father, we are to be accused of notable ingratitude,
if we behave not our selves as his children. Ephesians. 5. 26. 30.
Seeing Jesus Christ has cleansed us by the washing of his blood, and has
communicated this purification unto us by baptism, there is no reason why we
should defile our selves with new filthiness. Seeing he has joined and
ingrafted us into his body, we must carefully look, that we defile Col. 3. 1.
2.
not our selves in any sort, being members of his body. Seeing he that is our
Head is gone up to heaven, we must lay aside all earthly affections, and aspire
with all our heart to that heavenly 1. Cor. 6. 19.
life. Seeing the holy Ghost has consecrated us to be the temples of 1. These.
5 9.
God, we must labor and strive that the glory of God may be exalted in us,
and beware that we receive no pollution. Seeing our souls and bodies are fore
appointed to enjoy that immortality of the kingdom of heaven, and the
incorruptible Crown of God his glory, we must endeavor to keep both the one
and the other pure and unspotted, until the day of the Lord. Behold surely
good grounds, meet to frame and institute a happy life by, and to move a
Christian to bring forth the effects of such an excellent and worthy title
throught the love of We must always strive to come to perfection.
righteousness, having this mark always before his eyes to direct all his
actions thereunto: namely, to aspire to that perfection which God commands.
From which although the affections of our flesh seek to separate us, and the
difficulties are great, so that it is impossible for us to attain perfectly
thereunto in this mortal prison, yet let us not leave of to follow that way
which we have once begun, looking to our mark in purity, vprightnes, and
simplicity, and striving to come to our end, until we perfectly see that
sovereign goodness, when having put off the infirmity of our flesh, and being
made partakers of that goodness in full measure, we shall be received of God
into his heavenly kingdom. Let us now come to the second point. Although
the law of God comprised in ten Commandments, and those ten also contained
only in two, has a most excellent method and well ordered disposition,
whereby to direct our life, and to make it happy, yet it has pleased our good
Master, his eternal son, to frame them that are his by an exquisite
doctrine, according to that rule which he had given unto them in his law. The
beginning of that way which he takes, is after this sort: namely, to teach
them that it is the What the duty of every faithful man is. Romans 12. 1. 2.
duty of every faithful man, to offer his body a lively, holy, and acceptable
sacrifice to God, wherein consists the chiefest point of that service which we
owe unto him. The^ he goes on to exhort us, that we would not fashion our
selves to this world, but be changed by the renewing of our mind, that we may
prove what is the good will of God. That is no small reason to say that we
must consecrate What it is to consecrate our selves to God.
and dedicate our selves to God, that from hence forward we should neither
think, speak, meditate, or do any thing but to his glory. For it is not
lawefull to apply any thing that is consecrated to a profane use. Now, if we
be not our own, but belong to the Lord, we may thereby see both how to avoid
error, and whither we must direct all the parts of our life: namely, to the
rule of his holy and just will. Let us not propound to our selves this end,
to seek after that which is expedient for us according to the flesh. Let us
forget our selves as much as may be, and all things that are about us. We are
the Lords, let us live and die to him: and let his will and wisdom govern
all our actions. Let all the parts of our life be referred to him as to their
only end: and let all our humane reason yield and retire, that the holy
Ghost may have place in us, and that our reason may be subject to his
direction, to the end we may no more live of our selves, but having Jesus
Christ to live and reign within us. I live (says Saint Paul) yet not I now,
but Christ Gal. 2. 20.
lives in me. Truly he that has Jesus Christ living in him, and that lives
in Jesus Christ, lives no more in himself, and cares least for himself.
For if all true love has such force within the heart where it is placed, that
it cares not for itself, but delights in, and is altogether partaker of the
thing that it loves: how much stronger shall the heavenly love be to
with-drawe all our affections from the earth unto the things of the spirit?
True love of God breeds in us a dislike of ourselves.
O good Jesus, O love of my soul (says S. Augustine) as often as love
begins in me, it ends with hatred in thee: but when it begins in thee,
I come to the hatred of my self: so that the scope of thy love is nothing else
but dislike of our selves. Therefore our Savior said Matthew. 16. 24.
to his Disciples, that if any man would follow him, he should forsake
himself. Moreover, after the heart of man Fruits of the denial of our selves.
is once possessed with this denial of himself, first, all pride, hastines,
and ostentation, are banished out of the soul: next, covetousness,
intemperance, superfluity, desire of honor, and of all delights, with the
rest of those vices that are engendered through the love of our selves.
Contrariwise, where the denial of our selves reigns not, there is man given
over to all kind of villainy, without shame or blushing: or if any show of
virtue appear Self love is the cause of the most of our imperfections.
in his actions, it is corrupted before God through a wicked desire of glory.
Most of our imperfections proceed from the love of our selves, which hinders
us from discharging our duty toward God and toward our neighbors, The
definition of charity.
according to charity. Charity is nothing else but to love God for himself,
and our neighbor for his sake: I say, to love God, because he is the
sovereign good, and because the greatness of his goodness deserves it: to love
our neighbors, because the image of God shines in them, whom he has
substituted in his place, that we should acknowledge toward them the benefits
which he has bestowed upon us. And who is able to perform those duties that
S. Paul requires in charity, unless he has renounced himself, that he may
seek nothing but the profit 1. Cor. 13. 4.
of his neighbor? Love (says he) suffers long: it is bountiful, it
enuieth not: it does not boast it self: it is not puffed up: it disdaineth
not: it seeks not her own things: it is not provoked to anger, and so forth.
If that only saying were there, that we must not seek our own profit, it
should be of no small force with our nature, which draws us so much to the
love of our selves, that we forget what we owe to our neighbors. But if we
would faithfully discharge this duty, let us whilst we do good, and exercise
the offices of humanity, remember this rule: That we are Stewards of all that
God has given unto us, whereby we may help our neighbor, and that one day we
shall give account how we have executed our charge limited unto us in the
practice of charity, by a true and sound affection of friendship. Which thing
will have place amongst us, when we take upon The effect of true charity
toward our neighbor.
us their persons that stand in need of succor, when we pity their misery,
as if we felt and sustained it, and when we are touched with the same affection
of mercy to help them, that is in us to help our selves. As for that which
only concerns our duty toward God, the denial of our selves will make us
patient and meek. And when our affections prick us forward to seek how we
may live in rest and ease, the Scripture always brings us back to this,
that resigning our selves and all that we have, into the hands of god, we
should submit the desires of our heart to him, that he may tame them, and bring
them under his yoke. We are led with a furious kind of intemperance, and The
natural inclination of men
with an unbridled lust, in desiring credit and honor, in seeking after
power and might, in heaping up of riches, and in gathering together whatsoever
we judge meet for pomp and magnificence. On the other side, we maruellously
fear and hate poverty, baseness, and ignominy, and fly from them as much as
we can. Hereupon we see in what disquietnes of mind all they are that order
their lives after their own counsel, how many ways they assay to attain to
that, unto which their ambition and covetousness carries them. But they that
submit themselves wholly under the yoke of Gods will, never entangle themselves
in these snares. For first, they neither desire, hope, or imagine of any other
means to prosper by, than the blessing of God: and therefore they stay and
rest themselves assuredly thereupon, as upon that which is able to give the^ a
good issue in all things, and true felicity, which cannot in any wise be in
the doings of wicked men, what false prosperity soever appears in the eyes
of flesh. Hereof it comes, that they aspire not through injustice or other
sinister means to any worldly goods, but contemn them, seeking after the
only true goods which turn them not aside from innocence. For they are
assuredly persuaded that the blessing of God is not extended upon the woorkers
of iniquity, but only upon such as are upright in their thoughts and works.
Moreover, it serves for a bridle to restrain them, that they burn not with a
disordred desire of worldly goods, because they hold this for certain, that
the blessing of God cannot help them to obtain that which is clean contrary
to his word, whereby we are commanded to withdraw our whole heart from this
world, that we may lift it up in the meditation of eternal happiness. The Lord
(says Iustine Martyr) will not honor Corruptible things are no sufficient
recompense for virtuous men.
his children with worldly happiness, for a reward of their piety. For those
things that are subject to corruption can not be a recompense to good men for
their virtue: because they are circumscribed and limited by the change of the
mortal estate of virtuous men, who are deprived altogether of them at the time
of their death. And as good men are not said or accounted to be of the world,
so their glory, riches, and wealth, are not in the earth. So that in what
estate soever a Christian man is, he feels him self always moved to give
glory to God, and judges that all things are appointed by him in such sort,
as is most expedient Romans 8. 28.
for his salvation. If adversity press him, and the miseries of man's life
seek to make him distrust the grace and favor of God, or to murmr against
him through impatiencie, he strives so much the more on the other side to
consider of his heavenly justice and goodness, in that he chasticeth him justly,
and for his benefit: and arming himself with patience, he expects with a
quiet and thankful mind the issue of God his ordinance, whereunto he wholly
submits himself. Besides, he considers how God calls all his to bear
their cross, and Matthew. 16. 24. 25.
teaches them to prepare themselves to sustain a hard and laborious life,
full of travel and of infinite kinds of evils, unto which Jesus Christ their
Head was first made subject. Where this consolation follows presently upon
Romans 8. 17.
it, that such a life is a preparation to follow him into his eternal glory.
Yea the more we are afflicted and endure miseries, the more is our society
with Christ Jesus certainly confirmed unto us. Now the chief rule propounded
unto us by the spirit of God concerning this matter is, that with what kind
of tribulation soever we are afflicted, we should look to this end, to
acquaint our selves with the contempt of this present life, that we may thereby
be brought on to meditate upon the life to come. But because this divine
wisdom knows full well that we are inclined and led with a blind and even
brutish love of this world, it uses a very apt reason to draw us back and to
awaken our sluggishnes, that our heart should not be too much settled upon
such a foolish love. There is none of us that will not seem to aspire
throughout the whole course of his life to a heavenly immortality, yea to
strive for the obtaining of it. For we are ashamed not to excel the brute
beasts in some thing, whose condition would seem to be more happy than ours,
if we had no hope of eternity after death. Nevertheless, if a man examine the
counsels, deliberations, enterprises and works of every one, he shall find
nothing but earth in them, being such as tend altogether to the commodity of
this life. Now this blockishnes proceeds from hence, that our understanding
is as it were dimmed with that vain brightness which riches, honors and powers
have in outward show, whereby it is hindered from looking farther. In like manner
our heart being pressed with the affections of the flesh, which propound unto it
covetousness, ambition, and all other carnal desires, our soul is at length
persuaded to seek for her felicity upon earth. The Lord therefore to meet
with this How God teaches us to know the vanity of this life.
mischief teaches his servants to know the vanity of this present life, by
exercising them daily with diverse miseries. He sends the^ no prosperity,
which is not mingled with greater adversity, that by learning to condemn
altogether this earthly life, they may frame their hearts to desire and to
meditate upon the life to come. Wherefore when they try by afflictions, that
this present life, considered in it self, is full of disquietnes, of troubles,
altogether miserable, and in no respect happy, that all the wealth thereof had
in so great estimation, is transitory and uncertain, vain and mingled with
infinite miseries, they conclude thereupon that nothing is to be sought or hoped
for in this world but calamity, and that the crown of glory and true We must
not hate the blessings of this life.
felicity is to be looked for elsewhere, namely, in heaven. Notwithstanding
as long as they enjoy this life, he would not have them so to contemn it, as to
grow into a hatred thereof, or to be unthankful to God for the benefits which
they daily receive therein of his majesty, but rather to account it a special
gift of his heavenly clemency, in that through the midst of those tribulatio^s
which they endure, he makes a way and entrance for them unto eternal life. For
which, and for those infinite blessings which they receive also in this life of
his goodness, they acknowledge that they are bound to yield unto him immortal
thanks, laboring only to unfold themselves out of this ouer-great desire of
man, carried away with the disordinate love of this life, that they may
transfer their chief affection to the celestial and Psalm. 44. 22.
heavenly life. And seeing it is so, that all the faithful, as long as they
remain upon earth, are as sheep appointed to the slaughter, to the end they
might be made conformable to their head Christ Jesus, surely they should be
accounted passing wretched, if they did not lift their minds on high to
surmount all that is in the world, and to go beyond the regard and care of
things present. On the contrary side, if they have once lift up their thoughts
above the earth, when they shall see the unjust prosper in the world, when
themselves The comfort of the godly in the midst of troubles.
shall be ungently handled by the^, when they shall endure reproach, when they
shall be polled or afflicted with any kind of injury, their comfort in all these
evils will be to Math. 25. 34.
have the last day before their eyes, in which they know that the lord will
gather his faithful ones together into the rest Isai. 25. 8.
of his kingdom, that he will wipe away the tears from their Apoc. 7. 17.
eyes, crown the^ with glory, clothe the^ with gladness, satisfy them with the
exceeding sweetness of his delicacies, exalt them unto his high mansion, in a
word, make them partakers of his happiness. In the mean time going on in their
course with all tranquillity and joy of spirit, they are cheerfully to give
unto God that homage and worship that is due unto him, submitting themselves
wholly to his greatness, and receiving with all reverence his commandments.
Next, The sum of our duty toward God.
they must put that trust and hearty assurance in him, which they have received
by knowing him aright, attributing to him all wisdom, justice, goodness, virtue
and truth, and making this account, that all their happiness is in communicating
with him. Invocation follows, whereby their souls must have recourse unto him
as to their only hope, when they are pressed with any necessity. In the last
place is thanksgiving which is that acknowledgement, whereby all praise is given
unto him. Under these 4. points of worship, trust, prayer, and thanksgiving,
all those innumerable duties which we owe to God, may well be comprehended.
Moreover, the contempt of this present life, and the meditation of that which
is immortal and heavenly, will teach us the right use of earthly goods created
of God for the service of man, as necessary helps for this life. Which things
we must not The true use of temporal things
neglect in such sort, that we never use them but upon constraint and
necessity, taking no delight in them as if we were senseless blocks. Much
less may we abuse them by ouergreat lust in superfluity and delights, but
apply them to that end for which God has created and appointed the^ for our
good, and not for our hurt, namely, that they should sustain, nourish, preserve
and delight our nature, using the^ in all temperance and mediocritie with
thanksgiving. So that we are to use these goods as though we used them not,
that is to say, our chief affection and desire must be so smally set upon them
as if we were wholly deprived of them: and we must be disposed and affected as
well to sustain poverty patiently and with a quiet mind, as to use abundance
moderately. Especially let us refer the true and holy use of all our earthly
commodities to the works of charity, as we have already touched: knowing that
all things are so given unto us by the goodness of God, and appointed for our
commodity, as things committed to our trust, of which we must one day give
account before his majesty. For the conclusion therefore of our speech, we
learn that thelife of a Christian is a perpetual study and exercise of the
mortification of the flesh, until it be so thoroughly dead, that the spirit of
God may reign fully in his soul. We learn also, that our whole life ought to
be a meditation and exercise of godliness, because we are called to
sanctification: that true happiness Wherein a happy life consists.
of life in this world consists therein, namely, when being regenerated by
baptism and the spirit of God, we have the love of righteousness thoroughly
imprinted in our hearts, and follow the divine rule thereof by framing and
directing all our actions to the glory of our God and profit of our neighbors.
Wherefore every one of us must take his vocation and calling for a principle and
ground, and for a station assigned of God, unto which we must direct our
level, withdrawing our minds from the yoke and bondage of those natural
perturbations that are in us. We must not be led with ambition and desire to
take hold of many sundry matters at once, being assured, that every work done
according to our calling, how contemptible soever it be among men, shines
before God and shall be rewarded by him, being accounted very precious in his
sight.


Of Death. Chap. 72.
AMANA. NO man ought to be ignorant of this, that after God had created man in
the beginning, he placed him in a garden and paradise full of al pleasures and
delights, and gave him leave to use all things contained therein, the fruit of
the knowledge of good and evil only excepted, which was expressly forbidden.
Nevertheless, being unable to keep himself in that high degree and great
dignity, he fell by disobedience: so that thinking to make choice of life, he
chose the Genesis 2. 17.
fruit of death, as God had foretold him, saying, Whenever thou eatest of
this fruit of the knowledge of good and evil, thou shall die the death: which
thing fell upon him, and upon all his Romans 6. 23.
posterity. Whereby we see, that the reward and recompense of sin, is death,
not only bodily death, but which is more, spiritual, whereby we are banished
and shut out of the heavenly kingdom and inheritance, if we apprehend not that
great grace and mercy of the father offered to all that draw near unto him by
true confidence in Jesus Christ: to the end (as the Apostle says) that as
sin Romans 5. 21.
reigned unto death, so grace might reign by righteousness unto eternal life
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And this is the only way whereby to pass from
death to life, when we shall be subject to no condemnation or affliction.
Moreover, neither sword, famine, nor any other misery can hurt us, no not
temporal death, which (according to ma^s Temporal death is the way that leads
the godly from bondage to blessedness.
judgment) is the extremest of all miseries, shall in any sort confound us,
but rather be a mean and pleasant way for us to pass by from prison and
bondage to joyful liberty, and from misery to happiness. Therefore (my
companions) as death is the end of all men, happy to the elect and unhappy to
the reprobate, so let us finish our discourses with the handling thereof.


ARAM. Nothing but death and the end of this bodily life is able to accomplish
the wish and desire of a faithful christian. For the spirit being then
delivered, as it were out of a noisome and filthy prison rejoices with
freedom and liberty in those pleasant places, which it seeks after and
desires so earnestly.


ACHITOB. Heb. 9. 27. Ecclus 7. 36.
It is decreed that all men must once die. And therfeore (as the Wiseman says)
whatsoever thou take in hand, remember the end, and thou shall never do
amiss. Now ASER, as thou beganst to lay the foundation of our Academie, so
make thou an end of it with the treatise of Death that ends all things.


ASER. It is no marvel if natural sense be moved and astonished, when we
hear that our body must be separated from the soul. But it is in no wise
tolerable, that a Christian heart should not have so much light as to surmount
and suppress this fear whatsoever it be, by a greater comfort and
consolation. For if we consider that this tabernacle of our body which is
weak, vicious, corruptible, The comsort of every true christian against death.
casual, and inclining to putrefaction, is dissolved and as it were pulled
down by death, that it may afterward be restored to a perfect, firm,
incorruptible and heavenly glory, shall not this certain assurance compel us to
desire earnestly that which nature flies and abhors? If we consider that by
death we are called home from a miserable exile, to dwell in our country, yea
in our celestial country, shall we not conceive singular consolation thereby?
But some man may say that al things desire to continue in their being. For the
same cause I say, we ought to aspire to the immortality to come, where we have
a settled estate, which is not seen at all upon earth. How comes it to Romans
8. 22.
pass, that the brute beasts and senseless creatures, even wood and stones,
having as it were some feeling of their vanity and corruption, are in
expectation of the judgment day that they may be delivered from their
corruption, and yet we that have some light of nature, and boast that we are
illuminated by the spirit of God, lift not up our eyes above this earthly
putrefaction, when we talk of our being? But what shall we say of those men
(whose number alas is very great) who quenching all natural light, and opposing
themselves directly against the testimonies of truth, which press their
consciences and sound daily in their ears, dare yet doubt of, yea impudently
deny this day of judgment, and the change of this mortal life into a second,
which is immortal? If the word of god so expressly set down for our assurance be
of so little credit, that it will not satissie them, yet how is it that they are
not convinced by the writings Against Atheists and Epicures that deny the
immortality of the soul.
of so many Ethnike and heathen Philosophers, who make the immortality of the
soul out of doubt, and by the consideration of the being of this life conclude
a judgment to come, which brings perpetual happiness and felicity to the
souls of the blessed, and everlasting misery and pain to them that are
unhappy? Plato under the name of Socrates may serve for a fit teacher for such
Epicures and Atheists that will not hear the heavenly word of the almighty.
From whence comes it (says he) that we see so many wicked me^ pass the
course of their days in worldly happiness and fclicitie, and die in great rest
and quietness, whereas on the other side so many good men live and die in great
afflictions, and most hard calamities? The reason is, because God does not
punish and chastise all the wicked upon the Plato proves that there is a
judgment to come, and a second life.
earth, to the end men may know, that there is a judgment to come wherein the
ungodliness of such men shall be corrected. Neither does he recompense all good
men with blessings in this world, to the end they may hope that there is a
place in the other life where the virtuous shall be rewarded. Likewise he does
not punish all the wicked, nor reward al good men here beneath, least men
should think that the virtuous followed virtue in hope of a carnal and earthly
reward, or eschewed vice for fear of punishments and torments in this world.
For so virtue should be no more virtue, seeing there is no action that may carry
the surname of virtuous, if the intent of him that does it, be in hope of some
earthly and carnal recompense, and not for the love of virtue it self, and that
he may be accepted of God, and so conceive hope of eternal rewards in the other
life. Also he punishes and corrects some wicked men upon earth, and
rewards some good men, least if good men only were afflicted, and the wicked
suffered in quiet, men might be brought to believe that there were no
providence, and that the divine nature had no care of us, and so all men would
give over themselves to follow injustice. By the sequel of this speech Plato
infers and proves, that there is one God that has care over his cretures,
and that naturally every spirit loves him better that strives to resemble him
in manners and fashio^s of living, that reuere^ceth and honoreth him, tha^
those that fear him not, but despise him whose conditions are altogether
unlike his. Moreover, he proves evidently, that good How good men are
discerned from the wicked
men in fear and reverence of the Deity, strive to imitate it by good works
done to the benefit and safety of others: and contrariwise, that the wicked
despise God and all laws both divine and humane: whereupon it follows that
God loves good men, and hates the wicked. And because we see that good me^
are subject to calamity and The afflictions of the godly in this world, prove
a second life.
ignominy in this world, we must therefore undoubtedly confess, that there is
another life after this, wherein good men are eternally rewarded, and the
wicked punished. Otherwise it would follow, that God cared more for the wicked
than for the good, which were too absurd to grant. From hence that divine
Philosopher draws this conclusion, that the life of a wise man ought to be a
perpetual meditation of death, and that the very fear to die, and not any
desire to live, is that which makes death fearful to them that know not the
immortality of the soul. Now then ought not these men to blush for shame,
that dare doubt of the second life and future judgment, when they hear this
discourse of an Ethnike and Pagan, destitute of that true light of God, and
sincere religion which is manifested to us in Jesus Christ? Truly nothing is
more clear in all the holy scripture, than that as before the first day
mentioned in Genesis, all things were possessed of Eternity, so that there was
neither time, nor year, nor month, nor season, but all things were in that
Eternity, so when the last day shall come, all shall be eternal for the
felicity of the good, and torment of the wicked. But to return to our speech
of death, the word of Three kinds of death.
God gives us to understand of three kinds of death: the one is the separation
of the soul from the body, with the dissolution of the body until the
resurrection, and of this is our present discourse. The second is the death of
sin, as it is said oftentimes, that they are dead that nourish themselves in
sin. The third is called in the Apocalypse, Apoc. 20. 6.
the second death, and sometimes eternal death, unto which the wicked shall be
condemned in the last judgment. Therefore to continue our speech of corporal
and temporal death, if the doctrine of the son of God be never so little
apprehended Why the faithful ought to desire death.
of us by faith, we shall see clearly enough that the faithful ought to have
that in great request, which to humane sense seems neither happy, nor to be
desired, seeing it turns to their salvation. It belongs to him that will
not go unto Jesus Christ to fear death: and to be unwilling to go to Christ,
is a badge of such a one as will not reign with him. What traveler having
passed many dangerous ways, rejoices not when he draws near to his
country? And who is not content to depart out of an old ruinous house? What
pleasure have we in this world, which draws near to an end every day, and
which sells unto us so dear those pleasures that we receive What the life
of man is.
therein? What other thing is this life but a perpetual battle and a sharp
skirmish, wherein we are one while hurt with envy, another while with
ambition, and by and by with some other vice, besides the sudden onsets given
upon our bodies by a thousand sorts of diseases, and fluds of adversities upon
our spirits? Who than will not say with Phil. 1. 23.
S. Paul, I desire to be dissolved and to be with Christ? Why do we daily pray
that the kingdom of God should come, if it be not for the desire which we ought
to have to see the fulfilling thereof in the other life? We have a thousand
testimonies in the scripture, that the death of the body is a certain way by
which we pass into that true and eternal life, and into our own country.
Flesh and blood (says Saint 1. Cor. 15. 50. 53. 54. 55. 56. 57.
Paul) cannot inherit the kingdom of God, neither does corruption inherit
incorruption. For this corruptible must put on incorruptio^, and this mortali
must put on immortality: then shall be fulfilled that which is written, Death
is swallowed up in victory. They that believe in Jesus Christ have already
overcome death, sin, and hell. And therefore contemning death they may say, O
death where is thy sting? O grave where is thy victory? The sting of death is
sin, and the strength of sin is the law: but thanks be unto God which has
given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. He which has raised up the
Lord Jesus, shall raise us up 2. Cor. 4. 14.
also. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for Phil. 3.
20. 21.
the savior, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body that
it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working,
whereby he is able even to subdue all things-vnto himself. Ye are dead (says
he to the Colossians) and your life Col. 3. 3. 4.
is hid with Jesus Christ in God. When Christ which is our life shall appear,
then shall ye also appear with him in glory. My brethren (says he to the
Thessalonians) I would not have you ignorant 1. These. 4. 13. 14.
concerning them which are a sleep, that ye sorrow not even as other which have
no hope. For if we believe that Jesus is dead, and is risen, even so them which
sleep in Jesus will God bring with him. Jesus Heb. 2 14. 15.
Christ (says he to the Hebrews) was partaker of flesh and blood: that is to
say, was truly man, that he might destroy through death, him that had the power
of death, that is, the devil. And that he might deliver all them, who for
fear of death were all their life time subject to bondage. God has saved us,
and called us with an holy calling (as he says to Timothy) not according to
our works, 2. Tim. 1. 9. 10.
but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us through
Christ Jesus before the world was, but is now made manifest by the appeering of
our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolished Job 19. 25. 26. 27.
death, and has brought life and immortality unto light through the Gospel. I
am sure (says Job) that my redeemer lives, and he shall stand the last on the
earth. And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet shall I see God in
my flesh. Whom I my self shall see and mine eyes shall behold, and none other
for me. Jesus Christ is our head, and we are his members. This head cannot be
without his members, neither can forsake them. Where John 12. and 17.
Christ is there shall we be also. He that considers diligently these places
of Scripture, and infinite others contained therein, it cannot be but he should
have great joy and comfort in his heart against all fear and horror of death.
And then coming to compare the miseries which never leave this life, with that
unspeakable happiness and felicity, 1. Cor. 2. 9.
which eye has not seen, neither ear has heard, neither came into man's
heart, which God has prepared in the second and eternal life for all faithful
believers; a christian will not only pass over this mortal life with ease
and without trouble, Who they be that fear not death.
but will even contemn and make no account of it, in respect of that which is
immortal. But to whom is death sweet if not to them that labor? The poor
hireling is well at ease when he has done his days work. So death is
always sweet to the afflicted, but to them that put their trust in wordly
things, the remembrance thereof is bitter. Now then the children of God are not
afraid of death, but (as Cyprian writes in an Epistle sent to the Martyrs of
Christ) he that has once overcome death in his own person, does daily
overcome him in his members: so that we have Jesus Christ not only a beholder
of our combats, but also an assistant and fighter with us. And by his grace
abounding in the hearts of the faithful, they are so much the more bent to
meditate upon the benefits of the future and eternal life, as they see that
they are environed with greater store of miseries in this fading and
transitory life. Then comparing both together they find nothing more easy
than to finish sweetly their race, and to value the one as little, as they
account the other absolute in all felicity. Moreover, seeing heaven is our
country, what is the earth else but a passage in a strange land? And because
it is accursed unto us for sin, it is nothing else but the place of our
banishment. If our departure out of this world be an entrance to life, what is
A comparison between this life and that which is eternal.
this world but a sepulcher? And to dwell here what is it else but to be
plunged in death? If it be liberty to be delivered out of this body, what is
this body but a prison? And if it be our chief happiness to enioie the
presence of our God, is it not a misery not to enioie it? Now until we go out
of this world, we shall be as it were separated from God. Wherefore if this
earthly life be compared with the heavenly, no doubt but it may be contemned,
and accounted as it were doung. True it is that we must not hate it, but so far
forth as it keeps us in subjection to sin. And yet whilst we desire to
see the end of it, we must not be careless to keep our selves in it, to the
good pleasure of God, that our longing may be far from all murmuring and
impatiencie. For our life is as a station, wherein the Lord God has placed us,
that we should abide in it until he call us back again. Saint Paul indeed
bewailed his estate, because he was kept as it were bound Phil. 1. 23.
in the prison of his body longer than he would, and groned with a burning
desire until he was delivered: but withal to show his obedience to the will of
God, he protested that he was ready for both, because he knew himself indebted
for the glorifieng of his name, whether it were by death or by life. For it
belongs to him to determine what is expedient for his glory. Wherefore if it
behooves us to live and die unto him, let us leave both our life and death to
his good pleasure, but yet so that we always desire rather to die than to
live, and be ready cheerfully to renounce this life, whenever it pleases the
Lord, because it holds us under sin. And let us hold this Maxim, that no man
has thoroughly profited in the school of Christ Jesus, but he that with joy and
gladness expects the day of death, and of the last resurrection. S. Paul in
his epistle to Titus describes al Titus. 2. 13.
the faithful by this mark: and the scripture when it propou^deth unto us
matter of reioicing calls us back thither. Luke 21. 28.
Rejoice (says the Lord in Luke) and lift up your heads, for your redemption
draws near. It were absurd that that thing should breed nothing but sorrow
and astonishment in us, which Christ thought was fit matter to work joy in us.
Now than seeing death is dead to them that believe in him, there is nothing in
death which a man ought to fear. It is true that the image thereof is hideous
and terrible, because that besides the violent taking away of life, it
represents unto us the wrath of God, which biteth like a serpent: but now the
venom of it is taken away and can not hurt us. And as through the brazen
serpent which Moses lift up in the wilderness, the living serpents died, How
death can not hurt.
and their venom hurt not the Israelites: so our death dies, and is not able
in any sort to hurt us, if we behold with the eyes of faith the death of Jesus
Christ. Briefly it is nothing but an image and shadow of death, and the
beginning and entrance unto true life. Wherefore concluding our present speech,
let us learn that as our miserable nature had brought us to the like condition
of death: so the grace of God makes this difference, that some, namely the
wicked, die to their destruction; and others, which are the children of God led
by his spirit and word, die to live Psalm. 116. 15.
more happily, so that their very death is precious in the sight of God. And
although the lust of our flesh, being blind and earthly, strives continually
against the desires of the spirit, seeking to separate us as far as it can from
our sovereign Good, yet let us have this engraven in our hearts, that they are
happy that know the vanity of this world, more happy that set not their
affections upon it, and they most happy that are taken out of it to be with GOD
in the kingdom of heaven.


The end of this Academie. (...).
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THIS ACADEMIE.
A
ADmonition: sundry instructions how to admonish wisely. Page 153 Adversity:
who are soonest thrown down with adversity, 301. the common effects thereof,
345. the Romans were wisest and most constant in adversity, 347. examples of
constancy in adversity. 348 Adultery: the miserable effects of adultery,
240. the punishment of adulterers among the Egyptians, 241. Zaleucus law, and
the law of Iulia against it, 240. testimonies of Gods wrath against it. 241 Age
has no power over virtue, 61. the division of the ages of man. 563-564
Ambition: two kinds of ambition, 224. the cause of ambitious desires, 225. the
effects of ambition, 224. and 229. examples of me void of ambition, 186.
ambition breeds sedition, 225. ambitious men full of selfe-prayse, 226.
examples of ambitious men, 227. etc. they cannot be good counselors to
Princes. 231 Anger: the cruelty of Theodosius committed in his anger, 316.
Valentinian brake a vein in his anger. 317 Apparel: against excess in
apparel, 219. examples of sobriety in apparel. 219 Archbishop: the free gird
of a Pesant given to an Archbishop* 158. the Archbishop of Magdeburg brake his
neck in dancing. 216 Arms, Army: the exercise of arms must always continue,
762. the ancient order of the Roman army. 766 Arrogancy dwells in the
ends with solitarines. 157 Aristocratie: the description of an Aristocratie,
579. the estate of Lacedemonia was Aristocraticall. 580 Arts and Artificers:
the necessity of arts and artificers in a commonwealth, 750. artificers of
one science ought not to dwell all together. 751 Authors: how much we owe to
good authors. 45 Authority: what authority a prince has over his subjects.
670
B
Backbiting: the prudence of Dionysius in punishing two backbiters, 388. when
backbiting hurts most. 460 Bankets: the custom of the Egyptians and
Lacedaemonians at bankets. 203 Beard: what use is to be made of a white beard.
572 Belly: the belly an unthankful and feeding beast, 201. and 202. it has
no ears. 212 Birth: the folly of birth-gazers. 42 Biting: what biting of
beasts is most dangerous. 460 Body: the wonderful conjunction of the body and
soul of man, 19. the conceptio^, framing and excellency of the body. 21
Brother: he that hates his brother, hates his parents, 542. the benefit that
brethren receive by having common friends, 544. examples of brotherly love. 545
C
Calling: callings were distinct from the beginning, 478. six sundry callings
necessary in every commonwealth, 744. holiness is the end of our calling. 795
Captain: the loss of a captain commonly causes the ruin of an army, III.
how captains were punished if they offended, 768. a captain must not offend
twice in war, 773. what captains are woorthiest of their charge, 784. the
captains of an army must be very secret, 781. two faults to be eschewed of
every captain, 778. how a captain should exhort his soldiers. 790 Cheer:
good cheer keeps base minds in subjection. 206 Children must love, fear,
and reverence their father, 533. the duty of children toward their parents,
541. examples of the love of children toward their parents. 541 Choler:
whereof choler is bred, 314. how the Pythagorians resisted choler, 315.
magistrates ought to punish none in their choler. 316 City: what City seemed,
to Clcobulus best guided. 264 Citizens: who are truly citizens. 606 Clemency:
examples of great clemency in princes, 324. etc. it preserves the thrones of
Princes. 411 Commonwealth: a sure token of a desperate commonwealth, 407.
600. 690. the spring of corruption in Commonwealths, 550. the description of a
mixed commonwealth, 583. how a corrupt commonwealth must be corrected, 699.
when commonwealths begin to alter, 717* the causes thereof. 739 Commandment:
the 5. commandment only has a special promise annexed unto it, 538. there
is a show of commanding and obeying in all things. 575 Comparisons: 33. 38. 46.
47. 55. 64. 70. 105. 150. 176. 191. 212. 286. 338. 339. 343. 360. 371. 378.
383. 4^6. 446. 448. 487. 513. 550. 589 641. 687. Community: Plato established
a community of all things in his commonwealth, 490 the confutation thereof.
491 Concupiscence: the fruits of concupiscence. 238 Conscience: the force of
conscience in the wicked, 68. examples of tormented consciences. 68 Constancy:
the wonderful constancy of Socrates. 348 Correction n^^^ssarie for children,
534. the law Falcidia touching the correction of children. 551 Council: what
a council is, with the profit of it, 677. of the council of sundry
countries. 679. etc Counselors: qualities requisite in counselors of estate.
687 Counsel: good counsel for counselors, 155. and for princes. 157
Country: examples of the love of heathen men toward their country. 60. 98.
etc Covetousness is never satisfied, 445. the fruits of covetousness, 446.
examples of coueiousnes, 449. what magistrates are best liked of covetous
princes. 456 Coward: Agamemnon dispensed with a rich coward for going to war,
284. what vices proceed of cowardlines. 285 Creation: the end of the creation
of al things 92. Creatures: all creatures are sociable by nature. 594
Curiosity: against curiosity in knowledge, 161. two kinds of curiosity,
162. against curious inquiry into other men's imperfections, 166. curious
persons profit their enemies more than themselves, 167. witty answers made
to cu^io^^ questions, 169. curiosity in princes affairs, perilous. 168
Custom: a notable custom of the Lacedaemonians, 150. custom in sinning is
dangerous. 69
D
Death: the fear of death does not astonish the virtuous, 60. what death Caesar
thought best, 262. no man ought to hasten forward his death, 293. what it is to
fear death, 294. the comfort of every true Christian against death. 805.
Definition: the definition of ambition, 224. of anger, 312. of a body, 20. of
charity, 321. of a city, 595. of a Citizen, 605. of comelines, 181. of
confidence, 300. of duty, 94. of envy, 458. of fortune, 468. of friendship,
138. of a house, 490. and 492. of jealousy, 505. of justice, 390. and 391. of
intemperancie, 190. of judgment, 691. of liberality, 435. of the law, 596. of
malice and craft, 123. of man, 13. of meekenes, 321. of nature, 172. of
Oeconomie, 523. of policy, 523. of passion, 30. of Philosophy, 40. and 390. of
prudence, 104. of patience, 310. of pleasure, 236. of sedition, 705. of
society, 480. of the soul, 23. of temperance, 181. of virtue, 52. of vice 65.
of wedlock. 480 Democraty: the description of a Democraty, with the sundry
kinds of it. 528 Desire: the effects of desire. 36 Diseases: the end, cause,
and remedy of bodily diseases, 29. the cause of the diseases of the soul, 33.
the seed of diseases. 211 Discipline: the ancient warlike discipline of the
Romans, 769. the corruption thereof in these days. 769 Discord: all things
are preserved by agreeing discords. 19 Division: of Citizens, 606. of a
Commonwealth, 579. and 583. of duty, 94. of a house, 492. of justice, 393. of
the law, 596. of nature 171. of Philosophy, 40. of passions, 31. of speech,
127. of the soul, 23. of sciences. 76 Dowries: why the dowries of women have
always had great privileges, 486. Lycurgus forbad all dowries. 493 Drink:
the manner of drinking in old time, 203. against excessive drinking. 204
Drunkenness: hurtful effects of drunkenness and gluttony, 213. examples of
drunkenness. 214 Duarchy: what a Duarchy is. 617 Duty: wherein the duty of man
consists, 12. duty and profit are distinct things, 429. the duty of a wise
man, 12. what duty we owe to God, and what to our neighbor, 94. four rivers
issue out of the fountain of duty. 96
E
Eclipse: Nicias feared an eclipse of the Moon. 120 Education helps the
defect of nature, 175. examples thereof, 177. naughty education corrupts a
good nature, 551. how Plato would have children brought up, 552. of the
education of daughters. 554 Emperors: there were 73. Emperors of Rome within
100. years, 223. what this word Emperor imports. 624 End: the proper end of
all things. 477 Enemy: how one may reap benefit by his enemies, 112. 383. why
men are beholding to their enemies, 379. the common behavior of men toward
their enemies. 380 Envy is a note of an ambitious man, 225. the nature of
envy, 457. the fruits of it, 458. it hurts envious persons most, 459. a good
way to be revenged on the envious. 464 Ephoryes: why the Ephoryes were
appointed in Lacedemonia. 581 Equality: two sorts of equality. 737 Equity is
always one and the same to all people, 601. the equity of the Moral law ought
to be the end and rule of all laws. 602 Error: the spring of all error. 119
Estate: every Estate and policy consists of three parts, 578. the opinion of
Politics touching a mixed Estate, 625. examples of mixed Estates, 626. what it
is to hold the Estates, 685. a rule of Estate, 723. choice custom of seven
flourishing Estates, 732. means to preserve an Estate, 734* etc. it is
dangerous to an Estate to call in foreign succors. 785 Event: we must not
judge of enterprises by the event, 305. we must be prepared against all events,
306. the event of all things is to be referred to the providence of God, 42
Evil: what we ought to call evil. 63 Exercise: what bodily exercise is meet
for youth. 557 Expenses: a good law e to cut off the occasions of idle
expenses. 221
F
Fables: who delight most in reading of fables. 462 Family: there must be but
one Head in a family, 509. the progress of a family before it come to
perfection. 525 Father: why many fathers set not their children to school, 72.
the story of a father appointed to execute his own child. 535 Favor: the
punishment of one who sold his masters favor. 411 Fear: two kinds of fear,
278. the fear of neighbor enemies is the safety of a Commonwealth, 279.
good fear is joined with the love of God, 280. examples of wary fear 280. a
strange effect of fear in one night, 284. examples of fear which is the
defect of fortitude. 281 Feast: how wise men feasted one another in old time,
202. Socrates feast. 208 Fidelity: a description of fidelity. 414 Flattery:
the common practice of flatterers, 139. good counsel for Princes against
flatterers. 462 Flesh: the works of the flesh. 20 Foe: he that has no foe,
has no friend, 145. Look Enemy. Fortitude: the works of fortitude must be
grounded upon equity and justice, 251. it is a good of the soul, not of the
body, 266. the parts of fortitude, 267. examples of fortitude. 273. etc.
Fortune: what is to be understood by this word fortune, 307. how we may use
these words of fortune and chance, 469. the opinions of Philosophers touching
fortune, 470. the description of fortune, 470. examples of her contrary
effects. 472 France: one evident cause of the present ruin of France, 163. the
miserable estate of France, 408. one cause thereof, 607. the happy government
of France, 635. two causes of the present divisions in France. 716 Friend, and
Friendship: the difference between friendship and love, 138. what things are
requisite in friendship, 139. the chief cause and end of all true friendship,
138. friendship must be free, 142. three things necessary in friendship, 148.
examples of true friendship, 145. what manner of man we must choose for our
friend, 140. how we must prove a true friend, and shake off a false, 141. how
we must bear with the imperfections of our friend. 144.
G
Gaming: the effects of gaming, 374, what moved the Lydians to invent games,
374. Alphonsus decree against gaming. 375 General: a good lesson for a
General, 292, properties requisite in a General. 300 Glory: how jealousy of
glory is tolerable, with examples thereof, 251. etc. examples of the contempt
of glory. 254 Gluttony: the fruits of gluttony, 213. examples thereof. 214
God: all things are present with God, 407. he orders casual things
necessarily, 468 he is the Idaea of al good. 42 Goods: the nature of worldly
goods, 37. two sorts of goods, 52. and 526. two ways to get goods. 526 Grace:
effects of Gods grace in the regenerate. 18 Grammar: the commodities of
grammar, 556 Grief: a mean how to bear grief patiently. 331
H
Happiness: all men naturally desire happiness, 31. who are happy, and who
unhappy. 51. what it is to live happily, 38. 54. how we must make choice of a
happy life, 246. wherein good or ill hap consists, 330. notable opinions of
good and ill hap, 332, wherein true happiness consists. 334 Hatred: how far a
man may hate the wicked, 387. the difference between hatred and envy, 459. the
bounds of a good man's hatred, 463. Histories: the praise and profit of
histories. 79 Homage: what homage we ow to God. 93 Honor: how a man may seek
for honor, 232. examples of the contempt of honor, 233. the first step to
honor. 247 Hope: hope must be grounded upon the grace of God, 300. two kinds of
hope, 301. the fruit of hope, 302. hope and fear are the foundation of virtue.
561 House; a house consists of living stones, 489 small iarres must be avoided
in a house. 501 Hunting is an image of war. 554 Husbands: how they ought to
love their wives, 501. a husband must never beat his wife, 504. he must
neither chide nor fawn upon his wife before others, 507. examples of the love
of husbands toward their wives. 510. Husbandry: the praise of husbandry,
528. 752. the antiquity of husbandry. 752
I
Idleness: it is the mother and nurse of all vice, 369. Pythagoras precept
against idleness, 370. examples against idleness. 377 Ignorance: ignorance of our
selves the cause of much evil, 12. pernicious effects of ignorance, 117. 118.
common effects of ignorance 119. Impatiencie: who are most given to impatiencie
and choler, 312. how it may be cured. 313. Impost: a commendable kind of
impost. 220 Impudency: the description of impudency. 428. Incontinencie: the
difference between an incontinent and an intemperate man, 190. Socrates
disputation against incontinencie. 238 Infants: how infants are to be brought
up. 552 Ingratitude: means to keep us from ingratitude, 432. it was the cause
of man's fall, 425 great men are soonest touched with ingratitude, 428. examples
against it. 430 Innocence is a tower of brass against slanderers. 466
Injury: how many ways a man may receive injury. 384 Injustice: the fruits
of it in the wicked, 403. it is a general vice, 404. the effects of it, 405.
how many kinds there are of injustice. 404 Intemperance: the companions of
intemperance. 192. what predominant passions are in it, 189. examples of
intemperance. 193 etc. Joy: examples of some that died of joy. 36 Judgment:
from whence judgment proceeds, 89. the judgment of the best, not of the
most is to be preferred, 249. judgments are the sinews of an estate. 690
Judges: how the Egyptians painted judges, 394. a corrupt manor of making
judges. 701 Justice: the fruits of justice, 390. the ground of all justice,
391. examples of the love of justice, 395. how the abuse of it may be remedied,
399. the denial of justice is dangerous, 408. 658. the springs of all
corruptions of justice, 697. justice distributed into seven parts. 746
K
Knowledge: the knowledge of God and of our selves must be linked together, 12.
the end of the knowledge of our selves, 16. the benefits that come by
knowledge. 74 King: wherein the greatness of a king consisisteth, 57. wherein
kings ought to exercise themselves most. 80. the true ornaments of a king, 180.
the difference between a great and a little king, 398. what power the kings of
Lacedaemonia had, ^80. good precepts for kings, 648. a king must be skillful by
reason and not by use, 648. the first and principal duty of a king is to have
the law of God before his eyes, 655. he must begin reformation at himself and
his court. 656. the sum of the duty of a king. 674 Kingdom: what causes
kingdoms to flourish, 399, of the original of kingdoms, 586. their alteration
comes through vice, 67, they flourish through virtue, 61. Of the antiquity of
a kingdom, 623. the dangerous estate of an elective kingdom upon the death of
the prince, 633. what kingdoms are elective. 634
L
Law: what civil laws may not be changed, 597. the end of all laws, 603.
change of laws in a well settled estate is dangerous, 598. what the law of
nature is, 596. the ancient lawmakers, 599. what manner of laws are to be
established in the Commonwealth, 657. Learning: examples of ancient men that
gave themselves to learning, 570. examples of great love to learning. 81
Letter: Anacharsis letter to Craesus, 78, Alexanders to Aristotle, 80. Caesar's
to Rome: Octauianus to his nephew: Platoes to Dionysius: Pompeies to the
senate, 132. Pisistratus to his nephew, 146. Traians to Plutarke, 157. and 233.
Traians to the senate, 654. 707. Macrines to the senate of Rome, 747. Aurelius
to a tribune. 768 Liberality: a poor man may be liberal, 436. the laws of
liberality, 440. examples of liberality. 441 Love: love is the first
foundation of every holy marriage. 530 Life: man's life compared to the
Olympian assemblies, 38. one cause of the long life of our elders, 198.
Senecaes opinion of the shortness of our life, 211. our life compared to
table-play, 335. no man ought to hide his life, 373. the end of our life, 377.
three things necessary for the life of man, 750. wherein a happy life
consists. 804 Lying: lying in a prince is most odious. 417
M
Magistrate: of the name of magistrate, 587. good counsel for magistrates,
588. the duty of the magistrate consists in three things, 590. what manner of
then magistrates ought to be, 399. 593. the titles of a good magistrate. 610
Magnanimity: magnanimity consists in three things, 289. wonderful
magnanimity, 59. three effects of magnanimity, 290. examples thereof. 295.
296 Malice: the malice of Nero and Tyberius. 124 Man: the prerogatives of men
above other creatures, 594. the manner of man's conception and fashioning, 21.
the end of his being, 13. 73. 95. three things necessary for the perfection of
man, 173. common effects of man's frail nature, 339. the duty of a man at the
perfection of his age. 570 Marriage: the author, antiquity, and ends of
marriage, 482. reasons against marriage, 482 the defense of marriage, 484.
motives to marriage, 488. four kinds of marriage, 492. the best time and place
to pacify strife between married couples, 515. at what age men and women
ought to marry. 495 Mask: against masks and mummeries. 214 Master: what
properties are requisite in a master. 528. 530 Mediocritie: mediocritie must
be used in all actions. 160 Mecknes: the effects of meeknes, 321. examples of
meek princes. 323 Memory: the praise of memory, 88. examples of good
memories. 89. reasons why quickest wits have best memories, and contrariwise.
90 Mercy: who were forbidden to enter into the temple of mercy. 320 Mind:
base minds stand in great fear of death and grief. 283 Mirth: how mirth is
commendable. 464 Mocking: how a man may repulse a mock, 386. examples thereof.
387. Monarchy: what a monarchy is, 579. 617. the law of nature leads us to a
monarchy, 615 reasons against a monarchy, 617. the commodities of a monarchy,
622. monarchies have continued longest, 625. what agreement the French
monarchy has with every good policy. 626. Five kinds of monarchies, 628.
how the first monarchy came up. 629 Money: why money was first invented, 527
Mother: the mother is no less to be honored than the father, 540. every
mother ought to nurse her own child. 552 Murder: a cruel murder of a
gentlewoman, and her household. 450 Music: a commendable end of music, 553.
when music is most convenient. 202 Mystery: how far we may search into
heavenly mysteries. 41
N
Nature: the division of nature, 171. the corruption thereof. 173 Negligence:
two sorts of negligence. 725 Neighbor: reasons to move us to love our
neighbors. 320 Nobility: what nobility is, with the sundry kinds of it, 747.
nobility is the ornament of a commonwealth. 740 Number: the number of seven
accounted a perfect number. 563
O
Obedience to Gods law is the mother of all virtues. 94 Offenses are never
without pain. 67 Office: in what case a good man may sue for an office, 98.
700. the inconvenience that comes by setting offices to sale. 400 Old Age:
when old age begins, 571. to whom it is not grievous. 572 Officers: the
statute of S. Jews concerning the election of officers. 702 Oligarchie: what
an Oligarchie is, and how it changes into a tyranny, 581. reasons against an
Oligarchie. 621 Oration: Otans oration for a popular regiment, 618. Megabyses
oration for an Aristocratie. 619. Darius oration for a monarchy, 621. Coruinus
oration to his soldiers, 784. the benefit of making orations to soldiers, 775.
Cyrus oration to his captain. 776 Order: what order is. 740
P
Painting: the use of painting. 557 Parliament: the present estate of the
parliament of France. 695 Pastors: wherein the office of true pastors
consists. 745 Passions: the passions of the soul are headstrong, 35. the
scope of our passions, 32. pleasure and griese are the cause of passions, 28.
natural passions not to be condemned. 30 Patience: the fruits of patience,
310. what the wicked account of patience, 314 Peace: the discommodities of a
long peace, 756. the effects of peace. 758 People: the division of the people
into three orders or estates. 606 Perjury: examples of gods judgments upon
perjured persons. 420. 423 Perturbations: from whence the perturbations of the
soul proceed, 31. the original, nature and effects of perturbations. 33
Philosophy: how we may know whether we profit in Philosophy, 47. the fruits
that follow the study of it, 346. examples of love to Philosophy, 48. what
divine Philosophy is, 40. the chief foundation of all Philosophy, 45. the
perfection of Philosophy. 48 Philosopher: necessary points for a Philosopher,
45. what this word Philosopher imports, 51. what kind of knowledge is chiefly
required in a Philosopher, 78. Philosophers ought to be conversant with
Princes. 155 Plays: hurtful effects of plays. 216 Pleaders: against prating
pleaders. 129 Pleasure: pleasure is the end of superfluity, 210. what
Philosophers placed their chief Good in pleasure, 235. the fruits of pleasure.
236 Policies: a mean to preserve policies, 401. what policy is, and from
whence the word is derived, 577. no people without some policy. 576 Poverty:
why poor men are not less happy than the rich, 359* the fruits of poverty,
361 poverty pleads for it self, 362. what poverty is odious, 366. a good
law for the poor 438 Power: civil power ought to maintain the worship of
God, 578. two kinds of public power. 609 Praise: a good man may sometime
praise him self. 250 Pride: the effects of pride, 250. examples of pride
punished. 254 Prince: the loose life of Princes is dangerous for their Estates,
242. etc. a good consideration for Princes, 324. it is dangerous for Princes to
advance wickedmen, 343. the promise of a Prince is tied with a double bond,
417. how far Princes are subject to laws, 595. wherein their absolute power
consists, 596. when a Prince may deny the request of his three Estats, 598.
obedience is due to unjust Princes, as well as to just, 611. a child prince is a
token of Gods wrath 620. it is not lawful for any to kill his Prince although he
be a tyrant, 639. when a Prince may best be corrected, 643. two properties
requisite in him that teaches a Prince, 644. how a young Prince must be
taught, 645. excellent titles of a good Prince, 650. Look more in chap. 59.
and 60. Prodigality: how prodigality and covetousness may be in one subject.
447 Profit: profit must not be separated from honesty. 95 Promise: whither a
forced promise is to be kept, 414. no promise ought to be made against duty,
415. we must keep promise with our enemy, 416. examples of promisekeeping.
418 Prosperity: effects of 100 great prosperity in commonwealths, 281. more
hurtful than adversity, 340. examples of some that were overthrown by
prosperity, 342. of others that were not puffed up with it. 343. etc Prudence:
the effects of prudence, 104. 106. prudence has three eyes, 105. examples of
prudence, 108. etc. a prudent man is not ouer-light of belief. 114
Q
Quarrel: the common excuse of quarellers. 385 Quietness: how a man may have
continual quietness. 67
R
Rashness: the effects of rashness. 285 Reason: the error of the Philosophers
touching the strength of reason, 24. there is a double reason in man. 14
Recreation: how men ought to recreate themselves. 375 Religion: religion is the
foundation of all estates, 576. Socrates called it the greatest virtue, 53.
integrity of religion knitteth the hearts of subjects to their princes, 653.
the fruits of the contempt of religion. 704 Reprehension: how we must use
reprehension, 151. examples of free reprehension. 156 Revenge: private revenge
comes of frailty, 326. examples of princes void of revenge 327. Socrates
precept against private revenge, 381. a comendable kind of revenge. 382. 383.
Reward: the difference between a reward and a benefit. 672 Riches: how riches
may be well used, 435. the common effects of riches, 350. anotable example of
the true use of riches, 439. the nature, quality, and fruits of riches, 351.
what riches are to be sought for, 358. riches are the sinews of war. 749
Rome: of the ancient estate of Rome. 605
S
Salick: the Salick law excludes daughters and their sons from government.
635 Schoolmasters: what schoolmasters are to be chosen, 554. the properties
of a good schoolmaster. 564 Sciences: what sciences are first to be learned.
77 Scoffing: what scoffing is, and how it is to be avoided. 464 Secret: of
concealing a secret. 134 Sedition: the original of all sedition, 703. the
fruits of sedition, 705. the causes of sedition. 718 Selling: it is wickedness
to conceal the fault of that which a man sells. 416 Senate: what a Senate
is, and from whence the word came, 572. why the Senate of Lacedemonia was first
instituted, 580. of the Senate of sundry nations. 678 Servant: examples of
moderate train of seruing-men, 220. the duty of servants comprehended in
four points, 547. examples of the love of servants toward their masters. 548
Severity: an example of most cruel severity. 412 Shame: honest shame is
always commendable, 264. how we must learn to resist all naughty shame, 259.
261. shame is the keeper of all virtues, 256. what shame is hurtful. 259
Shamefastnes: the shamefastnes of the Romans, 263. of the Milesian maidens,
264. it is the best dowry of a woman. 516 Signs: Anaxagoras saying against
the superstitious fear of celestial signs. 121 Silence: Alexander gave money
to a poet to keep silence, 131. the praise of silence. 133 Sin: the
punishment of sin is equal with it both for age and time, 407. how we must
avoid and repress it, 258. some sins are punishments of other sins, 190.
how we may overcome great sins, 47. sin the first and true cause of all our
misery. 13 Sobriety: it preserves health, 200. examples of sobriety. 203.
etc. Society: the end of all society. 480 Sovereignty: what sovereignty is,
586. the mark of a sovereign. 595 Soldiers: good counsel for soldiers,
343. soldiers must begin war with prayer, and end with praise. 783 Soul: the
soul is not subject to man's jurisdiction, 573. the soul is infused not
traduced, 23. the properties of the soul, 25. the soul is truly man, 12. 85.
115. the actions, beauty, and delight of the soul. 26 Speech: pleasant
speeches full of doctrine, 114. how it is framed, 127. Laconical speech, 128.
two times of speaking, 130. how great men ought to speak, 131. a good precept
for speech, 132. examples of the commendable freedom of speech. 135 Spirit:
the difference between the soul and the spirit, 88. the proper work of man's
spirit. 74 Sports: the sports of prudent men. 113 Study: the end of all
studies. 556 Stupiditie: the description of stupiditie. 196 Subjects: what
service they owe to their princes, 608. how far they are bound to obey their
prince and his laws. 610 Superfluity: how Heraclitus dissuaded superfluity,
217. good counsel for princes and magistrates concerning superfluous expenses.
222 Swearing: against swearing. 317
T
Temperance: no virtue can be without temperance, 180. four parts of
temperance, 182. what passions are ruled by it, 181. examples thereof. 184
Temple: the temple of Diana was burnt by Erostratus. 196 Theft: theft punished
diversely in diverse nations. 602 Timocratie: the description of a Timocratie.
581 Tongue: the tongue is the best and woorst thing that is, 130. examples of
mischiefs caused by the intemperancie of the tongue. 134. Traffic: Lycurgus
forbad all traffic with strangers. 164 Treason: treason and cruelty never
find place in a noble heart, 296. the effects of treason, 418. examples of the
ill success of traitors, 422. a severe law against treason. 614 Truth: all men
by nature have some light of truth. 18 Turk: of the estate of the Turk, 631.
he disposes of all lordships at his pleasure. 632 Tyranny: when a kingdom
turns into a tyoannie, 579, tyrants are naturally hated, 610. marks of a
tyranny 631. of the name of a tyrant, 636. the difference between a good king
and a tyrant, 637. examples of the extraordinary deaths of tyrants. 639
V
Vain-glorie: Solon called every vainglorious man a fool, 255 Valor:
properties requisite in a valiant man, 267. all hardy men are not valiant,
268. how a man may be valiant, 288. from whence valor proceeds. 765
Vengeance: why God deferreth his vengeance upon the wicked. 69 Venice: of the
state of Venice, 605. the dukedom of Venice is elective. 624 Virtue: virtue is
neither without affections, nor subject unto them, 309. the property of virtue
oppressed, 347. three things concur in perfect virtue, 175. the near
coniuncti^ of all the virtues, 107. examples of the force of virtue in
adversity, 58. the excellency and property of virtue, 55. it is always void
of extreme passion. 37 Vice: when we begin to hate vice, 64. the effects of
vice, 65. how we should fortifi^ our selves against vice, 69. fi^^ vices
brought out of Asia by the Romans. 164 Victory: how victory is to be used.
791 Unhappiness: who are unhappy. 334 Unthankfulness: Draco punished
unthankfulness by death, 429. the fruits of unthankfulness. 430 Voice: the
diversity of men's voices is a great secret of nature. 22 Vsuric: biting vsuric
is detestable gain. 527
W
War: a notable example against civil war, 101. two kinds of war, 706. whether
diversity of religion be a cause of civil war, 738. the effects of war, 758.
wherefore and when we must begin war, 760. three things necessarily required in
men of war, 765. war ought to be speedily ended. 776. affairs of war must be
debated by many, but concluded by few. 781 Whoordome: the hurtful effects of
whoordome, 237. etc. good counsel against whoordome. 244 Wicked: why the life
of the wicked cannot be happ^^* 406. the property of the wicked. 67 Widow: of
the marriage of widows. 496 Wife: a wife is to be chosen by the cares, not by
the fingers, 493. the best way to order an (...) wife, 507. how she must deal
with hi^ (...) husband, 514. a short (...) of ^he duty of a wife, 517.
examples of the great love of wi^^s toward their husbands. 518. Wisdom: it is
true wisdom to know our selves, 11. the perfection of a wise man's life, 18. a
wise man is ashamed to offend before himself, 68. the praise of wisdom, 75.
730. Wit: quick wits commonly want memory, 84 Wimes: how the Jews punished
false witness bearing. 602 Woman: why the woman was created of the rib of man,
485. the natural gifts of women, 512. curtain takens of an adulterous heart in
a woman, 516. against ignorance in women. 555 Work: wherein she perfection of
every work consists, 266. two things requisite in every good work. 95
World: the differens opinions of the Stoics and Epicures concerning the
government of the world. 328 Wrath: Cotys brake his glasses to avoid occasion
of wrath. 315 Writing: pi^hie writings of ancient men. 132
X
Xenophon: the great prudence of Xenophon in conducting an army. 81
Y
Year: effects of the climacterical year. 63. 563 Youth: how the Romans taught
their youth to for sake the follies of their first age, 567. examples of
v^riuous yoong-m^n, 568. how the Per^ia^ youth was instructed, 263. two things
to be respected in the institution of youth, 556. the common diseases of youth,
559. six precepts requisite in the in^truction of youth. 558
Z
Zaleucus: Zaleucus la^e against adultery. 240 Zeal: the zeal of the
ancients in the service of their Gods. 97
FINIS.

