THREE CHRISTIAN SERMONS, made by Lodouike Lauatere, Minister of Zuricke in
Heluetia, of Famine and Dearth of Victuals:

And translated into English, as being very fit for this time of our Dearth:

By VV. Barlow Bachelar in Divinity.

Who can cause to cease the bottles of heaven? Job. 38.37, even he that says
to the small rain, and to the showers of his power, Be upon the earth,

Job. 37.6. He called for a Dearth upon the land, and brake the staff and
provision of bread, Psalm. 105.16. even for the wickedness of them that dwell
therein.

Psalm. 107.34. LONDON Printed by Thomas Creed. 1596.

TO THE MOST REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, MY LORD, THE ARCHBISHOP of Canterbury his
Grace: Primate of all England, and Metropolitan: one of her Majesty's most
honorable privy Counsel, my very good Lord and Patron.
IT was thought good by your Grace, whose thoughts are ever good toward the
Church of GOD, that these Sermons of Lauatere should be vulgarly translated, to
the end that all sorts among us, might in this time of Dearth, be directed to
know both the proper cause, and the right use of this Judgment: because for
the most part in such distresses, which is our corrupt nature, we are
accustomed, says Nazianzene, (...), either to account of them lightly, or to
lay them to Gods charge foolishly. Job. 1.22.
Wherein, as your Grace does show your faithful care, as of the High Steward
over God his family, to see that the Household have their meat given them,
Luc. 12.42
not only (...) in their just portion, but also (...), in due season, which is
Saint Paul his rule, that the food ministered unto them, be both seasoned and
seasonable, and a point of as much learning as discretion, Esa. 50.4.
in Esaias his judgment, to have a word in time for him that is weary: these
being the two principal effects desired from Pulpet Divinity, the one Ne
scandalizemus, by our offenses not to provoke Gods judgments: the other, Ioh.
16.1.
Ne scandalizemur, not to be offended when God does judge us: so withal, your
Grace does imitate the examples of the Ancient Fathers and Doctors of the
Church, especially those which were (...), and popular, who taking Saint Paul's
counsel in applying themselves to the Time, Romans 12.11.
preached unto their auditories, For so I read it, (...), not as some do,
(...).
according to Chrysostomes advice, not only (...), points profitable to the
persons present, but also (...), things proper to the occasions offered, that
so their Sermons might be, to use saint Austen his words, both Commodi and
accommodi, as well fitting the Occurrents, as profiting the Hearers. In
Nazianzene his time there was a Dearth, much like to ours at this instant, not
(...), through the barrenness of the ground, but (...), the destruction of the
corn, the hope whereof, in the beginning of the year, through the goodly
seede-time, and temperate Winter, made men's hearts to leap for joy, and the
Barnes, as it were, to enlarge themselves for the receipt of this promised
plenty: but on the sudden, (...), that which the distilling dew of Heaven
had comforted, and brought forth, the showers immoderate and continual
utterly rotted and corrupted, whereof though the Sheaues filled the Mowers
hand, and the Gleaners lap; yet did they not answer either the threshers
labor, or the owners measure: upon which so unexpected calamity, old Gregory
the father was amazedly silent, for deepest conceived griefs are not easily
uttered: but Nazianzene his Son, in the zeal of Gods glory, in care of the
people thus distressed, and in discharge of his own function, in a solemn
Sermon, appointed of purpose, enquired into the causes, which brought on, and
showed the means how to turn away this judgment. The like did Basil in the
like case of Dearth, but unlike to that and ours in respect of the second
causes: this in his time coming of a long drought, ours of never ceasing
rain: then the heaven being as he speaks (...), Caelum nudum sudum.
clear and cloudlesse: but the Sky over us, (...), lowering and Sunlesse.
Which though forreiners and trauailers account no strange thing in our land,
being an Island compassed with the Sea, and therefore Tacitus says, we have
always Triste caelum, and others in their iollitie have reported, that they
could never salute the Sun in England, (happily they stayed as little a while
in the land, as he did in his office, Qui somnum non vidit in consulatu, or
came at that time of the year when Vatinius was Consul in Rome, Macro. Sat.
lib. 2. cap. 3.
when there was neither VVinter, Summer, Spring, nor Autumn: or perhaps loved
their beds as well as he, who never saw the Sun rising or setting.) Yet who
so observed our heavy heavens this present year, the like not remembered by
any man living, by any record remaining, if he savor of any religion, he
cannot ascribe it either to the Climate, or inclination of our Sky, or to the
Vicinitie of the sea, but cry out as they did Exodus 8.19. This is the finger,
if not the heavy hand of God. The practice of these Bishops, and perhaps their
copies, did this learned man Lauatere follow, in framing of purpose three
Sermons proportionable to the number of years wherein his country Switzerland
was oppressed with Dearth: which, when to them nothing can be added, that may
concern either christian policy to prevent, or spiritual comfort and
instruction to endure, or turn off that Affliction, and for the proportion of
time answering to our Dearth, the price of things, for these three years
successiue, expressly inhaunced, I, by your Graces authority and
commandment, have divulgated to the benefit of our people. If any profit
arise thereby, which was your Graces intent, and my endeavor next unto God, let
the thanks redounde wholly to your Grace, being the first and only motion
thereof. My desert is nothing, such a task as this requiring not much labor,
nor any learning. Plat. M^^.
As Socrates once said, (...), my guerdon is sufficient, if in a greater
imployme^t any labor of mine, within my ability and strength, may increase that
your gracious favor, which hitherto your Grace has undeservedly vouchsafed
me. And so with my humble and hearty prayers to God for your Graces health, I
leave your Grace to him who never leaves his.

Lambeth. Nouemb. 9. 1596. Your Graces Chaplain in all humble duty bound. W.
Barlow.

Words mistaken in the printing (gentle Reader) correct thus.
In Page 54. line 7. for Psalm, read Verse. Ibidem, line 14. for Psalm,
read Verse. In Page 56. line 1. for Psalm, read Verse.
THE FIRST Sermon of Dearth and Famine.
2. Chron. Chap. 6. Verses: 26 When heaven shall be shut up, and there shall be
no rain, because they have sinned against thee, and shall pray in this place,
and confess thy Name, and turn from their sin, when thou do afflict them:

27 Then hear thou in heaven, and pardon the sin of thy servants, and of thy
people Israel (when thou have taught them the good way wherein they may walk)
and give rain upon thy land, which thou have given unto thy people for an
inheritance.

28 When there shall be famine in the land, when there shall be pestilence,
blasting, or mildeaw, when there shall be grasshopper, or caterpiller, when their
enemy shall besiege them in the cities of their land, or any plague or any
sickness:

29 Then what prayer and supplication soever shall be made of any man, or of
all thy people Israel, when every one shall know his own plague, and his own
disease, and shall stretch forth his hands toward this house:

30 Hear thou then in heaven, thy dwelling place, and be merciful, and give
every man according unto all his ways, as thou do know his heart (for thou
only know the hearts (...) the children of men).

31 That they may fear thee, and walk in thy ways as long as they live, in
the land which thou gave unto our fathers.


Solomon a King both for wisdom and Religion most renowned, having built and
finished the temple of Jerusalem, consecrated it unto God with his devout and
earnest prayers, in the presence of all the people. Wherein first he
commends and sets out God his Omnipotency, 2. Parts of Prayers. (...).
Basil.
his truth and mercy: then he requesteth that God would make good unto him the
promises made to his father David, and also make known his presence in that
temple so holy, so glorious, and appointed for his woorship, by hearing the
devout prayers of the faithful, which in that place should call upon him.
Particularly, he names six or seven kinds of Calamities, from which it
might please the Almighty to deliver that people crying unto him in that
place. Of these, the third is Drought, to Iewry of all other Countries most
pernicious, so that his request is, that if in this distress they desired
Rain, it might be given them. The fourth is Famine, Dearth of Victuals,
Pestilence, diverse and uncouth diseases, spoil of Corn, siege of Cities, or
any other like kind of distresses, in which he desires both God his attention
to their prayers, and delivery from those plagues. But leaving the particulars
which are in this prayer to be observed, our purpose is, by Gods assistance, to
entreat more largely of Dearth and Famine, a plague, which for these many years
not the wicked only for their punishment, but the godly also have for their
trial felt, being alike grievous and burdensome to all sorts: and it is feared
least in this so great scarcity of all things, in this age so given over both
to covetousness and riot, that the price of victuals will yet arise and
increase, unless our earnest repentance prevent God his wrath. Our heavenly
Father vouchsafe to deal with us not after our deserts, but according to his
unmeasurable mercy. But that ye may understand me in this whole discourse
more fully and plainly,

The Division.
1. I will show from whence comes this plague of Dearth and Famine, namely
from God his judgment.

2 How dreadful a plague it is.

3 Why God does chastise the world with this scourge.

4 How rich and poor should behave themselves in this time of Famine, both at
home and abroad.

Lastly, how God promises his chosen, not only to preserve them in it, but
also to turn it from them.

In the words of Dearth and Famine, How dearth and famine differ.
there is found but very small difference. Dearth is that, when all those
things which belong to the life of man, for example, meat, drink, apparel,
lodging, and other things, are rated at a high price. Famine is, when all
these before named, are not to be got for money, though there be store of
money.

Indeed this distinction rich men find: but the poor and needy feel no
difference between Dearth and Famine. For they in the greatest plenty of
victuals wanting money, are forced to starve and to pine with hunger. There
are two sorts of Famine or Dearth* The kinds hereof.
universal, when in all countries or most there is scarcity of corn:
Particular, when as any one village, city, or country, is punished that way.
Now as all other calamities are sent from God, so this of Dearth and Famine. For
God in his law expressly threatens his people with this plague, for
disobedience to his word. Leuit. 26. he speaks in this sort, verse 14. If ye
will not obey nor do my commandments but despise my laws: verse. 16. you
shall sow your seed in vain. Verse. 19. I will make my heaven iron and your
earth brass. Verse. 26. I will break the staff of your bread, the^ ten women
shall bake your bread in one oven, and they shall deliver your bred again by
weight, and ye shall not be satisfied. Deu. 28. He is more large in this kind:
Verse. 15. If you will not hear the voice of the Lord your God to keep and do
all his commandments, all these curses shall surprise and overtake thee:
Cursed shall thou be in the City, and cursed in the field: cursed shall thy
barn be, and thy store: cursed shall be the fruit of thy land, the increase of
thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep, verse. 33. The fruit of thy land, and
al thy labors, shall a people which thou know not, eat: verse 38. Thou
shall carry out much seed into the field, and shall gather but little in: for
the Grasshoppers shall destroy it. Thou shall plant a Vineyard, and dress it,
but shall neither drink of the wine, nor gather the Grapes, for the worms
shall eat it. Who so reads the writings of the Prophets, shall meet with
many testimonies (some of them in their place we will repeat) whereby God
threatens his people, that unless they repent, he will withdraw their wine,
oil, fruits of trees, fish, flesh, and other things which belong to the
sustentation of man's life. Amos 4.6. Says the Lord, I have given unto you
cleanness of teethe in all your Cities, and scarceness of bread in all your
places, yet have you not returned unto me, says the Lord. I have smitte^ you
with blasting, and mildew, and have caused it to rain upon one City, and not
upon another, etc. Which scripture is an evident demo^stration, that God
sends the scarcity of all things necessary for man's life, and that he
opens and shuts the clouds at his pleasure. And if God should not send it,
his servant the Prophets could not by his instinct set down the time so
exactly (as in both the Testaments they do) when it should come, how long it
should last, when it should cease, and other things of less account then
these, which the wisdom of man can of it self neither foresee, nor conceive.
Joseph. Genesis 41.25. by expounding Pharaos dream of the seven fat and lean
kine, and of the seven full and empty ears, foreshewed from God seven
plentiful, and so many barren years. Elizeus prophesied of the like number
years of famine. 2. Reg. 8..

In the new Testament, Agabus the Prophet by the breath of Gods spirit,
foretold of an universal famine over the whole world. Acts. 11.28. which fell
out true in the reign of Claudius Caesar. These things it pleased God to
reveal to his faithful servants, that in due time they might provide for
themselves, least afterward to the disgrace of the name of Christians, they
should be forced to seek for sustina^ce from the Paganish infidel. True it is
that we read of some Astrologers, which have foretold both of plenty, and
scarcity to come: among the rest Thales, as Diogenes Laettius records, was
accused that through giving him self wholly to the study of Philosophy, he
neglected his family and private gain, whereupon having by natural causes
foreseen that there should be the next year following a great scarcity of
oil, he engrossed into his hands for that present year all the Olive Gardens,
so that in the dearth he sold Oil at what price he list himself. Whereby he
showed that Philosophy will serve for the enriching of a man, if he will so
employ it. Notwithstanding this, and the like predictions of starre-gasing
diuiners, howsoever they argue a possibility, yet no necessity of truth,
having often times been taken tardie. For God is not bound to these second
causes, but eftsoons brings to pass many things besides, and contrary to
the course of nature, so that there is much difference between the
foretellings of the holy Prophets, and the co^iectures of these VVelkin
VVisards, Almanacke makers.
whose Prognostications of every years wars, diseases, heat, cold,
drought, moisture, grounded upon no certainty, prove either manifest
untruths, or coniecturall ghesses, most uncertain conclusions, most certain
collusions. (So that one of their own late Prophets, as being guilty of
their mockeries, has very fitly prefixed before his yearly false oracles, I
would say Almanacks, that speech of David, for the front verse of his
calculations: Let God be true, and every man a liar.) No doubt there is
otherwise good use of the Ephemerides or Almanackes, by them to know the
motion of the Moon, with set feasts, and other things of like kind: as for
the rest of the contents, they are like unto them that make them, always
certain in their uncertainty. Husbandmen also have their kind of
observations, foretelling of tempests, and winds through the whole year, the
assurance whereof is (as we commonly speak) but Hit I miss I: sometimes true,
very often false. For God being the Lord of nature, rules as himself
pleases, without, yea, and against the rules of nature. To which power Solomon
respecting, requesteth of God, that if in time of Famine, the people being
assembled, should pray for plenty, it would please him so to cross or order
those second causes, that the present plague might be removed. Which, if it
should come rather by casual accidents, then by divine ordinance, should not
need the use of prayers, were it never so extreme. And what else meant God
himself, Leuit. 23.10. commanding his people of Israel, that the day after
the Inning of the corn, they should bring a shease for an offering to the
Lord, and shake it before him, and after that, it was lawful for them to eat
bread of new wheat? And again in the feast of Pentecost, two loaves of their
new corn, for a first fruits unto the Lord. verse. 17. In the Autumn also, the
like use in the feast of Tabernacles: verse 39. then by all these ceremonies to
teach them, that plenty arises not by man's labor, sweat, or industry, but
of Gods blessing only, and therefore he alone to be thanked, both for Harvest,
and Vintage, and alone to be prayed unto, to preserve the corn, both on the
ground, and in the barn, and withal to know how to use those blissings to Gods
glory, and their own good. For this is the right use, says Saint Paul, 1.
Tim. 4.4. of Gods creatures, to sanctify them by prayer and thanksgiving.
From whence arises that Christian order of Grace before and after meals,
Grace at meals.
[which custom not to use, I take it to be rather brutish, then heathenish;
for eeuen among the Heathen, as Quintilian witnesses, it was duly and daily
observed: and amongst us never so usually omitted, til that same Cupchallenging
profession came into our land, wherein many, drinking to Health, drink
themselves out of Health, and Reason, out of Wealth and Religion.]
Furthermore, if God please to punish the world with famine and penury, it is
not hard for him to do it, who has them at his beck as we our servants and
attendants. So in the 2. of Kings the 8. Psalm. 105. and else where it is said,
that he calls for a famine, and it comes, though there be great hope of
plenty: again he calls for corn, and it shall come. Eze. 36.29. though no
expected help for provision. Hence is that of Saint Paul in the 4. to the Romans
he calls things that are not, as though they were: such is the power of God.
It has been found by experience, that both Summer and Harvest have answered
our desires, both through the plentiful increase upon the ground, and through
the commodious housing into the barn, insomuch that there has been great hope
of abundance, as well of hay and corn, as other fruits, and so the price to be
reasonable and low, and yet on the sudden beyond all expectation, the yield
has failed, and the price been enhanced, our sins provoking God to curse our
plenty, as it fell out in the years 1525. 30.31. In Heluetia, and this year
1596. with us in England. Again, on the contrary, in the greatest fear of
scarcity, it has pleased him to turn it from us above all hope, to the
effecting of both which, he has many and diverse means. The earth of it self
brings forth no fruit, except such as the curse forces. Diverse means by
which Famine comes:
Gene. 3.18. yea though it be diligently tilled and manured, yet the blessing
of GOD which only makes it fruitful and profitable must be expected. For
neither he that planteth is any thing, nor he that waters, but God which
gives the increase. 1. Corin. 1.3. The land of Israel in old time a most
fertile and lusty ground, in our age they which come from thence, report it to
be very barren and wild almost. In many countries which are very fruitful,
sometimes but few fields are tilled for fear of bordering enemies, oftimes
no field nor vineyard at all husbanded or dressed: for in long continued wars
husbandry is impeached, husbandmen either miserably slain, or carried captive
into other Countries, vines, trees, corn, burnt and consumed, herds and
flocks of cattle and sheep perish, or are driven away, and if peace ensue,
yet these losses must needs leave behind them a great Dearth of victuals. If
the Pestilence be rise, there must needs follow a Famine: for these two are
such fellow like companions, that the Grecians distinguish them but by one
letter, calling the Pestilence (...), (...).
and the Famine (...). (...).
Albeeit the Husbandman labor never so surely, yet is he often frustrate of
his hope in corn, the frost may nippe it, the heat may scorch it, great
raines may drown it, the wind may lay it, many times the years prove
unseasonable: in our time we may remember, that on Midsommer day we have been
feign to use bathes and stoues against the extremity of cold, and on new
years day again, we have dyned abroad in our Tarrises and open Galleries for
the great heat: this is not man's but Gods doing, who has the alteration of
times in his own power: besides this, the climate of the Country may work
much in the soil. Iewry being a hot Region, a drought does quickly burn
the corn: In Heluetia or Switzerland, the hotter and drier the summer, the
Country is the more fruitful, for it is hilly continually, having snow on
the Alps, cooled with springes and rivers, so that the Region being most
temperate, heat less hurts it.

In so much that it is said in that Country in a common Proverb, Their
children are never Sunne-burnt, [of the like nature is England, though not of
the like situation, for it has been observed, and is still kept for a rule,
that a Drought in England, never breeds Dearth, for when the sand helps
the clay, then England cries weale-away. There are over and besides these,
many other things which annoy both corn and trees, as mildeawes, blastings,
field-mice, Locusts, Palmer, and canker worms, Weasiles, and such like
Vermin: the frost also burns the knots and buddes of Trees, for which it is
compared in the Psalm. 147.16: to burning ashes. The Southwest and Northren
winds, and also thick and duskish clouds, choke and kill the blossoms, and
the unripe fruits of trees, and it falls out often, that in the prime of the
year, the young leaves are eaten away, and the bough left as seared and bare
as a dry broom, and if fruit decaie, there must needs be a penury of bread:
for in our Country, fruit is counted the best sustenaunce and the staff of
bread. When our Infantes cry for bread, we can easilye please and satisfy
them with an Apple or Pear: but when fruits fail us, then what remains? an
Apple being sold as dear as the weight thereof in bread. Our ancestors
were wont to say, that if the wood, that is, trees and vines, did underprop
the corn, it was a sign of a plentiful year: for bread and fruit is our
principal nourishment. But of all other, Locusts.
the greatest enemies to corn in many Countries are Locustes. And Grasshoppers,
of which both Scriptures and profane stories makes so often mention, sometime
seen so thick in the air, that they have darkened the Sun, and lighting on the
earth, they have covered at once many acres of ground, devouring all the fruit
within that compass, upon which loss has followed always extreme Famine,
and often times also a dreadful Pestilence: one example ye have in the tenth of
Exodus, of the hurt they did in Egypt, Pliny writes, that in the Country of
Cyrene, open war was proclaimed against them, first to destroy their eggs,
then their young ones, and then the Locustes themselves: Saint John in his
Revelation, compares the troop of Monks to the Locusts, not only for their
huge number, but for their insatiable ravening and devouring, what by
encroaching and importunity they can get. Joel. 2.25. calls the Locusts Gods
Great Army, for though they be but little in sight, yet no human force can
resist them, when God sends them: sooner an army of men may be discomfited,
then they destroyed. With them was Heluetia plagued, in Anno. 1364. and
Belgium, 1548. and in Polonia, 1335. In the reign of Cassimer the second,
such an huge company of Locustes appeared so dense and thick, that the Sun
could not be seen. And falling to the ground, they lay so thick, that they
covered the horse footelockes as they were feedyng: after which, followed a
wonderful Dearth. And so again in Anno. 1542. they oppressed both Polonia and
Silesia, in so great heaps, that the inhabitants, though in vain, went about
to scare them away with the ringing of belles, sound of trumpettes, and ringing
of basins. As great hurt also has been done to the fruits of the earth, Hayle.
both by hail, sometime falling from heaven as big as Hens Eggs, killing
under them both man and beast: examples are not scarce in that kind,
lamentable and late experiences do confirm it: as also by storms, tempests,
whirlewindes, and inundations, either rotting the seed, or pinching the blade,
or shaking the ears of corn, and ouerturning sometimes whole trees. Causes no
doubt both of private and public Famine.

But here we meet with a question often discussed and much debated, both by
learned men and Idiottes: Whether Sorserers or Witches, Faries or Spirits,
Whether Coniurers can raise storms?
(call them by what name you will) can raise any tempests, or bring down such
Hayle as we often see?

To which we answer with a distinction, that as they have some, so they have
no absolute nor self sufficient power to hurt, for even Satan himself (whose
power otherwise is great, whose bondslaues and vassalles these wretched varlets
are) cannot hurt either man or beast, either how or when him list, much less
these accursed slaves of his, can have the air and winds at commandment,
but GOD in his righteous judgment giving him leave, what may he not do? work
wonders in the world, shake the heavens, trouble the air, frushe the earth,
and turn all things topside totherway, a passing nimble spirit he is
doubtless, and a most speedy woorkeman, so that out of hand, even in the
twinckeling of an eye, he will use his leave granted, to some mischief. The
Hogs without leave (of God the Father) Matthew the 8. Chapter, he could not
possess, but no sooner had he obtained leave, but presently he tumbleth them
headlong into the sea.

The Egyptian Sorserers wrought incredible woonders, imitating Moses and Aaron,
before Pharaoh. Known and memorable is that story of Job to this purpose, to
show that this Behemoth being curbed, he is disabled, but if the reins be
given him, there is no ho with him* and yet has he his bounds set him, which
he cannot pass in any wise. Whereupon Origin on that place breaks out in
this wise. How sweet is thy kindness O King of heaven, how mighty is thy
power, how glorious thy majesty o eternal God? How greatly comfortest thou
those which fly unto thee, that the Aduersay of Mankind has no power over
any creature, but that which is granted him by permission? Neither is he
permitted but where GOD does know it may make for the evidence of faith, for
the trial of constancy, and for a pledge of a glorious reward: which we
knowing, let us with care and fear fly unto God, and with instance of prayer,
and sincerity of heart, cry unto him, to deliver us from the cruel assaults,
and from the subtle snares of the wicked, and suffer us not to be tempted
above our strength. Thus far Origin,

Now to our purpose, these Sorcerers having couenanted with the Devil, he
uses their malice to his purpose: he deuiseth for them, and prescribes to
them Medicines, Drugs, Poisons, Exorcismes, wherewith they may hurt men,
children and beasts, infect pastures, deceive the senses, iugle cunningly,
work incredibly, but not without his assistance. Who though they be thus
coniured together, yet holding Saint Paul's ground (If God be with us, who can
be against us?) what need we fear? For this is sure, that though they have
both ability, and will, yet have they no authority more then limited,
especially against the faithful, which are ever under the shadow of the
Almighty. But for the raising of storms, the congealing of hail, the
whirling of winds, we utterly deny them any power that way, because holy
writ attributes the raising and ruling of these tempests to God alone. Why
but themselves willingly without any torture, and boldly without fear, auow
that they can trouble the air, and disturb the elements at their pleasure.
But I say as boldly, that this (as many other their assertions) is but a
Devilish illusion. For Satan by natural reason, and by his quick conceit,
not only knows the causes, places, and effects of tempests, but also
executes partly with, and partly against his will, the just judgment of Gods
indignation: for he is (says Origin) Gods Executioner. Now he knows
these circumstaunces, having his commission with his leave granted, presently
goes to his accomplices, puts them in mind of their bargain, promises now to
wreake their malice, as they desire, teaches them the means how to effect
it, and sometimes forces them by violence unto it. And thus those malicious
Miscreants go to their business, bring their purpose to pass, and rejoice in
the fatal issues of their accursed Art: And now has this old Deceyuer
obtained that he would, not only in binding these VVretched Souls, as with a
threefold Cord, unto his own will, but also in persuading others to ascribe
any Calamity, Dearth, or Penury, not to Gods Judgment, but to the power and
malice of these Accursed Caitifes.

So that much crying out there is to have them burnt and hanged, no word in the
mean time of remorce for sins, much less of amendment of life. All which I
speak not to excuse their fault, or to mitigate their punishment: but to deny
them, and to prove that God only is the author of these plagues on earth.
This conceyt fitteth more properly the Paganism Romans, who were of opinion,
that men's Corn and Fruit might be enchaunted, and bewitched, to which purpose
they made laws against such charms in their twelve tables. He that
enchaunteth Corn, let him die the death. Again: Bewitch not by any Charm any
other man's Crop. This is the Devils iugling, to persuade men that these Varlets
are able to do that in very deed, which they have no power to do, nor
himself but by Gods leave. And yet admit these old accursed Hags could move
such hurly burly in the air, yet it must be by Gods permission, in judgment
for our sins, which we breaking off by repentance, the cause is removed, and
so these wretches not to be feared.

Often times again it happens that the cause of Dearth may come by continual
Rain, the seed perishing by too much wette: Rain.
[as it happened this year 1596. in England, wherein God having opened his
bottles, as himself speaks, Job. 38.37. has made the clouds which should
drop fatness, Psalm. 65.12. to pour down the moisture of rottenness. Joel.
1.17. so that sowing Wheat, we have reaped thorns, Iere. 12.13.] It may hap
also, that the Corn being ripe and forward unto Harvest, even ready for the
sickle, may be either burnt up, or mowed down by the enemy, as was the
Philistines by Samson, Iud. 15. or being in the barn, yet it may not perhaps
answer the hope of increase, either under the flaile, or in the dough, or in
the Oven: or else from Heaven or other mishappe be set on fire, or which is
another, and a greater mischief in the securest peace, in the greatest plenty
of all things, yet are there Usurers, Monopolists, Ingrossers, The vermin of a
realm.
Regratours, Forestallers, Transporters, buying and hoording up all kind of
Grain, that when the husband-mans store is spent, they may sell it out at what
price they list, and so wax rich by other men's misery. Albeeit sometimes GOD
preuenteth them either by bringing in of plenty, not expected, or by causing
their Corn to become fustie, and fit for no other use but the Dunghill: yea,
sometimes though there be no want of victuals, yet in the siege of Towns, and
Cities, the inhabitaunts having their passages stopped by the enemy, are
forced unless they will starve, to eat meats unclean and unsavory, or
else to yield to their foes mercy. Railing Rabshakah threatens, to drive the
Citizens of Jerusalem to that strait, that they should be compelled to drink
their own piss.

Wars also make a great scarcity, VVarres.
both for the present, and afterward, all the Corn either being wasted with
fire, or trampled down with Horses, or carried away by the Enemy, yea, if
there be but a rumor of War, the greater Towns both keep in their own
Corn, and lay up what they may get elsewhere, till the certainty of peace
be concluded. Neither are Kings and Princes blameless in this case of
Famine, who though their charge be to provide for the good of the people, yet
they utterly neglect them, rather impouerishing their subjects, yea, even in
the dearest years, burthening them with taxes and subsidies: the Court is
costly, and will be gallant: horses, hou^ds, hauks, harlots, iesters, must be
maintained, who wrings for it? the poor subject, who must rather be undone,
then the Court should want: from whence follows this inconvenience, that the
people being thus exhausted, and drunk up by these sucking subsidies and
exactions, many of them become desperate, and utterly neglect their family at
home, and setting the Hares head to the Goose gibblets, and all that they have
at a mumme chance, will rather loosely mispend it themselves, then thus to be
made spunges, and that which they have to be squeesed from them by crushing
Courtiers. But be it that these burdens and impositions be lessened, yet even
where there is greatest liberty, and most ease from them, there is many times
a Dearth. What is the reason? Riot, Surfeit, Pride, coffeehouse with their
private state. Not noble and rich men only, but the poor artizans must
forsooth be fed daintily, clad richly, furnished sumptuously, what exceeding
cost, how exquisit dishes, what strange devises, what far fetched wines must
now be in ordinary banquets. This was our ancestors praise, to keep great
houses for entertainment of strangers, their neighbors and friends they
enuited rather to maintain amity, then to procure surfets. Cards and Dice,
the very baine of any family, has brought many to penury. Drinking and
Quaffing, the direct pathway to beggary: these cup-shotten suertiships, and pot
smitten bargains, have undone many men, though at other times being sober and
wary enough. But of all other, the high roode way to Penury, is Venery: Venery.
these strumpets are so chargeable says Solomon, Prou. 5.10, and insatiable,
ever asking to have, never ceasing to crave. Plautus in his Commedy named
Truculentus, compares them very ellegantly to the sea, It swalloweth that you
give, and never cries enough, give what you will it is never seen again,
either by the giver, or of the receiver. Daintily the whores must be fed,
costly the bastardes, though closely, be maintained, the Pandars and Baudes
must have their fees, and the neighbors mouths must be stopped, lest that which
was seen through the chinkes, be revealed in the streets: and yet which is
strange, these so profuse and prodigal companions, that spare no cost abroad
upon their Courtezants, at home with their Wife and Children fare hardly, and
seem great husbands. Herod at the first dashe would part with half his
kingdom to please his dancing Damsel.

True is that which Solomon speaks, Prouer. 29.3. He that feeds harlots
wastes his substance. A fit text for this purpose and for these times, this
sin being as our Lands Locust, a principal cause of our great want. Further,
there may be a ready way to penury by ill huswiferie, VViues.
when wives being made for the comfort and company of their husbands, either
by importunate brawling chide them out of doors, and so make them spend
abroad lauishly, which they might save at home if they might do it quietly, or
by their gallant bravery and furniture eat them out of house and home, or by
their badde huswifery bring them to lay the key under the door, and to
forsake their home: such quarrelling and squandring Dames, Solomon Prou. 19.
and 27: compares fitly to a dropping house: and we in a common proverb say of
them that have such wives, That a storm of Hail is fallen into their Kitchen.
[A man were better let his Pottage burn his lips, then to have such blastes
to cool his broth. Children.
] Children also untoward and retchlesse, may work their friends want, by
deceiving and purloyning from them both money and grain, spending it leaudly,
and running into debt purposely: laying the payment thereof upon their parents
bags, by which theeuish riot, they bring both their parents and themselves
unto Penilesse bench. But what is he that can reckon up all the causes and
means of public and private Penury? If God happily send some ple^tifull
years, yet many forgetting their last want, lay up nothing again a dear year,
hoping that will never come, and so lash it out and lay it on, as though they
were borne for nothing else but to eat bread and break orders: but when a
scarcity comes, having neither corn for market, nor store for household,
they prove scarcely able to provide bread, and to pay their rent. The great
increase of people, the abundance of all sorts of Artificers, the diverse
cosonages, and conny-catching deceits, may cause a scarcity. But now to these
mischiefs, if either the corn be unwholesome, or yield not well, (which is Gods
curse) then may it prove a Famine, and very dangerous. God in his law
threatens that he will break the staff of bread, Staff of bread.
that is, bread shall not nourish them that eat it. For as old and diseased
folk leaning upon staves to uphold them, if you take the^ away they must needs
fall: so unless God do give the force of nourishment we cannot be satisfied:
as on the contrary, if he bless our meats, a little shall suffice us, being
able, if it please him, to do it without any outward means. Deuteronomy. 8. a place
cited by our Savior, in that his great temptation, Mat. 4. Man lives not by
bread only, but by every word which comes out of the mouth of God. By which
Word, some understand the ordinary meat which God has appointed to feed us.
Other expound it, the will and decree of God which he has revealed, namely,
that he will preserve the course of nature, and norish his creatures: so that
the sense may be double. First, that God which now gives us bread for
sustenance, may if it please him feed us otherwise. Secondly, not to attribute
the virtue of norishment to the creature of bread, but to his secret grace
whereby he blesses it to our strength. What ye breaking of the staff of bread
is, has been observed in the time of Famine, when men eating much are nothing
satisfied. Some lay the fault upon men's covetousness and overmuch sparing, they
say, yt in such times they which be masters of families, do too curiously
note, and as it were reckon every bit they put in their mouths, and take for ye
time a more strait account of their expenses then ordinary. This I confess is
some cause, for what will not pinch penny misers do? but if we search the cause
more narrowly, we shall find it to be ye curse of God which takes away ye
strength from the bread: and so from drink too, which does not always slake
the thirst, as it falls out in Agues and other hot diseases. Neither has
Apparel any long lasting power, but will be tottred presently (for even the
dura^ce of apparel is Gods blessing, as by ye example of the Israelites it may
appear, whose shoes and attire was not worn bare, nor torn, for so long time
in ye wilderness). There are many which go all day long lined with furs, and in
the night are hapt with many couerings, and yet are little the warmer. These and
the like plagues does God by Aggi threate^ to the wicked: and so in a plenty
you see God can send a scarcity. Thus have I generally and largely run over
these things, by which you see yt God uses diverse outward means to work a
dearth and famine: causes natural and artificial, their malice and fraud, the
covetousness and carelessness of men. He rules all things which are, at his
command and beck. For as the common enemy cannot either invade a land, or
destroy the corn, so neither can vermin, frost, hail, nor tempests, the
fruits, unless God please. For confirmation whereof, read the Psalm. He
commands the snow to come upon the ground, and the rain of the winter,
even the showers of his strength: and Psalm, 146. which covers the heavens
with clouds, and prepares rain for the earth, and brings forth grass upon
the mountains, and herb for the use of men, etc: and Psalm. 147. which
feeds thee with the flower of wheat, he sends forth his word upon earth,
and his word runs very swiftly. He gives snow like wool, and scatters
the frost like ashes, and sends his Ice like morsels: who is able to abide
his frost? he sends his word and melts them, he blows with his wind,
and the waters flow: and Psalm. 148. Fire, Hail, Snow, VVind, Storm,
fulfilling his word. Mountains and all his fruitful trees, and all Cedars.
Beasts and all cattle, worms and feathered fowls: and Ier. 14.22, Are there
any among the vanities of the Gentiles, that can give rain? or can the heavens
give storms? is it not thou o Lord our God? therefore we will wayt upon thee,
for thou have made all these things. Too many there are who think Famine and
Dearth to come by chance, they say there has always been an intercourse of
things, War follows peace, and Dearth plenty: and this interchaunge shall
hold on to the worlds end. But we out of the scriptures have learned, that
nothing comes by chance, but even the least things are guided by Gods
providence. Indeed in respect of us, many things may be said to come by
chance, but not in respect of God. Christ himself says, that a Sparrow, for
whose safety no statute prouides, lying open to the net of any that will lay
for her, cannot fall to the ground without his will, even the hairs of our
head are numbered. Yea the Pagans and Gentiles, believed that God defended both
cattle and corn, and guided the seasons, and ruled the storms, only herein
they sinned, in attributing to other inferior and supposed Gods, this great
power of the true God, in worshipping Ceres for corn, Bacchus for wine, Flora
for flowers, Robigo against blasting and vermin, and Apollo Nomius, or
Pastoral for their pasturs and medows: to all which and more then these, they
dedicated certain feasts, on which they made their prayers according to their
several powers: they had also their sacrifices called Amber talia, as Festus
deriues the word, because they went in Processio^ about their arable grounds,
called by the Latins, Arua. But we though we use in good policy, and in a godly
acknowledgement from whom we receive these blessings, Perambulatians.
the like Perambulations, have learned out of holy scripture, and by that
anniuersary Christian practice do confess, that God alone both gives and
withdraws fodder from cattle, how much more too and from man, for whom he
has made both beasts and other creatures. So that as long as men are
persuaded, that ple^tie and want comes not from God, they cannot either by
repentance turn to him, thus chastning the^, nor will they with patience abide
his punishment: and therefore it concerns us greatly to know from whence both
do come. And so much of the first part. It follows in the second place, The
second part.
to show how fearful and horrible a plague this is, which may be proved by
many reasons and arguments, specially if it endure long. When God gave David
his choice of three evils, Pestilence, Famine, the Sword, he chose the first
as the easyest to be endured. For many which be infected with the plague,
give up their souls to GOD, very speedily, and so are quickly rid from many
cares and troubles of this life, and from the dreadful panges of death. They
that die in war are not long tormented: but they which are pinched with
Famine, hoping every hour for succor, are ever pining away, till in the end
they die a lingering and a miserable death. Very true is that speech of Jeremy,
It was better with them that they were slain with the sword, then with them
that died for hunger, because these did starve being consumed by the
barrenness of the earth. As hunger is named an Inuentor of many Arts, (the
poorer sort devising many ways to sustain their life honestly) so is it also
said to be an il Counselor, egging men on to Larsonies, Thefts, Murders,
Vsuries, Deceites, and other horrible sins. Horace calls Poverty,
Impudent, because there is nothing which it dares not attempt. Therefore that
prayer of the wise man was very good: Pro. 30.7. Two things have I required of
thee deny me them not before I die. Remove far from me vanity and lies. Give
me not poverty nor riches: feed me with food convenient for me, least I be
full and deny thee, and say, who is the Lord? or least I be poor and steal,
and take the name of my God in vain. There have bin many rich men, who though
they have been houen and lifted up with their heaps of riches, yet have not
denied their God: notwithstanding such is the infirmity of man, that unless
God by his word should restrain us, wealth would make us insolent: so there
are many who endure their poverty patiently, abstain from stealth, resist all
inordinate desires, yet such is the corruption of our nature, that when hunger
gripeth us, we think any thing to be lawful for us, by theft, lying, or any
Malengine to maintain this life, and make no excuse for any such sin, but our
Bellies want. If any man should see tradesmen, husbandmen, laborers, some of
them stout and strong, and able men to do good service, wa^dring in the
streets, having no work to do, whereby to keep soul and body together: and
should withal hear the scritches, outcries, and lamentations of women,
children and men, for want of food, would it not make his heart to bleed,
unless it were harder the^ iron or the Adamant? Much more would it grieve him
to see his own family brought to that distress: and that which is here to be
reproved, in this so great penury of all things, scarce will the rich set the
poor on work, nor hire the^ to labor, although they ask but their meat and
drink for their wages: so that many being ashamed of their extreme poverty,
dissemble it as long as they can, dare not co^plain of it to their neighbors
and friends, and in this distres like bees they feed upon their own good [or
rather like Snailes live upon the air, and their own moisture, and so consume
away, as David speaks, and in doing nothing, come to nothing, says Austen]
baking themselves bread of oats and bran (fit for horses and not men) borowing
money here and there, laying their garments and furniture to pledge, their
houses and land to morgage, and what will not poverty drive me^ to? they fall
into ye mouths and teeth of biting and devouring usurers, who under a show of
licking the^ whole, such out even their heart blood, without al hope of any
remedy. The Egiptians, as scripture records it. Ge. 47.20. morgaged their lands
to Pharao, for the time of famine: and in ye 5. of Nehe. they which returned
from Babilo^, complained that they were forced to sell their children for want.
Famine also co^straineth many good and godly men to leave their country, and to
seek into strange places for sustenance. Abraham. Genesis 12. fled from Canaan
into Egypt. Isaac. Ge^. 26. from Gerar to Abimel. but ye god in his dream
warned him not to go into Egypt, but into the place that he should choose.
So Jacob with his son in his age, fled to his son Joseph into Egypt for
food and succor. Elimelech, Ruth 1. with his wife and children left Israel,
and came to Moab. Elizeus 2. Reg. 8. wills the Sunnamitesse woman to go into an
other country till the Famine there ceased, which should last seven years.
Profane stories are herein plentiful, as also our modern and domestical
Chronicles. It is not long, since many, and they good men, have wandered from
one place to another to relieve their hunger: and as many being brought to
extreme poverty, with their wives and children have been forced to beg from
door to door, in Cities, Towns, and Villages, but especially in Country
Towns, where commonly is most want, who having once followed this idle trade,
can hardly be reclaimed to work, though there be many indeed that cannot for
want of strength, do any kind of laboring work, their flesh scarce
cleaving to their bones. Very patheticall and pitiful is the complaint of
Jeremy. Lam. 4.4. The tongue of the sucking child cleaves to the roof of
his mouth for thirst: the young children ask bread, but no man breaks it
unto them. verse 7. Her Nazarites were purer then the snow, and whiter then the
milk: they were more ruddie in body then the red precious stones, they were
like polished Saphir. But now their visage is blacker then a cole: they can not
know them in the streets: their skin cleaves to their bones: it is withered
like a stock. Take an example or two for perspecuitie. Anno. 1527. When the
French made war for the recovery of Millaine, within the territories
thereof, so horrible was the spoil of corn through the continuance of war,
that a dreadful Famine ensuing, the price of grain rose to an unreasonable
rate. Co^uoy of vittails was sent from Strawsborow and Heluetia, to succor
them, else had they al died generally, very many having bin already famished to
death, as that doleful spectacle in the streets argued, where you might see
many fall down dead, some of them with herbs and grass in their mouths. At
which sight, our men being sore astonished, left their camp, and returned
home, some of them for ever forswearing wars, least they should be forced to
see the like spectacle. Ann. 157: and some years following, in Austria, and
through Germany, many were starued, and so in Italy too, where many rather
choosing any torment then that death, offered themselves to be Gallie slaves
very willingly, submitting themselves to that torture which is laid upon
none but Rascalles and Thieves, Anno 1572. in Occitana, and along the Sea
Coasts, a grievous Famine arose, though the Region in it own nature be very
fruitful, insomuch that every where you shall see starued Karcasses lie in
the streets: and in these cases it falls out often, that Mice, Dogs, Horses,
Asses, chafe, pels, hides, sawdust, are used for good sustenance, and at last
man's flesh, yea, (which is not to be spoken without trembling) the mothers
have eaten for very hunger their own children, as in the siege of Samaria, in
the first siege of Jerusalem under Nabuchodonozer, and in the last, under
Vespasian and Titus. How fearful this is, all mothers can easily conjecture,
and he that will read Josephus. lib. 6. cap. 11. de bello Iud. and Eusebius
which has borrowed it from Josephus, if his heart yarne not, it is brawnie.
Such was the Famine which the Inhabitants of Sancerra. 1573. endured, more
grievous then that of Sagu^tum, which for the extremity thereof is come into a
proverb. And such also was the Famine in France, Anno. 649, in the fourth
year of Clodouey his reign, and in the year, 839: and in Germany, Anno.
808. a dreadful Famine possessed the whole country, at which time Hatto the
Bishop of Moguntu^, executed that villainy upon the poor country swanes, asking
him bread. Vrspergensis writes, that the great Famine which befell, Vnno. 898.
made men to eat and devour one another: and so in Anno. 1010. a general Famine
was over the whole world: and An. 1062: an earthquake, and huge hailstones fell:
great dearth of vittaile, and a strange famine, was felt in our countries of
Heluetia, which punishment of late God has renewed, this superstitious (or
rather this irreligious) world deserving to be visited by no plague more
gentle. In the Holy war which the Christians had in Syria, in all places of
the world there was a great Famine, especially in the Christian army, as in an
example or two you shall see. When Antiochia was besieged by the Sarracenes,
such an intolerable Famine followed their plenty, that hardly they abstained
from man's flesh. Otho Frising. li. 7. ca. 4 let them note this by the way,
which think that the mean to avoid a dearth, is to press Soldiers out of
the land. About Prage in Bohemia. An. 284. many died through extreme hunger:
and Anno. 1313. through Boheme and Polonia, as Vrspergensis out of the 4. Book
of the Polonian Chronicles describes, Cap. 8. A Famine more cruel then any
war, raged in those two Countries, and daily increased, lasting three full
years, absuming many men, parents slaying their children, and they their
parents, to relieve their hunger: some did not stick to take the flesh of them
that were executed on the gallows, to stay the rage thereof, Wolves set upon
those they met, and devoured them, though they carried Gunns and Bows for
their defense. Oftentimes it falls out, that prisoners condemned to die, with
Famine, have eaten of their own flesh so far as they could reach, before they
could die: many also have had no other remedy to prevent it, but by slaying
themselves. And lastly, that which makes this plague more dreadful, it
seldom or never comes without a pestilence. And so much of the horror of
this fearful punishment. Now why God does punish men with this so terrible a
judgment, we will show in the next Sermon. God of his mercy turn our hearts
to him, that he may turn this plague from us. Amen.

The end of the first Sermon.
THE SECOND SERMON.
IN any public calamity, whereto mankind is subject, two things are
principally to be considered. First, from whom. Secondly, for what cause it
comes, wherein the judgment of the world respecting the second causes, rather
then the first and principal, is so foully corrupted, that men know not well,
either where to ask counsel, or how to behave themselves being surprised with
any misery. Among all other, Famine and Dearth of vittails is not the least, of
which we now entreat, having in our first sermon proved both by testimonies
and examples of scripture, the true, first, and efficient cause to be God. I
am he, (says God of himself) by Esaias. 45.7. which make peace, and create
evil, of punishment, not of sinning. Natural courses, and men's malice being
no causes, but outward means which God uses, stirring up the wicked to
chastise us (not by inspiring their malice into them, but using the malice
which is in them for his judgment, and our chastisement.) Secondly, we have
there described the miseries and mischiefs of that dreadful plague. Now in
the third place it follows, to enquire what should move so pitiful and
merciful a God to afflict men, good and bad, old and young, Countries and
Nations, with this tertible scourge. All men indeed feel this heavy hand of
Gods wrath, and the complaint is general and common: but wanting a right
judgment being more blockish then the bruit beast, neither feel nor
understand, either in the motives that provoke it, or the means how to be
freed from it: taking the wrong cause for the right, and the second for the
first. The common multitude with one consent lay all the fault upon the
oppression of Landlordes enhauncing their rentes, the malice of Farmers
grudging without cause, unmercifulness of Usurers grinding without pity, the
intolerable licenses of Monopoles and Solesales, engrossing without measure,
the covetousness of hoorders keeping up their grain without mercy: (all
which no doubt, are principal outward means whereby God does bring it to
effect) but of corruption in manners, of vices and vileness of life, of the
Immunitie and Impunitie of sinning, without shame, without restraint not one
word. Therefore as the Physician hitting upon the right humor and cause of
the disease, does with better judgment and happier success, apply his
physic: so we iumping upon the true causes of this so great a malladie,
shall more easily know both what to do in this extremity, and how to avoid
it. First therefore let us lift up our eyes to God punishyng, and then enquire
what mooues him to it, so shall we come to know our selves the better. But here
also we must take heed of judging amiss, entertaining false causes for the
true. For in this and the like calamities, the whole fault for the most part is
laid upon Religion. Certain Miscreants and Varlets, crying out of the Pulpit,
in the open Market, at their public Feasts, that the new Religion (for so they
entitle the preaching of the Gospel) is the only cause of this Dearth. Since
there has been a separation, and that the Saints departed, have not their Due
honor, and the Old manner of worshipping God (for so they call their Romish
superstition) is abandoned, the world has been still in a Deluge of Calamity:
from which, forsooth, we should be freed, if we had kept the profession of our
forefathers. Thus they speak, to the end they may make the world to despise
and despite us: but if they list, they may remember that it is not long since
their Professors have tasted of this smart whip, as well as we: some examples
you have in the former Sermon. Neither is this quarrel strange or fresh. For
in the reign of Ahab, there was a long Famine in Israel, at which the King
being moved, in his fury meeting Eliiah the Prophet, he told him that it
was he which troubled Israel, meaning by his speech, that he caused the Dearth
which so troubled the land (in which sense, Jonathan said, his Father Saul
troubled the people, when he willed them to abstain from meat) but Eliiah
answered boldly, It is not I, but thou and thy fathers house, because you have
left the Commandment of the Lord, and have followed Baall. So afterward Ioram
the King laid the cause of the Famine upon Elizeus, which was so great that
mothers eat their own children, the King in a rage sent his servant to kill
the Prophet, but being forewarned of God, he let him alone. The same was the
usual objection wherewith the Christians were vpbraided, as Tertullian,
Cyprian, Arnobius, and other which wrote Apologies for the Christians witness.
For as often as God punished the world with Frost, Hayle, Famine, War,
Pestilence, Inundations, or any other general and open calamity, presently
they cried out, Away with these Christians from the earth, to the beasts with
them, that they may be devoured, cast them to the Lions, these sacrilegious
wretches, for they are not worthy to live. Euse. lib. 9. cap. 7. describes
the edict and proclamation, Maximinus set up against them, wherein he
declares, that all the miseries which the world hitherto had suffered, came
upon the earth only for that pernicious and detestable error of these vile
caitifs, (so he called the Christians) and withal boasted, that therefore in
his time there was neither Pestilence nor War, because he continued the
worship of his Gods, and put the Christians to tortures and punishment. Albeit
not long after, all those mischiefs at once ouertooke and overwhelmed him,
quelling and confuting that his impudent and rebellious blasphemy against the
eternal God. So that no man must marvel that profane and wicked hel-hounds
which hate the truth and the light of the Gospel, should belch out such
blasphemy, since that Christ himself foretold his Apostles of these things to
come. The holy scripture does in plain terms set down, that the Dearth of
Victuals is the scourge of God, for the manifold and enormous sins,
principally, Atheism and Idolatry. Some places we have cited before, let us
add more to them. Leuit. 26.14. If you will not obey me nor do my
commandments, you shall sow your seed in vain. So does God speak, Deuteronomy.
28. and cap. 11. Psalm. 10. The land whither thou go to possess it, is not
as the land of Egypt, from whence you came, where thou sowest thy seed, and
wateredst it with thy feet as a garden of herbs, but the land whither you go
to possess it, is a land of mountains and valleys, drinking the water of the
rain of heaven, etc. Psalm. 16: but beware lest your heart deceive you, and
lest your heart turn aside and serve other Gods, and worship them: and so the
anger of the Lord be kindeled against you, and he shut up the heaven that
there be no rain, and that your land yield not her fruits, and so you
perish quickly from the good land which the Lord gives you: and Deutero.
32.23. Among other plagues which he threateneth unto Idolatry, he says: I
will spend my plague upon them, I will bestow mine arrows upon them, they
shall be burnt with hunger. The same does the other Prophets also, Esd. 3.1:
threatens Judah and Jerusalem, to take from them the stay and staff of Bread
and Water: that is, though they should have plenty of both, yet it should
have no power either to slake their hunger, or quench their thirst. See more in
him, Cap. 24. Jeremy cap. 5.15, Lo I bring a Nation upon you from a far,
which shall eat up your Harvest and your Bread, your Sons and your
Daughters, your Sheep and Bullockes, your Vines and Figge-trees. The causes
hereof, he particularly recites in the sixth Chapter, which I would wish
you to read as very fitly appertaining to our time. In the 14. Chapter,
which is his Sermon he made in that time of Famine, he sets down the
cause thereof briefly: Psalm. 7. Their sins, iniquities, and rebellions. The
false prophets in the time of Famine, promises them fruitful and plentiful
years, and when there was plenty, they bid them not to fear any Dearth in
that so great abundance, and the Jews believed them, for such is the nature of
man quickly to harken, and easily to believe them that promise prosperity.
Whereupon the Prophet tells them that they shall be sure to perish both with
Famine and Pestilence, say the other what they will, in these words: By Sword
and Famine, shall those Prophets be consumed. And the people to whom these
prophets do prophecy, shall be cast out in the streets of Jerusalem, because
of the Famine and the Sword. The very same doctrine did Ezechiel preach in
Babylon, which Jeremy did in Judah and Jerusalem, that for their Idolatry and
grievous sins, many of them should be given over by God to the Plague and
Famine, both they which were already, and they also which should return home
afterward. In the 4. Chapt. he is more vehement and plain, where God wills
him to pourtray the City of Jerusalem upon a brick, to besiege it, and the
whole time of the siege to eat bread made of wheat, barley, beans, lentiles,
millet and fetches, and that by weight, and drink water by measure, and
insteede of coals to bake his bread with, to take man's, or bullockes dung. By
all which, as himself interprets it, Verse. 16, it was meant that the force of
nourishing should be taken from the bread, and that their bread should be given
them by weight, and their water by measure, and that they should want fuel
necessary in Jerusalem. For whiles Cities are besieged, and in defensed places
by Garrisons kept, if Famine or Dearth be feared, all the corn is usually
carried to the General and Captains, which serve it out to every man by
weight and measure: and so water also in dry places, for in many vplands the
soldiers have been constrained to fetch their water by force and arms, as in
Jerusalem: the cause of all this he yields in the end of the Chapter, Bread
and water shall fail them, and they shall consume away because of their
iniquity. The same he repeateth almost word for word in the 12. Chapter, he
said, Thus says the Lord: Verse 7. Because you have not walked in my statutes,
nor kept my judgments, Verse 10. The fathers shall eat their sons, and the
sons shall eat their fathers, etc. This was a just judgment of God, they
contrary to God his express commandment, sacrificed their sons to Moloch,
(that is he whom the Gentiles call Saturnus) so that this was a punishment by
Retaliation, a like plague, for the like offense. And a little after, ver. 16. I
will send upon you the evil Arrows of Famine, which shall be for your
destruction, and I will increase the Famine upon you, and will break the
staff of bread. By the Arrows of Famine, he means the Canker and Palmer
worms, the grasshoppers and vermin, immoderate heat, unseasonable weather, and
showers: as also those walking Vermin, and those Tempests of a common wealth,
Monopolists, Ingrossers, Cornhoorders, who had rather the corn should wax
fustie in their garners, then to sell it out at a reasonable rate. And chap. 6.
verse 11. Thus says the Lord, smite the earth with thy hand, and stretch
forth with thy foot and say, Alas, for all the wicked abhominatio^s of the
house of Israel, for they shall fall by the sword, by the Famine, and by the
pestilence. And in the 7. chap. he again foretells of a great affliction to
ensue for the abominable wickedness of the la^d: Without the sword, and within
plague and Famine. And a little after he speaks unto Richmen, to whom also he
threateneth the like punishment, who (like unto the wealthy Cormullions of our
time) increase their wealth by others want, some of them abusing the
barrenness of the earth, and the Dearth of grain, to their own gain: other
feeding and faring most riotously, when as the poor did starve most rufully:
Their silver and their gold cannot deliver them in the day of the wrath of the
Lord God, they shall not satisfy their souls, neither fill their bowels: for
this ruin is for their iniquity. Rich men of all others, think themselves
best armed against all dangers that may happen either to soul or body,
Prouer. 10.15. The rich man's goods are his strong city: that is, as soldiers
trust to their munition, so do they to their wealth, which often fails them:
for the time may come wherein they may feel the like want which the poor
distressed do, whom they so little regard: for in the siege and expugnation of
Cities, the Rich usually fare worse then the poor, the common soldier
forcing them by torture of pain, or terror of death, to confess where their
wealth lies. In the fourth Chapter, he threateneth to the hard hearted and
impenitent sinners, sour plagues, Sword, Pestilence, Famine, noisome beasts.
Of Famine thus he speaks: verse. 13. Son of man, if the land sin against
me by committing a trespass (the Hebrew word signifies a lie) I will stretch
out my hand upon it, and will break the staff of the bread thereof, and will
send Famine upon it: and though these three men Noah, Daniel, Job, were among
them, they should deliver but their own souls by their righteousness, says
the Lord God. The cause, why this Prophet Ezechiel urges the people with the
threats of this plague, more vehemently and hotly then the other Prophets, is
because the state of the Jews was then most dangerous, no threatenings, no
warnings would move them, rebellious they were always and stifnecked,
therefore he repeateth the oftener this Blow, to make it the more to enter into
and pearce them: and in a few words he compriseth much matter. First that God
is the efficient cause of Famine: the impulsive or forcing causes, their
sins: the manner, The bread shall not nourish them: the effects, Man and
beast, rich and poor, pelly melly shall die. Now go we on to the smaller
Prophet. Hos. cap. 4: makes a long catalogue or beadroule of sins, for which
God chasteneth his people with this affliction. Thus he speaks: The Lord
has a controversy with the Inhabitaunts of the land, because there is no
truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the land, by swearing and lying, and
killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break out, and blood touches blood.
Therefore shall the land mourn, the fowls of the heaven, the beasts of the
field, and the fishes of the sea shall be taken away. And in his ninth
Chapter, verse 1. Rejoice not o Israel for joy, as other people, for thou have
gone a whoring from thy God, thou have loved a reward upon every corn
floor. The floor, and the VVinepresse shall not feed them, and the new Wine
shall fail in her, etc. Amos cap. 4, vpbraydeth the people, who for religions
sake went on pilgrimage to Bethel, and yet defiled themselves with Idolatry and
false whorsip, and tells them that therefore he will give them cleanness of
teeth: that is, they shall not need any Toothpikes to cleanse their teethe for
any meat sticking in them, because hardly they should have brown bread to chew
on. By all which places it sufficiently appears, that Famine and Dearth is sent
for the punishment of sins, especially Atheism, and false worship. And so
much generally, or as we say, in the whole lump of all the enormious sins
which are causes of this judgment, now we will single some of them out, and
examine them parcel meal: namely, how God has punished even some special
sins this way. For many think that because their sins are not notorious
and written in their foreheades, not gross sins, as Idolatry, and such like,
that therefore they deserve not to be in this kind afflicted: But they must
know, that being subject naturally to sin, they must also lie open to the
common punishment of sin. Let us see then some particulars, for which GOD
expressly threateneth Iere. cap. II: declares how his country men in Anathoth,
had forbidden him to preach upon pain of his life, Contempt of Gods word.
this impudency of theirs, God threatens to revenge by Famine: ver. 21.22. Of
ye men of Anathots that say, Prophecy no more in the name of the Lord, that
thou die not by our hands. Behold, says the Lord, I will visit them, their
sons and their daughters shall die by famine, etc. Surely, this is nothing else
but justice, if men set light by the word of God, the precious food of their
souls, that he should keep from them the necessary sustenaunce of their
bodies. See Amos. cap. 8. And whereas many desire to hear the word, to
confer with Preachers, and to read Scriptures, but will not obey what they
hear, this contempt does God this way punish. Iere. 42. When the City was
sacked by Nabuchodonozor, the remnant left behind came to Jeremy, to ask of
him whether they should go down into Egypt, or no? He denied it, persuading
them the contrary, notwithstanding they would needs go: for this
dissembling disspight he threatens this plague of Famine to pursue them in
Egypt. The like course do we take, daily hearing, but still refusing to obey, so
that worthy are we when we call for our daily bread, not be heard by God in
that petition.

Private gain.
2 The desire of private gain provoke God his wrath, when men prefer the
increase of their own commodities before the glory of God, the propagation of
his word, or the public benefit. The Israelites being reduced and brought
back from Babell, to their own Country, having no regard at all to Gods house,
built, settled and furnished their own houses and mansions both stately and
curiously, whereupon God threatens them this plague by Agge. ver. 4. Is it
time for you to dwell in your fieled houses, and this house lie waste? Now
therefore thus says the Lord, Consider your own ways in your hearts. Ye
have sown much, and bring in little, ye eat, but ye have not enough, ye
drink but ye are not filled, etc. verse 9. You looked for much, and lo it
came to little, and when you brought it home, I did blow upon it. And why says
the Lord of Hosts? because of mine house that is waste, and you run every man
to his own house. Therefore the heaven over you stayed it self from dew, and
the earth staid her fruit, etc.

3 Perjury and Oppression of the poor, Perjury and oppression.
is this way also visited, as that excellent example 2. Sam. 21. shows. When
the Famine had been in the land three years, David asks of the Lord, where
and what the cause was of this so heavy a judgment: answer was made, that
it was for Saul, and his bloody house, because he slew the Gibeonites
(contrary to the oath of Iosuah, and the Elders.) Doubtless, Saul had an
excuse and defense for himself in this fact, which might carry a pretense
before the people of Law and Justice, yet God assures David, till his cruelty
were revenged, the Famine should not be removed. Therefore David asks the
Gibeonites how they would be satisfied, they requiring seven of Saul his
sons, had them, hanged them up to the Lord, and so the Famine ceased.

Covetousness.
4 This plague also follows that inexpleble and devouring gulf of greedy
desire. Esaias. cap. 5. complaining that in the Lords vineyard, wild Grapes only,
and sour were found, among the rest, he says, VVo unto them that join house
to house, and lay field to field, till there be no place that ye may be placed
by your selves in the midst of the earth. This is in mine ears, says the Lord
of Hoasts. Surely many houses shall be desolate, even great and fair, without
inhabitant. For ten akers of Vines shall yield one bath, and the seed of an
homer shall yield one ephah. Now if there be but small yield, there must
needs be great scarcity.

5 In the 34. of Jeremy, Cruelty
we read that the king and the people, as it were conspiring together, did,
according to the Law, manumit or set free their men, and maid servants, but
afterward reuoking their former fact, they brought them back again to their
old slavery: even for this cruelty the Lord threatens this plague of
Famine. Poor folks and servants are not to be entreated cruelly, because we
must remember that they and we have one master in heaven, much less dealt
withal falsely (which is a cruelty cloked under the name of honest gain.) For
thus says the Lord, Mich. 6.10. Are yet the treatures of wickedness in the
house of the wicked, and the scant measure which is abominable, etc. verse 14.
Therefore thou shall eat and not be satisfied: verse 15. Thou shall sow but not
reap, thou shall tread thy Olives, but thou shall not annoint thee with oil:
for the statutes of Omri are kept, and all the manner of the house of Ahab. etc.

Pride.
6 Pride is also scourged by this distress as witnesses 2. Sam. 24. where it
is written, that David numbered the people, and gloried in the multitude of his
Subjects, for which sin God appointed him the choice of Famine, Pestilence, or
the sword of his enemies: because one of these should be the punishment of his
vaunting and vainglorie.

Surfets.
7 Drunkenness and Surfeiting are thus also chastized, by the testimony of
Ioell, who in his first chapter, wills the Drunkards to mourn, for there
should an huge army come, that should make the Vineyards wast, and pluck the
wine from their mouths, as if he should say, ye have so provoked God to anger
with your Drunkenness, that hereafter ye shall be content to drink water,
albeeit in that Country they seldom have any good water to drink.

8 Again, Neglect of tyth paying.
if Tithes or other Debts, whereby either Gods worship should be maintained, or
his power relieved be not justly paid, Dearth is the revenger of that
sacrilege. As on the contrary, God by Malachy promises abundance, if these
duties be faithfully discharged. If we read over all the Stories, from the
times of the Prophets to our days, we shall find many strange examples of
dreadful Famine, but withal, we shall read, that those times were most
corrupt, either Prince or Subject failing in their several functions and
places. In the Acts of the Apostles, mention is made of a great Famine, when
Claudius was Emperor of the Romans, the same which Swetonius and Dion do
both record: the cause why the world was so visited at that time was
especially for that Claudius Tiberius, a man given over to al impiety,
drunkenness and riot, did then reign, whom the soldiers by a Nickname called
Biberim: He preferred a base fellow who stood for the Quaestunship, before the
most worthy and noble men, for that like a good fellow he had pledged him at a
banquet, a whole Terse of wine, containing nine gallons, at one draught: and
they were usually the greatest men in his state, and the common wealth, that
could drink and eat most at a meal. Now it often falls out, like Prince,
like Courtier, like people. The Apostles in diverse places preached the
Gospel, which many both of the Jews and Gentiles withstoode, and would not
embrace it, and for this cause God aflicted them with Famine, and other
calamities. Eusebius writes, that in the time of Maximinus, the cruel sucker
of Christians blood, there was such a Dearth, that even the wealthy of the
land fell down dead in the streets for hunger, and were devoured by hungry
Dogs. A just judgment of God, for not long before, he had cast many
Christians to wild beasts to be devoured. It shall not be needful to single
out every cause or time, why or when God plagueth, either particularly, or
generally this way, the first Sermon has many examples to that purpose. How of
late years the price of things has been inhaunced, how scarce victuals has
been, and in the mean time what notable sins have and do still reign in
the land, every man sees: so that we cannot deny, but that God has just
cause to continue among us this his fearful and terrible judgment. If we shall
shift and examine our manners, we shall find the very same grievous sins, for
which God in scripture reproves and thus visits his people, to be so rife or
common among us, that there may be small hope that he will withdraw his
judgment. The malady is past al remedy, and as Jeremy speaks, the sore by
custom being insensible, is become incurable. What contempt of God his word?
either not at all heard, or very little regarded: yet has God stirred us up by
wonders and signs in heaven and earth, but presently they are forgotten.
Flashes of fire in the air, as though the heaven had been inflamed, Comets of
diverse sorts, like rods, like swords. Many Inundations, incredible hailes,
unusual storms, rough and raging tempests of wind, of water, earthquakes
strange and dreadful, with other wonders of like nature, but what one man
almost is moved thereby. Some because they are often seen, little regard the^,
and deny them to be the Signs of Gods wrath, rather to be the Tokens of
prosperity. The holy name of the mighty God, how often, how rashly is it
profaned? some either of lightness, or ill custom, think there is no grace
in their words, unless they imbosse them with oaths of this sacred name, and
that without any cause or motive thereto. Horrible execrations, oaths,
imprecations, and curses daily heard, yet no man trembles, no man, according
to his duty reproves the offe^ders, who^ our ancesters were wont to punish, by
making them to kiss the ground groueling: but now no fear of an oath, all
sorts of people swell with envy, hatred, malice. Murder is ma^hood. Bloodshed
and ungodly wars, ye means to increase wealth: so many dead paies beguiling the
prince weakening the army, but enriching the captains. Strange and raunging
lusts, whoredoms, incests, adulteries are turned off with a laughter, so far
from being punished. In this case more profane then the profane Gentiles,
who even abhorred these villainies. Excess in apparel, as it argues the
leuitie and wantonness of the mind, by daily changing of fashions, apishly
imitating the French, Spanish, and Italian cut: so does it transform us into
their lewd manners: wherein not youths only, but old Dotards also (whom it
as well beseems, as a Fiddle does an Ass) do offend. Every man in his
Velvet, Silks, Gold, Silver, Pearls, whereas in the mean time, the poor
and needy in great numbers sterue for cold and nakedness. Quaffing
Drunkenness, which al men not long since abhorred, of late is made the only
grace of a feast. As for Covetousness being the root of all evils, it has
brought forth fruit accordingly. For hence have sprung Vsuries, Monopolies,
strange arts (cousinage in deed) in counterfeit coining, in deceytfull
couenaunts, in false bargaining, far worse and more crafty then the very
circumcised Jews, yet these, though in a common proverb they be usually
called Jews for their cruelty and knavery, are notwithstanding advanced to
hiest places of dignity, or else are planted about the greatest men of the
land. Such are the times, and so strange the manners of men. But I appeal to
you that commit these sins, what will these ill gotten goods profit you, which
by others men's undoing you have scraped and raked together? They never thrive
to the third heirs, to whom you leave nothing else but stuff and fuel to
inflame the heat of their impiety. What can you answer for your selves to
Christ coming in judgment, at that great account of your deeds and words?
But little does this move you or any almost in this so wicked an age, where
sins are customably committed without shame, without fear, without punishment,
so desperately, so openly, that now custom has changed vice into virtue, at
least covered most foul sins under the name of virtue. The Usurer is a good
husband, the Drunkard a merry mate: the Dingthrif a great housekeeper. Shall
these fig leaves keep Gods judgment from you? Then have the Prophets
prophesied in vain, and God himself has threatened to no purpose: which for a
Christian to conceive were horrible, especially since so strange a corruption
has infected all states of men, as but glauncing at the^, you may see: so that
if God punish us more fiercely we cannot blame his rigor, nor accuse him of
injustice. Ministers negligent in their charges and duties, dissolute in their
life, light in behavior, offensive to the world, either ambitiouslie
compassing preferments, or couetouslie pinching their Tables and alms. Many
Magistrates, rather desiring honors, then the due maintenance of good Laws,
or reformation of manners, preferring their private good, before the weal
public, remiss in punishing grievous offenses, especially in the ^ycher sort,
whom they fear to offend. Man and wife agree like Dogs and Cats, continually
iarring and snarling, Parents.
bestowing the blows upon each other which would do their children more
good, whom, forsooth they so cocker that the wind must not blow upon them:
and so mar them by their indulgence, or else by ill example, either of
unseemly talk, or loose life. Artizans idle in their trade, all estates,
ages, and degrees of me^ wholly depraved: so that it is marvel that God lays
not yet a sorer judgment upon us, thus deserving it. But you will say, if
Dearth and Scrarcitie, be the punishment allotted for sin, wherefore then are
the godly therewith plagued? as we see by the examples of Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, and others of whom we spoke before. In the days of Ahab, many godly in
Israel this way afflicted: God himself confessing that there were seven
thousand which never bowed knee to Baal, Why the godly are thus distressed.
yet they thus distressed, and fed privily by Obadias in caves. Paul 1. Cor.
11. felt this scarcity. Many of the Saints killed with Famine: in the 11. to
the Hebrews, VVandring about in Deserts, in dens, in holes, on hills, where
commonly is no great plenty? We answer, that even the most faithful are
sinners, their corruption natural will stick by them to the death, although it
brake not out into manifest blaines and gross sins: and yet sometimes it
does, as when they are slack in punishing offenders, or backwarde in
preferring men of good quality and desert: so that it is good for them that
God punishes them in their bodies, for if in his exact judgment he should
deal with them, they should be in danger of eternal perdition. But this
happily will not satisfy you, for if Idolatry and notorious crimes, are to be
punished with Dearth and Famine, the^ should they be most subject to this
plague, which are more wicked then any other. For though the godly have their
slips and strains, yet it greeueth them that their standing is so slippery,
and their knees so weak, they wish that they might shake off those occasions
to sinning, but the Infidels and impudent sinners little regard any amendment,
which think it not inogh to offend God themselves, but are ready to draw
other into the same pitfals, yea and are angry, as the Apostle speaks, if
others will not go on with them in that excess of riot: and yet these are no
more, nay not so much punished as the other, having in such times of Famine
their arts and shifts, by which they not only escape the brunt of this heavy
judgment, but enrich themselves thereby. Rather had the godly starve for
hunger, then to use these sleightes to preserve their life, and yet is their
condition no better then theirs. This tentation has in all ages much
distracted and troubled the minds of the very best men: and has forced them
to doubt of gods providence, as though he regarded not the actions of men,
whether good or ill. Malachy in his third and fourth Chapter says, that many
have burst out into these blasphemies, It is in vain to serve the Lord, and it
is all one to do well or ill, for neither is the just rewarded, nor the ill
man punished. But we must know, there is a great difference between the wicked
and godly in the like punishment: as also that (albeit sin is the principal
and chief cause of all mischief) for other causes God does afflict men with
Famine, Sword, or Pestilence. The two Thieves on the Cross died the like
death, yet great was the difference between them, the one patiently taking his
death, and acknowledging Christ to be the Messiah: the other storming at his
punishment, and scorning our Savior to his face. Many causes there are which
move God to punish his children more then others, as we shall in brief see for
our comfort.

First God by Famine and such like plagues David saw the dearth of victuals
ceased not, he inquired of the Lord wherefore he was so angry with his people.
Answer was made him as you heard before. Ofttimes the faithful fall into many
errors and sins, neither can they be recalled into the right way, unless
God by punishment do fetch them in. Amos cap. 1, God complains, that although
he had punished his people with scarcity of bread and drink, yet they
returned not unto him. Whereout we gather, that God therefore sends Famine
upon the earth, that Men may be turned to him. As we pluck back and stay
our horses if either they gallop too fast, or go any thing out of the way, so
does God reduce us into a right path with such chastisements. If a boy that is
put to learning, either run away, or play the treuant, presently we send for
him to fetch him to school, perhaps with a rod at his back.

faith, yet if we be any long time pincht with any distress, then we feel
how necessary it is to cry with the Apostle, Lord increase our faith. Peter
walked upon the lake when Christ bid him, but feeling the wind so fierce, and
his ground so slipperie, in dismay of mind he began to sink, that by his
masters hand he might be supported. Math. 14. God will try our behauior
toward our neighbors, either in the payment of our debts, or in lending to the
needy, or giving freely, and such like: again how patiently we can endure
the cross, whereof, we glory much before miseries come, but when they light
upon us in some weight and number, then we grow discontented and impatient,
feeling our own infirmities how weak and frail we are. The soldier which
never saw a pight field, promises himself much courage, but when he sees the
armies join, hears the thundering of the Cannons, and spies a tempest of
bullettes whirling, beholdes rivers of men's blood flowing, and heaps of his
fellows lying some dead, some wounded, then he trembles and quaketh, wishing
himself at home. God knows our weakness before he chasten us, yet lest we
should think better of our selves then we ought, he will make us feel his
hand, that we may confess it our selves. Some will not stick to say, I will
rather die then rob: (alas not knowing the gripes of hunger and Famine, which
will, as we say, break through stone walls,) who afterward being in want,
are driven to fall into such leaude practices, for life is sweet.

a disease to which he is inclining: so deals God with us, that we might say
to our selves as our Savior to the woman. John 8, Go thy ways, sin no
more, lest a worse thing happen unto thee. The Germans have a proverb (which
we in England use) The burnt child dreads the fire. So if any have been once
distressed, he will beware lest he fall into the same or some greater danger.

There is also another cause why god thus exercises his children, namely that
they may pray earnestly, for such is our nature, that if he afflict us not, we
are more slack in praying. For Plenty makes wantonness: and prosperity,
dissolute. Which mischiefs Famine and calamities prevent, making us more
instaunte in prayer. They that are full fed prove unthankful, who if they
be but touched with want, then fly they unto him, whom before they forgatte,
and not for themselves only, but for others also that are in like sort
distressed. And if it please God to deliver them for that once, they after
prove more thankful to God, more careful in their duties, and more pitiful to
the needy.

Sathyrions pelles or skins (which as they write, will not lie still in the
bottom of a press or chest though kept down with clothes, but will swell
and rise up) we are of unquiet and restless minds, houen and lifted up,
knowing neither our selves, nor GOD. Wherefore he cuts our combs, and tames
our flesh with these wants, teaching us what we lack, and how necessary his
grace is for us. The whole race of mankind, if all their forces and wits were
united, is not able to bring forth a stalk from out the earth, or to create a
grape, and yet they bear them selves so loftily, as if they could live without
gods blessing and help: who if he withdraw his hand, they are like those whom
we teach first to go or swim, let go our hold, the one falls, the other
sinkes: all which in our fullness we consider not.

Furthermore, God by these and such other, kindles in the godly an earnest
desire of the other life to come, with the contempt of this Discontenting
world. For if we should here live at hearts ease without any crossing, we would
love this life too well, and not regard that at al: yea much adoo have we (even
for all these sorts and varieties of plagues, injuries, malice and villainies of
men) to weane our selves from the love of this world: much more hardly would
we be drawn from it, if none of these should happen to us. Still we hope
that our state will be bettered, but all in vain, for experience shows, that
it is like daily to be worse. They therefore who wish for a longer life in
hope of a better state here, may as well think that a garment will be the
better the longer and oftener it is worn. Our whole life, says the proverb,
is but a vale of misery. Art thou a single man? thou have no care but for thy
self: have thou a wife? that is a double care: will she not be ruled by thee?
that is a misery: an untamed wife? Is her alliance rich? they will disdain
thy kindred: they will be thy masters. Are they poor? they will be thy
boorders, and lie upon thy charge: have thou children? thy cares are the more,
the elder they wax, the greater is thy trouble. But if thou want for thy
self and them things necessary, now art thou weary of this life, and
desire to be dissolved and to be in heaven, where there is no want of food or
raiment, but a life Angelical, without care or trouble, and the sooner the
better thou think, because there is a more speedy riddance from these
calamities.

Lastly, God by punishing his children, chosen, thus fearfully the heavy
judgment, and direful wrath of the just God against men's sins, that
sithence he chasteneth small sins in them, much more will he scourge them
that sin with an hie hand: and that offend with a presumptuous foot. But, to
conclude: you having heard for the most part the causes and motives that
provoke God to send this plague of Famine, with other public and private
afflictions upon men, not sparing his own elect and faithful, let us desire
of God patience in such distresses, and repentance from sin, the causes
principal of such distresses. To him be glory and praise, etc.

THE THIRD SERMON.
AS an expert Physician first shows the causes and danger of the disease, and
after that, prescribes to his patient both physic to cure him, and the order
of his diet: the same course must a spiritual Physician take in any public
plague of Famine and Dearth: namely, to make men both feel the greeuousnesse
of the calamity, and also to teach them their duty of demeanor in this
public or private affliction. And this course have we hitherto observed in
the two former Sermons, setting forth God to be the author of plenty and
want, with the dreadfulnesse of Famine, and that our sins are the only motives
which provoke God thereto: and lastly, the end why God does punish in this
sort, as well his chosen children, as the wicked Atheist. Now it remains
that I prescribe the Diet, that is, the manner of our behavior in such
afflictions. And herein that we may more orderly proceed, we will first show
what duerie belongs to the Church of Christ in these cases, afterward what
concerns Magistrates, Preachers, Householders, rich and poor of all sorts to
do herein: particularly adding this as the preparatiue to our diet, that we
advertise the Faithful not so to despair in these punishments, as if God had
reserved to them no hope of mercy and assistance, though their sins be great
and many.

Solomon in this his prayer, among other things, warns the godly, that in
the time of Dearth and Penury they do confess their sins, bewail them,
and amend their lives, not only in ceassing to do ill, but in doing good.
For by these miseries it pleases GOD to call us into the way of godliness.
After, he wills us to praise the name of God, by acknowledging both his
judgment, and his mercy, that in punishing our sins thus, in that he
utterly overthrows us not. For it is his mercies that we are not all
consumed. For if he should mark extremely what is done amiss and punish us
accordingly, both in this life miserably, and in the other we should be
eternally afflicted. It is the nature of man from Adam, says Job, to conceal
his own fault and to lay it upon another: and so in the time of Famine,
many cry out upon Cornhoorders, Usurers, Ingrossers, Witches and Coniurers,
as if they were the only procurers of Scarcity, (and sometimes perhaps not
amiss) but this is the more Christian and nearest course to have recourse to
our selves, every man to say of himself herein, as David spoke in a like
punishment, It is I that have sinned, and have brought on this judgment.
Furthermore, he bids us desire God for Christ his sake to turn away these
grievous storms, rains or tempests, as also unseasonable droughts, which are
secundary causes of this plague. The temple of Solomon was a type and
representation of Christ and his Church, so that he requesting the Almighty to
hear his people praying in that Temple, it is all one as if he had desired the
Father to hear them for, and in the name of his son Christ. From whence also
it is evident, that, because God only knows the hearts of men, Solomon is of
this mind, that God only is to be prayed unto. Oft-times we only pray in
heart, sildom expressing our thoughts by word of mouth, and many times we are
troubled in our prayers, so that we cannot utter what we conceive, especially
our speech failing us, as at the instant of death. So that the prayers made to
them which hear us not, are in vain, neither understanding our thoughts, nor
knowing our wants, nor able to supply our necessities, nor to rid us from any
trouble. Paul. Romans 10. says, that he only is to be prayed to in whom we
believe, and we believe in none but in God. Again, in Scripture there is
neither precept, nor example, nor promise made, to prayers and invocation of
saints. That which they bring out of Ezechiell, is a very lame one, as after
shall appear. The Popish sort in these times of Distress, fly to their
Letanies and Processions, as to their sacred Anchor, which as they are used by
them are mere forgeries of men, and derogation to God, Gregory the great, and
Claudius Mamertin Bishop of Vienna, first inuenting them: wherein God has the
least part, Angels, Patriarchs, Martyrs, Confessors, (...).
Virgins, Widows, filing up the row and room, whom they have canonized as
their Turn-away Gods, to rid them from such plagues, which is in the only
wisdom and power of God himself. But what are the things which we must
desire of God? Surely that it would please him not to deal with us after our
deserts, but to turn from us, or at least diminish the grieuousnesse of this
affliction, granting us patience and thankfulness, with amendment of life,
and desire of doing well. Christ wills us to pray for our daily bread, that
is, for the things which concern this and the other life: all which as we
must earnestly entreat, so we must as constantly believe, that he is able
and willing to perform that we desire: Using in the mean time these lawful
and honest means, patiently enduring his heavy hand till it please him to
ease us, and avoiding those things which may either hinder the feruencie of
our prayers, or provoke his displeasure further: having rather an especial
regard to the ordering and bettering of our lives, which course the holy
Scriptures commend and set out.

The Israelites being slain by the Philistims, and the Ark of God taken: 1.
Samuel. 1. Sam. 7.3. exhortes them to repent, 1. Sam. 7.3.
and by forsaking the Heathenish Idolles, heartily to turn to their God, who
would deliver them if they did so: and the event proved this promise true.
Which example though it concern War, yet may it as well serve for Famine and
Dearth. The same order did Daniell observe. Dan. 9.5, 6. We have sinned, and
have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea, we have rebelled, and
have departed from thy precepts, and from thy judgments. For we would not
obey thy servant the Prophets, which spoke in thy name to our Kings, to our
Princes, to our Fathers, and to all the people of the land. He confesses that
every one had sinned, excepting none: although some had offended more
grievously, yet all were guilty of some sins. See Amos 4. and Joel. 1. and
2. Chap. Thus have all the godly behaved themselves, not despairing of Gods
grace, nor denying the faith, nor flying to means unlawful and extraordinary
in the Famine. The Prodigal Son, the lively remembrance of mankind, brought
himself by his own folly into these streights, that for very hunger he was
driven to be Swineheard, and full glad he was if he might be so happy but to
feed so well as his hogs: but this Penury making him to remember himself,
he returned to his Fathers house, and spying his father, cried out unto him a
far off, Father I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, neither am I
worthy to be called thy son. A very good president for us when God visits
with scarcity and want, to acknowledge our own faults, and fly to him for a
supply thereof, who is as ready to receive us, as we are willing to return
to him: which if we omit, either in neglecting him, and his word, or not
regarding the amendment of our lives, or slack assiduitie of our prayers, no
marvel it is if God weigh us down with his heavy hand. Iam. 4.2
Iam. 4.2. Ye fight, and war and get nothing, because ye ask not: ye ask
and receive not, because you ask amiss, that ye might consume it on your
lusts. Ezechiel in his fourth Chapter tells us, that even the prayers of the
most godly men are not allowed of God, unless they for whom they pray do
repent. Although Noah, Daniel, and Job, these three men stand up, yet shall
they only save their souls in their righteousness. So speaks Jeremy. 15.
Chapter. If Moses and Samuel were before me, I would not yet regard this
people: Cast them out of my sight, that they may go. And if they say whither?
then say unto them, such as are appointed to the sword, to the sword: and
such as are for the Famine, to the Famine. The Jews relied much upon the
prayers of the faithful: what need we fear, say they the Prophets threats,
sithence there are so many good men praying for us, whom GOD no doubt will
hear. Well, says the Prophet, be it that even these the most faithful
servants of the Lord do pray for you, yet shall they not avail you. By which
we learn that other men's prayers are nothing profitable to the unrepentant
sinner. Therefore in the seventh of Jeremy, God says unto the Prohet: Pray
not for this people, neither lift up thy voice for them. Thus was Samuel
rejected when he prayed for Saul. Now then if the prayers of such faithful
men will not prevail with God, much less the Orisons of Superstitious
Hirelings, worse perhaps then they for whom they pray. Again, if the
prayers of the godly alone here on earth profit nothing, Invocation of
Saints, is most ridiculous. For the Proposition is conditional, and as
Zuinglius has well observed upon that place of Jeremy. The Prophet says,
If they should stand, not, they do stand and entreat. For it is a
Proposition, or a supposition of persons, which were and are not: as if he
should say, If Job and Noah were now alive, and would request your deliverance
and ease, I would not be entreated by them. Moreover, Daniel whom Ezechiell
names, was then alive: so that to argue from this place for the Invocation of
Saints departed, is as the Prophet Esaias speaks, from the living to the dead.
It is rather an argument of the possibility of God his atonement, who so ever
should pray unto him. And let the Papists answer me, Whether were the fathers
before Christ in heaven or no? No: say they, but in Limbo Patrum: how could
they then pray in heaven? Let us therefore make this our conclusion: with our
hearty prayers to God alone, to join the amendment of our lives: he is
ready, and this will move him to attention. In which case I must exhort every
state and degree particularly. First, the godly Magistrate ought to put to his
helping hand, by removing those causes which do draw upon the subject these
great plagues: for the cause being removed, the effect ceasseth. David
faithfully discharged his duty herein, inquiring into the cause of that
Famine, as you have heard before, and knowing it, he removed it, and the Famine
ceased. In this behalf many Princes are faulty, who live as they list,
pampering themselves in their own pleasures, neither regarding the need of
the distressed subject, nor searching into the cause of the judgment, nor
seeking the means how to pacify Gods wrath: whereas good Magistrates ought to
suppress those vices, which are principally outward causes (much less to
license them) as Monopoles, Engrossing, Hoording, Dycing, Whoring: Excess in
meat, drink, and apparel, especially in young men squandring their goods,
whom it is good in time to keep short, least they run riot. For it is too
late, (as we in proverbs speak) When steed is stolen to make the stable
hold. When flock is fled, to seek to pin the fold. Our ancestors
were wont to have laws, which they called Leges sumptuariae, to restrain
excessive expenses: which were not amiss in our time to be executed, as very
necessary for the prevention of beggerie: as also to bridle the unconscionable
and lewd practices of those VVealth-deuouring vermin before named, which
inhaunce the price of things at their pleasures, and grind the faces of the
poor, of which you have an excellent example in the fifth Chapter of Nehemiah.
The Famine waxing very great among the people, the poorer sort complained
grieuouslie, that the mighty and wealthy men lent upon sore Usury, and took
to pledge their sons and daughters, and that they were as sorely oppressed by
their brethren, as if they were prisoners under an Heathen Tyrant: and if
Nehemiah had not wisely prevented it, this clamor had soon bredde to an
Uproar: for he in a zealous and loving regard of his Country men and
Brethren, neither objected to himself the envy of the cause that he took in
hand, nor yet the vnlikelihoode to bring it to pass, neither the danger of
his own safety, but boldly he rebuked the Ancient that they were no more
forward in the redress of this fault. He summoned an assembly, where both
Creditor and Debtor, both Lender and Borrower, should appear, and arguing in
the presence of them all, by reasons Politic and Divine, that the rich were
extremely too blame therein, first, says he, we (meaning Ezra, Zerubbabel,
and himself) have brought the people from bondage, and therefore it is not for
you to lay new yokes and burdens upon your brethren. Secondly what would the
Heathen say, and how would they rejoice to see this exaction? so that if you
feared God, or regarded man, you would not do it. Lastly, he moves them by
his own example, to restore to them their pledges and morgages of lands and
houses, and their pawnes of what kind soever: and thus in the end he brought
his purpose to pass. Which example I wish the Princes, and Magistrates of our
time, would in these hard years immitate and follow. The Romans and other
Countries had their Garner-wardeins, who to prevent an imminent Dearth, or
Famine, sent abroad their Purueyours for corn, to buie it into the land: such
had Solomon. 1. Reg. 4. Again it would be very profitable to a Commonwealth,
if in plentiful years the Magistrates would lay up Corn in their Garners
public, either to lend, or upon a reasonable price to sell to the
Husbandmen Seedecorne, and to the poor Breadcorne. That was Joseph's policy
in Pharaohs land, which if he had not done, the Famine had proved far more
dangerous. Eusebius Ecclesiast. Histor. Lib. 2. Cap. 12. writes of Helena
Queen of the Nation called Adiabeni, who in a Famine wherewith Iewrie was
afflicted, bought Corn of the Egyptians, and distributed it amongst the Jews.
Of which also Josephus is witness. In that Famine which raged Anno. 649.
whereof I spoke in the end of my first Sermon, Nauclerus makes an honorable
mention, of King Clodouey, he commanded a roof which was made of pure
Silver, to be taken down and distributed peecemeale among the poor. Profane
Stories of the Heathen commend this liberality to the poor in distress.
Gilbias Agrigentinus, as Val. Max. writes of him, gave liberal and daily
doale to the needy, and large dowries to poor Maidens, insomuch that the
City of Agritentum, and all the neighbor Cities there abouts, were much
relieved and comforted by his largess. Our chronicles of Heluetia have a
memorable example of liberality to the poor. There was one Nicholas a noble
man of Kaezingen, a wretch wonderfully sordid, base and covetous, who after
some years got to be Bishop of Constance, Anno. 1334. or there aboutes, and
not satisfied with this fat and rich Bishoprike, nor his covetous raking and
gathering goods for all this stinted: yet upon the sudden he was as
strangely altered (as the Poet faignes Euclio that famous Cormullion) for in
the years. 1343. and 1344. there fell a great Famine upon the whole upper
Country of Germany, in both which years he so well used his gathered goods,
that thrice in a week he fed and nourished some times three, and some times
four thousand, with bread and broth, and often times 4500. which came together
in flocks from the neighbor and bordering Countries. He ending his life
presently upon the ceassing of this Dearth, all the poor of the Country, in
remembrance of their good Benefactour, followed his corpse from the House where
he dyed (being a Castle belonging to the Sea) into the Mother City
Constance, where he was interred. An example worthy the imitation of
Prelates, and great men. Many perhaps in such extremities would relieve their
poor, but it lies not in their power to do it, for not knowing what
afterclaps may follow, they cannot safely distribute, and give out their corn
as they would. Sometimes such an inconvenience, or rather mischief follows,
that for want of grain, the Cities must be yielded up to thee enemy. We read
of Phalaris the tyrant, that by this stratageme he gate to possess the most
strongly defenced places of Sicilie: for faigning the making of a league with
the Inhabitaunts, he gave them Corn for store, but withal secretly took
order that their Garners, and Loftes should be open to the rain, that so the
weather beating in, the Corn would prove utterly unwholesome, and so
unprofitable. They poor souls, trusting to his provision, either neglecting
their tillage, or rioting out their own store, when he came upon them and
besieged them at unawares, which was his custom, for want of sustenance they
were forced to yield. There are men of that quality to set out all at a lump
in one day, not forethinking of an ensuing want. Salo. Pro. 6. by the example
of the Ants, teaches us how carefully and prouidently we should lay up
against the time to come. The City of Zurick is herein much to be commended,
Zurick.
in that not only they give things necessary both for back and belly to
many poor daily, upon the City charge: but in time of Dearth they sell upon a
reasonable rate al kind of grain, as well to the relief of their citizens
distresses, as also the foreiners coming to their markets may store themselves
at a less price. And the city of Strasborough, famous in it self, but more
renowned, for that in the years of Dearth, the years 1517. and 1529. and
other such times, they gave out of their public granaries, both to Citizens
and strangers, corn at an easy reckoning, besides the relief which their
poor citizens and others received from them in money and victuals. Besides
this, it is the Magistrates duty to see that Alms be disposed to the right
use. For some Cathedral and also parish Churches, have yearly revenues and
stocks of money left unto them for the poores relief, which coming into Rich
and sometimes into Church-mens hands, being called to no account nor reckening,
the pore are no whit the better for it. Of that nature is that Doale of Bread
and Flesh upon set Days given to the poor, which the Germans call Spenda,
either of the Dutch word which signifies to expend or lay out, or of the
Greek word (...) that is, to sacrifice, being one of the most acceptable
sacrifices to God. Hebr. 13. Moreover, it concerns the Magistrate to take order
that the people be set on work, in any case let them not be idle, and for
those lazy Lurdens, those valiant Rogues, and stout beggars, that like
Locustes burden the land, and eat up the fruit thereof, whereby the poor
laboring man and impotent person should be relieved, to banish them the
Country: but whatsoever befalles, to see the poor which would and cannot
work, relieved. Paul disdained not to bring the alms to the poor at
Jerusalem, which the faithful had given and gathered in Macedonia and Achaia.
And to this purpose of provision for the poor, he is very careful in the rest
of his Epistles. The Ministers of the word are also to teach the people out of
the holy scripture, that plenty is Gods blessing, and withal, that sin is
the cause of scarcity: they must stir them up to repentance, comfort the
distressed and poor, exhort the rich to enlarge their hands, and to open their
hands more liberally and fully in this hard time, yea [and themselves not to
soiourne (like our Gentlemen) out of their Country, but lie upon their
benefices for the greater relief of the poor, and for the better example to
all.] And also to join their prayers in earnest manner to Almighty God, that
he would look down with his favorable countenance, and deal mercifully with
his people: so did Jeremy and Amos, cap. 7. and both were heard. James ca. 5.
says, That the prayer of a just man preuayleth much. For example whereof, he
brings in the story of Eliah, Opening and shutting the heavens with his
prayers. So that in any case the Ministers, especially they which have the
Poor men's stock committed to them, must not at such times fail. Householders,
both man and woman, must instruct their children to know that they hold what
ever they have in Fra^ckalmoin, from God, and that their meat and drink it
is. Gods provision and blessing, for if he do but shut his hand, all things
decaie and are scant: and from their infancy to teach them, that at sitting
down and rising from meat, they give him thanks from whom alone they receive
it. Rich men above all, in the time of Famine, must have especial regard to the
poor, for which cause, God has endowed them with that great wealth. If thou
have Farmers whose corn and increase yields not proportionably to their
labors nor their charge, urge them not too vehemently to the payment of their
debts and rents. Vex not thy Tenants, nor raise their rents, conceiving this
with thy self, how hard it is for them to get whereby they may maintain
bread, cloth, and fuel. As for thy Debtors which are burdened with many
children (and be no wilful unthrifts) forbear them, and be not too haftie nor
rigorous with them. Pay the Labourer his wages duly, and rather with the most,
if thou see he want. Paul 1. Tim. 6. charge rich men to lay up for
themselves treasure in heaven, by being liberal and beneficial to the poor:
An alms, which no doubt, God will bless with increase. Not many years since,
Idols of gold and silver were set up, and shrines erected for sacrifices and
gifts to be offered there, as if hereby God had been well pleased: but this we
know out of Gods book, that if these lively Images of God, that is, the poor
and needy be clothed, fed and relieved, it is a sacrifice more acceptable to
him. But you will say, your charge is great, and so you cannot spare it them so
well. Lessen therefore your own excess in meats, drink, apparel, household
stuff set out rather for show, then necessity and use. Inuit the poor as
Christ wills to thy feasts. Amos complains and inueighes against the rich
of his time, that they lived at ease and fared delicately, never regarding the
poverty of their neighbors, the affliction of Joseph: such as was that
Gurmandizing glutto^, who spent so much upon his paunch daily, not vouchsafing
poor Lazarus his crummes. Far better dealt Charles the great, who daily in
his Court relieved in his presence a certain number of poor, thereby both to
put himself in mind of Christ and his Disciples: and also to temper and
moderate his great and hie authority: but if thou will not bid them home
(because cloth-laying is costly) yet send them some sustenance for themselves
and their children. Strange it is to see, what a deal of wine is sumptuously
quaffed and carowsed by common drunckardes, how much swilled in by challenging
Cupmates, the worth whereof, would very largely relieve a number of poor
souls.

A strange besotting sin, a custom(...)barous, senseless, graceless. Thou
would think thou sinnedst grievously, if thou should cause one to beguile
his brother of a farthing: but enforcing and provoking him to drink himself
down, and under the board, fear thou not God, and account it but a sport?
But to return, let rich men principally be very careful not to take
occasion by the Dearth of victuals to spoil the poor, whom they should
rather relieve: for there are some of that nature, that in such hard times
seek to enrich themselves, by undoing or oppressing the poor: and when they
should be thinking of their sins which have caused these afflictions, then are
they casting with them selves how to raise the price and to ingrosse the
commodities. But such are followed with a curse, says Solomon, Prou. 11. He
that withdraws the corn, the people will curse him, but he that sells it
out, blessing shall be upon his head. Some again are contriuing, how in the
times of want, they, having present money, may buy at an easy penyworth, the
lands, houses, and wood, of Banckrupts, and such as are in need: whereas in
Charity they should succor them then most of all, lest they should be driven
to sell all. Surely riches thus gotten will not be blessed, nor long continue.
The wealth which is most justly gathered, ofttimes slips away, no man knows
how: much greater uncertainty is there in the riches of deceit and oppression.
The Auditour will one day come for an account thereof. Hear what God himself
speaks concerning this, Leuit. 25.35, If thy brother be impouerished, and
fallen in decaie with thee, thou shall relieve him, as a stranger and a
soiourner. Thou shall take no usury of him, nor vauntage, but thou shall fear
thy God, that thy brother may live with thee. Thou shall not give him thy money
to usury, nor lend him thy victuals for increase, etc Amos the Prophet,
chapter 8. cries out against those which abuse the want and scarcity of
things, to the undoing of the poor, verse 4, Hear this, O ye that swallow up
the poor, that ye may make the needy of the land to fail, saying, when will
the new Moon be gone that we may sell corn? and the Sabbath, that we may set
forth wheat, and make the Epha small, and the shekle great, and falsify the
weights by deceit. That we may buy the poor for silver, and the needy for
shoes: yea and sell the refuse of the wheat. The Lord has sworn by the
excellency of Jacob, Surely I will never forget their works. Shall not the
land tremble for this? and every one mourn that dwells therein? and it
shall rise up as a flood, and be drowned as by the flood of Egypt.

That is, as Munster expounds it, as Nilus by his inundation casts up all
things which swim therein, upon the ground: so shall these devouring beasts
be cast off from the earth that bears them. It were easy for me to rehearse
many examples of merciless rich men, punished by GOD grievously. But letting
all pass, let us hear rather the last sentence of Christ himself in that his
great day, after his separation made of the sheep from the Goats: Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit you the kingdom prepared for you from the
beginning of the world, for I was an hungered and ye gave me meat, I thirsted
and ye gave me drink, I was a stranger, and ye lodged me: Naked, and ye
clothed me: Sick, and ye visited me: in prison, and ye came unto me.

What think you will then become of Usurers, Monopolists, Ingrossers, and all
that vile generation, which have not done the least work of mercy? who have
been so far from feeding the hungry, that they have rather devoured them,
by high prices, like hungry dogs: and so far from entertaining strangers
and keeping hospitality, that they have rather forced their neighbor and
fellow Citizens, to leave their Country, for extreme beggary, wrought by
their cruelty. The naked they have not clad, but their poor debtors being not
able to pay, have they stripped of house and home, and taken their pillows from
under their heads. The sick they have not visited nor comforted, but by
engrossing commodities into their hands, and selling them as they list, they
have made many being not able to reach their price, to pine and starve for
hunger. The prisoners have they not relieved, nor redeemed, rather cast in more
unto the^ for no great weight: nor upon any great want. To you I speak, you
unmerciful and cruel rich men of the world: ponder with your selves thoroughly,
and lay to your hearts this sentence of our Savior, which you shall find true
to your own destruction: and remember that which Solomon has said, It is
better to have a little with the fear of the Lord, then to have great
treasures otherways. Achan his example Josh. 7, is memorable, for the event of
ill gotten goods: when the City of Jericho was taken, he privily took a
Babilonish garment, 2000. shekles of silver, and a wedge of gold, thinking that
no body should have known thereof, that so himself and his children might
thereby be enriched: but, as it is well known, it cost him the life of himself
and all that belonged unto him. In which, there, by the way, arises a doubt,
why God should punish the children being guiltless, for the fathers fault?
this may serve for a short solution. Ill gotten goods are a bane to the
posterity, as well as to the parents. Many things there are which provoke a
man to gather wealth by ill means, for some dispairing of any good way to
come by them, use all the badde shifts in the world to compass them. Others
again not content with things necessary, must forsooth have wealth to spend
riotously, and to maintain their wives and children excessiuelie, how ever
they compass it, whether by hook or crook, they regard not. It is good,
doubtless, to be careful for them, so the care be moderate, neither
distrustful in God, nor offensive to him. No doubt Achan had a respect that
way, but the event proved it to be unlawful; and such will be the lot of
those, which by ungodly means, as Thefts, Robberies, Pillage, raising of
rents, engrossing wares, and such like ways endeavor to fill their coffers: the
only means to make their children watch for their death, as the Egles for a
carcass, who having once got that which their parents have thus raked
together, out it goes merrily til the bottom be bare, for it melts like snow
before the Sun. Crates the Tbeba^, wondered at this preposterous care of
parents, regarding to leave their children rich, but neither wise nor honest:
for what should he do with wealth that knows not how to use it? or what should
a mad man do with a sword? Many by-words have been taken up against ill gotten
goods, and the event has made them as true as common. Among the rest, Ill
gotten, Ill spent. And, The goods gotten by another annoy, The third heir
shall not enjoy. Mich. Cap. 6 compares the wealth that is compassed by guile
and villainy, unto a fire that shall consume the owners thereof. Many sentences
in Salomons proverbs, tending to this point: Better being a poor man with
honesty, then a rich man by extremity. The best care for children, is, to
bring them up in the fear and nurture of the Lord, and by good example to
direct them: the only way to undo them, is to leave them the inheritance of
such bad purchases. And so much for Rich men. The poor also which are pinched
and distressed for want of victuals, with their wives and children, must know
there is a duty for them to God and man. First therefore let them think, that
this cross is laid upon them by God, and so with patience bear it. An easy
matter to say so, you will answer, but not to do it. I do confess, that
our flesh can hardly be brought to endure hunger, nor patiently brook in that
time to be told of our duty. The belly, as Cato said, has no ears. Rather
give the hungry meat, then preach to them of patience: they wish more to see
what to eat, then to hear what to do. Yet if they will but consider that
this is sent unto them by Gods will, not coming by chance or ill fortune,
they will be more patient. Secondly, they must know, that God will hear
their prayers if they call unto him faithfully. The Lions roaring after their
pray, do seek their meat at God, and he gives it them: He feeds the young
Ravens that call upon him: much more men. He is our Father, as both in the
Lords Prayer, and in the Creed Apostolical, we daily confess, therefore
persuade we our selves that he chasteneth us for our amendment, not for our
overthrow: but of this before. Again, let them remember, that they are not
the first, nor shall be the last this way to be afflicted. Christ himself
endured it for our sakes. Paul and other the Saints of God have felt this
want: and in brief, GOD has promised, that neither this, nor any other way
he will tempt us above our strength. There is no father so hard hearted, that
will lay any burden upon his child, more heavy then he can bear, or will
suffer him to starve when he may succor him: much less God, who has more
then a fatherly care over us, will suffer us to perish, having all things at
his command, and many ways to rid us from any misery, even in the midst
of all calamities to assist us. So that let the poor sort in such distress
demean themselves well and vprightlie, both to GOD and men: to God, by
carefully avoiding those things whereby his wrath is provoked, and by daily
requesting his favorable aid and comfort: toward men, those especially which
have relieved them, let them be thankful, and if they be not able to pay
their debts, let them entreat their Creditors to be good unto them till God
make them able: for there are verily many good men, which by lending, giving,
suretiship, almsdeeds, forbearing and forgiving debts, have got themselves a
good report, and have comforted the poor afflicted: mary if once thou promise
at a day to return it, keep thy day: for herein many debtors are to blame,
pretending charge of wife and children, and indeed spending that at drinking
and gaming, which would both pay their debts, and maintain their family. Let
the^ also use good and honest means to rid themselves from Famine, laboring
with their hands for their living, and rather beg their bread from door to
door, the^ by wicked shifts to prevent their poverty. For this is one of Satan
his occasions which he takes to prick men forward to all kind lewdness.
Vprores, Mutinies, Thefts, Bawderie, and other such filthy gayning
occupations: all which the godlier sort will carefully eschew. An honest
matrone, if her modesty be tempted by shameless and impudent teachers, she casts
them off, and defies them: so should we do with these sleights of the devil,
following the example of Christ, who having fasted 40. days in the desert, and
then being hungry, the devil tempted him, but he gave him the auaunt, with the
sword of the spirit: and of Paul whom neither Famine nor death could separate
from the love God in Christ. We should be more faithful then the Saguntines:
they had rather die for hunger, then not to keep their promise with their
Confederates the Romans. The Patriarks, as you heard, being vexed this way,
chose rather to change their country, then their Religion. A good document for
these times, wherein religion is charged, as a cause of dearth. But if one sort
of poor be cruel to another, that is a mischief. Again, let the poor be
provident in a plentiful harvest, to lay up against a dear year, not to be
so wastfully given to spending, as before, but eeke it out to the utmost. It is
true which is common, Sparing is the best husbandry, but if it be at the
bottom, that thrift is too late. Many deceive themselves by thus reasoning*
there are Hospitals and Spittles built for the poor: thus to be relieved is a
miserable comfort, which to want, would be more credit and hearts ease: and
he that spendes himself out of house and home, in hope of an Hospital, is
more fit for a Prison then for a Spittle.

By this which has been spoken, we understand what every man in his several
place and duty, and all sorts jointly, ought to do in any public or private
Famine, or Dearth. If there be any godly men which hope of no amendment of
men's lives, yet let not them be weary of well doing, following the example of
the wicked. For if Noah, and Lot, and other just men had corrupted themselves
with the world, they had also perished with the world. Now in the last place
by the way of comfort, let us hear the most pleasant promises of God, wherein
he offers aid and assistance to his children in these afflictions: auouching,
if we hear his word, and walk in his ways, that he will nourish us in the
time of Famine: and as Deuteronomy. 28. to the despisers of his law and will, he
threatens hunger: so on the contrary, to the obedient and faithful, he
promises to open the treasures of his goodness, to give rain and fair
weather in due season, and to bless the labor of their hands. And Leuit. 26.
that the earth shall bring forth increase, and they shall be satisfied with
bread: and in this Chapter, God at the request of Solomon. promises to hear
the prayers of the people thus afflicted, calling unto him in that holy
Temple. Eliphas in the book of Job. says, That the Lord preserves from
death in Famine, and from the Sword in battle. Prou. 10.3. The Lord will not
famish the soul of the righteous. A sentence of sweet comfort against this
grievous temptation, then which scarce can be a greater. For we are ever in
fear least we pine for hunger, and the nearer we are to death, the more we
do fear this want, and therefore a sentence to be fully weighed, and
regarded.

Now him does Solomon call a Righteous man, which puts his trust in the
Lord, and follows his vocation carefully, and honestly, still preferring the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness. Psalm. 37. The kingly prophet David
says. In the perilous time, they shall not be confounded, and in the days of
dearth they shall have inogh. And presently after. I have been young, and now
am old, yet never saw I the just man forsaken, nor his seed begging bread.
Although the just be merciful and lends, yet his posterity shall not want.
Again: Psalm. 33. Behold the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
to deliver their souls from death, and to feed them in the time of dearth.
Again, Psalm 34. The Lions lack and suffer hunger, but they that fear the
Lord shall want no manner of thing that is good.

Many are the testimonies of the Prophets, wherein God shows that if his
people turn unto him with hearty repentance, he will give them plenty: As
O see the second, Joel the first and second, Amos the second. Zachary the
eight, Malachie the third. In which places God shows that he will relieve us
if we do repent. Zach. 10.1. Ask ye of the Lord rain, and it shall be
given you. Matthew. 6. Christ though he forbid all anxietie and distrustful care
for the things of this world, yet he promises all unto them that first seek
his kingdom. Neither are they bare promises, but armed for our comfort with
manifold examples, showing how God has fed many, and freed more in the time
of such distress. He preserved Moses in the Mount Sinai, without either meat
or drink forty days together. He fed Eliah at the brook Cherith, in the
Wilderness, and sent him food by Ravens, relieuing an hungry man by the
help of devouring fowls. So dealt he with the Widow of Sarept^^^, for
giving the Prophet that one loaf of bread which she had left, albeit she
looked for no other but death, when that was gone, neither the meal in her
barrel, nor the oil in her cruse failing, till the Famine ceased. Which
example for the excellency thereof our Savior repeateth, Luke 4. And again,
the same Prophet being persecuted by Iezabel, was fed by an Angel in the
desert, in the strength of which meat, he travailed forty days and 40.
nights, to the Mount Horeb. God when he brought his people out of Egypt (that
you may see more general examples of his providence) fed and preserved them
in the wilderness straungely forty years together, insomuch that their
Garments were not all that while worn; giving them Manna from Heaven,
appoynting them their daily stint and portion. When they wanted fresh water,
he willed Moses to strike the Rock, so that the very Cattle drunk their
fill, and being weary of Manna, and longing for flesh, he gave it them in
abundance, and very plentifully. For the Scripture says, There went a
wind forth from the Lord, and brought Quails from the Sea, and let them fall
upon the Camp, a days journey on this side, and a days journey on the other
side, round about the host, and they lay the thickenesse of two cubits upon
the earth, and the people gathered them night and day, and he that gathered
least, gathered ten Homers full. In the time of Elizeus he rid the Samaritans
from an extreme Famine, against all hope: where you have an excellent example
of a great Duke, that would not believe the Prophet, foretelling of this
strange plenty, who for his distrust, saw it, as the Prophet had said, but
inioyed it not. 2. Reg. 7. How miraculouslie did Christ feed thousands with
little five loaves, and two fishes. Mat. 14. seven loaves and a few fishes.
Matthew. 15. and yet baskets of fragments remaining: a miracle often repeated for
the confirmation of our faith. But you will say, Christ now adays works no
such wonders. He does, but we careless of them, do not observe them. Cast an
account of your daily expense for things necessary, and lay it to your commings
in, and see if God do not bless you much with a little. I am sure that many
have wo^dred how they should be able to defray so many charges laid upon them,
as now adays they are put to, having so small takings, but by the blessing of
God. It is recorded in the Chronicles of Austria, that Frederick the Emperor
having surnmoned a Parliament at Collen, to which resorted an huge multitude of
all sorts, he fearing that all the bread in the City would not suffice them,
and so the Parliament to be broke of, willed that account should be taken of
all the provision of bread, and compare the loaves with the men, and they found
the number of loaves to be by many fewer then the persons: and yet the next day
every man having eat his belly full, there was much bread still remaining. In
the Annals of Stumpsius, there is a memorable example of Gods present
assistance in extreme Famine. In the year 849. in Germany, among the Citizens
of Turing, one was purposed to fly with his wife and children, and to travail
abroad for succor of himself and them: as he passed through a wood being
even mad for hunger, he prouides himself to kill and eat his son, and being
now at his child's throat with his knife, on the sudden, as God would have it,
he spies two wolves praying upon a Stag, presently he leapes to them, drives
the^ away, and refreshes himself and his, with the new killed venison.
Sigebertus records it too, only differing in one year. In Anno. 1570. In
Bauaria it rained corn, of which much bread was baked: A singular testimony
of Gods provident presence. The like was done in Naples, Anno. 722. And in
Vasconia, anno. 828. But albeit these promises be true and just, yet are they
not so to be understood, as though we should utterly be without the cross:
since that even the Prophets and Apostles have felt the smart of hunger. For in
these as in other things, God deals as he pleases. He makes us hunger, that
we may be the more fervent in prayer: and again, though he keep us short of
these earthly things, yet he gives us greater gifts, Faith, Hope, Patience:
this being one of our comforts, which shall be the conclusion of this
discourse, which was our Savior his Prophecy, Math. 24. Luc. 21, that Famine
is one of the forerunners to the last day of judgment, whereby we have good
cause to lift up our heads and rejoice, because that day draws near. Wherein
being delivered from this and all other miseries and calamities whatsoever, we
shall there be everlastingly crowned in his eternal kingdom. To which he
bring us, who has bought it dearly for us.

FINIS.

