A MOST faithful Sermon preached before the Kings most excelle^te Majesty,
and his most honorable Council, in his Court at Westminster, by the reverend
Father Master.

Hughe Latymer.

Anno. Domi. M. D. L.

A Sermon preached before the King.
VIdete and cauete ab auaricia. Take heed and beware of covetousness, take
heed and beware of covetousness, take heed and beware of covetousness, take
heed and beware of covetousness. And what and if I should say nothing else these
three or. iiii. hours (for I know it will be so long, in case I be not
commanded to the contrary) but these words Take heed and beware of
covetousness, it would be thought a strange Sermon before a King to say
noteynge elsse but Cauete ab auaricia. Beware of Covetousness. And yet as
strange as it is, it would be like the Sermon of Jonas that he preached to the
Ninevites, as touching the shortness, and as touching the paucity or fewnes of
the words: For his Sermon was, Ad huc quadraginta dies, et Niniue subuertetur.
There is yet fourtye days to come, and Nynyue shall be destroyed. Thus he
walcked from street to street, and from place to place round about the City,
and said nothing else, but there is yet. xl. days (quod he) and Niniue shall be
destroyed. There is no great ods nor difference at the lest wise, in the
number of words, no nor yet in the sense or meaning between, these two
Sermons: There is yet forty days, and Niniue shall be destroyed, and these
words that I have taken to speak of this day: Take heed and beware of
Covetousness. For Niniue should be destroyed for sin, and of their sins
Covetousness was one, and one of the greateste, so that it is all one
infeffect. And as they be like concerning the shortness, the paucity of words,
the breuitye of words, and also the meaning and purpose: So I would they might
be like in fruit and profit, for what came of Jonas sermon? what was the fruit
of it? Ad predicacionem Ionae crediderunt Deo. At the preaching of Jonas they
believed God. Here was a great fruit, a great effect wrought, what is that
same, they believed god? They believed Gods Preacher Gods Offycer, Gods
Minister Jonas, and were converted from their syn. They believed that (as the
preachersayd) if they did not repent and amend their life, the Cyty should be
destroyed within fourtye days. This was a great fruit, for Jonas was but one
man, and he preached, but one Sermon, and it was but a short Sermon, neither as
touching the number of words, and yet he turned all the whole City great and
small, ritche and poor, king and al. We be mani preachers here in England, and
we preach many long Sermons, and yet the people will not repent nor convert.
This was the frut, the effect and the good that his Sermon did, that all the
whole City at his preaching converted and amended their evil living and did
pennaunce in sakcloth. And yet here in this Sermon of Jonas is no great
curiousnes, no great clerklines, no great affertacyon of words, nor of
painted eloquence, it was none other but Ad huc qua di aginta dies, and Niniue
subuertitur. yet fortye days and Niniue subuertitur, and Niniue shall be
destroyed, it was no more. This was no great curious Sermon, but this was a
nyppynge Sermon, apynchynge Sermon, a biting Sermon, it had a full byte, it was
a nyppynge sermon, a rough Sermon, and a sharp bitynge Sermon. Do you not hear
maruayle that these Ninevites cast not Jonas in prison, that they did not
reuyle him, and rebuke him? They did not revile him, nor rebuke him, but God
gave them grace to hear him, and to convert and amend at his preaching. A
strange matter, so noble a City to give place to one man's Sermon. Now England
cannot abide this gear, they cannot be content to hear Gods Minister and his
threatnyng for their sin. Though the Sermon be never so good, though it be
never so true. It is a naughty fellow, a sedicious fellow, he makes trouble
and rebellyon in the Realm, he lacks dyscression, but the Ninevites rebuked
not Jonas ye he lacks dyscression, or that he spoke out of time, that his
Sermon was out of season made. But in England if Gods Preacher, Gods Minister
be any thing quike, or do speak sharply, then he is a foolysh fellow, he is
rash, he lacks dyscression. Nowadayes if they cannot reprove the doctrine y^
is preached: then they will reprove the Preacher that he lacks dew
consideracion of the times, and y^ he is of lernyng sufficient, but he wants
discressyon, what a time is this pycked out to preach such things, he should
have a respect and a regard to the time, and to the state of things, and of
the Common w^^l. It reioiseth me sometimes when myfrend comes and tells me
that they find fault with (...)y dyscressyon, for by lykelyehoode (think I)
the doctrine is true, for if they could find faut with ye doctrine, they would
not charge me with the lack of discression, but they would charge me with my
doctrine, and not with the lack of discressyon, or with the inconueniency of
the time, I will now ask you a question: I pray you when should Jonas have
preached against the Covetousness of Niniue, if the covetous men should have
appointed him his time? I know y^ preachers ought to have a dyscressyon in
their preaching, and that they ought to have a consideracio^ and respect to the
place and to ye time that he preaches in, as I my self will say here that I
would not say in ye country for no good. But when then? syn must be rebuked,
sin must be plainly spoken against. And when should Jonas have preached
against Niniue, if he should have forborne for the respects of the times, or
the place or the state of things there? For what was Niniue, a noble, a rytche
and a welthy City. What is London to Niniue? like a village as Islington or
such another in comparison of London. Such a City was Niniue, it was three
days iourny to go through every street of it, and to go but from street to
street. There was noble men, rychmen, welthy me^, there was viciouse men and
covetous me^, and men that gave them selves to al voluptuouse living, and to
worldelynes of geting riches was this a time well chosen and discritely taken of
Jonas to come and reprove them of their sin, to declare unto them the
threatenings of God, and to tell them of their Covetousness, and to say plainly
unto them, that except they repented and amended their evil living, they and
their City should be destroyed of Gods hand within. xl. days? And yet they
heard Jonas and gave place to his preaching. They heard the threatninges of
God, and feared his stroke and vengeance, and believed God, ye is, they believed
Gods Preacher and Minister, they believed that God would be true of his word,
that he spoke by the mouth of his prophet, and there upon did penance to turn
away the wrath of God from them. Well what shall we say? I will say this and not
spare, Christ says: Niniue shall arise against y^ Jews at the last day and
bear witness against them, because that they hearing Gods threatnyngs for
sin. Ad predicacionem Io(...)e in cinere and sacco egerunt penitentiam, they
did penance at the preaching of Jonas in ashes and sackcloth (as the text
says there) and I say Niniue shall arise against England (thou England)
Niniue shall arise against England, because it will not believe God, nor hear
his Preachers that cry daily unto them, nor amend their lives, and specially
their Covetousness. Covetousness is as great a sin now, as it was then, and
it is the same sin now, it was then, for God hates sin, and al Covetousness
as much now, as he did then. And he will as sure stryke for syn now, as he did
then. But ah good God that would give them a time of repentance after his
threatnyng. First to se whyther they would amend or not, or he would destroy
them. For even from the beginning of the world they fell to sin. The first
age from Adam which was about two thousand years they fell ever to sin,
and they had prechers Noe and Enoch and other holy fathers. And in yt time a
great multiplicacio^ was that grew in two thousand years. For the Scripture
says: The sons of God saw the daughters of men that they were fair, and they
took them wives from among all that they had chosen. This is a long matter to
speak of al. But what means this the sons of God saw the daughters of me^?
who were these sons of God? The sons of God were those that came of the good
me^, of y^ good preachers, and of the holy fathers, that were gods me^, as they
that came of Seth and Enos, that were good men, and of others. For our
graundemother Eve, when Cayne had killed Abell, and then she had another son by
Adam, who was called Seth, What did she? She gave thanks to god for him, and
acknowledged that God it was which had given him unto her, for she said:
Dedit mihi deus seme^ pro Abel quem occidet Cain. GOD (said she) has given me
another sede in steed of Abell whom Cayne slew. Here is a long matter to
talk on. Some will say, was this a natural mother, was this naturally done to
publish the sin of her own son. what neded she to speak of that matter, or
to make any rehersall of that matter, to open the sin of her son, what
needed she this to do? yes, she was now a good woman, when she believed the
serpent, she was not good. But now she has repented yt deed, and had taken
hold of the promise of God, that there should come of her a seed, that should
tread down and destroy the head of the Serpente. She had taken hold of this
promys and was now a good woman and a godly woman, she opened the fault of
her son and hyd it not. Here could I say somewhat to them (if I would) that
spoke so much against me for my preaching hear the last year, Oh what a
great matter is made of it, and what a do, and what great faut is found with
me for speaking that I did of the Lord Admiral: A great matter is made of it:
But I will tell you, and I will speak now with a clear conscience: If it
were to do again and having the occasion that I then had: I would speak it
again every word of it, yea and a great deal more to. I spoke it for none
hatred. I spoke it but for an example of others to be ware thereby, and if it
were in the like occasion to be spoken again, I would speak it again. There
be some that think and say yt I was hired to it, and that my Lady of
Somersetes grace hired me to it. and that I was her feed man, and had money of
her to speak it. Well, so god help me, and as I shall answer in my
conscience, in my remembrance I never talked with her grace touching that man
in my life, nor (...) gave she me any thing in her life, for any such
purpose, and therefore they are to blame that speak so of m^.

But ^wys I could say somewhat to them again if I would, I know the bottes
that nip them by the guts.

But to return to Eve, and declare that the sons of God are to be
understood tgose that came of good men, as of Seth and Enos, and the same
good part of generation. And the daughters of men are to be understood of
the^ that came of Cain and of his seed. And therefore our graunde mother Eve
badde beware of maryinge with Caines seed, for feas of falling from God to
wickedness thereby. And here I would say a thing to your majesty, I shall speak
it of good will to your hyghnes, I would I were able to do your grace good
service in anything, ye should be sure to have it. But I will say this For
Gods love beware where you marrye, choose your wife in a fayeth full stock.
Beware of this worldly policy, mary in god, mary not for the great respect of
alyaunce, for thereof comes al these evils of breakinge of wedlock, which is
among Princes and noble me^. And here I would be a Suter unto your majesty,
for I come now rather to be a Suter and a Peticyoner then a Preacher, for I
come now to take my leave, and to take my, Vltimum uale, at least wise in
this place, for I have not long to live, so that I thyncke I shall never come
here into this plate again, and therefore I will ask a petycyon of your
hyghnes: For the love of God, take an order for maryages here in England. For
here is marriage for pleasure and boluptousnes and for goods, and so yt they may
join land to la^d, and possessions to possessions, they care for no more hear
in England. And that is the cause of so much adultry, and so much breach of
wedlock in y^ noble men, and gentlemen, and so much deuorcynge. And it is
not now in the noble men only, but it is come now to the inferyor sort.
Every man if he have but a small cause will cast of his old wife and take a
new, and will marye again at his pleasure, and there be many that have so
done. I would therefore wish that there were a law provided in this behalf for
adulterers, and that adultri should be punyshed with death, and that might be
a remedy for all this matter* There would not the^ be so much ad ultry, whordom
and lechery in England as there is. For the love of God take heed to it, and se
a remedy provided for it. I would wyshe that adultri should be punished with
death. And that the woman being an offender, if her housbande would be a suter
for her, she should be pardoned for the first time, but not for the second
time. And the ma^beyng an of fe^der should be pardoned, if his wife be a suter
for him, for the first time, but not for the second time, not if he offended
twyse. If this law were made there would not be so much adultery nor lechery
used in the realm as there is. Well I trust once yet as old as I am, to se
the day that lecherye shall be punyshed. It was never more need, for there was
never more lechery used in England as there is at this day, and mayntayned. It
is made but a laughinge matter, and a triste, and it is a sad matter and an
earnest matter. For leachery is a great sin, Sodom and Gomore was destroyed
for it. And it was one of the syns raygnyng in Niniue for which it should have
been destroyed. But think ye that leacherye was alone? No no, Couetuousnesse
was joined with it. Covetousness follows lechery, and commonly they go
together. For why, they that be given to voluptuousnes, and to the vice of
lechery, must have wherewyth to mayntaine it, and that must be gotten by
covetousness. For at the first when men fell to sin, and chiefly to lechery,
where fore the world should be destroyed (the book faith) there were Giaunts
in the earth in those days. And after that the sons of God had come to the
daughters of me^, and there had engendered with them. The same became mighty men
of the world, and men of renoume. etc. This is covetousness, for y^ book says.
Terra ^rat replet^ iniquitate, the earth was reple ate with iniquitye, for
they oppressed the poor. They made them haues, pessau^ts, villains and
bondme^ unto the^. These were Gyauntes, so called of the property of Giauntes,
for they oppres the weaker, and take from them what they list, by force,
vyolence and oppressyon. They were Gyauntes of the propertye of Gyauntes, not
that they were greater men of stature and strength of body then other me^ were.
For certain writers speaking of this matter, say: that they were Gyantes for
their cruelty and covetous oppression, and not in stature or pro(...)ritye of
body. Forther is no reason why Sethes children could beget on Cains daughters
greater me^ then others were in stature of body. But they were Gyauntes in the
property of Gyaunts for oppressyng of others by force and vyolence. And this
was covetousness wherewith God was so dyspleased, that he repented that he had
made man, and resolved utterly to destroy the world, and so called to Noe, and
told him of it. And I will not dyspute the matter with them (says God) from day
to day, and never the nere, but if they will not amend within an hundredth and.
xx. years. I shall bring in an universal (...)oud over their ears and
destroy them all. This was preached by Noe to them, and so that god of his
goodness patience and long sufferaunce, gave them a time to repent and amend
after his threatenynges, because they should se their evil doings, and
return to God. So they had an hundredth and. xx. years to repent. This Noe
was laughed to scorn, they like doddypoles laughed this godly father to
scorn, Well ye think little of the historye, if ye will know the menynge of it,
it is a great show what anger God has to sin.

But how long have thou England thou England? I can not tell, for god has not
revealed it unto me, if he had, So God help me I would tell you of it, I
would not be afraied, nor spare to tell it you for the good will I bear you,
but I can not tell how long time ye have, for God has not opened it unto
me: But I ca^ tell you that this lenity, this long forbering and holding of
his hand, provoke us to repent and amend. And I can tell that whosoever
contempneth this riches and treasure of Gods goodness of his mercy, his
patience and long sufferynge, shall have the more grievous co^dempnacion. This I
can tell well enough, Paul tells me this, and I can tell that ye have time
to repent as long as you live here in this world, but after this life I can
make no warante of any further time to repent. Therefore repent and amend
while ye be here, for when ye are gonne hence, ye are past that. But how long
that shall be whether to morrow or y^ next day, or xx. year, or how long, I
cannot tell. But in the mean time ye have many Jonasses to tell you of your
fauts and to declare unto you gods threatenings, except ye repent and amend,
therefore to return to my matter, I say as I said at the beginning: Vide te et
cauete ab auaricia. Videte. se it. First se it, and then amend it. For I
promise you great complayntes there is of it, and much crying out, and much
preching, but none amendment that I se. But Cauete ab auaricia, beware of
covetousness. And whi of covetousness Quia radix omnium malorum auaricia and
(...)piditas. For Covetousness is the root of all evil, and of al mischief.
Thus saying of Paul took me away from the gospel y^ is red in the church this
day, it took me from the epistle, that I would preach upon neither of them both
at this time, I cannot tell what alled me. But to tell you my imperfeccion: when
I was appointed to preche here, I was new come out of a sick nes, whereof I
looked to have died and weak I was. Yet nevertheless when I was appoyncted unto
it, I took it upon me, how be it I repented afterward that I had done. I was
displesed with myself, I was testi as Jonas was when he should go preach to
the Niniuits. Well, I looked on the Gospel that is red this day, tut it lyked me
not, I looked on the Epistle: tushe I could not away with that nether. And yet
I remember I had preached upon this epistle once before king Henry the. viii.
but now I could not frame with it, nor it liked me not in no sauce. Well, this
saying of Paul came in my mind, and at last I considered and waied the matter
deeply, and then thought I thus with myself: Is Covetousness the root of al
mischefe, and of al evil? then have at the root, and down wythal Covetousness.
So this place of Paul brought me to this text of Luke, Se and beware of
Covetousness Therefore you prechers out with your swords, and stryke at the
root, speak against Covetousness, and cry out upon it. Stand not tyckynge
and toyinge at the branches, nor at the boughs, (for then there will new
boughs and branches spring again of them:) but stryke at the root, and
fear not these Giauntes of England, these great men and men of power, these
me^ that are oppressors of the poor. Fear them not, but stryke at the rote of
al evil, which is mischeuouse covetousness. For covetousness is y^ cause of
rebellyon. I have forgotten my logyke, but yet I ca^ iumble at a Silogisme, and
make an argument of it to prove it by. Covetousness is y^ rote of al evil:
Rebellion is an evil, Ergo. Covetousness is ye root of rebellion. And so it
was in deed. Covetousness was the cause of rebellyon this last So^mer, and both
parties had covetousness, as well the gentle men as the commons. Both parties
had Covetousness, for both parties had an inor dynate desire to have that they
had not, and that is covetousness, an inordinate desire to have that one has
not. The commons would have had from the gentlemen such things as they desired.
The gentlemen would none of it, and so was there covetousness on both sides. The
Commons thought they had a right to the things that they inordinately sought
to have. But what then, they must not come to it that way. Now on the other
side the gentlemen had a desire to keep that they had, and so they rebelled to
against the kings commandment, and against such good order as he and his
councelle would have set in the realm. And thus both parties had covetousness,
and both parties did rebel. I heard say that there was godly ordynaunces
devised for the redress of it. But the Giants would none of it in no sauce. I
remember mine own self a certain Giaunt, a great man, who sat in commission
about such matters. And when the tounsemen should bring in what had been
enclosed, he frouned and chafed and so nere looked and threatened the poor me^,
that they durst not ask their right. I red of late in an act of parliament:
and this act made mention of an act that was made in king Henry's days (the.
iii. I trow it was, yea and such an other buysynes there was in king
Edwardes time the second also) In this parliament that I speak of, the
gentlemen and the commons were at varyaunce as they were now of late. And there
the gentle men that were landlords, would needs have away much lands from their
tenantes, and would neds have an act of parliament y^ it might be lawful for
them to enclose and make several from their tenauntes and from the commons
such porcions of their lands as they thought good, much a do there was about
this act. At last it was concluded and granted y^ they might so do, Provided
always that they should leave sufficient to y^ tenant. Well it was well yt they
were bound to leave sufficient for them. But who should be the judge to
lymite what was sufficient for them. Or who shall now judge what is sufficient,
well I for my part can not tell what is ^ufficie^t. But me thought it was well
that the tenauntes and poor commons should have sufficient, for if they had
sufficient (thought I) they had cause to be quiet. And then fell I to make
this argument within my self. If at yt time it were put in their will and
power, that they might enclose leaving to the tennant that were sufficient for
him, if they had it then in their power (thought I) that they might this do,
they would leave no more then suffyciente. If they left to the tenaunts and
pore commons no more in those days but suffycyente: then if they had any more
taken from them sense that time, then had they now not sufficient. They in
Christ ar equal with you. Peers of the realm must needs be. The poorest
ploughman is in Christ equal with the gretest prince that is. Let them
therefore have sufficient to maintain them, and to find them their
necessaryes. A ploughlande must have sheep, yea they must have sheep to dunge
their ground for bearing of corn (for if they have no sheep to healpe to fat
the ground, they shall have but bare corn and thynne.) They must have swyne for
their food to make their veneryes or bacon of, their bacon is their veniso^
(for they shall now have bangu^ tuum if they get any other venyson) so y^ bacon
is their necessary meat to feed on, which they may not lack. They must have
other cattels, as horses to draw their ploughe and for carriage of things to
the markets, and kine for their milk and chese, which they must live upon and
pay their re^ts. These cattle must have pasture which pasture if they lack,
the reaste must needs fail them. And pasture they cannot have, if the land be
taken in and enclosed from the^. So (as I said) there was in both parts
rebellion. Therefore for Gods love restore their sufficient unto them, and
search no more what is the cause of rebellyon. But se and beware of
covetousness, for covetousness is the cause of rebellyon. Well now, if
covetousness be the cause of rebellyon, then preaching against covetousness is
not the cause of rebellion. Some say that the preching now a days is the cause
of al sedicion and rebellion, for sense this new prechynge has come in, there
has been much sedicion, and therefore it must needs be that y^ prechyng is the
cause of rebellion here in England, forsoothe our preachinge is the cause of
rebellion, much like as Christ was cause of the destruccio^ of Jerusalem. For
(says Christ) Si non uenisse^ and locutus suissem eis, peccatum non haberent.
etc. If I had not come (says Christ) and spoken to them, they should have no
sin. So we preachers have come and spoken to you: we have drawn our swerdes
of Gods word, and stryken at the roots of all evil, to have them cut down,
and if ye will not amend, what ca^ we do more. And preaching is cause of
sedicio^ here in England, much like as Ely was the cause of trouble in Israel,
for he was a preachet there, and toulde the people of all degrees their
faults, and so they wynched and kycked at him, and accused him to Achab the
king, that he was a sedicious fellow, and a troublous precher and made much
uproar in the realm. So the king sent for him, and he was brought to Achab
the king, who said unto him: Art thou he that troubles all Israel? and
Ely answered and said: nay, thou and thy fathers house are they that trouble
al Israel. Ely had preached gods word, he had plainly told the people of
their evil doyngs, he had showed them Gods threatenynges: (In gods behalf I
speak, there is neither king nor Emperor, be they never in so great estate,
but they are subject to gods word) and therefore he was not afraid to say to
Achab: it is thou and thy fathers house that causes all the trouble in
Israel. Was not this presumptuously spoken to a king? was not this a sedicious
fellow: was not this fellows preaching a cause of all the trouble in Israel?
was he not worthy to be cast in bocardo or little ease? No, but he had used
gods sword which is his word, and don nothing elsse that was evil, but they
could not abide it, he never dysobeyed Achabs sword which was the regal
power. But Achab dysobeyed his swerd, which was the word of God. And therefore
by the punyshmente of god much trouble arose in y^ realm for the sins of
Achab and the people. But Gods preacher gods prophet was not the cause of y^
trouble. The^ is it not we Preachers that trouble England. But here is now an
argument to prove the matter against the preachers. Here was preaching against
covetousness all the last year in Lent, and the next so^mer followed rebellion:
Ergo preaching against covetousness, was y^ cause of the rebellyon, A goodly
argument, Hear now I remember an argument of master Mores, which he brings
in, in a book that he made against Bilney and here by the way I will tell you a
merytoy. Master Moore was once sent, in commissyon into Kent, to help triout
(if it might be) what was y^ cause of Goodwin sa^ds and the shelf that stopped
up Sandwych haven. Thither comes master Moore, and calls the country before
him, such as were thought to be me^ of experience and me^ that could of
lykelyhod best certify him of that matter concerning the stoppyng of Sandwich
haue^. Among others came in before him an old man with a white head, and one
that was thought to be little less the^ an hundredth years old. When master
Moore saw this aged man, he thought it expedient to here him say his mind in
this matter (for being so old a man it was lykely that he knew most of any
man in that presence and company.) So master Moore called this old aged man
unto him, and said: Father (said he) tell me if ye ca^, what is the cause of
this great arising of the sands and shelues hear about this haven, the which
stop it up that no ships ca^ ariue here. Ye are the eldest man that I can espy
in all this company, so that if any man can tell any cause of it, ye of like
lyhoode can say most in it, or at least wise more then any other man here
assembeled. yea forsooth good master (quod this old man) for I am well nigh an
hundredth years old, and no man here in this company any thing nere unto
mine age. Well then (quod master Moore) how say you in this matter? what thike
ye to be the cause of these shelues and (...)attes that stop up Sandwych haven?
Forsothe sir (quoth he) I am an old man I think that Tenterton steple is the
cause of Goodwyn sands, for I am an old man sir (quod he) and I may remember
the building of Tenterto^ steple, and I may remember when there was no steeple
at all there. And before that Tenterton steeple was in buildynge, there was no
manner of speaking of any flats or sands that stopped the heaven, and therefore
I think that Tenterton steple is the cause of the destroyinge and the decaying
of Sandwyche haven. And even so to my purpose is preaching of Gods word the
cause of rebellyon, as Tenterton steple was cause that Sandwich haue^ is
decayed. And is not this agai matter, that such should be taken for great wise
men, yt will thus reason against ye preacher of Gods word? But here I would take
an occasyo^ by the way of a dygressyon to speak somewhat to my Sisters the
women to do them some good to, because I would do al folks good if I could,
before I take my Vltimum uale (at least wise here of this place) for I thynk
(...) shall no more come here. For I (...) I have not long to live. So that I
judge I take my leave now of the court for ever, and shall no more come in
this place. Achab was a king, but Jesabel Jesabel she was y^ perilous woman.
She would rule her husband the king, she would bear a stroke in althings, and
she would order matters as pleased her, and so will many women do, they will rule
their husbands and do althinges after their own minds. They do therein against
the order by God appointed them. They break their Iniuncyon that God gave
unto them. Yea, it is now come to y^ lower sort, to mean men's wives, they will
rule and apparelle them selves gorgeously, and some of them far above their
degrees, whyther their husbands will or no. But they break their Iniuncion,
and do therein contrari to Gods ordynance. God says: Subdita eris sub
pote^tate uiri.

Thou shall be subject under the power of thy husband. Thou shalt be subject.
Women are subjects, ye be subjects to your husbands, At the first y^ man and
the woman were equal. But after that she had given credyte to the serpente, then
she had a iniunccion set upon her: Subditaeris subpotestate uiri, thou shall be
subject under ye power of thy husband. And as for (...) part of her iniunccio^
she takes, and she takes one part of her pe^nance, because she cannot avoid
it: and that is: In dolor paries: Thou shalt bring forth children with pain
and traueile. This part of their iniunccyon they take, and yet is the same so
grievous, that Christome says: if it were not for the ordinance of God which
cannot be made frustrate by man, they would never come to it again for no
worldly good. But god has provided here in. And (as Christ says in the
Gospel: Muiter cu^ parit tristici^ habet. etc. The woman when she bears child
has sorrow, but afterward she remembers not the pain, because there is a
soul brought forth into the world. But as it is a part of your penance ye we
men to travel in be aryng your children: so is it a part of your pennaunce to
be subjects unto your husbands, ye are underlings, underlings, and must be
obedyente. But this is now made a trifle and a small matter. And yet it is a
sad matter a godly matter, a gostly matter. A matter of damnacio^ and
salvation. And Paul says yt a woman ought to have a power on her head. What
is this to have a power on her head? It is a manner of speaking of the
scripture, and to have her power on her head, is to have a sign and a token
of power, which is by coueringe of her head, declaring that she has a
superioure above her, by whom she ought to be ruled and ordered. For the is not
immediately under God, but mediately. For by their iniunccion the husband is
their head under God and they subjects unto their husbands. But this power
that some of the^ have is disgused gear and of strange facyons.

They must we are Frenchehoodes, and I cannot tell you I, what to call it. And
when they make them ready and come to the covering of their head, they will
call and say, give me my French hoode, and give me my Bonet or my cap and so
forth. I would wish that y^ women would call the covering of their heads by the
terms of the scripture. As when she would have her cappe, I would she would say
give me my power, I would they would learn to speak, as the holy ghost
speaks, and call it by such a name as Saint Paul doothe. I would they would
(as they have much pryckynge) when they put on their cap, I would they would
have this meditacio^, I am now puttyng on my power upon my head, If they had
this thought in their minds, they would not make so much pricking up of them
selfs as they do now a days. But now hear is a vengaunce devil: we must have
our power from Turkey of Ueluet, and gay it must be. Far fet, dear bought,
and when it comes it is a false sign. I had rather have a true Englysh sign
then a false sign from Turki. It is a false sign when it covers not their
heads as it should do. For if they would keep it under the power as they
ought to do, there should not any such Tussockes nor tuftes be seen, as there
be, nor such laying out of y^ here nor breydynge to have it open. I would
merueile of it how it should come to be so abused and so far out of order,
saving that I know by experience, that mani will not be ruled by their
husbands as they ought to be. I have been desired to exhort some, and with
some I could do little in that matter. But there be now many Adams that will not
displease their wives, but will in this behalf let them have all their own
minds and do as them lists. And some others again there be now a days y^
will defend it, and say it may be suffered well enough, because it is not
express in Scripture, nor spoken of by name. Though we have not expressed
mention in scripture against such laying out of the hear in Tussockes and
Tufftes: yet we have in scripture express mencyon. Detortis erinibus, Of
writhen hear, that is for the nonce forced to courle. But of these tussocks
that are laid out now a days, there is no mencyon made in scriptures, because
they were not used in scripture time. They were not yet come to be so far out of
order, as to lay out such tussocks and tufftes, but I will tell the, if thou
wylt needs lay it out, or if thou will neades show thy hear and have it
seen: go and powle thy head or round it, as me^ do, for to what purpose is it
to pull it out so, and to lay it out? some do it (say they) of a simplicity,
Some do it of a pride. And some of other causes. But they do it because they
will be quarter masters with their husbands, quarter masters? Nay, half
masters yea some of them will be hole masters and rule the roast as they list,
them selves. But these defenders of it will not have it evil, because it is not
spoken of in scripture. But there be other things as evil as this which are
not spoken of in scripture expressly, but they are employed in scripture as
well as though they were there expressly spoken of. For the Prophet Esaias
says. Vequi consurgitis mane ad comessandum, ad Ebrietatem sectandam, et potan
do usque aduesperam, ut uino estuetis. Woo unto you that arise early in the
morninge, and goo to drynckynge until night, that ye may swim in wine. This
is the scripture against banqueting and dronkennes. But now they banquet al
night, and lie a bed in the day time till none, and the scripture speaks
nothing of that. But when then? the devil has his purpose this way, as well
as the other, he has his purpose as well by reuellynge and keeping ill rule al
night as by rysynge early in the morning and banquetinge alday. So the devil
has his purpose both ways. Ye noble men, ye great men I wot not what rule ye
keep: For Gods sake here the complayntes and suytes of the poor. Many
complain against you y^ ye liea bed till viii. or. ix or. x. of the clock, I
cannot tell what revel ye have over night, whether in banquetyng, or dycynge,
or cardynge, or how it is. But in the morning when poor Suitors come to your
houses, ye cannot be spoken wythall. They are kept sometimes without your
gates, or if they be let into the hall or some utter chamber, out comes one
or other. Sirre, ye cannot speak with my Lord yet, my lord is a sleep or he
has had business of y^ kings al night. etc. And thus poor Suitors are driven
of from day to day, that they cannot speak with you in. iii. or. iiii. days,
ye a hole month, what shall I say more? ye a hole year somtymes err they can
come to your spech, to be hard of you, For gods love look better to it,
speak with pore men when they come to your houses, and dyspatche poor
suitors, as in deed some noble men do, and would Christ that al noble men
would so do. But some do. I went one day my self be time in the morning to a
great ma^s house, to speak with him, in busynes that I had of min own. And me
thought I was up betimes, but when I came thither, the great man was gone forth,
about such affairs as behooved him, or I came. Well, yet (thought I) this is
well, I like this well. This man does somewhat regard and consider his office
and duty. I came to late for mine own matter, and lost my iourny, and my
early risinge to and yet I was glad y^ I had been so begyled. For Gods love
follow this example ye great men, and arise in the mornings, and be redi for
men to speak with them, and to dyspatche Sewters that resort unto you. But al
these I bring to dysproue them that defend evil things, because they be not
expressly spoken against in the scripture.

But what forces that? when the dyuyll has his purpose and is served as well
one way as an other way: though it be not expressye spoken against in
scripture, yet I reke^ plainly enough employed in the scripture. But now to
come to my matter again. Videte et cauete ab auaricia, See and beware of
Covetousness, and I shall desire you to consider. iiii. things, Quis dicat,
quid dicat, cui dicat, et quare dicat, who speakethe it, what he speaks, to
whom he speaks, and wherefore he speaks it. As here Christ speaks, to a
rych man against avarice. And whi against auarise? what shall be the end of all
couetouse persons? eternal damnacyon. For the couetouse persons (says Paul)
shall not possess ne enter into the kyngedome of God, hear therefore I shall
desire you to pray. etc.

VIdete cauete ab auaricia, See, and beware of couetousenes. First who spoke
these words? Forsothe Christ speak them, if I had spoken them of my self, it
had been little worth. But Christ spoke, and upon a good occasion: The story
is Duo litigaban(...) inter se. there were two at strife between the^ selves.
Luc. xii. and by this it appears that Christ spoke the^ well. Christ spoke
these words at that time, and now he speaks them by his preacher, whom ye
ought to believe and so it is al one. But upon what occasion did he speak it,
there were. ii. brethren at strife together for lands, welthy men (as it
appears) and the rich fellow would not tarry till Christ had ended his sermon:
but interrupted it, and would needs have his matter dispatched by and by. He was
at Christ's Sermon, but yet he would not differ his worldlycause till Christ had
made an end of his godly exhortacion. This was a thornie brother, he was a
gospeller, he was a carnal gospeller (as many be now adays for a piece of
an abbey or for a porcyon or chau^try lands) to get somewhat by it and to serve
his comodytye: He was a gospeller one of ye new brethren somewhat worsse then a
rank papiste. How be it a rank papyst now a days shall sooner have
promocyon then a true Gospeller shall have, the more pity. But this was a
thorni gospeller, he heard Christ's preaching and followed him for company,
and heard his words. But he was never the better for it, but the care of the
world, so choked the word of God in him, that he could not hear the sermon to
ye end, but interrupted the sermon for his worldly matter yer it were al done?
And what was Christ then doing? forsoo the he was sowing of good seed, but
it fell upon stonye ground, so that it could not take any rote in this fellow
to bring forth good fruit in him. And let me tell you of the sede that Christ
was then sowing. Bear with me a while and saying that I come now to take mine
Vltimu^ uale of this place, hear me patiently, and give me leave a little
while, and let me take my leave honestly. At the time when this fellow
interrupted Christ's sermon, he was preaching a long Sermon to his Dyscyples,
and to the people being gathered together in a wounderfull great multitude as
appears in the xii. Chapter of Saint Lukes Gospel, and there he first of al
taught his disciples a good lesson, saying: Cauete uobis a farmento
Phariseorum. Beware in any wise (says he) from the leven of the Pharisees. What
is this leven of the Pharisees? Leaue^ is sometimes taken for corrupt living,
which infectethe others by the evil example thereof, and against such corrupt
living, Gods preachers must cry out earnestlye, and never cease till it be
rooted up. In the City of Corinthe one had married his stepmother, his fathers
wife. And he was a iolye fellow a great rich man, an alderman of the Cyty, and
therefore they wyncked at it, they would not meddle in the matter, they had
nothing to do with it, and he was one of the head me^, of such rule and
authority that they durst not, many of them. But. S. Paul hearing of yt
matter, writ unto them, and in Gods behalf charged them, to do away such
abhomynacyon from among them. Saint Paul would not leave them, till he had
excommunicated the wicked doer of such abhominacion. If we should now
excommunicate all such wicked doers, there would be much a do in England, Ye
that are Magestrates, she we favor for affeccion to such, and will not suffer
they may be rooted out or put to shame. Oh, he is such a man's servant, we may
not do him any shame, Oh, he is a gentleman. etc. And so the thing is not now
any thing looked unto. Lecherye is used thoroweoute England, and such lecherye
as is used in none other place of the world. And yet it is made a matter of
sport, a matter of nothing, a lawghyng matter, and a tryste not to be passed
on, nor not to be reformed. But beware ye that are magestrates, their sin
does leaven you all, Therefore for gods love beware of this leue^. Well I trust
it will be one day amended. I look not to live long, and yet I trust (as old as
I am) to live so long as to se lechery punyshed. I would wysh yt Moses law were
restored for punishment of lechery, and that the offe^ders therein might be
punyshed according to y^ prescripcion of Moses law. And here I will make a
suit to your hyghenesse to restore unto the church y^ discipline of Christ. In
excommunicatinge such as be notable offenders, nor never deuyse any other
way. For no man is able to deuyse a better way then God has done, which is
excommunicacyon to put them from the congregacyon till they be confounded.
Therefore restore Christ's discyplyne for excommunicacio^. And that shall be a
mean both to pacifi gods wrath and indygnacion against us, and also that les
habominacion shall be used, then in times paste has been, and is at this day.
I speak this of a conscience, and I mean and move it of a good will to your
grace and your realm. Bring into the church of England open discipline of
excommunicacion that open sinners may be strycken with. Sometime leaven is
taken for corrupt doctrine, and so it is here taken in this place when he
says: Be ware of the leaven of the Pharise is. For Christ intended to make
his discyples teachers of all the world: and therefore to beware of corrupt
doctrine. And that that he said to them he says also to us. Receive no
corrupt doctrine, no myngle mangle: yet there be leaueners yet still and
mingle manglers, that have sowred Christ's doctrine, with the leaven of the
Pharysyes. Yea and where there is any peace of leaven, they will maintain
that one piece, more then all the doctrine of Christ, and about that purpose
they occupy and bestow all their wits. This was the first seed. The
second seed was Nihil occultum, quod non reuelabitur. There is nothing
pryuye or hydden that shall not be revealed and opened. It parteyne the all to
one purpose, for there he taught his disciples too beware of the leaven,
which was hypocrysye declarynge unto them that hypocrisye, would not be all
ways hydden but such as were not sincere should be known at the last day,
and all that was taught should at length be known. It has also an other
meaning for it is Gods proverb. There is nothing so pryuye but it shall be
opened, at least wise in the great day of reconnynge.

In the dreadefull day of the general account, in the day of reuelacion.
Then shall it be openly know en what so ever is done: be it never so pryuelye
done. These fellows that have their fetches and their far compasses too
bring things too their purposes, work they never so preuely never so
couertlye, yet at the last day, their doings shall be openly revealed.
Vsque ad sacietatem uisionis (says the Prophet Esaias) that is, till all the
world shall see it, to their shame and confusyon that are the doers of it. As
the Prophet Jeremy says: Sicut confunditur fur qui deprehenditur. etc. Even
as a theife that is taken with the manner when he stealethe. So shall sinners
be openly confounded, and their evil doings opened. Yea and though it be
not known in this world, yet it shall be known at the last day to their
dampnacyons. In deed God has veryfyed his proverb from time to time.
Nothing is so preuy the which shall not be reueyled. When Cayne had killed his
brother Abel: he thought he had conveyed the matter so preuelye and so
closelye, that it should never have been known nor have come to light, but
first God knew it well enough, and called unto him saying: Caine where is thy
brother: Abell? tut he thought he could have begyled God to. And therefore he
answered. I can not tell, what (quod Cain) am I set to keep my brother? I
cannot tell where he is. But at last he was confounded, and his murder brought
to light. And now all the world reads it in the Bible. Josephes brethren had
sold him a way: they took his motely cote and he sprinkled it over and over
with blood, they thought all was cock sure, they had conveyed the matter so
secretly, that they thought al ye world could never have espied it. And yet
out it came to their great benefit. And now it is known to us all as many
as can read the Bible. David saw a fair woman wash her naked. Though he was
straight way ravished, he was clean gone by and would needs have her. He sent
for her Yea he had gentlemen of his chamber about him that went for her by and
by and fet her. And here I have an other suit to your hyghnes. When you come to
age beware what parsons ye have about you. For if ye be set on pleasure, or
dysposed to wanto^nesse. Ye shall have mynysters enough, to be furtherers and
instruments of it. But David by his wisdom and policy thought so to have
cloked the matter, that it should never have been known. He sent for her
husband Urias, and showed him a fair countenance, and looked mere lie on him,
and sent him forth to war that he might do his pleasure with Bersaba
afterward, and he thought he had wrought wo^derous pryuelye. He thought all
the matter cock sure. But the Prophet of God (Nathan) came and laid his
fault plain before his face, and who is now that knows it not? Elyzeus
servant Giezi, a bribing brother, he came coulourablye to Naaman the Sirian: he
fained a tale of his master Elizeus, as al bribers will do and told him that
his master had need of this and that, and took of Naaman certain things and
brybed it away to his own behoof secretly, and thought that it should never
have come out, but Elizeus knew it well inoughe. The servant had his bribs
that he sought, yet was he stryke^ with the lepre, and so openly shamed.
Think on this ye that are brybers when ye goo secreatelye about such
things, have this in your minds when ye deuyse your secreate fetches and
conueiaunce, how Eliseus servant was served and made to be openly known. For
gods proverb will be true: there is nothing hidden yt will not be revealed. He
that took the silver basin and ewer for abrybe, thinks that it will never
come out, but he may now know that I know it, and I know it not alone,
there be mo besides me that know it. Oh briber and bryberye, he was never a
good man that will so take brybes. Nor I can never believe that he that is a
briber shall be a good justice. It will never be merye in England till we have
the skins of such. For what needs brybynge where men do their things
vprightlye, as for men that are officers and have a matter of charge in their
hands. But now I will play saint Paul. And translate the thing on my self. I
will become the kings offycer for a while. I have to lay out for the king
twenty thousand pounds, or a great sum whatsoever it be, well when I have
laid it out, and do bring in mine account, I must give. iii. hundredth
marks to have my byls warranted. If I have done truly and vprightlie what
should need me to give a penye to have my bylles warraunted? if I have done my
office truly, and do bring in a true account: Wherefore should one groate be
given? yea one groate for warrantinge of my byls? Smell ye nothing in this?
what needs any brybes geuynge except the byls be false? no man gives
brybs for warrantyng of his bills except they be false byls. Well such practice
has been in England, but beware it will out one day. Beware of Gods
proverb: there is nothing hydden that shall not be opened. Yea even in this
world, if ye be not the children of dampnacyon. And hear now I speak to you
my masters Mynters, Augmentacyoners, Receivers, surueiers, and Auditors: I
make a piticion unto you: I beseech you all be good to the King. Be good to
the king, he has been good to you, there fore be good to him, yea, be good
too your own souls. Ye are known well inoughe what ye were, before ye came to
your offices, and what lands ye had then, and what ye have purchased sense,
and what buyldynges ye make daily, well I pray you so build, that the kings
workmen may be paid. They make there moan that they can not get no money. The
poor laborers, gunmakers, poudermen bowmakers. Arrowmakers, smiths
carpenters, soldiers, and other crafts cry out for their duties. They be
unpaid some of them three or. iiii. months: yea some of them half a
year: yea and sum of them put up bylles this time. xii. mo^ths for their
monye, and can not be paid yet. They cry out for their money,) and as the
Prophet says) Clamor operariorum ascendit ad aures meas. The cry of the
workmanne is come up to mine ears. Oh for gods love let the work men be paid,
if there be monye enough? there will whole showers of gods vengeance rain
down upon your heads. Therefore ye mynters, and ye Augmentacioners, serve the
king truly. So buyld and purchase that the king may have monye to pay his
workmen. It seems evil fauouredli, that ye should have enough where with to build
superstuously, and the king lack to pay his poor laborers. well, yet I doubt
not but that there be some good officers. But I will not swear for all, I have
now preached iii. Lents. The first time I preached restitucion, restitucion
(quod some)? what should he preach of restytucyon let him preach of
contryssyon (quod they) and let restitucyon alone.

We can never make restitucyon, (The^ say I) if thou will not make
restitucion, thou shalt go to the devil for it. Now chose the either
restitucio^ or else endless da^pnacio^. But now therbe two manner of
restitucioners, secret restitucion, and open restitucion whither of both it be,
So yt restitucion be made it is al good enough. At my first preaching of
restituion, one good man took remorce of consyence, and acknowledged him self
to me, that he had deceived the king. And willing he was to make restitucio^,
and so the first le^t came to my hands twenty pounds to be restored to the
kings use. I was promised. xx. pound more the same lent, but it could not be
made, so that it came not. Well, ye next lent came three hundrethe and twentye
pounds more. I received it my self, and paid it to the kings Counsel. So I
was asked, what he was that thus made restytucyon.

But should I have named him? naie they should as sone have this wesau^t of mine.
Well, now this le^t came one hundredth and fore score pounds. x. s. which I have
paid and delivered this present day to the kings comcel. And so this man has
made a godly restitucio^. And so (quod I to a certain noble manne that is one
of the kings council) if every man yt has beguiled the king should make
restytucion after this sort, it would coughe the king. xx. M. pounds I thyncke
(quod I) yea that it would (quod the other) a whole. C. M. pounds. Alac alac,
make restitucion for Gods sake make restitucion, ye will cough in hell elsse,
that all the deuylles there will laughe at your coughinge: There is no remedy
but restitucion open or secret, or elsse hell. This that I have now told you
of was a secret restitucion. Some examples has be^ of open restitucion, and
glad may he be that God was so fre^dly unto him to bring him unto it in this
world. I am not a fraied to name him. It was master Sheringto^, an honest
gentleman and one that God loves. He openly confessed that he had deceived the
king, and he made open restitucyon. Oh what an argument may he have against
the devil, when he shall move him to desperacyon, God brought this out to his
amendment. It is a token that he is a chosen man of god and one of his elected.
If he be of God he shall be brought to it, therefore for gods sake make
restitucyon, or else remember Gods proverb: There is nothing so secret, etc. If
you do either of these two in this world, then are ye of God, if not, then for
lack of restitucion, ye shall have eternalle dapmnacyon. Ye may do it by
means, if you dare not do it your selfs, bring it to another, and so make
restitucio^. If ye be not of Gods flock, it shal^e brought out to your shame
and damnacion at the last day, when al evil men's sins shall be laid open
before us. Yet there is one way, how all our sins may be hydden^ which is
repent and amend, Recipiscentia, recipiscentia. Repenting and amending is a
sure remedi, and a sure way to hyde al, y^ it shall not come out to our shame
and confusion. Yet there was an other seed that Christ was sowing in that
sermon of his, and this was the sede: I sai to you my fre^des fear not him
that kills the body: but fear him, that after he has killed, has power
also to cast into hell fire. etc. And there to put his disciples in comfort
and sure hoope of his healpe, and out of all doubt and mystruste of his
assystence: he brings in unto them the example of the sparrowes, how they
are fed by Gods meare prouydence and goodness, and also of the hears of
our heads, how that not so much as one hear falls from our heads without
him, fear him (says he) that when he has killed the body, may also cast
into hell fire. Matter for all kinds of people hear, but specially for
kings. And therefore hear is an other suit to your highness. Fear not him
that kylleth the body: Fear not these forayne Princes and forayne powers.
God shall make you strong inoughe.

Stycke to God, fear God, fear not them, God has sent you many storms
in your youth. But forsake not God, and he will not forsake you: Peradventure
ye shall have that shall move you, and say unto you: Oh sir, oh such a one is
a great man, he is a mighty Prince, a king of great power, ye can not be
without his frendeship, agree with him in Relygyon, or elsse ye shall have him
your enemy. etc.

Well, fear them not, but cleave to God, and he shall defend you. Do not
asking Achab did, that was a frayde of the Assirian king, and for fear lest
he should have him to his ennemy, was content to forsake God, and to agree with
with him in religion, and worshippynge of God. And a non sent to Urias the
high Priest, who was ready at once to set up the Idolatry of the Assirian
king. Do not your highness so, fear not the best of them all, but fear God.
The same Urias was Capellanus ad manum, a chaplain at hand, an elbowe
chaplayne. If ye will turn, ye shall have that will turn with you, yea even
in their white rotches. But follow not Achab: Remember the hear how it
falls not without gods providence Remember the sparowes how they build in
every house, and God prouydeth for them. And ye are much more preciouse to
me (says Christ) then sparowes or other birds. God will defend you, that
before your time comes, ye shall not dye nor myscary. On a time when Christ
was going to Jerusalem, his dysciples said unto him: They there would have stoned
the, and wylt thou now go thither again? What (says he again to the^) Nonne
duodecem sunt horae die. etc.

Be there not twelve hours in y^ day? (says he). God has appointed his
times, as pleases him, and before the time comes that God has appointed,
they shall have no power against you. Therefore stycke to God and forsake him
not, but fear him, and fear not me^. And beware chiefly of two affeccions:
fear and love. Fear as Achab, of who^ I have told you that for fear of the
Assiria^ king he changed his religion, and thereby purchased godsh ie
indignacio^ to him and to his realm. And love, as Dina Jacobs daughter, who
caused a change of religion, by Sichem and Hemor who were contented for lust of
a wife to the destruccio^ and spoylynge of all the whole city: Read the
Chronicles of England and France, and ye shall see what chaunges of religion
has come by marriages, and for marriages.

Marye my daughter and be baptized, and so forth, or elsse. etc. Fear them
not. Remember the sparowes. And this rule should al estates and degrees of men
follow, where as now they fear men and not god. If there be a judgment
between a great man and a poor man: Then must there be a corrupcio^ of
justice for fear. Oh he is a great man, I dare not dysplease him. etc. Fi^ upon
the, art thou a judge and wilt be a frayed to give right judgment? fear him
not be he never so great a man, but vpryghtlye do true justice. Likwyse so^e
pastures go from their cure, they are afraid of y^ plage, they dare not come
nigh any sick body: but hyer other, and they go away themselves. Out upon
the. The wolf comes upon thy stock to devour them, and when they have most
need of the, thou runnest awa^ from them. The souldioure also that should go on
warefare, he will draw back as much as he can. Oh I shall be ^^ain. Oh such
and such went and never came home again: Such men went the last year into
Northfolke, and were slain there. Thus they are afraied to go. They will labor
to tarry at home. If the king command the to go, you art bound to go, and
serving the king, thou seruest god. If thou serve God, he will not shorten thy
days to thine hurt. Well says some, if they had not gone they had lived unto
this day. How know you that? who made the so privy of gods council? follow thou
thy vacacio^, and serve y^ kig, when he calls the. In seruig him you shall
serve god. And til thy time come, you shall not die. It was merueyle that Jonas
escaped in such a city, what then? Yet God preserved him, so that he could
not pearish. Take therefore an example of Jonas, and every man follow his
vocacion not fearing men, but fearing God. And other seed that Christ was
sowing in yt sermon was this: Qui confessus me fuerit hominibus, confitebor et
ego illum coram pair meo. He that confesses me before me^, I shall also
confess him before my father. We must confess him with mouth. It was of a
bishop not long a goo asked as touching this, laws (says he) must be
obeyed and ciuyle ordinance, I will follow outwardly, but my heart in religion is
fre to think as I will, So said Friar Forest half a papist, yea worsse then a
hole papiste. Well an other seed was: he that sins against the holy ghost,
it shall not be forgeuen him neither in this world, nor in the world to come.

What is this same sin against the holy ghost? an horrible sin that
shall never be forgeuen neither in this world nor in the world to come: what
is this sin? final impenitency, and some say, impu^gninge ^f the truth. One
came to me ones, that dyspayred, because of sin against the holy ghost. He
was sore troubled in his conscience, yt he should be dampened, and that it was
not possible for him to be saved, because he had sinned against the holy ghost.
I said to him: what man (quod I) comfort yourselfe in these words of the
Apostle: Christus est propiciatio pro peccatis nostris. And again: Ideo me
misit pater in mundu^, ut qui credit in me no^ pereat, sed habeat uitam
eternam. My father has for this purpose sent me into the world, that he which
believes in me, may not pearyshe, but may have the life everlasting. Also:
Quaqumque hora ingemuerit peccator saluus erit. In what hour soever the sinner
shall mourn for his sin, he shall be saved. I had scriptures inoughe for me (as me
thought) but say what I could say, he could say more against him self, then
I could sai at y^ time to do him good with all. Where some say that the sin
against the holy ghost, is original sin: I alleged against that, the
saying of saint Paul. Sicut par unius delictum. etc. And si qui segerit
penitenci^. If a man had done all the sins in the world, and have true
repentance, with faith and hope in Gods mercy, he shall be forgeuen. But
whatsoever I said he could still obiecte against me and aduoyde my reasons.
I was feign to take an other day, and did so. Let me goo to my book (quod
I) and goo you to your prayers, for ye are not all together without faith. I
got me to my study, I red many doctoures, but none could content me, no
expositoure could please me nor satisfy my mind in the matter. And it is with
me as it is with a scholar of Cambridge, who being demanded of his Tutoure
how he understood his lesson, and what it mente: I know (quod he) what it
means, but I can not tell it, I can not express it. So I understood it
well enough, but I can not well declare it. Nevertheless I will boungle at
it as well as I can. Now to tell you by the way what sin it was that he
had committed, he had fallen from the truth known, And afterward fell
to mockinge and scornynge of it. And this sin it was that he thought to be
vnforgeueable. I said unto him, that it was a vehemente manner of speakinge in
scripture, yet (quod I) this is not spoken vnyuersallye, nor it is not mente
that God doothe never forgive it, but it is commonly called Irremyssyble,
vnforgeueable, because that God does seldom for give it, but yet there is no
sin so great but God may forgive it, and doothe forgive it to the
repentaunte heart, though in words it sound that it shall never be forgiven:
As priuilegiu^ paucorum non destruit regulam universale^n. The privilege of a
few persons does not destroy an universal rule or saying of scripture. For
the scripture says: Omnes moriemur. We shall (...) every one of us, yet some
shall be ra^te and taken a live, as saint Paul (...) For this privilege of a
few does not hurt a generaltye. An irre(...)le sin, an inexcusable sin
yet to him that will truly repent, it is forgeueable, In Christ it may be
remytted, if there be no more but one man forgeuen, ye may be that same one
man that shall be forgeuen. Vbi a bundauit deli^tum, ibi abundauit et gracia.

Where iniquitye has habounded there shall grace habounde. Thus by little and
little this man came to a settled conscience again, and took comfort in
Christ's mercy. Therefore dyspayre not though it be said it shall never be
forgeuen. Where Cain said my wickedness is so great that God cannot forgive it.
Nay thou lie says Austen to Caine. Mayor est dei miseri cordia, quam
iniquitas tua. The mercy of God is greater then thine iniquitye, Therefore
despair not, but this one thing I say: beware of this sin y^ ye fall not
into it, for I have known no mobut this one man that has fallen from the
truth, and has afterward repented and come to grace a gain, I have known
many sense God has opened mine eyes to see a little, I have known many (I
say) that knew more then I, and some who^ I have honored, that have after
wards fallen from the truth, but never one of them (this man except) that
have returned to grace and to the truth again. But yet though God boothe
very seldom forgive this sin, and although it be one of the sins that God
does hate most of al others, and such as is almost never forgeuen, yet it is
forgeueable.

In the blud of Christ, if one trueli repent, and lo it is universal. As there
is also an other scripture, Vaeterre cuius rexpuer est. Woo be to the Land, to
the Realm: whose King is a child, which some interpreate and refer to
childish conditions. But it is commonly true the other way to, when it is
referred to the age and years of Childehod. For where the king is within age,
they that have governance about the king, have much liberty to live
voluptuously and lice^ciousti, and not to be in fear how they govern as they
would be if the king were of full age, and then commonly they govern not well. But
yet Josias and one or two mo though they were children yet had their realms
well governed and reigned prosperoustye, and yet the saying. Vaeterre cuis
rexpuer est, nevertheless true for that. And this I gather of this irremyssyble
sin against the holy ghost, that the scripture says it is never forgeuen,
because it is seldom forgeuen. For in deed I think that there is no sin
which God does so seldom nor so hardly forgive, as this sin of falling
away from the truth, after that a man ones knows it. And in deed this took
best place with the manne that I have toulde you of, and best quyeted his
conscience. An other seed was this. Be not careful (says Christ) what ye
shall say, before judges and Maiestrates, when ye are brought before them for
my names sake, for the holy ghost shall put in your minds even at the
present hour what ye shall speak.

A comfortable saying and a goodlye promise of the holy ghost? that the
adversaries of the truth (says he) shall not be able to resist us, what?
shall the adversaries of the truth be dum? nay, there be no greater talkers nor
bosters and facers the^ they be. But they shall not be able to resist y^ truth,
to destroy it. Hear some will say, what needs universities then and the
preseruacion of schools, the holy ghost will give always what to say. Yea, but
for all that, we may not te^pt God: we must trust in the holy ghost, but we
must not presume on the holy Ghost. Hear now should I speak of
vniuersytyes, and for preferring of schools. But he that preached the last
sunday spoke very well in it, and substauncyallye and like one that knew the
estate and condycyon of the vniuersytyes and Schools very well. But thus much I
say unto you magestrates. If ye will not maynteine schools and vnyuersities, ye
shall have a brutalytye. Therefore now a suit again to your highenes. So order
the matter that preching may not decay. For sureli if preaching decay,
ignorance and brutishnes will enter again. Nor give y^ prechers liuinges to
seculet men. What should seculer men do with the liuigs of preachers? I thinck
there be at this day ten thousand Studients les then were within these. xx.
years, and fewer preachers and that is the cause of rebellion, if there good
bishops, there should be no rebellion. I am now almost com to mi matter, sauig one
saying of Christ which was an other seed. Date, et dabi tur uobis. Give and it
shall be given un to you. etc. But who believes this? if me^ believed this promise
they would give more the^ they do and at least wise they would not stick to give
a little, but now a dais men's study is set rather to take gifts and to get of
other men's good then to give any of their own, so al o there the promises are
mistrusted and vnbeleued. For if the rytch me^ did believe this promise of God,
they would wyllynglye and readly give a little to have the overplus. So where
Christ says of iniuryes or offenses and trespasses. Mihi unidictam and ego
retribuam. etc, Leave the aduengynge of wrongs a lone unto me, and I shall pay
the^ home etc. If the rebels had believed this promise, they would not have don
as they did. So all the promyses of God are mistrusted. Noe also after the
floude feared at every rain, least the world should be drowned and destroyed
again, till God gave the rainebow. And what exercise shall we have by ye
rainbow? we may learn by y^ rainbow y^ God will be true of his promises, and
will fulfill his promises. For god sent y^ rainbow and. iiii. M. years, it is,
and more se^^e this promise was made, and yet god has be^ true of his promise
unto this day. So y^ now when wese y^ rainbow we may learn that god is true of
his promise. And as God was true in this promise, so is he and will be, in all y^
reast, but the covetous man does not believe that god is true of his promis, for
if he did, he would not stick to give of his goods to the pore. But as touching
that I spoke before, when we see the rainbow, and se in the rainbow that that is
like water, and of a watri color and as we may and ought not only to take
there of hold and comfort of gods promise, that he will no more destroi the
world with water for sine but also we may take an example to fear god, who in
such wise hates sin Likewise when in the rainbow we see that that is of fiery
couloure, and like unto fire we may gather an example of the end of the world,
that accept we amend the world shall at last be consumed with fire for sin, and
to fere the judgment of God, after which they y^ are dampened, shall be burned in
hell fire. These were thesedes that Christ was sowing, when this couetuouse man
came unto him. And now I am come to my matter. While Christ was this preachig,
this covetous fellow would not tarry till all the sermon was do^, but interrupted
the sermon, eue^ suddenly choppig in. Master (quod he) speak to mi brother,
that he may divide the inheritance with me. He would not a bide til the end of
the sermon. But his mind was on his halfepeny, and he would needs have his
matter dispatched out of hand, Master (quod he) let my brother, divide with me.
Yet this was a good fellow, he could be contented with part, he disired not to
have al together alon to him self, but could be content with a deuysyon, and
to have his part of y^ inheritance, and what was the enherita^ce, Ager. So that
it was but one piece of ground, or one farm. This couetousma^ could be
co^te^t with the half of one farm, where our men now a days cannot be
satisfied with many farms at once, one man must now have as many farms as
will serve many men, or else he will not be contented nor satisfied. They wylier
now a days one with an other, except they have al. Oh says the wise man: There
be three things wherein my soul deliteth: Co^cordia fratum, amor proximorum, et
uir ac mulier been sibi consentientes. The unity of brethren, y^ love of
neighbors, and a man and wife a greting well together. So that y^ concord of
brethren and a greeing of brethren is a gay thing. What says Solomon of this
matter. Frater qui adiuuatur a fratre quasi ciuitas firma, et turris fortis.
The brother that is helped of his brother is as a sure and well fenced city, and
a strong Tower he is so strong. Oh it is a great matter when brethren love and
hold well together. But if the one go about to pulle down the other, then are
they weke both of them, and when one pulls down his fellow, they must
needs down both of the^, there is no stay to hold the^ up. Mark in the
Chronicles of England. Two brethren have raygned jointly together, the one on
thissid Hu^ber, and the other beyond Hu^ber in Scotland and all that way. And
what has come of it? So long as they have agreed well together, so long they
have prospered. And when they have ierred they have both gone to wrak. Brethren
that have so reigned here in England have quarelled one with a another, and the
younger has been contented with his portion (as in deed the yo^ger brether
commonly ierreth first) but by the co^tencion both has feared y^ wors. So when
there is any contencio^ between brother and brother for la^d, como^ly they are
both vndo^ by it. And that crafti marcha^t (what ever he be) that will set
brother against brother, meaueth to destroy the^ both, but of these ii.
brethren whether this man here were y^ elder or the yo^ger I cannot sai,
scripture tells me not whither of these, ii. was y^ yo^ger. But a lykelihod
this was younger, for once it was a plain law that primogenitus, y^ is to say
ye elder brother had duplicia, and therefore of likelyhode it should be the
yo^gest brother y^ found him self agreued, and was not content: but Christ said
unto him: you man who has made me a judge or a deuider betwe^ you? Christ
answered him by a question, and mark this question of Christ, thou man Quis me
co^stituit iudecem aut diuisorem superuos. It is no small matter (says Auste^)
of what inteneio^ one asks a question, as Christ in an other place of y^
gospel, asks who was neighbor to the pylgrime that was wounded. There was
(says Christ) a man that went from Jerusalem to Hierico, and fell among
thieves, and they wounded him, and left him for dead. And a priest came by, yt
was his own contriman and let him lie a Leuit came by and would show no
compassion upon him: at last a Samaritan came by, and set him on his horse, and
conueighed him to the city and provided surgery for hi. etc. Now who was
neighbor to this wounded man (says Christ)? Qui fecit illi misericordiam
(quod y^ lawyer). He that showed merci unto him. He that did y^ office of a
neighbor, he was neighbor. As ye may perceive by a more famylyer example of
the Bishop of Exceter at Sutton in Staffordshire. Who is Bishop of Exceter?
forsooth master Couerdale. What? do not al me^ know who is bishop of Exceter?
what he has been by shop many years. Well, say I master Couerdale is Bishop of
Exceter, master Couerdale puts in execucyo^ y^ Bishops office, and he that
does the office of the Bishop, he is the Bishop in deed. Therefore sai I master
Couerdale is Bishop of Exceter. Alack there is a thing that makes my heart
sorry. J he are that Master Couerdale is poisoned. Alack a good man, a godlic
preacher, an honest fatherly man, and if it be true, it is a great pyty and a
lamentable case, that he fedeth the^ with gods word, and there feed him a gain
with poison. Alack, shall poysonning come now hither into England out of
Italy? But to the purpose of Christ's questyon, who made me a judge between
you? here an Anabaptist will sai: Ah Christ refused y^ office of a judge, ergo
there ought to be no judges nor magistrates among Christian men. If it had been a
thing lawful, Christ would not have refused to do the office of a judge, and
to have determyded the varyaunce between these. ii. brethren. But Christ did
thereby signyfy, y^ he was not sent for that office. But if thou wylt have a
trial and a se^te^ce of that matter according to the laws, thou must go to y^
temporal judge y^ is deputed therefore but christ's meaninges was, that he was
come for an other purpose, he had another office deputed unto him the^ to be a
judge in te^porall matters, Fgo ueni uocare peccatores ad peniteci^, I am com
(says he) to call sinners to repe^ta^ce. He was come to preach the gospel, the
remission of syn, and the kingdom of god and me^t not thereby to disalow the
office of temporal maiestrates. Nai, if Christ had meant that there should be no
magestrates, he would have bid him take al, but Christ me^t nothing so. But the
matter is, y^ this couetouse man, this brother took his mark amiss, for he came
to a wrong man to seek redres of his matter, nor Christ did not forbid him to
seek his remedy at the magestrats hand, but Christ refused to take upon hi y^
office y^ was not his calling. For Christ had an other vocacion then to be a
judge between such as co^te^ded about matters of la^d. If our rebels had had
this in their mynds they would not have been their own judges, but they would
have sought y^ redres of their grief at y^ hands of the king and his
maiestrates under him appointed. But no marvel of their blindness and ignorance
for the Bishops ar out of their dyoces, y^ should teach the^ this gear. But
this man perchance had heard, and did think y^ Christ was Messiah, whose
reygne in words sounds a corporal and a temporal reign, which should do
justice, and se a redress in all matters of worldly controversy. Which is a
necessary office in a Christyan realm and must needs be put in execucyon
for mynystryng of justice. And therefore I require you (as a suter rather then a
preacher) look to your office yourselfe, and lay not all on your officers
backs. Receive the bills of supplicacion youreself, I do notse you do so
now a days, as ye were wont to do the last year.

For Gods sake look unto it, and se to the ministrig of justice your own self
and let poor Suitors have answer. There is a king in Christe^dom, and it is the
king of Denmark that sytteth openly in justice thryse in ye week and has
doors kept open for the nones. I have hard it reported of one yt has been there
and seen the proof of it many a time and often. And the last justice that ever
he saw done there was of a priests cause, that had had his glebe land taken
from him (and now here in England some go about to take away al) but this
priest had had his glebeland taken from him by a great man. Well, first went out
letters for this man, to appear at a day, process went out for him according
to the order of the law, and charged by virtue of those letters, to appear
before the king at such a day. The day came. The king sat in his hal readi to
mi minister justice: The priest was there present: The gentleman this Lord,
this great man, was called, and commanded to make his apperaunce, according
to the write that had been dyrected out for him. And the Lord came, and was
there, but he appeared not: No quod he king? was he sommonid as he should be? had
he any warnig to be here? It was answered, yea, and y^ he was there walkyng up
and down in the hal, and that he knew well inoughe that that was his day, and
also that he had al redye ben called, but he said he would not come before y^
king at that time, alled gig yt he neded not as yet to make an answer, because
he had had but one su^moninge. No quod the king? is he here present: yea
forsooth sir said the priest. The king commanded him to be called, and to come
before him. And y^ end was this. He made this lord this great man to restore
unto the priest not only the glebela^d which he had taken from the priest, but
also the rent and profit the rof for so long time as he had wholde^ it from y^
priest which was viii. years or therabout (says he) when ye can show better
euydence the^ the priest has done, why it ought to be your land, the^ he shall
restore it to you again and the profits thereof, y^ he shall receive in y^
mean time. But til that day come, I charge ye yt ye suffer him peaceably to
enjoy yt is his. This is a noble king, and this I tell for your example, that ye
may do the like. Look upon the matter your self. Poor. men put up ^ils every
day, and never the nere. Confyrme your kingdom in judgment, and begin doing
of your own office yourself, even now while you are young, and sit once or twice
in the weke in counsel among your lords, it shall cause things to have good
succes, and that matters shall not be lingered forth from day to day. It is good
for every man to do his own office, and to se that well executed and
discharged. Ozias king in Juda, he would needs do the office of y^ priest, and
he would needs offer incence in the sanctuary which to do, was the priests
office. But he was suddenly stricken with the leprie of his labor, and so
continued alepre al days of his life. S. John's disciples would have had him to
take upon him yt he was Christ. But what said Iho^? Nemo sibi assumit
quicquam, nisi datu^ fuerit et de super. No man may take any thing upon him
self, except it be given unto him from above. If the Deuo^shire me^ had well
considered this, they had not provoked y^ plages that they have had light upon
the^. But vnprechig prelaci has been y^ chefest cause of al this hurly burly
and co^mocio^s. But if Christ may challenge any kind of me^ for taking his
office upon the^, he may say to y^ mass mongers. Who gave you co^missio^ to
offer up Christ? who gave you authority to take mine office in hand? for it is
o^li christ's office to do y^. It is a great matter to offer Christ, if Christ
had offered his body at the last supper, then should we so do to, who is worthy
to offer up Christ? an abominable presumcyon Paul says Accepit pane^,
postquam gracias egissit fregit ac dxit, Accipite, edite. He took bread and
after that he had given thanks, he brake it, and said. Take ye, eat ye etc,
and so said: Hoc est corpus meum, He gave thanks, well then in tha^gs giving
there is none oblacion, and when he gave thanks it was not his body. When I was
in examinacio^. I was asked many questions, and it was said to me what Christ
did that should we do, a bishop gathred that upon these words. Hoc facite inmei
recordacionem. Then said he to me, how know ye that they eat it before he
said, hoc est corpus meum. I answered again and said: how knowye y^ they did
not eat it. etc. so I brought into him y^ place of Paul above said, and that in
thanks geuyng is none oblacyon, and when he gave thanks it was not his body,
for he gave thanks in the beginning of supper, before they eat any manner
thing at al, as his accustomed manner was to do. I wonder therefore that they
will or dare by this text take upon the^ to offer Christ's body. They should
rather say: Quis me constituit oblatorem? who made me an offerer? But when
Christ said: Quis me constituit iudicem aut diuisorem superuos? who has made
me a Judge, or a deuyder of lands among you? Christ did refuse an other ma^s
office an office y^ he was not of his father deputed unto. Christ's kyngedome
was a spiritual kingdom, and his office was a spiritual office and he was a
spiritual judge. And therefore when the woman taken in adultery was brought
before him, he refused not to play the judge, but said: Quis te accus at? and
she say again Nemo domine. No man Lord (says she) then said he, Nec ego te
co^dem no. Nor I co^dempne the not. Vade et no li amplius piece are. On thy
ways, and sin no more. Hear he took upon him his own office, and did his
offyre, for his office was to preach and to bid fynners amend their evil
living, and not to be a temporal judge in temporal causes. And here is an other
occasion ofa suite to your hyghnes, for the punish me^t of Lechery. For lechery
flows in England like a floudde. But now to make an end in temporal causes
he fayde. Quis me constituit iudicem, etc. Who made me a judge of temporal
causes among you, and of worldelye mattiers: Thus came this fellow in hear
with interruptynge of Christ's sermon, and received the answer which I have
rehearsed? Thou manne thou fellow (quod he) who has made me a judge, among
you? And he said unto all the audyence: Videte, et cauete ab auaricia. See
and beware of Couetousenesse. Why so? O(...) a no^ in abund anci a cu^us quam
uita eius et. ex his que possidet. For no man's life stands in the habundaunce
of the things which he possesses. We may have things necessary, and we may
have haboundau^ce of things, but the haboundaunce does not make us blessed. It
is no good argument. Quo plus quis quc habet, tanto beatius (...) uit. The more
riches that a man has the more happellye and the more blisfullye he lives.
For a certain great man that had purchased much lands a thousand marks by
year or I wot not what, a great portion he had. And so on the way as he was
in his journey toward London, or from London, he fell sick by the way. A
disease took him, that he was constrained to lie upon it. And so being in his
bed the disease grew more and more up on him, that he was by his friends,
that were about him very godly advised to look to him self, and to make him
ready to God, for there was none other lykelyhode but that he must die without
remedy. He tried out, what? shall I dye (quod he) wounds, sides, heart, shall I
dye, and thus go from my goods? go fet me some Phisicio^ that may save my life,
wounds and sides shall I thus dye? There lay he still in his bed like a block
with nothing but wounds and sides shall I dye? Within a very little while he
died in deed, and then lay he like a block in deed. Thet was black gowns,
torches. Tapers and ringing of belles, but what is become of him, God knows,
and not I. But here by this ye may perceive that it is not the habou^daunce of
riches that makes a man to live quietly and blysfully. But the quiet life is
in a mediocritie. Mediocres optime uiuunt. (says he) they that are in a mean
do live best. And there is a pro uerbe which I red many years ago Dimidium plus
to to. The half somtymes more the^ the hole. The mean life is the best life
and the most quiet life of al. If a man should fill him self up to ye throat he
should not find ease in it, but dyspleasure, and with the one half he might
satisfy his greadye appetide. So this great riches never makes a ma^s life
quiet, but rather troublus I remember here a saying of Solomon, and his
example. Coacernaui mihi argentum et aurum. I gathered silver and gold
together (says he) I provided me syngers, and women which could play on
instruments to make men mirth and pastime. I gate me Psalte ryes and songs of
musycke. etc. and thus my heart reioysed in all yt I did. But what was the end
of all this? Cum co^uer tissem me ad omnia, when I considered (says Solomon)
all the works that my hands had wrought. etc. lo, al was but vanity, and
vexacyon of mind, and nothing of any value under the sun. Therefore leave
covetousness, for believe me if I had an enemy. The first thing that I would
wyshe to him, should be that he might have abo^^daunce of riches, for so I am
sure, he should never be in quiet. But think ye there be not many that would be
so hurt? But in this place of the gospel. Christ spoke and declared this
unquietness and vncerteinti of great riches by a sim^litude and parable of a
great rich man, who had much land that brought forth al fruits plentifullye.
And he being in a pride of the matter, and much unquiet by reason that he had
so much, said to him self: What shall I do, because I have riot (...)e inoughe
where to bestow my fruits that have growe^ unto me of my lands? I will thus
do (says he) I will pull down my barnes, and build greater barnes, and I will
say to my soul. My soul thou have much goods laid up in stoare for
many years, take thine ease, eat, drink and be merye. But God God said to
him. Stulte hac nocte, animam (...) tuam repetunt abs te. Thou fool, thou
fool, this night will they take thy soul from the again. And the^, whose
shall those things be which thou haste provided? Even so it is with him (says
Christ) that gatheryth riches unto him self, and is not Rich toward God. etc.
But yet the Couetousma^ ca^ never be content.

I walcked one day with a Gentelmanne in a parcke, and the ma^ne regarded not
my talk, but cast his head and eye this and that way, so that I perceived
he gave no great ear to me, which when I saw: I held my peace. At last,
oh (quod the Gentylman) if this park were mine, I would never desire more while
I lived. I answered, and said, Sir and what if ye had this parck to, for there
was an other parck eue^ hard by? this gentelma^ laughed at the matter. And truly
I thinck he was dyseased with the dropsy, the more he had, the more couetouse
he was to have still more and more. This was a farmer that had a farm hard by
it, and if he might have had this park to it, he would never have desired
more. This was a farmer not altogether so couetus a man, as there be many now a
days, as for one ge^tlema^ to rake up all the farms in ye co^try together in
his hands al at ones. And here one suit more to your highness. There lacks
one thing in this realm that it has need of, for Gods sake make some
promoters. There lack promoters, such as were in king Henrye the seuenthes days
your graundfather. There lack men to promote the kings officers when they do
amiss, and to promote all offenders. I thyncke there is great need of such
men of godly dyscressyon, wisdom, and conscience, to promote
tra^sgressoures, as re^trai soures, oppressors of the pore, extorcioners,
bribers, vserers. I here there be vserers in England, that will take xi. in the
hundredth: But I here of no promoters to put them up. Wereade not yt this
couetouse farmer or la^ded man of the gospel, boughte corn in the markettes
to lay it up in stoore, and then sell it again. But and if it please your
hyghnes? I here say that in England, we have land Lords (nay step Lords I
might say) are become grasyers, and burgesses are become regraters, and some
farmers, will regrate and bye up all the corn that comes to markets and lay
it up in store, and sell it again at an higher price, when they se their
time: I heard a macchaunt manne say that he had trauayled all the days of
his life, in the trade of marchaundyse, and had gotten. iit. or. itii. thousand
pounds by byinge and sellinge, but in case he might be lycenced or suffered so
to do, he would get a thousand pound a year by only byinge and selling of
grain hear within this realm. Yea and (as I hear say) Alderme^ are now a
days become Colliers. They be both wodmongers, and makers of cooles. I would
so God healpe me, what so ever he be: I would wyshe he might eat nothing but
coals for a while, till he had amended it. There can not a poor body by a
sack of coals. but it must come through their hands. But this rytche manne
that the Gospel speaks of, was a couetouse manne. God had given him plenti
but that made him not a good man, It is another thing that makes a good man.
God says, Sinon audieris uoe^m meam: If thou obey not my voice etc. And
therefore worldelye riches do not declare ye favor or disfavor of god. The
scripture says: Nemo scit an sit a moredignus, an odio. God has ordained al
things to be good. And the devil labors to turn all things to ma^s evil.
God gives me^ plenty of riches to exercise their faith and charity, to confirm
the^ yt be good, to draw the^ that be naught, and to bring the^ to
repentance: And the devil works al together to the contrary. And it is an
old Proverb, the more wicked the more fortunate. But the unquietness of this
couetouse richman, declares the unquietness of the mid that riches brings
with it. First they are all in care how to get riches, and the^ are they in
more care how to keep it still. Therefore y^ apostle says Qui uolunt dite year
incidunt in tentaciones uarias. They that studi to get great riches do fall into
many diverse temptacio^s. But the root of al evil is covetousness. What shall I
do (says this rich man.) He asked his own brayneles head what he should do, he
did not ask of the scripture. For if he had asked of the scripture, it would
have told him, it would have said unto him: Frange esurienti panem tuu^. etc.
Break thy bread unto the hungry. All the affeccion of men now a days, is in
building gay and sumptuouse houses, it is in setting up and pulling down, and
never have they done buildyng. But the end of al such great riches and
covetousness is this: This night thou fool thy soul shall be taken from the.
It is to be understand of all that rise up from little to much, as this rytch
man that the Gospel spoke of did. I do not despise riches, but I wysh that men
should have rytches, as Abraham had, and as Joseph had. A man to have riches
to help his neighbor, is a godly riches. The worldly rytches is to put all
his trust and confidence in his worldly rytches, that he may by them live here
gallantly, pleasauntly, and voluptuously. Is this godly riches? No no, this is
not godly rytches. It is a common saying now a days among many: Oh, he is a
rich man, he is well worth five hundredth pounds. He is well worth five hundredth
pounds that has given five hundredth pounds to the poor, otherwise it is none
of his. Yea, but who shall have this five hundredth pounds? For whom have thou
gotten that five hundredth pounds? What says Solomon. Ecclesia. v. Est alia
infirmitas pessima, quam uidi sub sole, diuitiae conseruate in malum domini
sui. Another evil (says he) and an other very naughty imperfection rytches
hoore ded up and kept together to the owners own herme, for many times such
riches do perish and consume away miserabli. Such a one shall so^time have a
son says he, that shall be a very beggar, and live all in extreme penurye.
Ogoodly riches that one man shall get it, and an other come to devour it.
Therefore Videte, et cauete ab auaricia. See and beware of couetusnes. Believe
gods words, for they will not deceive you, norlye. Heaven and earth shall
perish: but Verbum domini, manet in eternum. The word of the Lord abide
than(...) ^ndureth forever. On this leauened faith, this unseasoned fayeth*
Beware of this unseasoned fayeth A certain man asked me this question: Did
thou ever sea man ly(...)e long that had great titches? Therefore says ye
wisema^ if god send the riches, use the^. If God send the abundance, use
the^ according to ye rule of gods word, and study to be rych in our savior
Jesus Christ. To whom (...) the father and the holy ghost, be all honor
glory and praise for ever and ever.

Amen.
Imprynted at London by John Day: dwelling over Aldersgate beneth S. Martins.
These books are to be sold at his shop by the little Cu^duite in Chepesyde.

Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum* Per septenium.


