A SERMON PREACHED On Monday, the sixth of February, At WESTMINSTER: At the
opening of the PARLIAMENT.

By the Bishop of S: DAVID'S.

LONDON, Printed by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M. DC. XXV.

PSALM. 122. V. 3,4,5. Jerusalem is builded as a City that is at unity in it
self, ( or compacted together). For thither the Tribes go up, even the Tribes
of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the Name of the
Lord. For there are the Seats (or the Thrones) of Judgment; even the Thrones
of the house of David.
SOme are of opinion this Psalm was made by David, and delivered to the Church
to be sung, when the Ark of God was carried up to Jerusalem; when Jerusalem was
settled by David, to be the special Seat both of Religion and the Kingdom.
The people were bound thrice a year, at Easter, Pentecost, and the Feast of
Tabernacles, to come up and worship at Jerusalem. Deuteronomy. 16. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
And some think this Psalm was prophetically made to sing by the way; to sing
when they went up by the steps to the Temple. And it was fit. For they came up
with joy. And joy is apt to set men a singing. And at joy the Psalm begins.
Verse. 1.
I was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the house of the Lord.

But whatsoever the use of this Psalm was in any special Service, certain it
is, that Jerusalem stands here in the letter for the City, and in type and
figure for the State, and the Church of Christ. My Text looks upon both; and
upon the duty which the Jews did then, and which we now do owe to both.
The Temple the Type of the Church, that is for God's service. No Temple but for
that. The City the Type of the State, that is for the peoples peace. No happy
State but in that.

Both the Temple and the State, God's house and the Kings, both, are built upon
Pillars. And it is not long since I told you out of Psalm. 75. Psalm. 75.4^
that there are many times of exigence, in which if God do not bear up the
Pillars, no strength which the Pillars have in and of themselves can support
the weight that lies upon them: Be they Pillars of the Temple; or Pillars of
the State. Therefore here to ease the Pillars God has built up Buttresses (if
men do not pull them down) to stay the maine walls of both buildings. The
Buttresse and support of the Temple is Religion. God will not bless the house,
if men do not honor and serve him in it. The Buttresse and stay of the
Kingdom is Justice. God will not bless the State, if Kings and Magistrates
do not execute judgment; If the widow and the fatherless have cause to cry
out against the Thrones of Justice.

So the Church, and the Commonwealth, Gods house, the Temple, and the Kings
house, the house of David, are met in my Text. And they would ever meet, and in
love no question, did not some distempered spirits breathe sower upon them. For
the Church cannot dwell but in the State. Ye never read that she fled out of
the State into the wilderness, but when some Dragon persecuted her. Revel. 12.
Apoc.. 12.6.
And the Commonwealth cannot flourish without the Church. For where the Church
is not to teach true Religion, States are enforced, out of necessity of some,
to embrace a false. And a false is not a help to make a Kingdom flourish. But
when they dwell together; when the Church, the House of Grace is a welcome
inmate to the State, which is a wise fabric of Nature; then in the Temple
there is meeting: The people go up to bless, and praise the Name of the Lord.
And then in the State there is meeting: To settle the Thrones of Judgment, to
make firm the house of David. And then, and never but then, Jerusalem, that
is, both State and Church is as a City that is at unity in it self.

My Text is nothing but a most deserved praise of Jerusalem. And not of the
particular, material Jerusalem alone, but of any State, of any Church, that is
as Jerusalem then was, and that does as Jerusalem then did. This praise of
Jerusalem both formal in it self, and exemplary to us, is set down in three
things. And they sever the Text into three Jerusalem, it is builded as a City
at unity in it self. Secondly, the Religion of it; For thither the Tribes go
up, even the Tribes of the Lord, to the Testimony of Israel, to give thanks
unto the name of the Lord. Thirdly, the Government of it For there are the
seats of Judgment, even the seats of the house of David.

Jerusalem is from the unity and concord that compacted together. That Is for
the buildings; no desolation in the midst of it, says S. Basil. S. Basil. Ibid.
It Is like a City at unity in it self. That Is for the Inhabitants. For the
beauty and artificial joining of the houses is expressed but as a type of
this unity. When men dwell as near in affection as their houses stand in
place.

It Is a great ornament of a City, that the buildings be fair; that they
stand not scattering, as if they were afraid each of other. But wheresoever
it is so, the City is beholding to unity for it. Let the Citizens break their
unity once, they will spend so much in quarrels that they cannot build the City.
No other times but when the Inhabitants are at peace can build; nor no other
time can keep them from waste.

houses? out of question not, but for the Inhabitants that dwell therein. He
that takes the simple out of the dust, and lifts the poor out of the mire,
Psalm. 113.6.
Psalm. 113. loves not man for his house, nor no City for the buildings.
Jerusalem will not let me wander for an instance. For here so long as the
Inhabitants served God, and were at unity, what City like Jerusalem? The
City of the great King, S. Mat. 5. S. Matthew. 5.35.
The glory of the whole earth, Thren. 2. Thren. 2.15.
But when they fell from God to Idols, from unity to heart-burnings among
themselves, what then became of Jerusalem? what? why just that which our
Savior foretold, S. Matthew. 24.2.
S. Mat. 24. That one stone should not be left upon another that should not be
thrown down; not one, neither of Temple nor City. Adrichom in descrip. Ierus.
And so it came to pass before Adrian left it. If any man therefore will have
his house stand, he has no way but this; to labor that Jerusalem the City
may serve God in unity.

Now Jerusalem is by way of singular together. And David himself might best
call it so. For before David's time Salem and Sion were two Cities. The Jews
dwelt in Salem; Iud. 19.10.
but the Fort of Sion was yet held by the Iebusites, 1. Chron. 11. 2. Sam. 5.7.
1. Chron. 11.4.
Two Cities, the upper, and the lower. Two people, the Jews, and the
Iebusites. Two most different Religions, the worship of God and Idols, till
David's time. But then a City most compacted together. The Buildings, and the
Cities join. Benjamin and Judah dwell there together. Nothing then but unity.

City, that is too narrow. We must enlarge the Type to the State, and to the
Church. Saint Hilary puts me in mind, S. Hill. ibid.
that my Text reads not Jerusalem is a City, as if that were all it meant to
speak of; but Sicut ciuitas, as a City; just as you see that, so the State, so
the Church. The City the Model if you will, but the Building these.

And for the State first. That Is sicut Ciuitas, as the City, just so. Walls,
and Towers, and Forts are things of second consideration; ordo politicus, the
wise ordering of the people in concord and unity is simply the strongest wall
of a State. But break unity once, and farewell strength. And therefore
disioynted factions in a State when they work upon division, are publica irae
diuinae incendia, the public kindlings of Gods anger, and they burn down all
before them. And God seldom suffers these to fire a State, till himself be
heated first with the sins of the State. But then he will divide them in
Jacob, and scatter them in Israel, Genesis 49. Genesis 49.7.
Nay scatter Jacob and Israel it self for them.

And my Text has it not simply, like a City at unity, but at unity together
or in it self. And this the better to resist foreign malice. It were happy if
all States, Christian especially, were at unity in themselves, and with their
neighbors. And the Church prays that the course of this world may be so
peaceably ordered. Coll. Dom. 5. post. Trin.
But when the Ambition of neighboring States will admit nor safe, nor
honorable peace, then there is most need Jerusalem should be at peace and
unity in it self. Need? yes, need with a witness. For all division if it be
voluntary, it is an opening, if it be violent, it is a breach. Both make way for
foreign force.

Thus it was with Jerusalem of old when she lost her unity. For faction within
the walls was a help to Titus, and his siege without. And long after, when
the Christians had won it from the Saracens, their own divisions among
themselves to their loss and shame let in Saladin the Sultan of Egypt. Plat.
in vit. Urban. 3.


And this has been often fatal upon our Jerusalem. For scarce ever did a
great enemy enter this kingdom, but when it was not sicut Ciuitas, like a
City at unity in it self. Not at unity opened the door to the enemy still.
For Toustain's division and inrode made way for the Norman. And there were more
divisions then one to help in the Dane. And Guorthigernus first, and Mordredus
after brought in the Saxon. And I. Caesar himself, the mirror of men for
military Discipline, he which for ought I have read, and remember, scarce ever
turned his back to any enemy else, fled from the ancient Inhabitants of this
Kingdom,

Territa quaesitis ostendit terga Britannis, Lucan.
till Auaroius, called by Lib. 5. de Bell. Gal.
Caesar, Mandubratius, out of hatred, and in faction against Cassibellanus
brought him back again, and made him entrance.

So it seems Tacitus his observation was too true upon us, In vita I. Agrip.
That nothing gave the Romans, powerful enemies though they were, more
advantage against the ancient Brittans then this, Quod factionibus and studijs
trahebantur, that they were broken into fractions, and would not so much as
take counsel and advise together. And they smarted for it. But I pray what is
the difference for men not to meet in counsel, and to fall in pieces when
they meet? If the first were our Forefathers error, God of his mercy grant
this second be not ours.

Now there is Coagmentatio duplex, a double buckling and knitting of the State
together. And if either fail, the unity is broken. The one is of the Members
of the State with their Head, especially the most honorable which are nearest.
The other is of the members one with another. And this is grounded upon that of
the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12. ^Cor. 12.
where we find some necessity of every member; not a like necessity of any:
but honor and respect done to all. And why so? why? why the Apostle tells you,
verse. 25. Verse. 25.
It is that there may be no division in the body; that still it may be at
unity in it self.

And it is very obserueable, that in all that large discourse of S. Paul,
concerning the unity of the Body and the Members, he conceiues at full, how
Corruption can vnnaturalize Nature it self. Therefore he supposes the Eye may
quarrel with the Hand, verse. 21. Verse. 21.
and it is a dangerous quarrel that, when the Eye and the Hand, Direction and
Execution are at ods in any State.

Well he can conceive that. But he does not so much as suppose, that any
members would be at odds with the Head: No, God forbid. The Head can compose
other members, and settle their peace in the Body; but if any quarrel the
Head, all unity is gone. And yet though the Apostle cannot suppose so much
unnaturalness that any member should quarrel the Head; not the Tongue, as
unruly as it is, yet he is very direct, that there is an office, which the Head
owes the Body, and all the members to the very meanest, for the preservation of
this unity. For the head cannot say to the very feet, as low as they are, I
have no need of you. verse. 21. Verse. 21.


And for the Church, that is as the City too, just so. Doctrine and Discipline
are the walls and the towers of it. But be the one never so true; and be the
other never so perfect, they come short of preservation, if that body be not at
unity in it self. The Church, take it Catholic, cannot stand well, if it be
not compacted together into a holy unity in faith and charity. It was
miserable, when S. Basil labored the cure of it. For distracted it was then,
as S. Gr. Nazianzen witnesses, Orat. 20.
into 600. diverse opinions and errors. And it is miserable at this day, the
Lord in his time show it mercy.

And as the whole Church is in regard of the affairs of Christendom, so is
each particular Church in the Nation and Kingdom in which it soiournes. If it
be not at unity in it self, it does but inuit malice, which is ready to do
hurt without any inuitation; and it ever lies with an open side to the Devil,
and all his Batteries. So both State and Church then happy, and never till
then, when they are both at unity in themselves and one with another.

The vulgar reads it, Jerusalem is a cuius participatio in id ipsum, whose
participation is upon the same thing; And that reading is warranted by the 70.
(...), whose participation, or communion is in, and of the same. So this
reading follows the effect, the other the cause. For unity in it self is the
cause of all participation. For unity is in charity; and charity
communicates all good things. It Is bountiful, 1. Cor. 13. 1. Cor. 13.4.
and if any suffer, it suffers with it; participation still. Now in Heaven, and
the Church triumphant there will be full participation, because there is
perfect union. But on earth, whether it be in the State, or the Church
militant, look how much there wants of perfect unity, and so much there will
ever want of joyful participation.

Well; both State and Church owe either. Father forgive them, they know not
what they do. S. Luke 23.34.
But if unity be so necessary, how may it be preserved in both? How? I will
tell you how.

State in unity? In any case take heed of breaking the peace of the Church.
The peace of the State depends much upon it. For divide Christ in the minds of
men, or divide the minds of men about their hope of Salvation in Christ, and
tell me what unity there will be. This so far as the Church is an ingredient
into the unity of the State. But what other things are concurring to the
unity of it, the State it self knows better then I can teach.

State? If I mistake not, that can never be done but by Christian patience.
And that I find in the letter of my Text. For it is not here simply said,
Jerusalem is as a City, no, but built as a City. Built, and upon a Hill,
Esaias. 2. Esai. 2. 2.
Many a cold and a bitter storm it must endure, God knows. And if Christ had
not been a Rock in the foundation, S. Math. 16.18
I make no question it had been down long ere this. Built then; but upwards
in the Building from this foundation, mark all along the walls of it; Lapis
lapidem portat and portatur: there is such unity in the Building, that every
stone bears another, and is borne by another. And the Apostle calls for the
same duty in the spiritual Building, Gal. 6. Bear ye one another burden.
Gal. 6.2.
So no patience, no bearing, and no bearing, no unity. The Building cracks
presently. And continue it cannot long, if the great Master Builders take not
care of the Mortar. If it be laid with untempered, or distempered mortar, all
will be naught, Ezech. 13. Ezech. 13.10.


This Psalm was used for many years together in the Church at Euensong upon
New years day, the day of the Circumcision. Why the Church appointed it for
that day, is not my question now: This I am sure of, This Psalm calls upon us
for the peace of Jerusalem, verse. 6. And that peace can neither be had nor held
long unless there be a Circumcision, and a paring off round about of heated
and unruly affections in the handling of differences. And there must be a
Circumcision, and a paring off, of foolish, and unlearned Questions, yea and of
many Modal too, such as are fitter to engender strife then godliness. 2. Tim. 2.
2. Tim. 2.23.
or no peace. This is the way and no other that I know, to see Jerusalem
flourish as a City at unity within it self, both for State and Church.

Jerusalem is from the Religion of it. For thither the tribes go up, even the
Tribes of the Lord to the testimony of Israel, to give thanks to the name of
the Lord.

Jerusalem is very right now. At unity, and Religious. Oh that it had known
the day of its visitation, and continued so, Luke 19. S. Luke 19.12.
For at this time the Tribes went up to the Temple. It begins well: for to the
Temple, to the Church, to the consecrated place of Gods service, is one of the
best iourneyes men of all sorts can make. And you may give a shrewd guess at
the devotion of the time, by the frequenting of the Church. And this their
public coming to worship at the Temple was Gods express commandment, Exodus
23. Exodus 23.17.
Therefore assembling and meeting at public service in the Church is no humane
Institution, but from God himself. Nor is this Ceremony Jewish or Ambulatory,
to cease with the Law, and that Temple; but omnino perpetuum altogether
permanent in the Church of Christ, Christians must to the Church and place of
service too.

Why, but what are they to do Jerusalem was right here too. They did give
thanks to the name of the Lord, and there. It Is no good sign when men are to
seek what they should do when they come to Church. Yet if any man be
ignorant, my Text will inform him; men are there now to do as they did then,
to give thanks to the name of the Lord.

The 70. and the vulgar have it. To confess to the name of the Lord. It comes
all to one. For be the word Thank or Confess, it stands here expressiue of
the whole Liturgy, of all the public external Service of God; All which if
it be not accompanied with the inward service of the heart is worth nothing.
So they went to the Temple, as we must go to the Church, To confess, To pray,
To worship, To praise, To give thanks to God, which even under the Law was
preferred before Sacrifice it self, Psalm 50. Psalm. 50.13,14.


Nor may the wisdom of the world think, that to pray, and to give thanks to
God, are void actions. For what ever worldlings think, the Church does great
service to the State while it prays. And it is no hard thing to prove this out
of those Politicians themselves, which have given the world just cause to
think they wrapped up God in their pocket, when they went to counsel. For
their great Master confesses that not a few, but many things happen to States
ex fato vrgente, out of such a pressing destiny, that they cannot be
prevented, though the remedies be obuious and at hand.

And is it so? Why then, where is the wisdom of the wise, 1. Cor. 1. 1. Cor.
1.17.
Is it not confounded? out of question it is. For ye see the remedy is
acknowledged to be at hand, and yet not found. This purblind wisdom cannot
see it. But to come home to him. This Fatum vrgens what ere it be, if there
be a remedy and at hand, it may be prevented. It Is true it cannot, by worldly
wisdom only. For nisi Dominus, except the Lord keep the City, all other
watchfulness is in vain, Psalm. 127. Psalm. 127. 1.
But then allow God that which is fit for him, due to him. The highest room at
the Councell-Table, he will quickly divert this Fatum vrgens, this pressing
necessity.

The time was when Ruin was traveling so fast toward Nineue, that it came
within 40. days of the City, Ion. 3. Ion. 3.
And it was fatum vrgens, it came on apace. Did any wiseman of that State
discover that danger? secure a remedy? Not a man. The Prophet preached the
danger, and Devotion, as blind as it is thought, stumbled upon the Remedy,
Prayer and Repentance, things which with worldly wisdom has little to do. And
therefore to pray and give thanks are no empty Actions for the State.

Jews, was there no Reading, no Preaching of the Law to inform the people?
Yes, out of question: They heard Moses, and the Prophets in their Synagogues
every Sabbath day, Acts 13. Act 13.27.
yea, and in the Temple to, if S. Basil be right. S. Basil. ibid.
But mark then. The Original Copy of the Law: The word of God written in
Tables of Stone was in the Temple at Jerusalem. And there the Priests, which
were to judge according to the Law, Deuteronomy. 17. Deuteronomy. 17.11.
This Law they might and did expound, but they might not cross with it. No
preaching in their several Synagogues, and Parishes (that I may so term
them) but was according to the Law, contained in the Arc, at the Temple, the
Mother Church. And 'twas fit. For if every man may preach as he list, though
he pretend the Law and the Gospel too, Jerusalem will be quickly out of unity
in it self. And if they leave coming to the Arc and the Testimony, the
world will soon have as many differences in Religion, as there be young,
ignorant, and bold Priests in Parishes.

Now there was a double Testimony Conuention between God and the people. The
Law was the witness and Covenant on Gods part with the people. And that the
people should come; and tender their homage and obedience to God and the Law;
that was the Testimony, and the Covenant of the people with God, Deuteronomy. 16.
Deuteronomy. 16.16.
God he promised to be present at the Arc, Exodus 25. Verse. 22.
And he performed it, Number. 7. Verse. 8,9.
And so God is always ready at his end of the Covenant. All the fear is, we
fall short, and come not as we should, either to hear Gods Testimony to us,
or to give Testimony to the world by our obedience. And herein, as in all
things else, Christ be merciful, that brought mercy into the Covenant.

Prophet an Ascent or going up. Ascenderunt, and an Ascent it is. It was fitted
in the Letter. For the Temple at Jerusalem was built upon mount Moriah; no
going up to it but by an Ascent. And it is fit in regard of the Material Church
now. For how low soever the situation of any of them be, yet it is motus sursum,
upward still and toward heaven to frequent the Church. And it is fit in regard
of the whole Militant Church. That Is an Ascent too, to come out of Paganism,
Heresy, or Schism into the Church at unity in it self. He that fell among
Thieves, and was almost killed by the way, was not going up to Jerusalem, but
down to Jericho S. Luke 10. S. Luke 10.30.
from the Temple I warrant you. And as St. Augustine speaks, S. Aug. Ibid.
si non descendisset, (...)ones non incidisset, if he had not been sinking and
going downwards, from God, and from his Church, he had not fallen into the
hands of Thieves.

But it is most fit in regard of the Church triumphant in Heaven. For thither
is no going but by Ascending. Ascending still out of the dreggs of this sinful
life. And he is miserably out of this way that sinks farther, and farther into
sin, and dreams he is in the way to Heaven. Nor can any man say, feign I
would to Heaven, but I want stairs to to ascend and get up. For this Psalm is
Psalmus Graduum, a whole Ladder of steps from the Church here, to the Church in
Heaven.

And it is not unfit neither to express what pains they then were content to
take to serve God. For from their remotest habitations (and many were very
far off) every male came up thrice a year to the Temple to worship. And they
might not appear before the Lord empty, Exodus 23. Exodus 23.15.
no pains then too much, no charge too great to serve GOD. And notwithstanding
both pains and charge Apolina: Ibid.
properabant ascendere, they made haste to come up. Now, the Church is at our
doors, and we care not for going into it. And we come up empty handed, else
it were not possible so many Churches should lie so ruinous as they do. Will
you give me leave to tell you the reason of this? It Is in my Text. When this
devotion was on foot, Jerusalem was at untie in it self. For so goes the
Text. Jerusalem at unity, and then ascenderunt, then they ascend by
multitudes, and their devotion with them.

And this falls in upon the Persons Tribes. Not all the Tribes, Families, and
Kinreds of the earth. No: For the many by Idolatry had made themselves
strangers to the true God of Israel. But Tribus Domini, the Tribes of the Lord,
they went up, all of them.

The 12. Tribes from the Patriarks the seed of Jacob, were then Gods peculiar
servants. They were made so in the Covenant. The Testimony of it was the Law.
So this honor to be the Tribes of the Lord, God's people, was reserved in the
band of Religion. If they had not believed, and served God, they had not been
his. They might have been Tribes, if you will, without serving in the Temple;
but not Domini, not of the Lord, but by that service. And they might have been
in some kind of unity, but not in Domino, not in the Lord, but by that union.
And they might have been builded as a City, but not ad Dominum, to the Lord's
honor, and their own salvation, but by that faith And which was the honor of
Jerusalem then in all Dauid's time, and Salomon's too, All the Tribes went up;
All, not a Recusant Tribe, or Person among them.

Jerusalem. There the Temple. In that the Arc. In that the Law. And the Law
says not simply, that they shall assemble and meet to serve the Lord, but
precisely, that they shall do it in the same place which the Lord shall choose,
Deuteronomy. 16. Deuteronomy. 16.16.
And the Lord chose Sion, the Temple at Jerusalem to be this place, 2. Chron.
7. 2. Chron. 7.12


Would you have a reason why God tied them so stricktly to one place? It Is not
hard to give it. That people were wonderfully prone to Idolatry; therefore
says S. Basil, S. Basil. Ibid.
God tied them to one place of worship, lest wandering here and there in strange
places, they might fall into the service of strange Gods. And mark it, God
would then have but one Temple erected, one Altar, in one City, that the
people might not fall asunder into different superstitions, and leave true
Religion least followed. And the Jews seeing the command, never halted in this
duty so long as Jerusalem was at unity in it self. But when that brake all
misery began. For no sooner had Jeroboam made a Rent in this unity, and torn
away ten Tribes from the house of David, but by and by Samaria is as good as
Jerusalem: and the Calves in Dan and Bethel, as good as that God that brought
them out of the land of Egypt, 3. Reg. 12. 3. Reg. 12.28
So dangerous a thing it is, when unity and God's command are broke together.

The Jesuit Lorinus tells us, Ibid.
There are better causes to persuade us now to go on pilgrimage ad Limina
Petri, and the Jubilees at Rome, then the Tribes had here to go to Jerusalem.
What? better causes? The Jews had Gods express commandment to go to
Jerusalem, and the form of worship that was there. And what better warrant can
any man, or any people have, then Gods command? Let him or any other show me
such a command, That all the whole Church of Christ, all the Tribes which now
serve the Lord must come in person, or consent and do it at Rome, we will
never stay for Lorinus his better reasons. We will take Gods command for a
good one, and obey it. But they must not think to choke us with the wool that
grows upon Pasce oues, S. Ioh. 21.16.
S. John 21. which as the Fathers have diversely spunne out; so no one of them
comes home to the clothing of Rome, with such a large Robe of State as she
challenges. And this in the mean time will be found true; That while they
seek to tie all Christians to Rome, by a divine precept, their Ambition of
Sovereignty is one and a maine cause, that Jerusalem, even the whole Church of
Christ, is not at unity in it self this day.

Now beside the honor and service Jerusalem. Many, but one more especially.
And that comes in to the third commendation of Jerusalem; the Government both
Spiritual and Temporal. For there also are the seats of Judgment, even the
seats of the house of David. So they might serve themselves at the seats of
Justice, while they went to the Temple of serve God.

In the ascending 'twas illuc, thither. sitting, it is illic, there. One and the
same City honored with God, his Church, and the King. And it must needs be
so. For these three God, the King, and the Church, that is God, his Spouse, and
his Lieutenant upon earth are so near allied. God and the Church in love. God
and the King in power. The King and the Church in mutual dependence upon God,
and subordination to him: That no man can serve any one of them truly, but he
serves all three.

And surely 'twas in a blessed figure; that Gods house and the Kings stood
together at Jerusalem. The Temple (if I mistake not) upon the East, and the
Palace of Solomon upon the Southside of the same Mountain: to show that their
servants and service must go together too: that no man might think himself
the farther from God by serving the King, nor the farther from the King by
serving God. The Kings power is Gods ordinance: and the Kings command must be
Gods glory: and the honor of the Subject is obedience to both. And therefore
in the Law the same command that lay upon the people to come up illuc,
thither, to Jerusalem; the very same lay upon them to obey the Judges, and the
house of David, illic, when they came there. To obey the Sanhedrim and the
Judges, Deuteronomy. 17.10.
Deuteronomy. 17. and both them and the King, after the house of David was settled, as
in this place. For then there was seated ( as diverse of the Fathers and later
divines observe) both Authorities; S. Basil. Theodoret. Euthy^. Calvin. M^sc^,
Inn. Ibid.
both of the Priests, and of the King and his Judges. So the first lesson which
the people do or should learn by going up to the Temple, is obedience to both
spiritual and temporal Authority, but especially to the house of David.

Well then, illic, there were the Seats or Thrones of judgment. Of all things
that are necessary for a State none runs so generally through it, as Justice
and Judgment. Every part and member of a Kingdom needs it. And it is not
possible Jerusalem should be long at unity in it self, if Justice and
Judgment do not uphold it. And it is in vain for any man, whether he be in
authority, or under it, to talk of Religion, and Gods service, to frequent the
Temple, if he do not, in the course of his life, exercise and obey Justice and
Judgment. And this Lesson Religion ever teaches. For it was the very end of
Christ's coming to redeem us, That we might serve him in holiness and in
righteousness, S. Luke 1. S. Luke 1.75.
In holiness toward God, that is first: and then in righteousness and justice
toward men, that is next. And they stand so, that the one is made the proof of
the other, Righteousness of Holiness. For he that does but talk of Holiness,
and does unjustly therewhile, is but an Hypocrite.

Thrones, or Chayres, or Seats, (call them what you will, the thing is the
same) out of which, they give sentence upon Persons or Causes brought before
them. And they are signs of authority and power which the Judges have. And
it is not for nothing, that they are called Seats. For Judgment was ever given
in public sitting. And there is good reason for it. For the soul and mind of
man is not so settled when the Body is in motion. For the Body moved moves the
humors; and the humors moved move the affections; Non eadem videntur
Iudicibus iratis and quietis. Arist. lib. 2. Rhet. c. 1.
and Affections moved are not the fittest to do Justice and judgment. No;
Reason in a calm unmoved is fittest for that.

Now the Seats stand here both for the Seats themselves; And so sederunt Seeds
is Active for Passive, The Seats sat, for, The Seats are placed; or for the
Judges that sit in them; or sederunt, id est, permanserunt, for the perpetuity
and fixing of the Seats of Justice. The Seats must be in some reverence for
the persons that sit in them. The persons must have their Honor for the Office
they perform in them. And the Seats must be fixed and permanent, that the
people which are fallen into Controversy may know the Illi^, and the Vbi,
whither to come and find Justice.

The words in my Text are plural, Seats of Judgment. And it is obseruable.
For the exorbitances of men that quarrel others are such and so many, that one
Seat of Judgment only was scarce ever sufficient for any State. Seats they
must be, and they seldom want work. In the prime times of the Church,
Christians could not hold from going to Law one with another, and that under
unbelievers, 1.^ Cor. 6. 1. Cor. 6.6.
To meet with this frailty of man, God in this Commonwealth which himself
ordered, appointed not one, but many Tostat. in Exodus 21. q. 16. P. Cuneus de
Rep. Hebr. lib. 1. c. 12.
Seats of judgment. And therefore even the inferior Seats, howsoever as
they are settled by the King and the State, severally to fit the nature of the
people in several Kingdoms, are of positive and humane Institution; yet as
they are Seats of Judgment, they have their foundation upon Divine
Institution too, since there is no power but of God, Romans 13. Romans 13. 1.


By these Seats of Justice and Judgment the Learned in all ages understand
all Judiciary power and administration both Ecclesiastical and Civil; And
they are right.

For the Sanhedrim of the Jews their greatest Seat of Judgment under the
King (after they had that government) was a mixed Court of Priests and Judges,
Both for Causes and Persons. Pet Cun. de Rep. Hebr. lib. 1. page 101. and 106.
Deuteronomy. 17. though other Kingdoms since, and upon reason enough have separated
and distinguished the Seats of Ecclesiastical and Civil Judicature.

Since this division of the Seats of Judgment, there was a time when the
Ecclesiastical took too much upon them. Too much indeed, and lay heavy not
only upon ordinary Civil Courts, but even upon the House of David, and Throne
of the King himself. But God ever from the days of Lucifer gave pride a fall;
and pride of all sins least beseemes the Church. May we not think that for
that she fell? But I pray remember 'twas Fastus Romanus, 'twas Roman Pride,
that then infected this Church with many others.

The time is now come in this kingdom, that the Civil Courts are as much too
strong for the Ecclesiastical: and may ouerlay them as hard, if they will be
so unchristian as to revenge. But we hope they which sit in them will remember,
or at the least, that the House of David will not forget: That when God
himself and He best knows what he does for the unity of Jerusalem) erected
Seats of judgment, He was so far from Ecclesiastical Anarchie, that He
set the High Priest very high in the Sanhedrim. And Ecclesiastical and Church
Causes must have their trial and ending as well as others.

I know there are some that think the Church is not yet far enough beside
the Cushin: that their Seats are too easy yet, and too high to. A Paritie they
would have, No Bishop, No Governor, but a Parochial Consistory, and that
should be Lay enough too. Well, first, this Paritie was never left to the
Church by Christ. He left Apostles and Disciples under them. No Paritie. It was
never in use with the Church since Christ: No Church ever, any where, (till
this last age) without a Bishop. If it were in use, it might perhaps govern
some petty City; but make it common once, and it can never keep unity in the
Church of Christ. And for their Seats being too high, God knows they are
brought low, even to contempt. They were high in Jerusalem. For all Divines
agree, that this in prime reference is spoken of Ecclesiastical Censures, and
Seats. Calvin. Muscul. Iun. versio Geneu. Nay the Anabaptists themselves.
Ainsw. Ibid.
And the word is Thrones; no less. So the original: So the Septuagint: and so
many of the later Divines, forgetting their own invention of the Presbytery.

And one thing more I Will be bold to speak out of a like duty to the Church
of England and the House of David. They, whoeuer they be, that would overthrow
Seeds Ecclesiae, the Seats of Ecclesiastical Government, will not spare (if
ever they get power) to have a pluck at the Throne of David. And there is not
a man that is for Paritie, all Fellows in the Church, but he is not for
Monarchy in the State. And certainly either he is but Halfe-headed to his
own Principles, or he can be but Halfe-hearted to the House of David.

the House of David: the Guide, and the Ground too, under God, of that unity
which blesses Jerusalem. The house, that is, not the house only, but the
Government. All Regal and Judiciary power was seated by God himself in David
and his Posterity, 2. Sam. 7.10. and Psalm. 89.36.
2. Sam. 7. That He, as King over his people, might take care, both that
Jerusalem might be at unity in it self: and that the Tribes of the Lord might
go thither to give thanks to the Name of the Lord: that all the servants of
God among that people might know, that God had committed them to the trust of
David: that they might not promise themselves succor from God, otherwise then
as they lived in obedience to David: that they might not think to alter the
government, or the succession, but rest dutifully where God had placed them.
And therefore when Jeroboam rent ten Tribes from the house of David, almost
nothing but distraction and misery fell upon that people ever after, as appears
in the story.

This to the letter strictly. Now to the sense at large, as both Church and
State have subordination to the house of David. For Jerusalem that is at unity
under David. And the Tribes they go up to the Testimony under David. And the
Seats of judgment, they have their several ministrations, but all with
reference, all in obedience to the house of David.

Now in a State the King, obtinet locum fundamenti, is always fundamental.
All inferior powers of Nobles, Judges, and Magistrates rest on him. And yet
the holy Ghost does not say in my Text, that the Seats of Judgment are upon
the foundation of David, but upon the House of David. And the reason is plain:
because there is one and the same foundation of the King and his people, that
is, God and Christ. But when the house of the King is built upon God as Dauid's
was, then it is to the people and domus, and fundamentum, both an house, and a
foundation of all their houses.

And that you may see the truth of this, look into the Story of all States,
and you shall never find a thunderclap upon the house of David to make it
shake, but the houses of all the Subjects in the Kingdom shook with it. And
this is an evident Argument, that the house of David is a Foundation, when such
a mighty building as a State, is shaken with it. And therefore there is no man
that loves his own house, but he must love the Kings, and labor, and study
to keep it from shaking.

And if you mark the Text, here is Seeds super Sedem, one Throne, or Seat upon
another. And all well-ordered States are built so by Sub and Super, by
Government and obedience. The intermediate Magistrates have their
subordinations either to other, and all to David. But the House of David that is
both, Sub and Super; under the rest in the foundation; for so the Septuagint,
and the Fathers read it, (...), upon the house of David; so the house of David
under, as Foundation. But over the rest in the administration and the
government. For they which are upon him, must not be above him. A primacie, or
superintendencie, or what you will above the house of David in his own
Kingdom, is a dangerous, and an ill construction of Super Domum David.

The house of David a Foundation then: and my Text warrants both it and me. I
have no will to except against any form of government, assumed by any State:
Yet this my Text bids me say for the honor of Monarchical Government. The
Seats of judgment in it are permanent. And I do not remember that ever I
read Seats of Judgment so fixed, as under Regal power.

I do not by this deny, but that there may be the City in peace, and
administration of justice in other forms of gourenment, sometimes as much,
sometimes more. But there are Iudicia, not Seeds, Judgment, not Seats of it.
And Justice there may be; but it co^tinues not half so steady. The Factions of
an Aristocracy how often have they divided the City into civil wars, and made
that City which was at unity in it self, wade in her own blood? And for a
Democracie, or popular Government, Fluctus populi, fluctus maris, The waves and
the Gulfes of both are alike. None but God can rule the raging of the Sea, and
the madness of the people, Psalm. 65. Psalm. 65.7.
And no safety or settlednes, till there be a return in domum David, to a
Monarchy, and a King again.

I Will go no whither but to my Text and Jerusalem for instance. That people had
a Sanhedrim over them, a wonderful wise and a great Senate; the chief of the
Priests, and the most expert in their Laws of the other Tribes. If any greater
difficulty arose, God raised up Judges and Deliuerers to fight their Battles.
This people were well, a man would think, for point of Government, very well.
Calu. Ibid.
And yet Calvin observes, and it is true, though they had then Justice and
Judgment among them, yet they were but suspensa Iudicia, and vary mutata,
Justice with suspense and often changes. And which is more, that people restles
and unquiet even with the Ordinance of God himself till they had a King, 1.
Sam. 8. 1. Sam. 8.
So after the disobedience of Saul, (which can cast even Kings out of Gods
favor) that State was settled upon the House of David.

The King then a Foundation, and a settled one too, as Mortality has any. The
whole frame of the Commonwealth, understood here by the Seats of Judgment
rests upon the strength of his house. Upon his house? therefore it must be
built and settled, else it is not domus, not a house. When it is built, it must
be furnished, and plentifully too; else it is not fit to be domus Dauidis, the
Kings house. If any disaster has been, it must be repaired; else Domus lacera
a House upon props, can be no foundation of Justice to friends at home, or upon
enemies abroad. And there can hardly be a greater misery to a Kingdom, then
to have the House of David weak.

Well then; would you have the house of David as David's was now at Jerusalem, A
built, A furnished, A strong, An honorable House? I know you would. You are a
Noble and a most Loyal People. Why then I will not take upon me to teach, but
only to remember you of the way. The way is; -- Am I out? No sure. The way is,
To set David once upon his own feet; to make him see the strength of the house
which God has given him.; to fill him with joy and contentment in his peoples
love; to add of your. oil to make him a cheerful countenance, now that God
has anointed him with the oil of gladness over you; that in a free Estate he
may have leisure from Home-Cares, every way to intend the good and welfare of
his people; and to bless God for them, and them in God.

And for David, God has blessed him with many royal Virtues. And above the
rest with the knowledge that his House is a foundation. A foundation of his
people, and of all the justice that must preserve them in unity, and in
happiness. But it is Domus eius, His House still, even while it is your
foundation. And never fear him, for God is with him. He will not depart from
Gods service; nor from the honorable care of his people; nor from wise
managing of his treasure: He will never undermine his own house, nor give his
people just cause to be jealous of a shaking foundation. And here in the
presence of God and his blessed Angels, as well as of you, which are but dust
and ashes, I discharge the true thoughts of my heart, and flatter not. And now
my Dread Sovereign, upon you it lies to make good the thoughts of your most
devoted Servant.

Thus you have seen as short a Mapp, as I could draw of Jerusalem. She was
famous for her unity, and blessed too, when it was within her self. She was
famous for her Religion, and devout too, when all the Tribes went up to the
Arc of the Testimony, to give thanks to the name of the Lord. She was
famous for Justice, and successful too, both at home, and against foreign
enemies, when the Seats of Judgment Ecclesiastical and Civil were all, as
their several natures bear, founded upon the House of David.

This Jerusalem of ours is now at unity in it self. And I see here Capita
Tribuum, the Heads and Leaders of the Tribes, and People of the Lord, come up,
and present in his Temple. I would to God they were all here, that with one
heart, and one mouth, we might all pray unto God for all his blessings to come
down, and dwell in the House of David; and to rest upon this great and
honorable Council now ready to sit.

You are come up to begin at the Temple of the Lord. The Arc was wholly
Ceremonial; that is not here. But the Testimony of Israel, the Law, yea and a
better Law then that, the Law of Grace and of Christ, that is here. Here it is,
and open ready to teach the fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of all
wisdom, Psalm. 111. Psalm. 111.10.
In this Law you can read nothing but service to God, and obedience to the
House of David. And so you find them joined, 1. S. Pet. 2. 1. S. Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, and honor the King. And it is a strange Fallacy in Religion for
any man to dishonor the King, and to make that a proof that he fears God.

To the Temple and the Testimony you are come up. When God would give Moses
more special direction, he declared himself from the Mercy-seat, which was
on the Arc. Exodus 25. Exodus 25.22.
The Mercy-seat was wholly Ceremonial, as the Arc was on which it stood; that
is; the Seat Ceremony, but the Mercy substance. And though the Seat be gone
with Moses, yet I hope God has not left, will never leave, to appear in Mercy
to the House of David, and this wise Council. If he appear in mercy, I fear
nothing. If he appear otherwise there will be cause to fear all things. And
the way to have God appear in mercy is for both King and People, not only to
come to the Temple, that is but the outside of Religion, but also to obey the
Law, and the Testimony.

Judgment went out from God lately, and it was fierce. How many thousands
strong men, which might have bin a wall about Jerusalem, has the Pestilence
swept away? But his mercy soon ouertooke his Judgment: For when did the eye of
man behold so strange and sudden abatement of so great Mortality? A great
argument, that he will now appear in Mercy. And I cannot tell which has got
the better in the vie, Your Honor, or Your Religion, that you have made such
have to bring the Tribes to the Temple, to give thanks to the name of the Lord
for this.

The first Lesson of this days Evening prayer is Exodus 18. Exodus 18.
There Is the Story of Iethro's counsel to Moses, for assistance of inferior
Officers. This was not the beginning of that great and parliamentary Council,
which after continued successful in the State of the Jews. For that was set
after by GOD himself, Numb 11.16.
Numb. 11. yet I make no great doubt, but that the ease, which Moses found by
that Council, made him apt to see what more he needed; and so far at least
occasioned the settling of the Sanhedrim.

I take the omen of the day, and the Service of the Church to bless it. That
our David may be as happy in this, and all other Sessions of Parliament, as
their Moses was in his Council of the Elders. That the King and his people may
now, and at all like times, meet in love, consult in wisdom, manage their
Counsel with temper, entertain no private business to make the public
suffer; And when their consultation is ended, part in the same love that should
ever bring King and People together.

And let us all pray, That our Jerusalem, both Church and State, which did
never but flourish when it was at unity in it self, may now and ever continue
in that unity, and so be ever successful both at home and abroad. That in
this unity the Tribes of the Lord, even all the Families and Kinreds of his
people may come up to the Church, to pray, and praise, and give thanks unto
him. That no Tribe or Person for any pretenses (for they are no better) may
absent themselves from the Church and Testimony of the Lord: That the Seats of
Judgment Ecclesiastical and Civil of all sorts, may not only be set, but
set firmly, to administer the justice of God, and the King unto his people.
That all men may reverence and obey the House of David, who it self upon God,
is the foundation of all these blessings. That God would mutually bless David,
and this People. That so the People may have cause to give thanks to God for
David; And that David may have cause to take joy in the love and loyalty of of
his people; and bless God for both. Till from this Jerusalem, and this Temple,
and these Thrones, He, and we all may ascend into that glorious State which
is in Heaven. And this Christ for his infinite mercy sake grant unto us: To
whom, etc.

FINIS.
Imprinted at London by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings Most
Excellent Majesty. 1625.


