LATHAMS FALCONRY OR The Faulcons Lure, and Cure: IN TWO BOOKS.

The First, concerning the ordering and training up of all Hawks in general;
especially the HAGGARD FAVLCON GENTLE.

The second, teaching approved medicines for the cure of all Diseases in them.

Gathered by long practice and experience, and published for the delight of
noble minds, and instruction of young Faulconers in things pertaining to this
Princely Art.

By SIMON LATHAM. Gent.

THE HAGGARD FAVLCON IN OPEM ME COPIA FECIT


Printed at London for Roger Iackson, and are to be sold at his shop near
Fleet Street Conduit, 1614.

TO THE HONORABLE and worthy Knight, Sir THOMAS MVNSON Baronet, Master of his
Majesty's Armory, and Master of the Hawks to his HIGHNESS.
Honorable Sir:
ALthough I am not so well experienced in the art of book-making, I cannot but
know that the Author of any work, does by no one thing commend his judgment
more to the world, then by the choice of his Patron: for, as there are many and
differing respects, that concur to that act of election; so he that uses
the fewest and simplest, has the least opposition to withstand his judgment:
I therefore know no person of quality in this kingdom, to whom I can offer
these my labors for judgment, before your self in fitness, as well for your
dexterity in discerning, as place of emploiment, to which, when my love and
observance toward you is added, you will (I doubt not) with favor and
alacrity receive him to protection, that calls you not to the succor, or
defense of his errors, but the judging of his pain.

Your Worships true honorer, and to be commanded, SIMON LATHAM.

To the Reader.
I Hope thou meanest to be a learner to, else thou will not read much of me;
for I profess profit to thee, though perhaps thy end be pleasure. Thou will
not here find terms only to make thee able to talk, but things fit to do;
and those told thee that true and reasonable way, that as thou have a will to
prove them, thou will both praise and thank me. The practice and experience of
many years is here given thee in a few leaves (not drawn from traditions in
print or otherwise taken up, on trust; but out of certain and approved
conclusions) if thou please to use it: if not, thou art left to thine own
liberty. I will offer to instruct no man against his will, nor go about to
deserve well of such as understand me not. Every book has his Fortune to the
Capacity of his Reader; and I have mine in thee. Farewell, I could have used a
more mountebanque preface. But that which judges truth, labors least with
show.

Verses in commendations of the work.
MAn for the glory of his Maker made,
Must with his first and best of powers invade.
That sacred office; and it so fulfill,
As him to serve, who does preserve him still.
The limits of this just circumference,
Kept with a fair and just obedience:
The Storehouse of Gods treasure open stands,
And with his goods fills our unworthy hands.
These riches jointly strive to satisfy;
Some our delight. some our necessity.
Pleasure it self has still vnchidden stood,
To them allowed as good, whose selves are good;
Love to our Countries public welfare shown,
Without neglect of our domesticke own.
Delights may lawful seem; fair mirth and glee,
If sin and error separated be.
Among all those pleasures appro^ation have,
To which wise Nature inclination gave:
Art made the Die, an instrument of chance;
Art painted papers, that made purses dance:
But to the Hound or Spanniell Nature sends,
A different vigor; that the one intends:
To hunt the light-foote beast; the other strives
To spring the winged foul: and them retriues.
Art serves; but Nature is the powerful Queen
By which all things given or inclined been.
Seeing a foul high mounted; he that now
Would bring me forth a bird, and tell me how
To make this catch, that other to my use:
Had I not known this, I should strangely muse:
And think, his news iuggled with show of fairenes;
Or being done, admire it for the rarenes.
They from whose eyes these things blind ignorance sunders,
May well admit them place mong'st the worlds wonders.
To make the Haggard tame unto your fist,
To come, to go, to do even what you lift.
And when beyond a mountains height she is flowne,
To cast an ensign up, shall fetch her down:
To circle in her flight unto your call,
And force her to your voice and luring fall:
Is strangely artfull; and if pleasure be
In these inferior things it is here to see.
Go then thou little volume, that reports
The documents of reason to these sports;
And spread thy self before the general eye,
That some may read them with delight; some try
The rules thou give, and by experience raise,
Their own content with the just Authors praise.
This life be to the labors of his pen:
They are well judged of, by well judging men.
If any Critic into censures break,
He Is but a Bussard, we of Hawks do speak.
T. A.

depiction of falcon on stump

S See how my Haggard huffers in the air,
I It is a Faulcon far beyond compare.
M Mount up thy feather, with the flight of any
O O're-sore the fairest be they nere so many:
N No Faulcon to my Haggard I may see;
Nor may compaire, though many Faulcons be.
L Let me extol a Faulcon more report;
A A Faulcon is a Princes pleasant sport:
T It Is sport and pleasure delightful to the eye,
H Haggard Hawke with mounting lark to fly:
A Amid'st your pleasures then, take this delight:
M Maintain the Faulconer, and his Faulcons flight.
A TABLE OF THE Contents of the chapters contained in this Book.
AN Introduction to the discourse, setting down the occasion of vvriting the
work. page 1 Of the Haggard Faulcon. Page. 2 Of her wildness. Page. 2
CHAP. 1. Contents.
A collection of the names and natures of Hawks, especially the Haggard
Faulcon. Page. 3 Of the Ramadge, or Eias. Page. 4
CHAP. 2 Contents.
A description of the Haggard Faulcon* with the manner of her life being wild
and vnreclaimed. Page. 5 Of cawking. Page. 5 Of Brants and Wild-geese. Page. 6
The practice of the wild-Faulcon. Page. 6 Of rest for old Hawks. Page. 6 Of no
rest for young Hawks. Page. 6 Of reasonable rest for sick Hawks. Page. 7 Of
loosing breath. Page. 7 Glutan imperfection of the stomach Page. 7 A necessary
observation. Page. 7 Of good or bad mutes. Page. 7 A note for young Faulconers.
Page. 8
CHAP. 3 Contents.
The manner of reclaiming your Haggard, and of entering her to the lure. Page. 9
The use of a feather to stroke with. Page. 9 When to vnhood your Hawke. Page. 9
A good Caveat. Page. 10 Of the Hawks stomach. Page. 10 Fullness takes away
subjection. Page. 11 A rule to be remembered. Page. 12
CHAP. 4 Contents.
Ordering of Hawks in the time of luring, and how to keep them from carrying,
with other ill qualities. Page. 13 What it is that makes Haggards carry. Page.
14 That kindness draws love. Page. 15 Of accustoming Hawks to live Doves.
Page. 15 Stirring of the Dove makes the Hawke iet for joy. Page. 16 What to use
when you practice luring. Page. 16 Which is the stomach in Hawks. Page. 16
Ignorance in the Faulconer often spoils the Haggard. Page. 17
CHAP. 5 Contents.
An observation concerning the several conditions of Hawks and how to alter
any ill quality in them. Page. 17 Of making your Hawke. Page. 17 The first
rule. page 17 Which Hawke is not for the River. page 18 Not to give your Hawke
any affright. page 18 Of care in cleanly feeding them. page 18 The outward
action shows the inward disposition. page 19 The second Rule. page 20 The
third Rule. page 20
CHAP. 6 Contents.
How to order any wild hawke, or other that comes not from the mewe. page 22 A
great fault it Faulkners, page 23 When a hawke will be ready to enter. page 23
Not to give great but small stones. page 24
CHAP. 7. Contents.
How to know the dispositions of Hawks, as well by the plume, as by
observation, and the Falconers behavior toward his Hawke. page 24
CHAP. 8. Contents.
The manner of bathing of Hawks. page 29 Of feeding of hawks for bathing.
page 30 Of fire after the bathing. page 31 Sound hawks bathe seldom, sick
hawks often. page 31
CHAP. 9. Contents.
The manner how to weather hawks. page 32 Difference between the Haggard, and
the Eyas. page 33 Air and exercise preserve health. page 33 Of the Eyas. page
33 The knowledge she has of food and relief. page 33 The familiarity which
is bred in them. page 34 The manner of hawks in loosing their young. page 34
Of the Eyas. page 35
CHAP. 10 Contents.
How to know the time of setting down your hawke, and when to leave flying.
Page. 36 Before our Lady day the best time. Page. 37 Of the Passenger, or soar
hawke. Page. 37
CHAP. 11 Contents.
Necessary instructions to be observed of every Falconer, before he put his
hawke into the mewe. Page. 38
CHAP. 12. Contents.
How to put your hawke into the mewe, and how to order her whilst she remains
there. Page. 42 Order when you take her forth. Page. 42 Other necessary
observations. Page. 42 A good caveat for idle Faulconers. Page. 43
CHAP. 13 Contents.
How to take your hawke from the mewe and enseame her, and make her ready to
fly. Page. 44 A general course for all sorts of hawks. Page. 44 Of casting,
and when to give it. Page. 45 A special order in inseaming. Page. 46 Labor
makes a Hawke clean. Page. 47 Hawks subject to loose the benefit of stones.
Page. 47 Many sound Hawks love not woollen casting. Page. 50 Give not stones,
when a Hawke is unquiet. Page. 51 When a Hawke desires stones. Page. 53
Ignorance in giving stones. Page. 55 Order after a toiling flight. Page. 57
What discommodities belong unto a fat or full Hawk. Page. 59
CHAP. 14. Contents.
How to know when your Hawke is not thoroughly enseamed, and to prevent the
evil enseaming thereof. page. 61 To know when her inward parts are foul.
page. 61 The fruits of hastineste. page. 63 Signs from the heart and liver.
page. 64 Of giving trains. page. 64 Of cleansing the inward parts. page. 65
Much carriage good. page. 65
CHAP. 15. Contents.
How to avoid slime, glut, or the like imperfections in Hawks. page. 65 Of
glut. page. 65 Measurable moisture good. page. 65 An observation for health.
page. 65 The virtue of industry. page. 66 The prevention of medicines. page.
66
CHAP. 16. Contents.
Of the Gerfaulcon. page. 69 She will forget her own strength. page. 70 Be
favorable to them the first yeeere of their making page. 72 And ever be
careful at their drawing and enseaming. page. 72 She knows her own
advantage. page. 73 She ought to have her rights in all points. page. 73 She is
more subject to die through heat, then any other Hawke. page. 73
The end of the first Table.
The second Table containing the best approved medicines for the cure of all
diseases in HAVVKES.
CHAP. 1. HOw to avoid many infirmities in Hawks, when they are newly taken
out of the mew, with a description of natures working in maintaining health in
all sound Hawks. page. 77 Care in washing Hawks, newly drawn from the Mew.
page. 73 Nourishment of Hawks contrary to nature. page. 78 Hawks to remain
in moderate state of body. page. 79 The readiness of nature to cure
infirmities. page. 79
Chap. 2 A president of the wild Hawks practice for the preservation of her
health, drawn from the observation when the Havvke is in the mevv. page. 80
Chap. 3 How to preserve and keep your Hawke in health without any scowrings,
or medicincs at al. page. 82 Chap. 4 How to help and recover a Hawke that
casts her stones disorderly, and to make her cast in due time. page. 88 Chap. 5
An advertisement touching scowring and purgations. page. 91 Chap. 6 How to
prepare a strong hawke, and make her fit to be purged. page. 92 Chap. 7 How to
order a havvke that shall be found vveake and unable to abide any violent
dealing by medicines. page. 93 Chap. 8 A scowring to be given to any Hawke that
is full of flesh and strong, yet imperfect and unclean. page. 95 Chap. 9.
Another scowring to be given to a Hawke, that is but in reasonable estate of
body, foul and unclean. page. 96 Chap. 10 Another excellent scowring to be
given to any Hawks of what state soever, that has any inward misfortune, or
any other cold or stopping in the head. page. 97 Chap. 11 An excellent scowring
to give unto a full Hawke, after she has been lured and her grease heat, and
stirred in her before she be thoroughly inseamed. page. 98 Chapt. 12 Signs of
inward sicknesses and the cure. page. 98 Chap. 13 How to temper and cool the
heat of the liver, and to stay the inflammation page. 104 Chap. 14 Of the liver
and the gall. page. 105 Chap. 15 How to comfort the heart from any infirmity
that proceeds of heat. page. 106 Chap. 16 How to kill worms, to heat and
quicken a cold stomach, and to take away Fellanders, and other gross humors
in the pannell. page. 107 Chap. 17 Another good scowring to give any imperfect
Hawke troubled with Fellanders, or grief proceeding from the weakness of the
stomach. page. 110 Chap. 18 Another to purge the body, preserve the liver,
reins and kidneis, to help a short breath, to prevent the pantas, or wasting
of the lunges, and to purge away glut, and kill worms. page. 110 Chap. 19 To
purge a Hawke after she has cast her gorge, or that she stands long on her
meat before she puts it over. page. 111 Chap. 20 To stay the casting of the
gorge, and stay the weakness of the stomach, whence it proceeds. page. 114
Chap. 21 A very good medicine for the cold page. 115 Chap. 22 A very good water
to give to any Hawke, that is subject to any drought or heat inwardly. page.
116 Chap. 23 Of the frownce. page. 117 Chap. 24 A medicine to kill the Frownce,
that eats either into the mouth, tongue, or throat. page. 119 Chap. 25 Of the
Pantas. page. 121 Chap. 26 Of the Crocke, and the Crampe. page. 122 Chap. 27
For the Crampe. page. 123 Chap. 28 To cure a Hawke that has the Crocke in her
flying by any accident. page. 124 Chap. 29 Of diseases in the legs, or feet of
Hawks page. 127 Chap. 30 A medicine for the Crampe in the feet. page. 129
Chap. 31 Another remedy for the Crampe page. 129 Chap. 32 To cure a swelling in
the legs or foot, or any part thereof. page. 130 Chap. 33 How to burn salt.
page. 133 Chap. 34 Of the pin in hawks feet. page. 133 Chap. 35 To cure the
pin. page. 134 Chap. 36 To cure a strain in any part of the foot, page. 134
Chap. 37 To cure any new swelling, coming by blow or bruise, or any accident to
the legs or feet, page. 136 Chap. 38 For the falling sickness in hawks page.
137 Chap. 39 To cure the biting of a mad dog. page. 137 Chap. 40 Another
medicine against the biting of a mad dog page. 138 Chap. 41 To cure any new
wound coming by accident. page. 138 Chap. 42 To kill the itch in hawks bloody
feathers. page. 139
An Explanation of the words of art contained in this Book.
B
BAthing is when you set your Hawke to the water, to wash or bath her self,
either abroad or in the house. Batting, or to batte is when a Hawk fluttereth
with her wings either from the perch or the man's fist, stryuing as it were to
fly away, or get liberty. Bousing is when a Hawke drinks often, and seems
to be continually thirsty.
C
CReance is a fine small long line of strong and even twound Packthreed, which
is fastened to the Hawks leash, when she is first lured. Ceasing is when a
Hawke takes any thing into her foot, and gripeth or holds it fast. Check or
to kill, Check is when Crows, Rookes, Pies, or other birds coming in the
view of the Hawke, she forsakes her natural flight to fly at them. Casting,
is any thing that you give your Hawk to cleanse her gorge with, whether it be
flannell, thrummes, feathers, or such like. To cast a Hawke, is to take her in
your hands before the pinions of her wings, and to hold her from bating or
striving, when you administer any thing unto her. Cadge, is taken for that on
which Faulconers carry many Hawks, together when they bring them to sell.
D
DRopping is when a Hawke muteth directly downward, in several drops, and
ierketh it not longwaies from her. Disclosed, is when young Hawks are newly
hatched, and as it were disclosed from their shells.
E
ERie is the nest or place where a Hawke builds and brings up her young
ones, whether in woods, rocks, or any other places. Endew, is when a Hawke
digesteth her meat, not only putting it over from her gorge, but also
cleansing her pannell.
G
GOrge, is that part of the Hawke which first receives the meat, and is called
the Craw or crop in other fowls. Gurgiting, is when a Hawke is stuffed or
sufforated with any thing, be it meat or otherwise.
I
Ink, whether it be of Partridge, foul, doves, or any other pray, is the
neck from the head to the body. Intermew'd is from the first exchange of a
Hawks coat, or from her first mewing, till she come to be a white Hawke.
Iesses, are those short straps of leather, which are fastened to the Hawks legs,
and so to the lease by varuels, anlets, or such like.
L
LVer is that whereto Faulconers call their young Hawks by casting it up in
the air, being made of feathers and leather in such wise that in the motion it
looks not unlike a foul. Lease or leashe is a small long thong of leather, by
which the Faulconer holds his Hawke fast, folding it many times about their
fingers. Lice, are a small kind of white vermin, running amongst the feathers
of the Hawke.
M
MVting is the excrements or order which comes from Hawks, and contains both
dunge and urine. A Make-hawke is an old staunche flying Hawke, which being
inured to her flight, will easily instruct a younger Hawk to be waining in her
pray. Managing, is to handle any thing with cunning according to the true
nature thereof Mew, is that place, whether it be abroad or in the house where
you set down your Hawke, during the time that she raseth her feathers. Mites,
are a kind of vermin smaller then Lice, and most about the heads and nares of
Hawks.
P
PLumming, is when a Hawke cease a foul, and pulls the feathers from the
body. Plummage are small downie feather which the Hawke takes, or are given her
for casting. Pelt, is the dead body of any foul howsoever dismembered. Pill,
and pelf of a foul, is that refuse and broken remains which are left after
the Hawke has been releiued. Plume is the general color or mixtures of
feathers in a Hawke, which shows her constitution. Perch, is any thing
whereon you set your Hawke, when she is from your fist. Pray, is any thing
that a Hawke kills, and feeds her self thereupon. Pannell, is that part of
the Hawke next to the fundament whither the Hawke disgesteth her meat from her
body.
Q
QVarrie, is taken for the foul which is flowne at, and slain at any time,
especially when young Hawks are flowne thereunto.
R
RVfter-hood is the first hood whieh a Hawke wears, being large, wide, and
open behind. Reclaiming is to tame, make gentle, or to bring a Hawke to
familiarity with the man. Raised in flesh, is when a Hawke grows fat, or
prospers in flesh. Ramage is when a Hawke is wild, coy, or disdainful to the
man, and contrary to be reclaimed.
S
SLiming, is when a Hawke muteth from her longwaies in one entire substance,
and does not drop any part thereof. Stooping, is when a Hawke being upon her
wings at the height of her pitch, bends violently down to strike the foul
or any other pray. Summed is when a Hawke has all her feathers, and is fit
either to be taken from the Cry or Mew. Setting down, is when a Hawke is put
into the Mew. Sore-hawke, is from the first taking of her from the eiry, till
she have mewed her feathers.
T
TRussing is when a Hawke raseth a foul aloft, and so descends down with it
to the ground,
V
VNsumm'd is when a Hawks feathers are not come forth, or else not com'd home
to their full length.
VV
VVEathering is when you set your Hawke abroad to take the air, either by day
or night, in the frost, or in the sun, or at any other season.
Errata.
PAge 18, line 18, for lust read last. Page 27 l. 22 for a small copple r. one^
couple^. p. 38. l. 3. for found r. flowne. p. 47. l. 16. for liberty r.
benefit. p. 52. l. 19. for houses, r. rowles. p. 56. l. 10. for and r. but. p
71. l. 12. for it, r. is. p. 71. l. 18. for lure. r. take. p. 72. l. 28. for
flew, r. foul slaier. p 37. l. 6. for coming, r. cunning. p 73. l. 26. for
thereafter, r. therefore. p. 84. l. 6. for seek, r. soake. p 85. l. 22. for
remain, r remove. p 85 l. 30. for rest, r. choose. p. 90. l. 4. for lust, r.
taste. p. 73. last marginal note line 11. for leave, r. death.

depiction of falcon on stump

S See how my Haggard huffers in the air,
I It is a Faulcon far beyond compare.
M Mount up thy feather, with the flight of any
O O're-sore the fairest be they nere so many:
N No Faulcon to my Haggard I may see;
Nor may compaire, though many Faulcons be.
L Let me extol a Faulcon more report;
A A Faulcon is a Princes pleasant sport:
T It Is sport and pleasure delightful to the eye,
H Haggard Hawke with mounting lark to fly:
A Amid'st your pleasures then, take this delight:
M Maintain the Faulconer, and his Faulcons flight.
AN INTRODVCTION or preamble to the ensuing discourse, wherein the Author sets
down the occasion of writing this Work.
BEing requested by a friend of mine to put down in writing, the manner, and
way how to rule and order his Hawke, after he had drawn her out of the mewe:
And to make her ready, and fit to be flown. I consider red with my self, that
it would not be much, more labor, or amiss for me (huuing some spare and
idle time to spend) even to begin with her first, as she is wild, living in
the air. And although it has been affirmed, that the ways and coasts of
birds, and fowls of the air, are altogether uncertain, and not to be
distinguished in certain: yet do not I take it to be meant, nor spoken
generally, of all sorts, but only of such as live and abide near men, and
little fear the sight or conversation of men. for they care not, neithrr covet
to be constant in their flight, nor secure when they do rest, but even as it
happens, so are they in safety. And because the Haggard faulcon is the bird,
and hawke, that (in these days) most men do covet and desire to prepare, and
make fit for their pleasure. And whereas all other hawks, and of all sorts,
have heretofore had their particular praise and commendation, for the most
part) bestowed on them by diverse writers, and only she that has evermore
deserved the most: The Haggard Faulcon.
has had either none at all, or else the very least. Therefore I do intend
here in this treatise, to appoint her (as she is wild) to be a great part of
the subject of my discourse: and so according to my simple understanding, to
show of her nature and disposition: In her wildness.
And after how to alter and change the same into love and gentleness, with
subjection to the man, and so to rule, and govern her.

Lathams Faulconry The first Book.
CHAP. I. A short Collection of the natures and names of Hawks, but especially
of the Hawgard Faulcon.
WHereas I remember in Turberuile his book of Hawking, amongst others of his
collections, there is a description of seven kinds of Faulcons, and for the
franknesse of her metal and courage. He prefers the Faulcon gentle, as chief
amongst them all: and also sets down his reason why she is so called: which
is as he affirms, for her loving condition and behavior to the man. Also he
shows that she is venturous and strong, and full of courage: able to brook
and endure all times and seasons, no weather does come to her amiss, and so as
from his Author, he gives her his absolute commendation and praise. The second
as he places her, is the hawgard faulcon, otherwise caled the Peregrine
faulcon, and in the same place is so termed, which title he might as well and
as fitly have given unto the passenger soar faulcon, for she is likewise a
traveler, though not of so long continuance, But concerning the Haggard, the
author of his work, affirms amiss of her, for he affirms that she is a very
choice and tender hawke, to endure wind and boisterous weather. And whereas
he there shows a difference between them, in calling the one a Faulcon
gentle, and the other a Haggard faulcon: I take it, his meaning was, that
either the eias, or the ramage hawke, of the same and one kind, should be the
faulcon gentle, and the Haggard faulcon, that was taken wild, having prayed
for her self. And it must needs be so, howsoever I know the Tassell gentle is
the male and make unto them both: and therefore he needed not to have made any
such difference between them, but rather to have called or termed them
Faulcons gentle together, or slight Faulcons, and to have Preferred and placed
the Hawgard first in his book, Either ramage or eias
which place indeed she far deserves beyond the other: for she is more able
to endure both wind, weather, and all sorts of other extraordinary seasons, as
I could show you more at large. But because I have a great matter to
accomplish and perform, I will leave to speak any more of this point, or in
this place of any of them, for it would but little or nothing at al auail us, to
search or know any more of their titles or names the^ we do already: but even
to call them by such as in our memories and at this present are most familiar,
and ordinarily used amongst us.

CHAP. II. A perfect description of the Hawgard Faulcon, with the manner and
course of her life, while she is wild, and vnreclaimed.
THis Haggard Faulcon slight or gentle, which you list to term her, has for
the most part all places both by Sea, and Land, left unto her self, where to
rest and have her abiding, and where she best likes, there she continues
certain; like a Conqueror in the contry, keeping in awe and subjection the
most part of all the Foul that fly, insomuch that the Tassell gentle, her
natural and chiefest companion, dares not come near that coast where she
uses, nor sit by the place, where she stands: such is the greatness of her
spirit, she will not admit of any society, until such time as nature works in
her an inclination to put that in practice which all Hawks are subject unto at
the spring time: and then she suffers him to draw toward her, Tc cawke,
but still in subjection, which appears at his coming, by bowing down his
body and head to his foot, by calling and cowring with his wings, as the young
ones do unto their dam, whom they dare not displease. and thus they leave the
country for the summer time, hasting to the place where they mean to breed.

While th^se Hawks here mentioned, be remaining with us in the heart of
England, they do pray upon diverse and sundry sorts of fowls, as brants,
wildgeese, etc. but they are especially the Passenger-soare-Faulcons, or the
young Hawgards of great metal and spirit, that for want of understanding their
own harm, The brants and wild. geese.
do venture upon such vnwealdy pray, who not withstanding will afterward
learn to know their own error, and by being brusht and bete^ by those shrewd
apponents, will desist and leave off to meddle with them any more. Also the
Haggard does pray upon green foul, where she espieth her advantage; the
green plouer, the bastard plouer, and of diverse other fowls that might be
named, but most of all on housedoues, for they are most rife and common to be
found, and not of anything but what she labors and takes great pains to
get at all times, and yet-speeds not at all times of her purpose, but working
her self up into the air, passes aloft until she espieth something that she
likes, and then she stoopes, some days osten, and misses of her pray, and
then rests her self till breath and courage be regained, and then to her task
again.

Thus does she rest no day, but toil continually, unless the extremity of
foul, and tempestuous weather do let and hinder her, The practice of the
wild Faulcon. Rest old and staid hawks after toiling but to the young hawke
till she be staid and blooded, give no rest, or very little if it be possible.
when no other fowls are able to stir abroad to seek their food. This
proves what hurt we do unto our young hawks (being full of metal, sound, and
courageous) when as for two or three days flying, we do commonly determine
of two or three days resting: this we learn not from the wild hawke, whose
course and order (with reason, and as near as we may) we ought to imitate
and follow. She, when she has labored three or four days together in
boisterous and bitter weather is not the next day one jot the worse, but rather
the better, for by the daily use of her body, and exercise of her wings, she
is preserved and kept in perfect health. Sickly or crasie Hawks must have rest
in reason. The loss of breath. Glut and imperfection in the stomach.
she gathers noe glut to decay her stomach, nor wants no breath to maintain
her courage, which be two principal things we ought to care for: the one, if
we rest we cannot prevent: and for the other, no remedy but to feed with hot
meat, and very clean, to wash hard, to give stones, a few, and often, and
all will hardly serve: for when we purpose to rest one day or two, we are
forced (many times contrary to our expectation) to rest one week or two, so
that whosoever he be that can fly his hawke every day, shall have every day
a good and a perfect hawke: And contrary wise he that couets to fly upon rest,
shall seldom have a perfect or staid hawke, beside other dangers that may grow
to the great impairing of her health. A necessary observation
Further if the Faulconer be not quick of apprehension, and dilligent, much
harm may ensue: he must therefore be always present with her, to observe the
manner of her flights, the greatness of her suppers, how she hastes her meat
out of her gorge, how and what she casts in the morning, whether she muteth
seldom and sliceth, or often and dropping, Good. Bad.
which signifies some danger is like to ensue, as by catching heat, after her
drawing, while she is in her grease, or by some tedious flight, flown before
she be throwly clean, by receiving a great gorge after the same: also these
occasions of extraordinary and untimely heat, may breed the Cray, and
engender the fillanders* which although they proceed of the cold and dulnes of
the stomach, not kindly disgesting, what it receives: yet may this untimely
heat forenamed (the stomach being oruer charged) so choke and kill the
appetite, that suddenly (even of one gorge) this infirmity may grow. The
fillanders. How to attain unto the perfect knowledge of the conning and skill
full art of Faulconry.
He that will be a Faulconer, must be no sluggard, he must be up early, and
down late, or else he shall never see how his hawke reioiceth: neither must
he be tempted or drawn away with other mutabilities, or wandering affection,
but remain and continue constant in the art he professes.

I have already spoken of her chiefest physic, as she is wild, which is the
labor of her body, and the exercise of her wings: Now will I show you what
she actually adds to the former for the preservation, and continuance of her
health.

When she has slain and seized on her pray, if it be a dove, so soon as she
has broken the neck, then presently she goes unto that place which we abhor
our hawks should so much as touch, which is the croppe, and thereof she takes
her pleasure, and of that which is within it, as especially of the Mustard
seed, or Carlock, which soever it be, and of this she will not fail to to
cast great store in her casting every morning under her stand. And surely I
think she takes great delight to eat it, and uses it as physic for her
health. When she has well fed, and filled her gorge and body full of meat:
she leaves that place, and flies unto some solitary and secret place, where
she sits all the day in the air, and has the water and what she likes to
benefit her self withal. When night draws near away she flies unto the
place where secrely within her self she has purposed and appointed before to
rest all night.

And thus omitting to speak any more of her in the kind of her wildenesse, I
will now according to the order and method used by my self in mine own
practice, show how to reclaim, and make her subject to the man.

CHAP. III. Here follows the manner of reclaiming your Haggard, with the
means how to enter her to the lure.
WHen you do take one of these Hawks, or shall have one of them newly taken
and brought to your hands, most commonly here in England their bodies will be
full of meat, then is it best after her taking (as soon as you may) to set her
down, and let her sit where she may rest quietly for the first night, either
seeled, or in a rufter hood: so shall you prevent many dangers, that might
otherwise ensue, as the frounce; or surfeting on heat. Likewise if she be
taken when she is empty, it is your best course to use her as before, for they
are upon such occasion subject to anger and fretting, and thereof may the like
imperfections grow, the next day easily take her upon your fist gently, and
cease not to carry her the whole day continually, using a feather in steed of
your hand to touch and stroke her withal, and when you find her gentle and
willing to be touched without starting: A feather is more gentle then your hand,
and she will endure it better. Vuhood her first in the morning.
then may you alone by your self pull off her hood, and quicly, and gently put
it one again, holding this course until she begin to feed: then you must
proffer her meat often, suffering her to take but a little at once, even to
please her withal, never pulling of her hood, nor putting it one without a bit
or two, both before and after, to quiet her, and draw her love unto the hood
and your self, not forgetting to use your voice unto her, before you take it
off, and all the while she is a feeding and no longer: that as she reclaimeth,
and her stomach grows or increases, she may learn to know that when she
hears your voice, she shall be fed. Then, when through your diligent pains,
and this prescribed order in your practice you have brought her to feed
boldly: then will it be fit time to teach her to iumpe to your fist, which you
must do in this manner.

Set her down upon a perch, about your breast high, or otherwise if it be a
low perch, then you must be on your knees, because your Haggard will be
fearful, and ready to start and bate from you, when she shall see you so
high over her at the first, until she be better acquainted with you. Then
vnstrike her hood, and lure her using your voice, with a bitte or two of meat
bestowed on her as she is hoodded, for that will make her eager, and to love
your voice, because she sees nothing to cross that humor in her: whereas
otherwise it may be as yet her coyness, or her perceiving of one thing or
other may provoke her to take dislike, or to bate from you, and thereby catch
some sudden fear, A good caveat.
which at the first you ought to be careful to prevent, for it is hard to
work that out again, which she is suffered to take at the first, and most
commonly she will be subject to it ever after, whether it be good or evil.
Therefore it shall be your best course to hold this order, until you shall
find her familiar, and her stomach perfect: for it is that only that guides
and rules her, The stomach
it is the curb and bridle that holds and keeps her in subjection to the man,
and it is the spur that pricketh her forward to perform the duty she owes
to her keeper, and that which he requires from her to be effected: and
without that one only thing be preserved and carefully kept ripe perfect,
sharp, and truly edged, there is no subjection to be gained; nor no content
to be received: No subjection when the stomach is full.
but scornful disobedience, and altogether offensiuenesse.

Now by this time you may be bold to pull of her hood, and let her sit bare
faced* keeping your self as as yet close by her: and as you shall perceive her
to have any untoward humor in her, (as to stare about, or wry her self to and
fro) profer her a bit of meat with your hand, and use your voice withal to
draw her straight unto you, which when you have effected, and that you do
find she will boldly attend, willingly receive bits at your hand, and iump
readily to your fist: Then will it be a fit time to set her to the lure: which
order and practice (because I know the simplest Faulconer is not ignorant of) I
will omit.

But to proceed, so soon as your hawke will com redely in the creyance to the
lure garnisht with meat, stay not long in that kind, for she will soon
begin to scorn it, and look annother way. Then will it be convenient to let
her see a live dove at the lure, and lure her unto the same: which when she
has killed, and eaten the head, take her up very gently with a bit of meat,
and put on her hood: then lure her again unto the dead pelt, and so use her
two or three times and no more: for she will quickly begin to perceive your
intent, and will grow loath to be taken off, and her desire to keep it still
in her possession will cause her to drag it from you: and thereby her love will
rather abate, then increase.

Often luring at one time and at her first entrance is good to make her
perfect, and to hasten her withal: but use it not long, nor no longer then I
have directed. Also it is worse in a field hawke, then it is in a river hawke,
in regard (as you have heard) it moves her to carry, which is a great fault in
any hawke And therefore now it is full time to lure her loose unto live Doves,
which you must let her see at your lure to draw and hasten her to come unto you
with love and courage.

Also you must let her sease upon them and kill the^, even at your foot, one
after another, for half a dozen days together. being sure he that holds
her, may have skill to let her in with her head right toward you, and lure not
far until her stomach be perfect, and her self very ready to come: for
otherwise she may epsy something out of the way that she has more liking unto,
and so for that time be lost, which would be very hurtful unto her, although
she should be recovered again.

Likewise forget not all this time of her making (while she is on the ground,
either pluming or feeding to walk round about her, Remember this rule.
using your voice, and giving her many bits with your hand: And leave not off
this course, but every day use her unto it, until you have won her even to
lean and bend her body to your hand, and to bring what she has in her foot
toward you-so far as she is able, or otherwise to show her love and desire
unto the same.

By this time it will not be amiss to spring her up some live Doves as she
comes unto you, betwixt the man and the lure: and be sure they be given in a
long Criance, that she may not kill them far from you; but always that she
may trusse them over your head, and fall near you; for otherwise it may be a
special cave to stsrike a timorous conceit into her, and make her sit and
stare at you, and to drag and carry from you, and some time to leave and
forsake what she has and go her way, when she shall sit and see you coming
so far from her. I have heard of some Hawks that would not be taken up
again without striking or rapping in the Cryance: but whenever they have
been flowne, and not killed a foul, they would surely have been lost without
such a device, which is a great fault in any Hawke, and it does greatly redownd
unto the discredit of the Fawlkconer, that through his default and negligence,
she have caught such an ill property in her first making, because he had no
more care nor skill to govern her aright: For there is many a one that takes
in hand to keep a Hawke, that having neither skill nor judgment, do not
deserve the true title of a Faulconer. Therefore beware of this one thing,
which I may justly term an error in diverse keepers of Hawks, who have by this
oversight spoiled, and utterly undone many a brave Haggard.

CHAP. IIII. How to order and govern your Hawke in the time of her lureing,
and how to keep her from carrying, and other ill qualities incident to Hawks
at that time.
Having bestowed half a dozen Pigeons upon your Hawke, in the manner formerly
mentioned (always remembering to use your voice) you may now be bold (at a
convenient hour in the evening when she hears your voice, and has you in
her sight) to hold in your lure, and suffer her to fly about you, holding her
with your voice and lure as near you as may be, to teach her to do her
business, and work it on your head. Then cast her up a Dove with a loud
voice: I have heard of some men that have disliked this course, affirming that
Doves will make Haggards carry: which is not so, What it is that makes
Haggards carry.
for that is idleness and want of skill in their keepers, that causes them to
Carry: and besides he that can get nothing else, must of necessity be pleased
with what he has: And might I have never such variety of other fowls, yet
would I use the Dove, (although some other things would not be hurtful) for I
never had Haggard, but I could make her sit with the Doves head in her foot
(which is something lighter then the body) and never carry it. Therefore
experience tells me in this case what may be done: And I am persuaded that many
do deceive themselves in this respect, and do never find out the true cause
that makes their Haggards dregge and carry from them at their first luring unto
live doves: which is not the lightness of the dove as they suppose that prouokes
her unto it, but it is (as I have said before) either the unskillfulness or
negligence in their keepers; who have not painefully and with diligence ordered
them aright in their reclaiming and first making, neither have they taken due
time therein, nor used them with that respect of love and gentleness, whereby
they might win and draw their love unto them, but contrariwise have dealt
rashly and roughly with them, which the Hawke quickly perceiving, does for the
most part reward and requite her keepers unkindness, with strange behavior,
and disdainefull coyness. Another cause of their dragging and carrying is,
that their keepers have given them little or no content in their lureing: but
have sought to draw them unto them by constraint, and have given them at their
coming a very slight reward, or none at all, it may be sometimes upon the pelt
of a pigeon, or some other dead thing, in which she takes no delight neither
are such slight matters any thing worth, to win a Hawgards love withal, for as
you do teach her the way to come unto you, so must you by your art and
industry giver her full assurance of her Your kind dealing with her, does draw
her love to you.
content and welcome when she is come unto you, which assurance cannot be made
with dead things only, but with such as are living, which she is naturally
inclined to love and like of, for if the pleasure which she takes in her
reward, be the only cause that moves a hawke to come unto the man (which every
Fawlconer must confess is true) you must needs think when she misses that
content in her reward, and finds it not to her liking, if afterterwards she be
far from you, her have will be but small in repairing to you, likewise when
she has been thus badly rewarded, and long debarred of her natural desire
and delight, and after you shall come to lure her to a live dove, it is most
likely at her first ceasing upon it, she will be loath to let you come near
her, for fear you should deprive her of her unaccustomed yet long desired
pleasure, which she having obtained will be unwilling to leave, and therefore
will offer to rise, and carry it away: whereupon some men suddenly (yet simply)
impute the cause thereof to the doves lightness, which indeed is nothing so, for
if there be no fault at that time in the faulconer, Before she be well
accustomed to live doves.
that through his rashness or unskillful demeanor he gives her no occasion (which
he * as yet may easily do) then is it nothing else but the very pleasure* and
delight which she does take in the life and motion of the dove, for when she
feels it stir and flutter in her foot, The stirring of the dove which is
then stra^g makes her jot for joy.
the* nouelty of that from which she has been so long estraunged, makes her
iocund and so ouercomes her, with sudden joy and gladness, that she knows
not for the time how to sit, or behave her self, she will be so hot and eager
on it, for the preventing of which coins and fugitive desire in your Hawke at
her first luring unto live doves, you must restrain her and draw her gently to
you with your lure or cryance, not s^ddenly or rashly, but by degrees, and give
her some bits of meat with your hand, being on your knees, to please and
content her, and by this loving usage you shall find your first dove, to be the
worst dove: and the more ofter that you do use her unto them, the quietter
she will be and the better pleased both with them and your self, loving your
Which you must always be careful to use in your whole practice of luring your
Haggard.
voice, and you the better for their sakes, and by using this course you shall
find such a sudden alteration in her, that at the first she did not dragge
so fast from you, but now she will bring it with as much speed toward you:
yea she will meet you with it, and be willing to change a whole dove with you
for a bit of meat at your hand, and what can you desire more: and whatsoever he
be that carefully observes this rule, and does painfully practice the same,
(with due respect unto the Which is the stomach.
maine point) shall not fail of his expectation, but in the space and time
before limited shall be sure to have his hawke loueing inward, and ready
whenever time shall serve to be let into any hawke, or to be thrown of upon
a beaten foul, as the Faulconer in his discretion shall see and find it meet.
And because in these days every one that professes Faulconry, taking the
charge upon them to keep a hawke with a desire to be accounted Faulconers, yet
have not had time to obtain experience, and therefore of necessity must needs
want the knowledge of iudgeing and discerning the true nature of their hawks,
the The want of skill to know the nature and condition of the hawke, does cause
the Fawlcon to commit many errors in the reclaiming of the Haggard: many times
to her great danger and utter overthrow.
want of which knowledge makes them commit many errors in managing and
reclaiming their Haggards, for whose help and instruction I will proceed, to
the setting down of some necessary obseruances, concerning the qualities and
dispositions of diverse Haggards, the Knowledge of which cannot choose but be
much beneficial to direct the courses and practices of such young men, as do
intend industriously to labor to attain to the readiest, safest, most
profitable and commendable course of manning, reclaiming, and luring the
Haggard, Faulcon gentle.

CHAP. V. A necessary observation concerning the several conditions of Hawks,
and how to alter any malignant humor, or hurtful quallity in them.
ALthough the Fawlcons gentle, or slight Fawlcons, are by nature all of one
kind; yet in quality and condition they do differ far, which difference,
you must by your knowledge, together with your painful practice; seek to
learn and find out in the time of their luring and making, at which time if
you do with attentive diligence, mark and observe your Haggards disposition,
it will be an excellent means of attaining and performing your purpose with
much facillitie, and content.

For example, you shall sometimes meet with a Hawk that when you have well
lured her, and given all the good content you can devise unto her, yet upon the
least scope or liberty which shall be offered, she will no tarry with you, but
go her way, then may you be sure she as it were longs, and her mind
stands another way; therefore not only to prove her inclination, but also to
reclaim her from so bad a condition, you must take this course.

Abate her pride somewhat, yet with reason and respect unto the weather, which
being done, if you have never a make-hawke of your own, then must you obtain
the benefit of one by friendship, then be sure to take a fit hour in the
evening upon a convenient and easy place, and one couple of foul with your
make hawke, flowne and stooped once or twice, or as you shall see cause in the
managing of your flight, for your best vantage in landing, If this course stay
her not, there is no hope of her, for the river her love is not to foul, but
is addicted another way.
but when she is coming for the lust to kill it over land, be sure to stand
under the wind with your Hawke, and let her see the foul overthrown and go
into the quarry: and if you perceive she flies in with a courage, and cease
with love and heat on the foul, make in apace to cross the wings of the
foul, and make that safe, suffering them a while to take their pleasure
together, which done with meat cleanly dressed Be chary lest you fray your young
hawke with your have.
take up your old Hawke gently, and let the other have the quarry unto her
self, and take her pleasure thereon with your own help on your knees to
please her, and beware she takes no pill nor pelf, to glut her withal, and
so reward her with Be careful to feed clean the benefit whereof few takes
notice.
cleanly feed, giving her supper unto her as she sits upon the foul, use her
thus three or four times together, but let it be with good meat, clean washed,
and well dressed from your own hand.

When you have used this course, at your next coming to the brook, let your
make-hawke be flowne, and when she has stooped, and is wrought to her place
again, at your next showing let your hawke see the foul thrown in, and fly
for the killing thereof her self with the other hawke, then mark the manner
of that flight with circumspection, for by it you shall have a great guess of
your future hope, and what will ensue; for if she hotly and kindly entertaines
the benefit of the advantage offered unto her at that time by the other hawke,
and does with attentive eagerness follow the foul, which she saw thrown in,
flying round upon that and upon your self, and with good hap enioies the
foul; it shows her love and disposition is agreeable to your desire, and no
doubt (with good usage) may make you an excellent hawke. And although this is
the only means to reclaim and recover any metled Hawke, that has as it
were stragled, and killed check from her Keeper at random. Yet may you fail
in this prescribed order, although you observe and perform it never so
exactlie, unless you likewise be careful to keep and maintain her stomach
good and perfect, which must be done with clean feed, stones, and casting, for
of this be assured, if her stomach be imperfect, and defective, neither love
of man, love of foul, love of hawke, nor one thing, nor other, will hold her
in subjection, but do what you can she will fall off from you, Her inward
disposition of wildnes, is made known by her outward action of departure
and take any occasion to bid you farewell, utterly disclaiming and renouncing
all former familiarity, and acquaintance betwixt you, and will betake her
sellfe to her former course of wildness, from which your art has neither
won nor yet forced her haggardly inclination.

The second rule.
There is a Hawke of another disposition, which in her making has not once
offended you, but has proved inward and lovingly disposed toward you. This
Hawke you may presume to be more bold withal then with the other, for when you
have a couple of foul, that lie fit for your purpose, throw off your
make-hawk, and when she has once stooped them upon her point, or before, at
the setting in of the foul let in your young hawke: If she fix her eye upon
the other hawke, and work her, then need you not to doubt, but suffer your
young hawke fly till she has almost reached the other, but then be sure to
show the foul, and then if she stoop it with the other hawke, and work it
again with her, then if it be possible let them kill it at the next down
come, for so shall you please your young hawke in due time. For the only
content you can give to those kind of hawks, is to let them have their
desires speedily, before they begin to be weary, and while their courage is
in them, and until they be soundly in love and blood, for there is not any
thing that puts a young hawke sooner out of conceit with the man, or withdrawes
her love, and drives her sooner away, then to suffer her to fly too long
before she be served.

The third rule.
There is yet a Hawke of a third disposition, or quality, that also in the
time of her making, has given or showed little or no cause of offense unto her
keeper, yet in his observation he has perceived her to be of a working humor,
desirous to clime, and of an aspiring spirit, but through his care and skill he
has kept her down, and held her near about him, which course I hold
expedient to be used, for in my youth I learned and observed it, and ever since
in my labor have found the same to be the most certain and best rule to be
noted, that in the time of her making no scope be given to the Haggard, neither
to fly high, nor wild, but to be held down and near you: For whenever she
shall come to be welblooded on Foul, and perceiues what she should do, if
ever she were a flier you cannot hold her down, now when you shall come
(according to the foresaid manner) to let this Hawke into another hawk, you
shall see her go to her business without ever respecting or looking toward
the other hawke, but working upon you as if she were wild, then does it
behoue you to fear her, and be careful to let her see foul in due time,
least when she comes to her wonted place, she goes her way. For it is the
manner of such great metteld and self wild hawks, not to abide nor tarry at
the first no longer, then they be where they may command their pray. Therefore
for such a Hawke as a man shall find to be self conceited, not caring for nor
regarding the company of another hawke, you ought until she be very well
quarried to be careful, and suffer her not to fly too long at the first,
before you show her foul: and so the shorter work you make with her, the
greater content you give her, and shall thereby win her love unto you for ever.

With the first of these three orders, I have reclaimed an outrageous unstaid
hawke, and so besotted her with the love of foul, an other hawke, and the man:
that she has fallen clean from her vpwardnesse and high flying. Insomuch that
I have been enforced to fly her single, and kill foul with her on easy
places, and otherwise with a good stomach put unto her, have thrown her off on
great waters, and amongst many Foul, yea, and have had much ado to rowse and
stir her up from that submisse and dreaming disposition which she had caught,
yet in the end have by the foresaid means awakened and recovered her, brought
her to perfection and made an excellent hawke of her self, or otherwise.

And whosoever does keep many hawks, may sometimes meet with such a one,
which if he does; it shall be meet and convenient for them to take her from
the help of any other Hawke, and put her to service her self, adding to the
same the assistance of his own labor and sikll, with great respect unto her
stomach, with a steddie and certain hand to be held on her: For he that
observes not these things, shall hardly be able to keep and govern his Hawke
aright, as he ought to do.

CHAP. VI. How to order any wyld hawke or other, that comes not from the mew.
IN regard the making and reclaiming of a wild hawke newly taken, does
something differ from that of the hawke which is drawn from the mew, both in
respect of her fatnes, and diverse other causes; I have also thought it fit to
set down an order to be used in performing the same.

At such time as you have reclaimed and made your hawke familiar, and so gentle
as that she will endure to sit bare faced, in the evening or night amongst
company: then is it meet for you to begin to give her stones, and let her
have them by night, and every night, until you do find her stomach good,
and then you may proffer her casting, which she will not refuse but take it
willingly; and I would wish you to be very careful at your first giving of
her casting, that it may be with her love and liking, for otherwise I have
seen diverse havvkes beaten out of love with the same, A great fault in the
Faulconer.
so that they would never take it willingly after. Likewise if she should
take her casting before her stomach were sufficiently prepared, it were to no
purpose, neither would it avail any thing at all; for it is the stones that
must first prepare the way, by stirring and dissoluing such grease and glut, or
what besides she has in her, and make it fit to pass away in her mutes
downward, and also to be brought and drawn by her castings upward. Therefore
for this time and according to the foresaid order, and rules set down for the
time of lureing, and laboring your hawke, when as you ought to carry an even
and a steddie hand, feeding clean, and (with discretion) short withal, when
you are disposed to give stones, it shall be your best course, when she has
put away her supper from above, then before you go to bed to give her half a
dozen stones, ab^^^ the hand, if you have the art, if not then otherwise (...)
you like best to cast her: Let her have them as often as you can, until such
time as you come to give her such things, whereon she shall take plummage in
her living or training, By this time your Hawke will be ready for casting and
it will prevail.
and then to follow her in that kind, *adding unto the ink of a dove as much
clean washed flannell in quantity, as may make her a reasonable casting,
bearing this old proverb in your mind, that whereas washed meat and stones
makes a hawke to fly: so great casting and long fasting makes her to die,
after as you shall find just cause, and perceive by her that she has need,
^iue not to our hawke great stones and many, but small and often, for such
physic there is not any.
let her have stones again, and let her not be long without: but give them
after the foresaid order, which you shall be sure to have again in the
morning betime, and shall not be enforced to tarry for them: whereas
otherwise to be given in the morning to such kind of Hawks, it breeds many
inconveniences, of which I will wright more at large hereafter.

CHAP. VII. How you may know the nature and disposition of your Hawke, as well
by the plume, as also by observation: and that being found, how to order and
behave your self toward them accordingly.
WHereas in my former rules I have given notice of the variable disposition of
Hawks, though of one kind and generation: which as I have showed, must of
every Faulconer be carefully sought for and found out in the time of their
reclaiming and making. The knowledge of which being once attained unto, you
must be very careful to order and govern them according to the same,

For example, when you shall find your hawke to grow suddenly familiar with
you, and quickly, and lovingly reclaimed and inclined unto you: as diligently
to listen and give care to you, and to your voice, to learn spedily to come
unto you, and when she is com to seem eager and hot to cease upon that which
you shall throw or give unto her, and be familiar with your self, without
starting or staring about her, or otherwise to be coie or waiward: and when
she has done your will upon the ground close by you, then to look up for
your fist, and willingly and redily to iump unto the same. To such a Hawke may
you with reason be kind unto; and let her find the reward of her gentleness
by the sweetness your fingers.

Most commonly these loving qualities are to be found in your blanke Hawks,
for by experience I have ever found them to be the kindest and louingst hawks
of all others: and I have observed that these kind of hawks are much subject
to a little bot, or grubworme, which do breed in the guts, and will appear
in her mutes, crawling from forth the same, then shrinking on a heap, and so
they die. These worms abounding may by medicine be corrected, but are not
utterly to be destroyed: for they by nature do breed and increase in those
kind of Hawks, and do little harm, and that Hawke who has them, is never
bad in her kind, unless she be wronged by her keeper in the manner of her
usage. The color of the worm while it lives in a slight Faulcon is red, and
in a Barberie Faulcon it is white, but being dead it is white from them both.

There is a kind of Hawke that you shall find more sullen and dogged of
disposition, not caring for you, nor your voice: but looking behind her, or
some other way when she should be lured and come toward you. This Hawke
although you must of necessity love her, yet must you take good heed how you
let her understand the same; but deal with her according to her deserts,
looking straightly unto her: I mean in her feed, and manner of her diet: but
otherwise outwardly in your behavior toward her, that must be most loving and
gentle, although you get no more then you do wring and extort from her
perforce. Therefore be sure to lessen her pride by ordering her diet with
measure, and respect unto the weather, which falling-out mild and temperate,
you need not fear to hold her down, until you have quarried her in such sort
as is before appointed for a hawke of her condition: and so by degrees as you
see her alter and amend her manners, so may you alter her diet, adding to her
strength with reasonable expeditio^, which will be quickly gotten, if she be
sound, and the weather reasonable: but if the weather shall fall out to be
violent and frostie, then you must beware and take heed how you abate much
flesh, and especially how you keep it off too long.

These kinds of aukeward quallities are for the most part found in your black
and swarthie plumed Hawks: for although there be many of them that be good
mettelled Hawks, and high fliers: yet are they also hard of ward, and very
evil and uneasy to be reclaimed and brought in subjection. Therefore the
greater care must be had of them, and of necessity a straighter course be
taken with them, then with other Hawks, that be of a more mild and loving
disposition.

And whenever you do fly one of these hawks, and have no good success in
your flight fail not to take her down unto some live thing, to draw and hold
her love unto your self: for if she have not her will and pleasure from you,
she will assuredly seek it an other way. Therefore it is a very special
and singular good thing when your young Hawke has stooped foul, and failed to
kill, then to have a live foul ready to take her down withal, although it be
a tame one, yet let it be as near the color of the wild foul as you can,
being sure to make it safe from struggling or striving.

There is another kind of plumed Hawks, between a black and a tawnie, as it
were of a suddie color, which be as great mettelled Hawks and as sprightfull
as can fly. Also loving and kind of disposition, if they be well and
artificially reclaimed and made. And these kinds of Hawks, being let in with
another Hawke will be presently won with two or three quarries: if not, and
that means be wanting, then must you take the greater pains with them in
training to make them Hawks of themselves, which they will quickly be, after
you have made them to fly right and true upon you, if you observe and keep
this ensuing order: They must want no strength when they have not the
assistance of an other Hawke, neither must their stomach be wanting to put
them forward to perform their service. Then must you take a fit hour at
evening when all check be past, with fair weather: for foul weather and check
will breed offenses diverse ways: then must you have a small couple of Foul
conveniently in a hollow brook, where they may shroud themselves from you, and
you from them: for great waters and many Foul cause too much toil for young
Hawks, then throw off your Hawke as near them as possible you may with
conuenience, that you be not enforced to draw your Hawke on her wing too far,
nor tarry too long before you show the Foul unto her: for young Hawks must
not be suffered to fly too long at the first, but must be taught and brought
unto it by degrees: then the place being for your purpose, if your Hawke will
fly right, you may at the second stooping overthrow one of them, if she will
come hard and close for such a Hawke as comes with vehemency at the first does
more terrify and amaze a foul with once coming, then another that comes
coldly and with small courage shall do in three or four times. If you do
fail of your expectation, and that it be not suddenly effected, miss not to
take her down to a hand foul, before she has labored and beaten her self
out too much, and therein may you please her well and give her great content.
This course take with her so long as she is of her self, wanting the company
of another Hawke to help her, and so you shall be sure to hold her still in
love: for there is nothing more hurtful or displeasing to a young Hawke, then
at her first making to suffer her to toil, and make many stoopings before she
be served. That breeds dislike and causes her to fly wide and carelessly,
yea, and many times to go her way in great displeasure.

There be other kinds of plumed Hawks, and more then as yet I have made
mention of, but whatsoever they be or shall be, I hope I have formerlie in this
discourse, provided, showed, and plainly expressed, a several order or rule
for their usage, according as they shall be perceived (and through the
Faulconers skill) found to be in their several natures and diversity of
humors disposed and inclined.

CHAP. VIII. Here follows the manner of bathing your hawke.
Having here spoken particularly of the Haggard Faulcon gentle, and discoursed
of her life as she abides and lives wild in England, and as I have showed
that amongst all other birds and fowls, she is a commander, so likewise have
I displaied and set forth the greatness of her courage, for the excellency
whereof she deserves to be called and accounted the Queen of all other
hawks, who having the whole circle of the earth, and compass of the air
wherein to raunge, pass, and pervse at her pleasure, yet being by the art and
skill of man taken from the air, it has also been taught how by your skill
and industry to abate (though not the haughtiness of her courage, for that
remains yet) the greatness of her wild and furious stomach, and to alter and
change the settled order and course of nature, and by your artfull endeavor to
draw her as it were by constraint and yet willingly, to yield unto you, and to
your directions, being content to submit her self unto your custody, and
inure her self to your company with great boldness and familiarity: and
likewise how by diet, stones, and casting to prepare her stomach, whereby she
may be made fit to fly, and so to guide and rule her according to the course
of her condition, during her flying time. Now it will not be amiss for me to
speak something concerning the order and manner of bathing and weathering your
haggard, wherein I will briefly show you my advise and counsel.

First as concerning bathing of your Haggard, I my self have had very few
that would ever bathe at all, so long as they have continued with me sound, but
whenever I have proved them barefaced abroad, having fitted them with a
reasonable Neither so little as hunger should provoke them nor so much that
superfluity should prevent them.
gorge for the purpose, they would be so displeasing to me with their
unruliness and extreme bateing, that before I could conveniently take them
to my fist again, I have perceived them to receive more harm that way, then
they would have been the better for their bathing: therefore when trial shall
be made of any such hawke, and that you find she is not disposed thereunto,
it shall be better for you to keep her on your fist, The air.
then to wrong her to no end: for those kind of hawks although you labor
them the first year truly in their making, and have by your diligence
wrought them to your own content, having made them so familiar, that they will
sit abroad bare faced hard by you, when they are empty, yet if you shall
absent your self for trial, you shall find they will be unquiet, and so
distemper themselves, that when you shall appear and come into their sight
again, they will strive and do themselves great harm: and surely I had
rather my own hawke should fly two or three flights, being empty, then she
should bate or strive once in her lease, her body being full of meat. These
kind of hawks being fittest for the river, and most commonly flowne
thereunto, are oftentimes with killing Foul drawn into the same, being wetted
many times with waters and rain, likewise the time of year being winter,
wholly and sharply inclined to cold and wet, all which are great impediments,
and hindrances unto the bathing of Haggards, and it is in vain to offer it
unto them in that season; otherwise I have observed often that after two or
three mewes, and toward their declining age, through extraordinary actions of
untimely heates or surfets, they have desired and sought for bathing, and
grown to more quietness abroad barefac't; which inclination in them will be
easily found and descried: then is it meet for you not to neglect occasion,
but when the weather will permit you show her the water, if she do bath, let
her dry her self abroad, if it be fair and the weather temperat, otherwise
let her have the air of the fire with measure, and come no more abroad that
day nor night, but set her upon a very warm perch, and from the air,
otherwise it might be very hurtful to the hawke, for indeed there would be no
mixture of fire and air both, in the drying of their hawke: for The hawke that
is sound bathes seldom, yet is she hot by nature, the hawke that is not sound
baths often, being more then naturally hot by reason of her infirmity.
the one, it is natural and kind, it dries the feathers, tempereth and
seasoneth the body and cools the same, being hot by nature, but much hotter
by distemperature, which appears by the bathing of some, The fire.
and is proved by the not bathing of others whereby the difference between the
sound hawke and the unsound hawke is discerned. The other of necessity must
needs be hurtful, because in her first creation it is affirmed of her and al
other fowls, that their residence and continual aboade was allotted them in
the air, as a place and element most fit and correspondent to their natural
compositions: and therefore the fire being their opposite element, cannot choose
but be very hurtful, in regard it does not only dry the feathers of the
hawke: but also pierces into the body, and heateth it most unnaturally:
therefore when it is used upon necessity there ought great heed to be taken, as
I have said before; for certainly it is neither good nor wholesome for your
hawke, either wet or dry to receive much heat from the fire.

Thus (for breuities sake) I omit to speak any more of bathing these kind of
hawks, and do refer the same to every man's particular opinion, and
generally to the judgment of all good and ancient Faulconers, whose long
experienced practice I would not draw with in the limits of prescription: but
leave them to use their own hawks, as they through observation and just
occasion shall find it convenient.

CHAP. IX. The manner how to weather your Hawke.
THus having spoken somewhat concerning the bathing of your Haggard, I will now
speak some thing of her weathering, where you must note by the way that many
Hawks of the * same kind, are taken out of the next very young, Fawlcons.
whereby they do altogether forget their natural dam that bred them, and
betake themselves to love, and grow fond on them or him that do foster or
bring them up, also there be others of a more base and bastard kind, that out
of the same naure will very easily be brought to familiarity with the man, not
in the house only, but also abroad, hooded or vnhooded, nay many of them will
be more gentle and quiet when they are vnhooded, then when they are hooded, for
if a man do but stir or speak in their hearing, they will cry and bate, as
though they did desire to see the man: Likewise some of them being vnhooded,
when they see the man will cowre and cry showing thereby their exceeding
fondnes and fawning love toward him. These kind of hawks may you do with
what you will, using them at your pleasure, hooded or vnhooded, Mark the
difference between the Haggard and the Eyas.
and while she is in your hand she will be always best, and most quiet when
she is full gorged, and bare faced. These hawks being unseasoned in their
bodies (by reason they are debarred not only from the continual benefit of
the air, but also from other natural courses of feeding, flying, and the like
exercises, which they use in their youth, by which they become not only
strong, but also sound and perfect in their constitutions,) For want of the
air to cool and refresh them: together with continual exercise to keep them
in health.
are much subject unto heat, and therefore much addicted to weathering and
bathing, and almost will never refuse the water: which notwithstanding you must
not impute to their unsoundness, or evil disposition of her body, (although
there is, and ever will be some of them diseased) but unto the alteration and
change of their nature and kind, which by their bringing up with the man, is
much different from the nature of those that are nourished and fed by their dam.

For example, The Eyas.
these kind of hawks be all (for the most part) taken out of the nest very
young, even in their down, from whence they are put into a close house,
whereas they be always fed, and familiarly brought up by the man, until they
be able to fly, when as the summer approaching very suddenly, they are
continued and trained up in the same, the weather being always warm and
temperat: She knows no other dam to feed her, nor no other means to relieve
her.
thus are they still inured to familiarity with the man, so that of necessity
they must be both fond and loving toward him, not knowing from whence besides
to fetch their relief or sustenance. When the summer is ended they be commonly
put up into a house again, or else kept in some warm place, for they cannot
endure the cold wind to blow upon them, which manner of education or bringing
up, does make them to differ much in the natural inclination of their bodies,
from the Haggard, who as you shall hear is fostred after another fashion,
therefore you may boldly set abroad these Hawks vnhooded, as well to take the
air, (the benefit whereof cannot choose but give a cooling comfort to their
supernatural imbred heats) but also in regard of their Which is bred with them.
innated familiarity they will take no occasion to bate or strive, thereby to
hurt themselves when they are full gorged. But leaving to speak any more of
these kind of scratching Hawks, that I did never love should come too near my
fingers, and to return unto the courteous and fair conditioned Haggard
Faulcon, whose gallent disposition I know not how to extol, or praise so
sufficiently as she deserves.

She for the most part Eyrees and breeds on the tops of high rocks in the cold
air, where she continues for a time, never setting eye nor seeing any man,
but there is nourished and brought up by her natural Dam, until such time as
her feathers be at home, Because they should no longer devour her pray, which
she takes great pains to get, she beats them away, or leads them into some
strange country and loses them
her ioints and body strong, and able to rear her self from the stones and
mountains into the air, where she is entertained and tutured by her dam, and
by her trained up, and taught the way to pray for her self, which when the
young ones have learned, she suffers them to abide no longer in that coast:
but rebukes and chaseth them out of that country, or else leads them her
self into this or some other Country, (as we daily see by experience) and
there she departs from them. From that time forward they live and continue
wild, being forced to shift for themselves, by getting their living with their
own labor, which they do continually both in wet and dry tasting and
enduring of all times and seasons, calmes and storms, their bodies being
tempered and seasoned, with all sorts and changes of wind and weather.

Now must it needs be that these kinds of Hawks have, and evermore will
have some wildness in them, which disposition, although I have formerly showed
you how to alter and change, and to keep them loving and familiar with you:
yet that being wrought and effected by art you must beware that nature do not
get the upper hand, or bear the greatest swaie, for if it do, then your skill
fails you, and your art deserves no commendation.

Therefore when you shall determine to frame your Haggard to the fashion and
form of your other hawks (of which I have already made mention) It will not
be so suddenly nor easily effected, as (it may be) you expect: for if you
desire to set her abroad vnhooded to weather her, as you do your Eias, it
will not be: for your Eias may be set abroad at any time of the day, The Eias.
yea and the better when her gorge is full: but as for your Haggard, you must
take another course with her, for if you entende to weather her, you must do it
in the morning, or else in the evening before she be fed: also you must remain
close by her, with meat clean, and ready dressed to take her to your fist
withal: otherwise no sooner is her appetite sufficed with meat, but she being
abroad vnhoodded suddenly forgets al her former subjection, and fales to
striving and bating to be gone, especially she will be most earnest and
unruly when after you have been absent she shall see you come sodenlie unto
her, which temeritie and wild behavior shows, (for the time) your art is
abandoned, considering she had rather do her self a mischief by bating and
striving, then she would willingly come into your hands again. Now who for
pity to hurt and wrong this poor, loving, and kind Bird, would set her
abroad vnhooded, and alone by her self, knowing that nature has a
superiority and working in her above art, whereas she may be otherwise safely
preserved, kept, and well weathered in her hood; which course I would wish all
Faulconers to take in weathering their Haggards: for seeing she desires no more
but what she is used unto, her standing hooded can do her no harm, but is
rather a means to prevent her bating and striving by which her spirit and
courage is taken away, with which in the evening she should be able to
perform her business.

CHAP. X. How to know the time of setting down your Haggard, and when it is
convenient to leave flying them.
IT is now a convenient time for me to speak something concerning the setting
down of your Haggard Faulcon: for in regard the time of their flying, as
something different: it will not be impertinent to my present purpose, to set
down some needful observations concerning the same.

About our Lady day in Lent is the time when these kinds of hawks do leave
these countries, and al other estranged places: and they do begin to draw
together, and to dispose themselves thereunto a month before that time.
Wherefore then it will not be amiss either to set them down, or else to be
charie and careful of those times you fly them in: for they will be very
subject and apt to be lost, on little or no cause at all. And as they differ in
the eye of man, and their ages disagree: so is the one more subject to be lost
then the other, by reason of their difference. The deed of generation is the
very cause they leave these countries for: whereby they are provoked to
repair into those places of the world, that be most fit and convenient for
them to breed in.

The old Haggard being taken there, or elsewhere, having formerlie bred and
brought up many young, must needs at that time beset down, and fed up with hot
and bloody meat, Somewhat before our Lady day.
because nature (having long had his course) prouokes her with greater violence
to prepare herself unto her kind, with purpose to be gone: which course of
nature, if you should restrain, and seek by force to make her serve your
turn, she would with a longing languishing desire, consume her self to naught.

The intermewed Haggard is more able and strong to resist the course of nature:
because it is not so violent in her as in the former: yet is she subject to
the same at that time of the year. Nevertheless you need not scare the loss
of her so much, in regard she is not moved so much to increase her kind, for
want of years to increase the same: therefore you may boldly fly this hawke
something longer then the other, and hold her subject to your will.

The passenger soare-Faulcon is a more choice and tender hawke, Of the soar
Hawke.
by reason of her youth and tenderness of age, and theref^re she must be more
carefully kept and better fed the^ the other mewed hawks, because they are
more har^ of ward; yet she will be as soon reclaimd and made a certain hawke,
and rather sooner then the other, if she be well used, and respectively
handled. And in those places where flying may be had, she may be found longer
by a month then any of the other.

CHAP. II. Here follows certain necessary instructions to be observed of
every Faulconer before he does put his hawke into the Mew, which is a preparing
or making ready of your Hawke for the same.
THus flying time being past, it will now be convenient to prepare your hawke
for the Mew, for the performing whereof, this ensuing rules will not be found
unprofitable.

You must beware and take heed, at the first, (when you do purpose and also
begin to feed up your hawke and covet to fill her full of flesh, that she be
not her own caruer in her diet, nor that you do give unto her no great gorge
your self: for if you do, it is ten to one she will ouerfeede and surfeit on
the same, as you shall plainly perceive if you will mark with observation
that which follows.

Whereas you have perceived that your hawke all her flying time has continued
with you sound and healthful: and by the mending of your hand a little toward
her with good mean something more then ordinary, she would always thrive of
her flesh, and increase in health to your liking: yet now at the setting down,
and time of rest, you do (out of your love, and to the intent to fill her full
of flesh) give her good meat, and full gorges every day* for the space of a
seauenight, or a fortnight together, it may be longer, and yet in all that
time find small amendment or none at all: this no doubt will make you wonder
that your cost and care takes no greater effect, but that you find your Hawke
rather worse then better by it: for unless you know the reason of it, it
cannot choose but seem strange unto you. I have had this question propounded
unto me diverse times concerning Hawks in this estate, which although I am
well assured every good Faulconer of time and experiecne, can judge
sufficiently, not only of the cause, but also of the remedy, and how to
prevent it: yet in regard there are many keepers of Hawks do lack that
knowledge, and for want thereof have spoiled and surfeited many good hawks: I
will for their instructions speak more at large concerning this matter.

Whereas before during the time of her flying, your Hawke did by chance, now
and then meet with some good meat more then ordinary, as sometime the flesh
of Foul, or the like taken by her self; or otherwise bestowed on her by you,
in regard of her good deserts; upon the which it may be you have seen her
feed hastily, or with greediness, and yet you have not perceived that she
has been the worse, but the better for the same. From whence you must
understand that she commonly did win that with labor of her body, and the use
and exercise of her wings, which was a great help and furtherance to her
disgesture: besides the Faulconer (being expert in his art) will out of his
discretion, either in the morning, or at evening, after such extraordinary
feed, consider what danger it might procure, and so give her stones to prevent
the gathering or ingendering of any superfluous glut or humor, which might
thereby offend her, and so with diligent care continue a moderate and mean
diet after.

But now you cease and leave off from all those practices and observations of
the flying time, and your only pretense and purpose is to give rest and good
feed unto your Hawke, to the end to raise and fill her full of flesh, whereby
she may be made ready for the Mew. And to the'nent she should prosper and be
brought to that perfection, you do at her first setting down, give her as
much as she list to take into her gorge, thinking thereby to effect your
purpose the sooner: but therein you shall soon find that you have deceived
your self, for your Hawke being newly taken from flying, at which time you
kept her with a good stomach and sparing diet, being now suffered to take what
she will, does out of the heat and greediness of her stomach, fill her self
full upon the sudden, that for want of digesture, (which she must needs lack
by reason of her continual rest, (having no exercise, nor other means to
procure the same) her sudden fulness does so suffocate and stop the pooers
which are then open, and other passages of nutriment, that she will be
presently stunted by those obstructions, and not only be forced to stand long
at a stay, before she can be recovered, but many times she will languish and
fall into many surfets and diseases, by reason of the same.

Therefore to avoid these inconveniences, you must keep your Hawke all the
flying time as clean as possible you may, then at her setting down keep your
wonted course in feeding twice a day, and as near as you can with hot and
bloody meat, and no more in quantity then you shall find her well able to
endure and put away: and be sure to take heed of suffering her to glut her
self too full at the first: and by using this order you shall find that if
she be sound, she will thrive of her flesh in a short space, which if you
perceive, that within the week or the fortnight she is amended, to your liking,
the^ may you be bold to begin to feed her once a day, and if it be possible let
her have young pigeons at the first, because it is a more moist and delicat
feed, and easlier to be endued then any old feed: but if there be none of those
to be had, then you must be content to take what you can get, nevertheless be
sure that her first gorges of the last kind be reasonable and easy in quantity
for a while, because at that time of the year, old feed is more dry and hard
of disgesture then at other times, or then young pigeons be.

Thus having used this course, and by your own discretion finding the time
fit, to leave feeding twice a day, also observing how she likes and mends by
her feeding once a day, how the eagernes of her stomach does abate, and
according to these observations to rule and order her with art and discretion,
you shall be sure to have your hawke raised in her flesh, increased and settled
in her health, being thereby made ready and fit for the Mew, into which she
may be put shortly after, and no doubt there continue safe and sound, while
she remains there. Contrariwise if you do put your hawke into the Mew;
without any such preparation, or while she is abroad to suffer her to eat as
much as she will, or to give her at one time a whole old dove, dry and tough,
you shall find it will suddenly put the soundest hawke that is unto a stand, and
by this only means, surfetted and spoiled many a hawke: and there are very
few that escape which are so used; and then it is imagined they have taken some
blows or bruses in their flights, or have been wronged some other way, when
(indeed) there is no such matter, but even are destroyed by hasty extraordinary
feeding, and by superfluous and unreasonable kindness.

CHAP. XII. How to put your Hawke into the mew, and how to order her while she
remains there.
When you do take her forth.
NOw will it be good time if your mew be ready to put your hawke into the same,
and before you do it, be sure that she be free from mites and lice, which if
she be then infected with, may trouble and hinder her thriuing in the mew, by
reason they will then grow and increase upon her: also it is necessary that
you take of her old iessis, and put her on a pair both new and strong that
they may if it be possible continue and last until the time of her drawing; so
that you be not at that time enforced to hold her, and strive with her too
long, because then when she is in the prime of her grease, the least heat she
can take is all too much, and it may do her great harm: also it is very
convenient that your mew be kept always sweet and clean, with sweeping, for
your Hawke will rejoice in the pleasant air, and otherwise will droop with the
noisome sauors that will daily possess her inward parts and senses contrary
to her kind, which is always to have the benefit of fresh and sweet air. Also
you must be mindful to see and observe Where it is said that you must observe
when your Hawke thriues you are admonished to mark what usage she then has
for of this be sure, that usage which maks your Hawke to thrive and prosper, is
fitting and answerable to her nature, which when you have found, be sure to
continue it.
when and how your Hawke does thrive, and what estate she stands in, both by
her casting and mutes, and any other way by which you may discern the same.
Likewise you must not fail to let your hawke have always fair water standing
by her, which must be often shifted, and be sure never to let her be without
stones lying by her in gravel, that although you have taken her from her
natural liberty, and forced her to take a course contrary to her
disposition, whereby many offensive causes may be bred in her; yet that she
may have those means always at hand, by which nature has taught her to seek
a remedy, by the taking and casting of which stones, you shall be much
directed in the knowledge of her estate; and you must not fail to mark what
stones she casts every day, which you must gather up, and then having washed
them lay them in the place fit for her to take again. That meat which you do
kill for your Hawke with a piece, be sure to search, and cut out the black and
bruised flesh, which proceeds of the gunpowder; for there is no gun, but after
one shoot or two, (and especially in moist and wet weather) but sends forth
the shot as black as incke, which I refer to your own judgment, whether it
can be either good or wholesome for any Hawke to take into her body,
considering it is a thing so evil and contrary to her kind: and how is it
possible that those Hawks should escape and miss the same, that never have
their meat cleanly dressed, but through the idleness of their Keeper, A good
caveat for all idle Faulconers.
it is thrown into the mew feathers and all, without any care of cleansing,
even as it has lien battered and ranckeled from the time it was killed: and
yet I have heard some of them say, that they never saw nor heard of any hawke
that ever died by any such kind of feed, which speech does not only bewray
their ignorance, but also their negligence, and shows that they never had the
wit to observe, nor the skill to prevent so great a danger. Notwithstanding it
is too manifest that many excellent hawks have been utterly destroyed by
such indiscreet Keepers.

CHAP. XIII. How to take your hawke from the Mew, and how to inseame her and
make her ready to fly.
WHen the time comes that you intend to draw your Hawke out of the mew, it does
behooue you at the doing thereof to be very careful, This course ought to be
taken with any Hawke, of what kind soever she be.
that you be not too long a striving with her; whereby you should give her any
cause of forcible motion of her body by ba^cing; struggling or the like, but
with all possible expedition set her down upon a perch, to the end she may
there rest quietly, til her anger and turbulent humor be assuaged, thereby to
prevent and keep her from taking any heat at all, and so let her sit amongst
company and in their hearing, without any occasion of disturbance so near as
you can. Then when you think it convenient take her gently and fairelie unto
your fist, and carry her up and down, stroaking her with a feather lightly
and gently, and if you do perceive her begin to stir, and grow unquiet,
set her down again, and thus use her, until by degrees you have drawn her
to some reasonable familiarity; which when you have gained, and that she will
begin to feed, then give her more carriage, and use her unto it more and more,
and be sure still to keep her as quiet as may be, and seek by all means to
prevent her bateing; for there is more danger in some one Hawke, that is to be
reclaimed and inseamed from the Mew, then is in many other Hawks that have
been newly taken in England or from the cage, or any other place whatsoever,
for they that are newly taken here in England, do come from the labor of
their bodies and exercise of their wings, pare not fat (if I may term it so)
therefore they in their reclaiming and making cannot so suddenly heat
themselves by bating or otherwise, but they may be better preserved from any
hurt, and if it do chance that they miscarrie thereby, yet may they then be
more easily cured. Likewise those that come from the cage, and were taken
beyond the seas and have been tossed and tumbled up and down, I do hear few
that buy them, complain of their fatnes or overmuch fullness, and therefore
they are also so much the more from that danger, but that hawke which is mewed
and kept therein by the man, she is wholly restrained of her liberty, and
kept up in a narrow room, where she feeds with ease, and gets her fullness
with sitting still, If your hawk come full from the mew give her no casting
till the third week, many will think to have their hawks ready to fly in
that time, but many times their hasty affections do frustrate and make void
their unskilful intentions.
so that there is no one crammed foul or bird, that will be more fat and full
then she, and therefore no one of the other sort of hawks is in a quarter of
that danger in their inseaming that she is in, unless she be most carefully
kept, and curiously used until she be through inseamed. Thus not fearing but
this short admonition will be sufficient to every careful Fawlconer,
concerning this one material and necessary observation, I will proceed.

When you have brought her to eat, you must feed her twice a day, and so order
and diet her continually, and it must be with new and good meat, which you
must dress and wash clean, wringing out the blood with fair water, that she
may the sooner come unto a stomach, and for the quantity thereof let it be as
much as the wing of an old dove at once, or as you shall find her to put away
the one meal, and make her self fit and ready for the other: and for the
first week, or ten days after, she begin to feed, give her neither casting
not stones; but the week after give her half a dozen stones every night,
after she has put away her supper from forth her gorge, You must take this
course with any manner of long winged Hawke that is drawn from the mew.
which you shall find she will cast and render unto you again in the morning
very early. The third week approaching, you must give her every night a
casting, still bearing in mind your former manner of diet or feed, which you
must continue until your hawke be flying, and all her flying time, only adding
unto her meals somewhat in quantity, and forbearing to wash altogether so
hard, with respect to the hardness or mildnes of the weather, and as your own
discretion shall lead and direct you in finding her to fly and grow subject to
your demand my reasons for disposing of her usage in these several sorts are
these.

The first week or somewhat more, she will be altogether unfit and unready for
stones, or casting, by reason of her ramagenes, beside she will be possessed
with fretting angry humors, which will not so soon be wrought out of her:
likewise if either of them should be given her, being in her full pride of
grease, she may keep them, and never cast them, as I have (for a certain
truth) both seen and proved: otherwise she may fall sick with stirring or
remoouing her grease too soon.

The second week by means of the Fawlconers skill and pains taken, the week
before her anger and fretting will be somewhat assuaged, she will be gentle to
sit vnhooded, and will have well emptied her bowels, and scowred forth some of
her loose dross and relics of imperfection, and then she will be fit to
receive stones, and apt to cast them again.

This being effected the second week, then against the third week she will
be prepared with a reasonable stomach, to take her casting willingly, and not
be curious to do the like afterward, which she must have every night, Until
your exercise be with labor you can neither make her clean, nor keep her
clean.
it may be as yet you shall not find by her casting, nor her mutes, much grease
to come from her, nor that she inseameth, nor yet reclaimeth according to your
expectation, yet let not that trouble you, but now prepare your self to lure
her, and let her exercise and have the benefit of her wings: Then try with
stones now and then to stir her again, and as near as you can by night; for I
have learned by experience that stones given once by night do more good unto a
hawke, then twice by day, for speedy inseaming or removing any glut or evil
humor, which the hawks body is subject unto: for in the morning, although she
have need enough to keep them, yet a greedy appetite (which naturally she
has at that time of the day) often times prouoks her to cast them before they
have half exercised there virtue and operation in her, so that she receives
little liberty or none at all by them: and contrariwise according to her
necessity she will sometimes keep them all day and all night if you would
suffer her, for you shall perceive that she will even resolve as it were with
her self so to do by growing unquiet, and by begging and craving meat of her
Keeper for her dinner, the stones being still in her; and in my conceit, who so
suffers her not then to have her will and desire; but strives to contradict
her, does her much wrong, for if at the present she have hers, the next
morning he shall have his, I mean his stones with her health increased.

I have observed that most men can be well content to give unto their Hawke a
piece of Flannell or Cotton, although foul and slurred, which being received
into her body, she finds it so far differing from her natural desire, as
sometimes she will cast it up in the morning all black and tawnie, and
sometimes with it meat undigested, which shows how loathsome it is unto her,
especially when it is given without perfect scowring and washing, yet we never
so much as dream that this ever offends any Hawke; but surely it does either
a sound hawke clean, or an unsound Hawke whether she be foul or clean.
Therefore seeing it has been, is, and ever will be given unto Hawks for
casting. It is meet that you consider, and take notice how and when it is
fittest and best to be given. First of all you must be sure that it be
perfectly and well washed, and so kept, for there is no such thing, nor any
other thing, that passes into the body of the hawke; but the stomach works
and strives by nature to digest it, as do evidently appear by the hard bones
she eats, from whence it sucketh all the marrow, and other moisture, so does
it in like manner from the woollen whatsoever is possible to be withdrawn,
which is unnatural, and therefore must needs be unwholesome: wherefore to give
it when your Hawke is inseaming, and foul in her grease, and that also broken
in her, it is more tolerable; for then her stomach is not so apt or inclined
to savor or taste it, (being then coied and pestered with gross humors) as it
will be after, when it is freed and cleansed from them: Also then it often
times (through the annoyance of the hot and greasy savor) does provoke your
hawke to cast in the morning before her hour, or that she has perfectly
endured her supper which will appear and plainly show in the tawnie color of
her casting vnwrapped, and the like color and muddinesse of the water within
it, therefore if there be no remedy but we must use it, let it be as it is
before appointed; and when you give the easiest and lightest suppers, and some
plummage with it: but otherwise never upon a great gorge: no not unto the
soundest hawke that is: also in a morning when your hawke makes a loose, and
vnwrapped casting of plummage, it is good to give a little knot with stones, to
bring away loose or straggling feathers out of the pannell; or else at some other
time with stones in the morning, and view the color of it, whereby you may
judge the state of your hawks body, for by it you shall gather and perceive
whether she be hot and dry, or moist, and in good temper; or greasy, or
clean. If she be hot and dry, the casting will be even as it were scorched
black, yet nevertheless it may be wrapped, and the water in it reasonable
clear, which if you find, let her have no more casting of that kind; but in
stead thereof give her plummage, and she will do well so long as the water is
so good: for it is nothing but her dislike of the unkindness of the cotton:
But there is more danger to be doubted, when as the casting appears as I said
before blackish and tawny, and no water, but a roaping froth in it, which
shows and signifies more heat and drought then in the other, yet if it be
wrapped you need fear the less: and commonly this is found in such Hawks, as
are not made thorough clean at the first before they be flowne, but are hot
often in that estate: nevertheless if she be well ordered and carefully
attended after, those imperfections will easily be wrought out of her, which to
effect take this course. Give her one weeks rest, and feed her with good meat,
and easy gorges of the same: also give her some very fair and clean water
with it, and cease for that week to give her any casting at all, but every
night after she has put away her supper, give her half a dozen small stones
with the stumpe of a wing: then at the weeks end because you cannot prove her
estate so well, by the color of the casting of plummage, give her a little
supper, and after that is put away, wash her a flannell casting very well, and
give it her. Then if you do find in the morning, that it is perfect, then you
have your desire, if not use the same course again, until you have accomplished
your purpose, giving her rest, and using her as has been showed before, and
with this order rightly observed, you shall not fail in a short time to
recover your Hawks health, whereas otherwise death ensues, as may plainly
appear to every Faulconer of understanding, if they do but call to mind what
discommodities have followed their rash and hasty desires: for when they see
their hawks begin to shrink and droope on such occasions, will not be
contented, nor cannot bridle their affections, staying till they have restored
and wrought their health by degrees, which time and diligence would easily
accomplish, but most indiscreetly will think by extraordinary courses to
recover them on the sudden, and so whereas they should suddenly cure them,
they quickly kill them: But let every one (that of his own experience knows
not a better remedy) use the forementioned order, by which they shall not fail
to obtain their purpose (their Hawks health and their own credit) which being
attained, and that you perceive your hawke to be changed to your liking, There
be many sound Hawks will never brook a woollen casting.
leave of to give her any more unnatural casting at all (but as I have showed
sometimes for trial) and give her only casting of plummage, so shall you be
sure (if she have no other deadly infirmity) to preserve and keep her safe
and in continual case to do her business according to your desire.

Now then to return to speak of stones again, and first as concerning the
giving of them by night, my reason why they should be given more by night then
by day are these, your Haggqads, and your coy and right Ramage Hawks by kind,
It is not good to give your Hawk stones at that time when you know she will be
unquiet.
will not in that short time (spoken of before) be so well reclaimed, but that
they will have pride, and a stirring humor in them still, and especially in the
morning after their night rest. Therefore for this one cause of their
unquietness, to which they are much addicted in the morning, and also for the
time of their inseaming and reclaiming, the night is best: for then your Hawke
is addicted quietly to take her rest, without bating, stirring, or straining
of her body, being charged with stones. But some will say the night is too
long, and that they do over heat her: but by due observation I have found; it
is not so, whenever she has need and desires or deserves to have them:
for certain it is I have seen a Hawke in the time of her flying, that has
taken a dozen or more of stones her self in a morning, and has kept half of
them till the next morning. Also I have known the same Hawke when they have
been given unto her by the man at the same time, would not miss at her feeding
time, or at the sight of meat to cast half of them, and keep the rest till
the next day, which Hawke I have recovered and brought to perfection, and
orderly casting, only with a moderate diet, and stones given her in the night
without any trouble or distemper unto the Hawk at al, which otherwise she
might have received through bating, striving, and such unquietness in the
morning after her rest, all which most Hawks of mettell and courage are
subject unto at that time, which is often a great cause that Hawks do keep
their stones in the morning. All which do manifestly prove that the night is
best.

Also I have seen Hawks many a time (for want of orderly government) have
kept their stones the most part of a day, and some of them till the next day,
and not miss to do the like whenever they were given them in the morning. I
had also one Hawke my self where now I dwell, which my master bought, and I
received her with stones in her, which was made known unto me, and that it was
her accustomed order to keep them, or her casting, or both together, and that
she did use to fly with some stones and her casting in her. This p^evish custom
I altered and quickly changed, and brought her to cast them all, and orderly,
only by keeping a steddie and careful hand in the quality and quantity of her
diet and feeding, not giving her sometimes too little, and some times too much,
but keeping and observing a mean, and especially upon such occasions. It is
the careful feeding of your Hawke that makes her serviceable: for there is no
Hawke but will fly according as she is ordered and governed, as if her
stomach be right, she will fly with spirit, courage, and attention to the
man, otherwise if it be cold and dull, she will fly wild and carelessly, and
on plains and howses, all which is discommendable in a Hawke, and shows the
Faulconer fails of his art, and such occasions give cause to any Hawke to
cast at adventure, and not at any certain time. Also in curing of the foresaid
Hawke, as I used a certainety in her diet: so also I have evermore a care to
feed very clean, which is an other especial note to be marked by all
Faulconers, for in so doing, they shall be sure to keep their Hawks in
temper and clean: for thereby they cannot retain any superfluity of glut, or
any other thing, which otherwise might hurt the stomach, and breed sickness,
in the body, and is a special cause to make them cast either stones or
casting disorderly, and out of course.

Another order which I took for this purpose, was that I continually used her
unto stones at night, and never failed to give her few or many every night
(with most conueniency for the number) until I had changed and altered her
disordered kind of casting, and fully accomplished my desire, which I the
sooner brought to pas, by reason of this last practice of giving her stones by
night: and to prove that it is the best time to give any Hawke stones in, but
especially such as shall be perceived to have the like need, Her desire to
the stones is known by her long keeping and detaining the^.
and * desires them in that manner before rehearsed, I will set down one
example more of mine own experience.

I have an other Hawke, which was a Haggard-slight-Faulcon, that when I came
into the Mew with her dinner, did cast up some few stones at the sight of the
meat, and when she had eaten up the same, (being a young Pigeon) she presently
took above a dozen more, which she kept until the next day.

Likewise where now I live, and in my time, there was a Tassell-gentle, that
after he had eaten a whole young Pigeon, took presently 15, or 16. stones unto
the same, for proof whereof I have many of the best in Bletshoe house to
testify the same) he also made it something late the next day before he did
cast them, which apparently showed that he naturally loved them, and that they
did him good, and quickened his disgesture. These stones were every morning
after laid by him, being fair and clean washed, which he never missed to take
in a month together, yet at the sight of his meat, he would not fail to
cast some or all of them, which is a common thing that may be marked in Hawks,
not only in the Mew, but also in their flying time, the which proves that
Hawks may be by many occasions provoked to cast those stones which are given
them in the morning, before they have wrought to any purpose in them, and it
was nothing else but that distempered and untimely casting, which made that
Hawke continue so long before he could cure him self, whereas otherwise if he
had been undertaken by his keeper, and used unto them at nights, though not so
many at once, yet would he sooner have bin cured. Also this advises, that men
should be so skillful, and withal so careful as to epsy when their Hawks
have need of stones, and then not to let slip opportunity from one time unto
an other, and to give them now and then by chance as on the holy day, or at
times of best leisure, but they must apply them by day or night continually
with discretion, until they be cured, and shall cast in due time. And
whenever you do find your Hawke to fit long in the morning before she does
cast, and in the end also does keep some of them still, then be sure to cease
to leave of quite in the morning, and use her only unto them at night, and
assure your self if she have no other deadly infirmity in her, they will work
a true effect, and cause her to cast orderly at all times, If she does cast as
she should do, it must be within an hour and a half: if they be given in the
morning: for if she does not, either her health, or her government are
imperfect.

Also when your Hawke is in her best case, and prime of her flying, and as
clean as may be, yet then forget not (when you may conveniently) as specially
after frank or good feed, or in time of rest, to give stones with judgment
in her wants: for as they do work to cleanse and purge any thing that is bred
in her stomach: so likewise are they of operation to prevent any evil that is
there to be engendered or bred, if it be of substance to be wrought upon: for
indeed there is no such physic for a Hawke, as to give her stones in due and
needful time; and little do young Faulconers imagine how kindly their
natures do agree the one with the other. I heard one say that after a tedious
flight flowne with his Hawke, he would give her stones to cool her withal,
which act of his though I did well allow of, yet did I disallow of his opinion
concerning their effects, for indeed he knew what he did in action, but not in
operation: for no doubt he thought those stones with their coldness would not
only cool her for the present, He knew he gave her stones, but he knew not
their effects.
but also that they only wrought a cold effect, and so continued all the time
she possessed them, which opinion of his was altogether untrue, for if it were
possible to have such stones, they would do no good at all: and because I know
that many do deceive themselves and others in this respect, I will here show
you my opinion concerning the same. First, although it is most certain that
after she does cast her stones, and those ill humors as before possessed her she
is cooled, and the extreme heat (bred by reason of those superfluous humors)
much allaid, yet during the time that she enjoys them, she is made more hot
by them, and they by her: and for more confirmation of the same, let me ask
you one question, wherefore do you give stones to that Hawke which you have
newly taken and drawn out of the Mew, and do intend with reasonable
expedition to make ready to be slowne? It is not in plain terms to melt and
waste that glut and fatness that she has gathered, and is engendered and
grown in her pannell, with her full and frank feeding in the time of her rest
and mewing and to make the same ready, and fit to pass away and scowre through
her downward in her mutes, as also to ascend and be drawn and purged upwards
by the same stones, and her casting, that so she might be euacuated and emptied
of those gurgitiue and stuffing humors, and be inseamed and made clean and
ready to be put to labor so much the sooner. If this be true? wherefore then
should any man think that it is possible for stones with their coolness to
work a cooling effect at their instant being in the Hawke? or why should any
man give them for that purpose, seeking thereby to procure that, whereof there
is no need? for there is no sound Hawke gently taken from the Mew, that is
over hot, and moderately hot and cold, and in a mean temper, in respect of her
natural heat and coldness, unless afterward she be with ill usage over heat
and wronged. And also on that occasion, if the virtue of stones were present
coldness it would hazard present death to give them: for present heat and
sudden cold cannot agree together; and therefore although I do not allow to
give them to some, after drawing out of the Mew in the prime and extremest
fulness of flesh, (for the reasons which I have formerly alleged) yet in
convenient time after the same, as I have advised, and always after long and
tedious flights and toiling: for thereby you shall keep them in a temperate
heat and prevent sudden cooling, it will consume their grease, and remove
slime and glut, and by them the whole body will be brought into good temper,
being possessed with no other but natural heat, with the like kindly coolnes:
for as you may perceive, your Hawke by nature and kind is hot, as plainly
appears to every Faulconer. And by her long and tedious flights and labor,
she is made more hot, all which heat if it should cool suddenly would no
doubt bring her into no small danger, but much more if the stones should
likewise be of a cold operation, she must needs by all these sudden
contrarieties be brought to her death: but contrariwise stones do prevent the
same: for they being by her heat made hot themselves, do so continue in her,
After a toiling flight at evening, if you mistrust either grese or uncleanness,
let your Hawke have time to plum and give good blood for contentment but little
meat or none set her up warm, and give stones so soon as may be.
and by virtue of their heat do not only keep her temperate but also do
dissolve any superfluous humor incident to Hawks already ingendered, and do
prevent the breeding of any other that may grow by reason of her long labor
the sudden cooling of her grease, or any other accident or chance whatsoever.
All which being means to breed many imperfections in the stomach (whereof
arises heat, slime, and whitish froth appearing in the mouth of the Hawke) are
by virtue of their heat clean euacuated and forced from their receptacles,
and places of abode, whereby the Hawk is afterward cooled and brought into a
temperate disposition of body. So that you see although the stones do yield a
heating operation, while they remain in the Hawke, yet afterward there is a
cool effect wrought and produced by them.

Furthermore do you of long practice and experience but remember; that whereas
sometimes you have perceived your Hawke by all signs and shows to be free from
any extraordinary heat at all: nevertheless upon your forbearance a while,
before and after to give stones: Then when you did give them the next time, let
me but ask you whether you have seen your hawke oftentimes at her beginning to
cast before the stones, in the midst, and at the end of them, even to streane
and gush out abundance of waterish and yellow greasy slime and glut from
forth her body, or no? which as it is most true that every observing Faulconer
have, or might have seen so much; then must it necessarily follow that stones
and the property of them being in the hawks body, is first to heat and purge
before they cool. I make no doubt when you gave no stones, you failed not to
give casting every night, but yet you perceived not her glut to flow from her
at any time, with her casting as with her stones, which shows that stones are
phisical and cause her to purge upwards and through her: Furthermore observe
this one thing, when you have your hawke perfect clean, do but forbear one
week to give her stones, and all that time you shall see her make perfect and
clean castings, and though you prove her with casting of cotton, yet it will
be clean and white, then at the weeks end for trial of the property of
stones, give her half a dozen at night with a knot of flannel, or half a
score in the morning with the same; and you shall see the flannell will be
yellow and greasy, which shows that the stones have even melted and dissolved
that grease, which in that short time was bred and began to grow in her: all
which do apparently prove that they do never cool at the instant, but heat
and purge that coldness may grow thereon.

Likewise if sloth and idleness with other mutabilities, did not (often times
in some of the best of us) cross and prevent both our skill and diligence, but
that we might with clean feed and stones keep our hawks free from all
uncleanness, they would never be ouerhot, neither is it possible to ouerheat
such a hawke with flying that is perfect clean, and in breath; for if you
should fly her out of reason, which is not meet, yet when she is weary she
will go to a stand and rest her, as the wild Hawke is oftentimes compelled to
do, yet never troubled with heat so long as she keeps her self clean.
Therefore let me advise you to be careful evermore to keep your hawks
clean, for it is your suffering them to continue in their uncleanness, and for
want of giving them stones often enough to purge them withal, that causes and
provoke heat to grow and arise fuming in them: And this may suffice to
confute the opinion of those that being asked wherefore they do give their
hawke stones, and do think the night is too long, do answer that it is to
cool them, and verily believe that they have no other operation or working in
them but to cool: but here by reason you may see how much they are deceived,
and how void of true understanding this their opinion is: and of this be sure,
Remember that a fat Hawke maks a lean horse, a weary Faulconer and an empty
purse: three discommodities befitting every man to beware of. The wild Hawke
will sometimes attend.
you shall find it an easier matter when your Hawke is clean, so to keep her,
then when she is foul to make her clean. Therefore it is meet for every man
at the beginning to make his hawk perfectly clean, and so to keep her without
pampering, with great meals to make her sit, and seem fair upon the fist,
for thereby does sundry evils grow, besides disobedience toward her Keeper,
which is the greatest evil of all: yet some men will seldom take any care at
all, either to keep their Hawks clean, or to have them empty when they do
fly them; but do presume that their love to the man, foul, and their own
mettell, will cause them to fly and kill without any stomach at all, which I
will not deny but by chance may so fall out, but assure your self it will not
continue long: for there is no Hawke being put to labor, and forced to stretch
and strain her wings, when her bowels be filled and charged with meat, but is
in great danger of her life; and besides she will never fly with regard and
attention to her Keeper, because her stomach is not perfect; which (as I have
formerly showed you) is the principal governor of her in all her actions, for
proof whereof mark this in suing observation.

Take any younger Hawke out of the nest (though newly disclosed) and breed her
up as familiarlie as you can devise: yet when you shall come afterward to fly
her, she must be altogether guided and governed by her stomach: yea she will
be kept and also lost by the same: for let her fail of that never so little,
and every puffed of wind will blow her away from you; nay if there be no wind
stirring, yet she will wheel and sink away from him and from his voice, that
all the time before had lured and trained her up. Contrariwise if it be his hap
to find her again, when she is hungry, although she would starve before she
would pray for her self, yet will she then own him or any other man; nay,
she will be ready to take his cap from him, before she will leave or loose
him.

This shows how much they do deceive themselves, that because their Hawke
does at some time by chance fly well and Kill, being full or unclean, do
never after make any care to have them empty or clean when they are flowne:
they do not remember that the wild Hawke (as I have formerly showed) will
sometimes attend, although with coy and straung behavior: which strangenes you
will soon find your manned and reclaimed Hawke to be possessed withal. If you
do often use to fly her without a perfect stomach, of which I would wish you
to be very careful: for if there should not be a great difference to be
discerned betwixt your Hawke and the wild Hawke, as well in their flying, as
all other properties of service and subjection: it would be an evident sign
either of much negligence, or small skilfulnes in her Keeper: neither is there
any pleasure or content to be received from that Hawke; which for want of good
government flies wide or uncertain, going as it were at passage, and stooping
here and there without care or respect to her Keeper, as if she were wild.

There is not any Faulconer can appoint, or justly determine how long, or how
short his flight shall be; but it may fall out longer or shorter then he
expects, and it often happens to be longer then he looks for, and every
such long and tedious flight, is unto a full or an unclean Hawke a bitter
pill, which cannot well digest, whereas your clean and perfect stomacck't
Hawe, may fly her self weary, but never take harm. This observation many men
lightly pass over without so much as one thought of these errors, of fulness
and uncleanness, which notwithstanding have been the bane of diverse good Hawks.

CHAP. XIIII. How to know when your Hawk is not thoroughly in seamed, and how to
prevent those evils that do ensue by reason thereof.
WHen your Hawke is disposed to much bowsing or drinking, it is not to be
liked, but shows that her body is possessed with heat, and is much distempered
by the same, which heat may proceed of several causes, and through the
discretion of the Faulconer, and his due observation the certainty thereof, and
the cause from whence it proceeds may be perceived, as when she is not made
through clean after the drawing, but is flown and put to labor in that case:
then you shall see it appear white in the mouth and throat of the Hawke, her
breath tasting sour, and strong withal.

When her inward parts be not cleansed clean feed, casting, and stones, and
her body inseamed by other outward means
Likewise when she is put to flying, and toyled before she be through inseamed
of her body, it causes a more dangerous heat then the other, and you shall
soon discern that by her continual bowsing and drinking, and by the color
of her Mutes, which will be like unto stale skimmed Milk, inclining to a blew
and watched color, but more thick then milk when she is kept from the water.

Also you shall perceive them to be mingled with a curdeled matter, dipersed,
and in show white, which is a spice of the Cray, and the differences in these
two causes is this. Some man after he has drawn his Hawke out of the Mew, and
finds her to be fat and full, then for have and desire he has to see her on
her wings, takes no reasonable time with her, that she may inseame inwardly,
and outwardly together (as I may term it) but suddenly with short and
disorderly feed does abate and take of the prime of her flesh, whereby, as
that abateth, so does the fatness generally in all parts of the body most
certainly wast and consume away unto a washie or waterish substance: but
whatsoever he is that thus takes away the flesh of his Hawke outwardly, and
has not the skill nor knowledge withal to purge and make clean the intrals
and inward parts, which be subject to other bad and hurtful humors as well as
fatnes, that ought also to be expelled and cleansed forth, but does put her to
labor in that estate, which ingendreth and causes heat extraordinary in the
stomaek, which will appear in the mouth, throat, and other parts as I have
formerly showed.

Moreover when as you shall draw a full Hawke, and have not an especial care
to take sufficient time to inseame her in the other parts and fleshly
substance of her body outwardly, as well as to purge and cleanse her within, you
shall do her as much wrong, for although the pannell will be sat in the highest
degree, having as it were a leaf of the like fatty substance within it, yet
has the Faulconer a means and direct course with clean feed, casting, and
stones continually to practice and work withal, whereby (in a reasonable
time) he may dissolve, stir, and remove the grease, glut, or any other
imperfect humor the stomach is subject unto. Yet, although in the view of
your own eye, and in your own knowledge, by her mutes, castings, and other
signs, you do perceive that she is perfectly clean in her inward parts, if
you do then suffer her to take any heat at all, it is as much as her life is
worth: therefore take heed of it, and remember that the whole solid body is of
greater substance then the pannell is, and harbors a great deal more
fatness then it possible can do: neither can it be inseamed nor that which is
troublesome taken from it so soon nor by such means as the other may, but you
must tarry for it, and give it moderate labor in luring and training it easily
and gently at the first to temper it withal, and so by degrees you shall well
inseame her in all parts, and breath her: and with clean and good feed keep
her full of flesh, and free from all diseases, and have her ready and
altogether fit to do you service.

By this you may plainly perceive how much some men are deceived in the
inseaming and flying of their Hawks, who think that so soon as they will
feed with a good stomach, and make good castings, that then after two or
three times luring, The fruits of hastines.
they may be bold to put them to service: but it is not so. And let them
understand that most commonly have and rashness breed repentance: for there is
no man that can make a Hawke that is drawn from the Mew) ready to be flowne
under five or six weeks if she be a full Hawke: for if he do, he deals not
artificially with her, but shall hazard her greatly, and what folly is it in
that man that to covet and get one fortnight at the beginning, will endanger
himself to loose all the latter end, and his Hawke for ever; for it is most
certain, and does commonly fall out so: And although such Hawks do escape
and live that year, yet are they never worth any thing after: The substance of
the heart and of the liver will be black, and the body in diverse places will
have white specks
And if they so chance to die, you shall find that their grease was ouer-het:
for it will lie baked blew to their sides, and other places of their body: and
their heart and liver will be hory; and the places where they lay, which will
sufficiently testify the nature of the grief.

Therefore note thus much, that what show of cleannes soever you do find in
your Hawke, by her casting, mutes, or otherwise, although you have taken never
such pains with her, by casting, clean feed, and stones, to purge and cleanse
her inwardly: You must give no such trains that may cause your Hawke to labor
too much at the first. Neither must loose her before she have breath and
lightness.
yet do not believe that she is perfectly inseamed, nor will not be, until
she do come to the exercise of her wings and labor of her body, after which
she will break grease, and by degrees inseame thoroughly: and be sure that her
labor at first be not immoderat, for if it be it will engender grief; but it
must be in a mean and moderat manner; Also you must give her liberty by
degrees to stir her wings, and use her body, that there may be no heat
excessiuely taken, until she be thoroughly inseamed, and then (as I have
showed you) she may be weary with flying, but she will never take harm.

This may show unto him that is experienced plainly, and give instruction to
the ignorant as truly, that the inward parts and bowels of the Hawke may (by
the skill of man, and those means which art and nature has provided) be
wrought and brought to perfection, before the body be answerable or ready, The
inward parts and bowels may be purged and made clean with washed meat, casting,
and stones. The whole and fleshly substance of her body must have carriage on
horseback, and on foot, and be labored with luring and training to inseame it
withal, and make it light before she be flowne or put to hard labor.
Measurable moisture is natural and kind for all Hawks to have. A good
observation evermore to be mindful to preserve health.
and therefore as they in substance and kind be all one; so must they not be
divided by the Faulconer in his art and practice, but used and prepared (though
by several means) yet altogether as one: for otherwise one part or member may
be made a preparatiue for destruction to all the rest.

CHAP. XV. How to avoid slime, glut, and the like imperfections in your Hawke.
WHereas all Hawks are evermore subject unto moist and watrish humors,
ingendring and increasing in their inward parts, which humors do proceed, and
are derived partly from the element that raineth over them, or otherwise has
most mastery in them, which kind of glut or slime (being of the nature of
water, and in taste altogether waterish) is the chiefest thing that grows and
increases in her inward parts, and so long as it continues in a moderate and
temperate quantity, it is natural and good; but when it ouerfloweth and
abounds too much, then it is bad and ingenders sickness.

Therefore as the wild Hawke by nature does know her remedy, and how to stay
and correct the increasing of that humor, which if it were suffered to abou^d,
would hurt and ouercharge her, therefore she defers no time to preserve and
keep her health; but every day says, or may say unto her self, Phisician
help thy self, or else thou must perish: and so she detracts no time; but
this day prouides for the next: And when she feeds with the most greediest
appetite, even then she remembers to day, that she must purge to morrow. And
therefore as she eats no meat, whereof proceeds not something inconvenient,
that in time may hurt and annoy her stomach, so does she also never fail
carefully and moderatly to take plummage with it, We ought to miss no time
with our best endeavors.
for casting to cleanse her self of some part thereof the next morning: thereby
staying the superfluity and abundance of that natural moistnes, and glut,
which would if it were not corrected stayed and kept in order, breed, and cause
to grow in her many infirmities.

Likewise this her example may give advice unto all Faulconers, that when they
have taken these poor birds from their liberty, and as it were from
themselves, into their own custody: that then they be not sparing of their
best endeavors toward them, but be always diligent and watchful to order and
govern them according to their natural kind, and inclination, using them
lovingly and kindly, and giving them their dues rightly and in due time. For as
whatsoever it be that is performed in good order, and at convenient seasons, is
likely to prove succesfull in the end: so that which is undertaken rashly
without order, Then we should have no need to use any medicines at al
and at a time unfitting, seldom or never comes to good, nor deserves any
commendation, but rather the indiscretion and folly of such hare-braind and
witless attempters will be scorned at, and despised by every understanding and
skillful Faulconer. And to conclude this point, as there is nothing more
hurtful to man's life, then to follow the counsel of an unskillful Phisician:
so likewise there is nothing does sooner cast away and destroy your Hawke, then
to commit her to the custody of a Keeper that wants art and discretion:

I have not hitherto set down any thing which I have received, either by
advice or instruction from any man this thirty years, but out of mine own
practice and experience, neither out of any book written or printed, although
I never met with so vain a one; but I could find in my self a will and desire
to read it, though all my profit by it after, were to bless me from being of
his humor that writ it: And so likewise shall I my self be contented to have
this my pains and labor perused, and by them more ancient and experienced
then my self, both censured and corrected.

Thus have I written and discoursed of the Haggard Faulcon gentle. First of the
manner of her life, or course of living, while she is abroad in the open air,
either here in England, or else where, during the time of her wildnes, all which
I have spoken by that experience which I have won and attained unto, not only
by serious observations; but also by great and continual labor and industry,
which I have used in seeking to find and take them: And I have likewise showed
you the means how to use them at the instant: when by cunning and subteltie
you have beguiled and taken them: and how by skill and art ever after to order
and govern them, changing (by your wit and watchful diligence) their natural
timeritie and wildnes into love and gentleness. Further you have been taught how
you may by skill teach them to fly, and make them pliant and serviceable for
your use and pleasure.

And lastly those (whose self conceits do not hinder them from being ruled
by reason) may here be sufficiently instructed how to keep and maintain them
in health, without any medicine, scowring, or other inward appliments, unless
it be by such means and remedies, as nature and kind has taught them for the
helping and curing of those griefs and infirmities which they are subject unto.

Notwithstanding, being certainly persuaded that these my friendly
admonitions, being grounded upon the absolute truth, of infallible experience,
will not relish nor taste kindly in the stomach of many young men; neither
will it sincke into the heads of such, whose working brains are never at
quiet, till like unto the experienced Phisician, they have tried conclusions,
though it be with the loss of their poor patients lives. I do intend
therefore partly for the satisfaction of such: but especially for the help
and instruction of all those, who shall have Hawks come into their hands, that
by former bad usage, are made subject unto many infirmities, hereafter to set
down in the most exact manner my skill and experience will permit, such and so
many kinds of medicines and scowrings, as I have found by mine own practice
(being produced to use them by the foresaid occasions) have wrought effectually
in curing all diseases, incident to Hawks inwardly, together with a
rehearsal of such accidental imperfections, as I have observed to come and
grow upon a Hawke, with their several remedies how to cure them outwardly.

But before i do proceed any further in the same; it will not be amiss that
I do speak a little of one other kind of Hawke in particular, and show you
of the excellency of her nature and disposition, and how she ought to be
ordered and governed according to the same.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Ger-Faulcon.
THe Ger-Faulcon is the Hawke I now intend to write on. A Bird stately, brave,
and bewtifull to behold in the eye and judgment of man: more strong and
powerful then any other used Hawke, and many of them very bold, courageous,
valiant, and very venterous, next unto the slight Faulcon, of whose worthiness
I have already sufficiently discoursed.

The Haggard of that kind is most commendable, meetest to be accounted on,
fittest to be dealt with all, and easiest to be made for any pleasure that can
be thought upon: for the which any of that kind has been used, and to
reclaim and make her fit to be set to the lure.

You must take the same course that I have set down for the Slight-Faulcon,
being sure to make her very gentle and familiar with you, in the house and
abroad, before you enter, or set her to it, which with pains and gentle usage
will quickly be gained; for they are for the most part very kind and loving
Hawks, and will suddenly be reclaimed and made to love the man. After which
time that she shall come to be lured loose, and to other things, then would
she first of all be taught to come unto the pelts of hens, foul, Hearnes, or
any such like things so it be dead, for thereby she will not be over hot, or
eager of it, neither must you suffer het to touch any part of the flesh, to
draw as yet her love from your voice and your hand: but to spend only her time
on that in pluming: all this time you must be close by her, about her, and on
your knees, using your voice unto her, with her dinner or supper clean dressed,
and washed, giving still unto her some part thereof in bits with your hand, that
from thence only she may be satisfied, and in that to be her whole delight,
accounting the other in her foot but as a stand or means to stay her by you,
while she receives her full reward and welcome at your hands, and in using this
course often unto her, she being a Hawke of never such strength and ableness
to carry, it will in the end so reclaim and win her to your self, that she
will quite forget the same: She will forget her own strength.
and after if you list to train her with Doves she will not carry one feather
from you, but draw toward you, and ever desire to have her content at your
hand: for example, I my self did know one Ger-Faulcon that was as good as ever
did fly to the Hearne; nevertheless whenever she did pull down any one,
her love was so exceeding great to her keeper, that if he did come in to the
fall, before the Hearne was dead, she would presently forsake the quarry and
fly to him for her reward, which he continually with great care and skill had
given and used her unto at her first making: so would she do; also although
she had killed it, and taken blood thereon. This proves what a special point
it is in a Faulconer to take good time at the first making of any Hawke: for as
she is made then, so shall he ever find her after, and if she be well made,
she is twice made, nay she is everlastingly made, whereas contrariwise to post
and have forward to put her to some thing before she be well ready in all
points to go to any thing, it shows want of discretion, want of skill, want
of judgment, and he whatsoever he be that so does and uses, is no Faulconer:
no, in plain terms he is but a bungler. And let this one note (learn him to
amend that error. But to return, before you do spring her up any Doves, it is
meet you let her kill half a dozen at your Lure, close by your foot, having a
pair of short Creyances at your Lure, for it may be at the first seeing the
Dove to stir and flutter she may come roistingly to twich or take it away, so
far as she is able, which if she should so do, yet you have a remedy to
restrain her gently withal, so that there shall be no offense committed, but
you shall have your will, and she her will also, then ought you gently to get
in to her, and as beforesaid with bits of meat clenly dressed and bestowed on
her, you shall please her at the full, and lure her to the fist again. This
kind of order and course diligently observed and followed, will artificially
reclaim the Haggard-Ger-Faulcon, and make her love you, and ready for
whatsoever you shall put her unto, as to fly well, to kill Fowl, to make
flying, to lay, and leave beaten Fowls for other Hawks: but as I take it the
Hearne, and the stately flight, and mountie thereunto is the thing for the
which these Hawks are most accounted off, and desired in these days,
therefore as your entermewed Hawks are coueted and sought for, for that
purpose, and held to be of the most esteem, as so they are in very deed, as
especially in respect of their age, for that they have not then so strongly
confirmed themselves in their love and desire to any kind of prey more then
other, nor so much as elder Hawks have done, But that they may be easily
reclaimed and taught to do your will: Remember to be favorable unto them the
first year of their making, and ever after at the drawing, and take good time
with them in the inseaming: for this is the only and special note to be
observed in these kinds of Hawks: for these times as yet have ever shortened
their lives and destroyed them
so likewise you ought to be so much the more careful of them, and take this
course following with them, the first year of their making: for many of those
Hawks are often overthrown at that time with rash and hasty dealing, and do
never live to be drawn from the Mew, but if they do escape, yet they are never
after of power, nor able to clime to the mounty again: therefore as I have
advised you before, you ought not the first year to put them to any toil, but
to train them gently with Hearns and such as you are sure cannot go from
them, nor cause them to take much labor before they do master and enjoy them:
for these two causes the which you ought to understand and observe in all young
and aged Hawks.

First for your young Hawks when as they are newly taken from the Air, and
also from their liberty, delicate and full feed, you ought not so suddenly
and earnestly to alter their course of nature, but by degrees in their ordering
and manner of usage to govern them so, that their labor may not be
unreasonable, or their diet over hard, until you have once mewed them: for
otherwise it is ten to one they will not hold out and last with you.

Likewise you ought to have this consideration with you, and know that there
are not any kinds of Hawks seek to win their prey carelessly, and through
disadvantage as they list, but altogether through great labor and the best
advantage, and she that is the best wild Hearnnor that ever flew, or flew
sleare, and does by nature prey and love to feed on them in the time of her
wildness, I say that by the same nature and kind, even she is taught to
understand and know the difference, and when she is fit and finds the time,
Between her advantage and disadvantage.
she will omit no moment to take her best advantage, whereas otherwise she will
make no show to see that thing she most and chiefly desires: but content her
self till better opportunity serves: this order and course of hers will no
way give content or satisfy our delights to fly upon advantage, and coming
for her own ease and safety: therefore it appears that we must put her upon a
high pin, and set on her a new edge, and without great heed in all points, a
greater then she is in any sortable long to endure: if this be so in all young
Hawks, then ought you to be most careful of the young Ger-Faulcon, whom you
intend to make to the high mounty, and stately flight of the Hearne: for of
your other flights, as to the brook, or to the field, which you may also make
her unto, and a special Hawke fot the same: you may order and manage their
time with length or shortness at your pleasure, according to the ableness and
estate of your Hawks body, because your flights thereunto most commonly lie
obscurely, and in safety until you list your self, and at your own disposing.

But for your flight to the Hearne, it is wrought, flown, She ought therefore
to have her rights every way. These kind of Hawks are more subject to take
their leave through heat, then any other kind.
and maintained by the eye and view of the Hawke, and there can be nothing in
it ruled or disposed by the will of man either in the length, or shortness of
the time, until the strength, ableness, or unableness of the Hawke, and her
own will concludes the same. Thereafter as I have said unto you, if you will
or would have an excellent Hawke to the Hearn, of this kind, and to continue
with you long, deal with the entermewed Ger-Faulcon the first year, as I have
advised you: play with her gently, for that time, for they will not endure, nor
are able to brook such an edge and spur, as ought to be put unto them, to
cause them maintain so long and laborsom a flight

Secondly, for the other old or young Hawke, whether she be: but if she be a
fresh Haggard or there abouts she will be so much the more able to abide some
hardship, both in her diet and labor: Nevertheless at the first you know not
whether she has formerly disposed her self some other way, and settled her
love and desire on some other thing quite contrary to your expectation, and
therefore you ought to be careful at the first of these former obseruances,
and also to know that then nature must be changed, and she her self new made
and framed to your will: for which cause you ought to be careful of your
course, and expert in your Art: for although nature presents the subject, yet
oftentimes Art does, and must of necessity perfect the same.

And let me further advise all young men, that either are, or would be
Faulconers, that they do not dedicate or dispose themselves awry to other
exercises, or variety of pleasures: for if they do, they shall never be
expert in this curious art of Faulconry: therefore they must be no Table or
Card players, or other kind of gamesters, they must be no excessive drinkers
or Tobacco takers, but when their Hawks be lousy.

This time of making and flying being ended, then ought she to be fed up, and
filled full of flesh by degrees, and after the same manner as is before
appointed in such a chapter of the slight Faulcon, and also mewed with
attentive and continual careful heed; whereas she may evermore stand on sods
or turues often shifted, that they do not grow too hard and dry under them;
but may remain somewhat moist and soft: for they be very heavy Hawks, and
subject unto infirmity in the bottom of their feet, which is the cause it is
not thought meet to put them into houses loose: which kind and manner of muing
is far better for them then the other: so that their pearches of stand may be
well lined, and made soft for them, to fall and rest upon: for there she shall
be at her own disposing, as if she list, to fly from place to place, she
may, and it will do her much good to use her self unto it: Also she may go
to the water if she be disposed, and take stones at her pleasure. She may do
all things at her own likes, and she can do nothing at the stock when she
would, and is at your disposing: neither can you give her that which is fitting
to her own contenting, but by guess and imagination, wherein many times we
are altogether deceived.

But to return to the place where I concluded, with the stock there ought
also great care to be taken, to have special kufter hoods to cast easily
thorough, either plummage, bones, or stones, the which she ought to have very
often given unto her, to purge and cleanse her, as also to prevent the
ingendering or growing of too much glut and fatnes in her inward parts, which
may be very hurtful unto her, and hazard surfettings and her life. All this
performed and her self preserved until she be mewed: then ought you at the
least three weeks before you do take her to your fist: to inseame her with
washed meat and stones; for then is the danger, and the cause that does shorten
many of their lives. For there is no man can make one of those Hawks from the
Mew, ready to be lured under six weeks at the least, but he shall hazard her
life, if she take any heat at all: and contrariwise to be careful of that
time, and these former courses set down, they are as hard as the Lanner, and
will last as long. And I my self have known one of them an excellent Hearnor,
and to continue her goodness very near twenty years, or full out the time:
which shows that it is the true care of the Faulconer, the right order and
method in the managing of his business in due time, that brings it to right
perfection and causes it to continue in the same: and for the further ordering
of her from the Mew, and time of her rest till she be ready to fly: And for
your better instruction look back unto the chapter of the slight Faulcon,
whereas I have written of the same matter and estate of her in that kind, and
there you shall find a sufficient way and direct course to serve your turn
with all. And if you be disposed to frame and make this bird to the river,
there also you shall find a chapter to lead you the plain path way to that
delight, and give you full content: For they are very singular and special
Hawks for that purpose.

Lathams approved Medicines for all Hawks. The second Book.
CHAP. I. How to prevent and avoid many infirmities which Hawks are subject
unto when they are newly taken out of the Mew, with a true description of
natures effectual working, in keeping and maintaining health in all sound
Hawks.
WHen you do draw a fat or full Hawk out of the Mew, that proves unquiet in
her inseming. Then may you easily breed in her many and diverse diseases. First
by heating her in her grease, and by sudden cold after; which is the more
dangerous if it be procured by spowting, or washing her with cold water, after
she has bated and heat her self. Beware how you do wash your Hawke newly
drawn from the Mew.


Therefore when you have such a Hawke, that you perceive to be of a stirring
bating humor, if you will needs wet or wash her, let it be done before she do
bate or heat her self; for by that means you may keep her quiet, and prevent
her unruliness. Also it is not good to make too much have in the inseaming of
such a Hawke, but to take reasonable leisure, and not to break or disperse her
grease too soon, fot that takes away her stomach, which prolongs and
increases her unquietness, and being ouerheat by the same, it causes her to
cast disorderly, and to keep either stones or casting out of reason and due
time. It will also cause her to loose her flesh, which will breed weakness in
her body: whereof comes the Crocke and diverse other diseases: and for any of
them so taken while she is in her greafe, there is no recovery to be expected,
unless by some extraordinary work of art and nature she chance to be cured.

Every Faulconer shall find that it is an easier matter to preserve health in a
sound Hawke, then to recover it when it is decayed. And seeing it is known and
certainly affirmed that the wild Hawke lives and continues many years: it may
be a question why we think it well, and are content if we can keep our
Hawks alive but a few years, and yet it cannot be denied but the wild Hawke,
takes greater pains by far then the reclaimed Hawke does, for she never
eats but she sweateth, she gets her living by her labour^, and her wings
are all the fingers she has to feed her fat withal. And for ought that I can
perceive, this is the cause that makes her live so long, for whereas the
reclaimed Hawke sits often at her ease, and feeds her self fat with that she
never takes pains for, whose ease and idleness cannot choose but breed ill
humors, which do no doubt surfeit her body, and shorten her life. Besides she
is often times debarred from the benefit of the fresh and sweet air, she is
fed many times with meat contrary to her constitution, she is forced to
participat of many (...).
occurrents which are opposite to the same: she has sometimes her flesh puffed
up on the sudden, and as quickly abated, all which being opposite and
contrary to nature, cannot choose but destroy nature: for where the qualities
are different, there is a continual strife, and where strife is continued,
there must needs follow a victory to the one part, which brings a ruin to the
other, so that these differences being continued (unto our reclaimed Hawks)
must needs cut the thread of their lives before their time. But on the contrary
the wild Hawke lives and keeps her self abroad in the open air, feeds on
good meat, He is not sometimes very fat, and sometimes very lean, but most
commonly in a mean betwixt both. Inmediostat virtus.
and is her own caruer at all times, takes and leaves what she list without
control; she has no physical medicines: nor Apothecary scowrings given her:
but with good feed she keeps her self from being too lean, and with
continual I exercise from being too fat. Thus for the most part she remains
in a moderate estate of body, being seldom combred with contraries to impair
her health: and if at any time she find her stomach glutted or ouercharged,
she presently repaires to the water, stones, or grauel, with which (together
with the help and benefit of the air and good diet) she does purge and
recover her She does not as many Faulconers, do when they know their Hawke is
diseased, delay the curing thereof from time to time* but she presently seeks
to amend what she finds amiss.
lately lost health.

For to speak plainly and in a word, Nature turns Faulconer, and teaches her
by these materials, and self sought helps, not only how to prevent ensuing
dangers, but also to cure those encumbrances which precedent mishap had caused
her to fall into: and thus she makes her self ready and fit, for her future
labors. All these things do we never think of, having taken them from their
liberty, and made them subject to our custody: we do never remember ^^^ame
our courses according to their kind: but w^^^^ ^^ough our disorder and
indirect courses, we have wrought their unsoundness, we forget to look back,
or once to think upon natures healthful remedies, but as by means contrary
to nature, we have bred their diseases, so by as great contrarieties, we think
to cure them.

But if my counsel may prevail, when you find your Hawke distempered in her
estate, let the wild Hawks practice be your president, and fail not to use
those physical appliments, by which, that skillful Faulconer (Dame Nature)
has taught her to work her own welfare. That is, good meat, fair water,
stones well ordered, and a moderat diet, as occasion requires. For if these
things will not cure the diseases incident to the stomach of your Hawke by
nature, then persuade your self all the unnatural medicines, and
sophisticated potions, that you can procure will do her no good.

CHAP. II. A president of the wild Hawks practice, for the preserving of her
health, which is taken by observation while your Hawke is in the Mew.
WHat is the reason that many men do never so much as think of natures course
in the managing of these matters, which do concern the health of their Hawks
so nearly but when the date of their flying time is expired; whereas before
they followed their own courses and affections, never thinking of the time to
come, so now when they have put her into the Mew, they take no further care
while she is there, nor do not think there is either art to be used, or
experience to be learned during that time. For although in her flying time any
one, that has either skill in the art, or love to his Hawk, must needs find
out and perceive any thing that is amiss about her, because then she is
seldom from his fist, or out of his sight, and (yet it may be) knows not how
to remedy those infirmities he finds. Yet when they have once put them into
the Mew, then they are committed to the keeping of such a one (as if he can
give her meat once a day, and water once a week) is thought sufficient, which
loose practice does show how much many men do wrong both their Hawks and
themselves. For whatsoever he is that has attained so much skill, as in flying
time to find a fault, if he will diligently attend and observe at due times,
may in the Mew learn to mend a fault: for there he has a pattern of the wild
Hawks practice; and as it were a looking glass to behold and see how she
does order and govern her self when she is amiss: there he may mark how
often and many days together without ceasing she will take stones, and go to
the water, and how sparing she will be of her diet, eating but little, and
making choice of her feed, wherein she must be assisted by the diligence of
her Keeper, who must provide meat of several kinds for her, until she has
her liking, and not to feed her with one kind of meat, and because she
refuses that, so to give her over: likewise you must carefully mark what meat
it is whereon your Hawke has surfetted, or has eaten so much of that she is
sick with it: for she will be sure to loath that and hate it during the time
of her sickness; and it is not fit that you do proffer it unto her any more
before she be thoroughly recovered: for if you do, and that she chance to
distaste it again, it is ten to one she dies for it.

These things during the time of her mewing being carefully observed, will
afford good instructions fitting for their kind: And unto him that is
ignorant, and wants experience, it will being present understanding, and make
the way to further knowledge how she should be ordered afterward, when she
is drawn from thence.

CHAP. III. How to keep and preserve your Hawke in health, without any
scowrings, or medecines at all.
I Have in times past bin of opinion my self, that if I might give my Hawk a
new devised scowring, that it were not possible she should die in a long time
after. Although I had not so much understanding as to know the true operation
of any one of those simples it was compounded off, neither whether it went,
nor which way it passed, but only in at her mouth, and out with her mutes. And
no doubt, at this day there be some of the same mind concerning the one, and
of the like wisdom in respect of the other. Therefore I will not stand as yet
to teach or instruct which way to make a scowring: for I think they are as
common as they are vain, and used to little purpose and as many and diverse as
(almost) a Hawke has feathers, which they poor wretches find to their utter
destruction. But here I think it first fit to be considered what effects
these scowrings do work when they are given, and in what parts of the Hawks
body they be contained, and what can be there harbored for them to purge or
work upon, whereby any good or benefit should be procured to the Hawk by their
means.

First when a scowring is given to any Hawke, it is conuaied into the gorge,
where it rests not, but passes down into the pannell, which is the stomach;
which place every Faulconer of understanding knows is emptied and made clean
every morning when she has cast, but if by his observation of her casting he
perceiues the contrary by the foulenes and imperfectnes of the same: or that
there is any relics, as straggling loose feathers, superfluity of glut, or
other impediments of her health remaining or left behind: then he has her
natural physic ready, which is stones and fair water: Also if he be
disposed, he may use a little knot of fair white flannell, well, and clean
washed together with them to cleanse her with all, which flannell although it
be unnatural, yet being wrapped close, it remains firm in substance, and being
perfectly clean, returns again with the stones in the same manner, removing
that which is bad, and leaving no cause of offense behind to annoy the Hawke
withal.

Now then seeing you do sufficiently perceive by experience that the pannell
which is the stomach of the Hawke is thus far searched into, and by the skill
and diligence of the Faulconer carefully kept and preserved, and every day
curiously cleansed, what should any scowring do there where there is no
need: or what effect can it work unless to take away her life that would
feign live, if her keeper would suffer her:

For you must note that when a scouring is given, and received by the Hawke
into her body, then by her natural heat that strives to digest it, it is
forced to use the virtue it has, and does draw unto it one humor or other,
that it has power over: for there is no medicine but it has a certain power
(according to the virtue of the simples contained in it) to draw something
which is contained in the body of the Hawk. Now when this is given unto a Hawke
that is clean, and has no corrupt or superfluous humors, upon which the
force, and vigor of it may work, then must it needs exercise the same upon
the blood and entrails of the Hawke, which it does seek, wast, and consume
with such unnatural vehemency, that it must needs put her whole body out of
temper: therefore it is far unfit to give unto your Hawk any medicine, unless it
be upon extremity, and that there be manifest show and peoofe of a deserving
cause.

But now let us go a little further to see and find where and how this
scowring which we give our Hawke so often) may pass to prevail better in any
other part of the body then it has done in the pannell, or stomach already
mentioned. The next admittance, or passage it has from thence is into the
small guts, which place is ordered or disordered by the stomach, which being
governed, and carefully preserved and kept in health, the other cannot lightly
be distempered: for both health and sickness of that part depend upon the
estate of the stomach, and from thence especially do grow all other
annoyances, either upwards, or downwards: now if the guts be furred or
fraught with dross, as with such as we term fellanders, or any such like
imperfections, I do allow they may easily be scoured forth: but as I have
heard some affirm and say, that they could not only give a medicine to expel
them from their places of being: but also with the same they will prevent the
ingendring or increasing again: I am altogether incredulous of it, and do
know that no man in the world can maintain it: for if the stomach be in
health, the bowels will be clean and free from any such matter of
imperfection, especially in their flying time, when as they be fed clean, and
well ordered in their diet, nor are not clogged, nor cloyed with unreasonable
gorges, contrariwise if the stomach be imperfect, and that it do not digest
and indue well, then must needs sundry evils follow, and such as have been
named, and for curing thereof with scowring it cannot be, for they will grow
and increase again: But you must look back, and find out not only the
Fellanders that are apparently to be seen with the eye, but also the original
and principal cause, from whence they spring and proceed: for if by your
judgment and skill you do not duly consider that; if you do attain to your
desire, it is more by good luck then any cunning at al: for the stomach is the
place (as you have heard, and may perceive) that you must return unto and
seek to cure; for it is the coldness and dullness of that only, that causes
evil and imperfect digesture. And although it be never so sound and perfect,
yet it may, on the sudden, be dulled and cooled diverse ways: as sometimes
after great toil to give unreasonable gorges; also to feed frankely with
cold and stale meat which her stomache abhors: Likewise, for want of stones
in due time, to remain and purge those gross humors, which she has bin
suffered disorderly to retain for want of them.

Therefore, to prevent these, or such like infirmities before they do come,
you must be careful of the stomach, to feed it choicely, and to keep it from
any annoiance, suffering nothing to come there by your good will but sweet and
good meat, and such as the wild Haggard does take and rest to prolong her
life with all, so shall you preserve your Hawke from the Fellanders, and all
other inward diseases that Hawks be most subject unto.

When you do perceive that your Hawke is sick, and mourns on the Fellanders
(for so you may term it very fitly) she will be of a heavy cheer: and you
shall also confirm the same by your own view, in beholding them in her
mutes, to show and appear in raw and fleshly threads and such like matter
undigested, then is it not fit for you so soon and rashly to intend to scour
her, and by that means seek to disburden her of them, which will suddenly
after engender and grow again. For it is the rash and hasty humor of some
men, that presses them forwatd to use such means for remedy, as serves but
for the present time, nor hardly then neither; but rather by the unnatural
effects of their scourings, their is left behind in the body of the Hawke some
unsavory annoiance, whereby the stomach is made more unfit for quick and
perfect digesture then it was before. Contrariwise, if men would but tarry a
time convenient, of all other diseases the Fellanders would be easily cured and
soonest rid away, which to effect you must look unto the stomach, and by
orderly and clean feed, with the best meat you can get, seek to cleanse and
make that perfect.

And fail not every night, instead of casting, to give her half a dozen
small stones out of fair water, which you shall find will so work, and in
small time so temper the stomach, that it will be made fit and brought to
quick and good disgesture, and the Fellanders will soon be rid away. Also,
be sure that you feed with good and light meat, such as is easy to be
digested, and let it be hot and the quantie thereof reasonable.

And to prove that the Fellanders may be taken away without scowring, do but
remember whether the soundest Hawke in the world will not have them, while she
is in the Mew, of which there is no question to be made: for it is most
certain that all Hawks of that kind, will have them with a continuance of
rank and frank feed. And whosoever shall observe it, may often perceive such
a Hawke never cease taking stones and going to the water for a month together,
besides keeping of sparing diet, eating but little meat at once until she
has purged and cleansed her body, and bowels again. Also do but call to
mind whether (after her drawing out of the Mew) you have not perceived the
Fellanders or other relics of gross and drossie substance will not wear away
in due time only with good meat and stones, and a well ordered diet, without
the assistance or help of any scowring or medicine at all.

All this allowed and well considered of, I find no more reason why the one
part of the Hawke should be scowred with medicine any more then the other,
considering they work no such good effects as should move us to use them, and
that better remedies may be obtained and effected without them.

Whereas in this last discourse (touching the pannell of the Hawke which is her
very stomach) I have showed you that the other parts belonging upwards and
downwards, are governed and kept in health, and likewise subject to infirmity
by reason of the same; which appears more plainly by a prerogative power,
which nature has bestowed on it above the other parts, by which it is able to
make a division of such mixtures, of things contrary in kind contained in the
same, which is either taken by her self, or given unto her by others;
suffering the principal substance to pass for the nourishment of her body;
and withholding that which is hurtful, working and drawing it together into a
little knot or bundle, very curiously enclosing all things within it, and not
leaving so much behind as the least feather, corn, or grain of seed she
takes into it, all which she then returns back by casting it into open view,
in which is to be discerned the signs of health or grief to ensue.

Therefore if the stomach of your Hawke be imperfect, it is ten to one all the
parts both upward and downward, will be annoied and grieved by the same. If the
parts downward be grieved, you shall perceive it by her mutes in that manner
which I have formerly expressed. If the upper parrs be distempered you shall
perceive it by her heat appearing in her mouth and throat, which will be more
apparent by her stirring and flying, and will appear and show it self in
white and curdeled froth, which will be drawn into the wind pipe, and cleave
or stick to any other place, if it be not corrected in time, before it begin
to do so, which may easily be done in that manner, which shall be showed
hereafter.

CHAP. IIII. How to help and recover a Hawke that does cast her stones
disorderly, and to bring her to cast them in dew time.
WHen you have a Hawke that is slow to cast her stones, and will keep them
longer then she should, you must be very careful in her usage, and especially
to keep her full of flesh and strong: for as you do seek to break her of
that bad custom, she will be subject to some hard and rough dealing. The
cause thereof proceeds many times of heats taken in their grease before they be
inseamed, and present cold after it. Also at other times by their bad usage,
and by diverse infirmities incident to the bodies of Hawks this ill property
is caught and caused.

Now for the recovery thereof, you must use stones out of fair water, and them
to be given at due times and often: But whatsoever he is that thinks, by this
course, to cure his Hawks infirmity he must not give them in the morning, for
if he do he shall be constrained to tarry so long for the casting of them,
as she will loose her flesh with fasting, and he shall be forced to desist
from practice, and then will he be further from his remedy then he was at the
first And to provoke her to cast them by any means, speedily before she is
willing, is in vain, for then you do but hinder and wrong her: for she will
soon do the like again, and to practice that course often will make an end of
her. For the stones being kind and natural (as every man may understand)
there is no Hawke will take them her self but when she has need: And as she
has need of them, more or less, even so she will keep and detain them, for
they do agree with her nature and kind, and she loves them as may appear by
her taking them her self, and keeping them so long. I do not persuade you to
give stones to any Hawke, that being sick, or ill disposed, is thereby so
weakened, that she is not able to return them back from whence she had them
(neither will any such Hawke of her self take them) but unto a strong Hawke.
And when you do perceive her to keep them as she loves them, and somewhat
longer then you desire she should do, then to content your mind, you do
presently devise to give her something that may compel her by force to cast
them: or it may be you will first show her some live or dead thing to provoke
her thereunto, and if that will not serve; although you may perceive thereby
that she desires to keep them: yet will you not rest but assaie further with
Selandine, or such like, to provoke her to it, which she abhors, and the
unnatural lust thereof does so much offend her, that she is enforced to cast
up, as well that which she would have kept and loved, as that which was
contrary to her kind and therefore hated, which course is very unfitting to be
held with such a Hawke, as you do find disposed to keep her stones very
long, for it will take no effect with her but only for the present time.
Therefore if you will needs use it, it were fitter to be given to such a Hawke
as does cast orderly, thereby sometimes to purge her self of superfluous glut
on the sudden, which you suspected, or may find her stomach to be cloied
withal, through your own, or others neglect, or forbearance to give stones.

But for the other slow casting Hawke she will not be cured on the sudden, but
it must be wrought with practice and by degrees. Therefore when you shall have
such a Hawke, and that you shall (notwithstanding the council which I have
given to the contrary) resolve to deal with her from her recovery in the
morning, it is your best course not to give her many stones at one time;
neither let them be of the biggest, but about eight or nine of the smallest
that Falconers do use to give their Hawks: and then if she do cast any of
them within two hours, let her fast no longer, but feed her on the rest. Also,
if she cast none of them by that time, yet give her her dinner, and also her
supper at night; yet I have seen a Hawke that has cast them between her
dinner and her supper; but howsoever, two to one, she will cast either all or
the most part of them the next morning, and therefore let her not fast long
before you feed her at any time. And by following this course, you shall find
that in the end it will recover her, and bring her to cast in due time. And
thus much have I written for their sakes that think the night too long, and are
wilfully humored to give stones in the morning to such Hawks.

Nevertheless, for those that are not so much selfe-will'd, or settled in their
own conceits; let me withdraw them from the day, and persuade them that the
night is best to deal with such a Hawke: and it offers me occasion of
disquiet, or distemper unto her, as the morning does, but quietness and rest,
and therein she has the length of time to receive the true operation and
virtue of the stones. Diverse other reasons I could show and allege, but
they are needless; because in the forepart of this book I have written more at
large upon the same occasion.

CHAP. V. Advertisement touching scowring and purgation.
EVery Falconer ought to be most careful, to take special note of the estate
of that hawke, the which he does determine and dispose himself to give a
scowring unto; and also, that he do compose and make the same, according unto
her necessity, the strength and ablenes of her body, and thereafter to bestow
it on her: also, it is as requisite that he do rightly understand, at what time
it is best and fittest to be given. For so far as I have ever perceived, it
has been the opinion of most men, and thought the best course upon any
occasion, or unto any Hawke, of what estate soever, to purge and scowre her in
the morning, which order sometimes, and in some hawks may be amended: as it
cannot be chosen, but those Hawks that are brought and come from the cage, or
other places whereas they have been fed continually, with base and vilde
meat, must needs have all sorts of imperfections abounding in them: Wherefore
then for such Hawks it will not be amiss, if the Faulconer will not stay the
time and benefit thereof, by his best endeavor and practice, with good meat
clean dressed, fair water, casting, and stones, to purge and cleanse her with
all; then to give her a thorough scowring, and such a one as I shall appoint
and set down hereafter, and at what time, and in that manner as I shall
declare and show you.

CHAP. VI. To prepare your strong Hawke, and make her fit to be purged.
IT is meet you labor your strong, and full Hawke with carriage, with clean
feed, with stones and casting, at the least viij days to stir her body and
make it fit to be scoured; then you must feed the same Hawke in the morning,
and in that manner that she may be thorough empty, by eight of the clock at
night.

Also you must be sure that you give neither bones nor feathers, nor any other
thing, but only good and clean meat: then before you go to bed, give her the
scowring, and set her up very warm all night: for otherwise she may take
great cold by means of her emptines, and purging medicine: Then must you have
a water readily provided and made in this sort. Take a pint of fair running
water put into a glass, whereunto you must put half a dozen bruised cloves* as
many thin slices of licorish, and a little brown sugger candy: then must you
rise betimes in the morning, and with a spoonefull or two of this water give
her stones altogether, and when she has cast them again, give her her
breakefast of good meat, with reason in the quantity; for she will be perfectly
freed from the scowring, and will be ready for the same: For betwixt the stones
and the sweet and comfortable water, she will be purged upward and downward,
from al annoiance of the unnatural unsavory medicine, and her meat will agree
so much the better with her. This water is sufficient of it self without any
other medicine, being given with meat to nourish and procure health in any
poor Hawke, that has not her deadly wound. And so much of the ordering and
scowring any Hawke, that is strong and able of body to abide and endure the
same.

CHAP. VII. How to order your Hawke that shall be found to be weak, and unable
to abide, or endure any hard or violent dealing, by medicine or scowring.
IT is strange that any Faulconer should have in his hand a Hawke full of
flesh, any continuance of time, and that then she should be found to be both
bare of her flesh, weak and also foul within: it cannot be, unless in such a
Hawke wherein no hope of life is to be expected: but is plainly perceived to
be unsound and rotten. Therefore it must needs appear that such Hawks has
been euel^y ordered, and continued in unclean and unskillful keeping;
wherefore perceiving their poverty to pinch them, it behoues you to deal more
gently with them, then with the other: and to prepare a gentle and easy
scowring according to their poor estate, and such a one as I shall show you
hereafter: And appoint to be given unto such a Hawke on the like occasion. And
whereas you disposed your self formerly, and prepared for the night: so
contrariwise you must do for the morning; because your sickely Hawke will not
be able to brook and endure a cold winters night, to sit empty in; but it will
hazard her life: therefore you must feed her over night, with the best meat
you can get, that she may put it kindly away, and be empty betimes in the
morning: and then give her the scowring as early as may be, and set her on a
hot brick wrapped in a double woollen cloth, and so keep her at the least
three hours, or until she craves for her meat; when as you must give her a
little, and often of the best hot meat you can get, and never without some of
the aforesaid water with it, and so order and diet her, with good and
nourishing feed, and continual warmth, until she be able to return to her
accustomed diet again.

CHAP. VIII. A scowring to be given unto any Hawke that is full of flesh and
strong, and is perceived to be imperfect, and unclean within.
TAke a quarter of a pound of fresh butter and put unto it a sawcer full of
white vinegar, and boil them with a soft fire, and also clarify and skim it
well, then put into it three or four bruised cloves, one branch of rue, one
branch of wormwood, one flash or two of saffron, and a pretty piece of sugar
candy. Then boil al these together a good space: and when you have so done,
take out the rue, the wormwood, the cloves and the saffron, then when it is
cold dreane away what is left of the vinegar, and of the remainder make you
pellets, which being roled up in brown sugar candy, give two of them as big as
reasonable Acornes unto your Hawke, after that manner and at such time as I
have showed you before, If you fear any bruise you may ad a ilttle mummy.
and if you find not this medicine to be of sufficient force in the working:
then the next time take of allows the quantity of a fetch unwashed, and of the
clearest and purest in show and convey it very curiously into the midest of a
pellet, and so give it unto your Hawke, and it will pass gently away with the
rest, and purge downward to your liking, This scowring is good to be given
unto any Hawke, that has been continued in foul and disordered feed, and
has surfetted on the same: for it strengthens the heart and purges humors
from the stomach, and mightily refreshes the same, and bowels after large
feeding, it kills worms in the body, and resists rottenness, also t
greatly respects the head.

CHAP. IX. Another scowring to be given unto a Hawke that is but in a reasonable
estate of body, and is perceived to be unclean and foul within.
Take forth the rosemary the cloves and the mace when they are boiled, and then
after when it is almost cold put in the powder of rue.
TAke a quantity of fresh butter, and be sure it be perfect sweet, and boil it
over a chafing dish by it self, and skim it well, then put into it two or
three branches of rosemary, two or three cloves, a little mace, a little
saffron in powder, and a pretty piece of brown sugar candy: then boil all
these together again a good space: and in the cooling put in a little of the
powder of rue, and mingle them all well together. Then take forth the rosemary
and the cloves, and when you would use it role it up with sugar candy into
pellets, You may give some aloes by it self hansomly convaied into a bit of
meat, that it be not tasted till it be in the stomach and it is a very good
thing, but otherways I have known it to kill diverse Hawks.
and fear not to give one or two of them unto your weak and impouerished
Hawke in the morning betimes, and in that manner as I have appointed before for
the same, and also for the manner of her diet and feeding, when her hour is
come, and if you do think, or assuredly find that this scowring is not of
force to work your will, then take of Alowes washed, as much in quantity as of
the other unwashed, and convey it into the midst of a pellet, and so bestow it
on your Hawke: for although being washed it is not so violent in the scowring:
yet is it meet for your crasie Hawke and is of operation and virtue to
strengthen her stomach the more. Also it is an enemy to all putrefaction, and
defends the body from corruption: this scowring is good to purge gently, it
strengthens the heart and concocteth raw humors of the stomach, it
preserves the lights, and remoueth obstructions or stoppings, and suddenly
breeds health and lustiness.

CHAP. X. Another excellent scowring to be given unto any Hawke of any kind,
high or low, or of what estate soever, that is perceived to have infirmity
within her inward parts, also for any cold, or stuffing in the head.
TAke a good quantity of fresh butter, well boiled and clarified, and then well
washed in the best rosewater, and there close kept and preserved until you
have occasion to use it, when as you must take it forth and put into it the
powder of half a dozen cloves, the powder of two or three chewdes of saffron,
and as much of the powder of rue, as the shales of one small nut will contain:
then temper and mingle them all very well together, with good store of brown
sugercandy, and so keep it close in a box until you have need to use it: and
then if you be disposed you may give your Hawke very often of it in pellets,
without offense or fear, and feed her within an hour or less after it: for I
have had Hawks both long winged and short, that would have eat it very eagerly
with their meat, and it would presently make them very full, hawtie and proud.
This scowring sweetly perfumeth the body, it wastes and consumes wind, it
opens and purges the head, it makes humors fit to pass away; it comfort
the heart and stomach: it is good for difficulty of breathing, shortness of
breath, which proceeds of cold, and it is a good remedy against the pantas or
the stopping of the lights or longs, and it is also a present remedy for the
cray.

CHAP. XI. An excellent scowring to give unto a full Hawke, after she has
been lured and her grease heat and stirred in her before she be thoroughly
inseamed.
TAke the powder of rosemarie, the powder of box leaves of equal portions, and
a little of the powder of horehound, and mingle them all very well together
with sweet clarified butter, and brown suger-candy, and give a pellet or two
of the same unto your Hawke at night as you have been directed, and this will
purge and scowre the pannell, and other inward parts of grease, and all other
loose humors, and your Hawke shall insearne to your liking without any danger.

CHAP. XII. Signs of inward sickness and the cure.
WHen you do perceive your Hawke to sit broodely and crowching, with her
feathers displaied and open, and withal do as it were start or ierke with her
leg or foot, as sometimes a Hawk will do when she is touched on her pannell
with ones hand or finger, then may you be sure that she is not well in her
body, and that she is either troubled with worms, or else with some other
inward griping, or gnawing, which may proceed and grow of a cold cause: and for
remedy of either or both infirmities, you must omit no time to give her some
garlic at the night time, and use her unto it two or three times in the
week, and always on the morning miss not to proffer her water in a dish, or
porringer, wherein is a slice of rubarbe infused: and this will most assuredly
cure and amend her: also if you do apparantlie perceive that she is troubled
with the cold in her head, take a little of the juice of sage-leaues being
stamped and strained, and put into her nares with a straw, and it will amend
her in that place: for it is special good for the head and brain, and being
conuaied into the nares, it draws down slime and all other corrupt humors
out of the head.

Whereas I have heretofore showed you how behouefull it is for every
Faulconer, that as he has right knowledge and true understanding of his
Hawks, from other men's. So also that he should thorough his diligent and due
observation learn to be as cunning and skillful in the diversity of their
sundry natures and disposition, and thereafter to guide and rule them: and
also for that they are birds subject unto sundry accidents and evils, it is
meet they should be as exquisit and skillful to know one grief or sickness or
other infirmity one from another, and accordingly to give and apply by sundry
means a remedy: and not to seem or imitate the order and method of the
quack-saluar or mountibancke, that has but one poor medicine in his budget,
for every malady. Therefore as I have already here set down some few
scowrings, or medicines wholesome, medicinable, and by proof and experience are
tolerable, and fit to be given unto Hawks on just occasion. I have also
showed you the virtue and operation of such simples as are contained in them,
and will further hereafter, instruct you of them particularly, and of every
ones temperature and virtue, to the end that out of these already written, or
any other that I shall wright hereafter, you may with judgment and discretion
easily divide, add, or take from, whatsoever how much or little, and for what
grief soever to serve your turn, and give instruction to those that wants the
same, according as there shall be found and perceived any needful occasion
more or less, as touching the nature of the grief.

The stomach.
As for example to speak of the stomach that has no good appetite to feed,
and when it has fed, cannot digest well: it is a disease that may grow diverse
ways: therefore it is not possible to cure it with one medicine: Also if that
weakness of the stomach do come of a weak distemperature of it self only;
then must you needs use some means unto it self to heat and quicken it
again. Contrariwise overmuch heat in it self, may be the cause of that
weakness; which if it be so then will it appear diverse ways, and especially
in the mouth and throat; for they will continually be furred with white, and
curdeled froath, and her breath will be strong and sower: Also it will be
perceived by the over much black and sanguine color in her mutes, and burnt
casting, then you must of necessity cool it with some cool thing that is meet
for it: But if that weakness do grow of any superfluous humor, that does
abound, or has been there ingendered; then must that humor of necessity be
purged, upward and downward by some gentle medicine. Also this infirmity and
weakness of the stomach may grow on extraordinary heat and inflammation of
the liver, which may easily be perceived: for that Hawke that is sick of that
disease, will hold at one stay, and will hardly rise of her flesh, but if she
do it, will not continue, how well soever you do feed: likewise she will
look very dullie with her eyes, and her casting will seldom or never be good,
and her mutes will be evermore filled with over much black and other signs
which I will explain unto you more at large, and you finding this, then you
must have respect only to that; The Liver.
especially in her diet, and some otherways that I shall show you hereafter: I
could prescribe you here diverse other ways how this weakness and decay of
the stomach may grow, but let this suffice as yet, and approve that it cannot
be cured with one medicine, ignorantly given.

As I have here lastly a little touched and spoken of the liver, let me return
back unto it again, and give you further assurance that many Hawks, from
that only thing receive their deadly wounds, and at such times as it is never
suspected or thought on: for wheresoever it falls out that your Hawke
continues in a disordered kind of casting, either of stones, or casting, or
both, and that out of your judgment and own knowledge, you are assured that
your best means by practice, with good meat clean dressed, casting and stones,
and all other good usage, has not been wanting: for remedy of the same, then
may you be assured she is unsound, and in great danger of death, if it be not
suddenly seen and prevented, and in such a Hawk (as I told you before) you
shall find her mutes commonly to be filled with black and saguine matter
seldom dispersed abroad: but otherwise cloddered thick on lumpes, within the
which being stirred or removed, you shall find and perceive a raw and rank
kind of fleshly substance: All which imports and shows unto you that there
wants digesture, and that your Hawke has been over het and strained, as in
her flights for want of breath and cleanness, or by unquietness and toiling
on the fist, in the time of carriage, or on shipboard with baring and tumbling
up and down, and ill usage as they are brought over, a matter little
considered, yet certain it is, that with the same, and base feeding together a
number of them are surfeted in their bodies, and also baned in their livers,
which for want of understanding in many masters, the servant is after blamed
and wrongfully condemned for it, without any cause at all: for the liver or the
disease thereof, is so secret and vnaparant that unless it be quite and
clean shot and fallen or swelled (for that is the truth) with rottennes: and
that every man may discern it by the feeling of his hand, it is never
mistrusted nor thought of; when there is no other place within the Hawke more,
nor so much or often infected. Also this sickness and grief of the liver will
be easily perceived, by her castings the which will seldom or never be
wrapped, or clean after any of the least large feeding. And, although the
liver so far as you can perceive by your ordinary means, rests right in
the place, yet by these and such other signs as I have showed it is to be
gathered, and you may be assured that there lies her grief, and that with too
much heat and striving it is infected. And for remedy thereof, and to stay the
inflammation of the same, you must suddenly hold and keep her to a moderate
diet and abstain from all kind of hot meats, I mean such as be hot and
strong of disgestion. I do not forewarne you of the meat hot and new killed,
for such you must be sure to provide always, and betake you to, and of the
coolest and easiest to be digested, as of hens flesh, chickens flesh, young
Pigeons, and of whatsoever you can find to be cooling in operation, and easy
to be endured by such a Hawke as is perceived to be grieved in that place, and
through the same wants quick digesture: and with one, or with any of these
prescribed meats, you must not feed every day, but one day with one kind,
and a little thereof at once, and the next day with another, and so one after
another you must provide and give unto her, until you do perceive she begins
to rise and mend of her flesh; and then you must not forget to give casting and
stones moderately, and with discretion: to the end, that as by this
prescription and course of diet, and nourishing-feeding, her grief may be
cured; so otherwise by her winning and retaining unto her self glut, and such
other like superfluous imperfections of the same, naturally increasing, her
health may not be hindered.

Also you must be mindful, and remember to give your meat with one cool water
or other, and such as I shall set down, and appoint hereafter to be given for
the preservation of the liver, and those inward and secret parts. Furthermore
if you have rightly observed, you may remember that often times your Hawks liver
will be colored green and yellow, when she is dead, which shows that
although the same were not before perceived in the highest degree to be baned,
yet that it were much inflamed as by those colors appeared, The Gall.
which was the ouerflowing of the gall, a disease that most Hawks are subject
unto; and is as dangerous and deadly as death it self, if it be not present
lie foreseen and cured. This ouerflowing of the gall proceeds of great heat,
taken thorough disorder and ill usage, as by toiling flights in grease and
uncleanness, or by hanging by the heels, or tumbling and tossing, and such
other like abuses, whereby the liver and the same infecteth one and other,
wherefore the cure must be in them both; for that they are both as one joined
together; and how to understand and know when your Hawke is sick of this
disease, you must omit no time in the diligent search and view of her casting
and mutes, whereas in the one, the other or both, that grief is to be
discerned: for they will be continually mixed with green and yellow color,
which will not be (by any ordinary means) altered or changed, having got the
upper hand; but by skillful and cunning art must be stayed and cooled in the
beginning, and so her life preserved,

CHAP. XIII. To temper and cool the heat of the liver, and to stay the
inflammation of the same.
WHen you do perceive your Hawke to be ill affected in that place, and that
you perceive her to droope on the same, then must you first call to mind and
think on her diet, and the ordering thereof, according as you have directions
before, then you must take some of the distilled water of the herb called
Liuer-woort: and when you feed her, dippe your meat into the same and give it
unto her, and in using this course every day once or twice for a while, and in
time before she be too far spent, it will cure her be you asured of it. Also,
if you find her any whit to distaste the water, then put into it as much
brown suger-candie as will make it sweet: Likewise, if you perceive any whit
that her stomach do fail, as commonly that disease rests not alone, but
disperceth her branches into other parts. Then take the powder of three or
four cloves, and now and then give unto her at Morning or night finely conuaid
into a piece of meat; and that will strengthen the stomach, comfort the heart,
and also have respect unto the liver and other principal parts.

CHAP. XIIII. Of the Liver and the Gall.
HOw I am entered into these inward and secret parts, The Liver and Gaul.
I think it good to wright somewhat more of the liver, and also of the
superfluity and abounding of the gaul, and to show you how to qualify the
heat and outrage of them both: when as you do first perceive, by such signs
and tokens as I have before noted unto you, that your Hawke is grieved and
sick of this or these diseases; then must you defer no time to give something
unto her, to cure and amend her withal, for if you be slack therein, and
suffer it to run on and grow too much upon her, there is no way to stay it but
death will have her due: Therefore, you must first be sure to have great
respect unto her diet, that it may be of good meat, light and cool in
operation, for that is a special thing and means for the recovery of any of
these inward and secret sicknesses and otherwise without the same observation,
it is not possible to cure or amend any of them, but what else soever you give
for remedy, the same shall be a means to cross and prevent it: so much and
many gross humors do grow and proceed, of giving rank feed, and great
gorges unto crasie Hawks that want perfect di^esture, then you must provide
some distilled water of endive, and suckorie; and of any one of them, or both,
take a little, and into the same put a slice of rubarbe to infuse, and when you
feed your Hawke, dip your meat into it, and feed her therewith, and it will
cool the heat of the liver, and help the ouerflowing of the gaul: also it
comfort, cools and refreshes the stomach that is ouerheated, you may
give the rubarbe being dried in powder, about the weight of two barley or
wheat corns and it is very good; but then after four days you must scour
your Hawk with fresh butter, the powder of Rue, the powder of Cloves, and some
brown suger-candie: for the rubarbe being dried will leave a binding quality
behind it.

CHAP. XV. To comfort and preserve the heart, from any infirmity that
proceeds of heat.
WHereas at the death of your Hawks, you shall often find the skin about the
heart to be covered with white and hory specks, and also the place where the
heart does lie, likewise so infected, even so may you in her life time have a
great guess, nay full assurance when she is possessed with the same disease:
for you shall find and perceive such a Hawk to be most dry every way: as first
in her castings, they will have seldom any store of moisture in them, but it
will be froathy and roping her mutes will be thicker then ordinary, and she
will be often dropping of them, and seldom slice from her, which is an evil
sign, she will seem to be subject to the cray, and the frownce, her foot and
Sear will be of a dead color, and her pounces will show the like: for the I^t
and glassie die thereof will be vanished, and gone away: and she will be
subject and disposed unto much bowsing, weathering, and bathing. Nevertheless
if this vnnatuarall heat have not seated it self, or planted it in other
secret places, about the lights, reins, or other of those privy parts, in
white specks, or such settled curnels like unto the mazels of a swine; there is
no doubt but it may be recovered. The which to effect you must take the
distilled water or waters of borage and buglose together, into the which put
half a dozen sliced cloves to infuse, and with the same water, on or both, you
must feed with all, and give it once a day unto your Hawke with her meat,
affording her quiet rest and ease withal, that she may have no cause to
increase the disease: Also you must be sure as I have already forewarned you,
to be circumspect in her diet, that it may be of light and cool meat, and
small gorges thereof, and this will amend and help her: for otherwise there is
no Hawke of what kind soever, whose grief proceeds of heat, but that one
great gorge increases the same, and preuenteth the best means or remedy that
you can use for the amendment of the same.

CHAP. XVI. To kill and destroy the worms in the body, to heat and quicken a
cold stomach, that does not digest and indue well; but thorough the same
ingendereth Fellanders, and other gross humors and imperfections in the
pannell and guts.
THis remedy which here I do commend unto you, is an old medicine, the which
has been used a long time, and many years ago: and surely what observation
or use other men have made of it, I know not, neither am here able to recite
it: but for my self I have used and observed it, and have certainly found it
to be a most special and present remedy, for such things as here I do commend
it: and whereas it has been advised to be given out of oil steeped for the
same. I cannot commend it, because I have not used it, but for trial long ago,
when as then I dislik't it, and ever since have left it: But in this manner I
have often and always secretly unto my self, given it when I have gathered by
such signs, as I observed that my Hawke has been in this sort diseased. At
that time of the year when wormwood is grown up, If she will not bowse,
fail not the next morning after she has cast her garlic to give her stones
with a spoonefull of fair water, and you shall see her to purge her self
upwards of slime and glut very much.
and is moistest, then must you provide a glass full of the juice thereof, and
into the same put a score of cloves of garlic, clean pilled, and pierced
thorough in diverse places, and there preserve them close, and when you have
ocassion to use them, take forth one cloue or two, and a little dry them
outwardly, and so give them unto your Hawke at a night with her supper, using
this order for a week together, and fail not to let her have water offered
her in a dish every morning, or otherwise as you find her condition. Then leave
of your garlic, and every night after when you do give her her supper, role
two or three bits of meat in musterd seed and give her, and let her casting be
ever of plummage, you may bruise the seed a little if you will, but I hold it
more natural to give it whole, and it is a thing more precious then ever it
has been imagined to be given unto any Hawke: It purges the head, helps
disgestion, warmes the stomach, prouokes appetite, and preuailes much against
all cold causes of the body: and whenever you give your Hawke any train
newly taken from the field; be not curious to let her take her pleasure on the
crop: The virtue of musterd-seed.
for there is the musterd seed most natural and kind, and there is no better
physic: And whereas it has been ever thought a thing impossible at any
time, or by any means to kill and destroy the worms of the back. I dare
undertake that if it be possible for any man to know assuredly when his Hawke
has them, and for the number to guess what store of them, that they shall
never increase together, nor grow after, but that garlic and wormwood shall
forstall and correct them, nay altogether destroy and wast them; and that Hawke
that is used often unto it shall never die of them: for if it be possible for
any Hawke to draw by her breath in and unto her; any poisoned infection to rot
and kill her: wherefore then should she not as well thorough the same passage
suck up that which is of force to destroy the worms and so preserve her. I
see no reason to the contrary, knowing that the bellows draws so far as
unto themselves savors, both good and ill, and from them by dispersed veins
all along that leads unto the back, and other places whereas those worms do
lie, is way whereby may pass a senting remedy for to destroy that malady or
infection of those worms: These worms are to be found in blancke plumed Hawks
neither shall there be in any other place any worms able to abide or endure
it but it will correct and kill them, unless it be those which are the least
in show and substance, but greatest in strength of nature, and of whom I have
already spoken in the former part of this book, and showed there unto what
sort of Hawks they do belong, by nature and kind doing no hurt at all.

The lunges do draw a breath whereby
to cool the heart as it does lie:
Also the liver by that same air,
preserved is both fresh and fair.
But when these bellows do decay,
then health from both does fade away.
CHAP. XVII. Another very good scowring to give unto any imperfect Hawk that is
perceived to have Fellanders or other imperfections proceeding from the
weakness of the stomach.
TAke some clarified butter that has been preserved in rosewater, In this is
loofing and cleansing of humors, it comfort and dries superfluous humors,
it kills worms and resists putrefaction
then take the leaf of rue and of wormwood of equal portions, and with a
sharp knife mince them very exceeding small together, then temper and mingell
them together with brown sugar candy, and when you have so done, and roled and
made fit to be given, then into a pellet you must put a little of the powder of
mirrie: and so give on unto your Hawke, morning or evening, according as you
shall think it meet, and you shall find it a present and special remedy
against such inward diseases, and a great preserver of health and lustines.

CHAP. XVIII. Another to scowre and purge the body, to preserve the liver and
reins, and place of kidneis to enlarge a short breath, to prevent the Pantas
or wasting of the lungs, to purge from the stomach, glut, and all such
superfluous humors that does abound and to kill worms.
THere is a thing called Agricke, the which you shall have at the Apothecaries,
it is like unto a white mushrome or toad stool, and of this take a little
slice and put it into white wine, there to infuse with a slice or two of the
whitest ginger; and wash your Hawks meat a little therewith, and so with
discretion give it unto her, much or little, as you shall see cause, also you
may give it in powder, and it is very good.

CHAP. XIX. To purge your Hawke after she has cast her gorge, or stood very
long on her meat, before she put it over.
WHen you do perceive your Hawke to stand long upon her meat before she puts
it over, and that it is like to grow sower and to putrify in the gorge, then
it is meet you miss not to offer her water, and if she do bowse it may do
her much good, but it she refuse so to do, and that yo^ (...) have her put it
away, then give her three or four little stones, if it be possible above the
hand; and ten to one but they will cause her to writh it away: for I have often
times made trial of it at nights when my Hawks have stood on some part of
their meat, and have prevailed of my desire in due time (yet you must
understand howsoever) that this meat with lying too long in the gorge, must
needs putrify and be corrupted, and therefore will be offensive and noisome
unto the stomach and her other inward and secret parts, as also upward the
fume and stench thereof must needs ascend, whereby those passages and pipes
and the head will be stuffed with an ill perfume.

And therefore it is necessary, for the avoiding of such evils as may grow
thereon, both in body and head, that you do presently and thoroughly cleanse
them both, and all the powers thereof of that corruption, and sweeten them
again before you give her any meat, the which to effect, you must take some
butter that has been preserved in Rose Water, then take a little of the
powder of Saffron, the powder of myrrh, and the powder of half a dozine
cloves of mace, and mingle them all together with a little brown suger-candie,
and give one or two pellets thereof unto your Hawke, very early in the morning,
and when you have perceived that it has wrought with her, and that she is
emptied and her hour come to be fed, be sure you give her but one bit at once,
and of the best meat you can get, and so as often as you shall see cause that
day, and the next morning fail not to give her stones with one pellet of
wormwood, and when she has cast them again feed her with sweet and clean
meat, according as you find her disposed to eat, and with some of the
aforesaid sweet water; and these things with this order will purge her clear
of all gross humors, and sweetly perfume her body and senses, and set her free
from al danger of sickness or surfeting that otherways might have grown on
that occasion: many men on these occasions do desire to provoke their Hawks
to cast their meat, which if it could be effected to their liking, and as they
would have it, it were very good, but it is a hard matter so to do without
great hurt to the Hawke, as with striving and streyning of her self with the
vneasinesse of her casting.

Also, that which is given for provocation thereof, the body being amiss
before, must of necessity add more vexation and offense to the same; and
therefore all things considered, for mine own part, this is my resolution and
ever has been: I evermore rather desired to use all the ordinary means to
cause her put it away, then the least extraordinary to make her to cast it:
and whosoever he be that shall make trial of it, and can do it, shall find
her easier to be recovered, then if she do cast it through such an occasion:
if after he will observe and keep this order before expressed, and I dare
warrant she shall be no whit the worse for it very quickly.

Neuertelesse, if there be any man of the contrary opinion, or that will not
stay the time for trial thereof, but resolutely will have his Hawke to cast,
either meat that she has kept too long, or stones that has been given too
soon after her drawing, or any other occasion that does detain them, then to
effect the same. Take as much of Roach-allum, in quantity, as a pretty button,
or bean, and give it unto her and that will cause her to cast immediately, all
such things as she has within her, after which you must take a spooneful of
the forenamed sweet water and give her, and so let it rest so long as you shall
find it meet before you give her meat, this thing I think will not fail
you on this occasion to work your will and all, though for want of experience
and judgment, sometimes stones be given by young Faulconers too soon in the
fullness of grease, which time is unfittest and most dangerous. And also then
they are most hardest to be removed, yet then at that or such time I have seen
it constrain them to ascend back, and come forth from their place of being
even wrapped, by two or three together in the same grease, which they
themselves had with their heat and hasty working melted, removed, and
dispersed too soon.

CHAP. XX. To stay the casting of the gorge, and to strengthen the weakness of
the stomach, from whence it proceeds.
YOu shall have your Hawks stomach, sometimes, thorough the distemperature of
gross humors there abounding, for want of natural and kind purging with
stones and casting, to be grown so weak as that she will not keep her meat,
but will cast either all, or some part thereof; or otherwise, on some other
occasion of sickness will do the like, the which infirmity and weakness in her to
cure and amend; you must first of all be careful to order her very curiously
in her diet, and in these respects it is meet he should be no idle mate that
should undertake such a business, but both painful and careful to order her
as she should be. And first, he must provide the daintiest meat that may be
gotten, and give her but a bit at a time, and as often as with conueniency he
may, still providing change thereof, and as near as he can let it be of all
manner of small birds, for they are meetest for that purpose, and easiest to be
endued and always may be provided warm for her to feed upon. Then you must
provide some of the distilled water of the herb called Mint-ryall, and as
often as you feed, give some of it with her meat, until you see and perceive
she does mend, which soon will be if you observe well this order and manner of
diet; for otherwise that being neglected and carelessly handled, all the
medicines or other appliments in the world will do no good at all:
Contrariwise, this water is special good for this purpose, and with good
ordering will strengthen the weakness of the stomach, dry up all superfluous
humors that was cause of the same, and at an instant will stay the casting of
the gorge and make her keep her meat,

CHAP. XXI. A very good Medicine for a Hawk that is stuffed in the head with
cold.
TAke Rosemary leaves and dry them, and make them into fine powder, also take
the powder of half a scoare cloaues and mingle them well together, with
clarified and preserved butter out of Rose Water and brown suger-candie, and
give it unto your Hawke in pellets in the morning, and be sure to keep her
very warm until she be well, which will quickly be, for this is a very speedy
and sure medicine.

As I have heretofore showed you how necessary it is, that every Falconer do
know what aileth his Hawk when she is amiss, and certainly what is her
disease: so likewise ought he to be as skilful to know the virtue and operation
of such things as he shall give unto her, for curing of the same. For
otherwise, he may travel as a blind man without a guide, and run on quite
contrary, doing hurt unto that the which he intended to do good unto: as for
example, I have heard of some men that would give worme-wood in a pellet, or
knot unto his Hawke at a night with her supper, but for what purpose I have not
certainly understood, neither will I give any consent or advice so to do, as to
give it at that time with meat, or any other time on a full gorge, for the
nature of it is clean repugnant and contrary: it is a thing in taste very
bitter and full of juice, and it cannot choose but be offensive and distastefull
unto the Hawke in the time of her digestion, and may cause a crasie Hawke to
cast before her due time, and even to throw up her meat and all as most
certainly I have seen it done.

Therefore, as it is a thing very medicinable and powerful for those things,
for which by nature it serves, being rightly given; so also, it is as
vnmedicinable and hurtful if it be otherwise used: wherefore, understand you
thus much of the virtue and operation of the same; this weed here spoken of,
and called by the name of worme-wood, it is of force to loosen, scowre, and
purge gross and abounding humors from the stomach, and is meetest to be
given with stones when your Hawke has cast in the morning, and is through
empty, and especially after a great gorge that she has stood long on, and that
you fear surfering on the same: for it does mightily refresh the stomach and
body after large feeding, it kills worms in the same and resists
rottenness, and this observation ought to be held in any thing that is given
unto those poor Birds, the grief should be certainly known in all things
accordingly for remedy thereof.

You may perceive this disease oft-times by croking or hatling in the gorge, or
throat. To wash your Hawks meat in hearhow^d, or woodbine water is also very
good
CHAP. XXII. A very good water to give unto any Hawke that is perceived to be
subject unto drought and heat in the stomach, or else where inwardly.
TAke about an ounce and a half, or two ounces of french barley, and wash it
well in fair water, and put it into a pipkin or posnet with some reasonable
store of fair water, and let that boil three or four wa^mes and no more,
then cleanse away that water, and put to it as much more, and let that boil
even so long; also then throw that away, then the third time put to it at the
least a quart of fair water, and let that boil half an hour, or until it
come unto a pint, then strain that through a linen cloth from the barley,
and put into it as much sugar candy as will make it indifferent sweet, and
let them boil a little together, then after when it is cold, as often as you
do feed your Hawke, give some of it with your meat unto her, for three or
four days together, and no more, for it will not last; and therefore then you
must provide you of new after this manner, so long as you shall have cause to
use it which will not be long, for certainly I have seen it with one making
and using to cool and recover a very hot and dry Hawke that would not by any
means be filled full of flesh, or thrive in a long time before.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the frown.
AS concerning the frownce or heat, or both so termed, that is, thought to
proceed from forth the body of the Hawke, but cannot be directly known,
until trial be made by the Faulconer in the cure thereof, when as if he do
then duly observe, he may with judgment find out the original cause and
place from whence it does proceed, and so to use a certain means for remedy
thereof.

As for example, when you do find your Hawks mouth and throat to be
continually froathy and furred with white, then you may think and mistrust the
same to proceed out of the inner parts, and therefore must needs be said out of
the body: nevertheless as there is several places that thorough
distemperature therein, may seem upward such and the like annoiance; so also
you must out of your judgment and skill, use sundry means for remedy as
occasion shall serve.

And first for the stomach which is the pannell, and is nearest unto you, and
easiest to be searched: to begin withal it is therefore most meetest, and for
trial of that place and to be thoroughly resolved, whether that infirmity of
heat showing and appearing in the mouth, do grow from thence or no, use no
other thing but stones out of fair water morning or evening, as you shall find
your Hawke orderly to cast them, as if she use to sit long in the morning
before she do cast, then leave of that time, and provide for the night to let
her always have them, and assure your self that in good time they will purge
and cleanse that place of all superfluous heat, or other humors that were
gathered in the same, and the fume and annoiance thereof will be gone, the
which will show and be manifested in the mouth and throat: for they will be
clearly cleansed of the same: but if you do not find this order and means to
be answearable to your expectation very suddenly; then you may be sure there is
a further and a more dangerous ground and cause of the same infirmity, which
you ought more carefully to look unto, and provide for it another remedy, you
may be assured it is the liver that is diseased, and as it is seldom or never
mistrusted, so also it is a thing as little or no whit at all ever feared, but
certainly in this case that must needs be the part that is amiss; for there
are no other places but those two, which provoke that noisome and fuming heat
to ascend in that manner up into the gorge, the throat and mouth. And for the
stomach I have here set down a present and sure means with stones, and a
well ordered diet how to cool and destroy it in that place; then of necessity
it must needs depend of the liver, and the corruption thereof, which is the
cause that stones take no effect in the stomach: and for the liver to amend
and stay the inflammation and superfluous heat thereof, you must provide some
of the distilled water of sorrel, and whenever you do give your Hawke
stones give them out of that water, and some of it with them, also give it with
the meat you feed withal, the which you must have respect unto, and that it
may be easy in disgestion, and never on great gorge, until she be cured, but
easy gorges and the oftener: Also if you be disposed you may put into the same
water a little slice of rubarbe to infuse; for it is a very special thing to
preserve the liver: and these things with this order well observed, will both
cool the liver and the stomach, and free your Hawke clean from this disease.
And so much of this grief or infirmity that some men do call heat in the
stomach, others call it heat in the body or frownce, or the wet frownce.

CHAP. XXIIII. A medicine to kill and destroy the frownce, that does clean or
eat into any part of the mouth, tongue, or throat, where you may come to
dress it.
TAke a sawcerfull of the best white wine vinegar that you can get or may be
gotten, or more or less as you shall think good for the quantity you mean
to make, and into the same put three or four red sage leaves, and boil them a
prettied pace, then take the powder of burnt alum a pretty quantity and put
into it, and let it boil even one walme or two and no more, then take it off
and put it into a glass and there keep it: also if you do find the Frownce to
be very dangerous, take as much brimstone as two small nuts, beaten very small,
and put that into a linen cloth and tie it fast, then let the same be steeped
in the rest, a day and a night, which done, take it forth and crush it, or
streine as much of the juice as you can into the vinegar, and throw the other
away: and this will destroy any frown in the world, if the Hawke be orderly
dressed: For otherwise the best medicine that ever was, is but of little worth:
Therefore you must understand in what sort you ought to dress her, to the end
to prevent the tediousnes of the same, and the heating and turmoiling of the
poor Hawke, which amongst many men have no end, but with the loss of her
life: on this consideration you must remember in the cure of any such or other
thing inward-inwardlie or outwardly, (wherein consists and depends the
distemper of the whole body and hazard of life,) that as the one day you do
apply your salve, or other medicine to correct the raging humor or infection of
the infirmity, so must you the other day give rest, nourishment, and good
usage, withal to comfort, preserve, and hold strong the heart and body: for
otherwise your art is nothing worth, and your labor is all in vain. Therefore
if the frownce be never so rank, or never so little at the first dressing,
take of the scale to the quick, and with the tip of a feather lay on two or
three drops of the water, being warmed in a spoone, and so the next day, and
after but once in three days; and so use it being sure that you do never pull
of any scale, or scal to make it bleed, if you can choose: but only that
which will come gently away, for if you do, it will not heal, do what you
can, but scab and eat in further and further, the mouth is too tender, and
many Hawks are destroyed that way with often dressing, rubbing and fretting a
thing so tender as a Hawks mouth is: but otherwise with this water and this
order rightly observed, there is no frownce howsoever it grows or is entered;
but it will suddenly cure, and destroy it without all doubt.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Pantas.
THe Pantas is a disease that in all my life I have not had one Hawke infected
withal, neither did I ever hear or know of any other man's that had it, that
ever could be cured of it: and therefore if I should prescribe you any fained
or new devised medicine for it, I should both do my self wrong, and deceive
many others in so doing, therefore it is best for every man to fear it, and
ever to be careful to prevent and preserve his Hawke by good usage from it. The
grief is very easy at the first to be decerned: for after a little bating
she will begin to fetch her breath thick with panting; after as it more
increases she will show it by laboring in her pannell, even as she does sit
still: Also as it further grows, her lights do dry or wast, she will be
forced to gape for breath after she has a little stirred, and then there is
no remedy for it: but if at the first beginning, thorough the diligence and
skill of her keeper, it may be discried there is no doubt: but it may be
prevented and her life preserved. The which to effect, take a quarter of a
pound of the best sweet butter, and put it into dammaske rose water, and there
preserve and keep it very close: and as you have need to use it, which must be
very often; take some of it forth, and with the powder of rue and the powder of
saffron, and a little brown sugar candy mingled well together, make a pellet
or two and give every morning unto your Hawke for a week together very early
in the morning, and keep her very warm continually, and if it have not
taken too deep root this will cure and help i^* For these things are special
preservatives and remedies against the stopping, drying, or wasting of the
longs, and other places from whence this disease or infirmity do proceed; you
must keep your butter by itself continually in rose water, and your powder in
a paper until you have need, and then mix them and use them.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Crocke and the Crampe.
THe Crocke and the Crampe are two very dangerous eu^ls, and in the nature and
condition of their griefs they are much a like; yet a difference there is, and
also some hope of recovery, if they be taken in time. The Crampe may be taken
at any time of the year when the Hawke has been flowne, and is perfectly
inseamed and clean, only with taking cold after hard flying and toyling:
therefore beware how you do set your Hawks in cold places, at such times,
for more evils do grow thereon then is imagined or thought on: also, her body
inwardly may be possessed of the same, and even foundered as it were or
frettized with the like, and this one way may the Crampe be taken. And for the
Crocke, that infirmity also may be taken at any time thorough ill usage; but if
you have observed it, it has been most oftenest taken after their immediate
drawing, before they be thoroughly inseamed and clean, as with taking cold
after they have bated and het their grease, and with spowting and washing after
they have stirred and het themselves, or with over streining them in that case
and by striving, and through negligence hanging by the heels. Also after, in
the time of loosing, being laden with belles, a metled Hawk may with great
labor in seeking to prey take the same infirmity, but if it be not in grease
it will soonest be recovered: Again otherwise, they may have these infirmities
joined together, and then the use of their ioints will be taken from them, and
they will only lie down: whereas then there is seldom or never any remedy
but death, for it is in the highest degree of both the diseases: And if you
will look back toward the midst of this book, whereas I have advised you
to beware how you do spowte or wash your metled Hawks newly taken from the
mew, there shall you find necessary instructions how to prevent such evils,
and preserve your Hawks from the like and other inward infirmities: and so
much of the nature and condition of these sundty diseases.

CHAP. XXVII. For the Crampe.
IF you be well assured when your Hawke does take the Crampe, that she is
clean and perfectly inseamed, and ftee from grease, then must you resolve and
endeavor your self to cure her with continual moderate heat outwardly, the
which you must provide and prepare for her in this sort. Take a large brass
pot and fill it with fair water, into the which put two or three good handful
of sage, both red and white, and also as much Polopody of the O^ke and boil
them in the pot, the which you must cover with woollen clothes very thick:
for otherwise your Hawke will be hot too soon, or cold too soon which must
not be, but a temperate heat ought to be kept continually with the Hawke lying
on it: also, it is meet that you do give one cloue of garlic every morning,
for one week together, to the end to open her pipes and veins, and to expel
the inward cold from thence that has possessed or benumbed her, and if you
mistrust any grease to be in her that has been ouer-heat, then her body will
be much windy inwardly; and it will be good for you to purge and consume that
away, The Rue wastes and consumes ^^^de, it cutteth and digesteth tongue
humors, the wormwood purges and cleanses them away.
and other gross and tuffe humors as evil possessors of the same place, and
does increase that disease: for the which, take a little of the leaf of Rue,
and as much of the wormwood exceedingly shred with a sharp knife, and mingle
it with sweet-butter, and a little suger-candy, and when you would use it make
it into pellets and give one or two of them unto your Hawke, two or three
mornings in the week, and with this course well observed and used, make no
doubt but it will mend and make sound your Hawke. Also do you take out of the
pot often times some of the Polopode and sage in their fuming heat, and lay it
before the Hawke that she may taste it at her nares so long as it smoakes, for
it is a very special thing against that disease.

CHAP. XXVIII. To recover and cure a Hawke that has taken the Crock in her
flying time through any kind of accident.
WHen your Hawke has taken the crocke thorough any misfortune, as I make no
question but you have seen a Hawk to scratch off her hood, and sitting abroad
would so bate and strive in her lease that before she cold be conveniently
taken to the fist, has even crockt again and again, all which proves that
through such accidents and disordered occasions, yourcoie Hawks may come by
the like diseases. And for cure thereof the best remedy that ever I could find
to be joined with rest and ease, is the spirit of wine, the which you must
prepare and make in this fashion. Take half a pint of claret wine, or more or
less as you shall see cause for the quantity you mean to make, and put it
into a service dish of silver, if you have it, or otherwise into a dish of the
best pewter that you can get, and cover it with another dish of equal
proportion and bigness very close. Also into the same you must put a little
sugercandy, three or four thin slices of the whitest ginger, as many browsed
cloves, and boil all these on a chafing dish, over a soft fire, which you must
keep with temperate blowing, and now and then take off the uppermost dish, and
with a feather strike the moisture that hangs thereon into some thing, wherein
you may keep it safe, and always when you do feed your Hawke give her a
little of it with her meat, being sure to give her quiet rest and warmth
withal, and this will recover her without all doubt; but if she have taken
this disease before she be inseamed, then is it so much the more dangerous;
yet nevertheless if the Crampe have not also joined with it, and ceazed on her
and taken away the use of her external parts, she may with good usage be
recovered and brought to health again. The which to effect, look a little
back, and there you shall find a scowring made of Rue and Worme-wood, with
some other things the which you must purge your Hawke with all, at such times
and so often as you are there directed; for it serves for both the infirmities
when they be taken in grease, or as if they were united in one Hawke together.

As you do boil your wine, you ought to have knowledge and perseverance when
the heart and spirit thereof does fade or decay, the which to understand, is as
that do die, so the strength thereof cease to yield any more plentiful
store of moisture, and then you must provide you of new wine and other things
to increase your store withal. And as this thing is special good for any
Hawke that has taken this forenamed disease, by ouerstriuing, or streining her
self or other misfortune, so is it also as good to be given unto any sick or
weak Hawke to comfort and strengthen her withal, and to sweeten the inward
parts after the casting of the gorge, or any other occasion that may cause the
body inwardly and breath to be unsavory: also it prouokes appetite, and does
quicken digestion.

Whereas heretofore I have showed that in all sorts of Hawks, how much more
easier it is to preserve and hold health, that being safely employed, then
afterward when it is lost and decayed to seek to restore or renew it again.
The performance thereof I also do assure you must rest and remain in the
dutiful diligence, and continual honest care and pains of the Faulconer, his
mind must seldom be off on them, his eye ever on them, and himself never from
them at times befitting for himself and them. And then when other men that be
of a more lazy and negligent disposition shall have their Hawks miscarry and
decay, he shall be sure to keep his long alive, and safe from many evil
accidents, and inward and outward misfortunes that otherwise may fall upon
them, and often do, through sloth and ignorance in their keepers.

CHAP. XXIX. Of diseases that happen to Hawks, on their legs or feet.
IT is now meet and necessary that I do speak of such infirmities, as do
befall oftentimes unto Hawks, on their legs and feet, and do appear
outwardly in swelled knobs or knots, to the great torment and vexation of these
poor birds that have them: also, it is as fit I let you understand which way,
and of what they do proceed, and how you may prevent them. Then know you for
certain, that for the most part they do only grow with taking cold, after
your Hawks have flowne and chafed their bodies and blood, and distempered both
with immoderate labor, and afterward are not considered of their Keeper; but
so soon as they are fed, and oft-times with cold and stale meat, even up to
their throats, which at an instant ingendreth one evil or other in them; then
they are set down (what weather soever it be) on the cold ground, to sit and
trample and rest them: and whereas (they) poor birds, do take their utter
destruction very often, both inwardly and outwardly, as sometimes it will
appear by cold in the head, distemper in the body, and ill humors that do
distill and fall down into the legs and feet, appearing in gowtes, and such
other things as I have before named.

Also, at some other time when your Hawke is drawn into the brook with a
foul, after she has flowne and labored and is hot inwardly; although she be
presently carried away to be dried, yet afterward when night is come, she is
no more cared for, nor thought on then the rest, but even set up altogether on
some cold perch, and in some cold place where she receives her bane.

I do speak it out of my own experience, and have been an eye witness of the
same: for I have known diverse Hawks destroyed this way, and thorough these
occasions: Therefore let me advise every man to take heed, and beware how he
sets his Hawke down on the cold ground after his flight to the brook in the
winter time, if he do pretend and desire to avoid and shun such sundry
evils, that proceed on this occasion, besides some orher inconveniences that
do belong to the same, as for such Hawks as you do use and are accustomed to
be set down after their flying and feeding; to the end to trample and
quallifie the heat of their late desire; they will ever after unquietly look
for it, if they want it, and will not be pleased not contented without it: but
what have soever the Faulconer has on his way, or how late it is, or how far
soever unto his home, or what weather soever it be, yet they must be waited on
while they are quiet, sitting on the cold ground, and thus must the Faulconer
attend on them, it may be one quarter of an hour, or if it be less, yet long
enough for them to take their destruction; or else in riding of half a dozen
mile, they will never be at rest, which from my own home has been the
easiest, and shortest of my iournies to and from my hawking, which intolerable
toil in all seasons I do wish unto no Faulconer, if he may with conuenience
shun, or shift it for his own sake, and also his poor Hawks, that after
their labor and toil are forced quietly or unquietly to endure it, more
oftener to their torment and utter destruction, then a number of masters can
imagine or do ever think of, although it is the destruction and decay of many
Hawks, I have had two or three cast of Hawks under my own government:
nevertheless have used to quiet and cool them at such times on the fist; in
which course I have diverse ways received much content to my self, and the
like in my Hawks, and so shall whosoever he be that does follow the same in
both.

CHAP. XXX. A medicine for the Crampe that has ceased only on the legs and
feet.
WHen you do perceive by your Hawke that she has the crampe in her legs and
feet, and that there only she is benumbed with the same, then you must
provide some of the roots of pionie, and dry them and beat them to powder,
then make a little bag of fine linen, and put the powder therein, and all day
as near as you can lay the bag, or hold it where the Hawke may taste or smell
it at her nares: and when night does come hang it conveniently with an inckle
string about her neck, and in using this course it will help and amend her of
that evil.

CHAP. XXXI. Another remedy for the crampe which has been credibly reported
unto me to have cured Hawks that has lain long on that disease, and could
not be cured.
TAke the root called Brianie, and cleave it that you may conveniently fasten
it about the Hawks leg, and let her were it on that fashion: Also let it lie
close by her beak that she may taste it, and it will cure her: also take the
bone that is in the knee joint of a hare and on the hinder leg, and put it in
the end of the finger of a glove, and so unto the bewit of the Hawke, and let
her wear it there, and it will cure her: for most certainly I did of very
late years cure one Hawke, with it my self that was very much troubled with
it, and diverse people have sent unto me for them, and have reported that they
have had great ease by them.

CHAP. XXI. To cure a swelling in the leg or foot of the Hawke, or any part
thereof.
SOmetimes there will arise and grow a kind of swelling on the leg or foot of
your Hawke; which being suffered to continue long on some places thereof: will
grow dangerous and hard to be taken away: which otherwise are very easy to be
removed, yet I have heard of diverse opinions to the contrary, that have given
advice, not to meddle at the first with them, but to let them grow aleaging
that as yet, they be not ripe, because they can neither feel them very hard
nor very soft, but assure your self that is not the best course to be used,
for so they may with continuance eat so near the bone and sinews, whereby
the same may be afterward perished in the cure or otherwise it may fall into
the foot and joint, from whence all the singles do shoot and grow, which is
the hardest place of all to be recovered, there is so many veins and sinews in
that place for the humor to feed upon, wherefore even so soon as you do find
and perceive any of these things to appear in any of these places, in swelled
knobs or knots hard or soft, take a knife very sharp at the point, and slit
the place all along and long-waies on the leg or foot, whereas you shall find
the flesh to be within of a spungie and hollow substance, then if you perceive
it to be so thick with corrupt flesh or skin, fear not to clip it away on
both sides that you may come so much the nearer to the bottom, and when you
have so done, take a little of the water that I have set down for the frownce,
and warm it, and wash the place well with a feather until it do leave
bleeding: then take out of the aforesaid water as much of a sage leaf as will
cover the sore place and lay it on, and there use means to keep it, until it
do dry and stick fast thereunto, and then every day twice or thrice with a
feather do well moisten the leaf and place where it does lie with the same
water, if it be possible not stirring the leaf, but if you cannot force it to
stick fast; nevertheless if you wash it well with this water it will surely
kill the rank, and eating and swelling humor on what place soever it do
grow: some men when they do perceive first these kind of things to arise, and
grow on any part of the leg or foot of their Hawks, they do partly begin to
dispose themselves to chafe, and anoint them with one kind of oil or other,
hoping by that means to assuage and take away the swelling, but they were as
good to practice on a stone and seek to molifie that; for as I have showed you
these things do proceed of an unkind humor, whereby where it does rest and
settle, it corrupts the flesh, and being suffered, in time it conuerteth into
white eating curnels increasing, and are even in the same nature as frownces
be, and must be searched to the bottom, and destroyed with a sharp drying
medicine, I have cured a number of these kind of swellings only with this
water and the same manner of dressing, as of very late I cured a Hawke of my
lord Comptons, a Gos-hawke, that I was enforced first to slit her with a knife,
from her ear unto her nare, and close by her eye, and then to clip away all
the skin and flesh to the bones, and to her throat and killed her ranckor of
the humor that was in the very nature and likeness of a garget, and also
took diverse white curnels out of it, whereof one of them was as big as a
great bean, and had eaten clean through into the mouth; and this I clearly
destroyed and healed again within the month only with this water.

Also, if this kind of swelling do begin to grow on the very joint of the
foot, either on the top, or on either side, or between any of the singles, so
it be any thing upward, fear not to give ve^t unto it, being sure to have your
knife set for the purpose, with the back of the point ground away, that you
may carry it upward and go not too deep, yet be sure to pierce both the skin
and corr^pted flesh to the bottom: Likewise, you must have care to lance it
longwaies as the sinnewes do run, for otherwise, to cross either the leg
or the foot, you may endanger them and so spoil the Hawke: Thus with this
water and order in the usage of it, you may kill and destroy any of these kind
of infirmities that all Hawks are subject unto, and from whence does proceed
that which we term and call by the name of the gowte, and from no other
thing, and only with suffering and giving liberty unto the humor to plant it
self too deep before it be corrected: furthermore, if any or such like
swellings do begin to show under the sides of the foot, or under any of the
singles where the warts do grow and the sinnewes run; and whereas it is very
dangerous to cut or meddle with any such instrument, then you must take some
baie salt burned and beat to dust, and put it into, as it were, a little bag
made of purpose to hold it close, and by convenient means bind it unto the
swelled place in time, even so soon as it is first perceived, and this will
correct and kill the humor and dry it clean away.

CHAP. XXXIII. To burn your salt.
YOu must take a good handful of bay salt and put it fast into a course linen
cloth, then wet it well in water, and as you would roste a warden, so do you
that, in the hot embers for half an hour; and then it will be as hard as a
stone, then when you have cause to use it, scrape it, and apply it as is
aforesaid, and it will destroy any of those moist humors.

CHAP. XXXIIII. Of the pin in Hawks feet.
WHereas for the pin, it has been generally advised for the cure thereof, to
set the Hawke grieved with the same upon salt, which medicine, of mine own
knowledge is far unfit for such an evil, and also for the same; for salt is
hot and dry and will destroy and dry up a moist and waterish humor: and
contrariwise, the pin grows in the bales of the feet of unquiet Hawks in
the mew, who there does batter and bruise them with flying up and down and
falling on hard perches, until their feet be so sore that they dare not fly
any longer, but are forced to rest for fear to fall; then in which time of
quietness and rest which she is forced unto, through the same fear, the
bruised flesh and blood does dry up and grow to hard knots and coares in the
flesh, the anguish whereof will quickly make the foot to swell: therefore, in
this case it is not possible to do any good with any such thing that dries;
because this disease it self is dry, and dryness ought to be moistened, and
moistnes must be dried.

CHAP. XXXV. To cure the pin.
YOu must have your Hawke well and easily cast, and with a sharp knife search
and pare out the pin, or core, or corn, for they are all one, the which if
it have not planted it self to deep amongst the sinnewes, whereby to annoy
and hurt them, it will easily be amended, the which to effect and bring to an
end, you must have from the Apothecaries a salve, which he will make you at an
instant of these things. Namely, galbanon, white pitch, and venus turpentine,
the which you must use in this sort. Take a little of the finest lether that
may be got, If there be any hole in the bottom of the foot, dip a little
lint into fresh butter melted in a spoone, and put into it under the plaster,
and make you plasters of the same with your salve to use at your need, as
broad as the ball of her foot, and apply the same unto it, having provided of
other soft lether, as a means to keep it on that it may not remain; and so
dress it thrice in the week, and with all let her sit very soft and warm,
and this will cure her out of all doubt.

CHAP. XXXVI. To cure a strain in the foot, or any part thereof.
When you do perceive that your Hawke has caught a strain in the maine
joint, or in any of the lesser ioints of the singles, which will appear by
the heat and extraordinary burning that will be felt in the member and place
where it rests, then do you take a little of the oil of excetor, the which
you shall have at the Apothecaries, after vi. d or viij d the ounce: and keep
it in a little glass, and when you have occasion to use it, put two or three
drops in a spoone, and at morning and evening rub and chafe it well into the
place where the grief lies: and when you have so done, moisten a fine linen
cloth in the oil and wrap about the place, and wet another cloth also to
keep it warm and suppell: for otherwise if it take cold it will not be cured.
Also, if it fall out that the strain do happen on any of the tallent or
pownce ioints, whereby you do perceive that place only to swell, take heed
how you do lance or cut it, for that is a very tender and dangerous place to
open, and amongst the sinews where it may prove a long continued sore:
therefore, when any such thing does light on that place, then first take your
coping yrons and cut that talent to the quick, and let out a pretty deal of
the rank, and distempered blood that otherwise would conieale and settle in
the place and hardly after be removed, then have some old knife ready hot in
the fire, and sear it to stay the blood; which done anoint the pained place
well with the said oil of Excetor, and wrappe a cloth about it well oyled,
then you must have like the finger of a glove of lether to pull over all with
the talent out, and so make it fast with a drawing thread, that you may open it
and conuaie in a little oil at the top to keep it moist and suppell withal:
and so let it tarry on all the week, and this oil and this order well
observed and Kept with warmth and rest, will cure her for certain: for this is
a very special thing to comfort the sinnewes ouerstrained, and to cure and
assuage the anguish of the strain, and bring it to right perfection again, as
has been often proved,

CHAP. XXXVII. To cure a sudden or new swelling that comes by a blow,
bruise or any other accident unto the legs or feet.
TAke some of the oil of baye, and some aquauitae, and beat them well
together, and therewith anoint and chafe the swelled place very well, and when
you have so done, wet well a linen cloth in the same oil, and wrap about it:
Also with another cloth, or else a coat of leather to keep it warm, that no
air may pierce or touch it: and this assuredly will assuage the swelling, take
away the pain, and bring it to the right temper again: Also for the like
grief, if you have not this oil of baies in a readiness, then in stead
thereof take a little of your Bacon grease, that has been skimmed and
preserved from a pot, wherein Bacon was boiled by it self; and use it either
by it self; or with Aquauitae, anointing and chafing gently and well the
pained place therewith, and assure your self it will amend it: for there is
not a more better thing for any new swelling that comes by accident: And
furthermore do you remember that whereas in all these things I have advised you
to keep them warm and give rest, so also you must be sure to do so long as
there is any defect remaining, or left behind in the member. For otherwise if
you do apply these things never so often, or any other whatsoever can be
found, or imagined to be meet, and fit to be used to such purpose, and omit
others the principals in the like cases: namely ease and warmeth, with good
usage, your labor is ill bestowed, and whatsoever you have done, it shall
profit you nothing at all: For these are but members and branches of the body,
and have their particular nourishment and ease from the same. And therefore to
distemper (that) you do hurt unto all the rest, and surely many Hawks are
spoiled, and have their lives shortened only with ill government, and disorder
in these cases in spite, of the best appliments in the world.

CHAP. XXXVIII. For the falling sickness in a Hawke which you shall perceive
by her dizimes.
TAke a handful of the leaves of pellitarie of Spain and stompe it and streine
it: Then take a spoonefull of sallet oil, and mingle them well together, and
put into each ear three or four drops, and also some into her nares, and by
and by suck it all out at her nares again, or as much as you can get out, and
this will cure her of that disease: but be sure to keep her warm after in
some dark place, or else in such a hood that will afford her no light at all,
or otherwise if she will be quiet clean without a hood.

CHAP. XXXIX. To cure the biting of a mad Dog.
IF by misfortune your Hawke should be bitten with a mad Dog, as it has been
my own hap so to have a cast and in great danger of their lives, then at the
very first be ye sure that you do make water as forcibly as you can into the
wound, where you shall perceive and see the black and cloddered blood to lie,
for that is the nature of the venomous infection thereof so to do, but
thereupon you shall see it to bleed out fresh and kindly blood, which if it so
fall out, it is a special means of the cure; whereas otherwise if it have but
any time to rest, it will so disperse and spread it self into every part and
member, as that it will be incurable: then when you have done and clipped away
the feathers, that you may come conveniently unto the place, you must apply
unto it twice a day as much of the perfect balsome as the wound shall deserve
to have: Also you must give her inwardly for three or four days, with her
meat a little of Unicorns horn in powder, or otherwise of Hearts horn: and
with this I have most assuredly cured a cast that was most cruelly bitten and
torn.

CHAP. XXXX. Another very good medicine against the biting of a Mad dog.
Be sure at the very first to make water into the wound: Then take some of the
keenest onions you can possibly get, and beat them as small as may be, then
take some salt and honey and put into the same thing to the unions, and there
beat and mingle all together, and make thereof a salve, and apply it unto the
bitten place, and this will take away the pain and sorenes, and destroy the
poison, and the Hawke shall do well.

CHAP. XXXXI. To cure any new wound that may befall unto your Hawke by accident.
TAke the down that comes of cardus benedictus when the seed is ripe, and
apply unto it only, and it will cure it without any pain.

CHAP. XXXXII. To kill the ranckenesse and itching that sometimes will be in
Hawks bloody feathers, which is the cause she pulls them forth in that estate.
SOme Faulconers when they find their Hawks or Hawke thereunto disposed, will
presently to prevent the same ill quality that she is provoked unto, all to
balm or anoint her feathers, and place where they grow, with some kind of
bitter and noisome thing; but that only will not serve the turn, because as
I showed, she is unkindly urged thereunto thorough a rank and itching
quallitie that the same feathers are possessed withal, by means of some blow or
bruise they have by mischance taken in their breeding and growing: and to cure
the same take a pint of vinegar of the best, and into the same put two rasins
of ginger grated to dust, and let that boil a good space with two or three
branches of rue, and when the vinegar is much wasted, put in as much Allam as a
wal-nut, and half a spoonefull of honnie, and let them all boil even a
little: Then take it of, and whenever you have occasion to use it, warm a
little of it, and with a feather lay it on that, or those feathers that is
amiss: And this will take the rancknes and itching quite away; besides if the
feather have been much bruzed or crased, so it be cross cracked it will heal
and make it so sound that it shall shoot forth and do well again.

Here follows a note of the temperature and virtue of those those things that
I have written of before, and commended unto you to be powerful and
medicinable, and fit to be used in physic: for the amending and curing of
such infirmities and diseases as do belong unto all Hawks.


Rubarbe.




Rubarbe though it be of nature hot; yet it may be very safely given in those
diseases of the liver, which proceed from heat as well as those which proceed
from cold.



Hawks meat through it and feed withal: you may also give it in powder, and it
is very good: you may also infuse it in fair running water, and so use it when
you have need, or in any of your former cool waters.

Rewe.




Saffron.


or raw humors of the stomach, it opens the lungs, and remoueth
obstructions, or stoppings.

Myrre.
Arabia, it is abstersive and exsiccatiue, it kills worms, it is good for
the stomach, and resists putrefaction, this is to be given in powder.

Musterd seed.




Wormwood.




Cloves.




Liuer-woort.




Sorrel.


Mintes.




Borage and Buglosse.




Hearts tongue.




Rosemarie.




Sage.




Hoarehound.
The distilled water is to be used.
and is special good for all stoppings in those places, and against all
shortness and difficulty of breathing.

Honey suckle or Woodbine.


horehound is much cooling and very good to give unto any hot and dry Hawke.

Cardus Benedictus.
Cardus Benedictus, that is to say, the blessed thistle: which for the
operation and virtue that God has given unto it, may well be so called; the
properties whereof have been diligently and carefully gathered out of the
Hearbals of diverse and sundry learned writers.

This herb being very small and finely minced, or shred, mingled with sweet
butter and sugercandie, and now and then given in a morning unto your Hawke in
a pellet, or pellets; freeth the head of dizines, and purges the same and
whole body of all cold infirmities.

The powder thereof also now and then given in the same manner, or cleanly
conuayed into a bit of meat, preuenteth the same, or drives it away when it
is gotten

Also, it helps the weakness of the stomach and causes a good appetite to
meat, it does ripe and digest tough slime or glut that comes of cold, and
brings up that which is in the pannell, scowring the same of all gross
humors, and causes to fetch breath more easily: it is a special thing to
prevent the infection that comes, or is taken from one Hawke unto another: or
after it has ceased or is entered into her body: if suddenly the powder be
given and often while she is strong, it will expel the poison from the very
heart: It preserves the liver, lungs, and all other inward parts of the body:
The distilled water thereof has the same effects, and wastes and consumes
all evil humors, and preserves those that be good: and it is special good to
give unto any Hawke immediately after a blow or bruise.

You may give this herb any of these ways, and shall have good proof of
their virtues: First in the green leaves: secondly in the powder: thirdly in
the juice: and fourthly in the distilled water: and also in the licker wherein
the herb is boiled: For the most part the virtue that is in the one, is in
them all: so that in diverse diseases for the which the herb is medicinable:
for the lack of the one, you may use the other, and all are special
preservatives almost against, all inward and outward diseases, Also you must
understand that the powder, and water of the herb is most to be regarded, and
especially the water: for they may be longest kept and preserved, so that you
may have them always in a readiness to use as need shall require: when as you
cannot have the juice or the green leaves: and the water which is free from
bitterness, may be given with meat by it self alone, for the stomach and
taste will bear it, and like of it as well as of any other sweet water,

As touching the quantity of it, you need not be so careful as of other
things that do purge strongly; for in them there is great danger of death in
giving too much, otherwise no good done in using too little: but in this herb
it is not so, you may use your own discretion with reasonable judgment and
cannot do amiss: And thus much of this herb called Cardus Benedictus, the
which is so special and powerful, that it is meet for every man to have it
always by them in a readiness to use on any occasion for which it serves,
and also not to think it sufficient to give it once but to use it often times
together.

Herb Angel: or the Angelical, or Angelike herb.
Angelica is another excellent thing, and as it is affirmed by diverse learned
writers that the properties and virtue thereof is much like unto the other, and
that if the one be lacking, the other may be taken. The learned men of Germany
write thus of it, that if any man, or other thing be suddenly taken with
poison, or other evil air of infection. Let the powder of the root mingled
with some of the distilled water be given inwardly, and it presently helps.
Also the powder of the root being given with the distilled water of Cardus
Benedictus is of the like virtue, and will cleanse the body of any poisoned
infection newly taken.

They say also that the leaves of Angelica beaten with the leaves of Rue and
honey will cure the bitings of mad dogs, or any other venomous thing, also
with all some of the water wherein the root and leaves of Angelica is boiled
must be taken, or given into the body of either Hawke, or whatsoever it be that
shall have the like misfortune. (*)

FINIS.

