Faults escaped.
Page, Lin. Faults. Corrections. 80. 9. in them* and were in them. 219. 14.
Tius Titus 230. 25. ^ that Dioceses were ^ 231. 11. 25 85 241. 33. ture be
subverted, 71. in margin Act. 3*6. Act. 6.3. 163. in marg. Mat. 86. Math. 16.

The Christian Reader will pardon the rest.

Mr HENRY BARROWES PLATFORM. Which may serve, as a Preparative to purge away
Prelatisme: with some other parts of Popery. Made ready to be sent from Miles
Mickle-bound to Much-beloved- England. Together with some other memorable
things. And, A familiar Dialogue, in and with the which, all the several
matters contained in this book, are set forth and interlaced. After the
untimely death of the penman of the foresaid Platform and his fellow prisoner;
who being constant witnesses in points apperteyning to the true worship of God,
and right government of his Church, sealed up their testimony with their blood:
And patiently suffered the stopping of their breath, for their love to the LORD.

Anno 1593. Printed for the year of better hope.

To such as are already true Christians, and all that desire so to be; health
and salutation, in the Author of salvation.
THis Conference or Discourse between Desiderius and my self: Together with
other things of excellent argument, (worthily beloved,) was for your sakes (by
our mutual consent) put to printing. Reap therefore the benefit thereof, and
defend it from the unjust cavils of all that set against the same. And for the
literal faults therein, amend with the pen I pray you, as they are espied in
the reading. And if in the materials, all things hang not well togeither in
your sense, consider them better by the word of God, and what agrees therewith,
cast not away; neither receive any thing that dissenteth therefrom. But try all
things, and keep that which is good.

M. M.

TAke wings o Book and fly abroad with speed,
The things in thee are good for men to reed;
Which have not seen what thou can to them show,
And what thou speakst is meet for all to know:
Who would discern some things amiss that be,
Within the Land of our Nativitee:
To such thou shall be judged wondrous kind,
Because thou can right well inform their mind:
In such a sort as they shall bettred be,
And well advantaged by the things in thee.
Yet foes enough thou shall be sure to find,
Among Priests that have the souls of many pinde:
And Prelates too, which very seldom preach,
Or suffer those that carefully would teach
Gods truth, and give Christ's sheep their wholesome food,
All such Restreyners make the sinful brood.
And of that Rank not one of them is found,
That feeds the flock in wholesome pasture ground.
If such bring food, they poison give withal,
Which proves worse then wormwood mixed with gall.
They suffer not the milk of Gods word pure,
To work upon the souls of men a cure:
Though sincere milk thereof, that some is it,
Which makes for God the soul of each man fit.
And thou directs them in no other wise,
Nor would have any follow such men's guise;
As will not to that wholesome Word bend care,
And all his paths unto Iehovahs sear.
A Dialogue or Discourse, passing between Desiderius and Miles Micklebound, by
occasion of their old love and new meeting.
Miles Micklebound. RIght glad am I to see you Desiderius: but who ever would
have thought to have met you here in these parts? Some great and weighty cause
doubtless has occasioned you to come hither. But I pray tell me, how do all
our friends in England, and what good news bring you from thence?


Desiderius. It may be thought a wonder to see your self here (my much beloved
Miles*) for it was reported that you were at Rome, that you were the Popes
scholar, etc. But I am glad to see you so far from his city of seven hills,
where his seat is. And that putts me in better hope concerning you then others
have.


Miles For certain Desiderius, I am and always have been, further off and more
opposi^e to the Popes religion and learning, then now distant from his city
and seat, where I never yet came not purpose to come, unless I should happen
to long for fire and faggot.


Desiderius. That increases my hope, and to bring like joy unto your self,
know this, that our friends in England are generally well, as I see you are,
whereof I am not a little joyeux.


Miles. And how goes it with religion? Are there not good hopes for reformation?


Desiderius. The hopes that way, are as few and small as ever they were;
Howbeit that which you call reformation, others do count deformation.


Miles. But how then is it with the Prelates, Are they so proud; or do they
dominiere and bear like sway as heretofore?


Desid. Yea doubtless. For there are none that are put down more then the
Puritans (as they are called,) nor none that rise up faster then the Prelates,
as you call them.


Miles. Then in deed there can be no present hope, for Bishops and the abuses
brought in by them, are a bane to the beawtie of true religion, and do greatly
hinder all sound and sincere walking therein.


Desider. Multitudes are otherwise minded then you are, and many wiser then I
do think them to be the very pillars of the Church, and chief upholders of
true religion. And what should I then think of the matter?


Miles. Not as the multitude do, for then you think erroneously. And if these
be the pillars or propps of any Church, it must needs be the church of
Antichrist. For we find no warrant in all the scriptures, that their offices,
callings or administrations, have any place, power or right in the Church of
Christ, as shall plainly appear hereafter. But where you seem to let your
judgment rely upon the multitude, and to approve of that which wiser then your
self do justify; you are taught not to follow a multitude to do evil, Exodus
23. And the divine proverb shows, that it is as great an evil to justify the
wicked as to condemn the innocent. But, as woe is pronounced to him that calls
good evil; so likewise to him that call leth evil good. Esa. 5.29. For your
judgeing of matters in case of religion, you ought to look to the law and word
of God, and not to the wisdom of man. For the wisdom of the wise men of this
world is foolishnes with God, and the wisdom of God is foolishnes with them.
The Philosophers and other wise men, could never by their worldly wisdom
atteyne to the right knowledge of God and heavenly things. This apperteyneth to
the foolish things of the world, which God has chosen to confound the wise. As
says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1. Read the whole chapter at your leisure, for your
better information. But I pray you how said you that it was with the Puritans?


Desiderius. I observe that there are none more detest^d mocked and trodden down
then are they, nor none more upholden then those that you so much dislike, even
the Bishops. For they rise up hastily, and put the other down most hatefully.


Miles. It is then with the Bishops according to the old proverb, evil weeds
do grow apace. And Mr. Tindall in the practice of Prelates, shewe^h to this
effect, That as the Ivy comp^sseth the oak, and grows up about it, till it
is higher then he oak it self; so does the Prelates with their Princes. Hereof
we have seen lamentable experience in the papacy. For the Bishop of Rome has
gotten himself aloft, advauncing himself above the trees, as it is in Iothams
parable, Judge. 9.7. etc. that is, above Princes, even Kings and Emperors, who^
he makes his vassals and kissers of his feet. We ^^ad in ^yst, of one of those
Bishops, that (...) upon the Emperors neck; and having s^t on the crown with
his hand, he stroke it off with his foot. To show that he had power to (...)
up and call down Kings at his pleasure. God grant that such presidents may be
a warning for all Kings and Princes to keep down such climers, while power is
in their hand to restrain their unnatural growth. But is it not to now, that
the Arch Bishops grace is come to the Title of a Prince, and President in the
Right honorable privy counsel? And are not also the inferior Bishops
invested with the style of Barons and Peers of the Realm? Which titles and
authorities are in deed fit for Peers and Magistrates in the common wealth,
not for ministers of the Church, but is forbidden unto them in the sacred
Scriptures. And yet such titles do men give, and these Bishops presume to take
notwithstanding. And that, not as they are employed in civil affairs; but, as
they are ministers and spiritual men; and are therefore called spiritual
Lords, even as the others (truly honorable) are called the Lords temporal,
and are so distinguished one from another. The abuse ought to be much lam^nted
and utterly abandoned. And these are of that brood which the learned linguist
Mr. Hugh Broughton usually calls the banned Bishops. But tell m^ how do they
now behave themselves in their usurped authorities?


Desiderius. It may be answered, That that is not usurped which is given. But
Princes do give them their authority. Therefore they usurp it not.


Miles. If the Prince of princes has not given it them but forbidden it, they
are usurpers; and the donation of earthly princes cannot make them to be
otherwise; seeing it is unlawful for the one to give, and for the other to
receive such authorities and titles. But you answer not my demand, how they
behave themselves therein?


Desiderius. They imprison, put to silence, and degrade at their own pleasure,
and (to speak the truth, they) stand more upon the observation of their own
unholy ceremonies, then upon Gods most holy oracles. And all that refuse to
bovv, they will bend; till they break the back of their conscience. So that I
see no end of their evils, neither can I dive into their doings, for a
suitable discovery, without much sorrow of heart.


Miles When John Baptist sent Disciples unto Jesus to ask him whether he was
he that should come, or whether we should look for another? Our Savior
ansvvered, Go and tell John, what things ye hear and see. The blind receive
sigh^ and the halt walk: the leapers are cleansed, and the deaf hear. the
dead are raised up, and the poor receive the Gospel. Math 11.4 5.6 etc. Now
these being the works that the true Christ should do, and Jesus doing them,
John knevv and taught his disciples to know, that that was in deed the very
Christ promised. Even so those works that you say the Bishops do, being the
works of Antichrist; do tell and reach that these Bishops are truly
Antichristian. And the discovery of their doings has been sufficiently
performed heretofore by sundry persons and in diverse manners: by some merrily,
by some modestly, by some gravely, all soundly. Therefore take you no care for
that service, neither let any be dismayed for their loftynes and tyrannical
cariages. A lofty sail with great vvindes will soon break down a rotten
mast. And the higher the Bishops climb, the nearer they are to their fall, and
the greater shall it be. Yea who can tell how soon the vvindes of Gods wrath
shall blovv upon them, against which they shall not stand. The Axe of Gods
word is ready hastily to hevv them down, did not humane authority hinder
the stroke of it to support the Lordlynes of these Prelates for a season. But
when the time is come which the Highest has set, humane authority shall no
longer hinder, but help to further Gods work. As it was in the days of Cyrus
King of Persia, when the deliv^rance of Gods people came so suddenly, as they
were like those that dream, ( Psalm. 126.) which is, as if they reasoned in
themselves, are we delivered or do we but dream of deliverance? The first
Babylonians had their fail, and who need make doubt that these who are
Babylonians spiritual and were typed out by the former shall taste of their
cup? and when they have drunk, then may this race of Anchrists clergy
dolefully sing the dovvnfall of their offices and Bishoprics. For down they
must, mauger the Divil deviser and first foun^der of their function. ( Though
Babel should moun^ up unto heaven, and though she should defend he^ strength
from on high, yet from me shall her destroyers come, says the Lord. Ier.
51.53.)


Miles. I dare not be so severe to censure them in respect of their office,
(which may be holy, though they are unholy,) but in respect of their harmfulnes
in their office, which I co^^fess, is too too apparent and past all denial.


Miles. If a woulf should forbear to ravine and cease to do harm, yet is he
a Wolf still, and has in him the same wolvish nature; and who then would
trust him in a flock of sheep, or commit the guidance of them to his charge?
Even so, if those Bishop; and false ministers should forbear to do harm, yet
are they the same false ministers still, being not sent of God, not sanct^fied
unto his people, and therefore ought not to be trusted with the sheep of
Christ, not be a guide unto them, but to be thrust out, although for the time
present they did no harm at all. Thus might they both please God in doing
his will, and put away from themselves all danger and dread which continually
do compass them whiles they are ledd by such guides. Yea the peril whereof is
much greater then if they were sold to be under the conduct or command of the
chief Captains under their most mortal and manifestly known enemies. For such
danger is but ^^mporal, but this eternal. That concerns (...) the body
only, this the soul, and body ^o. Take heed therefore what ministers you
^ommit your self unto for the guide of your ^^^e, lest whiles they should feed
you with the ^holesome milk of Gods word, they fill you with the poi^on of
their own or other men's ^nventions. This is a true position that no mi^isters
may stand in any Church of Christ that ^re not Ministers of Christ, and have
their calling and sending from him mediately or immediately. And as the Apostle
says, No man ta^^ this honor unto himself, but he that is called of God as
was Aaron, Heb. 5.4. But those Bps. have no such calling or sending, and so
have no lavvful right to administer in the church of Christ, or to be retained
therein. Again, Christ's Church may be p^rfect and intyre, without the
forenamed Bi^hops or others of their brood; so may civil societies also; and
heathen idolatry likewise: only the Antichristian Syna^^ of Rome, and all
others in her fashion, cannot be perfect and entire, but defective and lame
without them. Therefore I vvish that all such offices were sent thither
again, or to the bottomeless pit from whence they came, out of the smoke,
with that heap of Locusts, Rev. 9.2.3. where the note upon the English Bible
approves this that I say, for there it shows in direct words, that those
Locusts are false t^^chers, heretics, and worldly subtle Prelates, (...)
Monks, Friars, Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishop^ Bishops, Doctors, Bachelors,
and Masters which fo^^sake Christ, to mainteyne false doctrine. And tho^^ Lord
God of hosts strong and mighty brin^ it to pass that they may have no more
autho^ritie over thy people, then they ought to yeel^ themselves unto.


Desiderius. You have very fitly compare^ them unto wolves, for they devour
and mak^ havoc of the flock, so as the poor sheep o^ Christ, can hardly be
suffered to feed in an^ good pasture. And much is the mischief they do in the
land. In which respect I desire with my heart that England were quitt of them,
for a full freedom from all their tyrannical jurisdiction, which as it is to
some very hurtful; so is it unto me detestable and most hateful. For lambs
should not be lions, nor sheep should not be wolves.


Miles. And I would we were quit of them not only as they are harmfull, and
havock-making creatures, but as they are false functions and ministeries that
God never instituted. For that was the ground whereupon Josiah that godly King,
put down the Chemarims, or Priests of Baal, 2 King 23.5. And histories do
make mention of Flamings, and Archflamings, that were in our own Land, before
ever any Arch Bishop was there. And although they are not so hurtful as are
these Bishops, (save ^^ly that they led the people on in Pagan(...),) yet being
false functions, down went ^^ey likewise, as did the Chemarims and other ^^e
functions of old. And the same doom for these now, who cannot choose will they
(...) they, but must taste of the same cup, when ^^e time is come that justice
shall take place a^^inst the false functions of this later age, a^^inst all the
inventions of men, and false or^^nances, in and about the worship of God, ^^d
performance thereof. For these are special (...). But to say that false
functions may be ^^ployed in true services of God, when the ^ersons possessing
them, do cease the doing charm; then if the Divil himself should cease ^^
forbear to do harm, that ground would ^ead men to a love and liking of him,
or lean^^g to him. Whereas all men notwithstanding were bound to hold him at the
swords point ^s the great enemy of mankind, whom never any man ought either
to trust, or to give over the combat against him, till they have expulsed him.
And even so for his Ministers. Lay this well to heart Desiderius, and look well
to your reasoning, for I perceive we shall have a conference profitable to be
printed, so as I add unto it some other worthy things that I have to show unto
you. And if I can conveniently get it done among these strangers, t^ printed
shall it be.


Desiderius. I assent unto it. And to proc^^^ on in our discourse I tell you,
that Bishops (...) spoken of in the holy scriptures which y^^^ self do
profess to be the ground of all thi^^ in religion. Does not Paul the Apostle
bo^^ to Timothee and Titus speak of Bishops, a^^ shows what they ought to be;
and saluteth (...) Bishops and Deacons at Philippi in his Epis^^^ to that
Church? So that it seems that (...) their office, but the abuse in their
office oug^^^ to be withstood and abolished. And why th^^ do you condemn the
office it self?


Miles. I condemn not, neither fin^ fault with the name of a Bishop, nor yet
wi^^ the office of a Bishop, in The Apostles sense an^ intendement. For his
meanings is of such B^^shops as ought to be over a particular church or
congregation, not over many congregat^^ons. And as the word Bishop, is derived
from the Greek word which signifies Overseer; so (...) Pastors, Teachers, and
Governors over part^^cular congregations are such Bishops. Whero^ there may be
many in one Church to feed (...) in the faith, and to govern it in holy order,
(...) in the fear of God, according to his word^ not as Lords over their
faith; but in all hum^^litie and meeknes as ensamples to the flock, (...) Pet.
5. But that one Bishop should be over many churches, even over a (...)
Province, or Diocese, and exercise domin^^^^ over them, as their Lord
spiritual, and that with all rigor and tyranny, this is a changing of the holy
ordinance of God to make their own craftines to prosper, as it is in Dan.
8.25. ^oncerning Antiochus Epiphanes. And by their grounds, there may as well be
a Bishop over all Christendom. And so came that un^oly father the Pope to be
mounted up into ^is chair of pre-eminence, wherein he poi^oned all
Christendom with his abomina^^ons. Such dominion has Christ forbidden to his
Ministers. Mat. 20.25. etc. Luke 22.25.^6. But he alone is our Archbishop and
Lord spiritual, who walks in the midst of the 7. golden candlesticks, or
churches. The others may we not acknowledge so to be, nor allow them so to do
by any power from him. But these are rather of and have their power from the
spirit that rules in the air, and in the children of disobedience. And are
not sent of God, except in his wrath for a scourge unto peoples and nations of
the earth. The ecclesiastical titles which they claim unto themselves are
peculiar privileges to our Lord Jesus only, and are to be given him to the
glory of his name: but his glory therein will he not give to any other.
Furthermore when such names and titles are given unto men, they are the names
of blasphemy, Revel. 13.1. So th^^ it is the Arch and Lord Bishops that I
disclai^ and testify against, which have jurisdiction o^ver a Dioces, as a
Diocesan Bishop, or ov^^ half a kingdom as a provincial Bishop, or o^ver a
whole kingdom as primate: For by like ground, there may be a Bishop ove^ all
Bishops and kingdoms in Christendom* Which yet were detestable before God,
and to such men also, as are enlightened by his spirit* The man of sin, and
mystery of iniquit^ spru^g up by degrees til it came to that height and our
Englih Prelates do help to hold (...) up still: But God that condemns it
will bring it down. But I hope that some others bette^ furnished with books,
ability and leisure, the^^ I either am or can possibly be, in this pilgrimage
from my native country, will by this occasion both confer the prophesies in
the holy scriptures, and gather togeither a Catalogue of writers as a cloud of
witnesses, for further manifestatio^ of the truth against these remnants of the
Antichristian race, although very much is done that way already. For touching
the Ministry of Arch and Lordbishops aforementioned, with other ministeries
under them: That their offices were never appointed by Christ, but is a new
ministry devised by man, both in their office, entrance, administration and
maintenance, and ought not therefore to be continued; the scriptures have
showed such light as have filled our land full of proof (...) several works
as well of the people called Brow^ists, as of the forwarder sort of Ministers.
And it is certain that all such offices are of evil note, and of very bad
esteem in all well reformed Churches in the world. Also the holy Martyrs and
writers old and new have condemned them. Mr Chadderton of Emmanuel College in
Cambridge has truly taught and confidently affirmed, in his Sermon on Romans
12. That the Church (speaking of the Church of England) abhors and loatheth
the things which are abounding in her; as namely Ach Bishops, Lord Bishops,
Deanes, Arch Deacons, Chancellors, Commissaries, Officials, and all such as are
rather members and parts of the whore and strumpet of Rome, then of the pure
virgin and spouse of the immaculate lamb. Therefore (says he) she will have
these (if they will needs be of her body) to show that they be created of
God, and united unto her by Christ her head. If they will needs be of the
heavenly Jerusalem, let them show that they came down from heaven, and who
gave them from thence. For the Apostles never knew them. Sion has not heard of
them. Jerusalem which is above will not acknowledge them. The watchmen (no
doubt) being a sleep, they have crept into the city of the Lord. But now they
are espied, now the church complains of them, both because they have no title
nor interest in it as public members: As also because of the length of their
unlawful swords they keep out the lawful members of the body. We therefore
which are the Lords remembrau- ^ers must never s^ffer him to rest, till he has
expelled out of I^rusalem, wherein they have no right to exercise (...) unlawful
authority. Thus far goes he ^e^e verbatim. And it were endless to set
down wh^^ others have written in this kind agreing therewith

Wicl^ffs Tenth Article, Mr Fox (who wrote th^^ Acts and Monuments of the
Church) makes to b^ this, That there be 12. Disciples of Antichrist, Popes
Cardinals, Patriarks, Archbishops, Bishops, Arch^^ deacons, Officials, Deanes,
Monks, Chanons, Friars Pardoners. And Mr Bales descends to the lower degrees
of popish ministers, even to Sir John the parish priest, which together with
the former, he calls the names of blasphemy written upon the head of the
beast. Mr Barnes in the 6. Art. for which he was condemned, said I will never
believe, nor can ever believe, that one man may by the law of God be Bishop of
2. or 3. Cities, yea of a whole Country, for that is contrary to the doctrine
of Paul who writing unto Titus, commands that he should ordeyne a Bishop in
every town.

Hooper on the 8. Commandment shows, that one man may nor have two livings,
and then he adds: But this is clawe me and I will clawe this: If the Bishop
permit not their Priests to have two Benefices ^^ might likewise happen the
Priests would say that the Bishop should be Bishop but of one city: and indeed
so it should be, and till Magistrates bring them to that point, it shall be as
possible to hear a Bishop wade godly and simply through the scripture, in all
case of religion, as to drive a Camel through the eye of a needle. etc.

The foresaid Christians called Brownists, whom I find very sound in these
things, have in their Apology page 50. prooved by 8. good Reasons, That the
Hierarchy and Ministry of Popes, Archbishops, Lordbishops, Suffragans,
Deanes, Archdeacons are Antichristian. And then by 12. sufficient Reasons more,
do prove that the Hierarchy and Ministry aforesaid, may not be set over the
Church of Christ; nor retained therein. For which I refer you to the said
Apology, which you may procure amongst the people of that profession at London,
or else where. It were tedious to tell the names of all the writers against the
foresaid Hierarchy and Ministry of Archbishops and the rest of that rabble:
but endless to set down all that is written concerning them and their
princelynes. I will here only insert a few more testimonies of the ministers
themselves, who being of one church with the chief ministers their own
masters, may better be credited against them, then mere opposites which are not
of them, but separated from them. And first for Henoch Clapham who in ans. to
the Bishops Arguments says, in the 2. section of the 2. part of his Survey of
the Church.

Their cock sure Argument (as they take it) is this; Christ promised to be with
his Apostles unto the end of the world at the giving of the commission, Mat.
28. 19.20. And Timothee is charged to keep the commandment pure unto the
coming of Christ: But none of those persons should live unto the end. Therefore
he spoke to some other in their persons, who must be as were the Apostles and
E^angelists Lords over Pastors and Churches. And who should these be but such
Lord Bishops as themselves who have and occupy jurisdiction and power over all
the Churches and ministers of England.

If this be true that our Bishops be Apostles (for if the successors should
have had an other name the scripture would have registered it) If I say they be
Apostles, then England has not dignified them truly, in saying, The Lord
Bishop of such a place, who rather should have said, My Lord Apostle of London,
My Lord Apostle of Lincoln: Even as it was said, Peter the Apostle of the
circumcision, and Paul the Apostle of the gentiles. Then likewise England
should for that great blessing have been more bound to praise God, she having
more Lord Apostles of her own, then was in the whole world unto Christ, who
sent forth so few as twelve, and Paul with Barnabas. They being for the most
part men of occupations, but these being men of state and stately Lords. But
before we admit them for Apostles let us compare them with Christ's. The first
were elected and ordained to their office, either by Christ the head, or
together by some particular Church: But these either by A Prince or by the
Cannons of that sea confirmed by an Archbishop.

Secondly, they were appointed to office to the end they might feed feed feed
the Lords sheep. But our English ones, are appointed to their rooms in their
old age to the end they may now (together with the Levites of 50. years of
age) rest their bones and feed their own bellies.

Thirdly, the first were tied to no one sea, but were sent to teach all
nations: These keep themselves within a stinted compass, teaching few or
none once in a long time.

Fourthly the Apostles of Christ could not discharge their work but by coming
through many wants; These of our land may discharge their work by leaning on
their elbowes in the middst of their Lordly platters.

Fifthly, the first were appointed to gather churches and establish all holy
order. As for these, not one of them ever gathered a church, but have kept many
in disorder.

Sixthly the first had attending on them (for the furtherance of their
Apostolical work) blessed Evangelists and preaching Disciples. These latter
have first a company of ruffling Chaplains that can handle cards and dice
well, secondly a company of swash-rutting serviters that can teach all the
parish to swear and wear all foolish fashioned apparel.

Seventhly, the first were plain simple hearted Ministers. These are Lords in
name, Lords in living, Lords in pomp, Lords checkmate with the nobleest Peer
of our Realm.

Eighthly the first were brought before lordly ri^lers, for preaching Christ and
his kingdom, these convent preachers before them, and say, if we silence them
not by bonds, imprisonment, gallows; the^ will cause the civil Magistrate take
away our Episcopal kingdom.

Ninthly the first established wise godly Elders in every congregation: These
establish dumb dogs and greedy hogs in their parishes and confused assemblies.

Tenthly, the Apostle Paul upbraided the Church of Corinthe for not exercising
the power of our Lord Jesus committed unto her in delivering up the incestuous
to Satan. These Bishops are not so foolish, but have got all the power into
their own hands, sending that latin burbolte our of their unholy court.

Eleventhly, the first sought no kingdom here, because they looked elsewhere to
sit on a throne with Jesus: But these so seek kingdom and establish their
houses here, as if they were of mind with the governor of the feast in Cana of
Galilee that sweet wine is best at the first.

Twelvethly, the Apostles of Christ were the chosen penmen of the holy Ghost,
and therefore their writings are of sufficient credit in themselves and
canonical: As for our English-ones, God never chose them for such purpose, and
therefore their writings which are almost none, and their sermons which are
almost as few, are to be suspected, and to come under examination.

Lastly to give 13. to the dozen, the Apostle Paul did think, they were set
forth the last Apostles, 1 Cor. 4.9. These men come more then XV. hundred years
after that they were Apostles. Likewi(...) these opposites can meet together in
one subject, black can be white, and Ataxia can be Eutaxia, Disorder, good
order, I shall never believe that Lord Bishops are either Apostles or
Evangelists, or yet so good as Pastors.

This comparison he wrote when heretofore by his separation he was called a
Brownist, and now it may serve as a glass for his Lords spiritual to behold
themselves in. But how he estemeth of them now, or how he makes the matter
with them, having i^ priesthood from and under them, I cannot tell. It is
doubtful he has learned to dye a black into while, and to make Ataxia, to be
Eutaxia, disorder, good order. But let his conscience see to it, lest he be
condemned thereof. For if his own heart condem^e him, God is greater then the
conscience.

The next testimonies are from such as never sep^rated. Mr Fenner has
published in Defense of godly mo^sters against Bridges slanders, page 111, that
of S. P^ul were now in England, and no greater man then he was made by Christ,
he might not be equal with these Bishops: For they are spiritual Lords, he was
never so: they might send for him by a Pursevant, lay him in the Counter, or
command him to the Fleet, so could not Paul do the least Minister of the
Gospel. And again in the same book p. 123. speaking of their offices he
says, Our kind of Bishops, the Commissaries, the Archdeacons and such like,
we account them no natural members of the body of Christ's Church because they
are of humane addition, not borne with her, nor grown up with her from the
cradle.

Mr. Cartwright in his first reply, page 8. and 88, striking at the chief and
strength of their ministry, to were, at the Arch Bishops, and Archdeacons,
under whom the other Bishops and ministers do execute their offices, proves
that these functions are not in the word of God, but of the earth, new devised
ministeries, and such as can do no good. Yea that the Arch Bishops office, is
the weck of the popish Hierarchy, come out of the bottomless pit of hell.

Mr Travers in Defense of Ecless. discipl. p. 88.^ 91 against D. Bridges,
proves by diverse good and sufficient reasons, that their Bishops are neither
Pastors nor Teachers. Upon which one in a certain place infers, And what
ordinary Ministry of the Gospel then do they execute? As for extraordinary,
the Prelates were not known, when they were in the world: besides that they
are as unlike them as darkness is to light.

And upon my memory I dare say, that in the Demostration the author speaking
of this lofty ministry, says, that they are plants which our heavenly Father
has not planted, and must be plucked up by the roots. And how Mr Chaderton
has painted them out I have showed before.

Finally, all the seekers of Reformation, have in the Admonition to the Parl.
2. treatise: sect. 14.18.20. professed, that the Names and offices of
Archbishops, Archdeacons, Lordbishops etc. are together with their government
drawn out of the Popes shop, Antichristian, Divilish and contrary to the
scriptures: That the Parsons, Vicars, Parish priests, Stypendaries etc. b^
birds of the same fither: And in a word (as has been noted before) that they
have an Antichristian Hierarchy and popish ordering of Ministers strange from
the word of God and the use of all well reformed Churches in the world. Thus
may we learn of our own worthies at home, if we will not learn of others
abroad, who have been forced to separate from church and ministry for such
foul, gross, most horrible and unsufferable corruptions, as are both in the
one and other. And well I remember that Mr Beza contra Saraviam mentioning but
3. or 4. of the corruptions there, says (if it be so) that then it is not a
corruption in Christianity, but a manif^st defection from Christ.


Desiderius. Trouble not your self further in this matter at this time, for you
have spoken thereof both largely and plainly, opening as it were a window
through the which I see a great light, and as my name by interpretation is
Desire; so do I most earnestly desire the same light might shine clearly in
eyes of all other men's understanding. And now I would I were as well able as
willing to make suit to the higher powers that by their lawful authority, the
unlawful offices and jurisdictions of the Prelates might be abolished. The
performance whereof as you know, would make way for establishing of godly
preachers throughout the land, and removal of all dumb dogs and ilde
drones, which feed their own bodies and sterve other men's souls. Might this
gracious work be once effected, there would be full supply for many painful
and well deserving preachers, out of those fat Bishoprics and ric^ revenues,
which now serve but for a few (and yet too many) proud prela^es, and their
swaggering retinue. But some that were fit to be suitors in this worthy cause,
will surely fainte, either for fear of man's face, or for want of faith in God.


Miles. Yet let all men be comforted in this, that God will have his work
done, when and by vvhomsoever he shall appoint the performance thereof. For
strong and Mighty is ^he Lord of Hosts, able to do all things, when man is
vveak and unable to do any thing. He has spoken the word and it shall stand,
yea his word is ^ure word, Hab. 3. who then shall resist? And who knows
not that the Aboats and the rest of that generation, ^ad as much ^oo^ing in
England as have now the Bishops and were (in their time) as much supported by
humane authority as are they? yet being parts of that an i^^ristian synagogue
and spiritual Babylon which the Lord has threatened to consume, they are
consumed, rooted out, end quite abolished, and that with as much detestation as
these their brethr^n are now had in admiration: who being grown great and go
ten up aloft, are also terrible to the peoples, wherein they fitly resemble the
Anakims and race of the Gi^nts in Canaan, for fear of whom the hearts of the
Israelites melted: wherein they and ten of the 12 spies greatly sinned: but
^aleh and Iosuah who were faithful, encouraged the Lords people to go up
against them, and possess the good land which the Lord promised them. Be you
careful to follow the example of the faithful and not of the fearful, even ^s
you desire to have sin subdued, and the unrighteous ordinances of Antichrist
overthrown, that the Lords blessed ordinances, which he has promised to his
people now under the Gospel, may be established and enjoyed among them. Labor
you as an isntrumental means, to make the same light appear unto others,
which you say has arisen unto your self; that both they and you may walk in
the light, as children of the light and of the day; forsaking all d^eds of
darkness. Continue constant in a good testimony, and bereave not your self of
the fruit that will follow. Seek unto him for your help, who is Lord of
Lords, and King of Kings, who has the hear^es of all Kings and Princes of the
earth to turn them as it pleases him. And secundarily s^eke unto higher
powers, the Prince Peers and Magistrates, with earnest suite according to your
place and utmost means that you can make, for furtherance of a full
reformation and freedom from the former abuses: which I steadfastly believe God
will accomplish at one time or other. Therefore when you have begun well, be not
weary of weldoing. And remember for your exampleing and encouragement, the good
hand of God that was upon Nehemias when he sought the wealth, prosperity, and
reedifying of Jerusalem, and what furthera^ce he found at the hands even of a
heathen King, Nehem. 1. chapt. which should put you into a strong hope of good
success and gracious grants from our Christian King.

But where you s^em to desire that the livings of idle and Antichristian
Prelates, might be converted to the maintenance of painful and Christian
preachers, you aim not aright at the glory of God, which cannot be advanced by
seeking to have his Ministry mainteyned by those livings, that were
formermerly consecrated to idolatry, and yet used to the high dishonor of
God, in maintenance of part of that great swarm of popish officers, whereof
some are cast out of the land, and many do yet remain. Whereas if men will be
the true Ministers of Christ, they should content themselves ^o live by the
means that he has appointed, that is; by the voluntari^ contribution of the
Lords free people, Saints by calling. And as for all such idolatrous livings,
they ought in every Country, by the Magistrates of the same to be converted to
civil uses: wherein how much the more that charity is respected, so much the
more shall God therein be honored. All such livings are of the stolen goods
which Antichrist has purloigned from the common wealth and civil estates of
people, to inriche his Clergy vvithall: and for supporting of his other
abominations. So as such goods and livings cannot rightly be employed till they
be converted ^o civil uses again. Which will be as the taking of the purse
from the thieves hand to give unto the true man. But whiles you think to beg
these idolatrous livings from the Prelates to the Preachers, your suite is not
worth the suing for, neither will God be pleased therewith. The preachers that
will depend upon God and follow his word are to have their wants supplied
otherwise, as is abovesayd. But thus though you seem to forsake the error
that you were in about the Bishops office, yet you are in an other error about
their livings, which you think ought to be for other Ministers. And herein I
will put my self to new pains to inform you better.


Desiderius. We have lately heard a Bell sound, that it is a just judgment of
God, upon K. Henry the 8. that there is not one of his posterity left to sit
upon his throne, for bereaving the Church of the Gleabes, Abbey lands etc. and
employing them to other uses. And how then shall the taking away of the Bishops
livings from the Clergy to the laity, from the service of God in the Church,
to the service of the common wealth; be esteemed less then a sinful and
sacrilegious act?


Miles. Such Bells (as you speak of) that sound so badly, deserve well to loose
their clappers, or to be hung out of all men's hearing. For the work of that
worthy King, in suppressing those Abbyes, Frieries, Nunneries and the Vermin
living in them, was all within the limits of his office and duty, as was also
the converting of those livings to his own or other civil uses. In which, the
more he respected the glory of God and charity, the more worthy was his work,
and deserved the higher praise even as those Kings and Princes shall do whom
God will employ as his instruments, for rooting out the remnant of that race,
the Arch and Lord Bishops, with a number of false functions, and anti christian
offices under them, and converting o^ their livings likewise to civil uses. For
these livings and ecclesiastical offices and Ministeries mainteyned by them,
have no better fundation then had the other. And these that yet remain, are
(of a truth) brethren of the same brood, and birds of the same fether; had
the same Sire, and were all hatched after the same fashion with the former,
that are driven away.


Desiderius You may therein be mistaken. For those Abbats and the like, were
indeed first invented, institu^ed and ordained in the Roman church; by
authority of it, and of the head thereof the Pope; and if you will I can further
and yet truly say, by the permission of God and power of the Divil was that
done: But our Bishops were made and ordained in our English Church of
Protestants.


Miles. Be it so, yet that makes the sin never the less, but rather vvil
cause the punishment from God to be the grea^er; in as much as they know more,
and yet do the same evil with others that know less. And the nearer that
men come unto God, the greater in his sight are the sins that they commit.
Therefore the Priests in Israel offered greater sacrifices for their sins,
then ordinary Israelites that fell into the same. Therefore also, judgment first
begins at the house of God, etc. Now as all Churches in the world are bound
to receive such Ministeries only as God has appointed and none other; so
whosoever do institute, appointe, ^^nd or receive, any office of Ministry
that God has not instituted, appointed and sent, do grea^ly sin. And if a
true Church shall do it, they sin more haynously then a false church that
does the same. Therefore your plea is nothing vvorth, save against your self
and our church of England, if it be (as you hold it) a true Church. And when
Lord Abbats etc. were cast out of it, yet Lord Archbishops, and Bishops etc.
were still retained, that had their being at the same time, and their original
with those that were rejected. But such Bishops and inferi^ur ministers as
they have made since, was by immitat^o^ of the Papists, who had them in their
church constantly, before we had any at all: and although they made some
change of persons for those places, yet was there no change of the offices
themselves, but they remained the same in Q. Elizabeth's days, that they were
before in Q. Mary's days. And there were diverse of the same persons that were
Bishops and Priests in Q. Mary's days* that kept the same offices in Q.
Elizabeth's days, by the former calling that they had in Pop^ry, and held still
the same Bishoprics, Parsonag^s and livings, that were allotted them for
maintenance in the very same ministry before. And they only recanted of some
popish heresies in doctrine and opinion, with renunciation of the supremaci^
of the Bishop of Rome. And some of them die not that, as I have seen under the
hands of 14. witnesses which was addressed to the Arch Bishop by way of
complaint against their popish Parson Mil^^ Bennes of Sevenock, who was left
upon them from the time of Q. Marie. Neither were such (if they reca^ted)
esteemed worse then such as were made by themselves, but rather reckned for
the better. And he that is made a Bishop or priest at Rhemes o^ Rome, coming to
England with such recantation as aforesaid, is admitted to administer without
any new ordination. Whereas the Ministry of Pastors made in the reformed
Churches must pass under a new ordinatio^ before they may administer there.
Which shows rightout what office and ordination it is that they like and love
best.


Desiderius. I pray you let me ask you, what difference you put between the
Israelites sin in worshipping the calves, or God by the calves, as they
pretended: and the papists sin in worshipping their images, or (as they would
have it,) God by their images?


Miles. I see in that small difference, for Israel was then a false church
though it had been of the true. And the heap of papists are likewise a false
church, though the Church of Rome before time was true. And whether men make
the images of calves or of other creatures, for any worship to God they are all
inventions of men, the works of their ^endes, and mere idols, which have no
warrant in Gods word, but are an open and direct breach of the second
Commandment* And in some ignorant papists that pray unto the image it self as
a thing of divine inspiration, it is a transgressio^ of the first.

But now to return to the sound of your Bell, which you brought as an instance
against converting of false church livings to civil uses. How contrary was
that sound to something, which others have written of that very point in our
own tongue, according to truth? Mr. Fr. John's. in Ans. to M.H. Jacob, has
words worthy of note, p. 199. saying, We acknowledge with thanks to God and her
Majesty, that cut of her highness Dominions there be already abolished many of
the abominations of the Romish Baby 16. And we pray God, that for as much as
many of them be yet remaining etc. that if it be the will of God, her High ^es
may be the instrument to suppress and abolish these ^lso, and to establish the
whole truth of God according to this word. And further, that she may take to
her own Civil uses the Lordships and possessions of the Prelates and other
Clergy, as God has fore told and appointed should be done with them ( Rev.
17.15. and 1* 17.18.) And as King Henry the eight (her Majesty's Fath^^ of
famous memory) did with the Abbats, Monks, Fryess, Nuns, and with their
possessions and revenewes.

Which happy work, by what Princes soever it be done (as certainly will come
to pass, for the Lord of Hosts has spoken it) it will greatly redound to the
glory of God, the honor of themselves, the free passage of the Gospel, the
peace of the Church, and benefit of the whole Common wealth.

Again a faithful witness of the truth, to ^ George Joy upon Dan. in the year
1545. writ down ingeniously his own and other men's judgment, concerning the
livings and maintenance the Prelates and other Clergy. Upon the 5. of D^^niel
this question is made, Do they not sin with B^^sazar, that convert the
Church goods into profane use^ Then it is there thus answered, The vessels
prophan^ by Belsazar were consecrated by the Word of God: Wher^^fore he sinned
in profaning them. But the goods and lew^ of our Temples, Abb^yes and
Bishoprics are not consecr^^ted to such uses by Gods Word, but by their own
invent^ ^ovetous charmings: wherefore Emperors, Kings, an^ Princes may take
them away and put them to better uses, (...) to the maintenance of schools,
universities etc. Thu^ wrote and witnessed those blessed servants of Go^
heretofore. Upon which I would infer that if the Magistrates may employ such
livings to maintena^c^ of schools and universities, then also for founding and
upholding of Hospitalls, almes-houses, and the like, for help of poor,
widows, fatherless, and strangers for the impotent sick and helpless of all
sorts, for making and repairing of bridges, hye ways, etc. And also if it
please the head of the Commonwealth, and need so require, they may serve for
support to the state, for royalty of the Court, for maintenance of lawful
wars against the enforcings of foreign foes, or rebellions of domestical
enemies, and a number the like services, wherein such livings might be lawfully
employed with comfort and safe conscience: all which may seem to be employed in
the former writers word et cetera, to be their meaning likewise. And we may
read in the Acts and Monuments in the hystories of John Wicleff, William
Swinderby, Sr. John Oldcastle Lord Cobham, John Claydon, and other the Martyrs
of Christ, who held and professed these orders of Archbishops, Lordbishops,
Archdeacons etc. to be the Disciples of Antichrist, yea very Antichrist
themselves: That the possessions and Lordships of the Clergy are the venime of
Judas shed into the Church, etc. Act. and Monum. edit. 4. p. 150. a 468. b.
562. b. 363. a 6 9. b.


Desiderius. Why whither will you now run?


Miles. Into the truth I trust, with all faithful witnesses of the same: and
no further the^ I am taught by the word and spirit of God.


Desiderius. But you have not always been of this mind, that such livings
ought not of right to apperteyne to the ministry of the Gospel.
Nevertheless if you have seen a further light by the opposers of Prelatisme
abroad, then you had at home, it would be good to make your friends and
country partakers thereof.


Miles. Very gladly shall I do that. But first you are to observe this for
your self, that the holy Martyrs and witnesses of Christ were of this mind
long before me, as I have showed and could show yet further if need require.
And for that I have not always been of this mind, it is sufficient that I
came unto it when God gave me means to see that it was the mind of his High
Majesty, whereunto and all men ought to conform our selves. The Apostle Paul
was not always of the mind that Jesus o^ Nazaret was the Christ: But some
while he persecuted such as professed him, til he saw otherwise. And then he
became a preacher of the same truth both abroad and in bands unto the death.
And eve^ so Lord Jesus just and righteous, give me constancy in witnessing this
part of thy truth against the Prelates, their offices, entrance,
administrations, manner of maintenance and large jurisdictions, all which are
unlawful and contrary to the scriptures. As for your desire or hope of help
from abroad; I could wish you rather to turn your eyes another way, and look
nearer home. For I am persuaded that there are not greater means of help to
be found in the world for this service, then God has raised up, in and unto
our own land, of the true borne subjects and natural children thereof. And
that both of the forwarder sort of Ministers, and learned men in our Church of
England, as also, and more specially of the people called Brownists; who by
their diligence in the scriptures and advantage of their cause, are most
strongly furnished against the Prelates, against their Antichristian
jurisdictions, and Lordly livings etc. At whose hands if help were sought,
espetially of the learned among them, great help might be had.


Desiderius. And may not the like helps be had from the Anabaptists also? for
they are likewise very opposite to the Bishops.


Miles. They are so. And to give them their due, many of them are very honest
men with all; but yet they disadvantage themselves sundry ways. First, by
their heretical opinions. 2. Because they have, approve and allow, of general
Bishops, for baptising, etc. in all their assemblies; at least, in so many of
them as hold one society, and are of one communion. And so what they condemn
and cast down in others, they (after a sort) do justify and hold up in
themselves, by their own practice. But the practice and profession of the
other (mistermed ones) accords in one, and strengthens one another.


Desiderius. I am glad you conceit the ways of the Anabaptists no better. For
I had you in some jealousy concerning them. But it is sorrow enough that you
prefer the Brownists before our forward Ministers.


Miles. I have good reason in this case so to do. For as they hold it
unlawful for our Ministers of England, to have those idolarrous livings
aforesaid, so they hold it unlawful for their own, and all other ministeries
to have them; but would that they were returned again to the Commonwealth
from whence they were taken. But our forward Ministers, that with the Prelates
down, and their livings to be taken from them, would gladly have them for
their own use, as you likewise pleaded for them. And I fear they hold it no
better then sacrilege if they be otherwise employed. Whereof your own self
also made question a little before. But to speak the truth without respect of
persons and to flatter with none, these things in thern are mere trifling, if
not also hypocrisy, arising of covetousnes. For if they be lawful for
themselves, they are lawful for the superior Ministers also, by whom these
inferior ones were made. If they say nay; For their inferior Ministry is a
true Ministry; but the Lordly Ministry is not so: therefore these livings
belong unto them and not to their Lords. Herein they deceive themselves, but
let them not deceive you nor others. For seeing the inferior Ministry is
derived from and made by the superior; either then the superior ministry
must be true, or these of their making cannot be true. But the other being
false that makes, these must needs be false that are made by them. For every
creature brings forth according to his own kind, whether it be man, or
byrds or beasts, whether clean or unclean. And if the root be holy, so are
the branches: But if the root be corrupt and impure, the branches must needs
be so likewise. Adam and Eve corrupted, brought forth a man in their own
likeness, that is* one corrupted like themselves. But I can show you diverse
ways whereby you may discern, that the Brownists (a^ you call them) are the
best Champions to fight this battle, and are most likely to win the field.


Desiderius. I cannot tell. I am sure they are counted a s^ct, and are every
where evil spoken of.


Miles. But the question is, whether it is for evil doing, or for weldoing? If
for well doing, they are ^o bear it patiently as partakers of the cross and
sufferings of Christ, whose faithful servants and witnesses of old, even in the
Apostles days were counted a sect likewise, even the sect of the Nazarites,
and were every where evil spoken of in like sort. But did it therefore follow
that they were according to the report and esteem that was amongst men
concerning them? Or should men therefore have rejected them, or any good thing
among them? Let it be far from you so to think, and further off in that sort
to speak, either of those former, or yet of these later Christians. Christ
himself was the chief corner stone, whom the builders refused, yet he became
the head of the corner. And surely these me which you and others are ready
enough to refuse for help in this service, are the most sound and sufficient
of any that I know for convicting of our common adversaries and terrible
opposites the Prelates and lofty Clergy of the land. Wherefore I would advise
you and all, never to shun, but diligently to seek, and thankfully to
receive their help when it may be had. And if we see them to err in any other
thing (as all men are subject to error) ^et readynes be showed in the spirit
of meeknes to help them. Thus shall we both please God and comfort one another.


Desid. Therein you say well. But where you charge the Anabaptists with
heretical opinions, (and true it is that such they hold) I pray you how much
better is it with the Brownists? They condemn (as the report goes) not only
the best people of the land: but also condemn and forsake the faith professed
and mainteyned there, counting it the faith of the Divils, and professing
another faith for themselves. Now for my own part, I am not only persuaded,
but fully assured through the mercy of God, that the faith professed in
England is the true saving faith of Gods elect, and if ever they be saved
themselves, it must be through the same faith in Christ. Therefore if they be
guilty of that report, my soul shall have no pleasure in them, till they
return by repentance. For, to err in that point is a matter of no small
importance.


Miles. That report is either a mere slander, raised up by the Divil in his
instruments for the disgrace of their cause, or if ever it was spoken by any of
them, it must be some one very simple, that erreth therein through ignorance; or
some that are strongly carried with zeal against the false and confused order
of that Church; and not distinguishing b^tweene order and faith, may happen
through have or inco^sideratenes to call the one by the name of the other. And
so when they speak of the impure faith of the Church of England, may intend
only the impure and corrupt order that is therein.


Desiderius. If you had not helped with such a lift, they had lien under it for
me. But sure such zeal is preposterous zeal, and such inconsideratenes, is
headie, rash and undiscreet ^ar^age, not agreeing with Christianity, not
beseeming sobriety.


Miles. Be it so. Yet can you not justly impute that to a whole company which
is done by one or two, when the rest do not approve it, but are against it.
And there is no religion wherein there are not some that miscarie themselves,
either through zeal, or ignorance, or else in headie, rash and inconsiderate
speech. Yet such as so offend among these, are liable to the rebuke of their
Presbytery and Church it self, if the cafe so require. And the maine
difference between them and England, is about outward orders and ordinances,
and the faith professed by both, is one and the same. And concerning the matter
of heresy, they never were not can be convicted thereof. And when they sent
their confession of faith to the Reverend learned man M. Francis Iunius,
desiring him if he saw them to err in any thing, to show it unto them: He
vouchsafed to write and send them a friendly and brotherly answer: But declared
no error nor heresy in all that they wrote unto him. Neither did any of the
learned in the Universities of L^yden, Saint andrews, H^idelberge, Geneva,
and other like schools of learning in the L^w countries, Scotland, Germany
and France, to whom they directed their Confession of Faith many years since.
And whereas the Heads and Doctors of Oxford, do carpe against them in their
Answer to The humble Petition of the Ministers of the Ch^ of England: and these
defending themselves in their Apology and calling upon the^ by many reasons for
proof of their accusations, they reply to Puritans and Papists, but do let
these alone unanswered: and for what cause, wise men may easily conjecture.

And now Desiderius, that you may the better perceive that they hold the same
faith with us in Engl. and what their difference from us in other things is,
hear what themselves have professed and printed. In the Preface of their
Confession of Faith, thus they write. And further we testify by these presents
unto all men, and desire them to take knowledge hereof, that we have not
forsaken any one point of the true Ancient Catholic and Apostolic faith
professed in our land: but hold the same grounds of Christian religion with
them still, agreeing likewise herein, with the Dutch, Scottish, Germane,
French, Helvetian, and all other Christian reformed Churches round about us,
whose Confessions published, we call to witness our agreement with them, in
matters of greatest moment, being conferred with these Articles of our Faith
following. The things then only against which we contend, and which we
mislike, in the English parish assemblies, are many relics of the man of
sin (whom they pretend to have abandoned) yet retained among them, and with a
high hand mainteyned, upholden, and impos^d. etc.

And Mr Henry Barrowe one of their writers, in a letter of his sent unto a
Right honorable Lady, and published in their Apology, concerning this point
says, That he did gadly embrace and believe the common faith received and
professed in the land, as most holy and s^und* And that he had reverend
estimation of sundry, and good hope of many hundred thowsands in the land:
though he misliked the present constitution of this Church, in the present
communion, ministry, ministration, worship, government and ordinances
ecclesiastical of these Cathedral and parishionall assemblies.


Desiderius. If the rest of them be like him, then are they not so uncharitable
in their judging of our people, as some men say they are.


Miles. They generally put difference between all good men's Church estate, as
they are under the ordinances of Antichrist, and their personal estate, endued
with many heavenly and holy graces. Therefore open not your ears too wide in
hearing reports, for many that are given out against them, are surely false.
But hear a little further what themselves do profess. Mr Barrow in his
writing entitled a few observations to the reader of M. Giffords last reply,
s. 4. says thus. Have we not commended, the faith of the English Martyrs, and
deemed them saved, notwithstanding the false offices and great corruptions in
the worship they exercised, not doubting but the mercy of God, through their
sincere faith to Jesus Christ extended and superabounded all their sins seen
and unseen. And what now should let, that we should not have the same hope,
where the same precious faith in sincerity and simplicity is found? So that
they neither neglect to search out the truth, nor despise the truth when they
see it, etc. And this he further clears in the same section.

Mr John Penrie likewise, in his Examination has these words, For I know the
doctrine touching the holy Trinity; Nature, and Offices of the Lord Jesus;
Free justification by him; both the sacraments etc. published by her Majesty's
authority and commanded by her laws* to be the Lords blessed and undoubted
truths, without the knowledge and profession whereof no salvation is to be had.
And shows the things that he disliketh, and for what cause he durst not
partake in the publik assemblies of our land, notwithstanding the former
truths there taught and professed.

And again in his Confession of faith he says, The truth of doctrine
touching the holy Trinity, touching the natures and Offices of Christ*
Justifying faith, Sacraments and Eternal life, and the rest, established by
her Majesty's Laws, and professed by her self, their Honors, and such as have
knowledge in the assemblies of this land: I acknowledge from my heart to be
such, as if I mainteyned not the unity, and held not the communion of the same
doctrine with them in these points, I could not possibly be saved: For out of
the communion of the true profession, which her Majesty has established in
these and the like truths, there is no hope of salvation left: But join
notwithstanding in the public assembles of this Land, I dare not, for the
former causes.

I do moreover willingly confess, that many, both of the Teachers, and also
of the Professors within these Parish assemblies, have so embraced this truth
of doctrine, established and professed in this Land, as the Lord of his
infinite goodness, has granted them the favor, to show outwardly many tokens,
whereby (in regard of the Lords election) I profess before men and Angels, that
I judge them to be members, of that body, whereof the son of God Christ Jesus
(...) the head. Only herein the Lord be merciful unto them, (as to my self in
regard of my sins:) that they are not under that outward form of government
which Christ has left, etc.

And whereas Mr Jacob would father upon this people, that they hold every
person in England which holds the public faith, is no true Christian. Mr
Johnson in his answer, page 7. says thus; Touching this point, I mind the
state of their people two ways: the one concerning their several persons
considered a part from the constitution of your Church; the other concerning
their estate and standing in that constitution. Concerning the former of these,
(that is, considering them a part from the co^stitution) I acknowledge that in
diverse of them there appears such knowledge and faith of the Gospel with the
fruits thereof, as they may well be thought* in regard of Gods election in
Christ, to be heirs of salvation, and in that respect to be true Christians:
God pardoning unto them their standing under Antichrist, which they do not see
or mind. But I sear least many more were heretofore partaker of this grace
then be now since your Antichristian estate and the unlawfulnes to a^ide
therein has been discovered. Concerning the latter, (that is, in respect of
their estate and standing in that constitution of your Church) I am persuaded
whosoever so stand, holding your publik^ faith and multitude of Antichristian
abominations withal they cannot by the word of God be judged true Christians,
as touching their outward estate in that Church of yours: but stand all subject
to wrath, God imputing this their sin unto them. And that all therefore
whosoever willbe assured of Gods mercy and salvation, ought with speed to go
out of your Church, it still remaining in Antichristian estate. etc.

Thus Desiderius, I have showed you what diverse of them have written and
professed in and about the point by you objected: and if it be not sufficient I
will show you more.


Desiderius. You may spare that labor for I am fully satisfied.


Miles. And for that cause I was the more large: As also that (when these
things are published) others at home and abroad may likewise receive
satisfaction. And if any of the people themselves have been so overseen, as to
speak according to the report that you heard, they may (by this means) be
again brought to their own grounds, which some through simplenes, rashness, or
inco^sideratenes may forget, and offend against the same: But the more
circumspect and wise, are more considerate and wary. Thus being somewhat weary,
I will rest from discoursing a while; and in the mean time, you may read these
three writings which will be worth your pains and the printing. And they also
will clear that people and the truth, from such clamours as you have heard
concerning the^. The first is a letter which one of them in Ireland wrote unto
a Scottish preacher there, Ao. 1594. wherein is laid down sundry grounds of
their separation. The other are two Petitions: the first whereof was written
by Mr Henry Barrovve in the days of Q. Elizabeth of famous memory: the second
by another of their vvriters, (...) the time of the first Parliament holden in
the happy reign of our now Sovereign, King James.

To Mr Wood. Wisdom and grace from God most high.
WHereas you seemed very desirous to have us set down in writing our faith and
profession concerning the true Church, together with the causes of our
separation from the English and Irish parish assemblies, promising your self
either to asse^t unto us, or show sufficient cause of your dislike by writing
also, with defece of your churches estate etc: We, as willing to render an
account of our belief and practice unto all men that shall demand the same,
and desirous of your salvation, and fellowship in the holy faith (if such be
the will of God) and our selves of further instruction and light by any that
can enform us from the word, have condiscended unto your request, believing and
confessing concerning this part of the Gospel, as follows.

That the true Church of God on earth, is communion and fellowship of Isa.
60.11. 1 Cor. 1.2.
righteous men and women, Act. 15.9.
whose hearts God has pu^ified by says, Mat. 11.27.28.29.
calling and gathering them unto himself, and under his true obedience by the
scepter of his word and spirit, Lev. 20.24 Job. 15.19.
sepa^ating them from the world of Infidels Turks ^ewes and false Christians,
Act. 2.42.42.
to live together under his holy covenant, obeying and wo^^shiping him in
spirit and truth, ^phes. 4.3.
keeping the unity of the Spirit in the band of peace an^ love and unfeighned.

That this Church ( Psalm. 2.28. Act. 10.35.
although dispersed among many nations over the face of the earth,) Cant. 6.8.
Ephesians. 4.4.5.
is one, as God is one, has one faith, Lord, Mat. 28.^0. Ex^. 12.49.
religion, law and government in all places, and unto it the scriptures and 2 Timothy 3.16 17.
written word o^ God, is given for the direction thereof and edification in all
things, whereunto each member is bound Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.20.
as well Prince as people, to observe inviolably whatsoever is therein
commanded, unto the worlds end; and that no man, nor the whole church it self,
has authority to alter change inovate break abrogate or superordeyne Gal.
3.15. Prove. 30.6 Deuteronomy. 12.32.
any thing unto or from this Law of the Most high, neither may the church or
any member thereof receive or obey other constitutions and traditions Deuteronomy
5.3.32. Gal 1.8
of men or Angels without incurring the wrath of God.

That this Church is the bride and body of Christ, the city and house of the
great King, whereinto may enter Esai 35.8.9. Psalm. 24.3.4. Rev. 21.27.
no profane person o^ impenitent sinner, but only such as by faith, and
^^pentance have washed away the guilt of their sins in the blood of the
lamb, and Ioh. 3.3.1. Pet. 1.23.
are borne a new by the seed of the word, and Josh. 24.15.16.22. Act. 2.41.
Psalm. 149.9 Mat. 18.15.
by a willing covenant made with the Lord, are under his government and scepter
of grace, and so do lead godly and christian lives.

That in this House, Hos 2.1.^. Mat. 16.19.
every servant and member has a like inter^st and liberty in the word of God,
by the power thereof to reprove condemn and slay sin in themselves and ^^l
other men, and are all bound to watch o^^er, exhort, and admonish one another
Collos. 4.19
even their shepherds and leaders if need so require.

That this Church has power from Christ Mat. 18.8.9.15.16 17.18. 1 Cor. 5
4.5.6. Number. 19.20 21.22. and 5.2.3.
to censure reprove and cast out of their fellowship all obstinate offenders and
wicked men, lest by any such the whole body should be infected and perish.

That they also have authority Ezekiel 33.2. Act. 1. and 6.14.
to elect, call and set over them watchmen and shepherds of their souls to
break unto them the bread of life, whom they are bound again to sustain Gal.
6.6.
with all their temporal goods, so farte as their abilities extend, and the
Ministers duty shall require.

That whenever the whole Nu^. 15.30.31 Hos. 2.2. Prove. 13.13. Rev* 2.5.
Church or any member thereof wilfully transgresses the law of the Lord, and
persisteth obstinate and incorrigible in any sin, refusing to hear the voice
of Christ, they will cease to be the people and servants of God, neither can be
so esteemed until they repent.

That all that will be saved, Deuteronomy. 12 5 13.14. Pro. 9 1.2.3.4. Zachar. 2.10.11.
Cant. 1.6 7.
must join themselves to some particular Church of Christ, to live therewith in
faithful obedience peace order and love; 2 Cor 6.14.14.15.16.17 18.
forsaking all false and adulterate synagogues, of which sort we affirm the
ordinary parish assemblies of our woesull country to be, and therefore have
abandoned them for these weighty causes.

1. They are not a communion of Psalm. 14.^^
Saints, Ioh. 17.^^ 16.
called and severed from the world, but do consist of all sorts of men,
reteyning a multitude of irreligious, profane, Atheists, Blasphemers,
Idolaters, whoremongers, and all manner wicked persons within her Majesty's
dominions.

2. They have not been won unto the faith Romans 10.14 15.17.
by the preaching of the gospel, ney^ther ever made Act. 2.37.41.
willing covenant to walk up rightly before the Lord; but were drawn by civil
force in the beginning of her Majesty reign.

3. Their public worship of God in their assemblies, is false and idolatrous,
Exodus 20.4 Mat. 15.9.
translate^ out of the Popes blasphemous Mass book the cursed inventio^ of the
man of Sin, imposed both upon the Lord and them.

4. The Ministry of Lordly Lord Arch bishops, Bishops, Deanes, Arch Deacons
etc Parsons, Vicars, Curates, etc is not the true Romans 12. 1 Cor. 12. Ephe. 4.
Ministry of Christ in his testament, neithe^ accords thereto in name,
office, calling, entrance, administration or maintenance, bu^ is the same which
was found and left in the Popes Church.

5. Their Church Mat. 6.24 Romans 6.16. Gal. 5.1. Revel. 13.16. and 14.9.10.
is in bondage and bea^eth the yoke of Antichrist, the burdenou^ traditions
ceremonies and injunctions of their Lords the Bishops their courts and canons.

6. They are Ier. 7.12.13.14. and 19.15.
obsti^ate and incorrigible in these and other their transgressions, and will
not be brought unto the true obedience o^ Christ and practice of his laws, but
speake^vil of the truth* and witnesses of the same and of them Mat. 23.34
35.36. Gal. 4.29.30.
some they have killed, many imprisoned, all persecuted banished and blasphemed.

Therefore this people in this fearful estate cannot in any just intendement be
esteemed the children or church of God. Nevertheless the firm foundation of
God stands, having this (...) seat, the Lord knows those that a^^ his, and
let every one (...) naming the name of the Lord depart from iniqu^y^ 2 Timothy
2.19.

Delivered to Mr Wood a Scottish preacher in Ireland, anno 1594.



The humble, most earnest, and lamentable Complaint and Supplication of the
persecuted and proscribed Church and servants of CHRIST, falsely called
Brownists, Unto the high Court of Parliament.
THe most high GOD, possessor of heaven and earth, brings at this present
before your Lordships and Wisdoms (Right Honorable) his own Cause, his own
People, his own sworn and most treacherous Enemies, together with the most
shameful usage of his truth and servants, that ever has been heard of in the
days of Sions professed peace and tranquillity.

His Cause and People he offers unto your confideration and defense, in our
Profession and Persons: His Enemies and their outrage against his truth and
servants, in the persons and bloody proceedings of the Prelates of this Land
and their Accomplices.

We profosse the same faith and truth of the Gospel, which her Majesty,
which your Honors, this whole Land, and all the reformed Churches under Heaven
this day do hold and mainteyne. We go beyond them (being our only fault,
even in the judgment of our tyrannical and most savage Enemies) in the
detestation of all Popery, that most fearful Antichristian Religion* and draw
nearer in some pointsby our practice unto CHRIST'S holy order and institution.
This is our Faith, this is our Cause (right Honorable) yea the Lords Cause in
our sinful hands.

For the profession and maintenance of which Faith, the forenamed Enemies of
GOD deteyne in their hands within the Prisons about London (not to speak of
other Gaoles throughout the Land) about three score and twelve persons, Men,
women, young and old, lying in cold, in hunger, in dungeons and in yrons. Of
which number they have taken the Lords day last, being the 3. of this 4.
Month, 1592. about some 56. persons, hearing the word of God truly taught,
praying and praising God for his favors showed unto us, unto her Majesty, your
Honors, and this whole Land; and desiring our God to be merciful to us, unto
our gracious Prince, and country. Being employed in these holy actions, and no
other (as the parties who disturbed them can testify) they were taken in the
very place where the persecuted Church and Martyrs were enforced to use the
like exercises in Queen Mary's days.

The former number are now unbaleably committed by the Prelate or Bishop of
London unto close (for the most part) several prysons; As Bryde-well, the
Lymboe or Dungeon in Newgate; the Feet, the Marshalsee; the Counters; the
Clyncke; the Gatehouse; the Wotte-Lyon etc. Wherein we willingly acknowledge
the lot and inheritance in this life of our Forefathers and Brethren, the
holy Martyrs of the former age, and the entayled A^eldama or bloody succession
of the Sea of London and that whole lynage. Well here our brethren lie (how
long Lord holy and true thou know) in Dungeons, in hunger, in cold, in
nakedness, and all outward distress; For these bloody men will allow them
neither meat, drink, fire, lodging, nor suffer any whose hearts the Lord would
stir up for their releife to have any access unto them: purposing belike to
imprison them unto death, as they have done 17. or 18. others in the same
poisome Gaoles within these 6. years.

The Wife and Husband being now taken by them, they permit not to be in the
same, but have sen^ them to be closely kept in other Prysons. What the poor
Family does at home in the mean time, your Lordships may consider and justly
pity. Some of this company had not one penye about them when they were sent
into close prison, nor any thing being abroad (which is the case of the most of
them, if not all) to procure themselves and their poor families any
maintenance, save only their handly labors and trades. Whereby it is come to
pass that these Enemies of God do not only starve and undooe a number of men
in the prisons, but even a lamen^able company of poor Orphans, and servants
abroad. Their unbrydled sclanders; their lawless pri^e searches; their violent
breaking open and ryfling of our houses; their lamentable and barbarous usage
of weomen and young children in these hostile assaults; their uncontrolled the
every, robbing and taking away of whatsoever they think meet for us in this
case; their unappeased and merciless pursuit of us, from our houses, trades,
wives, children, especially from the holy society of the Saints and Church of
God, we are enforced to omit lest we should be over tedyous to your Lordships.
But their dealing this way toward us is so woeful right Honorable as we may
truly demand with grief of heart, whether the foreign Enemy, or our native
Country men do possess and bear rule over us in our dear and native
country.

Their whole dealing herein is most barbarous, most inhumane, but specially
most unchristian; and such as exceeds the cruelty of the heathen and popish
professed Tyrants and Persecutors. The records of the heathen persecution under
Nero, T^ajan, Desius, Galienus, Maximinian, etc. can scant affoard us any
examples of the like cruelty and havoc. For the heathen Romans would murder
openly and profes^edly: These godless men have putt the blood of war about
them in the day of the peace and truce which this whole land professes to hol^
with Jesus Christ and his servants* Bishop Bonner, Story, Weston dealt not
after this sort: For those whom they committed close, they would also either
feed, or permit to be fed by others, and they brought them in short space
openly unto Smithfield, to end their misery and to begin their never ending
joye. Whereas Bishop Elmar, Do, Stanhope, and Mr Justice Young, with the rest
of that persecuting and blood thirsty faculty will do neither of these. No
Felons, no Murderers, no Traitors in this Land are thus dealt with.

There are many of us by the mercies of God still out of their hands. The
former holy exercise and profession we purpose not to leave by the assistance
of God. We have as good warrant to reject the ordinances of Antichrist, and
labor for the recoverie of Christ's holy institutions, as our Fathers and
brethren in Queen Mary's days had to do the like. And we doubt not if our
cause were truly known unto her Majesty and your Wisdoms, but we should
find greater favor then they did, whereas our estate now is far more
lamentable.

And therefore we humbly and earnestly crave of her Majesty and your Lordships
both for our selves abroad, and for our Brethren now in miserable captivity,
but just and equal trial according unto her Majesty's Laws. If we prove not
our adversaries to be in a most pestilent and godless course, both in regard of
their Offices and their proceedings in them, and our selves to be in the right
way, we desire not to have the benefit of her Majesty's true and faithful
subjects, which of all earthly favors we account to be one of the greatest.
Are we malefactors? Are we anywise undutifull unto our Prince? Mainteyne we any
errors? Let us then be judicially convicted thereof and delivered to the civil
authority: But let not these bloody men both accuse, condemn, and closely
murder after this sort, contrary to all law, aequitie, and ^^^science, where
they alone are the plaintiffs, the accusers, the Judges, and the executioners
of their most fearful and barbarous tyranny.

They should not by the Laws of this Land go any further in cases of
Religion, then their own ecclesiastical censure; and then refer us to the
civil power. Their Forefathers, Gardyner, Boner, Story deal thus equally,
And we crave but this aequitie. Oh let her excellent Majesty our Sovereign,
and your Wisdoms consider and accord unto this our just Petition: For streams
of innocent blood are likely to be spilt in secret by these blood-thirstie men,
except her Majesty and your Lordships do take order with their most cruel and
inhumane procedings.

We crave for all of us but the liberty either to dye openly, or to live
openly in the land of our Nat^vitie. If we deserve death, it beseems the
magestie of Justice not to see us closely murdered, yea starved to death with
hunger and cold, and styfled in loathsome Dungeons. If we be guiltless, we
crave but the benefit of our innocence: viz: That we may have peace to serve
our God and our prince in the place of the Sepulchers of our Fathers.

Thus protesting our innocence, complaining of violence and wrong, and crying
for justice on the behalf and in the name of that righteous Judge the God of
equity and justice, we continue our prayers unto him for her Majesty and your
Honors whose hearts we beseech him to incline toward this our most aequal and
just suite Through CHRIST JESUS our Lord.




Desiderius. I pray you tell me, Was this Petition of Mr Barrowes own writing?


Miles. The draught of it was, and some copies also. One of which I have seen
in the hands of a Gent. very fairly wri^ten, and out of it was this same
exactly taken. But read the other, and then tell me your judgment of them both.

To our Sovereign Lord the Kings most excellent Majesty, together with the
Honorable Nobility, Knights, and Burgesses now assembled at the High Court of
Parliament.
MAy it please your Majesty, Honors, and worships, graciously to respect the
humble suit^ of Gods poor afflicted servants, and well affected loyal subjects
to your Highness and Honors. We are many of us constrained to live in exile^
out of our native Country, others deteyned in prisons, all of us in some
affliction, which the Prelates and Clergy of this Land have infflicted upon us
for our faith in God, and obedience to the Gospel of our Lo: Jesus Christ, We
have never to this day been convinced of heresy, error or crime for which we
should sustain the great calamities we have endured. The grounds of Christian
religion professed and mainteyned in this Land and other Churches round about,
we also with one heart and spirit assent unto and profess. Enemies we are to
all Popery, Anabaptistrie, or other heresy, schism, rebellion, treason or
faction; and whatsoever else is contrary to the wholesome doctrine of the
Gospel or the prosperity and good estate of this Realm. Our only desire is
so to serve God as that we may please him with reverence and fear: absteyning
and keeping our souls and bodies, from all remnants of the Roman Religion,
Idolatry, superstition and vain will worship of what sort soever. We witness
against the unlawful pompous Hierarchy, and priest hood of this nation, as
utterly disagreeing from the Testament of Christ and Ministry there
appointed, in their Offices, callings, administrations and Lordlike livings and
maintenance. Against the confuse, profane and it religious multitude of all
sorts of vicious livers baptized into and retained in the body of this Church
of England without voluntary profession of, and holy walking in the faith of
the Gospel: against their manner of worship and service, by reading prayers
out of a book, in stead of true spiritual invocation on the name of the Lord:
and briefly, against all other popish aboses and relics of the man of Syn
whatsoever. And because this our testimony makes against the irregular
authority of the Prelates, reproves their evil actions, and disproveth their
Pomp, statelynes, rich revenues, stipends, etc. therefore have they in all
hostile manner set themselves against us, persecuting us unto bands, exile and
death it self; reproching us as Schismatiques, Donatists, Brownists, seditious
persons etc. though they could never co^vince us of these, or any the like
crimes: and though we have not ceased, neither by Gods grace will cease, to
wish and procure good to their souls and bodies in the Lord. Now therefore our
humble request is unto your Majesty, Honors; and worships, that
notwithstanding these differences we may be suffered to return into our native
country here to live in peace practicing the faith of Christ which we
profess, and have long since set forth to the view of the world in our public
Confession wherein none hitherto have shevved us any error: and seeing that
peoples of other nations are by your Majesty, and Honors, suffered in this
Realm, though differing from the ecclesiastical state of the same; we hope
that your Highness natural and loyal subjects, may find like favor at your
hands. For although we cannot but hold and witness the truth of God against the
corruptions remaining: yet hold we ^^ in no wise lavvfull for our selves or
any subjects to attempt the reforming or abolishing of these, or any the like
abuses, for God has committed the svvord into your Majesty's hand alone, who
in his time will persuade (we trust) your royal heart to fulfill his will
and execute his judgments upon the remainders of the spiritual ^abylon, which
will turn to as great honor to God, honor to your Majesty, and good of
this Realm as the abolishing of Abba^s, Muncks, Friars, Mass, Images etc.
has ^urned heretofore. So the Lord of Lords and King of the Rulers of the
earth will stablish your Crown etc* Kingdom unto length of days: And
howsoever this our suite shall be regarded, we will not cease in all places of
our pilgrimage to pray for and procure the good of your Majesty, your Honors,
worships, and all our country, whom God Almighty bless with long life and
happy days on earth and crown with everlasting glory in the highest
heavens. Amen.




Desiderius. Now have I read this Petition also, and I thank you for them
both; for me thinks they are able to give content, satisfaction, and
worthyness to speak, even in the presence of a Prince. A wonder it is if they
moved not Magistrates to pity and compassion, save only that our Lordly
Ministers are subtle incensers and great resisters. God give them repentance
unto life, if through their malicious sinning they be not appointed unto death.
But I much lament that our dear Country should be so stained with suffering
them to exercise such cruelty toward those that witness the truth in any part
thereof. It is therefore a much better thing for any to partake of their
afflictions, then with their persecutors in their oppressing of them. For of
the people of God afflicted the Apostle says; It is a righteous thing with
God, to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you, And to you which are
troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall show himself from heaven, with
his mighty Angels, In flaming fire, ^^^dring vengeance etc. 2 Thessalonians. 1.6.7. etc.


Miles. It is well observed Desiderius. For tha^ day of the Lords coming shall be
unto his people and weldoers, a day of gladness and much joy* but unto the
wicked and evil doers it will cause great terror and fear. To them it will
be as the Prophet Joel says, A day of darkness and of blacknes, a day of
clouds and obscurity. Joel 2.2. Then shall they cry hills and mountains
cover us from the presence of him* that suteth on the throne. (Then shall a
good conscience be more worth then a world. And whosoever would have it at that
day must labor to have and to hold, to nourish and enterteine it, all the
days of his life; lest when he seeks for it he find it not. And they that
once have it, let the^ take heed they make not shipwreck thereof.) But for the
comfort of all such as are persecuted for conscience sake, and to the terrifyng
of their persecutors, the Apostle uses this worthy speech, And in nothing
fear your adversaries which is to them a token of perdition, but to you of
salvation, and that of God. Phil. 1.28.


Desiderius. You began to speak of the unlawfulnes of appropriating such
livings to the maintenance of the true Ministry and worship, which the
idolaters consecrated unto false ministeries and false worship: I desire you
clear that point further if you can. For one would think there can be no use
made of them tending more to the honor of God, then the employing of them to
his service and worship.


Miles. The same color might have be set upon the offering up of diverse strange
beas^es in sacrifice to the Lord, which yet might not be done by any man, at
any time, for any cause. And this which you object, carries no fairer a show
with it, then did Saul his sparing the fat cattle of Ameleck under the same
pretense of offering them in sacrifice to the Lord: but not being according to
the mind of God manifested by his word, but contrary to the same* it was
imputed unto him for rebellion and transgression, which are matched by the
Prophet with witchcraft, wickedness, and idolatry. 1 Samuel 15. For the Lord has
no such pleasure in sacrifice, as when his voice is obeyed. ( ibidem.) And thus
may you see that Saul's good intent had as fair a color as can be set upon the
employments of popish livings to true Church uses; yet was this a special cause
of his ruin, and cutting off from his kingdom. God requires not that to be
done, which is right in the eyes of man, but all that he commands, and is
according to his will revealed, that is to be observed with all strictnes,
care, love, readynes and good conscience. We must not be wiser, nor holyer
then God, neither do more in his worship and service then he commands. And
seeing he has no where commanded nor given such livings for his Church and
Ministry, how may any man appoint or appropriate them thereunto? If God had
commanded all such livings to have been destroyed utterly, and made void from
all use of man, (as he commanded Adam and Eve not to eat (...) all of the tree
of knowledge of good and evil,) should he not therein be obeyed? How much more
readily then should men submit unto him therein, seeing he allows them for
charitable uses in the common wealth, and has appointed another manner of
maintenance for the ministry of his Church, as has been showed before.

And as it is plain that men have no commandment from God to bring in such
livings for church uses; so neither may they do it voluntarily, without
commmandement. For all voluntary religion and will worship is vain, and all
worship to God, by the inventions, traditions and precepts of men, is also
vain. Esa. 29.13. Mat. 15.8.9. Cull. 2.21.22.23. and against the 2d.
Commandment. Exo. 20.4.5.6.

Moreover by the law of God in Deuteronomy. 33, it is unlawful for any man to bring
the hyre of a whore, into the house of the Lord our God, for any vow, (Which
vows were voluntary.) And the reason why such might not be so brought, is
there expressed to be, because it is an abomination to the Lord our God. Then
whosoever brings into his house, for maintenance of his Ministry, Worship
or the like; the livings consecrated to the idolatrous worship and ministry
of that Popish heap of Antichristians the false Church, such (I say) do bring
in the hyre of a whore, which by this law is unlawful for men, and abomination
unto the Lord. For no man can justly deny that spiritual whoredom is as great
a sin as carnal, neither can any truly affirm, that ever there was a more
abominable (...) for spiritual whoredoms and adulteries then i^ the church of
Rome, which has made all nation drunk with the cup of her fornications, and
hat^ received much hire of many lovers, that have (for their dalliance and
pleasures with her) greatly in riched her. Whereupon it will inevitably follow,
and men may safely conclude that the hire of this spiritual whore is as
loathsome, intolerable and unlawfull^ for any service in and about the Church
and worship of God, or support of his Ministry, as the hire of any carnal
whore in the world ever was. For a^ the laws of God are spiritual, and have
in them besides the outward letter, a spiritual sense and understanding; so
must we by the same law forealleaged hold both these as an abomination to the
Lord our God. Let every one therefore that has his true fear, beware that
they neither bring in not assent unto the bringing in, for maintenance of the
true Ministry and worship, the hire of that Popish Church which is so
excedingly adulterate from the right way, worship, order and faith of God, and
so old (yea so incorrigible) in her evils, as the conscience of good
Protestants do well know, and need no further conviction that she is not,
neither possibly can be, the true Spouse and Church of Christ in such estate;
but a most abominable harlote^, wedded to her Lord God the Pope, as he is
called by themselves in their own writings. Though indeed he be the very
Antichrist, and suiteable head of that ^dolatrous church, which in all (...)
self above King and Kaesar, nay more then so, even above all that is called God
or that is worshipped. ^ These. 2.4. And how then should the hyre and wage, that
is, the livings and revenues, befallen unto this filthy woman the false Church,
for her fornications, be now converted and given unto the true Spouse and
Church of Christ, or unto the Ministry thereof. Is there any hon^st man
(think you) that will endure to see his wife decked with the known Jewels and
gifts that some notorious open harlote had received of her lewd lovers? And
may we think that Christ Jesus will endure his Spouse the true Church, to be
decked, supported and laciviously set up with the hire of the whore of Rome,
that false and counterfeyt Church, as though he had no other means to
mainteyne her, then that which is evidently the wage of wickedness and engine of
evil?


Desiderius. But how can the Popish church livings be accounted engines of evil?


Miles. Thus, First they did apperteyne to the Common wealth, and were in all
deceiveablenes of unrighteousnes craftily purloigned drawn and co^verted to
Antichrists church and clergy. From the time whereof they challenge the only
right and prerogative concerning them: though in deed they were then perverted
from a right and lawful use, to an unlawful, wrong and wicked use. For men
ought to honor the Lord with their riches, etc. ( Prove. 3.9.) and not thereby
to advance Antichrist and his religion. God is honored by riches, only when
they are employed acco^^ding to his Law and appointment. But these being
employed for sinful services contrary to the Law men are ready enough for
desire of enjoying suc^ settled livings to enter into and continue in an
ido^latrous, treacherous, and Antichristian estate. There^fore such livings are
engines of evil.

Secondly, they being once made ecclesiasticall^ caused great covetousnes to
come upon our Protesta^^ Bishops and Priests, that of a desire to have vvha^
the Popelings left, they played catch that catc^ may, as if they thought
themselves (as I know the^ are) the next heirs and nearest of kin unto the
for^mer Clergy, the burners of Gods holy Bible, an^ murderers of our
forefathers the Martyrs. And ar^ not these engines of evil?

3. And vvhiles they are continued in this eccle^siasticall use, they are great
allurements to the Iesu^ites and Seminary Priests, (the Popes marked
Mi^nisters, the merchants and sales-men of his Babylonish vvares,) to plot,
contrive and practice, their treasonable courses against Kings and Princes, no^
caring for the overthrovve of States and Countries* so as they may again make
way for the sale of their said vvares, and repossesse the former consecrated
livings to themselves again, vvwhich are now in the hands and use of the
Protestant Clergy, whom therefore the Papists do divulge as thieves. And are
they not engines of evil?

4. And again, the continuance of them in the use aforesaid, do strongly
nourish their hopes to see a day for their own seating in them again. Whereas
if that ecclesiastical use were changed, and the things established to a good
civil use, their hopes would utterly vanish away, and Princes should be settled
in much more safety then they are or can be whiles these baits remain. And
are not these then, rightly termed engines of evil?

Fifthly, they being not restored to the common wealth, from whence they were
taken; but serving for the pomp of proud Prelates and Priests, usurpers keeps
owners from their right; and through want of supply in such outward helps,
some do sterve, others do steal, through which many are hanged, God is
dishonored, the gospel disgraced, the face of good people ashamed, and true
christian hearts are wounded. And are not these the very engines of evil?


Desiderius. Enough Miles the point is plain. And I see by these that you
might make a whole volume of that argument only.


Miles Micklebound. But what think you then, were it not better that our
Clergy would carry themselves concerning these livings, as honest Abraham the
father of the faithful did about the spoils of Sodom which he recovered from
the five Kings, who had immediately before taken them for a spoil from Sodom.
Of the which, Abraham would not take for himself so much as a thread or a shoe
latchet, lest the King of Sodom should say, I have made that all false and
antichristian Ministeries (yet re^^yned in the land) ought by the Princes
authority to be rooted out. The second, That (by like authority) their
antichristian and idolatrous livings ought to be co^verted to (charitable)
civil uses: and are not to be given or appropriated to Gods true Ministry for
the maintenance thereof: neither ought it to receive the same. For it stands not
with the honor of God, that Beth-el, Gods house, should be garnished and
supported with the things belonging to or taken from Beth-aven the house of
idols. As if the Almighty wanted other means for support of his own house,
and must needs be beholden to the house of idols to help him and his. This sin
is in nature somewhat differing from the sin of the Babylonians in stealing away
the vessels out of the Lords house to busy in the belching banquets of
Belshazzar; but it differs not in substance from it.


Desiderius. You call the writing, the first part etc. which implies a second
likewise. But is there so?


Miles. I never saw it; but I hope ere my return, I shall see Amsterdam and
Leyden, where I shall make diligent inquiry among the people there. But doutful
it is, that after the Bishops heard of the first part and of an intendement of
a second, that they hastened the authors death, to stop the current that began
to run so strongly against them. Wherefore I exhort you to use this well, read
it advisedly, and the Lord direct thy spirit to the right understanding and
good use making of all things. And so fare ye well till to morrow and the day
after.


THE FIRST PART OF THE PLATFORM, PENNED BY THAT WORTHY SERVANT OF JESUS
CHRIST* and blessed witness of his most holy Ordinances, to the loss of life;
Mr. HENRY BARROVVE.
1. THat the offices of Archbishops, Lord Bishops, Archdeacons etc. with all
their Courts and under officers ought by the commandment of God to be
suppressed by the Princes authority: and the persons usurping the same,
hereafter to be compelled to walk in some lawful calling either in the Church
or commune wealth, as God shall make them fit and call them thereunto.

2. That this whole ministry and offices of Deane, Sub-deane, Prebends etc.
Parson, Vicar, Curates, Stypendarie Lectorers, as the ^aile of the Dragon ought
by the Prince to be suppressed and abolished: And the persons usurping the same
to be compelled from henceforth to walk orderly in some lawful calling or
office, in Church or common wealth, as God makes them fit and calls them
la^^fully thereunto, using the gifts that God ha^ given them aright to the
glory of the give^ the good of the Church.

3. That the Lands and lordly revenues ^ these Archbishops, Lord Bishops,
Deane etc. together with the gleabes, temporalitie etc. ought to be resumed by
the Prince, an^ wholly converted to civil uses.

4. That the Prince may give unto her su^^jects the owners of them, their
several tith^^ as well open as privy, or reserve so much (...) way of tribute
thereof as shall seem good u^ to her Majesty.

5. That the true Ministry ought not t^ be mainteyned by such gleabes,
tithes, set st^^pends, or by the rated wages of the profan^ but by the free
contribution and dutiful b^^nevolence of the faithful, especially of the
Congregation unto which they administer*

6. That the Prince ought to proclaim ^ publish the gospel of Christ, with the
tru^^ preaching and sincere practice thereof in a^^ things that God shall give
knowledge of: An^ to forbid and exterminate all other religion^ worship and
ministeries within her dominion^*

SEeing that holy and mighty God of heaven and earth will only be worshipped
and served ^n his Church according to his own prescript will in his word, Exodus
20.2 3.4.5. Man 15.9. Nu^. 3.10. Romans 12.7.8.
and not by any devises of men how holy or expedient soever they may seem to
themselves, and by that Ministry only which his son the Lord of the house
has instituted in his last will and testament, and not by any other or strange
Ministry: Seeing ^o great blessings and promises both ^f this life and of the
life to come are made to those people and church^s that thus worship and serve
the Lord according to his own holy will, as we most plentifully and com^ortably
read in the scriptures, Deuteronomy. 28.29.30.31.32. chapter
and on the contrary such dreadful plagues and fearful judgments denoun^ed
against and executed upon those Nations and people that make a show otherwise
to worship and serve God according to their own devises or policies: Zech. 11.
Ezekiel. 14. Ier. 23.2^.22.
Seeing God always speaks by his own Ministry (...) his own people, and
never by a^ false Sinistery* but always sende^ the one in his espetial mercy
(...) prepare and make fit unto his he^^ veny kingdom, Prove. 2.10.11.12. etc.
Pro. 16.17. and 14.12.
the other in h^^ wrath and displeasure to seduce (...) prepare al degrees unto
judgemen^ it behooveth every soul in what (...) state soever to look
diligently un^^ and to be well assured of their way wherein they walk and are
led: 16. Mat. 7.
B^ petially and above all, it is the offi^^ and duty of Princes and Rulers
(...) whom the word and sword of Go^ is therefore committed, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19. 1.
King. 2.3.2 Chron. 15. and 17. and 29 and 30. and 34. chap.
most car^^fully to advance and establish in the dominions the true worship and
M^^nisterie of God and to suppress (...) root out all contrary, as they
te^^der their own salvation at that da^ Amos. 5.4.5. Dan. 3.10. Reve.
14.4.9.10.11.12. Luk 12.4.5.
of all accounts and the salvation (...) all that people under their charge
Private members howsoever the^ ought to refrain and to keep the^^ souls and
bodies undefiled from ^ false worship which is imposed, suffering rather in all
patient and christian manner, whatsoever may be inflicted upon them for the
same, (as they that fear more to offend God then men, 1. Cor. 7.20 Tit. 3.1.
1. Pet. 2.13 16.
) yet ought they not to stretch forth their hand by force to the reformation of
any public enormities, which are by the Magistrates authority set up: For
that were to transgress the limits of their own place and calling, to usurp
and intrude into the Princes royal throne and dignity. Which heinous
presumption escapes not due vengeance either in this life or in the world to
come. Ezekiel. 4.4. and 22.30.31. Amos 3.7.8. Mic 3.8.2 Cor. 10.4.5.6.
But now howsoever no private subject ought to intermedle with the execution of
any thing, that belongs to the Princes and Magistrates office, without the
Princes special commandment and deputation thereunto: yet is it the bounden
duty of every true hearted subject and faithful servant of God, to witness and
cry out against all things that are exalted against the knowledge of God, to
pray for and by all hum^ble, peaceable and godly means, t^ advertise, exhort,
and excite, their Prince and Magistrates to remove and depose all false worship
and fals^ ministers in the land. For this caus^ have we the Lord Jesus Christ's
mos^ unworthy servants and witnesses hi^ thereto endured in all meek and
pa^cient manner, the great outrage an^ tyranny which this antichristian Ro^mish
prelacie and clergy have lon^ exercised over our poor bodies, ra^ther then to
stoop down either t^ that patched traditionall worshi^ which they devise and
impose, o^ unto that unlawful power which they usurp and exercise over all men
consciences: yea at this present (^^specially upon your honors so gr^^cious
acceptance) we are bold (y^ in all reverence and humility) t^ declare our
loyal hearts and inti^ affections as in the sight of Christ unto our most
gracious sovereign Queen Elizabeth, and unto this whole State, by discovering
these deceivers, and manifesting these heinous abuses and intolerable
inormities which remain in the Land by their means to the high displeasure of
God, though it be with the present peril and danger of our lives, which those
Antichristian Bishops armed with such power and hostility will soon upon the
knowledge that we have revealed these matters dispatch one way or another: But
we make no reckning nor speech of these things, neither are our lives dear
unto our selves so we may finish up our testimony and course with joy, and by
giving warning (if Gods will be) to prevent the heavy wrath and judgments of
God that hangs over this whole land, for the heinous profanation of Gods name,
contempt of his word, and general impiety even of all degrees: All which
enormities here to discuss in particular as they flow from them into all
estates of the land would require a larger discourse then this present time or
purpose will permit: Only in this place it may suffice that we engage our
mortal lives and undertake upon the loss of the same to make manifest proof
unto all men by the undoubted word of God in any free and christian conference
either public or private: or to make evident demonstration in writing by the
scriptures (if we may be permitted) That this whole ministry and public
ministration, which is by them exercised in the Church of England is false and
antichristian, such as cannot be joined to the gospel of Christ; nor used in
the Church of Christ which being proved such, then is it the Princes duty as
she tendereth the salvation of her own soul, and the safety of all this
people which the Lord has committed unto her charge to abolish and depose the
same.

Neither is there cause why her Majesty should make more scruple or delay
herein, then her most royal Auncestor of famous memory King Henry the eight
did in much less light and assurance, when he expelled the Pope and suppressed
the Abbeys etc. Especially when it shall be proved that the whole ministry
which now remains even from the Primate Archbishop to the lowest Sommoner,
together with their Courts, Canons Offices, Officers, etc. are of the same
birth, belonged to the same apostaticall throne, have as little mention, place
or use in the testament and Church of Christ as they, and therefore ought in
like manner together with their foresaid father and brethren be cast out, and
not to be suffered in the Church or common wealth: Neither can this matter and
motion now seem strange, seeing all foreign Churches in all other places have
cast out and changed this ministry, howsoever either of ignorance or fleshly
policy they might for a time give hands thereunto, yet except they can show
that Christ has instituted diverse and sundry kinds of ministeries and
governments unto his Church, one in one age and place, another in an other,
Ephesians. 4.4.5.6.10.11.12.13. Heb 3.6. and 12.27.28. and 13.8.
or that the Ministry of the new testament is not certain, permanent and
unchangeable, the same in all Churches, then doubtless these so diverse
ministeries, in name, office, entrance, administration, as theirs and this are,
cannot both of them be of God. Again, even at home the forward preachers of
these present times (not to speak of such motions unto the Kings of this land
at sundry other times) have a long time sought and sued unto her Majesty and
to the Parliaments for a Reformation, viz. That these Arch bishops, Bishops,
Arch deacons, Deanes, etc. with all their Courts, colleages, government and
administration might be removed and taken away* their ample and great livings
converted to the maintenance of sundry poor preachers, and that the Church
might be restored to that ancient order and governeme^t which Christ has
instituted (by them called discipline): which matter they neither could nor
durst have moved or attempted if the office, ministry, government of these
Lord Bishops etc. had not been wholly antichristian, 2 Chro^. 29. and 35. chapter
and directly contrary to the testament of Christ: For if the office,
ministry, and government of these Lord Bishops and their accomplices had been
of God, they ought still of necessity with all reverence to have been
reserved, the corruptions and abuses that had grown therein to be corrected and
purged* But if their offices, ministry and government were the institution
and ordinance of Christ, what a dangerous and execrable motion had it been to
persuade the Prince and Parliament to reject and cast out the true Offices,
Ministry and Government of Christ out of the Church? They that should thus
reject Christ's Ministry, Job. 13.20. Luke 10.16
ordinances, or any part thereof, reject Christ himself, do violence to his
members, spoil and ruinate the Church, and cannot be of God: But these men
sought not the reformation or correction of the persons, or abuses of these
Lordly Bishops, their Courts, etc. but the utter remooving and abolishing of
their offices, ministry and government for ever out of the land: whereby it is
manifest these men (howsoever they have since changed their copy,) took them
to be Antichristian and such as ought not to be used or suffered in the Church
of Christ.

And now that these Bishops and their train, their offices, ministry,
government are thus found, even by the preachers themselves not to be of God,
(as to any that will further examine the^ by the rules of Christ's testament
cannot be hid or doubtful) we see not how even these Reformists themselves
this choice reserved remna^t, or this rabble of Parsons, Vicars, Vagrant
hireling preachers, without certain place, office, or charge (which are but
the very tail of the dragon) should be exempt from the same judgment, Ioh.
10.1.
seeing they all are derived and proceeded from the same apostaticall throne
that the Bishops, yea even from the throne of the Bishops. So that if the
Bishops be not the true ministry of Christ, 2 Cor. 6.1^ Ps. 94.2^*
but false and antichristian, then can they not make and ordeyn true Ministers,
or in that office and estate have any thing to do in the Church of Christ. But
all these most forward Preachers themselves with all the rest of these Parsons,
Vicars, Curates, were all ordained and made ministers by these Bishops, and
execute their Ministry under them, according to their decrees, receiving
their license, swearing their canonical obedience, etc. Therefore if the one
be antichristian and to b^ cast out, so must the other of necessity: Especially
seeing the names, offices, entrance, administration, and maintenance of these,
are as false and contrary to the rules of Christ's testament, as those of the
Bishops, and have no more place or mention in the testament and Church of
Christ then their Lords and Bishops and their assistants have: Neither can we
see with what conscience they could both denounce the Bishops antichristian and
to be abolished, and yet both receive their ministry from them and execute it
under them, and that even when and since they labored this Reformation: whose
corrupt covetous mind yet further appears in that they sought the fat
livings and Lordly revenewes of these Bishops, Deanes etc. which they erewhile
blamed in those possessors, and so but labored to do as much for their Lords
the Bishops, Mat. 6.24
as the Bishops did to their Lord the Pope: which is but to cast out their name
and persons, 1 These. 2.3 4.5.
yet to reserve all their ^^vings and privileges, even all the fat and gainful
ware of Amalek unto themselves. 1 Samuel 15.21.
Thus howsoever they be divided amongst themselves (which Luke 11.1^
is no strength to their kingdom) yet is it evident they came all of a brood,
Rev. 9.
even of that swarm of Locusts that came out of the smoke of the bottomless
pit, when that key thereof was given to that fallen starr Antichrist: which
Locusts devoured all the fruits of the earth, and had the power of Scorpions
to sting and invenome the consciences of their hearers: But now being
discovered they shall together which the Beast (before whose throne they wrought
their miracles with the east wind of Gods judgments) be blown into the lake
that is prepared for the Beast and for the false Prophet, Rev. 19.20
and not in this estate be allowed any place in the Church of Christ for ever.

And now that this whole minis^tery, both Lord Bishops and their assistants,
Collegiate Deanes and their associates, Tithing Parsons and their Curates,
together with all these mercenarie vagrant preachers are found to be strange
and antichristian, such as are not to be used, suffered or mainteyned in the
Church of Christ, it remains that we entreat of their fat portion and large
livings, to whom of right they now belong, whether to the Church or Common
wealth, to the Ministry or to the Prince. To this or any false ministry they
cannot belong, Psalm. 16.4. 2 Chronicles. 13 9.10.
because a false ministry is not to be suffered much less to be endowed or
maintained in any Christian common wealth: Neither can the true Church or
Ministry prescribe or challenge any present right or interest in these lands
or endowments of this false Ministry. Christ has provided and instituted for
his Ministry an other kind of maintenance then such royalties, 1 Cor. 9. 7.
etc.
Lordships, gleabe lands, tithes, or (...) stipends: Gal. 6.6. 2 Cor. 9. 1. Cor
16*1.2.
The true ministry is ^o live and to be mainteyned of the ^lock to which they
attend and administer, and that not by tenthes or ^hirds, by stints or rates,
by bargain, ^aw, or imposition, but by the loving, free, yet dutiful
contribution of the flock, as the ability of the one extends, and the needs
of the other require, each one most willingly not by constraint imparting even
of all their goods unto them to ^eleeve their wants, not to nourish them in
superfluity, Phil. 3. 18.19.
idleness, etc. These worldly promotions, tithes, set stipends etc. belong
rather to idle ^ellies and hirelings, then to the true Ministry of Christ,
whereof they are and always have been rather the corruption then the
maintenance. These would but hinder and extinguish the continual love, care,
benevolence and duty of the flock unto their ministry; 1. Pet. 5.1.3.
as also the labor, diligence, and watchfulnes and faithfulness of the
Ministry to their flock as we have lamentable expe^^^ence in the present
estate of this ^^^nistery and people generally. Romans 12.7.8. 1 Cor. 12 29.
Ephesians. 4.11.
Aga^^^ the number, estate, and needs (...) the ministry are so uncertain,
the^ sometimes being more, sometim^^ fewer to be mainteyned, accordi^^ to the
greatness and variable esta^^ of each congregation (and not (...) each parish
one only, as here) (...) ministry also some of them havi^^ families greater
or less, and sund^^ necessary occasions so uncertainly they cannot be provided
for, rate^^ and limited by any better or oth^^ laws and orders then those
Chr^^^ has set down in his testament. (...) conclude, this alotting of
Lande^^ Tithes etc. to the ministry in ev^^ry parish both is preposterous,
sei^^ as yet there is not in every such p^^rish, no not in any one parish, a
pe^^ple rightly gathered unto, and joy^^ed in the faith orderly together, (...)
for a ministry, much less any tr^^ Ministry, rightly chosen and est^blished
amongst them: and also it presupposes yea makes a necessity that there must
be and always shall be unto the worlds end (so long as there be any
inhabitants) a true Church and Ministry in every parish, and so confirms
that popish error of local and personal succession, besides sundry other
inconveniences that would ensue thereof. This little that has been said may
suffice to show that the true Church and Ministry of Christ have no claim,
interest nor right unto, neither use of these Lordships, gleabes, tithes, set
stipends etc. which erewhile were possessed by these Prelates and prowling
Priests, then must they of necessiey belong and return unto the Prince and
commune wealth from whence they first proceeded: Now whether unto the King as
supreme Lord, or unto the Lords patrons that owe the advousons may some
question arise, which controversy being a matter in law, shall much better be
pleaded and decided b^ her Majesty's Sergeants and Iudg^ then by us that are
ignorant of the^ matters. Only this concernin^ the office of these Patrones we
say that we find no mention thereof i^ the testament of Christ (where a^ the
offices of his church are perfec^ly described, nor any use thereof i^ the Church
of Christ, but rathe^ find it greatly prejudicial and con^trary unto the
liberty and holy or^der of the Church. For Christ hat^ appointed that every
particula^ Church all the members thereof ga^thered together as well learned as
o^ther, Act. 6.2.5. and 14.23. Titus 1.5. 1 Timothy 3.10
with one accord should mak^ choice of their Ministry after du^ proof
according to the rules prescribed. Which choice can not be made or order kept
when one man (were he never so wise) takes away the power and duty of the
whole Church to make the choice, how much less when the Patron that owes the
advouson, is many times a stranger both to the Priest and people, ignorant, and
unable to discern or judge of the gifts, fitnes, life of the person chosen and
presented, the Patro^ many times being a child, a woman, yea peradventure a
profane or wicked person, a Papist, an Atheist, an Heretic etc. which choice
the miserable people rue that are subject to these woeful orders, and must
endure whatsoever these lords their Patron and Ordinary do, be the Priest never
so bad. Neither can all the learning and wisdom these Bps. have or want their
orders, laying on their hands, or breathing their vnholighoste upon them, make
either this trust and calling of these Patrones good, or the Parsons thus
called true Ministers of Christ. All that God has appointed to the Ministry he
calls lawfully to the ministry, neither can any that want this lawful
calling be lawful Ministers: Now then the office of these Patrones being
found thus contrary to the word of God, thus prejudicial and pernici^ous to
the Church, Number. 16.5 40. Number. 17.8. Heb. 5.4.
ought also by the Prince to be abolished: which office being taken away we
see no^ how any man can challenge the re^venous belonging thereunto as to their
private use. When in the bes^ consideration these Patrones were but as Deputies
or Feffees of trus^ to see the Town furnished of a con^venient Priest in due
time, and might not at any time deteine any part o^ the revenues to their own
private vse^ Such as challenge by impropriati^on claim by a new title and
advance the Princes right from whom they received the same. Which shows that
the Prince has power to change the use and bestow the Lands as pleases her
only to civil use. But as to these tithes which these ravenous Priests extort
from all her Majesty's subjects thrusting in their sickle into every field,
Number. 18.21. etc. 1 Samuel 2.14.15.16. Mat. 23.14.23.
their fleshhooke into every poor bodies kettle, without regard of faithful or
unfaithful, rich or poor, devouring widows houses, and poor succourlesse
children under color of long prayers, tithing even to the Mint and Anyse,
though the Prince ought to take the^ out of these greedy harpies hands, and
may of her royal authority assume not only them, but even what part of her
subjects goods it shall please her, Romans 13.6. Mat. 17.25.27.
in way of tribute: yet if her Majesty of her bounteous disposition shall
vouchsafe to give back and restore these tithes to their peculiar owners,
especially to the poor, or to reserve what portion thereof she please to her
own use, she shall both inriche and highly content all her subjects, and bind
them most firmly unto her: and far surpass in bounty, not only all her royal
Progenitors, but even rather all the Kings and Emperors that ever were in the
world, and relieve more poor hungry souls every day, then the King Assuerosh
did at his long lasting su^ptuous feast, Est. 1.3.4.5.
which shall no doubt be more acceptable and be held more pure religion and
undefiled before God, Esa. 58.6. and 1.17.
thus to visit the widow and fatherless in their tribulation, Iam. 1.27.
to smite off this more heavy yoke then ever was imposed by any King of this
Land, and let the oppressed go free, and to keep her self unspotted of the
world; then to make sumptuous feasts unto the rich, or to offer store of burnt
offerings unto God.

And as her Majesty shall hereby release the bodies of her oppressed subjects,
from daily grievous exactions of these greedy Priests; so much more shall she
relieve many a sorrowful distressed soul: yea even the whole Land that long
have been misled and held under these more then Babylonish yoke and Egyptian
bondage of their Antichristian power, ministry and traditions, by proclaiming
unto al her subjects the joyous heavenly pure gospel of Christ, 2 Chronicles. 17
7.8.9.
calling all men by all means to the holy free and sincere practice thereof in
all things as God shall give sight, Esa. 2.2.3. Ioh. 12.3^. 2 Chro. 19.5 6.7.
Deu. 1.15.16.17.
prohibiting, restreininge and abolishing all contrary religions and practice,
and by seeing the Law of God in both the Tables daily observed by all estates
and degrees within her highness Dominions. And lo how the Lord inviteth and
inciteth her highness hereunto preferring her and giving her the preeminence of
this glorious work before all the Kings of the world as also how richly he
rewards all that further this high service both by putting into their hands
the rich spoil of this confused Babylon, and by bringing them to Sion the
City of his solemn feasts. O what a joy, what a Iubile, what a happy day
were this to the whole Land, far surpassing that at Machanajjm to see our
heavenly King Christ Jesus thus with one accord received and welcomed into his
kingdom, his Church? How should Gods name and our Queens praise be celebrate
for this by every mouth even with a general applausion and Celeusme? The sound
whereof should not only fill this Land, but be heard into all others to the
giving them example and stirring them up unto the like extirpation of all
Idolatry, and unto the true practice of the Gospel: what Christian, yea what
stony heart would hinder God from this glory, the Prince from this fame, the
people from this comfort, themselves and all others from this salvation?

How heinous then is the sin and impiety of the Divines and Prophets of
these times, against God, their Prince, and the whole land, that by their
uttermost power and endeavors seek to stop and turn back her Majesty, her
most honorable Counselors and Nobles from this holy straight course, by
speaking evil of the Gospel and ordinances of Christ, and perverting the
straight ways of God, Act. 13.8. 2 Timothy 3.8.
by leading and houlding captive them and the whole Land under their false
worship and antichristian ministry to the seducing and destruction of all
their souls, Rev. 13.6.7.15.
and by accusing, reproching, slandering, persecuting, false imprisoning, and
if they could hanging and burning all such as either in all humble and
Christian manner stand and plead for the sincere and true practice of the
Gospel, Jude 3. Gal 5.1.
or by the light thereof discover and eschew the popish corruptions and
abominations which they impose and mainteyne contrary to the truth of the
Gospel. These are the only means whereby these Prelates defend themselves or
convince their adversaries, which if they were but even a little while plucked
out of their hands by her Majesty, and the honorable Governors, and called
to the spiritual sword to defend their doings by the direct rule of Gods word,
then were they disarmed, discovered, and confounded at once, then should it
soon be seen how well these timber, 1 Cor. 3.13. Ephesians. 5.13.
straw, and stubble buildings, of theirs would endure that fiery trial of Gods
word, Ier. 5.14. Rev. 11.5.
then should all these controversies soon be be at an end. Yet because they
bring certain delusions, calumniations and impediments, in humane wisdom,
worldly policy, and divillish deceit, which may deter, trouble, and keep back
the weak and simple from this holy reformation and sincere conversion to the
gospel of Christ, we will in the mean time address our selves in all
brevitie to remove some of their chiefest stumbling blocks out of the way, ^sa.
62.10.
that an aggest and straight causie may be showed unto all men, leading into
the Church of God, and holy practice of the gospel of Christ.

They object and publish,

That to abolish this present Ministry, worship, traditions, government of
their Church, would be an intolerable innovation and most dangerous
alteration, to the subvertion of the State, both in regard that these Bishops
are Pears of the same, and their power, Courts and ordinances, have been a
long time established and confirmed by sundry Parliaments and so all that speak
against them and their proceedings, are enemies unto, and speak against the
peaceable estate of this Land.

To these politic objections and carnal reasons, we answer with the Apostle,
Romans 8.6.7
That the wisdom of the flesh is death, but the wisdom of the spirit life
and peace, for that the wisdom of the flesh is an enemy against God, for it is
not subject to the Law of God, neither indeed can be. Mat. 21.44.
They therefore that thus stu^ble at the word of God shall be broken, and they
upon whom it thus falls shall be ground to poulder. They that call all men
unto the Law of God and to the Testament of Christ, Ier. 6.16. Deuteronomy. 4.6. Esa.
8.20. 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Timothy 1.13.
do not innovate: but they that depart in any jote and swerve from the same,
they innovate: The word of God is the Archtype and ground work of all States,
degrees, actions, both ecclesiastical and civil, Romans 2.16.
whereunto they must be framed, whereby they shall be judged, no other thing
standing before the face of that great Judge then his own revealed will in his
word: whatsoever then is agreeable unto the word of God is agreeable unto the
State, and whatsoever is contrary unto the word of God, is contrary unto the
State. If then the estate of these Prelates, Clergymen, ministry and their
proceedings, can not be approved by, but shall be found repugnant unto the
Testament of Christ, then are they pernicious and contrary to the State,
drawing into the heavy wrath of God unto utter subversion and destruction:
Then are they for the safety of the State, to be abolished, and they whosoever
they be enemies to God, to their Prince and unto the whole State that persuade
the contrary upon any earthly respect or worldly policy, upon any pretext of
expediencie, profit, peace etc. Alas there is no peace to the wicked and
disobedient. Esa. ^7.21. 2 These. 1.8 Esa. 60.12.
That Nation and that Kingdom that will not obey unto the Gospel of our L.
Jesus Christ shall perish, and those Nations shall be utterly destroyed as the
Lord has not vainly threatened in his word: Number. 18.7 2 Chronicles. 27 18.
And as to the persons of these Lordly Prelates and Pieres to Nobles (or rather
some of them without Pieres and above all the Nobles in the Land) we abash not
to affirm them to be no members of this state, either civil or
ecclesiastical, as in regard of their offices, functions and dignities etc.
Civil they cannot be because they pretend to be Archbishops, Bishops etc.
These are no civil honors nor offices, neither may be executed by any civil
persons: Truly ecclesiastical they are not, 1 Pet. 5.4. Phil. 2.11. John 13.13
because we find no mention in Christ's testament of any such Arch or Lord
Bishops, save our Savior Christ himself only who is the chief Bishop and Lord
of the house. He has often and earnestly forbidden all other Bishops, yea
himself whilst he was here in the flesh refused such civil dignities, Luke
12.13 14. Ioh. 8.11. 2 Timothy 2.4. mat. 20.25
titles, offices, and jurisdictions, which these men or rather monsters are not
ashamed notwithstanding Christ's express inhibition to receive and carry, Luke
22.25.26. Ioh. 13.15. Mark. 9.35.36.
coloring their pride under the Princes commandment, as though either the
Prince might give or they receive that which Christ forbids them: Or as
though their holy father the Pope might not so justify all his blasphemous
titles and fastuous pomp by Princes and Councels: Thus commingle and confou^d
they these distinct ordinances and callings of God the ^^il and ecelesiasticall
offices and functions in their own persons, and blasphemously usurp the very
peculiar names, offices and honors proper to CHRIST alone, whereby it is
apparent by all these concurring notes, 2 These. 2.4. Mat. 24.15. Rev. 13.
that they are the very Antichrist that Beast that confound all the orders and
ordinances both of Church and common wealth, and are the very bane poison and
ruin of both Church and commune wealth, as if we should search out and bring
to light the havoc and misrule they keep both in Church and commune wealth we
could make evident to all men: But to our purpose; They and al their train are
strangers in this common wealth. This Kingdom stood and flourished before any
Lord Bishops were, and shall much more when they are gone. What miss has this
State or commune wealth of their elder brethren the Lord Abbats and the Munks,
Friars and those vermin? yet were they rooted to seeming as deeply in this
State both in the Church and commune wealth as they, their Clergy and
Ministry now are, and carried as great a semblance of holiness, religion,
antiquity, vtility as these do, and might as well have been reserved and
reformed as any of these. They are all Brethren, of a birth they sprang all of
one head, and together with their head to one end they shall, for the Lord has
spoken it. As to the Laws wherewith they would fortify themselves and bind
others so long as they are but the Laws of men, Esa. 32.25.
and not the Laws of God, Mic. 6.16.
yea contrary to the laws of God, they are but as the new cords of the
Phi^listimes, not able to strengthen their mast, they shall neither avayle them
nor yet bind our Sovereign Queen and this whole State. The Kings of this Land
together with the assent of the Nobles and Commons have always taken absolute
power to correct or abrogate any Laws that are found contrary to the word of
God. There is no cause they should now fear the false Prophets threats, Deu.
18.22
whilst they have the warrant of God his word for what they do: For God shall
bless them in the deed.

Further they suggest, That this Reformation would extinguish all learning,
take away the study of all liberal Arts, and so would draw the people and
whole Land into ignorance, atheism, barbaritie, dissolutenes, and in the end
change the government from a Monarchy to Democratie or Anarchie.

These calumniations tending to the hie co^tumelie and reproach of that
Ministry, order and government which Christ has prescribed in his testament,
yea even of the Gospel and sacred person of Christ himself, 1 Cor. 16.22.
deserve rather censure the^ answer. 1 Timothy 6.3.4.
The untruth thereof is evide^t in that such effects were never found to follow
the sincere practice of the Gospel, Esa. 2.9. Hab. 2.14.
to which whosoever consents not, is puffed up and knows nothing how wise or
learned soever he seem in his own Ioh. 6.45.
eyes: 1 Timothy 3.15 Esa. 66.11.12. and 24.23. and 60.19.20. Zech. 14.6.7. Re.
21.23.
where the Gospel is purely taught and faithfully obeyed, there says the
Prophet shall the earth overflow with knowledge as the sea with waters: And as
to the Church of God it is said the pillar and sure keeper of truth, the
nourserie of all good education, the school of all holy knowledge, no enemy
but a favourer of all lawful arts and science: where the glory of God and
the Lamb are the light thereof: Mic. 4.2.3 Esa. 2.3. 1 Ioh. 1.6.7
where the lively graces of Gods spirit are ever burning and never quenched.
There are all men of all degrees instructed in their duties from the hiest to
the lowest: And whosoever walks not in the light as Christ is in the light can
have no fellowship or place there: Esa. 35.8. Joel 3.17. Zech. 14.21. 1 Pet.
2.9. Esa. 11 6.7.8.9.
Into the Church of Christ enters no profane, ignorant, or ungodly person:
The Leopard must leave his fiercenes, and the Cockatrice his poyzon, so that
the young kid may feed with the one, and the weyned child play at the hole of
the other, before they can be received as members: And being entered there can
no inordinate walking, 2 These. 3, 6 14. 1 Cor. ^1.16.
no dissolute or unruly person be there suffered: The Church has always
vengeance ready against all disobedience by the spiritual weapons and
judgments of Gods word. Mat. 1^.12 2 Cor. 10.4 5.6.
The government thereof (as the Prophet ravished in the contemplation thereof
says) shall be of peace and exactors of righteousness: Esa. 16.17.18. Mic. 4,
3.4.5. 1 Co 14.33.
violence shall no more be heard in the Land, neither desolation nor
destruction in the borders: They shall there break their spears into sithes
and their swords into mattocks: Christ's servants are an humble, meek,
peaceable and obedient people, loyally subject and assuredly faithful to any
civil government the Lord sets over them. Tit. 3.1. 1 Pet. 2.13 14. Romans
13.1.2. Eccles. 8.2. etc.
They reverence and willingly obey even their heathen tyrannous Magistrates,
with out resistance even to the death, how much more their Christian, faithful,
loving Magistrates, partakers with them of the same comforts and hope? All
power here is yielded and rendered to the civil Magistrate, every soul being
subject, and no part thereof taken away, or taken together with the civil
Magistrate as these Princely Prelates with their Palatine royal privileges and
these Lordly Bishops with their Courts and civil jurisdiction. Neither can
Satan himself without impudent slander accuse the servants of Christ of
sedition or disobedience, Rev. 17.5. and 18.2. Prove. 5.3.4.5. and 7.10. etc.
and 9.14.15.
much less of such dissolutenes, violence, atheism barbaritie: No, these with
infinite other enormities flow from the false Church from Babylon the mother of
all the abominations, dissolutenes, confusion, impiety, where all are
received, feasted, blessed, even every unclean byrd, Psalm. 94.20 Rev.
13.2.6.7. Dan. 7 8.25.
and hateful spirit: Their ungodly throne, their false and deceitful
ministry which shows them not the Counsels of God, which discovers not
their transgressions, neither has any sprituall weapons or power against any
syn be it never so haynouse, but war together in most desperate manner and
oppose themselves against the ordinances of Christ his Gospel, are the very
cause of this impiety, prophanenes, ignorance, and atheism that abounds.
And this we say that if Gods ordinance, even the Princes laws and sword,
(which yet punishes some offenses) kept not out barbaritie, and dissolutenes,
more then their ministry, there should be no peace nor order, neither might
one live by an other in their Church: So that, this their Pseudohierarchie is
the most pestilent Anarchie that Satan and all his instruments shall ever be
able to raise up, 2 These. 2.9.
as wherein he has bestowed his uttermost power, delusions, and deceits to
suppress the holy practice of the gospel, and to keep Christ out of his
kingdom.

There now remain certain difficulties and impediments which are propounded by
way of question, and being of no great moment are as soon answered as
propounded.

They demand; If these spiritual Courts of theirs were taken away, what order
then should be taken for Matrimonies, adulteries, testaments, with which the
common laws of this land meddle not? and also how the civilians should then
live? We answer, That the trial, judgments, punishments of these causes and
offenses belong unto the civil Magistrates office, Luke 12 13.14. Ioh. 8.11.
and neither to the Church nor to any private men. God shall give our
Magistrates wisdom if they take counsel at his word, Deuteronomy. 4.5.6.7.8.
to provide for the reformation of these and many other abuses. And as to the
officers of these Courts, they are to be compelled to walk orderly in some
lawful calling: 2 These. 3.10.12. Ephesians. 4.28 Prove. 20.17.
There are many godly means for them to live by their diligent endeavors in
this common wealth: but howsoever they may not be suffered to live or to
continue in their ungodly trade: Neither ought the Prince to stay upon their
worldly provision from executing the will of God which so nearly concerns her
own salvation, Mat. 10.33.
and the salvation of all her people.

They further demand; If these livings, and revenewes of this present Ministry
should be quite taken away, how then the true Ministry should be mainteyned,
or these Bishops and Priests hereafter live? To the first we have already
answered; That the true Ministry should be mainteyned of the free, yet
dutiful benevolence of the faithful, especially of that flock unto which they
attend and administer, according to the present ability of the one and needs
of the other. If they here object that if the ministry should have no more
certain or other maintenance, they should then famish, the people now
generally being so worldly, covetous, and uncharitable, as they will hardly pay
that which is by law enjoined, much less give of their own accord. We answer,
that this no way hinders the maintenance of the true Ministry, 1 These.
5.12.13. 1 Timothy 5.17. Heb. 13.7.
but bewrays rather the unfaithfulnes and impiety both of the people and
present Ministry: Of the people, in that they no more regard, love and
reverence to their Ministry, if so be it were of God: Mat. 7.6. Ier. 4.4. Amos
6.12. Hos. 4.8.9. Eze. 13.4, 8.9. Mal. 1. Zech. 11.4.5.
Of the Ministry in that they so evil instruct this people, standing
Ministers and Hierders unto the profane, worldly, irreligious multitudes,
administering or rather sacrilegiously prostituting and selling the most holy
things of God, as the sacraments etc. unto them all in this estate for their
tithes and wages, 2 Cor. 6.14 15.
which no true Minister of Christ may do. The Ministry of Christ belongs
not unto neither will take charge over such profane worldlings, Gal. 6.6. and
4.14, 15
there can be no spiritual band or communion betwixt them. The true sheep and
faithful people of Christ will not only bestow their earthly goods, but even
their lives for those that bring unto them these heavenly treasures, that tred
out the corn and divide the portion unto them, 1 Cor. 4.11 Romans 15.27.
that labor for, and watch over their souls etc. Unpossible then it is that
the true Ministers of Christ should want means to live whilst they execute
their office faithfully (especially where the State receives and favors the
gospel: 2 These. 3.6 10.14. Romans 16.17.18.
) Neither are they any longer to be mainteyned then they execute their office
faithfully, or they any longer bound to the flock or any member thereof then
they remain in the faith and obedience of the word of God. Thus still breaks
out the corrupt mind and colored covetousnes of these tithing and hireling
Priests that thus let out their tongues to hire, make merchandise of the word
and port sale of their sacraments, making their bargain sure beforehand, which
binds them together howsoever they do the work, or the people bring fruits
of faith; These things are not regarded or looked to amongst them either of the
Priest or people: Yet these things prove that there can nor may be no such set
permanent livings allotted to the Ministry of the Gospel. And now to the
other part of their question, How these Bishops and Priests should live, if
their livings be taken from them? We answer as above. They may for no worldly
cause be suffered to continue in so unlawful and ungodly, yea so pernicious a
course to themselves and to the whole land, but must be compelled to walk
orderly in some lawful calling or other. Prove. 13.4, and 14.23.
God gives much to the diligent, when the sluggard suffers want worthily.
Mat. 20.
Such as have faith and gifts unto edification never had greater cause to use
them, 1 Cor. 9.10.
to call the people to faith and to instruct them in the ways of the Lord. The
more they thus labor the more they shall deserve to be cherished and esteemed:
Psalm. 37.25
The labourer is worthy of and shall not want his hire both with God and man:
The others of them that have not these gifts may apply themselves in civil
things, as to teach the tongues, to instruct children etc.

They have yet an other question; how the people should be taught if all this
ministry should be deposed? To which we answer: The people ought at no hand to
be taught by a false Ministry. And further, though they be deposed from their
Antichristian ministry, which they exercised to the destruction of their own
souls, and of as many as heard and followed them; yet such of them to whom God
has given fit gifts and graces to teach, ought from henceforth to employ the
same to the glory of God, Romans 12.^. 1 Pet. 4.10.11,
the benefit of others, and the building up of Christ's decayed Church. Thus
shall the people have all the help they had before. To whom if you ad such of
the faithful as God has given the gift of prophecy, 1 Cor. 14.29.30.31.32.
and interpretation of the scriptures unto, who must and will labor in this
work according to the measure of faith in all holy order and sobriety, Romans
12.3.
as also those that the Lord shall daily raise up and send unto his vineyard,
the people shall want no means of instruction, neither be destitute of any
good gift, but have them much more plentifully and excellently then ever they
had without comparison. Yea so shall God bless his own ordinances and their
diligence and zeal, Ezekiel. 4.7.
as they shall in short time be thoroughly furnished of Teachers every where,
and the work in all places be orderly set up. Only let no man despise the day
of these small things, Zech. 4.10.
for they shall rejoice and see the stone of tin in the hand of Zerubbabel.

Your Honors humbly in all duty bounden, HENRY BARROVVE.


RIght Honorable, we have as our frail memories and small measure of
knowledge would suffer in the middst of many encombrances in this our miserable
imprisonment, drawn an unperfect discourse of such weighty causes, as we were
desirous when God should call us thereunto, to make known unto her Majesty or
some of her Honorable Council. And now by your Honors desert and gracious
allowance occasioned, we most gladly relate and present the same to your good
Lordship only, as to one whose rare wisdom we know most able to discern, and
whose care to preserve and defend the innocent according to right: Wherefore we
most willingly put both this weighty cause and our woeful lives in your hand,
to be preserved to some equal trial from our enemies rage like to be increased
here upon, in that it so nearely touches their estimation and worldly
prosperity. And howsoever these high causes of God (which have not been
hitherto looked into since the first defection from the sincere practice of the
gospel in the primitive Church) may seem strange unto your Honor at the first
view, especially if they be weighed with humane reason; yet being examined by
that Archtype and true pattern of Christ's testament, we doubt not but your
Honor shall see with us how far the present State is swerved from the
inviolable order prescribed; Espetially, if your honor vouchsafe but to look
into the office, entrance, and administration of this ministry, you shall soon
see it (as some of their own writers confess and none can deny) to be received
by succession from the Pope: who, though he were expelled with many of his
enormities out of this Land by her Majesty's royal progenitour, yet remained
these offices and laws, courts, worship etc. untaken away or suppressed,
notwithstanding that the Lord of Hosts had said, they shall not take a stone of
Babel for a corner, Ier. 31.26.
nor a stone for foundations, for it shall be desolate for ever: So that it is
impossible antichrists ministry should build up or serve in the true Church of
Christ, himself having instituted and ordained an other Ministry in his
testament, and forbidden and accursed all such as have not their warrant from
thence. It is then our purpose Right honorable to make plain in our Treatise
that when the Pope was expelled, his ministry and orders which came out of the
bottomless pit, were still reserved and set up in sted of the Ministry and
Testament of Christ, and so still remain. Which their Ministry being thus
found antichristian must by the Prince be abolished and suppressed, that Gods
wrath be not kindled against this whole Land, for the wilful violating and
defacing of Gods ordinances, bowing down unto, endowing and mainteyning of such
bitter plants of Antichrists grafting: Neither will it suffice to say, The
Martyrs in Queen Mary's days stood in these offices in King Edwards days;
seeing it were great impiety to justify any iniquity by the example of frail
man (no man living without error.) For that were to set the Martyrs of Christ
against Christ, and either to build our faith wholly upon men, and cast aside
the Testament; or else to rip up the ignorances of men to mainteyn some sin
in our selves, even presumptu^ously to tempt God to continue obstinate in
known sin, which, fa^ be it from us, seeing the spirit o^ God teaches us
that neither Martyr nor Angel from heaven can justify any thing Christ in his
word condemns, nor may withdraw us from the evident rules in Christ's
testament or from any jote thereof, much less from the pure and holy
ordinances and government of Christ in his Ch: (...) have stood in such offices
(...) known it unlawful, suffering v(...) they did see, Teaching us so far to
follow their examples as they followed Christ: Neither need this matter now
trouble us seeing all countries about us have suppressed the Bishops and their
Courts with all that rabble and many other abominations which flow from the
same and remain still with us. The most learned also of the Clergy of this
Land have written and cried out for the utter abolishing of these offices: So
that it is of al confessed that the Prince ought to suppress and abolish all
such offices and orders as cannot be approved by the word of God. Shall then
this famous Land Right honorable lie still in the known dreggs of Popery under
Gods wrath for the same? Shall a few pompous Prelates for their own private
lucre, pride and idleness, with hold the practice of Christ's testament, and
misleade the whole land to judgment? Shall her Majesty's most loyal subjects
be persecuted and miserably made away in Prisons, for not bowing down to these
confessed abominations? Shall her Majestic and her most Honorable Council be
thus guilty of innocent blood through the Bishops evil dealings? God forbid.
Especially the the Lord alluring her Majesty and the Council both with
spiritual promises and heaps of earthly treasures (with much peace and
happiness to the whole Land) without injury too, or just complaint of any her
subjects, so highly shall they be contented: So that if this be not now
received (being thus by Gods providence put into your hands) it will be
received in the age to come; whatsoever come of our miserable bodies, it will
be looked upon. It is Gods word wh^^^ has now discovered it, which goes not
out in vain, nor returns fruitless, but surely effects the will of God.
We have then further in our discourse right Honorable, taken briefly away some
of these silver smithes deceitful objections, being ready upon the dispense of
our lives, through the assistance of Gods spirit, to make all appear mist,
chafe, and dounge that they can allege for themselves in this their estate.
The other parts of our Treatise how this should be effected, what the true
Ministry of Christ is, how it should be erected and brought in, we have
purposely reserved till we know your Honors pleasure for the discussing of
these which must be agreed upon before we can proceed to the other, and then
upon your honors acceptance (though we are more willing, and have more need
to hear and learn, then to instruct and speak) we shall to the utmost of our
power make your Honor partaker of that truth God gives us to see. Even of
these things also which ought to be abolished we have yet refrained to mention
some, which necessarily follow upon the rest, and will bring yet more present
benefit unto her Majesty, of earthly wealth, an unutterable Sum: Not meaning
of the Universities, for they may be employed to the maintenance of Teachers
and Students in the knowledge of to^gue^ and other honest, christian, and lawful
Arts, the Monkish orders, and profane learning, with all unlawful Arts
abolished and suppressed. If any thing shall be objected against the points we
have written, we beseech your (...) may b^ set down and discussed either by
public conference under notarie, o^ in private before your Honor with whom
your honor shall think meet or in writing: yea if your Honor shall be willing to
hear any of the points discussed by the scriptures your Lordship may procure
any of the learned whom yet your Honor may best trust in such business, and
call us to trial in your own audience, without making any acquainted with the
end of the Question, lest they deal partially, and so seek to trouble and not
to edify, as their custom is. In the mean time by reason of our long close
imprisonment, we having had no exercise to our bodies, air, or other things
needful, even for the preserving of life this three years in effect, our
bodies weak, and memories impaired, and greatly broken; as also in no small
peril to be indirectly hastened to our grave by our adversaries in this
prison, as they have heretofore endeavored; Most humby beseech your Honor we
may be placed at some honest man's house where your Honor please to appoint, or
where we can provide, putting in sufficient bond for our appearance, when and
where we shall be called to any lawful trial. Thus beseeching Almighty God by
his own holy spirit to direct your Lordship in these weighty affairs, yea to
draw forth your honorable years in health, safety, and prosperity, to your
own endless comfort and good of the whole Land, craving pardon for our
boldness, and giving most humble thanks for your honorable compassion already
showed, we in all due revere^ce take our leave until we further understand your
Honors will.

From the Fleet this 13. of this 9. Month. Your Honors most humbly in the
Lord to command John Greentwood. Henry Barrowe.

Desiderius. GOod morrow Monsiour Mi^^^. ^ am glad of your return; and tha^
not only because I love your person and company but also that I may have a
little further discours^ with you who have been so profitable unto me b^
writings and conference. Here I give you again the Platform, wishing that it
and the rest were printed together; but especially if it has a second part.
Bu^ how is it that toward the end of this there are cer^tain words wanting?


Miles. Those words were spoiled by ill acciden^ in my custody; but the
reader may gather the sense or help himself as he may: For I am now where ^
cannot have another coppie to perfect it: but our hope must be that London,
Arnsterdam, or L^yden* will supply all such defects.


Desiderius. But what say you for the second part^


Miles. I know not where to have it, neither do I think that ever it was
finished. For, the adversary-Prelats thought better to finish the authors lives.


Desid. Oh miserable murderers. God give the^ repentance, and raise up others
that remain, with ability, power, will and readiness, to p^^form that thing
which their fellows and friends christianly intended.


Miles. It were in deed a work worthy the undertaking, and I doubt not of the
sufficiency of sundry men for the well performing of it, if they set
themselves unto it.


Desid. To whom was this work presented?


Miles. As I have heard, To the Right Honorable S. William Cicill Knight,
Barron of Burleigh, Lord High Treasurer of England etc.


Desiderius. They in their writing have praised his wisdom, but had he
preserved their lives from the violence and cruelty of the Prelates, that would
have praised his virtue.


Miles. What shall we say? there has seldom any truth come to light but it
has cost some blood, and that should teach men to love it the better. Such use
let all people learn to make of it.


Desid. What is that John Greenwood whose name also is subscribed in the end of
this first part?


Miles. He was a coepartener with Mr Barrow in his testimony, imprisonment, and
death it self. A learned man he was, as appears by an answer of his to Mr G.
Gyfford touching read prayer. He had formerly been a Minister according to the
order of the Church of England, but degraded himself by repentance, as he says
of himself in his Examination. And afterward he was Teacher in a particular
church separated from the public assemblies of the land. A Gentleman of a good
house told me that Queen Elizabeth asked the learned Doct. Raynolds what he
thought of those two men? And he answered her Majesty, that it could not
avail any thing to show his judgment concerning them, seeing they were put to
death: and being loath to speak his mind further, her Highness charged him upon
his allegiance to speak. Whereupon he answered, that he was persuaded, if
they had lived, they would have been two as worthy instruments for the Church
of God, as has been raised up in this age etc: Her Majesty sighed and said no
more. But after that, riding to a Park by the place where they were executed,
called to mind their suffering of death, (and being willing to take further
information concerning them,) demanded of the Right Honorable E. of Cumb.
(that was present when they suffered) what end they made? He answered, A very
godly end, and prayed for your Maiesti^, the State, etc. Moreover Mr Philips a
preacher famous, having both heard and seen Mr. Barrowe his holy speeches, and
preparation for death, said; Barrowe Barrowe my soul be with thine. For thus
have I been credibly informed.


Desiderius. You have saved me a labor, for I had thought to have asked some
questions hereabouts: but I am satisfied aforehand. Yet I pray you tell me the
reason why they printed not this platform heretofore, and that espetially
against the Kings Majesty's first Parliament in England; For that was the time,
then was the hope.


Miles. Had his Majesty any Arch or Lord Bishop in all his kingdom of
Scotland? were not all pu^ down? And who would not then have thought, but the
like worthy work should have been done in England, after his Highness coming
thither, to have brought those kingdoms and countries into Christian
uniformitie? This was their hope; who sought no praise to themselves; but
desired that his Majesty should (as the isntrumental means) have done it of
himself, without any man's soliciting; that the whole praise should be
primarily unto God the cause of all causes, and secundarily unto his Highness,
for preferring the will of the HIGHEST, in so weighty a point, as the
abolishing of Bishops, and converting of their livings unto charitable uses in
the common wealth: But seeing things fall out contrary to expectation; It is
(in my opinion) great pity, that such a work should any longer lie unprinted.
Wherefore through their neglect, I will cause it to come forth; being persuaded
it shall tend much to the honor of God and relief of many, which is both
piety and pity. And if it prove any loss to proud Prelates the possessors
of those overlarge-livings, it is but their due demerite, and they may all
learn thereby (God giving them such grace) to make much spiritual profit for
their souls health and comfort: whereof they have far more need, then of that
abundance of bodily benefits. And in hope to effect the ends premised, I
entreat all men who shall happen to have any of these coppies, to make good
use of them both for their own instruction and benefit, as also for the common
good; and that especially against all succeeding Parliaments, till the mark
aimed at be rightly hit, and the goal fully won.


Desid. But how know you they stayed the printing of the Plot against the
Prelates, upon any such desire, hope, or consideration as you mentioned?


Miles. I had speech with Mr. Francis Johnson one of the Pastors of that
people, who came with other his assistants to make their humble suit to the
King, and were ready to enterteyne conference with the Prelates, that his
Majesty might the more perfectly have understood the innocency of their cause,
and the evilnes of their adversaries: And that same party told me, if they
should print the foresaid Platform, he thought it would give offense, and be
very ill taken, inasmuch as it was thought that the King and Council would do
something of themselves for the abolishing of Bishops etc. And so they
patiently waited to see what would be done. And whereas God so disposed that
Arch Bishop Whitgift at the beginning of the first Parliament after his
Majesty's coming suddenly died, the said Mr Johnson thus spoke unto me and
others; That God had showed unto the King what he would have him to do with
the rest of the Bishops, in taking away the chiefest of them at such a time.
And as it was well observed of him; so I do most earnestly desire that all whom
it concerns will well call it unto mind, and duly consider of it, for such
good use as the GOD of heaven would have to be made by men on earth. For seeing
that he who is the God above all Gods, Angels, and men, did in his wisdom and
providence, put down at such a time, him that was Bishop above al Bishops in
the Land: and at once turned him out of the Council, Court and Parliament; as
also from the Church, Ministry, and world it self, happily it may insinuate
that Bishops are unfit for, and unworthy of, all and every of those places,
till they be cast in an other moulde and made all new. And if there be no use
of the highest and chiefest of them, and at the chiefest time, as God did seem
to show unto his Majesty, and to the body of the land then assembled: Then
may we think there is as little or less use of the inferior Bishops at any
time.


Desiderius. I grant it worthy to be well considered and seriously thought upon.
But whiles it is in mind I pray you tell me, who penned the second Petition
that you showed me? For you named the author of the first, but not of the
latter.


M. Micklebound. That was by one yet living, who knows nothing of my purpose
in all this business, nor what I am, nor how I came by the copy, neither will I
make known his name without his knowledge and consent: Therefore speak no more
of that matter.


Desiderius. Yet you may tell me whether ever they were put up according to the
direction or no^


Miles. I would if I could; but I think rather that they were not: And
otherwise the sin of the Land was the greater that did them no good upon so
weighty, so earnest, and so christian a suite; but left them under the tyranny
of such bitter Bishops, of whom they are caused so much to complain. If they
were not delivered, there is the more need to have them published, that such
whose hearts God shall any way touch thereby, may make a holy use thereof, to
his glory, the good of their own souls, the staying of Gods wrathful judgments
from their nation, and for benefit to Gods people for time to come: So shall
it fare better with the latter wltnesses of Christ, then it did with the
former, that stood forth in the forefront of the battle against the Beast:
Which war they waged with the loss of their lives: but happy they in the
life to come. For blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, even so says the
Spirit. For they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.


Desiderius. Were ever any of them put to death?


Miles. Yea, and that I caused to appear before in part. Their Petitions also
which I showed you, do manifest their hard entreaty sundry ways, and how that
many of them through the envy of the Prelates, have been made to end their
days in loathsome prisons. And besides that, six of them were executed unto
the death, who sealed up their testimony with their blood; and most chearefully
left this world, to go unto Christ their Redeemer.

The 6. executed were these.

Mr Barrowe and Mr Greenwood, at Tyburne. Mr John Penrie, at Thomas a Waterings
by London. Mr William Dennys, at Thetford in Norffolk. And two others, Coppin
and Elias, at S. Edmunds

Bury in Suffolk. And thus several places of the land, are sta^ed w^^h the
blood of Gods Saints, whose death is precious in his eyes, Ps. 116.15. King
Saul, who slew the Gibeonites, had a better color for that his fact; then can
be set upon the killing of these Christians. For they were of the remnant of
the Amorites, whom he might lawfully have destroyed, yet when peace was made
with them whereby the Lord gave them life; Saul greatly sinned in putting them
to death. And for this, the Lord brought famine upon the land in the days of
David. Whereupon that righteous King said unto them that remained, What shall I
do for you, and wherewith shall I make the atonement, that ye may bless the
inheritance of the Lord? To whom they answered; We will have no silver nor
gold of Saul nor of his house, neither for us shall thou kill any man in
Israel. And he said, what ye shall say that will I do for you. Then they
answered the King, The man that consumed us, and that imagined evil against
us, so that we are destroyed from remaining in any coast of Israel, let seven
men of his sonns be delivered unto us and we will hang them up unto the Lord,
in Gibeah of Saul, the Lords chosen. And the King said, I will give them, etc.
2 Samuel 21. The days may come that God may also stir up this or some other
Prince like David, to call into question the murdering (not of the remnant of
the Amorites, but) of the homeborne subjects of our own land, who deserved to
live, rather then the prelates themseves that caused them to die. But when
justice by man, or judgment from God do take place, these bloody men will
feel the reward of their iniquity. For Haman was not more enviously bent
against the Jews, for the rooting out of them, then our Haman-like Bishops
have been for the destoying of these whom they rail against as Puritans,
Brownists, Sectaries, schismatiques, and what not? Thus abusing not only those
who separate from their Antichristian jurisdiction, adulterate ministry, and
false worship, with their government ecclesiastical; but some such also as
stand unseparated from the same, who only agree in judgment with the former.
But as I have put you in mind of the famine which God brought upon Israel in
the days of David for that bloody sin done against the Gibeonites in the days
of Saul; so you may remember and should not forget, that in our land, God
brought a great pestilence in the days of King James, so as there died in one
city London, above 3300. in one week: besides those that died in other cities
and towns of the same plague. And who knows not but that it might be for
that bloody sin against the foresaid Christians, through the instigation of the
Prelates, who by their murders made these to be martyrs, in the days of Q.
Eliz. who was of her self a most worthy Princess. God give men wisdom and
grace to consider rightly of all things, and so of these two thus compared
together.


Desiderius. But would you wish the like reward to our Bishops, that came upon
Saul's bloody house?


Miles. No verily. But if I knew it to be the will of God I would. For we are
taught to pray that his will may be done. Mat. 6. And if some of the^ might be
so served by the command of their Kings and Princes, it would make the rest
prove more righteous, and less hurtful, then they have been, or yet are. But
I wish with my heart their true repentance that they may escape the judgment
of God, and find mercy with men; learning by this and other examples in the
scriptures, to be weaned from their wickedness. But if ever any King or Queen
do follow the footing of David, for the executing of wrath upon them; or if
ever they do fall into the hands of such Lord Tyrants as themselves, then let
them acknowledge Gods justice, as did their forerunner, who said, as I have
done, so God has rewarded me. Judge. 1.5. But to pass from this, and return
to our former speech about idolatrous livings, wherein (while I think on it)
let me know your mind, whether you have not by our conference, or by the
Platform, or both, perceived that the English Bell had but a bad sound which
would call men from honoring God, and that noble King Henry, for his heroical
acts against Babell, in the overthrow of her buildings, and enriching the
common wealth with the spoils.


Desiderius. I am very well satisfied, and I thank you for your pains and
love, in applying your self to my capacity, making me to know so many needful
things in such ample measure; that though our sinful estate is discovered to be
such in England, as gives just cause of sorrow: yet my heart again rejoices
that I see the way how to shun the danger of it.


Miles. That is well for you, and I wish the like good unto the whole nation of
the English. But what say you to those exploits of King Henry the 8? For me
thinks they made greatly against the beast, false prophet, and his marked
soldiers, the merchants of his Babylonist wares, who were by this means put
in doubt that their trade would decay and come to an overthrow. And if Princes
in all dominions would now do the like against the remainders of those places
and offices, the utter downfall of that kingdom of Antichrist would suddenly
follow, to the high honor of God, and gladness of heart to all his people,
which should with due regard behold the fulfilling of the prophesies
foretelling such a work.


Desiderius. As one truth leads unto an other; so by degrees you have brought
me to be of your mind in this point, like as in others. But wherefore are the
chief defe^ders of this cause called Brownists?


Miles. Because one Mr Brown minister at Achurch heretofore professed their
cause, pubished it in printe, and for a time continued the practice of it, till
the fear of persecution, and love of this world like Demas, or of ease like
Isacar, made him to turn his back upon it. And yet (I think if he were asked)
his conscience will not suffer his tongue to say, that it is not the truth:
although he has left the relief of Sion, to live upon the spoils of Babylon.


Desiderius. Were there none that did write for (...)


Miles. Yes verily. The Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists have in their
authentic writings laid down the ground ^herof, and upon that ground is all
their buiding reared up, and surely settled. Moreover, many of the Martyrs both
former and latter have mainteyned it, as is to be seen in the Acts and
Monuments of the Church. Also, in the days of Queen Elizabeth, there was a
separated Church, whereof Mr Fitz. was Pastor that professed and practiced that
cause before Mr Brown wrote for it. But he being one of the first writers in
her Majesty's reign, therefore those that followed him, (or Christ rather,
through his means, directing them by Gods word,) were called Brownists, as if
they had been baptized into his name: Which were falsehood to think, and
blasphemy to speak.


Desiderius. The name makes them very odious to others, and to say the truth,
it caused me to carry some prejudice against them, to the forestalling of my
judgment in the things they hold.


Miles. There are too many that do so: But let not the name offend you or any;
for there was never any truth brought to light, but Satan through his notable
craft and cunning, has caused some to paint it out after the names of men,
that it might seem base and contemptible in the eyes of all, and to be ^eceived
of none. Hereupon have Christians been called Hussites, Hugonotes, Lutherans,
Zuingliaus, Calvinists, Puritans, Brownists, and the like. But there could be
no name more odious then was given to our Master Christ himself, whom the
wicked called Beelzebub, and his people must (in their measure) be partaker of
his reproach. Let none therefore seek to have a good name by doing any evil
thing; nor yet for avoiding a bad name, neglect any good that God requires at
our hands; neither let any man mesure any truth by the face that foes do set
upon it.


Desiderius. I perceive by your plea, that if these men had their right, they
should be acknowledged for true Christians, and not to be calumniated by the
name of Brovvnists.


Miles. Your perceiving then is good, and your words are just and right; for
so they ought to be esteemed.


Desiderius. But why then do you so often call them so your self?


Miles. For distinction sake only, but not at all in reproach: And if you could
alvvayes understand me whom I mean, when I call them Christians, then would
I give them no other name.


Desiderius. You have shevved me that many of those people were imprisoned;
some brought there to their end; others executed by death: and now I ask,
whether any have been banished?


Miles. Ye sundry times. And once in my own sight and hearing at the Sessions
in London, four of them were enforced to abjure the land, and in what sort
and manner, it may appear by a vvriting that seems then to be taken by some
that were beholders thereof, and affected therewith. Which writing was this.

A Memorandum Anno Domini 1604.
IN the Reign of our now Sovereign Lord King James, who is a defender of the
Gospel, four persons were enforced to abjure the Land for the Gospels sake,
(who practiced the Ordinances thereof, in obedience to the King Christ, whom God
set to Reign in his Church, by the scepter of his word:) separating themselves
from our Church of England, refusing to communicate, join, or partake with the
same, in the public Ministry, worship, and government ecclesiastical, with
many other corruptions derived from Popery, and are still retained in the body
and bosom of the English Church. This abjuration was urged upon the Statute of
the 35. of Q. Eliz. after they had suffered 3. months imprisonment: And (at
the public Sessions in London,) it was thus carried; That they should take
their oaths to depart the Realm within one month, and not to return again
into any of the dominions of the late Queen, without leave from his Majesty,
or his Highness Successors. Their chief speaker pleaded, that they were true
and faithful subjects to his Majesty, and had not deserved so to be dealt
with; and desired to be discharged without an oath, and they would both promise
and be bound to depart. But that not being granted; he desired that their oath
might be with conditions and not so strictly against returning. For said he,
we may be occasioned to travel by sea to other countries, and by cross winds
be driven again into those dominions contrary to our purpose. Or, we may be
taken at sea, and brought hither by force, and diverse the like; and so be
forsworn though against our wills. Then it was told him that all such things
was to be borne with. But he replied, it could not save their oath from being
broken, without such things were expected. Moreover he told the bench that they
held themselves so bound to Parents, Prince and Country, that if in an other
land, they heard of any treason, it was their duty to come and disclose the
same. And therefore said he, I will never take my oath without conditions: Which
he affirmed sundry times. And when he saw notwithstanding, that the oath was
strictly administered unto them according to the Statute, he adjoined this
speech himself, But if the performance of any duty to Prince, Country,
Parents, or the like, do move me to return, I will then be free of the oath.
And thus he would have the Bench to understand he swore; but not otherwise. And
they all keeping silence, the Towne-Clark answered; that in such case they
should seek for leave. And the party replied, that, the case might require
such have as they could not stay for leave. Then were they commanded to pay
their fees, and to be gone within a month.



ANd was not this a lamentable case Desiderius, that in the days of the
gospel, men should be thus entreated for the gospels sake, and for resistance
of the ordinances of Antichrist?


Desiderius. Yes doubtless, if it were so.


M. Mick. Were so! Yes upon the adventure of my best limme, or life it self,
it was so. And for those things wherein they differ from the opinions and
practices in our Church of England, I never savve any truth more clear in all
my life. As you also may easily perceive, if you scan the difference from point
to point by the scriptures. And there is no truth in England but they hold the
same: dissenting only from them wherein they dissent from the word of GOD
ALMIGHTY, which ought to be followed in every jote and tittle thereof.

Now by the Memorandum that I showed you, I remember a saying in the Preface of
their Confession of faith at their first publishing of it, which said, They
hoped God would raise up another John Fox to compile together the latter
Martyrs and Witnesses of our Lo: Jesus in these our days. And it seems that
the work goes foreward, in that God stirs up some to keep records of such
things, for further use in time to come.

Now for the Statute above mentioned, I know it was intended against popish
Recusants, and not against these. And (without all question) their injuries
have been more then enough, though Laws were not wrested against them. And
this wrong was the greater, considering their love and loyalty to Prince and
Country: But their judges must come before the Judge of all the world that will
do right. In respect whereof I pray for them that their case may be found
clear, through repentance, which is the right way thereunto, if it be done in
time. And for all the Saints here combating under the banner of the great
Captain of the Lords Host, that is, Jesus Christ, it behooves them in patience
to possess their souls, and look for their rest when the Lord comes, who
will wipe all tears from their eyes, and give them an inheritance everlasting,
immortal, which fades not away, reserved in the heavens for them. Which shall be
enjoyed, when others on the left hand, shall both hear a contrary sentence,
and receive a worse reward. But as Abigail the wife of Nabal is praised, in
that she used such wise and good means to prevent and stay David from bringing
that evil which he intended against Nabal and all his house, for his churlish,
reprochful, and evil answer; so much more shall it be a praiseworthy work, and
special part of good service and durie, in any that shall persuade and withdraw
the Magistrates and people, from bringing any evil upon the servants of God,
without a cause. For as the Psalmist says, what has the righteous done? To
which every good Christian may answer, They have surely done that which
deserves praise, and not punishment; not imprisonment, reproaches, confiscatio^
of goods, banishment, untimely death, or any the like evil entreaty.


Desiderius. They may so answer, and that truly: but the world will not
receive it. And now I pray you tell me, What difference do you put between
those people called Brownists, and our sincerest and best professors of the
Gospel called Puritans?


M. Mickelbound. The difference is laid down in few words, The former do both
hold and practice the truth, and separate themselves from the contrary. The
latter have the truth in speculation only, and either dare not or at least
do not practice it. Neither dare or do they leave off all the unrighteous
ordinances of Antichrist, but daily do bend and stoop unto many of them. And
for what cause, others may well conjencture: but their own hearts can best
tell it to themselves.


Desiderius. But those Christians called Brownists, are at great difference
among themselves. For some holds private communion, others of them will at no
hand allow it. And so there arises ill will, with decrease of love in one
toward another. But I pray you which of those persons or opinions do you like
best?


M. Mickelb. For their opinion, I would have my judgment spared at this time:
Only this I say, that their difference is not such as ought to make any
division between them: or to break off the communion and fellowship which they
had before. And if any do, it is (doubtless) the fault of those that do it.
They have need therefore to take heed of prejudice and preposterous zeal,
which else will be as a mother and nourse to breed and bring up that wicked
weed Envy, a capital vice, in sted of Christian Love, a holy virtue. Be they
then exhorted to show forth the fruits of Christian moderation, bearing with,
and supporting one another; praying with and for one another; enterteyning holy
peace between themselves, and with the Lord; setting against the sins in
themselves, rather then that difference in their brethren; so shall they the
better carry forth their good cause against their envious Opposites. For while
they combine together among themselves, they shall be able to push, and at last
to overthrowe the Antichristian Kingdom and Hierarchy, against which they
jointly bear witness. And thus shall they be truly zealous. As for their
persons, there is neither of them do lose one jote of my love, if they
continue their love to the Lord, and his commandments, walking faithfully
according to that which he gives them to see and know by his word, both in
holiness to himself, righteousness toward men, and sobriety in themselves, with
abstinence from worldly lusts. And if they alike thus walk, my love is alike
unto them.


Desiderius. Some do object against them their manner of receiving the Lords
supper, as being rude, unreverent, malepert, and too too presumptuous; sitting
upon their seats, as if they were Christ's Camerades: whereas for more
reverence they ought to take it kneeling.


Miles. This is no more against the former called Brownists, then it is against
the latter called Puritans, even the best and sincerest of them: For they
likewise so hold, that it ought not to be taken kneeling* but sitting: and
either do or feign would so practice, if they could in safety, or durst
endure the trouble following after it. But for the point it self, How do
those objecters prove, that such manner of receiving, is presumptuous etc? But
are not they presumptuous rather that shall make them selves wiser then Christ,
and give laws in his kingdom or Church, which himself (the only Law giver)
has not given? Do they think that their good intents will carry out any thing
in Gods worship, which has not warrant in his word? If that were so, then had
not Vzzah been slain, for staying the Ark of God from shaking; 2 Samuel 6.6.7.
Neither should King Saul have been rejected for saving alive the fat cattle of
Amalek, to offer in sacrifice to God. 1. Sam. 15. But the point being
sufficiently cleared by sundry writers, I refer you to them. And I, what
should I need to say more but this, that ^ee must in all things look unto the
first institution, as our Lord Jesus himself also did, when men spoke unto him
of putting away their wives, who told the^ that Moses for the hardness of their
hearts suffered it; but from the beginning it was not so. And in like manner,
to such as plead for kneeling at the receiving of the Lords supper, we may
answer, that for want of love to the Lord and his truth, it has pleased him
to give them over to hardness of heart and strong delusions. And as the Papists
those gross idolaters, receiving the signs of Christ's body and blood, to wit,
bread and wine, thinking it to be the very body and blood it self, contrary to
their own senses; they do for more reverence to it, kneel before it, and
worship it as their God and Maker: even so our formal Protestants at the
celebration of the Lords supper do likewise kneel; imitating therein those
idolaters, and so nourishing that popish error of errors. But from the
beginning it was not so. For at the first institution, it was received as they
sat at the Table; But we can no where find in all the scriptures, that ever
they received it kneeling; or that ever true Christians believed those holy
signs were transubstantiated into the body and blood of Christ as the Papists
falsely teach* Therefore as well that opinion, as their and the Protestants
practice, is highly sinful, and for ever ought to be shunned. Both because God
never required such a belief, nor appointed such a gesture in the act of
communion, as they have taken up to themselves, from the brain of man's mere
invention. We are therefore to take heed what examples we follow. Dinah the
daughter of Iakob, going forth to see the daughters of the country where they
came, was defiled bodily: but some of our Protestants looking forth to see
after what fashion the Papists served God before them, have been defiled
spiritually. Whereas they should have remembered and observed, that which is
written for our learning, (in Levit. 18.3.4.) and commanded Israel of old,
saying; After the doings of the Land of Egypt wherein ye dwelt shall ye not
do: And after the manner of the land of Canaan whither I will bring you, shall
ye not do, neither walk in their ordinances, But do after my judgments, and
keep mine ordinances to walk therein: etc.


Desiderius. It is a good instruction: And being well followed, it will prevent
infinite errors and other abominations. But how do you manifest that the
Papists do worship the signs of Christ's body and blood, as the very body and
blood it self, and that contrary to their own senses, as you said. For if that
be true, they are most vile idolaters indeed.


Miles. So they are. For when they receive the bread, they see it, feel it,
smell it and taste it to be bread, yet they believe in the heart and say with
the mouth, that it is body, even the same that was crucified on the cross;
quite contrary to their own senses of seeing, feeling, smelling and tasting,
as I said before. And that bread, which their own sense tells them, is no other
creature but bread, do they adore and worship as the Creator, as God, and as
Christ. And so in like manner believe they the wine to be the very blood of God
Christ, which was shed for the redemption of the Church. Which horrible
idolatry of theirs is as gross, as to worship and believe in a molten or
carved image, in sted of the true God. And both these sorts of idolatry, are
not only against the second commandment, but also against the first. Thus may
you perceive that the Papists are deluded with a lie extraordinary; beleving
the lying miracle of transubstantiation. Whereas in all true miracles wrought by
Christ and his Apostles, never any were taught to believe any thing contrary to
their own sight, and their other senses; but these seduced souls are
miserably misled that way. And why? even because their lying prophets do so
believe and teach. But is it not as strange that they will have so many Christ's
at one and the same time? For after the words of consecration are used, those
signs are transubstantiated into the very body and blood of Christ (by their
opinion) and becomes the whole Christ: so that if they do the like in an
hundred thousand places at once, they have then (if you will believe them) so
many CHRIST'S. And they being all eaten up in one day, yet they can make as many
more in another: and that as often as they consecrate their bread to such an end
or use. And is not this a wonderful miracle, and these marvelous men, thas can
by the words of their mouths effect such strange things? Or rather are not
these monsters among men, to believe such strange and strong delusions? But so
shall it fare with those that have not the love of the truth. 2. These ^. And
now let us leave them to their wanderings, seeing they are so bewitched, that
nothing which man can do, is able to draw them from their delusions into the
right way and truth of the gospel ^word Christ.


Desider. The more is the pity. For as we are debtors unto all; so I would we
could do them good.


M. Mickelbound. They have the letter of the scripture in that point before
spoken of. For Christ says in Ioh. 6. This is my body: But they have not the
meaning at all. Neither do they consider that all sacramental signs have the
name of the thing signified. As for example: The tree of life, and the eating
thereof, was a sacramental sign to them that should live in obedience to God,
that they should have life. The tree of knowledge of good and evil, had the
name of that which they should (by lamentable experience) find, if they
(contrary to Gods commandment) should eat thereof. The Altar, which Iakob
builded unto God, he called by the name of the Mighty God of Israel. Not that
it was so indeed: But that it was a sign and remembrance, of that God who had
appeared unto him, for his help; and had mightily delivered him from the
furious hands of his brother Esau. And other the like examples are in the
scriptures. Even so Christ says of the elemental signs of bread and wine, in
the Lords supper: Take eat, etc. This is my body* this is my blood, etc. Not
that they are so in deed, for when he spoke those words his blessed body was at
the table among his disciples, and not in the bread; as they plainly saw with
their eyes, and did know with understanding: But they were true signs of his
body and blood, and as verily as they received them; so certainly should every
true believer receive Christ and all his merits, to be fully theirs by faith.
And the papists that worship these signs as the very body and blould of
Christ, (because they were in mystery so called;) If they had lived in the
days of Iakob, they might as well, and it is like they would, have worshipped
that Altar, as the Mighty God, because it was in mystery (that is, in sign
and signification) so called. But as therein they should have been notable
idolaters, so are they in worshipping a piece of bread which they eat, as God
the Creator both of it and them. And seeing they think that to be their God, if
now they would see their foolishnes by a few words. I wish them to consider
what becomes of it in short space after they have eaten it, and so they shall
see that if ever it was a God, it soon vanishes away and becomes none, which
is contrary to the nature of the true God, who is eternal, immortal,
unchangeable, etc. but the bread eaten, goes into the belly, and is carried out
into the draught, as Christ speaks. So that this their God Bread, is more
base then the God Bell, or any of the the Gods of the heathens. And are not
these gross idolaters? Yea, this their absurd foolishnes, was a stumbling
block unto Averois, of who^ I have read, that he said; Because the Christians
eat that God which they worship, my soul shall be with the Philosophers.

Wherefore, I would they might learn, that as the outward signs of bread and
wine, being received into the belly, turns unto the nourishment of the body,
so Christ being received into the soul by faith, is the true nourishment
thereof, and salvation of the whole man. For he has redeemed us from death and
destruction, justified us in the sight of God, and procured us life with him.
All which we apprehend through faith. But in this truth I know you are already
grounded, so as I need not speak further for your instruction; and as for them,
should I speak, should I write, should I do all I can, it will not profit
them. For (without the extraordinary work of God,) they must still believe as
their church believes. For that cannot err, as they fondly suppose. So that it
may hold what it will and they must hold the same, without all trial or
mistrust. Thus by one error, they are fast fettered in many; and must be left
to their blind guides, till they fall together into the ditch. For other guides
they will not have. Therefore I shall now spare a labor, and speak no further
of this point.


Desiderius Thus brought I you out of the way wherein you were showing the
unlawfulnes of kneeling in the sacrament. Yet was it not without fruit, for
even by that which you have said, men may plainly see, that we ought not to
conceit or imitate those supersticious, idolatrous, and absurd Papists, who
are so addicted to their own vvayes, and are like those that cried, Great is
Diana of the Ephesians. Act. 19.28. And great with these, is their goddess
the false church.


M. Mick. But what say you of the Christians whose cause I pleaded for, that
addict themselves to the ways and word of God.


Desiderius. I freely acknowledge that such ought to be lovingly respected. And
you have brought me to like better of them then ever I did; but espetially that
you so well cleared their doctrine of faith to be sound, and their separation
to be but from sin, and such outward orders and ordinances, that are unsound
and sinful: which they therefore forsake, that they might do the will of God
according to his written word; the light of our feet and lantern to all our
paths.


M. Mick You have said enough to clear them both from heresy and schism; for
he is no heretic that is sound in the faith. And he is no schismatique that
separates only from disorder and sin. For we ought not to communicate in sin
either with men or Angels.


Desiderius. And that is the ground whereupon I my self neither do nor dare
communicate in the Church of England with that sinful ordinance of man the
service book, or book of common prayer.


M. Mick. If you profess so much in England by your practice, as you have here
confessed with your mouth, you may happen to be called a Brownist, if not to
taste of other hard entreaty.


Des. Yet the truth is the truth. Which as it appears unto me, so stand I
bound to obey unto it. But I pray you why do the foresaid people solemnize
marriage in civil Assemblies or dwellings?


M. Mick. Because it is a civil action, and ought civilly to be performed,
according to the true nature of it.


Desiderius. Why, it is the judgment almost of all men to have it done in the
Church by a Minister. And (in England) it is a common received custom to have
it so performed.


M. Mick. I wish rather that for the proof of it you could have said, Thus
says the Lord. And then to have showed the chapter and verse where it is so
said. But you have done nothing less, neither in deed it is impossible to be
done: there being no such thing once named or implied in all the scripture. And
consequently, the ground whereon you stand is not rocky and firm, but unsure
and sandy, which shall wash away with the rain, and every house built upon
such a foundation, when the floods come and the winds blow, shall certainly
fall, as we may learn both by Christ's own doctrine in the Gospel, and reason
it self does show the same. And if an Argument drawn from a common custom
be good, then if it be a common custom to have the Lords holy Sabbaths
profaned with Bear and Bull baiting, with dicing and carding, with May games
and morris dance, with laciviousnes and luxury, with rifling or revelling,
etc. then all is good, and all may be done, sane conscientia: But I hope that
both you and every child of God truly sanctified, do defy and abhor all
such things, not only on the Sabbath days, but every day of the week, and of
their whole life.

And is it not a common received custom in England, to worship God by their
book of common prayer in English, as the Papists by their Massebook in Latin,
and by their Images, beads, crucifixes, and other the like; in stead of true
invocation upon the Name of God by the work of his Spirit: But being all
without and against the vvarrant of the word of God, your self dare neither
practice nor approve them. And why then do you not mind the like in other
things no less unvvarrantable. As is the solemnization of marriage
ecclesiastically, and other such like. Many abominations might be pleaded for
by common custom, and multitude of men in that mind. But lay aside these
sandy grounds, and hear the words of the Law, Thou shall not follow a
multitude to do evil, neither agree in a controversy to decline after many
and overthrow the truth. Exodus 23.2.

Believe it for truth, That

All Church actions, are laid down in the scriptures, which is the rule of
truth: But in them we find no mention of marriage to be a Church action:
Therefore it ought not to be so made or used.

And again, All the duties of the Ministry are expressed in the scriptures:
But in them there is no more mention or vvarrant for the ministers solemnizing
of marriages, to the living, then is for their burying of the dead, which is
just none at all. Ergo, they are both unlawful, and ought not to be done.

And where you affirm the contrary, saying, it ought to be done by a Minister;
do you mean a minister indefinitely, without any respect, whether he be true
or false?


Desiderius. No, But I mean a true Minister only. For no true Christian ought
to go to false minister for any such end.


M. Mick. Your reason is right and good: But then the Ministers of England have
no right in that work, they being in respect of their offices, not true but
false Ministers, and so proved.


Desiderius. But in respect of their guiftes they may be said to be the
Ministers of Christ. For many of them have excellent gifts.


M. M. So had Balaam likewise, who yet was but a false Minister and a
Southsayer. And so have many Lawyers and others in our Land, if they would and
might be suffered to exercise their gifts, who yet are no Ministers at all.
Gifts then do help to make men fit for a Ministry, but do not make them
ministers, much less true Ministers. For every true Minister must not only be
qualified with gifts fitting for the same: But must also be lawfully called
thereunto. Even as, every civil Magistrate and Judge, must not only be
qualified with gifts fit for the Magistracy and Iudgeship which he
exercises, but must also be lawfully called thereunto, and rightly put into
the possession thereof. But where you say, many of the Ministers of England
have great gifts, and thereupon conclude them to be true Ministers, you therein
condemn the dumb ministry that do but read their stervice only, and have
no gifts for praying nor preaching.


Desiderius. It is no matter. Let them go undefended. For I hold them false
Ministers, and meddle not with them.


M. Mick. Yet they have the same Ministry with those that have the greatest
guiftes. So that if the one be false, the other is so likewise. Again, if men
have never so good gifts, and be called unto a false ministry, they are
(notwithstanding their gifts) false ministers. But now to return to our
former point, and apply this to the purpose. Marriage is the ordinance of God;
but a false ministry is the ordinance of the Divil. And (says the Apostle) I
would not that ye should have fellowship with the Divils. 1. Cor. 10.20. These
can have no more communion together then Light with Darkness, Christ with
Beleal, or the Believer with the Infidel. All which is condemned, 2 Cor. 6.

Moreover, If you would have no marriages right and lawful, unless they be
solemnized by a true Minister; then you must either make the popish min^sterie
in Q. Mary's days to be true Ministers, or else all that were then so married,
to be unlawful marriages, and the children that were begotten of such parents
to be illigitimate, that is to say bastards. But were it not a foul extremity
to affirm either of these? Doubtless a Mariner that should he so absurd in
sailing, would soon run his ship upon the sands, or break it asunder against
the rocks.

Again, If marriages be only lawful that are made up in a Church by a
Minister; then wheresoever there is not a Church and Ministry, there can be
no lawful marriage. But the Apostle teaches otherwise and says, that marriage
is honorable among all, Heb. 13. And therefore not only where there is a
Church and Ministry, but also where there is none. So that marriage is Gods
ordinance, and lawful to be performed even among the Pagans.

Furthermore, If marriage be only right and lawful, when and where it is done
in a Church by the Minister* then are all marriages to be condemned that have
been made up in Christian Countries civilly before the Magistrates. But that
they may not be. For the word of God gives approbation to such marriages, in the
marriage of Boaz and Ruth, whereof we read, Ruth 4.9.10.11.12. And on the
contrary, show you if you can, any one place in all the holy scripture, that
approves of marriage to be either a sacrament, as the blind Papists would have
it; or a Church action, for the minister to perform; as you and our
Protestants do plead. By which plea and practice you notably nourish the old
popish error, that Marriage is a Sacrament.


Desiderius. I will reason no further in this matter. For I perceive that both
scripture and reason is against me. And when I find it so, down goes the
bucklers. For I love not to be a proctor in a bad cause.


M. Mickelh. It goes well where there is so good a conscence. (But it is not so
in the Spiritual Courts, which are as worthy to go down as your bucklers.)
And had you held out longer, you had heard more. But here is this brief
writing concerning the point, which in likelihood was written by some of that
people of the right Christian prosession; though I neither know how, where, nor
when I came by it. But a special end of it might be in the providence of God
for your good.

Let him that reads consider.

THat which the word of God does approve and inco^mend unto us to be good and
lawful, that ought all to reverence and obey: Yea though the laws decrees and
customs of men were to the contrary: Much more where any thing is done which
both the law of God, and law of man does allow to be lawful, none can disallow
or speak evil of it, except they be such as either in bad conscience or great
ignorance do open their mouths both against heaven and earth. Which fearful
sin, the Lord keep all his servants from.

Now to apply this to a question objected concerning marriage, I hold and
affirm as follows.

Viz. That where a man and a woman (that may mary together by the word of God)
do take one an other for husband and wife, by words of the present time,
before lawful witnesses, using prayer to God to bless them therein, that (I
say) is lawful marriage, and allowed both by the word of God and law of man.

1. The Word of God. By the word of God, as may be seen in these scriptures,
Genesis 2.22.23.24. Ruth 2.9.10.11.12. Math. Prove. 2.17. Romans 7.3. Genesis
29.21.22.23. compared with 1 Timothy 4.5.

Then also by the law of man, and that both by the common law of this land, and
by the civil law also, and even the canon law it self.

(2. The law of this land.) For the common law of this land, see the Statute of
32. Henr. 8. chap. 38. revived in the 1. of Q. Eliz. directly and of purpose
allows and ratifieth all marriages done according to the word of God. The
words of the Statute are these,

Whereas heretofore the Bishop of Rome has always entangled and troubled the
minds of people against the regal power of this Realm of England, and also
much unquieted the subjects of the same, by his usurped power in them, as by
making that unlawful, which by Gods word is lawful, both in marriages and
other things, etc. And whereas also other prohibitio^s then Gods law admits,
much more debate and suite of law, with wrongful vexation of the innocent
party has been procured, and many just marriages brought in doubt, and danger
of undooing, and also many times undone, and lawful heirs disinherited,
whereof there had never else (but for that usurpation) been moved any question,
since freedom in the^ was given us by the law, which ought to be most sure and
certain, etc. Be it therefore enacted that no re^ervation or prohibition Gods
law excepted, shall trouble or impeach any marriages without the Leviticall
degrees, and that no person of what estate degree or condition soever he or
she be, shall be admitted within any of the spiritual Courts, within this
Realm, to any process plea or allegation contrary to this foresaid Act.

Again in Anno 25. Henr. 8. chapter 22. the Satute has these words as follows,

The Parliaments, Convocations, and Universities agreed, that even in matters
of marriage, no man of what estate degree or condition soever, has any power to
dispense with Gods laws.

(3. Book of common prayer.) Whereto also the Book of Common prayer agrees,
which in express terms avoweth their matrimony to be lawful who are coupled
together so as Gods word does allow, and declares moreover, that the very
thing which makes marriage, is the covenant betwixt the parties themselves,
when they take one another for man and wife, by words of the present time: as
may be seen in the Book of Common prayer, in the charge given to the parties,
and the parties speeches one to an other.

(4. Civil law.) Next as touching the Civil Law, it defines that to be
lavvful marriage, when the parties that may mary together and are of years do
both of them consent in taking each other for man and wife, if they be at
their own government, or if they have parents, with their consent. For this
see Vspian. tit. 5.1. Justinian institut. lib. 1. tit. 9.1. et tit. 10. Gaij
institut. lib. 1. tit. 4.

(5. Canon law.) Lastly touching the Canon law, it also defines and
declares, that the only thing which makes the marriage is the mutual
vvilling consent of the parties, declared by words or signs of the present
time. See for this Can. Sufficiat 27.^.2. et Titus de spous.

But thus as aforesaid were he and his wife married together: that is, being
such as might marie by the word of God, they took one an other for husband and
wife, by words of the present time before lavvfull vvitnesses, having prayer
also made unto God to bless them therein.


Desiderius. This writing is worthy to be printed with the rest, for although
it be brief, yet (in my opinion) it i^ ^i^^ie, and to the purpose.


M. Mick. And I wish that by this occasion, the^ would be stirred up to publish
a larger work of the same Argument, which I certainly hear they have amongst
them. For I doubt not but it would show you a better light, then yet has or
can shine from me in whom remains overmuch darkness.


Desiderius. It is like they will do it at your motion, and be otherwise
thankful unto you for defending them and their cause.


M. M. The Apostle says, (1. Ioh. 5.1.) Every one that loves him which
begat, loves him also which is begotten of him. So that I have done but a
duty and fruit of Love, in defending of them and their good cause, both which
are of God: and if it deserve any thanks let them give it to him, who is worthy
of all praise. As for me, they shall never know who I am if I can possibly keep
it from them.


Desid. But I pray you where had you the other writing called A memorandum?


M. M. In the house of one that keeps Record of many things. Where it sufficed
me to get a copy, which made me so much the ritcher, and the good man of the
house was not the poorer.


Desiderius. We must now come to a conclusion, for other important affairs do
call me from these businesses, which have been very profitable to me, and I
pray put all to the printing, that our friends and Country may have the
benefit. For to them I desire all good may come. But I have heard here is much
popery in this place, which as it is no friend to our opinions; so I wish that
it hinder not the printing of these points.


M. M. We will put it to the trial. But I wish that the Printers can read our
English copies.


Desiderius. Oh that they might lively come forth to make their appearance
powerful at the time of every Parliament, til some good do come thereof.


M. M. The Almighty can effect what it pleases him, when and by what means he
will: But by that which I have seen both in Court and Country, I have (for the
time present) little hope in man. Yet I am assured that the time shall come
wherein God will honor some with the work of that good King Josias, in a
larger measure for reformation then ever yet was seen in England. And as any of
these copies shall come into the hands of gracious persons, be they humbly
entreated conscionably to consider of the matter, and accordingly labor to
advance the glory of God, and to procure the good both of the King and
Country, by effecting (through diligent suite, and holy endeavors) reformation
in the things before treated on. Which so far as time, place, and purse will
permit, shall be put to the Press. And so because of your have I cease.


Desid. Fare ye well Monsieur Miles, Dieu vous guard ^al, and a thowsands thanks
for all you pains, etc.


Miles. M. Adieu Desiderius, and God direct you always to desire the
furtherance of his glory, and your own faithfulness, to your endless comfort,
Amen*



