THE CASE OF TENVRES upon the Commission of Defective Titles, Argued by all the
Judges of Ireland, with their Resolution, and the Reasons of their Resolution.

DVBLIN, Imprinted by the Society of Stationers, Printers to the Kings most
excellent Majesty. 1637.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, THOMAS Viscount WENTWORTH Lord Deputy general of
Ireland.
MY LORD,
THis work is Yours by more then one Interest, and therefore it returns
naturally unto YOU, for to lay aside my particular respects, (it being by Your
Lordships favor that I serve his Majesty in this place,) You are Pater
Patriae, and not more by Your Office, then by your love to this nation, and
your most equal, and indifferent dispensation of Justice, (next under his
Majesty) the Father of this Church, and Commonwealth; And for whom can an
oblation of this nature be more proper? besides, all that is here, as it was
at first spoken, in an humble obedience to Your Lordships Order, so it was
after upon a noble invitation from You digested into this form, and it is now
made public by Your Commandment; so that in all the passages of it, it
carries Your Image, Your Superscription, and therefore by this dedication, I
do not so much give it, as restore it. If there be any thing in it, that is
mine, that answeares Your expectation, even in that, that it answeares Your
expectation, I have my reward; for all that are below Your Lordship, I hope it
shall have this use, it shall satisfy them, that Your Lo: proceedings in this
business have bin in all points agreeable both to Honor, and Justice; God
lead Your Lordship by the hand, until You have finished those great, and
heroical works so happily begun, May they all prosper to the high pleasure of
Almighty God, the increase of Honor, and Revenew to his Majesty, of peace, and
prosperity to this Kingdom, and to Your own immortal glory.

Your Lordships most humble servant James Barry.

The Case of Tenures upon the Commission of Defective Titles.
Trin. 13. Caroli Regis.
AT the late inquiry concerning His Majesty's Title to the County of Mayo,
there was an Act of State published, wherein it was declared, that it was not
his Majesty's intention, to take from his people any thing that was justly
theirs, and that therefore none, who held any Lands, or other Hereditaments
whatsoever within that County, by Letters Patent from the Crown, should be
any ways prejudiced by finding his Majesty's Title, although their
Letters Patent were not found, or well and certaynely found, in the great
Office then intended to be taken, but that they should have the same benefit of
them, as if they had been specially found, so as they did produce their
Letters Patent, or the enrollment thereof, before the Lord Deputy and
Council, at the Council Board, by a certain day limited in the Act; and that
they were allowed by that Board, to be good and effectual in Law.

In pursuance of that Act, there were several Letters Patent produced, and
among the rest, the Lord- Viscount Dillon did show forth Letters Patent,
obtained from his late Majesty, and passed upon the late Commission of
Defective titles; Upon perusal and consideration whereof, his Majesty's
Council were of opinion, that they were void in law; And therefore it was
thought fit, and so ordered by the Lord Deputy and Council, that the doubt
arising upon the Letters Patent, should be drawn up into a Case, and that
that Case should be openly argued at the Council Board, by Council learned on
both sides.

The Case was after drawn up in these words.
KIng JAMES by Commission under the great Seal, dated the second day of March,
in the fourth year of his reign, did authorize certain Commissioners, to
grant the Manor of Dale, by Letters patents under the great Seal of this
Kingdom, to A. and his heirs, and there is no direction given in the said
Commission, touching the tenure to be reserved.

There are Letters Patent by color of the said Commission passed unto A. and
his heirs, to hold by Knights service, as of his Majesty's Castle of Dublin

The question is, whither the said Letters patents be void in the whole, or
only as to the tenure.

THis Case was argued on several days, first by Nicholas Plunket for the Lord
Dillon, and Sergeant Catlin for the King, and after by John Pollexfen for the
Lord Dillon, and Osbaldeston Attorney general for the King.

And because it was a Case of great weight and importance, it was delivered
unto the Judges, and they were required by the Lord Deputy and Council, to
confer and consider of it, and to return unto them their resolution
concerning it, but they (upon private conference among themselves) did not
agree in opinion, and therefore it was thought necessary, for public
satisfaction, that it should be argued solemnly by them all: and thereupon in
Trinity term last, the Case was argued by Ryves Puisne Judge of his Majesty's
Court of Chief place, Barry second Baron of the Exchecquer, and Cressy one of
the Judges of the Court of Chief place: and after on another day appointed for
the Case, by Mayart one of the Judges of the Common pleas, Bolton Chief Baron,
Lowther chief Justice of the Common pleas, and Shurly chief Justice of the
Court of chief place.

And for that I intend to make as summary a Report as I can, I will first set
down such arguments, and objections as were made by them that argued for the
mayntenance of the Letters patents.

It was objected by them, That the Letters patents were good for the Land, and
void only as to the tenure.

For diverse reasons
1. Regularly where a Man does less then the authority or commandment
committed unto him, there (the commandment or authority being not pursued) the
Act is void; But where a Man does that which he is authorized to do, and
more, there it is good for that which is warranted, and void for the rest.
Cokes instit. sect. 434. Perk. 189. vid. 8 Coke. 85. But in the Case in
question, the Commissioners do that, which they had authority to do, and they
do more; therefore for that which they had authority to do, that is, to
grant the Lands, the Letters patents are good, for that which they do more,
that is, the reserving of a tenure they are void.

Their authority was, to grant the Manor of Dale to A. and his heirs, that
they have fully done, and if they had stayed there, no man will deny, but they
had well executed their authority; but they go further, and do more, and
Reserve a tenure, therefore for that more, for that Reservation, their Act is
only void.

2. Where a Man has authority to do an act, and he does it in substance,
though he differ in the manner, yet the authority is well executed. As if a
Man make a deed of Feoffment of Blacke-acre, and whit-acre, and a letter of
attorney to enter into both Acres, and to deliver seisin of both of them
according to the form and effect of the deed; and he enters into
Blacke-acre, and delivers seisin secundum formam Cartae, this livery and seisin
is good, albeit he did not enter into both, nor into one in the name of both;
and yet this is done in another manner, then his authority warrants; for his
authority was, to enter into both, and to deliver seisin, of both, neither of
which he does, no not so much as enter into one in the name of both.

So when the Feoffment is made to two, or more, and a letter of Atturncy to
make Livery to both, and the Attorney makes Livery of seisin to one of the
feoffees, secundum formam and effectum Cartae, this is good to both, and yet in
that Case, he that is absent may vvayve the Livery; Surely, this is done by
the Attorney in another manner, then the authority warrants, for his warrant
was to make Livery to both, and the intention of the Feoffor was, that both
should take, and the estate be settled in both, and yet he makes Livery to one
only, and so, that the estate may be settled only in him, and yet he has
well executed his authority, for in substance he has done that which is
commanded, and though it differs in the manner, it is not material; both those
Cases are put in Cokes instit. sect. 66.

But in the Case in Question, the Commissioners have done in substance, that
which was commanded them, therefore their authority is well executed, and the
act they have done is good. That they have done in substance, that which was
commanded them, appears in it self, for their authority was to grant the
Manor of Dale to A. and his heirs, this they have done: And if they have
added any thing to the grant, whereby it may be said to be done in another
manner, yet the act being done in substance, it shall be good.

3. That wherein they have exceeded their authority, scilicet, the Reservation
of the tenure, it is not of the essence of the grant, Of the essence of a grant
are only Grantor, Grantee, and the thing to be granted, and apt words in an
Instrument or Patent; Besides, of the essence of a grant it cannot be, for
grants were at Common Law, tenures were introduced by the Conquest. Seldom in
his Not. to Eadmer. 194. Bracton libr. 2. de acquir. rerum domin. The tenure is
another distinct thing, aliud from the Land, in that they cannot consist in one
person, the Land is the thing granted, that belongs to the Patentee, the tenure
is Reserved to the King, that belongs to him, the Reservation is aliud, or
supra, or praeter the grant, not alio modo. And therefore the Letters patents
may be void for the tenure, and yet good for the grant of the Land.

4. Although it were admitted, that the Reservation of the tenure, be not a
distinct thing, or aliud from that, which they had authority to do, but is
rather a doing of the same thing, for which they had warrant, in another manner
then their authority does warrant; yet it will not follow, that the whole act
is void: For an authority given, may be executed in another manner, alio modo
then the Commission does Warrant; and yet stand good, for that which is done
according to the authority.

And that may be in these Cases.
1. Where the authority is clothed with an interest, for there in many Cases,
he that has the authority may vary from the authority, And the act though it
be done in another manner, shall be good. As where the custom of a Manor
is, that the Lord may grant Lands by Copy of Court-roll in Fee, if the grant
be in tail, or but for life, this is good, Stanton and Barnes his Case Hill.
36. Eliz. Roc. 492. in B. R. Cokes instit. sect. 66.

So where the custom was, to grant Copyes for two lives, and he grants to the
Husband for life, and after to the Wife Durante viduitate. This is good. Downs
and Hopkins Case P. 36. Eliz. B. R. The Statute of 32. Henr. 8. does enable
tenant in tail, to make a Lease for one and twenty years, if he makes a Lease
for twenty years only, or to one for ten years, and after makes a Lease to
another for eleven years more, this is good, and so it has been Resolved in
Tompson, and Traffords Case, Hill. 35. Eliz. B. R.

2. Where the varying from the authority given, is in letter, or circumstance,
and not in a point material, or in substance, for that see the Cases cited
before Cokes instit. sect. 66. and Litt. 434.

3. Where the varyance from the authority, although it be in matter of
substance, is supplied by operation of law. As if a license be granted to a
Copyholder for life, to make a Lease for ten years, if he shall so long
live, the Copyholder makes a Lease for ten years absolutely, without the
limitation, videlicet, if he shall so long live, yet adjudged good; and the
License well pursued. It was Hatt and Arrowsmiths Case Hillar. 38. Elizabeth.
B. R.

And in the Case in question, where all agree, that the Kings meaning in this
Commission was, that a tenure in Capite should be Reserved, albeit it be not
expressed in words; or if it had been in express terms, that a tenure in
Capite should be reserved, and they had only granted the Manor, without
reservation of any tenure, yet the Law supplying this defect, and raising a
tenure in Capite, this shall make the grant good.

4. Where the varyance from the authority is cured by the party himself, by
some other act, As if Tenant in tail, Husband and Wife, a Bishop, etc. who are
authorized by the Statute of 32. Henr. 8. to make leases for one and twenty
years, or three lives of Lands usually let, make a lease of Lands usually
let, and of Lands not usually let, reserving one entire Rent, all is void:
Shepherds Case; But if Tenant in tail will make such a lease, and reserve the
accustomed Rent for the Lands usually let, and another Rent for the Lands
not usually let, here the lease shall be good for the Lands usually let,
and voydeable only for the other; for by these several reservations, the
varyance from the authority is Cured. Tanfeild and Rogers Case Trin. 36. Eliz.
B.R.

5. Where the varyance from the authority (how material soever it be) is
notwithstanding made void, either by the Common Law, or act of Parliament; As
where the King does license I. S. to grant twenty Marks annuity in Mortmaine,
and he grants the Annuity with clause of distress, by Hussy, and Bryan
chief Justices, and Starky chief Baron, and Justice Faierfax, the addition of
distress is without warrant, and void; yet all admit the grant of the Rent
good notwithstanding, 2. and 3. H. 7. grants 36.

By the Statute of 1. Elizabeth. a grant by a Bishop of an ancient Office of
Seneschall-ship to two, that had never before been granted, but to one, is
adjudged void, 10. Coke 61. the Bishop of Salisburyes Case, Put case then that
such a grant is made by a Bishop to I. S. and to an Infant, jointly, or the one
after the other, this is a material varyance, and yet, because the grant in
respect of the Infant is void, (as it was held in Scambler and VValters Case,
M. 40. and 41. Eliz. B.R. cited in Cokes instit. sect. 1. the grant to I. S.
(as they held) is good.

5. Although the habendum, tenendum, condition, etc. be parts of a grant, yet
the Habendum may be void, and the grant good; as in Auditor Kings case cited
in 8. Coke 56. in the Earl of Rutlands Case; where the Case was, the King
granted Lands to A. and his heirs, in the premises, Habendum to him, and his
assigns, omitting the word Heirs in the habendum, yet the Fee shall pass by
the premises, and the habendum shall be void.

The condition may be void, as in Litletons Case a Feoffment upon condition
that he shall not alien, and yet the grant remain good.

6. The reservation of a tenure was not necessary in the grant, if it were not
necessary, it is invtile, and utile per inutile, non vitiatur. 3. Coke 10.
Dowties case.

7. The honor of the King shall be preferred before his profit 9. Coke 131. in
Bewlyes case: and therefore when the Kings grant may be taken to two intents
good, in many Cases, it shall be taken to that intent, which is most
beneficial for the King; But if it may be taken, to one intent good, and to
another intent void, there for the honor of the King, and the benefit of the
Subject, it shall be taken in such manner, that the grant of the King may take
effect, for it was not the intent of the King, to make a void grant, vid. 8.
Coke. 56. the Earl of Rutlands case, the Lord Staffords case, 8. Coke. 77. the
Earl of Cumberlands case, 8. Coke. 167.

Upon this rule the Case of Priddle and Napper. 11. Coke. 11. was put, which
was said, to be a far stronger Case, then the Case in Question, and that, in
Case of an authority executed in other manner, alio modo, and yet good: The
point resolved, as to this purpose, was this, King Henr. 8. did grant License
to the Prior and Covent of Mountacute, to appropriate the Church of Tintinhul
to their Priory, and this was, per verba de praesenti tempore.

It did appear, that at the time of the license, the Church was full of an
Incumbent, and so that no appropriation could be made, in praesenti, but in
futuro, by special words, to take effect, after the death of the present
Incumbent; and therefore the license ought to have been special, otherwise
the King was deceived in his grant, and so the appropriation void, which by
color of that license, they made to take effect, after the death of the
Incumbent: But it was resolved, that the appropriation was sufficient in law,
for the license was general, and therefore, it shall be taken in such sense,
that it may take effect, that is to take effect, after the death of the
Incumbent. And the reason there given, is the rule before remembered, for
Construction of the Kings grants.

In which Case it is to be observed, first that the license or authority given
by the King was in general words, to make the appropriation presently.
Secondly that this authority could not be executed in that manner. Thirdly by
virtue of that license, they make the appropriation in futuro, S. to take
effect after the death of the Incumbent; So they do it in another manner, then
their authority warrants, and yet good, and their authority well pursued.

Then if that authority executed in so different a manner, from the words of
the authority, was adjudged to be well executed, much more shall it in this
Case be said to be well executed, when they have pursued the very words of
the authority, and if to some intent there might be a construction made, to
make the grant void, yet if by another construction, the grant may be made
good, and the Kings intention fulfilled, without any prejudice to him, then
for the honor of the King, and the benefit of the Subject, that Construction
shall be made, that the grant shall be good, and such Construction may be
made in this Case, for here the tenure reserved being void (as it is agreed
by all) a tenure in Capite, (being the tenure intended by the Commission) shall
be raised by implication of law; by this Construction the grant shall be made
good, and the Kings intention shall be fulfilled, without any prejudice to him.

They agree, that in all grants of Lands by Letters patents here in Ireland,
by virtue of the Kings Commission, or letter Missive under the privy Signet, if
that tenure be not reserved, either by the Letters patents, or by the law,
which is directed by the said Commission, or letter Missive, there the grant
shall be void in the whole, both for the Land and tenure.

And therefore, where the king gives power, to grant Lands, and to reserve a
tenure, which the law will not create, or to reserve some other thing, which
the law it self will not reserve; as if the Commission had been, to grant
lands, and to reserve a tenure by Knights service, if the land be granted,
reserving a tenure in socage, the grant is void in the whole.

So if the Commission had been, to grant land, and to reserve twenty
shillings Rent, and they reserve ten shillings; In these Cases the
Commissioners have not done so much, as they should, the king is prejudiced,
and no construction or implication of law can help, as in our Case it does.

And here in this Case, the tenure reserved shall not toll that tenure, which
is employed by the law, because the tenure reserved is void: For that they
cited the Case of Littleton, in his Chapter of Frank-almoigne, sect. 140.

A Man that holds Lands by Knights service, at this day grants them, by
license to an Abbot, etc. to hold in Frank-almoigne, the tenure reserved is
void, and he shall hold by Knights service, and so a gift in Frankmarriage,
reserving a Rent, this reservation is void, and he shall hold only by
fealty. 4. H. 6. 22. Otherwise it would be, if the reservation were good, for
there the tacit reservation shall be silent, as in VVheelers case. 6. Coke 6.

They agree, that if these Letters patents had been made, by Bill signed by
the kings own hand, under the great Seal of England, the tenure reserved
would control the tenure, which the Law would have raised; For in Letters
patents past in England, the Letters patents are ultima intentio Regis, and the
Judges (who are to make Construction thereof,) are to ground their judgment,
upon the Letters patents themselves, and the contents thereof, without any
regard to the particular, or any thing without the Letters patents, Doddingtons
case, 2. Coke. 34.

But in Letters patents of Lands in Ireland, under the great Seal of Ireland,
the Letters patents are not ultima intentio Regis, but tota, and sola, prima,
and ultima intentio Regis are all to be taken, and gathered out of the
Commission, or vvarrant from the king under the privy Signet, upon which they
are passed; And here the Judges are to ground their judgment upon the
Commission, or vvarrant, as well as upon the Letters patents.

And to these seven Arguments, or reasons, all that was spoken by them, that
argued for the Letters patents may be reduced.

But it was resolved by the two chief Justices, the chief Baron, Baron Barry,
and Justice Ryves (with whom Baron Lowther agreed in opinion, though he could
not then argue, by reason of sickness.)

That the Letters patents are void in law, both to the Land, and to the tenure.

In this case five things did fall into consideration.
1. The commission mentioned in the Case, and the authority of it. 2.
Authorities, and their several sorts, and how they ought to be pursued. 3. The
Authority in this case, what it is, if it be pursued, as it ought to be?
wherein it is not pursued. 4. Tenures what they are in the grant, that the
reservation of a tenure is modus concessionis, that it is not aliud, or a
distinct thing from the grant, that tenures had their original in England,
before the Norman Conquest. 5. The reasons why the Letters patents are void in
the whole, and the authorities upon which the Resolution is grounded.
Commission mentioned in the case, is the commission that was in force, in the
time of his late Majesty, for the strengthening of Defective Titles, a
Commission that was one of the greatest graces, and bounties, that ever (before
that time) was vouchsafed by the kings of England to their Subjects, of this
kingdom; a Commission, that was agreed by all, to be a good, and legal, and
effectual commission, and to contain in it self full power, and authority to
grant.

Of which the chief Justice of the Common pleas in his argument fayd, that
upon this occasion he did seriously peruse it, and in his judgment, it was as
full, and strong a Commission, for granting the Lands, (concurrentibus hijs
quae de jure requiruntur) as any he had seen. There was in the Commission
(as he said) plenitudo potestatis, there is not any question of the
Commission, nor of the power granted by the Commission; Neither (as it was
declared) was it the intention of his Majesty, to deny unto the Subject, the
full benefit of it in all things, wherein the Commissioners had pursued their
authority, given by the Commission; and proceeded according to the law.

For that, that there was no direction in the Commission for the tenure, it was
no defect in the Commission (as the chief Baron observed) nor any omission, or
negligence in them, that were trusted with the drawing of it, it was done upon
good advise, and of purpose; for the cases of them, that were to pass upon
that Commission, were so different, and there was such variety of tenures, that
it was not possible, to give any certain direction in the Commission
concerning them.

Besides the intention of that Commission was not, to give authority, for the
alteration, or diminution of the Kings tenures; it was intended only, for the
establishing of the estates, and possessions of the Subject: And therefore
there is not a word in it, of any tenure, so that the purpose of it was, where
any former tenure was in esse, to preserve it, and where no tenure was in
esse, to leave it to the Reservation of the Law.

So that now the Commission being cleared, and agreed to be good, and legal,
and to contain full power, and ample authority to grant the Lands.

The sole Question will be, of the pursuance of the Commission, and whither
this power granted by the Commission, be well executed, and pursued by the
Commissioners.

To find out the law in this Case, the several sorts of authorities in our
Books were considered, and how they ought to be pursued.

For authorities these differences were agreed for Law.

All authorities are either authorities in law or authorities in fait 8. Coke.
146. the 6. Carpenters case.

Authorities in law are, where the law gives authority, without any
authority from the party; as the law gives authority to the Lord, to
distraine for his Rent, and service, to the owner of the soil, to distraine
damage feasant, to him in the reversion, to enter, and see if vvast be done,
and the like.

An authority in fait, is where the authority is given by the party.

Authorities in fait are either Nude and bare authorities, or authorities
clothed with an interest Cokes instit. 52.

Nude authorities are given either by 1. Deed. 2. Commission. 3. Patent. 4.
Writ 5. or Act of parliament.


And for all those authorities, it is a certain rule, and ground in our law,
that they are to be pursued strictly, and precisely, both for matter, and
form, or otherwise, the act done, by color of that authority is void. 10. H.
7. 15.

But the execution of authorities that are clothed with an interest are of a
more large, and favorable interpretation, then the execution of those, that
are but bare authorities. 5. Coke. 94. and 95. in Barwickes case.

1. That authorities by Deed are to be pursued strictly, and precisely, both
for matter, and manner. See the Case of 12. Ass. 24. 26. Ass. 39.
There the Case was, that the Plaintiff did make a Charter of Fee-simple to
the Tenant, and a letter of Attorney to deliver Livery of seisin, the Attorney
delivers Livery upon condition, this Livery is void; for the authority is not
pursued in the manner.

So on the contrary, if the letter of Attorney had been, to deliver Livery of
seisin upon condition, and the Attorney makes Livery without condition, this
is void. Cokes instit. 258. 11. H. 4. 3. A letter of Attorney is made, to make
Livery after the death of I.S. and the Attorney makes Livery during the life of
I.S. all is void. 40. ass. 38.

If I command a Man, to make a Deed of feoffment in my name, according to a
Copy shown unto him, in Latin, if he make a Deed of feoffment according to
the effect of the same words, in English, or French, the Feoffment is without
warrant, for in that case, he does not pursue the authority in the manner, 10.
Henr. 7. 9. So where an authority is given to enfeoffe, and he leavyes a Fine,
ibid. and 10. Henr. 7. 15.

2. For authorities by Commission, that they must be pursued, it is the Earl
of Leicesters case in Plowd. Com. 380.
The Earl of Leicester, 1. Mar. was indicted of high treason, before Sir
Richard Sowthwell, and seven other Commissioners, by virtue of a Commission,
directed to the said Sir Richard and fourteen more.

After another Commission was directed to Sir Thomas White, and others
reciting that where the Earl of Leicester stood indicted, before Sir Richard
Sowthwell, and fourteen other Commissioners, of diverse Treasons, etc.

It gave them authority, ad indictamentum praedictum recipiendum, and ipsum
Robertum super inde audiendum, etc. ac debito fine triandum, terminandum, etc.

By color of that Commission, they did arraigne him upon that indictment found
before eight of the Commissioners, he confessed the treasons, etc. and had his
judgment.

It was resolved, that all that was done was void, and coram non iudice, for
that they did not pursue their authority.

3. Authority by Patent must be pursued.
The King licenses an Abbot and Covent to Alien, the Abbot sole Aliens, it is
void, 21. Henr. 7. 7. and 8. And the rule given by Frovvicke, when the King
makes any grant or License, it ought to be executed accordingly, and strictly,
as if the King grants me License, to make a feoffment by Deed, I cannot make a
Feoffment without Deed; Nor e Contra, So that the License must ever be
pursued, or otherwise the act done, is not warranted by the License, vid. 18.
ass. Pl. ultimo. The Lord Cliffords case 2. Coke. 80. Stamf. prarog. Regis 31.

The License was to levy a Fine of the Manor of Dale, to find two Chapleines,
and he would have levied the fine, leaving out the Chapleines, and could not be
suffered. 3. Ed. 3. 5. Stamf. ubi supra, vid. 30. Ed. 3. 17.

4. Authorities by Writ must be pursued.
In a praecipe quod reddat there must be two Summoners, therefore summons by
one Summoner is not good, Plowd. Com. 393. 50. Ed. 3. 16.

5. Authority given by Parliament must be pursued.
The Statute of Merton Cap. 3. ordaynes, that in a Redisseisin, the Sheriff
assumptis secum custodibus placitorum Coronae, etc. accedat ad tenementum illud
de quo facta fuerit querela. If the Sheriff take but one Coroner, it is not
good, for the act appoints a number, two at the least, which number ought to be
satisfied, or else the authority given by the Act is not pursued, 23. ass. 7.
Plowd. Com. 393.

So that by the Rule of all these Books it is manifest, that a Nude authority
must be pursued strictly, both for matter and manner, or the act done by color
of the authority is void.

But in what Cases, the Act so void for not pursuing of the authority, shall
be void in the whole, or in part only, this difference was taken.

Where he that has an authority does that which he is authorized to do, and
aliud, and another thing distinct from that for which he has authority. And
where he does the same thing which he is authorized to do alio modo, in
another manner, then the authority does warrant.

In the first Case it is good, for that which is warranted, and void for the
aliud. In the other it is void for the whole.

And therefore if a letter of Attorney be made to I. S. to make Livery of
seisin in vvhite-acre, and he makes Livery in vvhite-acre, and Blacke-acre,
there he does Idem and aliud: And therefore it is good for vvhite-acre, that
is according to his authority, and pursuant to it, and void for Black-acre,
which is Aliud from his authority, Perk. 38.

Otherwise it would be, if the letter of Attorney were to make Livery of one
acre, and he makes Livery of two acres, there it is void for both; because he
couples both together; and it is not named in certain in the feoffment, of
which Acre Livery shall be made; according to 4. H. 7. 5. But in the case of
Perk: the Acre is named in certain, VVhite-acre, and so a difference.

On the other side, when the same thing is done in another manner than the
authority warrants, there is Idem alio modo, and therefore all is void; As in
the case of 12. Ass: 24. 26. Ass: 39. 40. Ass: 38. 10. H. 7. 9. the cases
already cited.

The true reason why in all those Cases the Act is void, is, because the
Authority is executed Alio Modo, And so is the reason expressly given in the
book of 12. Ass. why the liverye is void, because the Attorney does it in
other manner, than the Authority warrants.

This is the difference that must rule the case one way or other.

And therefore the only labor will be to find out under which part of that
difference the case in question does lie.

For that. First it will be necessary to enquire.

What the authority in this Case is, whether it be pursued as it ought to be?
wherein it is not pursued.
The Authority given to the Commissioners in this Case is twofold:

An Authority expressed in their Commission. S. to grant the manor of Dale.
And an Authority implied in law, to reserve a tenure in Capite.
For where there is no direction for the tenure, the law will imply a tenure in
Capite, as the best for the King.

In this Case then by the very Commission, the tenure is made a part of the
grant, and Modus Concessionis, for the authority though it be twofold,
expressed and implied, yet both being put together, that which is to be done
by virtue of that Authority, is but one entire Act, one grant, a grant of the
Manor of Dale, reserving a Capite tenure, so that their Authority to grant the
land is not absolute, but sub modo, so that they reserve a tenure in Capite;
And although the power to reserve a tenure in Capite; be only employed by the
law, and be not given by express words in their Commission, that makes no
difference:

For by the rule of our Books, Authorities implied in law, as well as those
that are expressed, must be pursued.

Where a letter of Attorney is made to deliver Livery of scism, the Attorney
has a tvvofold authority.

An authority expressed in his warrant, and that is general to deliver seisin.

And an Authority implied in law, that is, to deliver an Actual and express
Livery, and not a Livery in Law.

And therefore if the Attorney delivers seisin within the view, though it be
warranted by his express authority, yet because he has not pursued his
implied authority, the Act is void. And so it was resolved, P. 3. Eliz. C.B.
in Yarhams Case, Cokes Instit. sect. 66.

This then being their Authority. S. to grant the Manor of Dale, and upon the
grant to reserve a tenure in capite.

Now how have they executed this authority?

There are Letters Patents passed to A. and his heirs, by Color of the
Commission, to be holden by Knights service, as of his Majesty's Castle of
Dublin.

Here they have not pursued their Authority, for where by the Commission
either a tenure in Capite ought to have been reserved, or else the tenure left
to the reservation of the law, They expressly reserve a tenure by Common
Knights service.

That the Letters Patents as to this tenure (thus reserved) are void, it was
agreed on all sides.

But whither they should be only void to the tenure, or whither the
reserving of a tenure, so diverse from the tenure intended, and warranted by the
Commission, shall destroy the whole grant, both for the land and tenure, was
the point, wherein they did differ.



Whither it be a part of the grant, And Modus Concessionis,

or vvhither it be a distinct thing, and Aliud from the grant as this Case is.

For if (as they that argued for the Letters Patents held) the reservation of
the tenure, and the grant of the land, be Aliud, and Aliud, two distinct
things in the Consideration of the whole grant made, and the authority given
by the said Commission, for the making thereof, then peradventure the patent
may be void, as to the tenure, and yet good for the grant of the land.

But if the reservation of the tenure be incident unto the authority, and
included within it; and the reservation of the tenure, and the grant of the
land make up but one entire grant, so that the one is a part of the other, and
the Reservation of the tenure be Modus Concessionis, Then the granting of the
land, reserving a diverse or contrary tenure, to that which their Authority
did warrant them to reserve, is a doing of Idem alio modo. And so the whole act
is void.

They held that the Reservation of the tenure is Modus Concessionis, and that
it is not Aliud. S. a thing distinct and separate from the authority of the
grant of the land, but implyedly included within it, and incident to it.

Although a grant may be without Habendum, express Tenendum, Reddendum, or
Condition, yet when they, or any of them are added, they are de modo
Concessionis, and do direct, and rule the grant.

1. For the Habendum.

The proper office of the Habendum is to limit the estate; yet sometimes it may
1. Alter the estate in the premises. 2. Diminish or enlarge. 3. Give to a
stranger. 4. Make the grant void.


1. It may alter the estate in the premises.

As where land is given to two in the premises, Habendum, the one moytie to the
one, and the other moytie to the other, by the premises they have a joint
estate, the Habendum makes them tenants in Common, Litt. 66. So where land is
given to two, Habendum to the one for life, the remainder to the other. By the
premises they should have a joint estate in possession. But the Habendum does
alter that, and makes the one sole tenant of the freehold for life, and the
other sole tenant of the Remainder. 8. E. 3. 320. feoffments and faits. 73.

2. It enlarges or diminishes the estate that would pass by implication in the
premises, and so destroys the implication, This is common in every grant.

3. It gives to a stranger not named in the premises of the grant.

As if a man gives lands to I.S. Habendum with A. his daughter in
Frank-marriage, there the wife not named in the premises, by the Habendum,
takes a joint estate with her husband. this Case is vouched in Pl. Com. 158. to
be in 4. E. 3. which being not found in that year, it is there so left without
any further reference, but you shall find it in 5. E. 17. so Cokes Instit.
sect. 17. yet vid. 4. E. 3. 4. So likewise where a lease is made to A.
Habendum for twenty years, the Remainder to B. and his heirs, here B.
gains an immediate freehold, by the Habendum, and yet he is not named in the
premises of the deed. Plowd. Com. 158.

4. It will make the grant void.

As if I have a Rent in Fee, and I grant it to another, if I stay there, the
grant shall be for life, But if I say further, Habendum after the death of I.S.
there all shall be void, Plowd. Com. 152. 156.

So if the King grants lands by letters patents, Habendum from a day to come,
there the whole grant is made void by the Habendum. 5. Coke. 93. Barwicks Case.

He in the Reversion for life grants his estate, Habendum after Michaelmas, and
after Michaelmas the tenant atturnes, yet Resolved that the grant is void,
though if there had been no Habendum, it had been good by the premises of the
deed, Bucklers Case, 2. Coke 55.

In all these Cases, the Habendum being void, makes void the grants, which
would have been good without it.

As the Habendum has these several operations in the grant, so has

2. the Reddendum.

As an estate by implication shall be controlled by an express limitation; so
an employed Reservation shall be controlled by an express Reservation,

A man makes a lease rendering rent, and does not say to whom the rent shall be
paid, this by implication shall be to the Lessor, and his heirs, But if the
words be to the Lessor, the heir shall not have it, 31. H. 8. Dyer. 45. 12. E.
3. Ass. 86. Plowd. Com. 171. in Hill and Granges Case. 10. E. 4. 18. and 21. H.
7. 25.

The Reservation of a Rent in some Cases shall make severance of the grant, and
make several grants, and several reversions.

As if a man makes a lease of three Manors, reserving twenty shillings for
one, five pound for another, and twenty pound for the third, there are several
Reversions, and there shall be several Avowries, 14. Eliz. Dyer, 308. VVinters
Case. 9. E. 3. 12. 5. Coke 55. Knights Case.

3. For the Tenendum.

The proper office of the Tenendum is to reserve the tenure, and to toll the
tenure by implication.

Before the statute of Quia Emptores terrarum, If a man made a feoffment, the
feoffee held of the feoffor by such services, as the feoffor held over; But if
other services were Reserved, then the feoffee held by such services as were
reserved.

That the Donee in tail shall hold of the donor, as the donor held over, is
Regularly true, if the donor make no special Reservation, for then the
special Reservation excludes the tenure, which the Law would create. Cokes
Instit. sect. 19. vid. 34. H. 8. Dyer 52.

4. For the Condition.

That does likewise direct, and rule the grant, the Condition does change the
quality of the grant, and makes the estate Conditional, and defeasible, which
otherwise would be absolute, and indefeasible:

So that all these. viz. the Habendum, the Reddendum, the Tenendum, and the
Condition, are de modo Concessionis, and do Rule, and direct the grant, the
first limits, and sets forth the quantity, the other describe the quality of
the estate.

And of all these the Tenendum is inseparably annexed to the estate, the rest
may be determined, and yet the estate continue, but the tenure cannot be
determined, as long as the estate continues.

1. The Condition may be released. 2. The Rent may be released. 3. The estate
may be enlarged.
But the tenure cannot be destroyed, It may be transferred from one to
another, in Case of Common persons, But a Tenure in Capite cannot be
transferred, or extinct by any release, or grant, for it is an incident
inseparably annexed to the Crown.

Obj. that the tenure is Aliud from the land, for the land is the subjects, and
the tenure belongs to the King.

Answ. that the question is not, whither the tenure be Aliud from the land, for
it is clear the land is one thing, and the tenure another: but the question is,
whither the reservation of the tenure be Aliud from the authority of granting
the land, or included in it, as modus concessionis, S. they shall grant, and
grant in this manner.

2 It was answered, both are the Kings, But the tenure was asleep by the
possession in the King, and it is now to be awakened by this Commission, in
which it appears, that the intent, and plain meaning of the King was, to
grant the land to the subject, and to reserve the tenure for himself. And that
the Tenure is not such a stranger to the land, it is proved by our books, in
Mary Blages Case, 1. H. 4. 2. It is said, that land lies naturally in tenure.
2. that land lies always in tenure, And therefore the tenure is of the nature
of the land, it arises out of the land, and has existence in the land, it is
inherent in it, and inseparable from it, it is upon the matter of the essence
of the grant of the land, for no grant of land in Feesimple, to a common
person, either from the King, or a Common person, can be without a tenure,
either expressed, or employed, We have not in our law properly Allodium, that
is, any land in the hands of a subject, that is not holden, Cokes Instit. sect.
1.

The lands only that are in the Kings possession are free from tenure, for a
tenant is he that holds of some superior Lord, by some service, And
therefore the King cannot be a tenant, because he has no superior, but God.
praedium domini Regis est directum dominium cujus nullus est Author nisi Deus.

And as Bracton says, lib. 1. cap. 8.

omnis quidem sub eo, and ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub Deo.

vid. lestatute. 16. R. 2. cap. 5. 14. Eliz. Dyer. 313. 1. Coke 47. vid. 8.
Coke 118. where it is said, that it would be against Common right and reason,
that the King should hold of any, or do service to any of his Subjects; and
therefore some have thought it not so proper, in the Kings Case, to say, that
he is scised in dominico suo ut de feodo. Cowell Interpret. verb. feudum and
institut. p. 66. As if feodum or fendum were taken in our law as it is in the
feudall law only for lands held by services.

But with us it has another signification, Littleton tells us, feudum idem est
quod haereditas, and so it was defined, long before Littleton, by Bracton, and
Briton, and Fleta.

And in truth it has two significations in our books, In the first, it is
taken to be the same with an inheritance, and so it is proper enough in the
Kings Case.

In the other it is taken for lands held, as in that of Horse de son fee.

We find both in Bracton lib. 4. cap. 9. fol. 263. feudum est quod quis tenet
ex quacunque causa sibi and haeredibus suis, etc. and alio modo dicitur feudum,
quod quis tenet ab alio sicut dicitur talis tenet de tali tot feuda per
servicium militare.

And agreeing with him is Fleta (which for the most part is transcribed out of
Bracton) lib. 5. cap. 5.

And here just occasion might be taken, to clear our Master, Littleton, from
that imputation which is cast upon him, by the Author of the Common wealth of
England, page 127. where he lays ignorance to his charge, for laying, that
Feodum idem est quod haereditas, which (says he) it does not signify in any
language.

It were easy to make it manifest, how proper that sense is, But because it
has partly appeared, by that which has been said, and for that the Author of
that Book is not known, for some have doubted, whither Sir Thomas Smyth be
the Author of it, or no, Sir John Fernes generositie, page 99. And so to argue
with him, would be to fight with a shadow, therefore they did abstain.

So that it is clear, that only lands in the Kings possession are free from
tenure, But if they once come into the hands of a Common person, there if the
feoffor do not reserve a tenure, the law will.

Before the statute of Quia Emptores Terrarum, if a man made a feoffment in
fee, and reserved no tenure, the law did imply a tenure, and the feoffee held
of the feoffor, by such services as the feoffor held over,

Upon a feoffment made after that statute, if no tenure were expressed, the law
will imply a tenure de Capitalibus dominis.

And as it is in the Case of Common persons, so in the Kings Case, In every
grant wherein feesimple passes, there must be a tenure either expressed, or
implied.

Of such Necessity is the Reservation of a tenure in the Kings grant, that
although the King should grant land without any Reservation of tenure, or by
express words absque aliquo inde Reddendo, yet the law would create a tenure
in Capite 33. H. 6. 7. 6. Coke 7 VVheelers Case. 9. Coke 123. Anthony Lowes
Case.

14. H. 6. 12. The Abbot of St. Bartholomewes Case. The King grants lands in
fee, Tenendum cy frankement come le Roy esten son Corone, yet the patentee
shall hold in Capite, for it is vested in the King by his prerogative, and
cannot be extinct,

It is so inseparable it cannot be released. In Anthony Lowes Case, The King
grants, or releases the Services to his tenant, and his heirs, this release
cannot extinguish the tenure in all, though where the tenure is by Common
Knights service, or socage, it extinguishes all the services, but that only,
which is an incident inseparable to every tenure, viz. fealty, And all for
this reason, Because there is a necessity of a tenure, and the Kings Charter
does not alter the law; the tenure and services are part and parcel of the
Manor, and shall go with the Manor, and descend as the Manor, to the heir
of the part of the mother, although it be newly created, 5. E. 2. Avowry 207.

Besides, consider the tenure in the Commencement, and fruits of it, it is ever
inherent in, and Relative to the land.

The Commencement of the tenure. S. the form of doing homage and fealty is,
that he shall be faithful and true for the land that he holds.

The fruits of the tenure, what are they? but the profits of the land,
wardship, Livery, primer seisin, relief, fine for Alienation, and the rest.

And therefore where the land and signiory meet in an equal estate, and
right, in the same person, the signiory by unity of possession is
extinguished, And there are two reasons given of that extinguishment;

1. Because the signiory that was first extracted out of the land, when it
comes to the land again, it is naturally extinct, for it is Revolutio ad
materiam primam.

2. He that has all the profits entirely, cannot be said to have part of the
profits. Sir I. Davys rep. 5.

The Escheate which is the last resort of the tenure, is the land it self, and
therefore the Reservation of the tenure cannot be said, to be a distinct thing
from the grant of the land, as Black-acre from VVhiteacre.

Tenures in Capite were brought in by the Conquest, but grants were by the
Common law, then if grants have been ancienter then tenures, the tenure of
Necessity must be Aliud from the thing granted.

To prove that this tenure was brought in by the Norman Conquest, Seldom was
cited in his Spicileg. to Eadmer. p. 194. where he has that out of Bracton de
Acquir. rerum domin. lib. 2.

Forinsecum servitium dicitur Regale servitium quia spectat ad Dominum Regem,
and non ad alium, and secundum quod in Conquestu fuit adinventum.

Resp.
It was answered that M. Seldom in that place does barely recite the words of
Bracton, not delivering any opinion of his own:

For in that Book cited, page 170. and in his titles of honor, the last
edition, page, 612. We find that he was of another opinion, and that this
tenure was in use in England, in the times of the Saxons.

What were those Thani Majores, or Thani Regis among the Saxons? but the Kings
immediate tenants of lands, which they held by personal service, as of the
Kings person by grand serjeanty, or Knights service in Capite.

The Land so held, was in those times called Thainland, as land holden in
socage was called Reveland, so frequently in Domes-Day. haec terra fuit terra
Regis Edwardi Thainland, sed postea conversa est in Reveland. Cokes Instit.
sect. 117.

After some years that followed the coming of the Normans, the title of Thane
grew out of use, and that of Baron and Barony succeeded for Thane and
Thain-land.

Whereby we may understand the true, and original reason, of that which we
have in the Lord Cromwels Case, 2. Coke 81. That every Barony of ancient time
was held by grand serjeanty; By that tenure were the Thain-lands held in the
time of the Saxons, and those Thain lands were the same that were after called
Baronies.

It Is true the possessions of Bishops and Abbots were first made subject to
Knights service in Capite by William the Conqueror, in the fourth year of
his Reign, for their lands were held in the times of the Saxons. in pura and
perpetua Eleemosyna, free, ab omni servitio saeculari.

But he then turned their possessions into Baronies, and so made them Barons
of the Kingdom, by tenure, so that as to them, this tenure, and service may be
said to be in Conquestu adinventum. But the Thainlands were held by that tenure
before,

As the Kings Thane was a tenant in Capite, so the Thanus mediocris, or middle
Thane was only a tenant by Knights service, that either held of a mean Lord,
and not immediately of the King, or at least of the King as of an Honor, or
Manor, and not in Capite.

What was that Trinoda Necessitas, which so often occurres in the grants of the
Saxon Kings, under this form, Exceptis istis tribus Expeditione, Arcis and
pontis exstructione? (See it in a Charter of King Etheldred in the preface to
Cokes 6. Report, etc.) but that which was after expressed by Salvo forinseco
servitio. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 26. and 35. 12. Ed. 1. Guard. 152. 26. Ass. 66.
Seldom Analect. Anglobrit. 78.

And therefore it was said that Sir Henry Spelman was mistaken, who in his
Glossary verbo feudum, referres the original of feuds in England, to the
Norman Conquest.

It is most manifest, that Capite tenures, tenures by Knights service, tenures
in socage, Frankalmoigne, etc. were frequent in the times of the Saxons.

And if we will believe what is cited out of an old French Customary in a Mss.
treatise of the Antiquity of tenures in England, which is in many men's hands,
all those tenures were in use long before the Saxons, even in the times of the
Britains, there it is said; The first British King divided Britain into
four parts; And gave one part to the Arch-flamines to pray for him, and his
posterity; A second part he gave to his Earls and Nobility to do him
Knights service; A third he divided among husbandmen, to hold of him in socage.
The fourth part he gave to Mechanical persons, to hold in Burgage.


But that testimony was waiv'd, there being little certainty, or truth in the
British Story before the times of Caesar. Neither would they make use of that,
which we are taught by William Roville of Alenzon in his preface to the grand
Customier of Normandy, That all those Customs (among which these tenures are)
were first brought into Normandy out of England by Edward the Confessor.

Besides that which has been said, we find Feuds, both the name, and thing
in the Laws of those times, among the Laws of Edward the Confessor. cap. 35.
where it is thus provided.

Debent enim universi liberi homines, etc. secundum feodum suum, and secundum
tenementa sua, Arma habere, and illa semper prompta conservare, ad tuitionem
regni, and servitium dominorum suorum, etc. Lambard Archaionom. 135.

This Law was after confirmed by William the conqueror, vid. Cokes Instit.
sect. 103.

As these tenures were common in those times, so were all the fruits of them,
homage, fealty, Escuage, Reliefes, wardships.

For Reliefes, we have full testimony in the Reliefes of their Earls, and
Thanes, for which, See the Laws of King Canutus, cap. 68. and 69. the Laws
of Edward the Confessor, cap. de Heterochijs, And what out of the book of
Domes-day, Coke has in his Instit. sect. 103. Camden in Barke-shire, Seldom in
Eadmer, 154.

That wardships were then in use, and not brought in by the Normans, as Camden
in his Britt. 179. Nor by Hen. 3. as Randolph Higden in his Polichronicon, And
others (not understanding him) would persuade, vid. Seldens Notes on
Fortescue. 51.

Among the privileges granted by Edward the Confessor to the Cinque Ports,
we meet with this, that their heirs shall not be in ward, Lambards
Perambulation of Kent. 101.

And in the Customs of Kent, which are in the Magna charta of Tottells
Edition, and in Lambards perambulac. There is a rule for the wardship of the
heir in Gavell-kind, and that he shall not be married by the Lord. And those
Customs say of themselves, that they were, Devant le Conquest, even le
Conquest.

For the Antiquity of wardships in England, and Scotland, see also Hect. Boet.
lib. 11. Buchanan rerum Scot. lib. 6. and the Laws of Malcolme 2. which prove
the Antiquity of wardships in Scotland, and therefore in England, before the
Norman Conquest; for in those times it is probable, the Laws of both nations
did not much differ, As for the times after, it appears they did not, by
comparing their Regiam Majestatem, and our Glanvill. Neither is the bare
Conjecture of Sir Henry Spelman sufficient, to take away the force of those
Laws, vid. Spelman. Glossar. verbo Feudum.

Upon all this they did Conclude, That upon consideration of the Authority
given, and grant thereupon made, the reservation of the tenure cannot be said
to be Aliud. S. a separate and distinct thing from the Authority of granting
the land, but rather included within it: And that the Reservation of the
tenure, though it be not ipsa concessio, the grant it self, yet it is Modus
concessionis, and a part of the grant, And that therefore the Authority being
not pursued in that, the whole grant is void.

And so it was Resolved, for these reasons, and upon these Authorities.

1. The Maine and principal reason, why they did Resolve that the Letters
patents were void in the whole, was, because that here the Commissioners had
but an Authority, and that Authority they have not pursued.

By the Commission they were to grant the lands, and to reserve a tenure in
Capite, or to leave the Reservation to the law; Now there is a tenure by
common Knights service reserved, so they have executed their Authority in
another manner, then the Commission warrants, they have done Idem alio modo,
And therefore by the rule of the books before cited, the whole grant is void.

It was agreed by all, that if the Commissioners here had granted the land,
Reserving a tenure in Capite, the Patent would have been good, and
effectual, or if they had granted the land, and reserved no tenure, there
because the Law in that Case would raise a tenure in Capite, such a grant
would have been good, and well warranted by the Commission:

2. This Commission is a Nude Authority, for the interest is in the King, and
the Commissioners have only a bare Authority to grant, and therefore it ought
to be pursued most strictly, both in matter, and manner, and the execution of
it is to be expounded strictly.

This Answers all the Cases that have been put on the other side, where an
Authority in some sort may be executed alio modo, and yet good, as the Case of
Stanton and Barnes, where by Custom the Lord might grant Copy-holds in fee,
and he grants a Lesser estate simply, or a lesser estate with a remainder
over, And the other Report, that has been cited between Downs and Hopkins,
where the Custom was to grant Copies for two lives, and he grants to the
husband for life, and after to the wife durante viduitate; The Case of Hatt and
Arrowsmyth, where a Copyholder for life was licensed to make a lease for
years, si tam diu vixerit, and he makes a lease absolutely, without that
limitation. The Case of Baron and Feme making a lease upon the Statute of 32.
H. 8. The Case of 3. H. 7. where upon a license to grant an Annuity, he grants
it with clause of distress; And yet for that Case, see the Case of Suttons
Hospital. 10. Coke.

The Case of Priddle and Napper, and all the other Cases, that have been put
upon this ground.

For in all those Cases there is an interest coupled with the Authority, and
therefore they are not to be compared to this Case, in which there is only a
mere and a bare Authority.

3. This Commission is a public authority of Record, to which the subjects
may resort, and of which they ought to take Notice, to pass according the
Commission at their peril. And therefore if either through ignorance, or
Carelessness, or otherwise they neglect to have their patents drawn pursuant
to the Commission, the fault is their own, they cannot transfer the blame of
this to the King, as in like Case it is resolved, upon the Commission of
Bankrupts 2. Coke 26. So at the common Law, a patent without recital of a
lease for years of Record, is void, for the subject may resort to the
public Record; The King intends Ardua Regni,

This answers the objection, touching even that honor of the King, that has
been spoken of, and cleares his performance of his part in this Case.

For the King in favor of his Subjects of this Realm, has granted a good,
and gracious, and effectual Commission, upon which many legal, and good, and
effectual Letters Patents have been made, that have been allowed, and
approved for good.

But if upon this Commission, so good, and gracious for the subject, the
subject shall contrary to the authority given by the Commission obtain
Letters patents, in fraud, and deceit of the Crown, to defeat the King of his
tenures in Capite, a principal flower of his Crown, if these Letters patents
be void, where is the fault? certainly in the subject, that contrary to the
Authority of the Commission, obtaines this grant in deceit of the King, to
defeat him of his tenure, which was but an ill return for so great and
gracious a bounty; And that Objection of the operation of law, Answers not
the intention of the party in this case, for plainly, and apparently, the
meaning of the Patentee was, to suppress the King's tenure in Capite, and to
hold by a mean, and inferior tenure, which was contrary to the authority of
the Commission, and in deceit, and prejudice of the King.

Now that Patents obtained in deceit, and prejudice of the King, are clearly,
and wholly, and utterly void, to all intents, and purposes, is a ground so
obvious, so positive, and infallibly true; that they would not cite any book,
or authority to prove it, for it is mavelous clear, and granted of all
sides, that patents obtained in deceit, and prejudice of the King, are
altogether void,

If any desire an Authority, he may have a Cloud of Authorities, in the Case
of Alton VVoods. Coke. 1. Report.

4. This is an Authority appearing within the body of the Record, of the
Letters Patents themselves; for the Letters Patents are ex Assensu of such and
such Commissioners, virtute and secundum intentionem Commissionis, etc.

Now the tenure in Capite being as strongly implied in the Commission, as if it
had been expressed; (as it has been confessed of the other part) for it is
upon this implication, that they say the Patent is void for the tenure, it is
as much, as if the King had given Commission to grant the land, to hold in
capite, and not otherwise.

Now in so much as the Commissioners have granted the lands, in other Manner
(and all this appears within the body of the Record of the letters patents
themselves) the patent is void in the whole, for Construction is to be made
upon the whole patent, and not upon any part of it distinct, as it is Resolved
in Bucklers Case. 2 Coke 55.

And this hitherto has been always the constant Resolution of all the Judges
of Ireland, our Predecessors, That if upon Letters of warrant, or Commission,
Letters Patents be made varying in any point material, from the warrant, or
Commission, (and all this appears within the body of the Letters patents
themselves) that the Letters patents are all utterly void, And this has been
ever agreed upon by reason of the difference between the manner of passing of
Letters patents in England, and Ireland.

But where the warrant, or Commission, and the variance do not appear within
the Letters patents, how it shall be aided for the King, by Averment, or
otherwise has been some doubt, and Question.

5. Although that it be true, that this commission is of a vast, and large
extent, yet it is not boundless, for the law always bounds, and circumscribes
these ample Authorities with reasonable, and equal constructions, without
prejudice to others, as it was resolved upon the Commission of Sewers, upon
which we have the Reported Cases in 5. Coke 99. Rookes Case, and 10. Coke 138.

This Commission of Sewers gives power, and Authority to the Commissioners, To
proceed according to their wisdoms, and discretions, which is a most ample
power, yet the law does bound, and circumscribe it with an equal Construction.
S. that their proceedings ought to be bounded with the rules of Reason, Law,
and Justice, and that their taxes be equal, and that all persons that be
subject to the danger, or receive benefit by the Reparation, be contributary to
a ratable, and equal contribution of the charge, And if they do otherwise,
their ordinances are void, and they cannot make new inventions, as Artificial
Mils for casting out of water, etc.

For these general Commissions are all accompanied in law with an equal and
reasonable construction for the execution of them.

So this Commission is a most ample, and large Commission, for the securing of
the estates of the subjects, in their lands, but yet it ought to be so
executed, according to law, reason, and justice, that they do not prejudice
the King in his tenures, contrary to their warrant.

6. Because that this Reservation of a mean tenure, is in other manner than
the Authority warrants, and to the damage and prejudice of the King.

If the Commission were, to grant an estate for life, and they grant an estate
tail, or if the Commission were to grant in tail, and they grant in Fee, All
the patent is void, because they do it in other manner then the authority
warrants, for the Habendum is Modus Concessionis.

If they reserve another Rent, then is warranted by the Commission, or parcel
an entire rent, where the rent in charge ought to be reserved, although that
it be several upon the survey, yet the whole patent is void, because that
they do it in other manner then the Authority warrants, for the Reddendum is
Modus Concessionis.

Why then shall it not be the same reason, in this Case, for here they reserve
another tenure, then that which is warranted by the Commission, and therefore
they have executed their authority in other manner then their Authority
warrants, for the Tenendum also is Modus Concessionis.

It was granted by them that argued on the other side, that if it be
prejudicial to the King, the whole Patent shall be void.

Now it is most apparent, that this employed tenure (if it be admitted) will
be greatly prejudicial to the King, for the King shall loose his tenure, and
the fruit of his tenure, in most Cases for ever, and in all Cases for a long
time; and neither the Master, nor the Attorney of the Court of Wards can help
it.

And for that, the course of Patents here in Ireland was observed.

First, the Commissioners give warrant for drawing of the Patent, and the
reservation of this mean tenure, the Kings Council draw the Patent
accordingly, and so it passes the signature of the Lord Deputy, the privy
signet; and the great seal, then it is enrolled in the Chauncery, All this
while it is taken according to the tenure expressed in the patent, when it is
enrolled, it is transcribed into the Exchecquer, and the transcript delivered
into the Exchecquer by the master of the Rolls, the Lord Chief Baron receives
it, and delivers it to the second Remembrancer, and he puts it in charge
according to the tenure expressed; the Escheator, and Feodary inform
themselves of the Kings tenures there, where if they make enquiry, the patent
is produced, in which an express tenure is reserved, they cannot judge the
contrary, and so it passes according to the express tenure; And so have the
Letters patents now in question passed, and the King by color of them, has
lost the profits of the Land, and the benefit of the tenure.

7. The express reservation in the Letters patents excludes the reservation,
and implication of Law, Although (as in the case in question) it tend to make
void the whole grant, it is a sure rule in Law, expressum facit cessare
tacitum. If the King upon his Letters patents reserve no tenure, it shall be a
capite tenure, but if another tenure be expressed, that shall prevayle; 33. H.
6. 7. per prisot.

In VVheelers Case. 6. Coke. 6. Where in a patent the words of the Tenendum
were, Tenendum de nobis per servitium unius Rosae, pro omnibus servitijs.

It was objected, that the tenure as it is expressed cannot stand, for that no
tenure can be without fealty, and the words are per servitium unius Rosae,
pro omnibus servitijs.

2. It was objected, that in Case where no tenure is Reserved, or in Case
where it is expressed to be absque aliquo inde Reddendo, the tenure shall be
Knights service in Capite.

And therefore it was urged, that the tenure in the principal Case, must
needs be a Capite tenure by Knights service, and that the tenure expressed,
should be void, and give place to the better tenure for the King.

These are strong objections, yet Resolved in respect of that favor that is
given to express Reservations, that in the said Case, fealty (that is an
incident to all services) shall be admitted to stand with the words, and
then the tenure expressly reserved was so complete that it might well exclude
the Knights service tenure, which otherwise the Law would have employed.

Hereby may appear the favor that is given to express Reservations, and
tenures, that thereby a tenure in Capite by Knights service shall be excluded,
a tenure which shall arise where nothing is Reserved, which shall arise
though the words be, absque aliquo inde reddendo. vid. Sr John Molins case.
6. Coke 5.

It is agreed on the other side, that where the express tenure is good, there
it controlls the employed tenure, but in our Case it is void.

And where a tenure expressed is void, a tenure by implication of Law may
arise.

But it was Resolved; that although the express tenure be void, yet no
tenure by Implication of Law, shall arise against the express Reservation, And
so in the Case of a void Habendum, which stands upon the same reason, It was
adjudged in B. R. Between one Hegge and Cross, 33 et 34. Eliz. which you may
see in Bucklers case, 2. Coke. 55. Where the Case was.

Tenant for life makes a lease for years, and after grants the reversion to A.
Habendum from a day to come for life, after the day the lessee for years
attorns, in that Case the Habendum is void, yet that void Habendum makes
void the whole grant, and excludes the implication of Law in the premises,
and no estate shall pass by implication of Law in the premises, against the
express limitation of the party in the Habendum: see the Cases cited before p.
26.

So our Tenendum although it be void, yet the express reservation in the
Tenendum shall exclude the implication of Law.

For that opinion of Martyn. in 4. H. 6. 22. that was Cited on the other part,
that if land be given in frankmarriage, reserving a rent, the reservation of
the rent is void, by reason of the employed tenure in frankmarriage; that
opinion (as was said) may well be doubted of, for we find as good Authority
against it, in the old Tenures fol. 211; That the Reservation of the rent is
good, and destroys the frank-mariage, and makes it a Common Estate tail: But
the best opinion is, that both of them shall stand together, S. the gift in
frankmarriage, and also the Reservation of the rent, S. that the donce in
frankmarriage shall hold quitt of the rent, until the fourth degree be past,
and then the rent shall take effect, and so was the opinion of the Judges, in
Webb and Potters Case in 24. Eliz. and so are the books to be understood; 13.
E. 1. formedon. 63. 31. E. 1. tail 31. 26. E. 3. grants. 75. et 26. Ass. 66.

For the Case of Littleton 140. A man seized of certain tenements, which he
held of his Lord by Knights service, at this day grants by license the same
tenements to an Abbot, in frankalmoigne, the Abbot shall hold immediately by
Knights service, of the same Lord, of whom his grantor held, and shall not
hold of his grantor in frankalmoigne.

In that Case (they say) the express tenure being void, a tenure by
implication of Law does arise.

It was Answered, there is a difference betvveene the Kings Case, which it
the Case in question, and the Case of a Common person.

For the grants of a Common person, the rule of Law is, that the grant shall be
taken most strongly against the grantor.

For the Kings grants the rule is, that they shall be taken most beneficially
for the King, and most strong against the patentees.

And we have another rule, that the grant of the King shall not be extended
to pass any thing, contrary to the intent of the King expressed in his grant,
And if the grant cannot take effect, according to his intent expressed in his
grant, the grant is void.

And therefore, for the rules put by them that argued on the other side, that
the patents of the King shall be taken in such sense and to such intent that
they shall be good, etc.

It may be Answered, that there is another ground in our Law, that when the
King is deceived in his grant, so that it cannot take effect, according to his
intent expressed in his grant, the grant is void, so the best a exposition is,
to make all these rules to agree together.

And therefore the rules put on the other side, are true with this limitation.
S. Except the King be deceived, so that his grant cannot take such effect, as
he intends by his express grant.

In the Lord Lovells Case. 18. H. 8. B. Pat. 104. The King excerta scientia, et
mero motu grants lands to one, and to his heirs males; if a Common person had
made such a grant, the Law would say, that the word males were void, and
the fee simple should pass; But will the Law make such a construction in the
Kings grant? No, there the grant shall be void, for he was deceived in his
grant, in that it cannot take effect according to his intent expressed in his
letters patents.

And so in the Case of 7. H. 4. 42. and 21. E. 3. 47. The Earl of Kents Case,
If the King has a ward of land, or a lease of land for years, and by his
letters patents grants the land to another and his heirs, the grant is void,
and it shall not amount by construction, to a grant of his estate, or interest.
vid. 21. Ass. 15. And the other books Cited in the Case of Alton VVoods upon
this ground.

29 Eliz. in the Exchecquer, the Case was; King H. 7. was seized of two
manors. S. de Ryton et condor, he grants ex certa scientia et mero motu totum
illud manerium de Ryton et condor, adjudged that the grant was void.

The like Case was resolved 39. Eliz. where the queen was seized of the
Manors of Millborne and Saperton in the County of Lincoln, and the queen
grants ex certa scientia, and mero motu, totum illud Manerium de Millborne, cum
Saperton in Com: Linc: and it was held that neither of the Manors did pass;
And yet if a Common person had made such grants; the grantee in both the said
Cases should have had both the Manors.

So in our Case, the King is deceived in his grant, in that his grant cannot
take effect, according to his intention therein expressed, For the Kings
intention is to make a grant agreeable in all things, to the Authority given to
the Commissioners, by the said Commission;

And that appears plainly by the very words of the letters patents, for the
words are, Sciatis quod nos etc. virtute ac secundum intentionem et effectum
of the said Commission, Dedimus et Concessimus etc. as in the patent; and he
conceived that the vvarrant made by the Commissioners, for passing the patent
(which here we call the fiant) had been according to the intent, and effect
of the said Commission: And upon that warrant which exceeded the Authority
given to the Commissioners, this patent was past, yet still with a reference
to the intention and effect of the Commission.

Now this grant cannot by any possibility take effect according to the Kings
intention therein expressed, for the Kings intention in the beginning of the
grant is, that it shall be according to the intention, and effect of the
Commission, which must be a tenure by Knights service in capite, either by
express Reservation, or by implication, and operation of Law. And the tenure
reserved in the patent, is a tenure by Common Knights service, as of the Castle
of Dublyn, differing altogether from the intention, and effect of the
Commission, so as it is not possible, that this tenure expressly reserved can
be according to the intention and effect of the Commission, or that the intent
and effect of the Commission can any vvayes acoord with the tenure expressly
reserved in the patent.

So as it is very plain and manifest that the King is deceived in this grant,
and that it cannot take effect according to his intention therein expressed.

For the Authorities on which their Resolution was grounded.

The principal Case was that of 12. Ass. 24. which (as it was said) was a
Judgment in effect in the point, A Judgment in a time, when the Law was as
flourishing, and the Judges as learned, as in any time either before, or since,
A Judgment approoved in all ages subsequent, 26. Ass. 39. 11. H. 43. etc. And
no Authority in all our books against it, for the material Cases that have
been put on the other side, are of Authorities accoupled with an Interest, and
by Consequence do not come to the point in question.

And we see that the Authority of this Judgment is so great, and clear,
that it is confessed by them that argued on the other part; But the reason of
the Judgment given by the Judge, that gives the Judgment is denied. S. pur
ceo que il fait ceo en auter manner, and a new reason is invented, S. because
he does not pursue his Authority.

Here we find them put to a straight; S. to Confess the Judgment, and
deny the reason, for who better knevv the reason of the Judgment, then the
Judge that gave it, This new reason. S. That he has not pursued his Authority
if it be examined, will come to the first reason, for if it be demanded, why
he has not pursued his authority, it must be Answered-pur ceo que il ad fait
ceo en auter manner que le authority soy garrant, which is the reason of 12.
Ass.

But we have other Authorities in the point, upon the same reason, that of
10. H. 7. 15. which has been remembered, per Keble the most Learned Lawyer of
that time, quant home ad authority de fair ascun fait a un auter, il doit
pursuer son authority, en matter, et en form, there is Modus concessionis, and
by the Case that he there puts, if he does it in other form, alio modo it is
void.

If I enfeoffe a man, to enfeoffe another, and he leavies a fine, this is
void, yet the matter in substance is the same, for a fine is but a feoffment
of Record, but because that he has done it in other manner, all is void.

11. H. 7. 13. A letter of Attorney to make liverie to I.S. or I. N. and the
Attorney makes livery to both, the livery is void in all, and it is not good
as to the one, and void as to the other, but void in the whole, because that
he has done it in other manner, then the authority warrants.

8. Cook. 85. In Sir Richard Pexhalls Case, If the King licenses his Tenant,
to alien two parts of his Manor of Dale, which is held in Capite, and he
aliens all the manor, it is void in the whole, and it is not good for two
parts, and void for the third, And the reason is, because he does it in other
manner then the license warrants. vid. 10. H. 7. 13. 38. H. 8. Dyer. 62. 40.
Ass. 38. 10. H. 7. 15.

There was a Report cited by the Chief Justice of the Common pleas, and the
Chief Baron, the Case was in C.B. in England T.M. 2. Caroli. Betvveene George
Bishop of Chichester plaintiff, and John Freeman defendant. Intr. Pasch. 1.
Caroli. Rot. 207. And the Case was this.

The Bishop of Chichester was seized in fee, (in the right of his Bishopric,)
of Allingburne park, in the County of Sussex, and he, and his predecessors
have anciently granted the office of Keeper of this park for life, with the
fee of five marks.

Anthony Bishop of Chichester, 2. February. 44. Eliz. by his deed granted the
Office of Keeper of the park to one Freeman for life, Et ulterius concessit
pro executione officij predicti the ancient fee of five marks, una cum a
livery Coat, or thirteen shillings four pence for it, Nec non pasturam pro
duobus equis, una cum the vvindfalls, which grant was confirmed by the Deane,
and Chapter.

And whither this grant was good against the successor, or void, upon the
statute of Anno 1. Eliz. Cap. 25. was the question.

In which the doubt was, vvhither this Addition of a livery Coat, pasturage,
and vvindfalls will make the whole grant utterly void; or if the Law shall
make such a construction, that for this addition it shall be only void, and
shall stand good for the other; which was the ancient fee, and well granted.

And by Justice Crook, and Harvy, against Yelverton, the grant is void in the
whole, because, that the Bishop has not pursued the Authority given him by the
statute, by reason of this express, and new addition, and yet they profess,
that they had rather have given opinion for the defendant, for that he was a
poor man, and an ancient servant to the Bishop; and yet in this Case, the
Addition, and new Augmentation is a several, and distinct clause in the
grant, and the things added de novo, are also several, and distinct in specie
from the ancient Fee of five Marks.

And in the argument of this Case, Justice Crook cited a far stronger Case
to be adjudged in the case of the Archbishop of Canterbury. 43. Eliz. And the
Case was this.

Parker Archbishop of Canterbury granted the office of surveyorship, with the
ancient fee to one Parker, Et ulterius he granted unto him pasturam pro duobus
equis in the park, and the whole grant was adjudged void, and yet here was a
several grant, by a several, and distinct clause, and of another thing,
several, and distinct in specie, Aliud et Aliud.

And these Cases are far stronger then the Case in question, for here there
is not a bare Authority, but an interest accoupled with an authority.

And in this Case Justice Crook cited Scamblers Case, 41. Eliz. to be
adjudged, that the whole grant was void, and not good as to the man of full
age, and void as to the Infant, as it has been cited by some that argued on
the other side.

And so upon the whole matter they did resolve.

1. That the Commissioners by this Commission have a good, and legal, and
sufficient power, and authority to grant.

2. That all Letters Patents made upon this in which they have pursued their
authority, are good and effectual in Law. S. where they have either reserved
an express tenure by Knights service in Capite, or no tenure, for there the
Law implies a tenure in Capite.

3. But where the Commissioners reserve a the whole patent is void.

1. Because, that the Commissioners have but an Authority.

2. Because, that this is but a Nude Authority, and not accoupled with any
Interest.

3. Because, it is a public Authority of Record, whereof the subjects ought
to take notice, to pass according at their peril, otherwise the patent shall
be in deceit of the King.

4. Because, that the Authority appears within the letters patents themselves,
and exposition shall be made upon the whole patent.

5. Although it be a most ample and large Commission, yet it is bounded, and
circumscribed by the Law, with an equal Construction. S. that nothing shall
be done in other manner then the Authority warrants in prejudice of the King.

6. Because that this reservation of a mean tenure, is in other manner then
the authority warrants, and is in damage and prejudice of the King.

7. And lastly because that this express reservation controlls the implication
of Law: and for that the King was deceived in his grant, in that it cannot take
effect according to his intention therein expressed.

For these Reasons they did resolve.

That this express Reservation of a mean tenure tends to the destruction of
the whole patent, and makes it void in Law both to the lands and to the tenure.

The Order of the Council Board upon this Resolution of the Judges.
By the Lord Deputy and Council. WENTWORTH.
WHereas there was an Act of Council made at this Board, and dated at the
Abbey of Boil, the Eleaventh day of July 1635. ordayning, and establishing,
that the Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and Inhabitants, their heirs, and assigns
holding any Castle, Manors, Lands, Tenements, or other haereditaments in the
County of Roscoman, by or under any effectual letters patents from his
Majesty, or any of his Royal predecessors Kings, or Queens of England, should
have, hold, possess, and enjoy all the said Castles, Manors, Lands,
Tenements, and hereditaments of what kind, or nature soever they be, to them,
and to every of them, and to those, who hold any estates under them, against
his Majesty, his heirs, and successors, in as full, large, ample, free, and
beneficial manner to all intents, purposes, and constructions, as if the truth
of their several Cases, and their several letters patents passed thereupon,
had been specially found in the great office then to be taken, for finding his
Majesty's title to the said County, and their letters patents accordingly
entered, in haec verba, in the said office, so that they did produce their said
several letters patents, or the enrollments thereof, before us the Lord
Deputy, and Council, at this Board, before the first day of the then next
Easter Term, and that no possession should be taken from any such patentees,
or their assigns, or tenants, whose patents should be at this Board allowed to
be good, and effectual in Law: And whereas the like Acts of Council were made
at this Board, for the several Counties of Slygo, Mayo, and Gallway, and the
County of the town of Gallway; And whereas several letters patents past under
his Majestyes great seal, of diverse lands, tenements, and hereditaments in the
said several Counties, by color of a Commission under the great Seal, dated
the second day of March, in the fourth year of the Reign of his Majestyes
Royal Father King James, of blessed memory, were presented unto us at this
Board, which being taken into consideration by us, we thought fit for our
better Information of the validity of the said letters patents, to call before
us some of those who claymed by those letters patents, as namely, our very good
Lord the Viscount Dillon of Costillogallen, whom we appointed to attend us
with his learned Council therein, which he did accordingly; Whereupon his
Majestyes learned Council, and the Council learned of the said Lord Dillon,
agreed upon a Case drawn up by them, to be argued by them on both sides before
us, which Case follows in haec verba, King James by Commission under the
great Seal, dated the second day of March, in the fourth year of his Reign,
did authorize certain Commissioners, to grant the manor of Dale, by letters
patents under the great Seal of this Kingdom, to A. and his heirs, and
there is no direction given in the said Commission, touching the tenure to be
reserved; There are letters patents by color of the said Commission passed
unto A. and his heirs, to hold by Knights service, that is to say by the
twentieth part of etc. as of his Majestyes Castle of Dublyn, the question is,
whither the said letters patents be void in the whole, or only to the tenure,
upon which case his Majesty's learned Council, and the learned Council on the
part of the said Viscount Dillon argued before us, several days, and we
(desirous to take such a Resolution in the matter as might be equal and just)
held fit to advise therein withal his Majestyes Judges, who not agreeing
unanimously in opinion, we adjudged it fit, that every of them should argue
it, and deliver his Judgment, and opinion therein, before us, which they did
accordingly. Wherein five of them, viz. the Lord Chief Justice of his
Majesty's Court of Kings Bench, the Lord Chief Justice of his Majestyes Court
of common pleas, the Lo: Chief Baron of his Majestyes Court of Exchequer,
Baron Barry, and Justice Rives concurred in opinion clearly, that the letters
patents were void in the whole, and two only, viz. Justice Mayart, and
Justice Cressy differed from those five in opinion, holding that the letters
patents were only void, as to the tenure; we thereupon taking the same into
consideration at this Board, do hereby adjudge, order, and declare, that the
said letters patents are wholly void in Law; and consequently that all such
letters patents passed under color of the said Commission, and that mention
the parcells granted to be held by Knights service, as of his Majestyes Castle
of Dublyn, or by any tenure other then by Knights service in Capite generally,
are not good, effectual, or valid in Law, but void in the whole; And
therefore we do at this Board disallowe all such letters patents so granted;
as aforesaid, of any lands, tenements, or hereditaments in any of the said
Counties of Roscoman, Slygo, Mayo, Gallway, or the county of the town of
Gallway.

Given at his Majestyes Castle of Dublyn. 13. July. 1637. R. Dillon. Ad.
Loftus. W. Parsons. Gerr. Lowther. R. Bolton. Chr. VVandesford. Ph. Mainwaring.
Cha. Coote. Geo. Radcliffe.


THE END.

