A NEW ORCHARD AND GARDEN OR The best way for planting, grafting, and to make
any ground good, for a rich Orchard: Particularly in the Nor^^ and generally
for the whole kingdom of England, as in nature, reason, situation, and all
probability, may and does appear.

With the Country Housewifes Garden for herbs of common use their virtues,
seasons, profits, ornaments, variety of knots, models for trees, and plots for
the best o^dering of Grounds and Walks.

AS ALSO The Husbandry of Bees, with their several uses and annoyances (...)
being the experience of 48. years labor, and now the second time corrected
and much enla^ged, by William Lawson.

Whereunto is newly added the Art of propagating Plants, with the tr^^ ordering
of all manner of Fruits, in their gathering, carring home, and preservation.

Skill and pains bring fruitful gains.
Nemo sibi (...).


LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for JOHN HARISON, at the golden Unicorn in
Paternoster Row. 1631.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL SIR HENRY BELOSSES. Knight and Baronet.
Worthy Sir,
WHen in many years by long experience I had furnished this my Northern
Orchard and Country Garden with needful plants and useful herbs, I did
impart the view thereof to my friends, who resorted to me to confer in
matters of that nature, they did see it, and seeing it desired, and I must not
deny now the publishing of it (which then I allotted to my private delight)
for the public profit of others. Wherefore, though I could plead custom the
ordinary excuse of all Writers, to choose a Patron and Protector of their
Works, and so shroud my self from scandal under your honorable favor, yet
have I certain reasons to excuse this my presumption: First, the many
courtesies you have vouchsafed me. Secondly, your delightful skill in matters
of this nature. Thirdly, the profit which I received from your learned
discourse of Fruit Trees.

Fourthly, your animating and assisting of others to such endeavors. Last of
all, the rare work of your own in this kind all which to publish under your
protection, I have adventured (as you see) Vouchsafe it therefore
entertainment, I pray you, and I hope you shall find it not ^he
vnp^ofitablest servant of your retinue: for when your serious employments are
ouerpassed, it may interpose some commodity, and raise your contentment out of
variety.

Your Worships most bounden, WILLIAM LAVVSON.

THE PREFACE to all well minded.
ARt has her first original out of experience, which therefore is called the
Schoole-mistresse of fools, because she teaches infallibly, and plainely^ as
drawing her knowledge out of the course of Nature, (which never fails in the
general) by the senses, feelingly apprehending, and comparing (with the help
of the mind) the works of nature; and as in all other things natural, so
especially in Trees: for what is Art more then a provident and skillful
Collectrix of the faults of Nature in particular works, apprehended by the
senses? As when good ground naturally brings forth th^stles, trees stand too
thick, or too thin, or a ^^^derly, or (without dressing) put forth
unprofitable suckers, and such like All which and a thousand more, Art
reformeth, being taught by experien^e and therefore must we count that Art the
surest, that stands upon experimental rules, gathered by the rule of reason
(not conceit) of all other rules the surest.

Whereupon have I of my mere and sole experience, without respect to any
former written Treat^se gathered these rules, and set them down in writing,
not daring to hide the least talent given me of my Lord and Master in Heaven:
neither is this in^urious to any, though it differ from the common opinion in
diverse points, to make it known to others, what good I have found out in this
faculty by long trial and experience. I confess freely my want of curious
skill in the Art of planting. And I admire and praise Pliny, Aristotle,
Virgil, Cicero, and many others for wit and judgment in this kind, and leave
them to their times, manner, and several Countries.

I am not determined (neither can I worthily) to set forth the praises of this
Art: how some, and not a few, even of the best, have accounted it a chief part
of earthly happiness, to have fair and pleasant Orchards, as in Hesperia and
Thessaly, how all with one consent agree, that it is a chief part of Husbandry
(as Tully de senectute) and Husbandry maintains the world; how ancient, how,
profitable, how pleasant it is, how many secrets of nature it does contain,
how loved, how much practiced in the best places, and of the best: This has
already been done by many. I only aim at the common good. I delight not in
curious conceits, as planting and graffing with the root upwards, inoculating
Roses on Thorns. and such like, although I have heard of diverse proved some,
and read of more.

The Stationer has (as being most desirous with me, to further the common
good) bestowed much cost and care in having the Knots and Models by the best
Artizan cut in great variety, that nothing might be any way wanting to
satisfy the curious desire of those that would make use of this Book.

And I show a plain and sure way of planting, which I have found good by 48.
years (and more) experience in the North part of England: I preiudicate and
envy none, wishing yet all to abstain from maligning that good (to them
unknown) which is well intended. Farewell.

Thine, for thy good, W. L.

A Table of the things Contained in this Book
CHAP. 1.
OF the Gardner his labor and wadges. page 1
CHAP. 2.
Of the Soil. page 3 The kinds of trees. p. 3 Of barren earth. p. 4 Of Grass.
p. 5 Of the Crust of the earth. p. 6
CHAP. 3.
Low and near the River. p. 6 Of Winds. p. 8 Of the Sun. p. 8 Trees
against a wall. p. 8
CHAP. 4.
Of the quantity. p. 10 Orchards as good as a Cornefield. page 10 Good as the
Vineyard. p. 11 What quantity of ground. 11 Want no hinderance. p. 12 How
Landlords by their Tenants may make flourishing Orchards. p. 12
CHAP. 5.
The form of the Orchard. 12
CHAP. 6.
Of Fences. page 14 Effects of evil Fencing. p. 14 The kinds of Fencinge^. p.
15 Of Pales and Rayles. p. 15 Of Stone-walles. p. 15 Of Quicksets and Moates.
p. 16
CHAP. 7.
Of Setts. p. 17 Of Slipps. p. 17 Of Burknots. p. 17 Of Small Setts. p. 18
Tying of Trees. p. 19 Signs of diseases. p. 19 Of Suckers. p. 20 A Running
plant. p. 20 Of bough Setts. p. 21 The best Set. p. 22 Times of removing. p.
23 The manner of setting. p. 26
CHAP. 8.
Of the distance of trees. p. 28 The hurts of too near planting. p. 28 All
touches hurtful. p 29 The best distance. p. 29 Of wast ground in an Orchard.
p. 30
CHAP. 9.
Of the placing of trees. p. 31
CHAP. 10.
Of Grafting. p. 33 ^he kinds of Grafting. p. 34 (...) to Grant. p. 34 What a
Graft is. p. 34 ^he ^ies of a Graft. p. 34 (...) of Grafting. p. 35 (...) of
Grafts. p 36 (...) sing. p. 37 ^. p. 38 ^. p. 39 ^^aft^ng in the Scutcheon p 39
CHAP. 11.
The right dressing of trees. p. 40 Timber-wood evil dress 41 The cause of
hurts in wood. page 42 How to dress Timber. p. 43 The profit of dressing. p
43.45 Trees will take any form^. 44 How to dress all Fruit Trees. p. 44 The
best times for proyning. p. 47 Faults of evil dressing and the remedies. p. 48
Of water-boughes. p. 49 Barke-pyld. p. 49 56 Instruments for dressing. 50
CHAP. 12.
Of Foyling. p 53 Time fit for Foyling. p. 53
CHAP. 13.
Of Annoyances. p 54 Two evil in an Orchard. p. 54 Of galls cankers moss etc.
55 Of w^l^ull annoyances. p. 60
CHAP. 14.
Of the age of trees. p. 60 The parts of a trees age. p 61 Of Man's age. p. 62
The age of timber trees. 64 To discern the age of trees. p. 65
CHAP. 15:
Of gathering and keeping Fruit. p. 65
CHAP. 16.
The profit of Orchards. p. 67 Of Cydar and Perry. p. 67 Of Fruit, Waters and
Conserve. p. 68
CHAP. 17.
Of Ornaments. p. 68 Of the delights. p. 69 The causes of delights. p. 70 Of
Flowers, Borders, Mounts etc. p. 71 Of Bees. p. 72
THE BEST, SVRE AND READIEST WAY to make a good Orchard and Garden.
CHAPTER. 1. Of the Gardner, and his Wages.
Whosoever desires and endeavors to have a pleasant, and profitable
Orchard, must (if he be able) provide himself of a Fruicterer, religious,
Religious.
honest, skilful in that faculty, and therwithall painful: By religious, I
mean (because many think religion but a fashion or custom to go to Church)
maintaining, and cherishing things religious: as Schools of learning,
Churches, Tithes, Church-goods, and rights; and above all things, Gods word,
and the Preachers thereof, so much as he is able, practicing prayers,
comfortable conference, mutual instruction to edify, alms, and other works
of Charity, and all out of a good conscience.

Honesty in a Gardner, Honest.
will grace your Garden, and all your house, and help to stay unbridled
Seruingmen, giving offense to none, not calling your name into question by
dishonest acts, nor infecting your family by evil counsel or example. For
there is no plague so infectious as Popery and knavery, he will not purloine
your profit, nor hinder your pleasures.

Concerning his skill, Skillful.
he must not be a Scolist, to make show or take in hand that, which he cannot
perform, especially in so weighty a thing as an Orchard: than the which, there
can be no humane thing more excellent, either for pleasure or profit, as shall
(God willing) be proved in the treatise following. And what an hinderance shall
it be, not only to the owner, but to the common good, that the vnspeakeble
benefit of many hundred years shall be lost, by the audacious attempt of an
unskillful Arborist.

The Gardner had not need be an idle, or lazy Lubber, for so your Orchard
being a matter of such moment, Painful.
will not prosper. There will ever be some thing to do. Weeds are always
growing. The great mother of all living Creatures, the Earth, is full of seed
in her bowels, and any stirring glues them heat of Sun, and being laid near
day, they grow: Mowles work daily, though not always alike. Winter herbs at
all times will grow (except in extreme frost.) In Winter your young trees and
herbs would be lightened of snow, and your Allies cleansed: drifts of snow will
set Dear, Hares, and Conyes, and other noisome beasts over your walls and
hedges, into your Orchard. When Summer clothes your borders with green and
peckled colors, your Gardner must dress his hedges, and antike works: watch
his Bees, and hiue them: distill his Roses and other herbs. Now begins Summer
Fruit to ripe, and crave your hand to pull them. If he have a Garden (as he
must need) to keep, you must needs allow him good help, to end his labors
which are endless, for no one man is sufficient for these things.

Such a Gardner as will conscionably, quietly and patiently, travel in your
Orchard, Wages.
God shall crown the labors of his hands with ioyfulnesse, and make the
clouds drop fatness upon your trees, he will provoke your love, and earne his
wages, and fees belonging to his place: The house being served, fallen fruit,
superfluity of herbs, and flowers, seeds, graffes, sets, and besides other
offall, that fruit which your bountiful hand shall reward him withal, will
much augment his wages, and the profit of your bees will pay you back again.

I^ you be not able, nor willing to hire a gardner, keep your profits to your
self, but then you must take all the pains: And for that purpose (if you want
this faculty) to instruct you, have I undertaken these labors, and gathered
these rules, but chiefly respecting my Countries good.

CHAP. 2. Of the soil.
Fruit Trees most common, and meetest for our Northern Countries: (as Apples,
Pears, Kinds of trees.
Cheries, Filberds, red and white Plummes, Damsons, and Bulls,) for we meddle
not with Apricockes nor Peaches, nor searcely with Quinces, which will not like
in our cold parts, unless they be helped with some reflex of Sun, or other
like means, nor with bushes, bearing berries, as Barberies, Goose-berries, or
Grosers, Raspe-berries, and such like, though the Barbery be wholesome, and the
tree may be made great: do require (as all other trees do) a black, fat,
mellow, clean and well tempered soil, wherein they may gather plenty of good
sap. Some think the Hasell would have a chanily rock, and the sallow, and
eller a waterish marish. The soil is made better by deluing, Soil.
and other means, being well melted, and the wildness of the earth and weeds
(for every thing subject to man, and serving his use (not well ordered, is by
nature subject to the curse,) is killed by frosts and drought, by fallowing and
laying on heaps, and if it be wild earth, with burning.

Barren earth.
If your ground be barren (for some are forced to make an Orchard of barren
ground) make a pit three quarters deep, and two yards wide, and round in such
places, where you would set your trees, and fill the same with fat, pure, and
mellow earth, one whole foot higher then your Soil, and therein set your
Plant. For who is able to manure an whole Orchard plot, if it be barren? But if
you determine to manure the whole site, this is your way: dig a trench half
a yard deep, all along the lower (if there be a lower) side of your Orchard
plot, casting up all the earth on the inner side, and fill the same with good
short, hot^ and tender muck, and make such another Trench, and fill the same as
the first, and so the third, and so through out your ground. And by this means
your plot shall be fertile for your life. But be sure you set your trees,
neither in dung nor barren earth.

Plain.
Your ground must be plain, that it may receive, and keep moisture, not only
the rain falling thereon, but also water cast upon it, or descending from
higher ground by sluices, Conduits, etc. For I account moisture in Summer very
needful in the soil of trees, Moist.
and drought in Winter. Provided, that the ground neither be boggy, nor the
inundation be past 24. hours at any time, and but twice in the whole Summer,
and so often in the Winter. Therefore if your plot be in a Bank, or have a
descent, make Trenches by degrees, Allies, Walks, and such like, so as the
Water may be stayed from passage. And if too much water be any hinderance to
your walks (for dry walks do well become an Orchard, and an Orchard them:)
raise your walks with earth first, and then with stones, as big as Walnuts:
and lastly, with gravel. In Summer you need not doubt too much water from
heaven, either to hurt the health of your body, or of your trees. And if
ouerflowing molest you after one day, avoid it then by deep trenching.

Some for this purpose dig the soil of their Orchard to receive moisture,
which I cannot approve: for the roots with digging are oftentimes hurt, and
especially being dug by some unskillful ^eruant: For the Gardener cannot do
all himself. And moreover, the roots of Apples and Pea^es being laid near
day, with the heat of the Sun, will pu^ forth suckers, which are a great
hinderance, and sometimes wi^h evil guiding, the destruction of trees, unless
the deluing be very shallow, and the ground laid very level again. Cherries
and Plummes without deluing, will hardly or never (after twenty years) be kept
from such suckers, nor aspes.

Grass al^o is thought needful ^or moisture, Grass.
so you let it not touch the roots of your trees: for it will breed moss, and
the boall of your tree near the earth would have the comfort of the Sun and
Air.

Some take their ground to be too moist when it is not so, by reason of waters
standing thereon, for except in sour marshes, springs, and continual
ouerflowings, no earth can be too moist. Sandy and fat earth will avoid all
water falling by receipt. Indeed a stifle clay will not receive the water, and
therefore if it be grassie or plain, especially hollow, the water will abide,
and it will seem waterish, when the fault is in the want of manuring, and other
good dressing.

This plainness which we require, had reed be natural, because to force an
uneven ground will destroy the fatness. For every soil has his crust next
day wherein trees and herbs put their roots, and whence they draw their sap,
which is the best of the soil, and made fertile with heat and cold, moisture
and drought, and under which by reason of the want of the said temperature,
Naturally plain.
by the said four qualities, no tree nor herb (in a manner) will or can put
root. As may be seen if in digging your ground, you take the weeds of most
growth: as grass or docks, (which will grow though they lie upon the earth
bare) yet bury them under the crust, and they will surely dye and perish, and
become manure to your ground This crust is not past 15. or 18 inches deep in
good ground, in other grounds less. Hereby appears the fault of forced
plains, viz. your crust in the lower parts, is covered with the crust of the
higher parts, Crust of the earth.
and both with worse earth: your heights having the crust taken away, are
become merely barren: so that either you must force a new crust, or have an
evil soil. And be sure you level, before you plant, lest you be forced to
remove, or hurt your plants by digging, and casting amongst their roots. Your
ground must be cleared as much as you may of stones, and gravel, walls,
hedges, bushes, and other weeds.

CHAP. 3. Of the Site.
THere is no difference, that I find betwixt the necessity of a good soil, and
a good site of an Orchard. For a good soil (as is before described, cannot
want a good site, and if it do, the fruit cannot be good, and a good site will
much mend an evil soil. The best site is in low grounds, Low and near a
River.
(and if you can) near unto a River. High grounds are not naturally fat.

And if they have any fatness by man's hand, the very descent in time does wash
it away. It is with grounds in this case as it is with men in a common wealth.
Much will have more: and once poor, seldom or never rich. The rain will
scind, and wash, and the wind will blow fatness from the heights to the
hollowes, where it will abide, and fatten the earth though it were barren
before.

Hence it is, that we have seldom any plain grounds, and low, barren: and as
seldom any heights naturally fertile. It is unspeakable, what fatness is
brought to low grounds by inundations of waters. Neither did I ever know any
barren ground in a low plain by a River side. The goodness of the soil in
Howl or Hollowdernes, in York^sh^re, is well known to all that know the River
Humber, and the huge bulkes of their Cattle there. By estimation of them that
have seen the low grounds in Holland and Zealand, they far surpass the most
Countries in Europe for fruitfulness, and only because they lie so low. Psalm
1.3.
The world cannot compare with Egypt, Ez^. ^7.8.
for fertili^y, so far as Nilus does over flow his banks. (...) 39.17.
So that a fitter place cannot be chosen for an Orchard, then a low plain by a
river side. For b^si^es the fatness which the water brings, if any cloudy mist
or rain be stirring, it commonly falls down to, and follows the course of
the River. And where see we greater trees of bu^ke and bough, then standing on
or near the waters side? If you ask why the plains in Holderns, and such
countries are destitute of woods? I answer that men and cattle (that have put
trees thence, from out of Plains to void corners) are better then trees.
Neither are those places without trees. Mr. Markham.
Our old fathers can tell us, how woods are decayed, and people in the roomth of
trees multiplied. I have stood somewhat long in this point, because some do
condemn a moist soil for fruit trees.

A low ground is good to avoid the danger of winds, both for shaking down
your unripe fruit. Winds. Chap. 13.
Trees the most (that I know) being laden with wood, for want of proyning, and
growing high, by the unskillfulness of the Arborist, must needs be in
continual danger of the South-west, West, and North west winds, especially in
September and March, when the air is most temperate from extreme heat, and
cold, which are deadly enemies to great winds. Wherefore choose your ground low
Or if you be forced to plant in a higher ground, let high and strong walls,
houses, and trees, as wall-nuts, plane trees, Oaks, and Ashes, placed in good
order, be your fence for winds.

The sucken of your dwelling house, descending into your orchard, if it be
cleanly conveyed, is good.

Sun.
The Sun, in some sort, is the life of the world. It makes proud growth, and
ripens kindly, and speedily, according to the golden term: Annus fructificat,
non tellus. Therefore in the countries, nearer approaching the Zodiake, the
Suns habitation, they have better, and sooner ripe fruit, then we that dwell
in these frozen parts.

This provoke most of our great Arborists, to plant Apricockes, Cherries and
Peaches, by a wall, Trees against a wall.
and with tackes, and other means to spread them upon, and fasten them to a
wall, to have the benefit of the immoderate reflexe of the Sun, which is
commend^ble, for the having of fair, good and soon ripe fruit. But let them
know it is more hurtful to their trees then the benefit they reap thereby: as
not suffering a tree to live the tenth part of his age. It helps Gardners to
work, for first the wall hinders the roots, because into a dry and hard wall
of earth or stone a tree will not, no^ cannot put any root to profit, but
especially it stops the passage of sap, whereby the bark is wounded^ and the
wood, and diseases grow, so that the tree becomes short of life For as in the
body of a man, the leaning or lying on some member, whereby the course of blood
is stopped, makes that member as it were dead for the time, till the blood
return to his course, and I think, if that stopping should continue any time,
the member would perish for want of blood (for the life is in the blood) and so
endanger the body: so the sap is the life of the tree, as the blood is to man's
body: neither does the tree in winter (as is supposed) want his sap, no more
then man's body his blood, which in winter, and time of sleep draws inward. So
that the dead time of winter, to a tree, is but a night of rest: for the tree
at all times, even in winter is nourished with sap, and grows as well as man's
body. The chilling cold may well some little time stay, or hinder the proud
course of the sap, but so little and so short a time, that in calm and mild
season, even in the depth of winter, if you mark it, you may easily perceive,
the sap to put out, and your trees to increase their buds, which were formed in
the summer before, and may easily be discerned: for leaves fall not off, til
they be thrust off, with the knots or buds, whereupon it comes to pass that
trees cannot bear fruit plentifully two years together, and make themselves
ready to blossom against the seasonablenesse of the next Spring.

And if any frost be so extreme, that it stay the sap too much, or too long,
then it kills the forward fruit in the bud, and sometimes the tender leaves and
twigs, but not the tree. Wherefore, to return, it is perilous to stop the
sap. And where, or when, did you ever see a great tree packt on a wall? Nay,
who did ever know a tree so unkindly splat, come to age? I have heard of some,
that out of their imaginary cunning, have planted such trees, on the North side
of the wall^ to avoid drought, but the heat of the Sun is as comfortable
(which they should have regarded) as the drought is hurtful. And although
water is a sovereign remedy against drought, ye want of Sun is no way to be
helped. Wherefore ^o conc^ude this Chapter, let your ground lie ^o, that it may
have the benefit of the South, and West Sun, and so ^ow and close, that it may
have moisture, and increase his fatness (for trees are the greatest ^uckers
and pillars of earth, and (as much as may be) f^ee from great winds.

CHAP. 4. Of the quantity.
IT would be remembered what a benefit rises, not only to every particular
owner of an Orchard, but also to the common wealth, by fruit, as shall be
showed in the 16. Ch^pter (God willing) whereupon must needs follow: the
greater the Orchard is (being good and well kept) the better it is, for of good
things, being equally good, the biggest is the best. And if it shall appear,
that ^o ground a man occupies (no, not the corn field) yields more gain to
the purse, and house keeping (not to speak of the unspeakable pleasure)
quantity for quantity, than a good Orchard (besides the cost in planting,
Orchard as good as a cornfield.
and dressing an orchard, is not so much by far, as the labor and seeding of
your corn fields, nor for durance of time, comparable, besides the certainty
of the on before the other) I see not how any labor, or cost in this kind, can
be idly or wastfully bestowed, or thought too much. And what other things is a
vineyard, Compared with a vinyard.
in those countries where vines do thrive, than a large Orchard of trees
bearing fruit? Or what difference is there in the juice of the Grape, and our
Cider and Perry, but the goodness of the soil and clime where they grow? which
makes the one more ripe, and so more pleasant then the other. What soever can
be said for the benefit rising from an orchard, that makes for the largeness
of the Orchards bounds. And (me thinks) they do preposterously, Compared with
a garden.
that bestow more cost and labors, and more ground in and upon a garden than
upon an orchard, whence they reap and may reap both more pleasure and more
profit, by infinite degrees. And further, that a Garden never so fresh, and
fair, and well kept, cannot continue without both renewing of the earth^ and
the herbs often, in the short and ordinary age of a man: whereas your Orchard
well kept shall dure diverse hundred years, as shall be showed chap. 14. In a
large orchard there is much labor saved, in fencing, and otherwise: for three
little orchards, or few trees, being, in a manner, all outsides, are so
blasted and dangered, and commonly in keeping neglected, and require a great
fence; whereas in a great Orchard, trees are a mutual fence one to another,
and the keep^ng is regarded, and less fencing serves six acres together, than
three in several enclosures.

Now what quantity of ground is meetest for an Orchard can no man prescribe,
What quantity of ground^
but that must be left to every man's several judgment, to be measured
according to his ability and will, for other necessaries besides fruit must be
had, and some are more delighted with orchard then others.

Want is no hinderance.
Let no man having a fit plot plead poverty in this case, for an orchard once
planted will maintain it self, and yield infinite profit besides. And I am
persuaded, that if men did know the right and best way of planting, dressing,
and keeping trees, and felt the profit and pleasure thereof, both they that
have no orchards would have them, and they that have orchards, would have them
larger, yea fruit trees in their hedges, as in Worcestershire, etc. How
Landlords. by their Te^an^s may mak^ flour^shing Orchards in England.
And I think, that the want of plunting, is a great loss to our commonwealth,
and in particular, to the owners of Lord-ships, which Land lords themselves
might easily amend, by granting longer term, and better ^ssurance to their
tenants, who have taken up this Proverb Botch and sit, Build and flit: ^or who
will build or plant for an other man's profit? Or the Parliament might join
every occupier of grounds to plant and mainetaine for so many acres of
fruitful ground, so many several trees or kinds of trees for fruit. Thus much
for quantity.

CHAP. 5. Of the form.
THe goodness of the soil, and site, are necessary to the well being of an
orchard simply, but the fo^me is so far necessary, as the owner shall think
meet, for that kind of form wherewith every particular man is delighted, The
usual form is a square.
we leave it to himself, Suum cuique pulchrum. The form that men like in
general is a square, for although roundnesse be forma perfectissima, yet that
principle is good where necessi^^ by art does not force some other form. If
within one large square the Gardner shall make one round Laby^inth or Maze with
some kind of Berries, it will grace your form, so there be A. Al these squares
must be set with trees, the Gardens and other ornaments must stand on spaces
betwixt the trees, and in the borders and fences.


B. Trees 20. yards asunder.


C. Garden Knots.


D. Kitchen garden.


E. Bridge.


F. Conduit.


G. Stairs.


H. Walks set with great wood thick.


I. Walks set with great wood round about your Orchard.


K. The out fence.


L. The out fence set with stonefruite.


M. Mount To force earth for a mount, or such like set it round with quick,
and lay boughs of trees strangely intermingled tops inward, with the cart^^ in
the middle.


N. S^ill-house.


O. Good standing for Bees, if you have an house.


P. If the river run by your door, and under your mount, it will be pleasant.


sufficient roomth left for walks, so will four or more round knots do. For
it is to be noted, that the eye must be pleased with the form. I have seen
squares rising by degrees with stays from your house-ward, according to this
form which I have, Crassa quod aiunt Minerua, with an unsteady hand, ^ough
hewn, for in forming the country gardens, the better sort may use better
forms, and more costly work. What is needful more to be said, I refer
that all (concerning the Form,) to the Chapter 17 of the ornaments of an
Orchard.

CHAP. 6. Of Fences.
Effects of evil fencing.
ALL your labor past and to come about an Orchard is lost unless you fence
well. It shall grieve you much to see your young sets rubd loose at the roots,
the bark pild, the boughs and twigs cropped, your fruit stolen, your trees
broken, and your many years labors and hopes destroyed, for want of fences. A
chief care must be had in this point. You must therefore plant in such a
soil, where you may provide a convenient, strong and seemly fence. For you
can possess no goods, that have so many enemies as an orchard, look Chapter
13. Fruits are so delightsome, and desired of so many (nay, in a manner of all)
and yet few will be at cost and take pains to provide them. Fence well
therefore, let your plot be wholly in your own power, that you make all your
fence your self: for neighbors fencing is none at all, or very careless.
Take heed of a door or window, (yea of a wall) of any other man's into your
orchard: Let the fence be your own.
yea, though it be nayld up, or the wall be high, for perhaps they will prove
thieves.

All Fences commonly are made of Earth, Kinds of fences, earthen walls.
Stone, Brick, Wood, or both earth and wood. Dry wall of earth, and dry
Ditches, are the worst fences save pales or railes, and do waste the soonest,
unless they be well copt with glooe and mortar, whereon at Mighill-tide it
will be good to sow Wall-flowers, commonly called Bee-flowers, or winter
Gilly-flowers, because they will grow (though amongst stones) and abide the
strongest frost and drought, continually green and flowring even in Winter,
and have a pleasant smell, and are timely, (that is, they will flower the first
and last of flowers) and are good for Bees. And your earthen wall is good for
Bees dry and warm. But these fences are both unseemly, evil to repair, and
only for need, where stone or wood cannot be had. Whosoever makes such Walls,
must not pill the ground in the Orchard, for getting earth, nor make any pits
or hallowes, which are both unseemly and unprofitable. Old dry earth mixed with
sand is best for these. This kind of wall will soon decay, by reason of the
trees which grow near it, for the roots and boales of great trees, will
increase, undermine, and ouerturne such walls, though they were of stone, as
is apparent by Ashes, Rountrees, Burt-trees, and such like, carried in the
chat, or berry, by birds into stone-walles.

Fences of dead-wood, as pales, Pale and Rail.
will not last, neither will railes either last or make good fence

Stone walls (where stone may be had) are the best of this sort, Stone walls.
both for fencing, lasting, and shrouding of your young trees. But about this
must you bestow much pains and more cost, to have them handsome, high and
durable.

But of all other (in mine own opinion) Quickwood, and Moats or Ditches of
water, Quick wood and Moates.
where the ground is level, is the best fence. In unequal grounds, which will
not keep water, there a double ditch may be cast, made straight and leuel on
the top, two yards broad for a fair walk, five or six foot higher then the
soil, with a gutter on either side, two yards wide, and four foot deep set
with out, with three or four chesse of Thorns, and within with Cherry, Plumme,
Damson, Bullys, Filbirds, (for I love these trees better for their fruit, and
as well for their form, as priuit) for you may make them take any form. And
in every corner (and middle if you will) a mount would be raised, whereabout
the wood may claspe, powdered with wood-binde: which will make with dressing a
fair, pleasant, profitable, and sure fence. But you must be sure that your
quick thorns either grow wholly, or that there be a supply betime, either
with planting new, or plashing the old where need is. And assure your self,
that neither wood, stone, earth, nor water, can make so strong a fence, as this
after seven years growth.

Moates.
Moates, Fish Ponds, and (especially at one side a River) within and without
your fence, will afford you fish, fence, and moisture to your trees, and
pleasure also, if they be so great and deep that you may have Swans, and other
water birds, good for devouring of vermin, and boat for many good uses.

It shall hardly avail you to make any fence for your Orchard, if you be a
niggard of your fruit. For as liberality will save it best from noisome
neighbors, liberality I say is the best fence, so Justice must restrain
rioters. Thus when your ground is tempered, squared, and fenced, it is time to
provide for planting.

CHAP. 7. Of Sets.
THere is not one point (in my opinion) about an Orchard more to be regarded,
than the choice getting and setting of good plants, either for readiness or
having good fruit, or for continual lasting. For whosoever shall fail in the
choice of good Sets, or in getting, or gathering, or setting his plants, shall
never have a good or l^sti^g Orchard. An^ ^^ake want of skill in this faculty
to be a chief hinder^nce to the most Orchards, and ^o many for having of
Orchards at all.

Some for readiness use slips, Slip^.
which seldom take root: and if they do take, they cannot last, both because
their root having a maine wound will in short time decay the body of the tree:
and besides that roots being so weakly put, are soon nipt with drought or
frost. I could never see (lightly) any slip but of apples only set for trees.

A Bur-knot kindly taken from an Apple tree, Bur-knot.
is much better and surer. You must cu^ him c^ose at the root end, an
handful under the knot. (Some use in Summer about Lammas to ci^cumc^se him,
and put earth to the knots with hay roaps, and in winte^ cu^ him off and set
him, but this is curiosity, re^dlesse, and danger with removing, and drought,)
and cut away all his twigs save one, the most principal, which in setting you
must leave above the earth, burying his ^^unk in the ^^^st of the earth for his
root. I^ matters not much what part of the bough the twig grows out of. If it
grow out of or ^eere the root end, some s^y such an Apple will have no c^are
nor kirnell. Or if ^t ^p^e^se the Plantor, he may let h^s bough be crooked, and
leave out his top end, one foot or somewhat more, wherein will be good
grafting^ if either you like not, or doubt the fruit of the bou^h o^ commonly
your bur-knots are summer fruit) or ^fy^^ ^hinke he will not cover his wound
safely.

The most usual kind of sets, is plants with roots growing of kirnel, Usual
Sets.
of Apples, Pears, and Crabbes, or stones of Cherries, P^ummes, etc. Removed
out of a Nursery, Wood or other Orchard, into, and set in your Orchard in their
due places I g^ant this kind to be better than either of the former, by much,
as more sure and more durable H^rein you must no^e that in sets so removed, you
get all the roots you can, and without brusing of any; Maine roots cut.
I utterly disl^ke the opinion of those great Gardners, that following their
Books would have the maine roots cut away, for tops cannot grow without
roots. And because none can get all the roots, and remouall is an hinderance,
Stow sets removed.
you may not leave on al^ tops, when you set them: For there is a proportion
betwixt the top and root of a tree, even in the number (at least) in the
growth. If the roots be many, they will bring you many tops, if they be not
hindered And if you use to stow or top you tree too much or too low, and leave
no issue, or little for sap, (as is to be seen in you^ hedges) it will hinde^
the growth of roots and b^ale, because such a kind of stowing is a kind of
smothering, or choking the sap. Great wood, as Oak, E^me, Ash, etc. being
continually kept down with sheeres, knife, axe. etc. neither boale nor root
will th^iue, but as an hedge or bush. If you intend to gr^ff^ in your Set, you
may cut him closer with a greater wound, and ne^rer the earth, within a foot
or two, because the graft or grafts will cover his wound. If you like his
fruit, and would have him to be a tree of himself, be not so b^ld: th^s I can
tell you, that though you do cut his top close, and leave nothing but his
bulk, because his ^ootes are ^ew, if he be (but little) bigger than your
thumb (as I wish all plants removed to be) he will safely recover wound within
seven years; by good guidance that is^ I^ the next time of dressing immediately
above his uppermost ^p^ig, you cut him off ^sl^pe cleanely, ^o that the sprigge
stand on the back side, (and if you can Northward, that the wound may have the
benefit of Sun) at the upper end of the wound: and let that sprigge only be
the boale. And take this for a general rule; General rule.
Every young plant, if he thrive, will recover any wound above the earth, by
good dressing, although it be to the one half, and to his very heart. This
short cutting at the remove, saues your plants from Wind, ^ying of trees.
and need the les^e or no st^king. I commend not Lying or Leaning of trees
against holds or st^yr^s; for it breeds obstruction of ^ap and wounds
incureable. General rule.
All removing of trees as great as you^ arm, or above, is dangerous: though
sometime some such will grow but not continue long: Because they be tainted
with deadly wounds, e^ther in the root or top. (And a tree once thoroughly
tainted is never good) And though they ge^ some hold in the earth with some
lesser taw, or tawes, which give some nourishment to the body of the tree: yet
the heart being tain^ed, Signs of diseases, Chap 13.
he will hardly ever ^hri^e; which you may easily discern by the blackenesse
of the boughs at the heart, when you dress your trees. Also, when he is set
with more tops than the roots can nourish, the tops decaying, blacken the
boughs, and the boughs the arms, and so they bo^le at the very heart. Or th^s
ta^n^ in the remouall, if it ki^l not presently, but after some short time, it
may be discerned by blackness or ye^lownesse in the bark, and a small hungered
leaf. Or if your removed plant put forth leaves the next and second summer,
and little or few spraies, it is a great sign of a taint, and next years
death. I have known a tree tainted in setting, yet grow, and bear blossoms
for diverse years: and yet for want of strength could never shape his fruit.

Next unto this or rather equal with these plants, are suckers growing out of
the roots of great trees, Suckers good sets.
which cherries and plums do seldom or never want: and being taken kindly with
their roots, will make very good sets. And you may help them much by enlarging
their roots wi^h the taws of the tree, wh^nce you take them. They are of two
sorts: Either growing from the very root of the tree: and here you must be
careful, not to hurt your tree when you gather them, by ripping amongst the
roots; and that you take them clean away: for these are a great and
continual annoyance to the growth of your tree: and they will hardly be
cleansed. Secondly, or they do ar^e from some taw: and these may be taken
without danger, with long and good roots, and will soon become trees of
strength.

There is another way, which I have not thoroughly proved, A running Plant.
to get not only plants for gr^ffing, but sets to remain for trees, which I
call a Running Plant: the manner of it is this: Take a root or kirnell, and
put it into the middle of your plot, and the second year in the spring, g^^d
his top, if he have one principal (as commonly by nature they have) and let
him put forth only four Cyo^s toward the four corners of the orchard, as
near the earth as you can. If he put not four, (which is rare) stay his top
till he have put so many. When you have such four, cut the stock aslope, as
is aforesaid in this chapter, hard above the uttermost sprig, and keep those
four without Cyons clean and straight, till you have them a yard and a half,
at least, or two yards long. Then the next spring in graffing time, lay down
those four sprayes, toward the four corners of your Orchard, with their tops
in an heap of pure and good earth, and raised as high as the root of your
Cyon (for sap will not descend) and a sod to keep them down, leaving nine or
twelve inches of the top to look upward. In that hill he will put roots, and
his top new Cyons, which you must spread as before, and so from hill to hill
till he spread the compass of your ground, or as far as you list. If in
bending, the Cyons crack, the matter is small, cleanse the ground and he will
recover. Every bended bough will put forth branches, and become trees. If this
plant be of a bury knot, there is not doubt. I have proved it in on^ branch my
self: and I know at Wilton in Cleeue-land a Peare-tree of a great bulk and
age, blown close to the earth, has put at every knot roots into the earth,
and from root to top, a great number of mighty arms or trees, fi^ling a great
roomth, like many trees, or a little Orchard. Much better may it be done by Art
in a less tree^ And I could not mis^ke this kind, save that the time will be
long before it come to perfection.

Many use to buy sets already grafted, Sets bought.
which is not the best way: for first, All remoues are dangerous: Again, there
is danger in the carriage: Thirdly, it is a costly course of planting:
Fourthly, every Gardne^ is not trusty to sell you good fruit: Fifthly, you know
not which is best, which is worst, and so may take most care about your worst
trees. Lastly, this way keeps you from practice, and so from experience^ in so
good, Gentlemanly, Scholerlike, and profitable a faculty.

The best sets.
The only best way (in my opinion) to have sure and lasting sets, is never to
remove: for every remove is an hinderance, if not a dangerous hurt or deadly
taint. This is the way. The plot-forme being laid, and the plot appointed where
you will plant every set in your orchard, Unremoved how.
dig the roomth, where you^ sets shall stand, a yard compass, and make the
earth mellow and clean, and mingle it with a few coale-ashes, to avoid
worms: and immediately after the first change of the Moon, in the latter end
of February, the earth being a fresh turned over, put in every such roomth
three or four kirnels of App^es or Pears, of the best: every kirnell in an
hole made with your finger, finger deep, a foot distant one from another: and
that day month following, as many more, (lest some of the former miss) in the
same compass; but not in the same holes. Hence (God willing) shall you have
roots enough. If they all, or diverse of them come up, you may draw (but not
dig) up (nor put down) at your pleasure, the next November. How many soever
you take away, to give or bestow elsewhere, be sure to leave two of the
proudest. And when in your 2. and 3. year you Graffe, if you graffe then at
all, leave the one of those two vngraffed, lest in graffing the other you
fail: For I find by trial, that after first or second graffing in the same
stock, being mist (for who hits all) the third miss puts your stock in
deadly danger, for want of issu^ of sap. Yea, though you hit in graffing, yet
may your graffes with wind or otherwise be broken down. If your graffes or
graffe prosper, you have your desire, in a plant unremoved, without taint, and
the fruit at your own choice, and so you may (some little earth being
removed) pull, but not dig up the other Plant or Plants in that roomth. If
your g^^ffe or stock, or both perish, you have another in the same place, of
better strength to work upon. For thriuing without snub he will ouer-lay your
grafted stock much. And it is hardly possible to miss in grafting so often,
if your Gardener be worth his name.

It shall not be amiss (as I judge it) if your Kirnels be of choice fru^te,
Sets vngrafted best of all.
and that you see them come forward proudly in their body, and bear a fair
and broad leaf in color, tending to a greenish yellow (which argue^ pleasant
and great fruit) to try some of them vngraffed: for although it be a long time
ere this come to bear fruit, ten or twelve years, or more; and at their first
bea^ing, the fruit will not seem to be like his own kind: yet am I assured,
upon trial, before twenty years growth, such trees will increase the bigness
and goodness of their fruit, and come perfectly to their own kind. Trees
(like other breeding creatures) as they grow in yeares^ bigness and strength, so
they mend their fruit. Husbands and Houswiues find this true by experience, in
the rearing of their young store. More then this, th^e is no tree like this for
soundnes and dureable last, if his keeping and dressing be answerable. I grant,
the readiest way to come soon to fruit is graffing: because in a manner, all
your graffes are taken of fruit bea^^ng trees.

Now when you have made choice of your sets to remove, Time of removing.
the ground being ready, the best time is, immediately after the fall of the
leaf, in, or about the change of the Moon, when the sap is most quiet: for
then the sap is in turning: for it makes no stay, but in the extremity of
drought or cold. At any time in winter, General rule.
may you transplant trees so you put no ice nor snow to the root of your plant
in the setting: and therefore open, calm and moist wea her is best. To remove,
the leaf being ready to fall and not fallen, or buds apparan^ly put forth in a
moist warm season, for need, sometime may do well: but the safest is ^o walk
in the plain trod^e^ path.

Some hold opinion that it is best removing before the fall of the leaf, and I
hear it commonly practiced in the South by our best a^borists, the leaf not
fallen: and they give the reason to be, that the descending of the sap will
make speedy roots. But mark the reasons following and I think you shall find
no soundness, either in that position or practice, at least in the reason.

1. I say, it is dangerous to remove when the sap is not quiet, for every
remove gives a maine check to the stirring sap, by staying the course thereof
in ^he body of your plant, as may appear in trees removed any time in summer,
they commonly dye, nay hardly shall you save the life of the most young and
tender plant of any kind of wood (scarcely herbs) if you remove them in the
pride of sap. For proud sap universally stayed by remoual, ever hinders; often
taints and so presently, or in very short time ki^s. Sap is like blood in man's
body, in which is the life, Cap. 3. p. 9 If the blood universally be cold, life
is excluded; so is sap tainted by untimely remouall. A stay by drought, or
cold, is not so dangerous (though dangerous if it be ex^reme) because more
natural. 2. The sap never descends, as men suppose, but is consollidated and
transubstantiated into the substance of the tree, and passes (always above
the earth) upward, not only betwixt the bark and the wood, but also into and
in both body and bark, though not so plentifully, as may appear by a tree
budding, nay ^^uctifying two or three ye^es, after he be circum^is^d at the
very root, ^i^e a river that inlargeth his channel by a continu^l descent. 3 I
cannnot perceive what time they would h^^^ the sap to descend. A^ M^^sommer in
a biting drought it stays, but descends not, for immedi^tly upon moisture it
makes second shoots, at (or before rathe^) Michaeltide, when it shapens his
buds for next years f^uit. If a^ the f^l of leaf, I grant, about that time is
the greatest stand, but no descent, of sap, which begins somewhat before the
leaf fall, but not long, therefore at that time must be the best removing, not
by reason of descent, but stay of sap. 4. The sap in this course has his
profitable apparent effects, as the growth of the tree, covering of wounds,
putting of ^uds, etc. Wh^rupon it follows, if the sap descend, it must needs
have some effect to show it. 5. Lastly, boughs plasht and laid lower then the
root, dye for want of sap descending, except where it is forced by the maine
stream of the sap, as in top boughs hanging like water in pipes, or except the
plasht bough lying on the ground put roots of his own, yea under boughs which
we commonly call water boughs, can scarcely get sap to live, yea in time dye,
because the sap does press so violently upward, and therefore the fairest
shootes and fruits are always in the top.
Object. Remove soon.
If you say that many so removed thrive, I say that somewhat before the fall of
the leaf (but not much) is the stand, for the fall and the stand are not at
one instant, before the stand is dangerous. But to return.

The sooner in winter ^ou remove your sets, the better; the latter the worse:
For it is very perilous if a strong drought take your Sets before they have
made good their rooting. A Plant set at the fall, shall gain (in a a manner) a
whole years growth of that watch is set in the Spring after.

The manner of setting.
I use in the setting to be sure, that the earth be moldy, (and somewhat moist)
that it may run among the small tangles without straining or bruising: and as
I f^^l in earth to his root, I shake the Set easily to and fro, to make the
earth settle the better to his roo^s: and withal easily with my foot I put in
the earth close; for air is noisome, and w^ll follow concauities. Some
prescribe Oats to be put in w^^h the earth. I could like it, if I could know
any reason thereof: and they use to set their Plant with the same side toward
the Sun: but this conceit is like the other. For first I would have every
tree to stand so free from shade, that not only the root (which therefore you
mus^ ke^p^ bare from grass) but body, boughs, and branches, and every spray,
may have the benefit of Sun. And what hurt, if that part of the tree, that
before was sh^dowed, be now made partaker of the heat of the Su^n? In ^urning
of Be^s, I know it is hurtful, because it changes their entrance, passage,
and whose work: But not so in Trees.

Set in the crust.
Set as deep as you can, so that in any wise you go no^ beneath the crust.
Look Chap. 2.

Moisture good.
We speak in the second Chapter of moisture in genera^l: but now especial^y
having put your removed plant into the earth, power on water (of a puddle were
good) by distilling presently, and so every week twice in strong drought, so
long as the earth will drink, and refuse by ouerflowing. For moisture
m^llifies, and both gives leave to the roots to spread, and makes the earth
yield sap and nourishment with plenty and facility. Nurses (they say) give most
and best milk after warm drinks.

If your ground be such that it will keep no moisture at the root of your
plant, such plant shall never like, or but for a time. There is nothing more
hurtfall for young trees then piercing drought. I have known trees of good
stature after they have been of diverse years growth, and thrive well for a
good time, perish for want of water, and very many by reason or taints in
setting.

It is meet your sets and grafts be fenced, till they be as big as your arm
for fear of annoyances. Gra^ts must be fenced.
Many ways may sets receive damages, after they be set, whether grafted or
vngrafted. For although we suppose, that no noisome beast, or other thing must
have access among your trees: yet by casualty, a Dog, Cat, or such like, or
your self, or negligent friend bearing you company, or a shrewd boy, may tread
or fall upon a young and tender plant or graft. To avoid these and many such
chances, you must stake them round a pretty distance from the set, neither so
near, nor so thick, but that it may have the benefit of Sun, rain, and air.
Your stakes (small or great) would be so surely put, or driven into the earth,
that they break not, if any thing happen to lean upon them, else may the fall
be more hurtful, then the want of the fence. Let not you stakes shelter any
weeds about your sets, for want of Sun is a great hinderance. Let them stand
so far off, that your grafts spreading receive no hurt, either by rubbing on
them, or of a^y other thing passing by. If your stock be long, and high
grafted (which I must discommend (except in need) because there the sap is
weak, and they are subject to strong wind, and the lighting of birds) tie
easily with a soft list three or four pricks under the clay, and let their
tops stand above the grafts, to avoid the lighting of Crows, Pyes, etc. upon
your grafts. If you stick some sharp thorns at the roots of your stakes,
they will make hurtful things keep off the better. Other better fences for
your grafts I know none. And thus much for sets and setting.

CHAP. 8. Of the distance of Trees.
I Know not to what end you should provide good ground, well fenced, and plant
good sets; and when your trees should come to profit, have all your labors
lost, for want of due regard, to the distance of placing your trees. I have
s^ene many trees stand so thick, that one could not thrive for the throng of
his neighbors. If you do mark it, you shall see the tops of trees rubd off,
Hurts of too near planting.
their sides galled like a galled horses back, and many trees have more stumps
then boughs, and most trees no well thriuing, but short, stumpish, and evil
thriuing boughs: like a Corn field ouer-seeded, or a town over peopled, or a
pasture ouerlaid, which the Gardener must either let grow, or leave the tree
very few boughs to bear fruit. Hence small thrift, galls, wounds, diseases,
and short life to the trees: and while they live green, little, hard,
worme-eaten, and evil thriuing fruit arise, to the discomfort of the owners.

Remedy.
To prevent which discommodity, one of the best remedies is the sufficient and
fit distance of trees. Therefore at the se^ing of your plants you must have
such respect, that the distance of them be such, that every tree be not
annoyance, but an help to his fellows: for trees (as all other things of
th^^^ m^ k^nd) should shroud, and not hurt one another. General rule.
And assure your self that every touch of trees (as well under as above the
earth) is hurtful. Therefore this must be a general rule in this Art^ That no
tree in an Orchard well ordered, All touches hartfull.
nor bough, nor Cyon, drop upon, or touch his fellows Let no man think this
impossible, but look in the eleventh Chapter of dressing of trees If they
touch, the wind will cause a forcible (...) Young twigs are tender, if boughs
or arms touch (...), if they are strong, they make great galls. No kind of
touch therefore in trees can be good.

Now it is to be considered what distance amongst sets is requisite, The best
distance of trees.
and that must be gathered from the compass and roomth, that each tree by
probability will take and fill. And herein I am of a contrary opinion to all
them, which practice or teach the planting of trees, that ever yet I knew,
read, or heard of. For the common space between tree and tree is ten foot: if
twenty foot, it is thought very much. But I suppose twenty yards distance is
small enough betw^xt tree and tree, or rather too too little. For the distance
must needs be as far as two trees are well able to over spread^ and fill, so
they touch not by one yard at least. Now I am assured, and I know one
Apple Tree, set of slip finger-great, in the space of 20 years, (which I
account a very small part of a trees age, as is showed Chapter 14.) has spread
his boughs eleven or twelve yards compass, that is, five or six yards on
every side. Hence I gather, that in forty or fity years (which yet is but a
small time of his age) a tree in good soil, well liking, by good dressing (for
that is much available to this purpose) will spread double at the least, viz.
twelve yards on a side, which being added to twelve allotted to his felllow,
make twenty and four yards, and so far distant must every tree stand from
another And look how far a tree spreads his boughs above, so far does he
put his roots under the earth, or rather further, if there be no stop, nor let
by walls, trees, rocks, barren earth, The part^ of a tree.
and such like: for an huge bulk, and strong arms, massy boughs, many
branches, and infinite twigs, require wide spreading roots. The top has the
vast air to spread his boughs in, high and low, this way and that way: but the
roots are kept in the crust of the earth, they may not go downward, nor upward
ou^ of he earth, which is their element, no more then the Fish out of the
water, Camelion out of the Air, nor Salamander out the fire. Therefore they
must needs spread far under the earth. And I dare well say, if nature would
give leave to man by Art, to dress the roots of trees, to take away the tawes
and tangles, that lap and fi^t and grow supe^fluously and disorderly, (for
every thing sublunary is cursed for man's sake) the tops above being answerably
dressed, we should have trees of wouderfull greatness, and i^finite durance. And
I persuade my self that this might be done sometimes in Winter, to trees
standing in fair pl^ines and kindly earth, with small or no danger at all. So
that I conclude, that twenty four yards are the least space that Art can allot
for trees to stand distant one from another.

Waste ground in an Orchard.
If you ask me what use shall be made of that waste ground betwixt tree and
tree? I answer: If you please to plant some tree or trees in that middle space,
you may, and as your trees grow contigious, gr^a^ and thick, you may at your
pleasure take up those last trees. And this I take to be the chief cause, why
the most trees stand so thick. For men not knowing (or not regarding) this
secret of needful distance, and loving fruit of trees planted to their hands,
think much to pull up an^, though they pine one another. If you or your
heirs or successors would take up some great tre^s (past setting) where they
stand too thick, be sure ^ou do it about Miasummer, and leave no maine roo^^
I destina^e this sp^ce of four and twenty yards, for trees of age and sta^ure.
More then thi^, yo^ have borders to be made for wal^es^ with Roses^ Berries,
etc.

And chiefly consider: that your Orchard, for the first twenty or thirty
years, will serve you ^or many Gardens, for Safron, Licoras, roots, and other
herb^ for profi^, and flowers for pleasure: so that no ground need be wasted if
the Gardener be skillfull and diligen^. But be sure^ you come not near with
such deep de^uing the roots of your trees, who^e compas^e you may partly
discern, by the compass of the tops, if your top be well spread. And under
the droppings and shadow of your trees, be sure no herbs will like. Let this
be said for the distance of Trees.

CHAP. 9. Of the placing of Trees.
THe placing of trees in an Orchard is well worth the regard: For although it
must be granted, that any of our foresaid trees (Chap. 2.) will like well in
any part of your Orchard, being good and well dressed earth: yet are not ^ll
Trees alike worthy of a good place And therefore I wish that your Filbird,
Plummes, Dimsons, Bules^^, and such like, be utterly removed from the plain
soil of your Orchard into your fence: for there is not such fertility and
easefull growth, as within: and there also they are more subject, and an abide
the blasts of Aeolus. The che^ries and plummes being ripe in the hot time of
Summer, and the rest standing ^onger, are not so soon shaken as your better
fr^i^: neither if they suffer loss, is your loss so great. besides that, your
fences and ditches w^ll de^ou^e ^ome of your fruit growing in or near your
hedges And seeing the continuance of all these (except Nu^s) is small, the care
of them ought to be the less. And make no doubt^ but the fences of a large
Orchard will contain a suffi^ien^ ^umber of such kind of Fruit Trees in the
wh^le compass. It is not material, but at your pleasure, in the s^d fences,
you may either intermingle your seuer^l ki^ds of fruit trees, or set every kind
by himself, which order does very well become your better and greater fruit.
Let therefore your Appl^s P^^res, an^ Quinches, possess the soil of you
O^chard, unless you be especially affected to some of your other kinds: and of
them let your greatest ^rees of growth stand furthest from Sun, and your
Quinches at the S^u^h side or end, and your^ Apples in the middle, so shall
none be any hinderance to his fellows. The Warden-tree, and Winter-Peare will
challenge the pre^emine^ce for stature. Of your Apple Trees you shall find
difference in growth. A good Pippin will g^ow large, and a Costard-tree: stead
them on the North side of your other Apples, thus being placed, the least will
give Sun to the rest, and the greatest will shroud their fellows. The fences
and out-trees will guard all.

CHAP. 10 Of G^af^ing.
NOw are we come to the most curious point of our faculty: Of Grauing or
Caruing.
curious in conceit, but indeed as plain and easy as the rest, when it is
plainly shown, which we commonly call Graf^ing, Grafting what.
or (after some) Grafting. I cannot Etymologize, no^ show the original^ of the
Word, except ^t come of Grauing and Ca^u^ng. B^t the thing or matter is: The
reforming of the frui^^ of one tree with the f^uit of another, by an
artificial transplacing or transposing of a twigge, bud or leaf, commonly
called a Graft) taken from one tree of the same, A Graffe.
or some other kind, and placed or put to, or into another tree in one time and
manner.

Of this there be diverse kinds, but three or four now especially in use: Kinds
of gra^^ing.
to wit, Grafting, incising, packing on, grafting in the scutchion, or
inoculating: whereof the chief and most usual, is called grafting (by the
general name, Catahexocen:) for it is the most known, surest, readiest, and
plainest way to have store of good fruit.

It is thus wrought: You must with a fine, thin, strong and sharp Saw, Graft
how.
made and armed for that purpose, cut off a foot above the ground, or
thereabouts, in a plain without a knot, or as near as you can without a knot
(for some Stocks will be knotty) your Stock, set, or plant, being surely
stayed with your foot and leg, or otherwise straight overthwart (for the
Stock may be crooked) and then plain his wound smoothly with a sharp knife:
that done, cleave him cleanly in the middle with a cleauer, and a knock or
mall, and with a wedge of wood, Iron or Bone, two handful long at least, put
into the middle of that clift, with the same knock, make the wound gape a
straw breadth wide, into which you must put your Graffes.

A Graft what.
The graft is a top twig taken from some other Tree (for it is folly to put a
graffe into his own Stock) beneath the uppermost (and sometime in need the
second) knot, and with a sharp knife fitted in the knot (and some time out of
the knot when need is) with shoulders an ynch downward, and so put into the
stock with some thrusting (but not straining) bark to bark inward.

Eyes.
Let your graffe have three or four eyes, for readiness to put forth, and give
issue to the sap. It is not amiss to cut off the top of your graffe, and leave
it but five or six inches long, because commonly you shall see the tops of
long graffes die. The reason is this. The sap in graffing receives a rebuke,
and cannot work so strongly presently, and your graffes receive not sap so
readily, as the natural branches. When your graffes are cleanely and closely
put in, and your wedge pulled out nimbly, for fear of putting your graffes out
of frime, take well tempered mortar, ^oundly wrought with chafe or horse dung
(for the dung of cattle will grow hard, and strain your graffes) the quantity
of a Gooses egg, and divide it just, and therewithal, cover your stock,
laying the one half on the one side, and the other half on the other side of
your graffes (for thrusting against your graffes) you move them, and let both
your hands thrust at once, and alike, and let your clay be tender, to yield
easily; and all, lest you move your graffes. Some use to cover the clift of the
Stocke^ under the clay with a piece of bark or leaf, some with a sear-cloth
of wax and butter, which as they be not much needful, so they hurt not,
unless that by being busy about them, you move your graffes from their
places. They use also moss tied on above the clay with some bryer, wicker, or
other bands. These profit nothing. They all put the graffes in danger, with
pulling and thrusting: General rule.
for I hold this general rule in graffing and planting: if your stock and
graffes take, and thrive (for some will take and not thrive, being tainted by
some means in the planting or graffing) they will (without doubt) recover
their wounds safely and shortly.

The best time of graffing from the time of removing your stock is the next
Spring, Time of graffing.
for that saues a second wound, and a second repulse of sap, if your stock be
of sufficient bigness to take a graffe from as big as your thumb, to as big
as an arm of a man. You may graffe l^sle (which I like) and bigger, which I
like not so w^ll. The best time of the y^ere is in the ^ast part of February,
or in March, or beginning of Apr^ll, when the Su^ne with his h^a^ begins to
make the s^p stir more rankely, about the change of Moon before you see any
great apparancy of lease or fl^we^s but only knots and bads, and before they
be proud, though it be sooner. Cheries, Pea^es, Apricocks, Q^^nces, and Plummes
would be gathered and graf^ed sooner.

The graff^s may be gathered sooner in February, or any time within a month,
Gathering graffes.
or two before you graffe or upon the same day (which I commend) If you get
them any time before, ^or I have known graf^es gathered in December, and do
well, take heed of drought. I have my self taken a bu^knot of a tree, and the
same day when he was laid in the earth about mid Februory, gathered graf^s and
put in him, and one of those graffes bore the th^rd year after, and the fourth
plentifully. Graffes of old trees would be gathered sooner then of young trees,
Graffes of old ^^ees.
for they sooner break and bud^ If you keep graffes in the earth, moisture
with the heat of the Sun will make them sprout as fast, as if they were growing
on the tree. And therefore seeing keeping is dangerous, the surest way (as I
judge) is to take them within a week of the time of your graf^ing.

The gr^fts would be taken not of the proudest twigs, for it may be your stock
is not answerable in strength. And therefore (say I, the graf^s brought from
South to us in the North although they take and thrive (which is somewhat
doub^full, Where taken.
by reason of the difference of the Clime and carriage) yet shall they in time
fashion themselves to our cold Notherne soil, in growth, taste etc.

Nor of the poorest, for want of strength may make them unready to receive sap
(and who can tell but a poor graft is tainted) nor on the outside of your
tree, for there should your tree spread but in the middest^ for there you may
be sure your Tree is no whit hindered in his growth or form. He will still
recover inward, more then you would wish. If your clay clift in Summer with
drought, look well in the Chinkes for Emm^^s and Earewigs, Emmits.
for they are cunning and close theeues^ about grafts you shall find them
stirring in the morning and evening, and the rather in the moist weather. I
have had many young buds of Graffes, even in the flourishing, eaten with Ants.
Let this suffice for graffing, which is in the faculty counted the chief
secret, and because it is most usual it is best known.

Graffes are not to be disl^ked for growth, till they wither, pine, and die.
Usually before M^dsummer they break, if they l^ue. Some (but few) keeping
proud and green, will not put till the second year, so is it to be thought of
sets.

The first show of putting is no sure sign of growth, it is but the sap the
graffe brought with him from his tree.

So soon as you see the graft put for growth, take away the clay, for then
does neither the stock no^ the graffe need it (put a little fresh well
tempered clay in the hole of the stock) for the clay is now tender, and rather
keeps moisture then drought.

The other ways of changing the natural fruit of Trees, are more curious then
profitable, and therefore I mind not to bestow much labor or time about them,
only I shall make known what I have proved, and what I do think.

And first of incising, Incising.
which is the cutting of the back of the boale, a rine or branch of a tree of
some bending or knee, shoulderwise with two gashes, only with a sharp knife
to the wood: then take a wedge, the big^es of your graffe sharp ended, flat on
the one side, agr^eing with the tree, and round on the other side, and with
t^^^ being thrust in, raise your bark, then p^t in your gr^ffe, fashioned like
your wedge just: and lastly cou^r your wound, and fast it up, and take heed of
straining. This will grow but to small purpose, A great stock.
for it is weak hold, and ligh^ly it will be under growth. Thus may you graft
betwixt the bark and the tree of a great stoc^e that will not easily be
clifted: But I have tried a better way for great trees, viz^ First, cut him off
straight, and cleanse him with your knife, then cleave him into four q^arte^s,
equally with a strong cleauer: then take for every Clift two or three small
(but hard) wedges just of the bigness of your graf^s, and with those Wedges
driven in with an hammer open the four clifts so wide (but no wider) that they
may take your four gr^ffes, with thrusting not with straining: and lastly
cover and clay i^ closely, and this is a sure and good way of grafting: or
thus, clift your stock by his edges twice or thrice with your cleauer, and
open him with your wedge in every clift one by one, and put in your grafts, and
then cover them. This may do well.

Packing on is, when you cut asl^pe a twig of the same bigness with your
graft, Packing thus.
either in or besides the knot, two inches long, and make your graft agree
^umpe with the Cyon^ and gash your graft and your Cyon in the midst of the
wound, length-way, a straw breadth deep, and thrust the one into the other,
wound to wound, sap to s^p, bark to bark, then tie them close and clay them.
This may do well. The fairest graft I have in my little Orchard, which I have
planted, is thus packt on, and the branch whereon I put him, is in his
plentiful root.

To be short in this point, cut your graft in any sort or fashion, two inches
long, and join him cleanly and close to any other sprig of any tree in the
latter end of the time of grafting, when sap is somewhat rife, and in all
probability they will close and thrive: thus The sprig. The graft. The twig.
The graft.
Or any other fashion you think good.

Inoculating is an eye or bud, taken bark and all from one tree, Inoculating.
and placed in the room of another eye or bud of another, cut both of one
compass, and there bound. This must be done in Summer, when the sap is proud.

Much like unto this is that, they call grafting in the scutchion they differ
thus: That here you must take an eye with his leaf, or (in mine opinion) a bud
with his leaves. Graf^ing in the Scutchion.
(Note that an eye is for a Cyon, a bud is for flowers and fruit,) and place
them on another tree, in a plain (for so they teach) the place or bark where
you must set it, must be thus cut with a sharp knife, and the bark raised
with a wedge, and then the eye or budde put in and so bound up. I cannot deny
but such may grow. And your bud if he take will flower and bear fruit that
year: as some grafts and sets also, being set for bloomes. If these two kinds
thrive, they reform but a spray, and an vndergrowth. Thus you may place Roses
on Thorns, and Cherries on Apples, and such like. Many write much more of
grafting, but to small purpose. Whom we leave to themselves, and their
followers; and ending this secret we come in the next Chapter to a point of
knowledge most req^^si^e in an Arborist, as well for all other woods as for an
Orchard.

CHAP. 11. Of the right dressing of Trees.
Necessity (...) sli^g trees.
IF all these things aforesaid were indeed performed, as we have showed them in
words, you should have a perf^ct Orchard in nature and subst^nce, begu^ne to
your hand: And yet are all these things nothing, if you want that skill to
keep and dress your trees. Such is the condition of all earthly things,
whereby a man receives profit or pleasure, that they degenerate presently
without good ordering. Man himself left to himself, grows from ^i heavenly
and spiritual generation, and becomes beastly, yea deuillish to his own
kind, unless he be regenerate No ma^u^ll then, if Trees make their shootes,
and put their spraies disorderly. And truly (if I were worthy to judge) there
is not a mischief ^h^t b^eedeth greater and more general harm to all the
Orchard (especially if they be of any continuance) that ever I saw, (I will not
except three) then the want of the ski^full d^essing of trees. It is a common
and unskillful opinion, and saying. Let all grow, and they will bea^e more
fruit: and if ^oulop away su^erfluous boughts, they say, what a pity is this?
General rule.
How many apples would there have borne? not considering there may arise hurt
to your Orchard, as well (nay rather) by abundance, as by want of wood. sound
and thriuing plan^ in a good soil, will ever yield too much wood, and
disorderly, but never too little. So that a skillful and painful A^bo^ist,
need never want matter to ^ffect a plentiful and well dressed Orchard: for it is
an easy matter to take away superfluous boughs if your Gardner have skill to
know them) whereof you^ plants will yield abundance, and skill will leave
sufficient well ordered. A^lages both by rule and experience do consent to a
pruining and lopping of trees: yet have not any that I know described unto us
(except in dark and general words) what or which are those superfluous
boughs, which we must take away, and that is the chief and most needful
point to be known in lopping. And we may well assure our selves, (as in all
other Arts, so in this) there is a vantage and dexterity, by skill, and an
habit by practice out of experience, in the performance hereof for the profit
of mankind; yet do I not know (let me speak it with the patience of ou^
cunning Arborists) any thing within the compass of humane affairs so
necessary, and so little regarded, not only in Orchards, but also in all other
timber trees, where or whatsoever.

How many forests and woods? Timber wood evil dressed.
wherein you shall have for one lively thriuing tree, four (nay sometimes 24.)
evil thriuing, rotten and dying trees, even while they live. And instead of
trees thousands of bushes and sh^ubs. What rotte^esse? what hollownesse? what
dead arms? withered tops? curtailed trunkes? what loads of mosses? drouping
boughe? and dying branches shall you see eue^y where? And those that like in
this sort are in a manner all unprofitable boughs, canked arms, crooked,
little and short boales: what an infinite number of bushes, shrubs, and skrogs
of hazels, thorns, and other profitable wood, which might be brought by
dressing to become great and goodly ^rees. Consider now the cause: The lesser
wood has been spoiled The cause of hurts in woods.
Imagine the root to be spread far wider.
with careless, unskillful, and untimely stowing, and much also of the great
wood. The greater trees at the first rising have filled and ouer-loaden
themselves with a number of wastfu^l boughs and suckers, which have not only
drawn the sap from the boale, but also have made it knotty, and themselves and
the boale mossie for want of dressing, whereas if in the prime of growth they
had been taken away close, all but one top (according to this pattern) and
clean by the bulk, Dress timber trees how.
the strength of all the sap should have gone to the bulk, and so he would
have recovered and covered his knots, and have put forth a fair, long and
straight body (as you see) for timber profitable, huge great of bulk, and of
infinite last.

If all timber trees were such (will some say) how should we have crooked wood
for wheels, co^r^s, etc.

Answ. Dress all you can, and there will be enough crooked for those uses.

More than this, in most places, they grow so thick, that neither themselves,
nor earth, nor any thing under or near them can thrive, nor Sun, nor rain,
nor ^ire can do them, nor any thing near or under them any profit or comfort.

I see a number of H^gs, where out of one root you shall see three or four
(nay more) such as men's vns^ilfull greediness, who desiring many have ^ore
good) pretty Oaks or Ashes, straight and tall, because the root at the first
shoot gives sap amain: but if one only of them might be suffered to grow,
and that well and cleanely pruned, all to his very top, what a tree should we
have in time? And we see by those roots continually and plentifully springing,
notwithstanding so deadly wounded. What a commodity should arise to the owner,
and the Commonwealth, if wood were cherished, and orderly dressed.

The wast boughs closely and skilfully taken away, Profit of trees dressed.
would give us store of fences and fuel, and the bulk of the tree in time
would grow of huge length and bigness. But here (me thinks) I hear an
unskillful Arborist say, that trees have their several forms, even by nature,
the Pear, the Holly, the Aspe, etc. grow long in bulk with few and little
arms, the Oak by nature broad, and such like. All this I grant: but grant me
also, that there is a profitable end, and use of every tree, from which i^ it
decline (though by nature) yet man by art may (nay must) correct it. The end of
Trees.
Now other end of trees I never could learn, than good timber, fruit much and
good, and pleasure. Uses physical hinder nothing a good form.

Neither let any man ever so much as think, that it improbable, Trees will
take any form.
much less impossible, to refo^me any tree of what kind soever. For (believe
me) I have tried it, I can bring any tree (beginning by time) to any form. The
pear and holly may be made to spread, and the Oak to close.

But why do I wander out of the compass of mine Orchard, into the Forests and
Woods? Neither yet am I from my purpose, if boales of timber trees stand in
need of all the sap, to make them great and straigh^ (for strong growth and
dressing makes strong trees) then it must needs be profitable for fruit (a
thing more immediately serving a man's need) to have all the sap his root can
yield: The end of Trees.
for as timber sound, great and long, is the good of timber trees, and
therefore they bear no fruit of worth: so fruit, good, sound, pleasant, great
and much, is the end of fruit trees. That gardner therefore shall perform his
duty skilfully and faithfully, which shall so dress his trees, that they may
bear such and such store of fruit, which he shall never do (dare undertake)
unless he keep this order in dressing his trees.

How to dress a fruit-tree.
A fruit-tree so standing, that there need none other end of dressing b^t fruit
(not ornaments for walks, nor delight to such as would please their eye only,
and yet the b^st form cannot but both adorn an^ d^light) must be parted from
within two foot, or thereabouts, of the earth, so high to give liberty to
dress his root, and no higher, for drinking up the sap that should f^ede his
fruit, for the boale will be first, and best served and fed, because he is next
the root, and of gre^^est wax and substance, and that makes him longest of
life, into two, three, or four arms, as your stock or graff^s yield twigs,
and every arm into two or more bran^hes, and every branch into his several
Cyons, still spre^ding by equ^ll degrees, so that his lowest spray be hardly
without the reach of a man's hand, and his highest be not past two yards higher,
rar^ly (especially in the midst) that no one twig touch his fellow. Let him
spread as far as he list without his maister-bough, or ^op ^qually. And when
any bough does grow sadder and fall lower, than his fellows (as they will with
weight of fruit) ease him the next spring of his superfluous twigs, and he
will ri^e: when any bough or spray shall amount above the rest; either snub his
top with a nip be^wixt your finger and your thumb, or with a sharp knife, and
take him clean away, and so you may use any Cyon you would reform, and as
your tree shall grow in stature and st^ength, so let him rise with his tops,
but flowly, and e^rely, especially in the midst, and equally, and in breadth
also, and follow him upward with lopping hi^ under growth and water boughs,
keeping the some distance of two yards, but not above three in any wise,
betwixt the lowest and the highest twigs.

1. Thus you shall have well liking, Benefits of good ^ressing.
clean skind, healthful great, and long-lasting trees. 2. Thus shall your
tree grow low, and safe from winds, for his top will be great, broad and
weighty. 3. Thus growing broad, shall your trees bear much fruit (I dare say)
one as much as six of your common trees, and good without shadowing, dropping
and fretting: for his boughs, branches, and twigs shall be many, and those are
they (not the boale) which bear the fruit. 4. Thus shall your boale being
little (not small but low) by reason of his shortness, take little, and yield
much sap to the fruit. 5. Thus your trees by reason of strength in time of
setting shall put forth more blossoms, and more fruit, being free from
taints; for strength is a great help to bring forth much and safely, whereas
weakness fails in setting though the season be calm.
Some use to bare trees roots in Winter, to stay the setting til hotter
seasons, which I discommend, because, 1. They hurt the roots. 2. It stays it
nothing at al 3. Though it did, being small, with us in the North, they have
their part of our April and Mayes frosts. 4. Hinderance cannot profit weak
trees in setting. 5. They wast much labor. 6. Thus shall your tree be easy to
dress, and without danger, either to the tree or the dresser. 7. Thus may you
safely and easily gather your fruit without falling, bruising or breaking of
Cyons.


This is the best form of a fruit tree, which I have here only shadowed out
for the better capacity of them that are led more with the eye, than the mind,
craving pardon for the deformity, because I am nothing skillful either in
painting or caruing.

Imagine that the paper makes but one side of the tree to appear, the whole
round compass will give leave for many more arms, boughs, branches, and
Cyons.

The perfect form of a Fruit-tree.


If any think a tree cannot well be brought to this form: Experto creed
Roberto, I can show diverse of them under twenty years of age.

The fittest time of the Moon for proyning is as of grafting, Time best for
proining,
when the sap is ready to stir (not proudly stirring) and so to cover the
wound, and of the year, a month before (or at least when) you graffe. Dress
Pears, Apricocks, Peaches, Cherries, and Bullys sooner. And old trees before
young plants, you may dress at any time betwixt Leaf and Leaf. And note,
where you take any thing away, the sap the next Summer will be putting: be sure
therefore when he puts a bud in any place where you would not have him, rub it
off with your finger.

And here you must remember the common homely Proverb: Dressing betime.
Soon crookes the Tree,
That good Camrell must be.
Begin betime with trees, and do what you list: but if you let them grow
great and stubborn, you must do as the trees list. They will not bend but
break, nor be wound without danger. A small branch will become a bough, and a
bough an arm in bigness. Then if you cut him, his wound will fester, and
hardly, without good skill, Faults of evil dressed trees, and the remedy.
recover: therefore, Obsta principijs. Of such wounds, and lesser, or any bough
cut off a handful or more from the body, comes hollowness, and untimely death.
And therefore when you cut, strik close, and clean, and upward, and leave no
bunch.

This form in some cases sometimes may be altered: If your tree, The form
altered.
or trees, stand near your Walks, if it please your fancy more, let him not
break, till his boale be above you h^^ad: so may you walk under your trees at
your pleasure. Or if you set your fruit trees for your shades in your Groves,
then I ^espect not the form of the tree, but the comeliness of the walk.

All this hitherto spoken of dr^ssing, must be understood of young plants,
Dressing of old trees.
to be formed: it is meet somewhat be said for the inst^uction of them that
have old trees already formed, or rather deformed: for, Malum non vitatur nisi
cognitum. The faults therefore of a disordered tree, I find to be five: Faults
are five, and their remedies.
1. An unprofitable bo^l^. 2. Water-boughes. 3. Fretters. 4. Suckers: And, 5.
One principal top.


A long boale asks much ^eeding, and the more he has the more he desires,
Long boale.
and gets (as a drunken man drink, or a couetuous man wealth) and the less
remains for the fruit, he puts his boughs into the air, and makes them, the
fruit, and it self more dangered with winds: No remedy.
for this I know no remedy, after that the tree is come to growth, once evil,
never good.

Water boughs, Water boughs.
or vndergrowth, are such boughs as grow low under others and are by them
ouergrowne, ouershadowed, dropped on, and pinde for want of plenty of sap, and
by that means in time die: For the sap presses upward; and it is like water
in her course, where it finds most issue, thither it flows, leaving the
other lesser sluices dry: even as wealth to wealth, and much to more. These so
long as they bear, they bear less, worse, and fewer fruit, and waterish.

The remedy is easy, Remedy.
if they be not grown greater then your arm. Lop them close and clean, and
cover the mid^l of the wound, the next Summer when he is dry, Barke-pild, and
the remedy.
with a salve made of tallow, tar, and a very little pitch, good for the
covering of any such wound of a great tree: unless it be barke-pild, and then
sear-cloath of fresh Butter, Honey, and Wax, presently (while the wound is
green) applied, is a sovereign remedy in Summer especially. Some bind such
wounds with a thumb rope of Hay, mo^st, and rub it with dung.

Fretters are, when as by the negligence of the Gardner, two or more parts of
the tree, Fretters.
or of diverse trees, as arms, boughs, branches, or twigs, grow so near and
close together, that one of them by rubbing, does wound another. This fault of
all other shows the want of skill or care (at least) in the Arborist: Touching.
for here the hurt is apparent, and the remedy easy, Remedy.
seen to betime: galls and wounds incurable, but by taking away those members:
for let them grow, and they will be worse and worse, and so kill themselves
with civil strife for roomth, and danger the whole tree Avoid them betime
therefore, as a common wealth does bosom enemies.

A Sucker is a long, proud, and disorderly Cyon, growing straight up (for pride
of sap makes proud, Suckers.
long, and str^ight growth) out of any lower parts of the tree, receiving a
great part of the sap, and bearing no fruit, till it have tyrannized over the
whole tree. These are like idle and great Dro^es amongst Bees; and proud and
idle members in a common wealth.

Remedy.
The remedy of this is, as of water-boughes, unless he be grown greater then
all the rest of the boughs, and then your Gardner (at your discretion) may
leave him for his boale, and take away all, or the most of the rest. If he be
little, slip him, and set him, perhaps he will take: my fairest Apple Tree was
such a Slip.

One or two prin^ipall top boughs are as evil, in a manner, One principal
top or bough, and remedy.
as Suckers, they rise of the same cause, and receive the same remedy: yet
these are more tolerable, because these bear fruit, yea the best: but Suckers
of long do not bear.

I know not how your tree should be faulty, if you reform all your vices
timely, and orderly. As these rules serve for dressing young trees and sets in
the first planting: Instruments for dressing.
so may they well serve to help old trees, though not exactly to recover them.

The Instruments fittest for all these purposes, are most commonly: For the
great trees an handsome long, light Ladder of Firpoles, a little, nimble, and
strong armed Saw, and sharp. For less Trees, a little and sharp Hatchet, a
broad mouthed Chesell, strong and sharp, with an hand-beetle, your strong and
sharp Cleeuer, with a knock, and (which is a most necessary Instrument amongst
little trees) a great hafted and sharp Knife or Whittle. And as needful is a
Stool on the top of a Ladder of eight or more ^ungs, with two backe-feet,
whereon you may safely and easefully stand to graffe, to dress, and to gather
fruit thus formed: The feet may be fast wedged in: but the Ladder must hang
loose with two bands of iron. And thus much of dressing trees for fruit,
formerly to profit.

CHAP. 12. Of Foyling.
THere is one thing yet very necessary for make your Orchard both better,
Necessity effoiling.
and more lasting: Yea, so necessary, that without it your Orchard cannot last,
nor prosper long, which is neglected generally both in precepts and in
practice, viz. manuring with Foil: whereby it happens that when trees (amongst
other evils) through want of fatness to feed them, become mossie, and in their
growth are evil (or not) thriuing, it is either attributed to some wrong
cause, as age (when indeed they are but young) or evil standing (stand they
never so well) or such like, or else the cause is altogether unknown, and so
not amended.

Can there be devised any way by nature, Trees great suckers.
or art, sooner or soundlier to seek out, and take away the heart and strength
of earth, then by great trees? Such great bodies cannot be sustained without
great store of sap. What living body have you greater then of trees? The great
Sea monsters (whereof one came a land at Teesmouth in Yorkshire, hard by us,
18. yards in length, and near as much in compass) seem hideous, Great bodies.
huge, strange, and monstrous, because they be indeed great: but especially,
because they are seldom seen: But a tree li^ing, come to his growth and age,
twice that length, and of a bulk never so great, besides his other parts, is
not admired, because he is so commonly seen. And I doubt not, but if he were
well regarded from his kirnell, by succeeding ages, to his full strength, the
most of them would double their measure. About fifty years ago I heard by
credible and constant report, That in Brooham Park in West more-land, near
unto Penrith, there lay a blown Oak, whose trunk was so big, that two
Horse men being the one on the one side, and the other on the other side, they
could not one see another: to which if you add his arms, boughs, and roots,
and consider of his bigness, what would he have been, if preserved to the
vantage. Also I read in the History of the West-Indians, out of Peter Martyr,
that sixteen men taking hands one with another, were not able to fathom one
of those trees about. Now Nature having given to such a faculty by large and
infinite roots^ taws and tang^es, to draw immediately his sustenance from our
common mother the Earth (which is like in this point to all other mothers that
bear) has also ordained that the tree over laden with fruit, and wanting sap
to feed all she has brought forth, will waine all she cannot feed, like a
woman bringing forth more children at once then she has teats. See you not how
trees especially, by kind being great, standing so thick and close, that they
cannot get plenty of sap, pine away all the grass, weeds, lesser shrubs, and
trees, yea and themselves also for want of vigor of sap? So that trees growing
large, sucking the soil whereon they stand, continually, and amain, and the
foyzon of the earth that feeds them decaying (for what is there that wastes
continually, that shall not have end?) must either have supply of sucker, or
else leave thriuing and growing. Some grounds will bear Corn while they be
new, and no longer, because their crust is shollow, and not very good, and
lying they s^ind and wash, and become barren. The ordinary Corn soiles
continue not ferti^e, with following and foyling, and the best requires supply,
even for the little body of Corn. How then can we think that any ground (how
good soever) can sustain bodies of such greatness, and such great feeding,
without great plenty of Sap arising from good earth? This is one of the chief
causes, why so many of our Orchards in England are so evil thriuing when they
come to growth, and our fruit so bad. Men are loath to bestow much ground, and
desire much fruit, and will neither set their trees in sufficient compass, nor
yet feed them with manure. Therefore of necessity Orchards must be foiled.

The fittest time is, Time fit for foyling.
when your trees are grown great, and have near hand spread your earth,
wanting new earth to sustain them, which if they do, they will seek abroad
for better earth, and shun that, which is barren (if they find better) as
cattle evil pasturing. For nature has taught every creature to desire and
seek his own good, and to avoid hurt. The best time of the year is at the
Fall, that the Frost may b^^e and make it tender, and the Rain wash it i^to
the roots. The Summer time is perilous if ye dig, because the sap (...)
amain. The best kind of Foil is such as is fat, Kind of foil.
hot, and tender. Your earth must be but lightly opened, that the d^ng may go
in, and wash away; and but shallow, lest you hurt the roots: and in the Spring
closely and equally made plain again for f^are of Suckers. I could wish, that
after my trees have fully possessed the soil of mine Orchard, that every seven
years at least, the soil were bespread with dung half a foot thick at
least. Puddle water out of the dunghill powered on plentifully, will not only
moisten but fatten especially in June and July. If it be thick and fat, and
applied every year, your Orchard shall need none other foiling. Your ground
may lie so low at the River side, that the flood standing some days and nights
thereon, shall save you all this labor of foiling.

CHAP. 13. Of Annoyances.
A Chief help to make every thing good, is to avoid the evils thereof: you
shall never attain to that good of your Orchard you look for, unless you
have a Gardner, that can discern the diseases of your trees, and other
annoyances of your Orchard, and find out the causes thereof, and know and apply
fit remedies for the same. For be your ground, site, plants, and trees as you
would wish, if they be wasted with hurtful things, what have you gained but
your labor for your travel? It is with an Orchard and every tree, as with
man's body. The best part of physic for preservation of health, is to foresee
and cure diseases.

All the diseases of an Orchard are of two sorts, either internal or
external. Two kinds of evils in an Orchard.
I call those inward hurts which breed on and in particular trees.

1 Galls. 2 Canker. 3 Moss. 4 Weakness in setting. 5 Bark bound. 6 Bark
pild. 7 Worm. 8 Deadly wounds.
Galls, Galls.
Canker, Moss, weakness, though they be diverse diseases: yet (howsouer Authors
think otherwise) they rise all out of the same cause.

Galls we have described with their cause and remedy, in the 11. Chapter under
the name of fretters.

Canker is the consumption of any part of the tree, bark and wood, Canker.
which also in the same place is deceiphered under the title of water-boughes.

Moss is sensibly seen and known of all, the cause is pointed out in the
same Chapter, Moss.
in the discourse of timber-wood, and partly also the remedy: but for Moss
add this, that at any time in summer (the Spring is best) when the cause is
removed, with an Harecloth, immediately after a shower of rain, rub off your
Moss, or with a piece of weed (if the Moss abound) formed like a great knife.

Weakness in the setting of your fruit shall you find there also in the same
Chapter, Weakness in setting.
and his remedy. All these flow from the want of roomth in good soil, wrong
planting, Chap. 7. and evil or no dressing.

Bark-bound (as I think) rises of the same cause, and the best, Barke-bound.
and present remedy (the causes being taken away) is with your sharp knife in
the Spring, length-way to launch his bark throughout, on 3. or 4. sides of his
boale.

The disease called the Worm is thus discernd: The bark will be hoald in
diverse places like gall, Worm.
the wood will die and dry, and you shall see easily the bark swell. It is
verily to be thought, that therein is bred some worm I have not yet thoroughly
sought it out, because I was never troubled therewithal: but only have seen
such trees in diverse places. I think it a worm rather, because I see this
disease in trees, bringing fruit of sweet taste, and the swelling shows as
much. Remedy.
The remedy (as I con^ecture) is so soon as you perceive the wound, the next
Spring cut it out bark and all, and apply Cowes p^^le and vinegar presently,
and so twice or thrice a week for a months space: For I well perceive, if you
suffer it any time, it eats the tree or bough round, and so kills.

Since I first wrote this Treatise, I have changed my mind concerning the
disease called the worm, because I read in the History of the West-Indians,
that their trees are not troubled wiih the disease called the worm or canker.
which arises of a raw and evil concocted humor or sap, Witness Pliny, by
reason their Country is more ho^ then ours, whereof I think the best remedy is
(not disallowing the former, considering that the worm may breed by such an
humor) warm standing, sound lopping and good dressing.

Bark pild.
Barke-pild you shall find with his remedy in the 11. Chapter.

Deadly wounds are when a man's Arborist wanting skill, Wounds.
cut off arms, boughs or branches an inch, or (as I see sometimes) an
handful, or half a foot or more from the body: These so cut cannot cover in
any time with sap, and therefore they die, and dying they perish the heart, and
so the tree becomes hollow, and with such a deadly wound cannot live long.

The remedy is, if you find him before he be perished, cut him close^ Remedy.
as in the 11. Chapter: if he be hoald, cut him close, fill his wound, tho
never so deep, with mortar well tempered and so close at the top his wound
with a Sear cloth doubled and nailed on, that no air nor rain approach his
wound. If he be not very old, and detaining, he will recover, and the hole
being closed, his wound within shall not hurt him for many years.

Hurts on your trees are chiefly Ants, Hurts on trees Ants, Earewigs,
Caterpillars, and such like worms.
Earewigs, and Caterpillars, Of Ants and Earewigs is said Chap. 10. Let there
be no swarm of Pismires near your tree-root, no not in your Orchard, turn
them over in a frost, and power in water, and you kill them.

For Caterpillars, the vigilant Fruterer shall soon espy their lodging by
their web, or the decay of leaves eaten round about them. And being seen, they
are easily destroyed with your hand, or rather (if your tree may spare it) take
sprig and all (for the red peckled butter fly does ever put them, being her
sparm, among the tender spraies for better feeding, especially in drought, and
tread them under your feet. I like nothing of smoke among my trees. Unnatural
heates are nothing good for natural trees. This for diseases of particular
trees.

External hurts are either things natural or artificial. External evils.
Natural things, externally hurting Orchards.

1 Beasts. 1 Dear. 2 Birds. 1 Bulfinch. 2 Goats. 2 Thrush. 3 Sheep. 3
Blackbird. 4 Hare. 4 Crow. 5 Cony. 5 Pie. 6 Cattle. 7 Horse. etc.

The other things are,
1 Winds. 2 Cold. 3 Trees. 4 Weeds. 5 Worms. 6 Mowles. 7 Filth. 8 Poysonfull
smoke.
External wilful evils are these.
1 Walls. 2 Trenches. 3 Other works noisome done in or near your Orchard. 4
Evil Neighbors. 5 A careless Master. 6 An indiscreet, negligent or no
keeper.
See you here an whole Army of mischeifes banded in troops against the most
fruitful trees the earth bears? assailing your good labors. Good things have
most enemies.

Remedy.
A skillful Fructerer must put to his helping hand, and disband and put them to
flight.

Decre, etc.
For the first rank of beasts, besides your out strong fence, you must have a
fair and swift Greyhound, a stone-bow, gun, and if need require, an Apple with
an hook for a Dear, and an Hare-pipe for an Hare.

Birds.
Your Cherries and other Berris when they be ripe, will draw all the
Black-birds, Thrushes, and Maw Pies to your Orchard. The Bul-finch is a
deuourer of your Fruit in the bud, I have had whole trees shald out with them
in Wintertime.

Remedy.
The best remedy here is a Stone bow, a Piece, especially if you have a Musket
or Spar-hawke in Winter to make the Blackbird stoop into a bush or hedge.

Other trees.
The Gardner must cleanse his foil of all other trees: but fruit trees
aforesaid Chapter 2 for which it is ordained, and I would espeecially name
Oaks, Elmes, Ashes, and such other great wood, but that I doubt it should be
taken as an admission of lesser trees: for I admit of nothing to grow in mine
Orchard but fruit and flowers. If sap can hardly be good to feed our
fruit trees, why should we allow of any other, especially those, that will
become their Masters, and wrong them in their liuelyhood.

And although w^ ^dmit without the fence of Wallnuts in most plain places,
Trees middle-most, and ashes or Oaks, or Elmes v^most, set in comely rows
equally distant with fair Allies ^wixt row and row to avoid the boisterous
blasts of winds, Winds.
and within them also others for Bees; yet we admit none of these into your
Orchard-plat: other remedy then this have we none against the nipping frosts.
Frosts.


Weeds in a fertile soil (because the general curse is so) till your Trees
grow great, Weeds.
will be noisome, and deforme your allies, walks, beds, and squares, your
under Gardners must labor to keep all cleanly and handsome from them and all
other filth with a Spade, weeding knives, rake with iron teeth: a skrapple of
Iron thus formed.



For Nettles and ground-Iuy after a shower.

When weeds, Remedy.
straw, sticks, and all other scrapings are gathered together, burn them not,
but bury them under your crust in any place of your Orchard, and they will dye
and fatten your ground.

Worms and Moales open the earth, Worms Moales.
and let in air to the roots of your trees, and deforme your squares and
walks, and feeding in the earth, being in number infinite, draw on barrennesse^

Worms may easily be destroyed. Remedy.
Any Summer evening when it is dark, after a shower with a candle, you may
fill bushels, but you must tred nimbly^ and where you cannot come to catch them
so; sift the earth with coal ashes an inch or two thicknes, and that is a
plague to them, so is sharp gravel.

Moales will anger you, if your Gardner or some skilful^ Moale-catcher ease you
not, especially having made their fortresses among the roots of your trees: you
must watch her well with a Moal spare, at morn, noon, and night, when you see
her utmost hill, cast a Trench betwixt her and her home (for she has a
principal mansion to dwell and br^ed in about April, which you may discern
by a principal hill, wherein you may catch her, if you trench it round and
sure, and watch well) or wheresoever you can discern a single passage (for
such she has) there trench, and watch, and have her.

Wilful annoyances must be prevented and avoided by the love of the Master and
Fruterer, Wilful annoyances.
which they bear to their Orchard.

Remedy.
Justice and liberality will put away evil neighbors or evil neighborhood.
And then if (God bless and give success to your labors) I see not what hurt
your Orchard can sustain.

CHAP. 14. Of the age of Trees.
IT is to be considered: All this Treatise of trees tends to this end, that men
may love and plant Orchards, whereunto there cannot be a better inducement then
that they know (or at least be persuaded) that all that benefit they shall
reap thereby, whether of pleasure or profit, shall not be for a day or a
month, or one, or many (but many hundredth) years. Of good things the
greatest, and most durable is always the best. If therefore out of reason
grounded upon experience, it be made (I think) manifest, but I am sure
probable, that a fruit tree in such a soil and site, as is described so
planted and trimmed and kept, The age o^ trees.
as is before appointed and duly foiled, shall dure 1000^ yee^es, why should we
not take pains, and be at two or three years charges (for under seven years
w^ll an Orchard be perfected for the first planting, and in that time be
brought to fruit) to reap such a commodity and so long lasting

Let no man think this to be strange, Gathered by reason out of experience.
but peruse and consider the reason. I have Apple trees standing in my little
Orchard, which I have known these forty years, whose age before my time I
cannot learn, it is beyond memory, tho I have enquired of diverse aged men of
80. years and upwards: these trees although come into my possession very evil
ordered, misshapen, and one of them wounded to his heart, and that deadly (for I
know it will be his death) with a wound, wherein I might have put my foot in
the heart of his bulk (now it is less) notwithstanding, with that small
regard they have had since, they so like, that I assure my self they are not
come to their growth by more then 2. parts of 3. which I discern not only by
their own growth, but also by comparing them with the bulk of other trees.
And I find them short (at least) by so many parts in bigness, although I know
those other fruit trees to have been much hindered in their stature by evil
guiding. Herehence I gather thus.

If my trees be a hundred years old, and yet want two hundred of their growth
before they leave increasing, Parts of a trees age.
which make three hundred, then we must needs resolve, that this three hundred
year are but the third part of a Trees life, because (as all things living
besides) so trees must have allowed them for their increase one third, another
third for their stand, and a third part of time also for their decay. All which
time of a Tree amounts to nine hundred years, three hundred for increase,
three hundred for his stand, whereof we have the te^rme stature, and three
hundred for his decay, and yet I think (for we must conjecture by comparing,
because no one man lives to see the full age of trees) I am within the
compass of his age, supposing always the foresaid means of preserving his
life. Consider the age of other living creatures. The Horse and moiled Ox
wrought to an untimely death, yet double the time of their increase. A Dog
likewise increases three, stanns three at least, and in as many (or rather
more) decays.

Man's age.
Every living thing bestows the least part of his age in his growth, and so
must it needs be with trees. A man comes not to his full growth and strength
(by common estimation) before thirty years, and some slender and clean
bodies, not till forty, so long also stands his strength, and so long also must
he have allowed by course of nature to decay. Ever supposing that he be well
kept with necessaries, and from and without strains, bruises, and all other
dominyring diseases. I will not say upon true report, that Physic holds it
possible, that a clean body kept by these 3. Doctors, Doctor Diet, Doctor
Quiet, and Doctor Merriman, may live near a hundred years. Neither will I
here urge the long years of Methushalah, and those men of that time, because
you will say, Man's days are shortened since the flood. But what has shortened
them? God for man's sins: but by means, as want of knowledge, evil
government, riot, gluttony, drunkenesse, and (to be short) the increase of the
curse, our sins increasing in an iron and wicked age.

Now if a man, whose body is nothing (in a manner) but tender rottenness,
whose course of life cannot by any means, by counsel, restraint of Laws, or
punishment, nor hope of praise, profet, or eturnall glory, be kept within any
bounds, who is degenerate clean from his natural feeding, to effeminate
niceness, and cloying his body with excess of meat, drink, sleep etc. and
to whom nothing is so pleasant and so much desired as the causes of his own
death, as idleness, lust, etc. may li^e to that age: I see not but a tree of a
solid substance, not damnified by heat or cold, capable of, and subject to
any kind of ordering or dressing that a man shall apply unto him, feeding
naturally, as from the beginning disburdened of all superfluities, eased of,
and of his own accord avoiding the causes that may annoy him, should double
the life of a man, more then twice told; and yet natural philosophy, and the
universal consent of all Histories tell us, that many other living creatures
far exceed man in the length of years: As the Heart and the Raven. Thus
reports that famous Roterodam out of Hesiodus, and many other
Historiographers. The testimony of Cicero in his book De Sen^ctute, is weighty
to this purpose: that we must in posteras aetates ferere arbores, which can
have none other sense: but that our fruit trees whereof he speaks, can endure
for many ages.

What else are trees in comparison with the earth: but as hairs to the body of
a man? And it is certain, without poisoning, evil and distemperate diet, and
usage, or other such forcible cause, the hairs dure with the body. That they
be called excrements, it is by reason of their superfluous growth: for cut them
as often as you list, and they will still come to their natural length) Not in
respect of their substance, and nature. H^ires endure long, and are an ornament
and use also to the body, as trees to the earth.

So that I resolve upon good reason, that fruit trees well ordered, may live
and like a thousand years, and bear fruit, and the longer, the more, the
greater, and the better, because his vigor is p^oud and stronger, when his
years are many: You shall see old trees put their buds and blossoms both
sooner and more plentifully then young trees by much. And I sensi^ly perceive my
young trees to enlarge their ^rust, as they grow greater, both for number, and
greatness. Young He^fers bring not fo^th Calves so fair, neither are they so
plentiful to milk, as when they become to be old Ki^e. No good Houswife will
b^e^d of a young but of an old bird-mother: It is so in all things naturally,
therefore in trees.

The age of timbe^ tree^.
And if fruit trees l^st to this age, how many ages is it to be supposed, st^ong
and huge timber trees will last? whose huge bodies require the years of diverse
Methushalaes, before they end their days, whose sap is strong and bitter,
whose bark is hard and thick, and their substance solid and stiff: all which
are defenses of health and long life. Their strength withstands all forcible
winds, their sap of that qu^lity is not subject to worms and tainting. Their
bark receives seldom or never by casualty any wound. And not only so, but he
is free from remoualls, which are the death of millions of trees, where as the
fruit-tree in comparison is little, and often blown down, his sap sweet,
easily, and soon tainted, his bark tender, and soon wounded, and himself
used by man, as man uses himself, that is either v^skilfully, or carelessely.

It is good for some purposes to regard the age of your fruit trees, Age of
trees disc^rne^.
which you may easily know, till they come to accomplish twenty years, by his
knots: Reckon from his root up an arm, and so to his top-twig, and every
years growth is distinguished from other by a knot, except lopping or removing
do hinder

CHAP. 15. Of gathering and keeping Fruit.
ALthough it be an easy matter, General Rule
when God shall sen^ it, together and keep fruit, yet are they certain things
worthy your regard. You must gather your fruit when it is ripe, and not before,
else will it wither and be tough and sour. All fruit generally are ripe, when
they begin to fall. For Trees do as all other bearers do, when their young
ones are ripe, they will waine them. The Dove her Pigeons^ the Cony her
Rabbets, and women their children. Some fruit tree sometimes getting a taint in
the setting with a frost or evil wind, will cast his fruit untimely, but not
before he leave giving them sap, or they leave growing. Except from this
foresaid rule, Cherries, Cherries. etc.
Damsons, and Bullies. The Cherry is ripe when he is sweld wholly red, and
sweet: Damsons and Bulies not before the first frost.

Apples are known to be ripe, Apples.
partly by their color, growing toward a yellow, except the Leather-coat and
some Pears and Greening.

Timely Summer fruit will be ready, some at Midsummer, most at Lammus for
present use; When.
but general^y noe keepi^g fruit before Michal-tide. Hard Winter fruit and
Wardens longer.

Dry stalks.
Gather at the full of the Moon for keeping, gather dry for fear of rotting.

Gather the stalks with all: for a little wound in fruit, is deadly: but not
the stumpe, that must bear the next fruit, nor leaves, for moisture putrifies.

Severally.
Gather every kind severally by it self, for all will not keep alike, and it
is hard to discern them, when they are mingled.

If your trees be ouer-laden (as they will be, being ordered, Ouerladen ^^ees.
as is before taught you) I like better of pulling some off (tho they be not
ripe) near the top end of the bough, then of propping by much, the rest shall
be better fed. Propping puts the bough in danger, and frets it at least.

Instruments.
Instruments: A long ladder of light Fur: A stoole-ladder as in the 11.
Chapter. A gathering apron like a poake before you, made of purpose, or a
Wallet hung on a bough, or a basket with a five bottom, or skin bottom,
with Lathes or splinters under, hung in a rope to pull up and down: bruise
none, Bruises.
every bruise is to fruit death: if you do, use them presently. An hook to
pull boughs to you is necessary, break no boughs.

For keeping, lay them in a dry Loft, the longest keeping Apples first and
furthest on dry straw, Keeping.
on heaps ten or fourteen days, thick, that they may sweat. Then dry them
with a soft and clean cloth, and lay them thin abroad. Long keeping fruit
would be turned once in a month softly: but not in nor immediately after
frost. In a loft cover well with straw, but rather with chafe or bra^^e: For
frost does cause tender rottenness.

CHAP. 16. Of Profits.
NOw pause with your self, and view the end of all your labors in an Orchard:
unspeakable pleasure, and infinite commodity. The pleasure of an Orchard I
refer to the last Chapter for the conclusion: and in this Chapter, a word or
two of the profit, which thoroughly to declare is past my skill: and I count it
as if a man should attempt to add light to the Sun with a Candle, or number
the Stars. No man that has but a mean Orchard or judgment but knows, that
the commodity of an Orchard is great: Neither would I speak of this, being a
thing so manifest to all; but that I see, that through the careless laziness
of men, it is a thing generally neglected. But let them know, that they lose
hereby the chiefest good which belongs to housekeeping.

Compare the commodity that comes of half an acre of ground, set with
fruit trees and herbs, so as is prescribed, and an whole acre (say it be two)
with Corn, or the best commodity you can wish, and the Orchrad shall exceed by
diverse degrees.

In France and some other Countries, Cydar and Perry.
and in England, they make great use of Cydar and Perry, thus made: Dress
every Apple, the stalk, upper end, and all galls away, stamp them, and
strain them, and within 24. hours tun them up into clean, sweet, and sound
vessels, for fear of evil air, which they will readily take: and if you hang
a poakefull of Cloves, Mace, Nutmegs, Cinnamon, Ginger, and pills of Lemmons in
the midst of the vessel, it will make it as wholesome and pleasant as wine.
The like usage does Perry require.

These drinks are very wholesome, they cool, purge, and prevent hot Agues. But
I leave this skil^ to Physicians.

Fruit.
The benefit of your Fruit, Roots and Herbs, though it were but to ear and
sell, is much.

Waters.
Waters distilled of Roses, Woodbind, Angelica, are both profitable and wondrous
pleasant, and comfortable.

Conserve.
Saffron and Lico^as will yield you much Conserues and Preserues, are ornaments
to your Feasts, health in your sickness, and a good help to your friend, and
to your purse.

He that will not be moved with such unspeakable profits, is well worthy to
want, when others abound in plenty of good things.

CHAP. 17. Ornaments.
ME thinks hitherto we have but a bare Orchard for fruit, and but half good,
so long as it wants those comely Ornaments, that should give beauty to all our
labors, and make much for the honest delight of the owner and his friends.

D^li^ht the chief end o^ Orchards.
For it is not to be doubted: but as God has given man things profitable, so
has he allowed him honest comfort, delight, and recreation in all the works
of his hands. Nay, all his labors under the Sun without this are troubles,
and vexation of mind: For what is g^eedy gain, without delight, but moyling,
and turmoylidg in sl^u^ry? But comfortable delight, with content, is the good
of every thing, and the pattern of heaven. A morsel of bread with comfort, is
better by much then a fat Ox^ with unquietness. And who can deny, but the
principal end of an Orchard, is the honest delight of one wearied with the
works of his lawful calling? An Orchard delightsome.
The very works of, and in an Orchard and Garden, are better then the ease and
rest of and from other labors. When God had made man after his own Image, in
a perfect state, and would have him to represent himself in authority,
tranquillity, and pleasure upon the earth, he placed him in Paradise. What was
Paradise? An Orchard is Paradise.
but a Garden and Orchard of trees and herbs, full of pleasure? and nothing
there but delights. The gods of the earth, resembling the great God of heaven
in authority, Majesty, and abundance of all things, wherein is their most
delight? and whither do they withdraw themselves from the troublesome affairs
of their estate, Causes of wearisomnesse.
being tired with the hearing and judging of litigious Controversies? choked
(as it were) with the close airs of their sumptuous buildings, their stomachs
cloyed with variety of Banquets, their cares filled and ouerburthened with
tedious discoursings? Orchard is the remedy.
whither? but into their Or^hards? made and prepared, dressed and destinated
for that purpose, to renew and refresh their senses, and to call home their
ouer-wearied spirits. Nay, it is (no doubt) a comfort to them, to set open
their Cazements into a most delicate Garden and Orchard, whereby they may not
only see that, wherein they are so much delighted, but also to give fresh,
sweet, and pleasant air to their Galleries and Chambers.

And look, what these men do by reason of their greatness and ability, provoked
with delight, All delight in Orchard^.
the same doubtless would every of us do, if power were answerable to our
desires, whereby we show manifestly, that of all other delights on earth, they
that are taken by Orchards, are most excellent, and most agreeing with nature.

For whereas every other pleasure commonly filles some one of our senses, This
delights all the senses.
and that only, with delight, this makes all our senses swim in pleasure,
and that with infinite variety, joined with no less^ commodity.

Delights old age.
That famous Philosopher, and matchless Orator, M. T. C. prescribes nothing
more fit, to take away the tediousness and heavy load of three or four score
years, then the pleasure of an Orchard.

Causes of delight in an Orchard.
What can your eye desire to see, your ears to hear, your mouth to taste, or
your nose to smell, that is not to be had in an Orchard, with abundance and
variety? What more delightsome then an infinite variety of sweet smelling
flowers? decking with sundry colors, the green mantle of the Earth, the
universal Mother of us all, so by them bespotted, so dyed, that all the world
cannot sample them, and wherein it is more fit to admire the Dyer, then imitate
his workmanship. Coloring not only the earth, but decking the air, and
sweetning every breath and spirit.

Flowers.
The Rose red, damask, velvet, and double double province Rose, the sweet musk
Rose double and single, the double and single white Rose. The fair and sweet
senting Woodbinde, double and single, and double double. Purple Cowslips, and
double Cowsl^ps, and double double Cowslips. Primerose double and single. The
Violet nothing behind the best, for smelling sweetly. A thousand more will
provoke your content.

Borders and squares.
And all these, by the skill of your Gardner, so comely, and orderly placed in
your Borders and Squares, and ^o intermingled, that none looking thereon,
cannot but wonder, to see, what Nature corrected by Art can do.

When you behold in diverse corners of your Orchard Mounts of stone, Mounts.
or wood curiously wrought within and without, Whence you may shoot a Bucke.
or of earth covered with fruit trees: Kentish Cherry, Damsons, Plummes, etc.
with stairs of precious workmanship. And in some corner (or more) a true Dyall
or Clock, Dyall.
and some Anticke-workes, and especially siluer-sounding Music, Music.
mixed Instruments and voices, gracing all the rest: How will you be rapt with
delight?

Large Walks, Walks.
broad and long, close and open, like the Tempe groves in Thessalie, Seats.
raised with gravel and sand, having seats and banks of Cammomile, all this
delights the mind, and brings health to the body.

View now with delight the works of your own hands, your fruit trees of all
sorts, Order of trees.
laden with sweet blossoms, and fruit of all tastes, operations, and colors:
your trees standing in comely order which way soever you look.

Your borders on every side hanging and drooping with Feberries, Raspberries,
Barberries, Currens, and the roots of your trees powdered with Strawberries,
red, white, and green, what a pleasure is this? Your Gardner can frame your
lesser wood to the shape of men armed in the field, Shape of men and beasts.
ready to give battle: or swift running Greyhounds: or of well sented and true
running Hounds, to chase the Dear, or hunt the Hare. This kind of hunting
shall not waste your corn, nor much your coin.

Mazes well framed a man's height, Mazes.
may perhaps make your friend wander in gathering of berries, till he cannot
recover himself without your help.

To have occasion to exercise within your Orchard: it shall be a pleasure to
have a Bowling Alley, Bowle^ Alley.
or rather (which is more manly, and more healthful) a pair of Buts, Buts.
to stretch your arms.

Herbs.
Rosemary and sweet Eglantine are seemly ornaments about a Door or Window,
and so is Woodbinde.

Conduit.
Look Chapter 5, and you shall see the form of a Conduite. If there were two
or more, it were not amiss.

And in mine opinion, I could highly commend your Orchard, if either through
it, or hard by it there should run a pleasant River with silver streams:
River.
you might sit in your Mount, and angle a peckled Trout, or sleightie Eele, or
some other dainty Fish. Or moats, Moats.
whereon you might row with a Boat, and fish with Nets.

Bees.
Store of Bees in a dry and warm Bee-house, comely made of Fir-boords, to sing,
and sit, and feed upon your flowers and sprouts, make a pleasant noise and
sight. For cleanely and innocent Bees, of all other things, lone and become,
and thrive in an Orchard. If they thrive (as they must needs, if your Gardener
be skillful, and love them: for they love their friends, and hate none but
their enemies) they will, besides the pleasure, yield great profit, to p^y him
his wages Yea, the increase of twenty Stocks of Stools, with other fees^ will
keep your Orchard.

You need not doubt their stings, for they h^rt not whom they know, and they
know their keeper and acquaintance. If you like not to come amongst them, you
need not d^ubt them: for but near the^r store, and in their own defense, they
will not fight, and in that case only (and who can blame them?) they are
m^nly, and figh^ desperately. Some (as that Honorable Lady at Hacknes, whose
name does much^ grace mine Orchard) use to make seats for them in the stone
wall of their Orchard, or Garden, which is good, but wood is better.

A Vine ouer-shadowing a seat, Vine.
^^is very comely, though her Grapes with us ripe slowly.

One chief grace that adornes an Orchard, Birds.
I cannot let slip: A brood of Nightingales, N^^hting^le.
who with their several notes and tunes, with a strong delightsome voice, out
of a weak body, will bear you company night and day. She loves (and lives in)
hots of woods in her heart. She will help you to cleanse your trees of
Caterpillars, and all noisome worms and flies. Robin-red-brest.
The gentle Robin^red-brest will help her, and in winter in the coldest
storms will keep a part. Wren.
Neither will the silly Wren be behind in Summer, with her distinct whistle
(like a sweet Recorder) to cheer your spirits.

The Blackbird and Th^estle (for I take it the Thrush sings not, Blackbird.
Thrush.
but deuoures) sing loudly in a May morn^^^^ and delights the ear much (and
you need not (...) their company, if you have ripe Cherries or Berries, and
would ^s gladly as the rest do you pleasure:) But I had rather want their
company than my fruit.

What shall I say? A thousand of pleasant delights are attendant in an
Orchard: and sooner shall I be weary, then I can reckon the least part of that
pl^asure, which one that has and loves an Orchard, may find therein.

What is there of all these few that I have reckoned, which does not please the
eye, the ear, the smell, and taste? And by these senses as Organes, Pipes, and
windows, these delights are carried to refresh the gentle, generous, and noble
mind.

Your own labor.
To conclude, what joy may you have, that you living to such an age, shall see
the blessings of God on your labors while you live, and leave behind you to
heirs or successors (for God will make heirs) such a work, that many ages
after your death, shall record your love to their Country? And the rather,
when you consider ( Chap. 14.) to what length of time your work is like to
last.

FINIS.
THE COUNTRY HOVSE-VVIFES GARDEN. Containing Rules for Herbs and Seeds of
common use, with their times and seasons, when to set and sow them.

TOGETHER, With the Husbandry of Bees, published with secrets very necessary
for every House-wife. As also diverse new Knots for Gardens.

The Contents see at large in the last Page.

Genes. 2.29. I have given unto you every Herb, and every tree, that shall be
to you for meat.

LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for JOHN HARISON, at the golden Unicorn in
Paternoster Row. 1631.

THE COUNTRY HOVS WIFE'S GARDEN.
CHAP. 1. The Soil.
THe soil of an Orchard and Garden, differ only in these three points: First,
the Gardens soil would be somewhat dryer, Dry.
because herbs being more tender then trees, can neither abide moisture nor
drought, in such excessive measure, as trees; and therefore having a dryer
soil, the remedy is easy against drought, if need be: water soundly, which
may be done with small labor, the compass of a Garden being nothing so great,
as of an Orchard, and this is the cause (if they know it) that Gardners raise
their squares: but if moisture trouble you, I see no remedy without a general
danger, Hops.
except in Hops, which delight much in a low and sappy earth.

Secondly, the soil of a Garden would be plain and level, at least every
square (for we purpose the square to be the fittest form) the reason: Plain.
the earth of a garden wanting such helps, as should stay the water, which an
orchard has, and the roots of herbs being short, and not able to fetch
their liquor from the bottom, are more annoyed by drought, and the soil being
mellow and loose, is soon either washed away, or sends out his heart by too
much drenching and washing.

Thirdly, if a garden soil be not clear of weeds, and namely, of grass, the
herbs shall never thrive: for how should good herbs prosper, when evil
weeds wax so fast: considering good herbs are tender in respect of evil
weeds: these being strengthened by nature, and the other by art? Gardens have
small place in comparison, and therefore may be more easily be fallowed, at the
least one half year before, and the better dressed after it is framed. And
you shall find that clean keeping does not only avoid danger of gathering
weeds, but also is a special ornament, and leaves more plentiful sap for
your tender herbs.

CHAP. 2. Of the Sites.
I Cannot see in any sort, how the site of the one should not be good, and fit
for the other: The ends of both being one, good, wholesome, and much fruit
joined with delight, unless trees be more able to abide the nipping frostes
than tender herbs: but I am sure, the flowers of trees are as soo^ perished
with cold, as any herb except Pumpions, and Melons.

CHAP. 3. Of the Form.
LEt that which is said in the Orchards form, suffice for a garden in
general: but for special forms in squares, they are as many, as there are
diuices in Gardners brains. Neither is the wit and art of a skillful Gardner
in this point not to be commended, that can work more variety for breeding of
more delightsome choice, and of all those things, where the owner is able and
desirous to be satisfied. The number of forms, Mazes and Knots is so great,
and men are so diversely delighted, that I leave every House-wife to her self,
especially seeing to set down many, had been but to fill much paper; yet lest
I deprive her of all delight and direction, let her view these few, choice, new
forms, and note this generally, that all plots are square, and all are
bordered about with Priuit, Raisins, Fea-berries, Roses, Thorn, Rosemary,
Bee-flowers, Isop, Sage, or such like.

The ground plot for Knots.
Cinkfoyle.
Flower-^e^uce.
The Trefoyle.
The ^ret.
Lozenge^^.
Crosse-bow.
Diamond.
Ouall.
Maze.


CHAP. 4. Of the Quantity.
A Garden requires not so large a scope of ground as an Orchard, both in
regard of the much weeding, dressing and removing, and also the pains in a
Garden is not so well repaied home, as in an Orchard. It is to be granted,
that the Kitchen garden does yield rich gains by berries, roots, cabbages,
etc. yet these are no way comparable to the fruits of a rich Orchard: but
notwithstanding I am of opinion, that it were better for England, that we had
more Orchards and Gardens, and more large. And therefore we leave the quantity
to every man's ability and will.

CHAP. 5. Of Fence.
SEeing we allow Gardens in Orchard plots, and the benefit of a Garden is much,
they both require a strong and shrowding fence. Therefore leaving this, let us
come to the herbs themselves, which must be the fruit of all these labors.

CHAP. 6. Of two Gardens.
Herbs are of two sorts, and therefore it is meet (they requiring diverse
manners of Husbandry) that we have two Gardens: A garden for flowers, and a
Kitchen garden: or a Summer garden: not that we mean so perfect a distinction,
that the Garden for flowers should or can be without herbs good for the
Kitchen, or the Kitchen garden should want flowers, nor on the contrary: but
for the most part they would be severed: first, because your Garden flowers
shall suffer some disgrace, if among them you intermingle O^ions, Parsnips,
etc. Secondly, your Garden that is durable, must be of one form: but that,
which is for your Kitchens use, must yield daily roots, or other herbs, and
suffer deformity. Thirdly, the herbs of both will not be both alike ready, at
one time, either for gathering, or removing. First therefore

Of the Summer Garden.
THese herbs and flowers are comely and durable for squ^^es and knots, and all
to be set at Michaeltide, or somewhat before, that they may be settled in, and
taken with the ground^ before winter, though they may be set, especially sown
in the spring.

Roses of all sorts (spoken of in the Orchard) must be ^ bent. Some vie to ^et
sl^ps and twine them, which sometimes, but seldom thrive all.

Rosemary, Lauender, Be flowers, Isop, Sage, Time, Cowslips, Pyony, D^^ies,
Cloue Gilnflowers, Pinkes, Sothernwood, L^^lies, of all which hereafter.

Of the Kitchen Garden.
THough your Garden for flowers does in a sort peculiarly challenge to it se^fe
a profit, and exquisite form to the eyes, yet you may not altogether neglect
this, where your herbs for the pot do grow. And therefore, some here make
comely borders with the herbs aforesaid. The rather because abundance of
Roses and Lauender yield much profit, and comfort to the senses: Rose Water and
Lauender, the one cordial (as also the Violets, Burrage, and Buglas) the other
reviving the spirits by the sense of smelling: both most ^urable for smell,
both in flowers and water: you need not here ^aise your beds, as in the other
garden, because Summer toward, will not let too much wet annoy you.

And these herbs require more moisture: yet must you have your beds divided,
that you may go betwixt to weed, and somewhat form would be expected: To
which it avails, that you place your herbs of biggest growth, by walls, or
in borders, as Fenell, etc. and the lowest in the midst, as Saffron,
Strawberries, Onions, etc.

CHAP. 7. Division of herbs.
GArden herbs are innumerable, yet these are common and sufficient for our
country House-wifes.

Herbs of greatest growth.
Fenell, Anglica, Tansie, Hollihock, Louage, Elly Campane, French mallows,
Lillies, French poppy, Endive, Succory and Clary.

Herbs of middle growth.
Burrage, Buglas, Pa^sley, sweet Sicilly, Floure-deluce, Stock Gil^flowers,
Wall-flowers, Anniseedes, Coriander, Feather fuel, Marigolds, Oculus Christi,
Langdibeefe, Alexanders, Carduus Benedictus.

Herbs of smallest growth.
Pansy, or Har^s-ease, Coast Margeram, Sauery, Strawberries, Saffron, Lycoras,
Daff^downdillies, Leekes, Chiues, Chibals, Skerots, Onions, Batchellors
buttons, D^sies, Peniroyall.

Hitherto I have only reckoned up, and put in this rank, some herbs. Their
Husbandry follow each in an Alphabeticall order, the better to be found.

CHAP. 8. Husbandry of Herbs.
ALexanders are to be renewed as Angelica. It is a timely Pot-hearbe.

Anglica is renewed with his seed, whereof he bears plenty the second year,
and so dies. You may remove the roots the first year. The leaves distilled,
yield water sovereign to expel pain from the stomach. The root dried taken
in the fall, stops the poares against infections.

Annyseedes make their growth, and bears seeds the first year, and dies as
Coriander: it is good for opening the pipes, and it is used in Comfits.

Art^choakes are renewed by dividing the roots into sets, in March, every
third or fourth year. They require a several usage, and therefore a several
whole plot by themselves, especially considering they are plentiful of fruit
much desired.

Burrage and Buglas, two Cordials, renew themselves by seed yearly, which is
hard to be gathered: they are exceeding good Pot-hearbes, good for Bees, and
most comfortable for the heart and stomach, as Quinces and Wardens.

Camomile, set roots in banks and walks. It is sweet smelling, qualifying
head-^ch.

Cabbages require great room, they seed the second year: sow them in
February, remove them when the plants are an handful long, set deep and wet.
Look well in drought for the white Caterpillars worm, the spaunes under the
leaf closely: for every living Creature does seek food and quiet shelter,
and growing quick, they draw to, and eat the heart: you may find them in a
rainy deawy morning.

It is a good Pothearbe, and of this herb called Cole, our Country
House-wiues give their pottage their name, and call them Caell.

Carduus Benedictus, or blessed thistle, seeds and dies the first year, the
excellent virtue thereof I refer to Herbals, for we are Gardiners, not
Physicians.

Carrets are sown late in April or May, as Turnips, else they seed the first
year, and then their roots are naught: the second year they dye, their roots
grow great, and require large room.

Chibals or Chiues have their roots parted, as Garlic, Lillies, etc. and so
are they set every third or fourth year: a good pot-hearb opening, but evil
for the eyes.

Clarie is sown, it seeds the second year, and dies. It is somewhat harsh in
taste, a little in pottage is good, it strengthens the reins.

Coast, Roo^es parted make sets in March: it bears the second year: it is
used in A e in May.

Cor^ander is for usage and uses, much like Anniseeds.

Daffadownd^llies have their roots parted, and set once in three or four
year, or ^onger time. The^ flower timely, and after Midsammer, are scarcely
se^ne. They are mo^e for ornament, then for use, so are Dasies.

Da^sie-rootes parted and set, as Flowre-deluce and Camomile, when you see them
grow too th^cke or decay. They be good to keep up, and strengthen the edges of
your borders, as Pinkes, they be red, white, mixed.

Ellycampane root is long lasting, as is the Lou^ge, it se^ds yearly, you may
divide the root, and set the root, taken in Winter it is good (being dried,
powdered and dru^ke to kill i^ches.

Endive and Suc^ory are much like in nature, shape, and use, they renu^
themselves by seed, a^ Fennel, and other herbs. You may remove them before
they put forth shankes, a good Pot-hearbe.

Fennel is renewed, either by the seeds (which it bears the second year, and
so yearly in great abundance) sown in the fall or Spring, or by dividing one
root into many Sets, as A^tichoke, it is long of growth and life. You may
remove the root vnshankt. It is exceeding good for the eyes, distilled, or any
otherwise taken: it is used in dressing Hiues for swarms, a very good
Pot-hearbe, or for Sallets.

Fetherfewle shakes seed. Good against a shaking Fever, taken in a posset
drink fasting.

Flower-deluce, long lasting. Divide his roots, and set: the roots dried have a
sweet smell.

Garlic may be set an handful distance, two inches deep, in the edge of
your beds. Part the heads into several cloves, and every cloue set in the
latter end of February, will increase to a great head before September: good
for opening, evil for eyes: when the blade is long, fast two and two together,
the heads will be bigger.

Hollyhocke rises high, seedeth and dies: the chief use I know is ornament.

Isop is reasonable long lasting: young roots are good set, slips better. A
good pot-hearbe.

Iuly-flowers, commonly called Gilly-flowers, or Cloue-Iuly-flowers (I call
them so, because they flower in July) they have the name of Cloves, of their
sent. I may well call them the King of flowers (except the Rose) and the best
sort of them are called Queene-Iuly flowers. I have of them ^ine or ten
several colors, and diverse of them as big as Roses: of all flowers (save the
Damask Rose) they are the most pleasant to sight and smell: they last not past
three or four years unremoved. Take the sl^ps (without shanks) and set any
time, save in extreme frost, but especially at Michael tide. Their use is much
in ornament, and conforting the spirits, by the sense of smelling.

July flowers of the wall, or wall- Iuly-flowers^ wall-flowers, o^ Bee-flowers,
or Winter- Iuly-flowers, because growing in the walls, even in Winter, and
good for Bees, will grow even in stone walls, they will seem dead in Summer,
and yet revive in Winter. They yield seed plentifully, which you may sow at any
time, or in any broken earth, especially on the top of a mud-wall, but moist,
you may set the root before it be brancht, every slip that is not flowr'd will
take root, or crop him in Summer, and he will flower in Winter: but his
Winter-seed is untimely. This and Palms are exceeding good, and timely for
Bees.

Leekes yield seed the second year, unremoved and die, unless you remove
them, usual to eat with salt and bread, as Onyons always green, good
pot-hearb, evil for the eyes.

Lauendar Spike would be removed within 7 years, or eight at the most. Slips
twined as Isop and Sage, would take best at Michael-tide. This flower is good
for Bees, most comfortable for smelling, except Roses: and kept dry, is as
strong after a year, and when it is gathered. The water of this is comfortable.

White Lauendar would be removed sooner.

Lettice yields seed the first year, and dies: sow betime, and if you would
have them Cabbage for Sallets, remove them as you do Cabbage. They are usual
in Sallets, and the pot.

Lillies white and red, removed once in three or four years their roots yield
many Sets, like the Garlic, Michael-tide is the best: they grow high, after
they get root: these roots are good to break a Byle, as are Mallows and
Sorrel.

Mallows, French or gagged, the first or second year, seed plentifully: sow
in March, or before, they are good for the house-wifes pot, or to break a
bunch.

Marigolds most commonly come of seed, you may remove the Plants, when they be
two inches long. The double Marigold, being as big as a little Rose, is good
for show. They are a good Pot-hearbe.

Oculus Christi, or Christ's eye, seeds and dies the first or second year: you
may remove the young Plants, but seed is better: one of these seeds put into the
eye, within three or four hours will gather a thick skin, clear the eye,
and bolt it self forth without hurt to the eye. A good Pot-hea^be.

Onyons are sown in February, they are gathered at Michael-tide, and all the
Summer long, for Sallets; as also young Parsley, Sage, Chibals, Lettice, sweet
Sicilly, Fennel, etc. good alone, or with meat as Mutton, etc. for sauce,
especially for the pot.

Parsley sow the first year, and use the next year: it seeds plentifully, an
herb of much use, as sweet Sicily is. The seed and roots are good against the
Stone.

Parsneps require and whole plot, they be plentiful and common: sow them in
February, the Kings (that is in the middle) seed broadest and reddest. Parsneps
are sustenance for a strong stomach, not good for evil eyes: When they cover
the earth in a drought, to tread the tops, make the roots bigger.

Peny-royall, or Pudding Grass, creepes along the ground, like ground Iuie. It
lasts long, like Daisies, because it puts and spreads daily new roots. Divide,
and remove the roots, it has a pleasant taste and smell, good for the pot, or
hackt meat, or Haggas Pudding.

Pumpions: Set seeds with your finger, a finger deep, l^te in March, and so
soon as they appear, every night if you doubt frost, cover them, and water
them continually out of a water-pot: they be very tender, their fruit is great
and waterish.

French Poppy bears a fair flower, and the Seed will make you sleep.

Raddish is sauce for cloyed stomachs, as Cap^rs, Olives, and Cucumbers, cast
the seeds all Summer long here and there, and you shall have them always young
and fresh.

Rosemary, the grace of herbs here in England, in other Countries common. To
set sl^ps immediately after Lammas, is the surest way. Seed sown may prove
well, so they be ^owne in hot weather, somewhat moist, and good earth: for the
herb, though great, is nesh and tender (as I take it) brought from hot
Countries to us in the cold North: set thin. It becomes a Window well. The
use is much in meats, more in Physic, most for Bees.

Rue, or Herb of Grace, continually green, the sl^ps are set. It lasts long
as Rosemary, Sothernwood, etc. too strong for mine Housewifes pot, unless she
will brue Ale therewith, against the Plague: let him not seed, if you will
have him last.

Saffron every third year his roots would be removed at M^dsummer: for when
all other herbs grow most, it dies. It flows at Michael-tide, and grows
all Winter: keep his flowers from birds in the morning, and gather the yellow
(or they shape much like Lillies) dry, and after dry them: they be precious,
expelling diseases from the heart and stomach.

Sauery seeds and dies the first year, good for my Housewifes pot and pie.

Sage: set slips in May, and they grow aye: Let it not seed it will last the
longer. The use is much and common. The Monkish Proverb is tritum: Cur moritur
homo, cum saluia crescit in horto?

Skerots, the roots are set when they be parted, as Pyonie, and Flower-deluce
at Michael-tide: the root is but small and very sweet. I know none other
special use but the Table.

Sweet Sicily, long lasting, pleasantly tasting, either the seed sown, or the
root parted, and removed, makes increase, it is of like use with Parsley.

Strawberries long lasting, set roots at Michael-tide or the Spring, they be
red, white and green, and ripe, when they be great and soft, some by Midsummer
with us. The use is: they will cool my Housewife well, if they be put in Wine
or Cream with Sugar.

Time, both seeds, slips and roots are good. If it seed not, it will last
three or four years or more, it smells comfortably. It has much use:
namely, in all cold meats, it is good for Bees.

Turnep is sown. In the second year they bear plenty of seed: they require
the same time of sowing that Carrets do: they are sick of the same disease
that Cabbages be. The root increases much, it is most wholesome, if it be
sown in a good and well tempered earth: Sovereign for eyes and Bees.

I reckon these herbs only, because I teach my Country Hou^ewife, not
skillful Artists, and it should be an endless labor, and would make the
matter tedious to reckon up, Land^ beef, Stocke-Iuly-flowers, Char^all,
Valerian, Go-to bed at no^ne, Piony, Liconas, Tansie, Garden mints, Germander,
Centaurie, and a thousand such physic Herbs. Let her first grow cunning in
this, and then she may enlarge her Garden as her skill and ability increases.
And to help her the more, I have set her down these observations.

CHAP. 9. General Rules in Gardening.
IN the South parts Gardening may be more timely, and more safely done, then
with us in Yorkshire, because our air is not so favorable, nor our ground so
good.

2 Secondly most seeds shakt, by turning the good earth, are renewed, their
mother the earth keeping them in her bowels, till the Sun their Father can
reach them with his heat.

3 In setting herbs, leave no top more then an hand^ull above the ground, nor
more then a foot under the earth.

4 Twine the roots of those slips you set, if they will abide it. Gilly-flowers
are too tender.

5 Set moist, and sow dry.

6 Set slips without shankes any time, except at Midsummer, and in frosts.

7 Seeding spoils the most roots, as drawing the heart and sap from the root.

8 Gather for the pot and medicines, herbs tender and green, the sap being in
the top, but in Winter the root is best.

9 All the herbs in the Garden for flowers, would once in seven years be
renewed, or soundly watered with puddle water, except Rosemary.

10 In all your Gardens and Orchards, banks and seats of Camomile,
Peny-royall, Daisies and Violets, are seemly and comfortable.

11 These require whose plots: Artichokes, Cabbages, Turnips, Parsneps, Onyons,
Car^e^s, and (if you will) Saffron and Scerrits.

12 Gather all your seeds, dead, ripe^ and dry.

13 Lay no dung to the roots of your herbs, as usually they do: for dung not
melted is too hot, even for trees.

14 Thin setting and sewing (so the roots stand not past a foot distance) is
profitable, for the herbs will like the better. Greater herbs would have more
distance.

15 Set and sow herbs in their time of growth (except at Midsummer, for then
they are too too tender) but trees in their time of rest.

16 A good Housewife may, and will gather store of herbs for the pot, about
Lammas, and dry them, and pow^d them, and in Winter they will make good service.

Thus have I lined out a^ Garden to our Country Housewiues, and given them
rules for common herbs. If any of them (as sometimes they are) be knotty, I
refer them to Chap. 3. The skill and pain^s of weeding the Garden with
weeding knives of fingers, I refer to themselves, and their maids, willing
them to take the opportunity after a shower of rain: withal I advise the
Mistress, either be present her self, or to teach her maids to know herbs
from weeds.

CHAP. 10. The Husbandry of Bees.
THere remains one necessary thing to be prescribed, which in mine opinion
makes as much for ornament as either Flowers, or form, or cleanliness, and I
am sure as commodious as any of, or all the rest: which is Bees, well ordered.
And I will not account her any of my good House-wiues, that wants either Bees
or skilfulnesse about them. And though I know some have written well and
truly, and others more plentifully upon this theme: yet somewhat have I
learned by experience (being a Bee-maister my self) which hitherto I cannot
find put into writing, for which I think our House-wiues will count
themselves beholding unto me.

Bee-house.
The first thing that a Gardener about Bees must be careful for, is an house
not stakes and stones abroad, Sub^dio: for stakes rot and reele, rain and
weather eat your hiues, and couers, and cold most of all is hurtful for your
Bees. Therefore you must have an house made along, a sure dry wall in your
Garden, near, or in your Orchard: for Bees loueflowers and wood with their
hearts.

This is the form, a Frame standing on posts with a Floor (if you would have
it hold more Hiues, two Floores boorded) laid on bearers, and back posts,
covered over with boords, slate-wise.

Let the floores be without holes or clifts, least in casting time, the Beees
lie out, and loyter.

And though your Hiues stand within an hand breadth the one of another: yet
will Bees know their home.

In this Frame may your Bees stand dry and warm, especially if you make
doors like doors of windows to shroud them in winter, as in an house:
provided you leave the hiues mouths open. I my self have devised such an house,
and I find that it keeps and strengthens my Bees much, and my hiues will last
six to one.

M. Markham commends Hiues of wood I discommend them not: Hiues.
but straw Hiues are in use with us, and I think with all the world, which I
commend for nimblenesse, closeness, warmness and dryness. Bees love no
external motions of dawbing or such like. Sometimes occasion shall be offered
to lift and turn Hiues, as shall appear hereafter. One light entire hiue of
straw in that case is better, then one that is dawbed, weighty and cumbersome.
I wish every hiue, for a keeping swarm, to hold three pecks at least in
measure. For too little Hiues procure Bees, in casting time, either to lie out,
and loyter, or else to cast before they be ripe and strong, and so make weak
swarms and untimely: Whereas if they have room sufficient, they ripen timely,
and casting seasonably, are strong, and fit for labor presently. Neither would
the hiue be too too great, for then they loyter, and waste meat and time.

Your Bees delight in wood, for feeding, especially for casting: Hiuing of Bees.
therefore want not an Orchard. A Mayes swarm is worth a Maies Foale: if they
want wood, they be in danger of flying away. Any time before Midsummer is good,
for casting and timely before July is not evil. I much like M Markhams opinion
for hiuing a swarm in combs of a dead or forsaken hiue, so they be fresh and
cleanly. To think that a swarm of your own, or others, will of it self come
into such an hiue, is a mere conceit Experto creed Roberto. His smearing with
honey, is to no purpose, for the other Bees will eat it up. If your swarm
knit in the top of a tree, as they will, if the wind beat them not to fall
down: let the stool or ladder described in the Orchard, do you service.

The less your Spelkes are, Spelkes.
the less is the waste of your honey, and the more easily will they draw, when
you take your Bees. Four Spelkes athwart, and one top Spelke are sufficient.
The Bees will fasten their combs to the Hiue. A little honey is good: but if
you want, Fennel will serve to rub your Hiue withal. The Hiue being dressed and
ready spelkt, rubd and the hole made for their passage (I use no hole in the
Hiue, but a piece of wood hoal'd to save the hiue and keep out Mice) shake in
your Bees, or the most of them (for all commonly you cannot get) the remainder
will follow. Many use smoke, Nettles, etc. which I utterly dislike: for Bees
love not to be molested. Ringing in the time of casting is a mere fancy,
v^olent handling of them is simply evil, because Bees of all other creatures,
love cleanliness and peace. Therefore handle them leasurely and quietly, and
their K^eper whom they know, may do with them, what he will, without hurt:
Being hiued at night, bring them to their seat. Set your hiues all of one year
together.

Signs of breeding, if they be strong.

1 They will avoid dead young Bees and Droanes. 2 They will sweat in the
morning, till it run from them; always when they be strong.
Signs of casting.
1 They will fly Droanes, by reason of heat. 2 The young swarm will once or
twice in some fair season, come forth mustering, as though they would cast, to
prove themselves, and go in again. 3 The night before they cast, if you lay
your eat to the Hiues mouth, yo shall hear two or three, but especially one
above the rest, cry, Up, up, up; or, Tout, tout, tout, like a trumpet, sounding
the alarm to the battle.
Much descanting there is, of, and about the Master-Bee, and their degrees,
order and government: but the truth in this point is rather imagined, then
demonstrated There are some conjectures of it, viz. we see in the combs diverse
greater houses then the rest, and we hear commonly the night before they cast,
sometimes one Be, sometimes two, or more Bees, give a loud and several found
from the rest, and sometimes Bees of greater bodies then the common sort: but
what of all this? I lean not on conjectures, but love to set down that I know
to be true, and leave these things to them that love to divine. Keep none
weak, for it is hazard, oftentimes with loss: Feeding will not help them:
for being weak, hey cannot come down to meat, or if they come down, they
dye, because Bees weak cannot abide cold. If none of these, yet will the other
Bees being strong, smell the honey, and come and spoil, and kill them. Some
help is in casting time, to put two weak swarms together, or as M. Markham
well says: Let not them cast late, by raising them with wood or stone: but
with impes (say I.) An impe is three or four wreathes, wrought as the hiue,
the same compass, to raze the hiue withal: but by experience in trial,
Catching.
I have found out a better way by Clustering, for late or weak swarms
hitherto not found out of any that I know. Clustering.
That is this: After casting time, if I have any stock proud, and hindered from
timely casting, with former Winters poverty, or evil weather in casting time,
with two handles and crook^s, fitted for the purpose, I turn up that stock so
pestred with Bees, and set it on the crown, upon which so turned with the
mouth upward, I place another empty hiue well dr^st, and spelkt, into which
without any labor, the Swarm that would not depart, and cast, will presently
ascend, because the old Bees have this quality (as all other breeding
creatures have) to expel the young, when they have brought them up.

There will the swarm build as kindly, as if they had of themselves been
cast. But be sure you lay betwixt the Hiues some straight and cleanly stick
or sticks, or rather a board with holes, to keep them asunder: otherwise they
will join their works together so fast, that they cannot be parted. If you so
keep them asunder at Michael-tide, if you like the weight of your swarm (for
the goodness of swarms is tried by weight) ^o catched, you may set it by for
a stock to keep. Take heed in any case the combs be not broken, for then the
other Bees will smell the honey, and spoil them. This have I tried to be very
profitable for the saving of Bees. The Instrument has this form. The great
straight piece is wood, the rest are iron claspes and nails, the claspes are
loose in the Stapes: Two men with two of these fastened to the Hiue, will
easily turn it up.

They gather not till July; for then they be discharged of their young, or else
they are become now strong to labor, and now sap in flowers is strong and
proud: by reason of time, and force of Sun. And now also in the North (and
not before) the herbs of greatest vigor put their Flowers; As Beans,
Fennel, Burrage, Rape^ etc.

The most sensible weather for them, is heat and drought, because the nesh Be
can neither abide cold or wet: and showers (which they well foresee) do
interrupt their labors, unless they fall on the night, and so they further
them.

Droanes.
After casting time, you shall benefit your stocks much, if you help them to
kill their Droanes, which by all probability and judgment, are an idle kind of
Bees, and wastefull. Some say they breed and have seen young Droanes in taking
their honey, which I know is true. But I am of opinion, that there are also
Bees which have lost their stings, and so being, as it were gelded, become idle
and great. There is great use of them: Deus, et natura nihil fecit frustra.
They hate the Bees, and cause them cast the sooner. They never come foor^h but
when they be over heated. They never come home laden. After casting time, and
when the Bees want meat, you shall see the laboring Bees fasten on them, two,
three, or four at once, as if they were thieves to be led to the gallows, and
killing them, they cast out, and draw them far from home, as hateful
enemies. Our Housewife, if she be the Keeper of her own^ Bees (as she had need
to be) may with her bare hand in the heat of the day, safel^ destroy them in
the hiues mouth. Some use toward night, in a hot day, to set before the mouth
of the hiue a thin board, with little holes, in at which the lesser Bees may
enter, but not the Droanes, so that you may kill them at your pleasure.

Snayles spoil them by night like thieves: they come so quietly, Annoyances.
and are so fast, that the Bees fear them not. Look early and late,
especially in a rain or dewey evening or morning.

Mice are no less hurtful, and the rather to hiues of straw: and therefore
couerings of straw draw them. They will in either at the mouth, or sheere
themselves an hole. The remedy is good Cats, Rats-bane and watching.

The cleanly Be hates the smoke as poison, therefore let your Bees stand
nearer your garden then your Brew House or Kitchen.

They say Sparrowes and Swallows are enemies to Bees, but I see it not.

More hiues perish by Winters cold, then by all other hurts: for the Be is
tender^ and nice, and only lives in warm weather, and dies in cold: And
therefore let my Housewife be persuaded, that a warm dry house before
described, is the chiefest help she can make her Bees against this, and many
more mischiefs. Many use against cold in Winter, to stop up their hiue close,
and some set them in houses, persuading themselves, that thereby they relieve
their Bees. First, tossing and moving is hurtful. Secondly, in houses, going,
knocking, and shaking is noisome. Thirdly, too much heat in an house is
unnatural for them: but lastly, and especially, Bees cannot abide to be stopped
close up. For at every warm season of the Sun they revive, and living eat,
and eating must needs purge abroad, (in her house) the cleanly Be will not
purge her self. Judge you what it is for any living creature, not to disburden
nature. Being shut up in calm seasons, lay your ear to the Hiue, and you
shall hear them yarme and yell, as so many hungered prisoners. Therefore
impound not your Bees, so profitable and free a creature.

Taking of Bees.
Let none stand above three years, else the combs will be black and knotty,
your honey will be thin and uncleanly: and if any cast after three years, it
is such as have swarms, and old Bees kept all together, which is great loss.
Smoking with rags, rozen, or brimstone, many use: some use drowning in a tub
of clean water, and the water well brewde, will be good botchet. Draw out
your spelkes immediately with a pair of pinchars, lest the wood grow soft and
swell, and so will not be drawn, then must you cut your Hiue.

Straining Honey.
Let no fire come near your honey, for fire softeneth the wax and dross, and
makes them run with the honey. Fire softneth, weakeneth, and hinders honey
for purging. Break your combs small (when the dead empty combs are parted
from the laden combs into a sieve, borne over a great bowl, or vessel^, with
two staves, and so let it run two or three days. The sooner you tun it up,
the better will it purge. Run your swarm honey by it self, and that shall
be your best. The elder your hiues are, the worse is your honey.

Vessels.
Usual vessels are of clay, but after wood be satiated with honey (for it will
leake at first: for honey is maruellously searching, the thick, and therefore
virtuous.) I use it rather because it will not break so soon, with falls,
frosts, or otherwise, and greater vessels of clay will hardly last.

When you use your honey, with a spoone take off the skin which it has put up.

And it is worth the regard, that bees thus used, if you have but forty
stocks, shall yield you more commodity clearly than forty acres of ground.
And thus much may suffice, to make good Housewiues love and have good Gardens
and Bees.

Deo Laus.
FINIS.
The Contents of the Country House-wifes Garden.
Chap. 1. The Soil. Page 77 Chap. 2. Site. p. 78 Chap. 3. Form. p. 79 Chap.
4. Quantity. p. 85 Chap. 5. Fences. p. ibid. Chap. 6 Two Gardens. 86 Chap. 7.
Division of herbs. p. 88 Chap. 8. The Husbandry of herbs. p. ibid. Chap. 9.
General rules. p. 96 Chap. 10. The Husbandry of Bees. p. 98 Bee-house. p. 98.
Hiues. p. 100. Hiuing of Bees. p. ibid. Spelkes. p. 101. Catching. p. 102.
Clustering. p. 103. Droanes. p. 104. Annoyances. p. 105. Taking of Bees. p.
106. Straining honey. p. ibid. Vessels. p. ibid.
A MOST PROFITABLE NEW TREATISE, From approved experience of the art of
propagating Plants; by Simon Harward.
CHAP. 1. The Art of propagating Plants.
THere are four sorts of Planting,

There are likewise seasons to propagate in; but the best is in the Spring, and
March, when the trees are in the Flower, and do begin to grow lusty. The young
planted Siens or litt^e Grafts must be propagated in the beginning of Winter, a
foot deep in the earth, and good manure mingled amongst the earth, which you
shall cast forth of the pit, wherein you mean to propagate it, to tumble it in
upon it again. In like manner your superfluous Siens, or little Plants must be
cut close by the earth, when as they grow about some small Impe, which we mean
to propagate, for they would do nothing but rot. For to propagate, you must
dig the earth round about the tree, that so your roots may be laid in a
manner half bate. Afterward draw into length the pit on that side where you
mean to propagate, and according as you perceive that the roots will

CHAP. 2. Grafting in the Bark.
GRafting in the Bark, is used from mid- August, to the beginning of Winter,
and also when the Western wind begins to blow, being from the 7. of
February, unto 11. of June. But there must care be had, not to graffe in the
bark in any rainy season, because it would wash away the matter of joining the
one and the other together, and so hinder it.

Grafting in the budde, is used in the Summer time, from the end of May, until
August, as bring the time when the trees are strong and lusty, and full of sap
and leaves. To wit, in a hot Country, from the midst of June, unto the midst
of July: but cold Countries, to August, after some small showies of Rain.

If the Summer be so exceeding dry, as that some trees do withhold their sap,
you must wait the time till it do return.

Graft from the full of the Moon, until the end of the old.

You may graft in a Cleft, without having regard to the Rain, for the sap will
keep it off.

You may graft from mid- August, to the beginning of November: Cowes dung with
straw does mightily preserve the graft.

It is better to graft in the evening, then the morning.

The furniture and tools of a Grafter, are a Basket to lay his Grafts in,
Clay, Gravel, Sand, or strong Earth, to draw over the plants cloven: Most,
Woollen clothes, barks of Wilow to join to the late things and earth before
spoken, and to keep them fast: Oziers to tie again upon the bark, to keep
them firm and fast: gummed Wax, to dress and cover the ends and tops of the
grafts newly cut, that so the rain and cold may not hurt them, neither yet the
sap rising from below, be constrained to return again unto the shootes. A
little Saw or hand Saw, to saw off the stock of the plants, a little Knife
or Penknife to graffe, and to cut and sharpen the grafts, that so the bark may
not pill nor be broken; which often comes to pass when the graft is full of
sap. You shall cut the graffe so long, as that it may fill the cliffe of the
plant, and therewithal it must be left thicker on the bark side, that so it
may fill up both the cliffe and other incisions, as any need is to be made,
which must be always well ground, well burnished without all r^^t. Two wedges,
the one broad for thick trees, the other narrow for less and tender trees,
both of them of box, or some other hard and smooth wood, or steel, or of very
hard iron, that so they may need less labor in making them sharp.

A little hand-Bill to set the plants at more liberty, by cutting off
superfluous boughs, helu'd of Iuory, Box, or Brazell.

CHAP. 3. Grafting in the cleft.
THe manner of grafting in a cleft, to wit, the stock being clou'd, is proper
not only to trees, which are as great as a man's legs or arms, but also to
greater. It is true that in as much as the trees cannot easily be cloven in
their stock, that therefore it is expedient to make incision in some one of
their branches, and not in the maine body, as we see to be practiced in great
Apple trees, and great Peare-trees, and as we have already declared heretofore.

To graft in the cleft, you must make choice of a graft that is full of sap and
i^yce, but it must not be, but till from after January until March: And you
must not thus graft in any tree that is already budded, because a great part of
the juice and sap would be already mounted up on high, and risen to the top,
and there dispersed and scattered hither and thither, into every sprigge and
twigge, and use nothing welcome to the graft.

You must likewise be resolved not to gather your graft the day you graft in,
but ten or twelve days before: for otherwise, if you graft it new gathered, it
will not be able easily to incorporate it self with the body and stock, where
it shall be grafted; because that some part of it will dry, and by this means
will be a hinderance in the stock to the rising up of the sap, which it should
communerate unto the graft, for the making of it to put forth. and whereas this
dried part will fall a crumbling, and breaking through his rottenness, it will
cause to remain a concauity, or hollow place in the stock, which will be an
occasion of a like inconvenience to befall the graft. Moreover, the graft being
new and tender, might easily be hurt of the bands, which are of necessity to be
tied about the Stock, to keep the graft firm and fast. And you must further
see, that your Plant was not of late removed, but that it have already fully
taken root.

When you are minded to graft many grafts into one cleft, you must see that
they be cut in the end all alike.



that there may not be the least appearance of any cut or cleft. For if they
do not thus ^^mpe one with another, they will never take one with another,
because they cannot work their seeming matter, and as it were cartilaguous
glue in convenient sort or manner, to the gluing of their joints together. You
must likewise beware, not to make your cleft overthwart the pitch, but somewhat
aside.

The bark of your Plant being thicker then that of your Graft, you must set
the graft so much the more outwardly in the cleft, that so the two saps may in
any case be joined, and set right the one with the other but the rind of the
Plant must be somewhat more out, then that of the grafts on the cloven side.

To the end that you may not fail of this work straight, there is not any
danger nor hardness in sloping

If the Stock of the Plant whereupon you intend to graft, be not so thick as
your graft, you shall graft it

CHAP. 4. Grasting like a Scutcheon.
IN grafting after the manner of a Scutcheon, you shall not vary nor differ
much from that of the Flute or Pipe, save only that the Scutcheon-like graft,
having one eyelet, as the other has yet the wood of the tree whereupon the
Scutcheon-like graft is grafted, has not any knob, or budde, as the wood
whereupon the graft is grafted, after the manner of a pipe.

In Summer when the trees are well replenished

In which there is only one eylet higher then the midst together, with the
residue of the tail which

Thus your Scutcheon being well raised and taken

This done take your Scutcheon by the end, and your tail which you have left
remaining, and put into to bind them together, begin at the back^ side of the
Tree, right over against the midst of the incision, and from thence come
forward to join them before, above the eylet and tail of the Scutcheon,
crossing your band of Hemp, so often as the two ends meet, and from thence
returning back again, come about and tie it likewise underneath the eylets:
and thus cast about your band still backward and forward, until the whole
cleft of the incision be covered above and below with the said Hemp, the eylet
only excepted, and his tail which must not be covered at all; March, and
April.

If you perceive that your budde of your Scutcheon do swell and come forward:
then cut off the tree three fingers or thereabouts, above the Scutcheon: in
byas-wise the three fingers in the top of the tree, which you left there, when
you cut it in the year going before, as has been said.

shall not go about to make the cleft of any more sides then one, being about
a foot high from the ground; you must open it with your small wedge: and being
thus grafted, it will seem to you that it is open but of one side; afterward
you shall wrap it up with a little Moss, putting thereto some gummed Wax, or
clay, and bind it up with Oziers to keep it surer, because the stock is not
strong enough it self to hold it, and you shall furnish it every manner of way
as others are dealt withal: this is most profitable.

The time of grafting.
All months are good to graft in, (the month of October and November only
excepted) But commonly, graft at that time of the Winter, when sap begins to
arise.

In a cold Country graft later, and in a warm Country earlier.

The best time general is from the first of February, until the first of May.

The grafts must always be gathered, in the old of the Moon.

For grafts choose shootes of a year old, or at the furthermost two years old.

If you must carry grafts far, prick them into a Turnep newly gathered, or
say earth about the ends.

If you set stones of Plummes, Almonds, Nuts, or Peaches: First let them lie a
little in the Sun, and then steep them in Milk or Water, three or four
daye^ before you put them into the earth.

Dry the kernels of Pippins, and sow them in the end of November.

The stone of a Plum-tree must be set a foot deep in November, or February.

The Date-stone must be set the great end downwards, two cubits deep in the
earth, in a place enriched with dung.

The Peach-stone would be set presently after the Fruit is eaten, some quantity
of the flesh of the Peach remaining about the stone.

If you will have it to be excellent, graft is afterward upon an Almond tree.

The little Sie^s of Cherry-trees, grown thick with hair, rots, and those
also which do grow up from the roots of the great Cherry-trees, being
removed, do grow better and sooner then they which come of stones: but they
must be removed and planted while they are but two or three years old, the
branches must be lopped.

The Contents of the Art of Propagating Plants.
THe Art of propagating Plants. page 109. Grafting in the Bark. p. 111.
Grafting in the cleft. p. 113. Grafters Tools. Time of planting and seting.
Time of grafting. How to cut the stumps in grafting. Sprouts and imps: how
gathered. Grafting like a Scutcheon. p. 116. Inoculation in the Bark.
Empla^ster-w^se grafting. To pr^cke stick^s to bear the first year. To have
Cherries or Plums without stones. To make Quinces great. To set stones of
Plummes. Dates, Nut, and Peaches. To make fruit smell well. To plant
Cherry-trees.
THE HUSBAND MAN'S FRVITEFVLL ORCHARD.
For the true ordering of all sorts of Fruits in their due seasons; and how
double increase comes by care in gathering year after year: as also the
best way of carriage by land or by water: With their preservation for longest
continuance.
OF all stone Fruit, Cherries.
Cherries are the first to be gathered: of which, though we reckon four sorts;
English, Flemish, Gascoyne and Black, yet are they reduced to two, the early,
and the ordinary: the early are those whose grafts came first from France and
Flanders, and are now ripe with us in May: the ordinary is our own natural
Cherry, and is not ripe before June; they must be carefully kept from Birds,
either with nets, noise, or other industry.

They are not all ripe at once, nor may be gathered at once, Gathering of
Cheries.
therefore with a light Ladder, made to stand of it self, without hurting the
boughs, mount to the tree, and with a gathering hook, gather those which be
full ripe, and put them into your Cherry-pot, or Kybzey hanging by your side,
or upon any bough you please, and be sure to break no stalk, but that the
cherry hangs by; and pull them gently, lay them down tenderly, and handle them
as little as you can.

To carry Che^rie^.
For the conueyance or portage of Cherries, they are best to be carried in broad
Baskets like siues, with smooth yielding bottomes, only two broad laths going
along the bottom: and if you do trasport them by ship, or boat, let not the
siues be filled to the top, lest setting one upon another, you bruise and hurt
the Cherries: if you carry by horseback, then panniers well lined with
Fearne, and packt full and close is the best and safest way.

Now for the gathering of all other stone-fruite, as N^rtarines, Other
stone-fruit.
Apricockes, Peaches, Peare-plumbes, Damsons, Bullas, and such like, although
in their several kinds, they seem not to be ripe at once on one tree: yet
when any is ready to drop from the tree, though the other seem hard, yet they
may also be gathered, for they have received the full substance the tree can
give them; and therefore the day being fair, and the dew drawn away; set up
your Ladder, and as you gathered your Cherries, so gather them: only in the
bottomes of your large siues, where you part them, you shall lay Nettles, and
likewise in the top, for that will ripen those that are most unready.

In gathering of Pears are three things observed; to gather for expense,
G^thering of Pears.
for transportation, or to sell to the Apothecary. If for expense, and your
own use, then gather them as soon as they change, and are as it were half
ripe, and no more but those which are changed, letting the rest hang till they
change also: for thus they will ripen kindly, and not rot so soon, as if they
were full ripe at the gathering. But if you^ Pears be to be transported far
either by Land or Water, then pull one from the tree, and cut it in the
midst, and if you find it hollow about the choare, and the kernel a large
space to lie in: although no Pear be ready to drop from the tree, yet then
they may be gathered, and then laying them on a heap one upon another, as of
necessity they must be for transportation, they will ripen of themselves, and
eat kindly: but gathered before, they will wither, shrink and eat rough,
losing not only their taste, but beauty.

Now for the manner of gathering; albeit some climb into the trees by the
boughs, and some by Ladder, yet both is amiss: the best way is with the
Ladder before spoken of, which stands of it self, with a basket and a line,
which being full, you must gently let down, and keeping the string still in
your hand, being emptied, draw it up again, and so finish your labou^, without
troubling your self, or hurting the tree.

Now touching the gathering of Apples, Gathering of Apples.
it is to be done according to the ripening of the fruit; your Summer apples
first, and the Winter after.

For Summer fruit, when it is ripe, some will drop from the tree, and birds
will be picking at them: But if you cut one of the greenest, and find it as
was showed you before of the Pear: then you may gather them, and in the house
they will come to their ripeness and perfection. For your Winter fruit, you
shall know the ripeness by the observation before showed; but it must be
gathered in a fair, Sunny, and dry day, in the waine of the Moon, and no Wind
in the ^^st, also after the deaw is gone away: for the least wet or moisture
will make them subject to rot and mi^ dew: also you must have an apron to
gather in, and to empty into the great baskets, and a hook to draw the boughs
unto you, which you cannot reach with your hands at ease: the apron is to be an
Ell every way, loopt up to your girdle, so as it may serve for either hand
without any trouble: and when it is full, unloose one of your loopes, and empty
it gently into the great basket, for in throwing them down roughly, their own
stalks may prick them; and those which are pricked, will ever rot. Again, you
must gather your fruit clean without leaves or brunts, because the one hurts
the tree, for every brunt would be a stalk for fruit to grow upon: the other
hurts the fruit by bruising, and pricking it as it is laid together, and there
is nothing sooner rotteth fruit, then the gre^ne and withe^ed leaves lying
amongst them; neither must you gather them without any stalk at all: for such
fruit will begin to rot where the stalk stood.

To use the fallings
For sach fruit as falls from the trees, and are not gathered, they must not
be laid with the gathered fruit: and of fallings there are two sorts; one that
falls through ripeness, and they are ^est, and may be kept to ba^e or roast:
the other windfals, and before they are ripe; and they must be spent as they
are gathered, or else they will wither and come to nothing: and t^^^e^o^e it is
not good by any meane^ to beat down fruit with Poales, or to carry them in
Carts loose and iogging, or in sacks where they may be bruised.

When your fruit is gathered, you shall lay them in deep Baskets of Wicker,
Carriage of fruit.
which shall contain four or six bushels, and so between two men, carry
them to your Apple-Loft, and in shooting or laying them down, be very careful
that it be done with all gentleness, and leisure, laying every sort of fruit
several by it self: but if there be want of room having so many sorts that
you cannot lay them severally, then such some fruit as is nearest in taste and
color, and of Winter fruit, such as will taste alike, may if need require, be
laid together, and in time you may separate them, as shall be showed
hereafter. But if your fruit be gathered fair from your Apple-Loft, then must
the bottomes of your Baskets be lined with green Fern, and draw the stuborne
ends of the same through the Basket, that none but the soft leaf may touch the
fruit, and likewise cover the tops of the Baskets with Fern also, and draw
small cord over it, that the Fern may not fall away, nor the fruit scatter
out, oriogge up and down: and thus you may carry fruit by Land or by Water,
by Boat, or Cart, as far as you please: and the Fern does not only keep
them from bruising, but also ripens them, especially Pears. When your fruit is
brought to your Apple-Loft or store^ house, if you find them not ripened
enough, then lay them in thicker heaps upon Fearne, and cover them with Fern
also: and when they are near ripe, then uncover them, and make the heaps
thinner, so as the air may pass through them: and if you will not hasten the
ripening of them, then lay them on the boords without any Fearne at all. Now
for Winter, or long lasting Pears, they may be packt either in Fern or Straw,
and carried whither you please; and being come to the iourneys end, must be
laid upon sweet straw; but beware the room be not too warm, not windy, and
too cold, for both are hurtful: but in a temperate place, where they may have
air, but not too much.

Of Wardens.
Wardens are to be gathered, carried, packt, and laid as Winter Pears are.

Of Medlers.
Medlers are to be gathered about Michaelmas, after a frost has touched them; at
which time they are in their full growth, and will then be dropping from the
tree, but never ripe upon the tree. When they are gathered, they must be laid
in a basket, sieve, barrel, or any such caske, and wrapped about with woollen
cloths, under, over, and on all sides, and also some weight laid upon them,
with a board between: for except they be brought into a heat, they will never
ripen kindly or taste well.

Now when they have lain till you think some of them be ripe, the ripest,
still as they ripen, must be taken from the rest: therefore power them out into
another sieve or basket leasurely, that so you may well find them that be
ripest, letting the hard one fall into the other basket, and those which be
ripe laid aside: the other that be half ripe, sever also into a third sieve or
basket: for if the ripe and half ripe be kept together, the one will be
moldy, before the other be ripe: And thus do, till all be thoroughly ripe.

Qu^nces should not be laid with other fruit; for the sent is offensive both
to other fruit, Of ^uince^.
and to those that keep the fruit or come amongst them: therefore lay them by
themselves upon sweet straw, where they may have air enough: they must be
packt like Medlers, and gathered with Medlers.

Apples must be packt in Wheat or Rye-straw, and in maunds or baskets lyned
with the same, To pack Apples.
and being gently handled, will ripen with such packing and lying together. If
several sorts of apples be packt in one maund or basket, then between every
sort, lay sweet straw of a pretty thickness.

Apples must not be powered out, Emptying and laying Apples.
but with care and leisure: first, the straw picked clean from them, and then
gently take out every several sort, and place them by themselves: but if for
want of room you mix the sorts together, then lay those together that are of
equal lasting; but if they have all one taste, then they need no separation.
Apples that are not of like colors should not be laid together, and if any
such be mingled, let it be amended, and those which are first ripe, let them be
first spent; and to that end, lay those apples together, that are of one time
of ripening: and thus you must use Pippins also, yet will they endure bruises
better then other fruit, and whilst they are green will heal one another.

Pippins though they grow of one tree, and in one ground, Difference in Fruit.
yet some will last better then other some, and some will be bigger then
others of the same kind, according as they have more or less of the Sun, or
more or less of the droppings of the trees or upper branches: therefore let
every one make most of that fruit which is fairest, and longest lasting.
Again, the largeness and goodness of fruit consists in the age of the tree:
for as the t^ee increases, so the fruit increases in bigness, beauty,
taste, and firmness: and otherwise, as it decreaseth.

If you be to transport your fruit far by water, then provide some dry
hogges-heads or barrells, Transporting fruit by water.
and pack in your apples, one by one with your hand, that no empty place may
be left, to occasion sogging; and you must line your vessel at both ends with
fine sweet straw; but not the sides, to avoid heat: and you must bore a dozen
holes at either end, to receive air so much the better; and by no means let
them take wet. Some use, that transport beyond seas, to shut the fruit under
hatches upon straw: but it is not so good, if caske may be gotten. When not to
transport fruit.


It is not good to transport fruit in March, when the wind blows bitterly,
nor in frosty weather, neither in the extreme heat of Summer.

If the quantity be small you would carry, then you may carry them in Dossers
or Panniers, To convey small store of fruit.
provided they be ever filled close, and that Cherries and Pears be lined with
green Fearne, and Apples with sweet straw; and that, but at the bottomes and
tops, not on the sides.

Rooms for fruit.
Winter fruit must lie neither too hot, nor too cold; too close, nor too open:
for all are offensive. A low room or Cellar that is sweet, and either boorded
or paued, and not too close, is good, from Christmas till March: and rooms
that are seeled over head, and from the ground, are good from March till May:
then the Cellar again, from May till Michaelmas. The apple loft would be
seeled or boorded, which if it want, take the longest Rye-straw, and raise it
against the walls, to make a fence as high as the fruit lies; and let it be
no thicker then to keep the fruit from the wall, which being moist, may do
hurt, or if not moist, then the dust is offensive.

There are some fruit which will last but until Allhallontide: they must be
laid by themselves; Sorting of Fruit.
then those which will last till Christmas, by themselves: then those which
will last till it be ^andlemas, by themselves: those that will last till
Shrouetide, by themselves: and Pippins, Apple-Iohns, Peare-maines, and
Winter-Russettings, which will last all the year by themselves.

Now if you spy any rotten fruit in your heaps, pick them out, and with a
Trey for the purpose, see you turn the heaps over, and leave not a tainted
Apple in them, dividing the hardest by themselves, and the broken skinned by
themselves to be first spent, and the rotten ones to be cast away; and ever as
you turn them, and pick them, vnder-lay them with fresh straw: thus shall you
keep them safe for your use, which otherwise would rot suddenly.

Pippins, John Apples, Pear maines, and such like long lasting fruit, Times of
stirring fruit.
need not to be turned till the week before Christmas, unless they be mixed
with other of a riper kind, or that the fallings be also with them, or much of
the first straw left amongst them: the next time of turning is at Shroue-tide;
and after that, once a month till Whitson-tide; and after that, once a
fortnight; and ever in the turning, lay your heaps lower and lower, and your
straw very thin: provided you do none of this labor in any great frost,
except it be in a close Celler. At every thawe, all fruit is moist, and then
they must not be touched: neither in rainy weather, for then they will be danke
also: and therefore at such seasons it is good to set open your windows, and
doors, that the air may have free passage to dry them, as at nine of the
clock in the fore-noone in Winter; and at six in the fore-noone, and at eight
at night in Summer: only in March, open not your windows at all.

All lasting fruit, after the midst of May, begin to wither, because then
they wax dry, and the moisture gone, which made them look plumpe: they must
needs wither, and be smaller; and nature decaying, they must needs rot. And
thus much touching the ordering of fruits.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks for JOHN HARISON, at the golden Unicorn in
Paternoster Row. 1631.


