PHYALA LACHRYMARUM. OR A FEW FRIENDLY Tears, shed over the dead Body of Mr
Nathaniel Weld Mr of Arts of Emanuel College in Cambridge; who in the short
journey of his life, died between the five and six and twentieth year of his
youth, 1633.

Together with sundry choice Meditations of Mortality.

Dignus longiore vita nisi quod vita meliore dignus.

LONDON. Printed by R. Y. for George Lathum at the sign of the Bishops head in
Paul's Churchyard. Anno 1634.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE Thomas LORD Bruce, Earl of Elgin.
THe message sent by those two sorrowful sisters in the Gospel unto our
Savior (with the change only of one sickly word) is the ground of the sad
news which I bring to your Lordship: (if at least that which is already known
every where, may be called news) the friend whom you loved is dead, which is
the cause that these few plaintive leaves present themselves to your Lordship
in their funeral blackes; his true love and affection to me, has persuaded
me to proclaim my grief in this manner, for the loss of so worthy a dear
friend, to the world. And your Lordships love to him has prompted me, a mere
stranger to your Lordship (with boldness enough without your knowledge) to send
them abroad under the countenance of your Honorable Name. If your Lordship
question my overmuch daring herein, in fastening my poor scriblets upon your
Protection, I have nothing to say for my self, in excuse, but to fly behind
the traverse of his Name, where your Lordship will be pleased either to see no
faults at all, or willingly to over-see them. To this my simple memorial of
him, I have (as a poor Postscript) added diverse Emblemicall Essays, which
for mine own private entertainment of idle hours, I have long since at
several times composed and laid by me (amongst many other of several
subjects) unseene of any, save of him whose absence I now lament: which, seeing
they received approbation from him, I am the more confident to adventure to
your Lordships hands, and next, to the public view; especially conceiving
within my self, that it will not seem altogether unsuitable or improper (after
the naming of a particular friend) to fall into some few short discourses of
friends and friendship in general; neither (after the lamentation for a lost
friend) to let fall some scattering meditations of death, by whom this so dear
friend is reaved from the sweet communion of so many his good friends, who do
still love him, and miss him. The conclusions which I have fetched out of these
Italian proverbiall maxims, I must confess are but as the first faint drops
which Chemists are wont to extract out of precious Simples and Mineralls,
through an earthen Limbecke or a Bolts-head, of brittle glass (at the best)
and so of themselves neither greatly useful or pleasant, but as it is in the
Proverb, Chi beve vino, beve sangue, al meno quadagna il color; he that
drinks wine drinks blood, (at least) he gains the color clear to himself:
so this my collection of so many elegant Proverbs in a language so delightful,
standing in the front of my barren conceits like a curious nosegay of fragrant
flowers, with their stemmes hid in the hollow cane of a silly fennell-stalk,
may hope to win favor and acceptance, for the pleasant sent which they bring
with them; the Diamond (by being set on a dark dull foil) losing yet none of
the natural worth, though much of that precious luster, which Art could have
added unto it. And thus (having given up this account of my self to your
Lordship, and fearing to add prolixitie to my boldness) I humbly commend my
self and my worthless pains to your Lordships pardon, and acceptance: in the
one applealing to the goodness of your own Noble Nature; the other beseeching
you to vouchsafe me for his sake, for whose I have herein cast my self upon
the necessity of craving your Lordships favor and pardon, and so rest.

By your Honor Of no use to be commanded, Of no worth to be entreated, W.
LATHUM.

Flete meos casus.
HOw can I choose but dolefully complain
Unto each gentle ear, and tender mind
The sorry accident, that does constrain
My heart to scald with sighs of strangled wind,
And eyes to drown in their own dreery drain?
Who sees a field, sown with all sorts of grain,
Some newly springing up, some spindled new,
Some goodly blooming, others in the wane,
Hanging their tydie ears of yellow hew
Down to the earth, (from whence at first they grew)
Then sees belive a thriftlesse husbandman
Pass by the aged croppe (which cumbers ground
And hinders that no other prosper can)
While with his corbed sickle he reapes down
The fresh young stalks whose joints with sap abound;
Such one (comparing this sad uncouth sight)
The root of my complaint, may read aright.
Tu quibus ista leges incertum est Lector ocellis,
Ipse equidem siccis scribere non potui.
ELEGIA INTRODUCTOria in Lachrymas sequentes.
Scarce is (amongst a thousand days) one day
So fortunate and luckie every way,
But that in compass of those twice twelve hours,
Some one or other lucklesse chance devours:
Or some of all from all in general,
Or all at once, from some in special;
And every state one thing or other meet
That mingles gall, and aloes with their sweet.
Each where I hear complaint, and most lament
On every side of loss and detriment;
Husbands the wives, the wives their husbands loss,
Parents their child, children their parents cross;
Brothers for sisters death are discontent,
Sisters for brothers; these do those lament;
Merchants their ships, shepherds do lose their sheep,
Some wail the loss of what they cannot keep.
I none of these, but I have lost a friend;
Time may all else, but not this loss amend:
Which loss whoever suffer, understand
What it is to be deprived of their right hand,
To have a leg cut off, an eye put out,
And live a creeple, to be led about;
A maimed-uselesse man, at once bereft
Of outward strength, and inward joy; so left
A wandering Pilgrim in a land unknown,
Injured of all, because beloved of none:
This leglesse, eyelesse, handlesse man am I,
All these I lost, when he from me did die.
All ye that chance, (if any chance) to reed
These sorry lines of mine; if ye indeed
Of such like friend be sped, as I him vant
(In this selfe-loving Age, (ah) very scant)
Their patronage and mine I you commend,
For ye can truly value such a friend.
Your tender gentle hearts can entertain
A quick impression of another pain,
And nimbly can (at half a word) resent
The weight and burden of their discontent:
And passionate your loft compassion is,
And tender unto all that is amiss.
For love of that, which is to you most leefe
Come all ye (as my seconds) to my grief;
Lend me your tears, and sighs to furnish out
The woeful work which I am now about.
And if such chance you ever do mischance,
(As God defend it should) in sovenance
And fair requital of your love, I Will pay
You tears for tears, and sighs for your sighs; nay,
(Unwilling, barely to repay your own)
I Will pay you interest of ten for one:
And (till my briny brain be drayned dry)
Will side with you, and mourn incessantly:
(Ab) for your grief will bring to memory
Mine own unhappy grief, and keep my wound
Still bleeding fresh, whilst every seeming sound,
And each like word, (that even but relates
And to his name alludes) insinuates,
And will my heart with news thereof inform,
Still raising in my bosom a new storm;
So shall your moan my mournful moan augment,
For full of harmony, a sweet consent
Of sorrow is with sorrow, tears with tears,
And grief in parts the music higher reares;
But now from you my conference must break
Whilst all my other mourners I do thus bespeake.
PHYALA LACRHYMARUM.
YE Lady Graces, and ye Muses nine,
And all ye virtues Moral and Divine,
Ye Sciences, and most renowned Arts,
And, all ye sons of Art, come weep in parts;
And each good man who goodness does admire,
And all (save ye of the Celestial Quire,
Ye Angels, and ye blessed Saints, possessed
Already in Heaven of your happy rest,
For by our loss and sorrow all ye reap
A gainful harvest, and for joy do leap,)
All clad in sable weeds, with Heben wands,
And Cypress branches in your friendly hands,
Disshevel'd hair about your shoulders thrown,
With all the sorry signs of hearty moan,
With panting breasts, with sighing well nigh rent,
With careful looks and eyes often upward sent,
With 'haviour speaking nothing, save neglect
Of all, but what on sorrow does reflect.
Come sit with me, and help me to condole
The sad departure of the blessed soul
From the dead corpse, of this dear friend of ours,
And with your tears (as with so many showers)
Embalme it over all, and strew his hearse
With the sweet fragrant odours of your verse:
Since (like a body that has lost a limb)
Each of you all do suffer loss in him.
Yea, with so loud alewes and drerement
Let be your plaints, and over him lament,
That future Ages, in your grief, likewise,
For loss of him with you may sympathize,
And cause an Annual Obit to be held
In his remembrance, whom they never beheld.
But that you may no Ceremonies fit
In your last duty unto him, omit,
Ere ye upon him lock his Coffin door,
And in a bath of your salt tears all over,
And dew of Roses (steeped in Amber grize)
Having first drencht him, much (as may suffice)
Bring some of those Arabian merchandise,
Sweet Aromatic Gummes, and precious spice,
Pure Frankincense, and pounded Cynamom
Nutmegs, with Cloves, and Mace, and Saffron some,
Add Storax-Calamite, and Bengewine,
And precious Spicknard unto these conjoyne,
Aloes, with Myrrh, and Cassia-Fistula,
The fragrant fuel, and the spicie spray
Whereof that bird (of self dusts, self worm) bred
Does build her neast to serve for her deathbed,
Which flaming round about her, she sits down,
And with sweet martyrdom her self does crown.
In stead of others more, with these same few
Thick over all his pale dead corpse bestrew;
But (chief and principal of all the rest)
These three bestrew, the Head, the Mouth, the Breast;
Since in these three (his Breast, his Mouth, his Head)
Many sweet Notions fostred were and bred;
And Meditations sweet, (well styled indeed
The fodder of the soul) did hence proceed;
And many sweet discourses (sweetly made)
And prayers so sweet, that God self could persuade.
Ne, only thus these precious perfumes serve,
His corpse from putrefaction to preserve,
But signify how sweet and fragrant is,
How grateful and accept this sacrifice
Of soul and body, which (in life and death)
He offered has to God, and witnesses
The good report and praise (like savory sent
Of sweet delicious Nard) of's life well spent,
Which here he to the world behind him leaves;
So double guerdon he both here and there receives.
This done, him in his Coffin sweetly lay;
Yet (ere ye to his Bear do him convey)
Weave him a Chaplet, all of flowers sweet,
For flowers and garlands been for virgins meet.
Now come with flowers, not flowers by them worn
Who loss of love do suffer (all forlorn:)
Bring here therefore no caytive Columbines,
Flowers of ill omen, and unhappy signs;
No gaudie Tulips here admitted be,
(Emblemes of false (faire-fained) sanctity,)
Whose worth all outward is in show alone,
But inward sent has not, ne virtue none,
For thy' true flowers I do not them areed,
But (at the best) a glorious kind of weed:
As worthless simples, numbered amongst them
Gay Dazies of the field, which we contemn.
Instead of these, bring store of fragrant flowers,
By faithful friends, and pious paramours
In honor greatly held; whose savorie sent
Of mingled sweets do show the sweet content
Who ere so happy be thereof to taste,
Of two true hearts in love united fast.
For well his tongue and 'haviour could indeed
Of faithful love a learned lecture read,
And well him love became, who loyal was
Unto his love; (unhappie love) alas,
Which when both hearts, and hands, and friends consent
Had all clapped hands with infinite content,
And all things ready to enjoying, had
(Save publication) death the Banes forbad.
Worthy for this were death to be contrould,
For certes too too blame was death, and bold,
So hopeful crop of love, (like full ripe wheat)
To blast, and smite, which ready was to reap.
Bring bashful Pinkes in which is to discry
Sweet Emblem of faire-maiden-modestie;
Which (though of flowers least almost) the field
For sweetness, to the greatest need not yield.
Then Gilliflowers, and sparkling Sops in wine,
With Rosemary and senting Eglantine,
Whose leaves (with prickles fenced) teach sweetest gains
Is that, that is conquered with the hardest pains.
Next Hyacynths, and black-fac'd Violets,
In which (me seems) the God of Nature sets
The world to school, not ever to esteem
Ought at first sight, as it does outward seem;
But on the hidden virtue to reflect,
For the inward good, mean outsides to respect;
Since, though this flower be black, of stature low,
A hanging-guilty look, that makes no show;
Yet amongst all, scarce one may parallel
Her savory sent, and sweet delightful smell.
Bring Hearts-ease store, Oh flower most blessed of all,
Which all they wear, whom nothing can befall
Beyond their expectation, ill ne ought
So good, as to excess, to tempt their thought.
Of pretty Panses plenty let be brought,
For this flowers name does signify a thought;
And therefore chiefly unto such belongs
Who dare not trust their love unto their tongues:
But in a Labyrinth of thoughts do walk,
And to themselves in pleasing silence talk;
Unthinking still what ever they first thought,
So naught by them is into practice brought.
Bring Medway, Cowslips, and deft Daffodillies,
The country Primrose, and all sorts of Lillies,
And Floure-de-Luce, (Le fleur de lice, more right)
Deliciae flos, the flower of delight.
Then usher in th'obsequious Marigold;
Whose riddle who so wise is to unfold,
Why the Suns course it daily follows so
That as that to the South or West does go,
So broad or narrow this does shut or open,
And hight for thy' the faithful Heliotrope?
Then with Rose-buds (if Rosebuds may be found)
It tissue thick, and traile it all around.
And last, a traile of winding Ivy let
Run all along, on either side beset
With sprigs of Daphnis, stained with drops of gold,
And Olive leaves that still with peace does hold;
In sign that he with conquest died in peace,
And does the number of the Saints increase
In eviternall peace, free from annoy
Of all this worlds fond cares, which wont destroy
All true content, and racks men's hearts in twain,
And makes them old before their time, to gain
Some one or other worldly good, which hence
They must not with them bear; and this torments
Their very souls, and makes that grudgingly
With great reluctance hopeless many die.
So nor in life nor death with peace are blessed.
But to return whence I too far digrest.
Now on his Hearse a counterpoint be cast,
And on this counterpoint, this Garland placed,
In token of th'integritie and truth
And single Caelibat of his chaste youth:
For single life, right soberly maintained,
And kept from being vitiously profaned,
Gains thanks of God and man, and with renown
And happy praise, both life and death does crown.
Now forward set, in order, two and two,
And to the Temple do before him go,
Some with long Rosemary-branches in your hands,
Dangling with black, and ashie-pale Ribbands;
And some again with both your handfulls come
Of sav'ry Dyll, and senting Marjorum,
And that Thessalian herb, whence busy bees
Suck hunny, and with wax do load their knees:
And all the way with slips of wormwood dress
In sign of this days bitter heaviness.
Clean-purging Isop bring, and Germander,
With Cotton, and her sister Lavander;
Bring Balm, that quickly heales any green wound;
And sage, that all the vital parts keeps sound;
And Camomel, (how ever mean and base)
The Emblem of true constancy and grace;
That does against all scornful feet oppose,
And much more sweet, for thy', and thicker grows,
And Sallet-budded Broom, wholesome and good
To purge, and eeke, the waterish-wasted blood.
Bring Strawberry, Primrose, Plantan leaves, Toutsain,
And all what ever Simples, sovereign
For man's relief, (for in, or outward cure)
Bring some of all, leave none behind, be sure:
Bring Saint John's Wort, whose virtuous oil may dare
(For skill in healing) with self Balm compare.)
And Lungwort (sovereign above all the rest)
To ease the straightened bellows of the breast;
And all the worts that ere ye reckon can,
For they are all wel-willers unto man.
And let not herb of Grace forgotten be,
Which (as it is such) with him does well agree:
For, full was he of grace: and (as it is Rewe)
It us befits, our rewfull hearts to show.
Yea, Rushes bring, (which strewed wont to been
To welcome friendly strangers seldom seen.)
But bring no herbs (I charge) of evil fame,
That banefull ever to man's life became,
To let in death, ere their appointed hour,
By their cold juice, and inward deadly power.
Therefore (I you areed) no sleepie slip
Of Poppie amongst your other herbs let slip;
No Coloquintida, ne no Henbane,
Nor Hemlocke, that intoxicates the brain;
Nor Fennell-finkle, bring for flattery,
Begot of lies, and fained courtesy.
But above all, as ye love him, this day
Whose funeral ye done attend, I pray
Bring not the leaves of that sour Indian fume,
(The common Mountebanke) which, not the rheum,
But all diseases else, to cure dare vaunt,
(At least prevent) which in our bodies haunt:
Which taints the breath, and (worse than any goat)
Does make it stink, whereon men so do doat,
That morning, Noone, and Night, they wont it take,
And their continual dear companion make.
So like that poisonous Arrian Heresy,
It all the world has overrun well nigh;
For now all matters ended, or begun,
Must through this smoakie purgatory run.
And all what ere we eat and drink is choked
Yea, sacred meat and drink therewith are smoked.
With that pragmatick-crotched-pated Bertholdus Swart, a German borne, by
Profession a Franciscan Friar, a great Alchimist, first inventer of the Gun and
Gunpouder; this invention he taught to the Venetians about the year 1330, who
therewith gave the Genowayes a notable overthrow.
Friar,
Who Niter first devised to set on fire,
And to discharge it from that fatal gin,
To The bane of men, to thunder near of kin;
May he of all posterity be cursed
Who brought this weed in daily practice first:
Ah, for 'twas this unsavory fulsome weed,
That traitorously conspired his death indeed;
Provoking him to cough, which broke a vein
Within his lungs, first causer of his bane.
All we for thy', who now bewitched are
With this deceitful drugge, in time beware.
Now all ye mourners who the honor have
To bear him on your shoulders to his grave,
Take up your load, and weeping all the way,
Unto his shadie chamber him convey:
The mother earth is ready to receive
Her welcome child; there in her arms him leave.
Thus finished is midway my doleful song,
Which ere I any further do prolong,
My self I do apply, and turn my speech
To whom it most concerns, and them beseech
For his dear sake, whose memory is dear
As was his life, and love to me too, here
In Jet or Touch these sorry lines ingraffe
Too much though (true is) for an Epitaph.
Here WELD has left his body in this Tomb
In pawn, till he again from Heaven come,
Whither he is gone on pilgrimage before
The happy Saints to visit, and adore
His blessed Lord and Savior till Doomes-day,
Where he to wait on him, intends to stand.
Then underneath his Monument, write this
(Though of far better he most worthy is)
In plates of shining Brass, of purpose made,
And in black Marble, on his Grave inlaid.
Here lies the Mould, the Coffin and the Shell
That does the Shell, the Mould, and Coffin hold,
Where late our dear friends blessed soul did dwell;
Now Heaven is to this blessed soul the Mould,
The Coffin, and the Shell become, until
The general Assizes of the world, when all
Souls their own Moulds and Coffins shall fulfill,
And to their old Shells, every Kernel fall.
In hopeful expectation of which day
Our worthy WELD, whom we so justy mourn,
Leaves here his Gage, that he will no longer stay,
Than he must needs, but suddenly return.
True sign, that of his word he will be just,
Thus in his absence, to leave us the care
Of his dear dust, as his Feoffees in trust;
O Grave (for his sake) sacred, be well ware
No violence be done unto his dust,
But kept inviolate until he come,
Till then, religious Ashes rest in peace
(More than Mausolus in his glorious Tomb)
Till the renewing of your lives old lease.
And, as a poor Appendix to his Tomb,
Writ so, as to be read, vouchsafe a room
To this my secret plaint, and private moan,
Conceived in silence to my self alone,
When at his grave I did recall to mind
The fickle-fraile condition of mankind.
Ah for my friend, who wished and loved me well,
I him as well; I (living) saw him dead,
who mote have lived, to have bidden me farewell,
And seen me gasp my last, on my deathbed.
But so't pleased him (who each man's vital thread
Spins as him list) his thread of life to break,
And mine has spared, and longer lengthened;
(The longer though, so much more still the weak:)
Ah the weak web of man's frail flesh, how soon
(That long was weaving) is it again undone?
But if of all thy friends there be not one
Some little monument of carved stone,
That will thee raise, thy name whereon to write,
And none to thee this duty will acquit:
Yet I shall joy that I have thought it fit,
And that I thus to them have mentioned it:
And were thy friend, thy sound-whole-hearted friend,
As thy good nature, wont him often commend,
In heart (as once he was) and may again,
If God to his endeavors say Amen,
This charge by him, should be for thee defraid,
For in small cost much love may be bewrayd.
And if prayers lawful were to any Saint,
And Saints our prayers could hear, and God acquaint
With what we want, and in necessity
We mote (poor men) relieved be thereby:
Thou should my Saint of Intercession be,
And (my dear Not) I Would only pray to thee:
For thou amongst the Saints a Saint do dwell,
And reap'st the fruit there, of here living well;
Where hope and faith both being at an end,
Naught thou (save charity) have to intend:
And Gloria Patri, and Te Deum sing,
And quousque Domine, ceasest thou to bring
The world to question, and the hard constraints,
And sufferance to avenge of thy dear Saints?
Thus thou in prayers, and praises mixed among
Do spend, or rather do thy time prolong.
But now (thou Muse) of all the mournfullest,
Who at a sad and doleful tale art best:
And (thou Calliope) whose powerful Muse
Can minister, and goodly well infuse
Meet matter, and fit words to any one
For fancy and conceit to workeupon,
For virtues sake, assist me to bewary
(Since well I mean) what I have here to say;
And as my Midwives, help me forth to throw
The Infants of my brain wherewith I go;
And teach their newborn tongues (however weak)
Of this your darling worthily to speak.
Wherein if they so fairly them acquit,
To say but somewhat that may do him right,
'Twill welcome prove; their very naming him.
Will grace, and add enough to their esteem;
For never man more worthy is than he
To be remembered both of you and me.
Rarely was ever seen (be it not envied,)
Such a combination, and so full a tide
(In such an under-age) of all true vvorth,
Where nature and Grace consented to set forth
A model to the world of what they can,
When they intend to frame some special man,
For every purpose and intention fit;
A most acuminous, quick-pregnant wit;
A clear fine fancy, and a quaint conceit,
Active, and nimble, and yet full of weight;
A piercing present strong capacity;
A spacious, vast, tenacious memory;
A mind composed of art and industry;
A heart affecting (unaffectedly)
To make pure profit of all good men's good;
And each vainefull of piety as blood.
I say unaffectedly, since what need he
(Whom Nature has enabled to be
What ere him pleased) affect the speech, the tone,
The phrase, gest, or garb of else any one?
Here Art, Learning, Knowledge, Wisdom, Judgment,
(Above his age) and strange Intendement,
With learning, and the Learned tongues as well
He furnished was; the kernel as the shell,
Excellent in some, scarce yielding to the best,
Well seen, and rational in all the rest:
Yea, (what himself would not) I dare him vant,
In no scientiall knowledge ignorant.
In so small time, how deeply were thou read?
And how far traveled and traversed
(...) in the books of God and Nature fit to teach
Both learned and unlearned out of each?
Loyal, and full of faith and faithfulness
To God and man, in all he did profess,
Here, Bounty and all courteous Amenage,
Of Generositie the true presage,
As far from surquedrous-proud-selfe-conceit,
Which all great wits does commonly await,
As his religion and his faith was free
From spot or taint of unsound heresy.
Here that Sal Gemmae (as we may it call)
Discretion; which does kindly season all;
A breast full fraught with clear integrity,
And all set off with sweet Humility,
A winning virtue, and a special grace,
To usher in a man before Gods face,
Than which no virtue shines but half so bright,
And without which the weightiest gold is light.
This added luster and imbellishment
To all his other worth where ere he went:
So that as he by virtue gained respect,
Virtue by him regained the like effect:
Each of them honored by each others worth,
As pearl in gold, both sets, and is set forth:
Yea, all that man to God and man indeares,
Were met together in these tender years.
Scarce the sixth year of's manhood he attained,
When he this mass of virtuous treasures gained,
Where, had he but gone on as he began,
And doubled his few years, Lord, what a man,
And to what excellence would he have grown,
To the worlds wonder, and emulation:
Much have I heard of thy rich Mines, Perue,
Thy Rubies, Diamonds, and Saphyrs blew,
And of that Island-rivers precious shells
Where orient pearl of namelesse value dwells:
But in one Mine, one Shell, one Rock or Shore,
Some of all these were never found before.
Gardens and orchards infinite there are,
With all sorts of fruits, and flowers rare:
But all at once grown on one stalk and tree,
I never saw till now (dear NOT) in thee.
Ah my dear Lord, pardon this fault of mine,
If not considering well this deed of thine,
I too too foolish fondly have repined,
And in the heat of grief have spoke my mind
Thus sawcely. Far better a great deal
Never to the world this jewel to reveal,
Than shown a while to put it up again
In The case, unseene for ever to remain.
But 'twas thy will, and thus I answer must,
My discontent, since certes it is but just,
That he who makes the jewel may dispose
Thereof at pleasure, lest it else mote lose,
In this unbeveld age, when it is so hard
For vertue-selfe from taint her self to guard,
Any those Diamonds and Pearls of Grace,
Which round about his Gemme he did enchase.
Unfeigned friend, Oh how unfainedly
Do I lament, when I say thou did die?
Why mote not I (whose life is of no use)
Thy too too hasty death by death excuse?
The Sun to set at night is natural;
But if at noone to set it should befall,
It would the world with wonder deep dismay;
But should it set in'th nonage of the day,
The course of nature (all sorts would cry out)
Confounded is, and quite turned round about.
And is it not thus, the very same in men,
When we see fouresocore, fifty, threescore years and ten
Climb back (as 'twere) the western hill again,
As if the South point of their life to gain:
Whilst younglings (such as this days sample shew'th)
Set in their graves in'th morning of their youth?
A needful caution to the younger fry,
Since life it self is but uncertaintie:
And death no time prescribes, or can it stay,
But it will come at all how'rs of the day;
That every one, they stand upon their guard,
Remembering ever that death never spared
Youth for youths sake:
But (for the practice of his bow) will slay
All sorts of game that comes within his way,
Be It Stagge, Buck, Hynd, Do, Hearse, Calfe, or Phone,
All Is one to him, and he to all is one;
Whether it out of season be or in,
Impartially, he reaketh not a pin.
Ah, when I heard them sorrowfully say,
That thou were dead, the very like dismay
In every face I did observe (me thought)
As when in Pharo's Land sad news was brought,
That in one instant time, and casually,
One was found slain in every family:
So Much unhappy tidings one nights scope
Can bring to light, to strangle all our hope.
Since when to day with joy I heard them tell
The worst is past, and hope thou should do well,
The morrow next (by break of day) I hear
The Passing Bell invite thee to thy Bear,
And to prepare thy self for going hence,
Which message, though with Christian confidence,
Through strength of highest hope, and faith-unfain,
Did readily, and joyful entertain:
So (like a full ripe nutt slipped from the shell)
Thou slip'st away, and bad'st us all farewell.
But well without thee (Ah!) how can we fare?
With whose sweet company we wont repare
Our former loss of time, which we misspent
In idleness, or things impertinent.
Oh my dear WELD, whose conversation was
So lovely unto me, could sighs (alas)
And true-shed tears (the characters of grief)
Unto thy sickness added have relief;
Had it in power of learned Leach-craft ly'n,
Or in the miracle of Medicine;
A noble Art (no doubt) which can again
New twist the thread of life nigh cracked in twain:
Could devout prayers of friends have thee repriv'd
From death, and made thee to be longer lived,
Thou should not now thy Friends and Parents backs
Have clothed all over thus, in mourning blacks:
Ne all their heavy hearts should now have clad
In sable mantle of thoughts dark and sad:
Ne should my Muse have on thy heavy Hearse,
(O heavy Hearse,) attend in sable Verse:
Ne yet the eyes of my ink-stained quill
On my white-cheekt leaves these black tears distill.
How lovely were thou (living) unto all?
All, for thou were not sullen-cynicall,
Nor of a supercilious-haughtie eye,
But affable, and full of courtesy,
Well pleased with mirth, and harmless merriment,
Which (but injuriously) can never be shent.
How did all hug thee, and embrace, for thy'
Thy (hardly-sampled) self, and company?
How joy'd all at thy coming? and in heart
How sad, and sorrowful at thy depart?
Yea, and (now dead) how does each thing retain
Like love to thee, and of thee been as feign?
When (weary) thou thy deathbed did forsake,
How ready was thy winding sheet to take
Thee in her milke-white arms (not satisfied)
Till wholly to her self the did thee hide.
And next thy coffin (being very proud
At'th second hand, t'injoy thee in thy shroud)
For love of thee the sheet where thou do dwell,
Does hug and kiss, much like the loving shell,
That for the almons sake the tender skin
Encloseth round, where th'almond lies in.
And then the Earth which (living) loved thee so,
To kiss thy feet where ever thou did go,
With no less love does now embrace thy chest,
Within her own dear bosom long to rest,
Till thou (whom she seems so in love withal)
In thine own dust, into her arms do fall.
Last, when thy soul of thee did take her leave,
An Angel readily did it receive,
And in his winged arms did it convey
Nimbly to Heaven, and still all the way
With sacred kisses courted it, and sang
To it a Requiem sweet, whereat it sprang
In's Arms for joy; (no doubt) for very joy
That it should now so suddenly enjoy
The blessed vision of her Lord who died
Ingloriously, her glory to provide.
How can I then, but (living) thee admire,
Whom ('live and dead) both Heaven and Earth desire?
Farewell (deerfriend) too soon ripe, long to last:
Happy young man, who so long journey have
In so small time dispatched: such hap as this
The first heirs of the first world long did miss,
And staid sometimes a thousand years well nigh,
Ere they (as thou) su'd out their Livery.
Happy young man; and fortunately blessed,
In all; and amongst all not blessed least
In thy Mecoenas (that thrice-noble Lord)
Who countenance to thy learning did afford;
Ne only did thee hold in great regard,
But thee with bounteous hand did often reward,
And graced thy person for thy virtues sake.
Mote learning-selfe, and learned men him make
Full great requital (gentle Lord) for this;
And make his fame the golden Stars to kiss:
And by the power of their mighty Muse,
The praises echo loud, of the Great Bruce,
And honor him, who in so dear account
Holds the true sons of the Syonian Mount:
Him leaving, henceforth standing brave enrowl'd
Amongst the Ancient Roman Peers of old,
( Mecoenas, Varus, Pollio, Patrons all;)
Whose showers of bounty down did daily fall,
On merit and true worth; and men of Art
Cherisht, and by their goodness kept in heart.
Forsooth the Lord, whom I so truly vant,
All noble virtues in his bosom hant,
And as himself indeed right learned is,
Which (Ah great pity) most great men do miss,
So has he als' a bounteous heart, to prize
And tender virtue, and good qualities
In all, in whomsoever they appear,
(The very essence of a noble Peer.)
Pardon (great Lord) this poor Parenthesis,
Which but the skirt of thy just praise does kiss,
And which (by way of humble thanks) I send
In name of my (late living) now dead friend;
Who (living) honored thee, and spoke all good
Of thee and thine, and thy rare bountihood;
That in his sickness did so often address
Thy messengers and golden messages;
Yea, and in person daign'st to visit him,
Where in he read to him thy great esteem,
That (had not mortal been his malady)
It much had made to his recoverie.
The joy, and hearty comfort he conceived
Of'th gracious words and deeds from thee received;
God recompense this love to thee and thine
Tenfold, which thou to that dear friend of mine,
Whilst I return again to make an end
Of this course web, which I did him intend,
Which, ere I fully finish, take by the way
(Dear NOT) this little what I have to say.
Unmanly it is I know, for men alive
With Soule-divorced bodies once to strive;
Yet (well as once I loved thee) I must have
A Contestation with thee in thy Grave.
We see by proof it is usual in our Land
For Traders, having got into their hand
All upon trust from others what they may,
Often suddenly to break and run away:
(For their own ends) not caring to undo
Their Creditors, with wives and children too.
Simply to cozen, and deceive is bad,
And is of all good men in hatred had;
But to deceive a friends especial trust
Of all else it is a thing the most unjust.
Now, though it be a thing that near concerns
My self, and thy best friends, yet my heart yernes,
And I am loath (remembering what thou wast)
Any the least aspersion here to cast
Upon thy credit (tender and precize)
To hurt what (living) thou so dear did prize:
But thou this merchant art (mine own dear NOT)
And when we saw thee thrive, and full of that
Rich merchandise of Honesty, and Grace,
Of Goodness, and a dainty diapaze
Of sweet harmonious worth, and virtues rare
elsewhere to find) and which few men do care
To traffic for; thereof we were so feign
(And sure so should if it were to do again)
And very fond, that eftsoons we brought forth,
And ventured all with thee that we were worth;
Our liking, our affection. yea our heart,
And our best love we did to thee impart.
But when our time of hoped gain once came,
(With injury enough, and thy much blame)
Thou for preferment in a better world
Gav'st us the slip, and our care quite off hurled;
Leaving us poor, and bankerout hereby,
Yea, and thou have undone us utterly
Since all our Stock thou do with thee retain,
And we naught left have to begin again:
And though we had, yet since thou prov'st unjust
(Mine own heart root) we know not whom to trust:
Yet would thou had but lived, I dare well say
Thou would have paid while thou had ought to pay.
How ere, it joys my heart to think, as I
Live in thy debt, that thou in mine did die.
And howsoever I thee thus have shent,
Yet since thou did but what all would, content
Are we to sit down by our loss: could we
But see thee now and then, and talk with thee
As we were wont, our loss would feeme the less.
But since our case is quite remediless,
And we have no means left to get our own,
But to pursue thee whither thou art gone;
Though say we so should do, thou would allege
(To put us off) that places privilege;
Whence 'twould be harder to compel thee, then
In The Temple Hall t'arrest a thousand men:
Therefore, for my part, I let fall my suit
With promise, henceforth nere to prosecute.
So though through grief and creve-coeur, my heart
Within me die, to think that we must part:
Yet, till our next and happy enterview
I take my leave, now worthy WELD adieu:
Farewell dear NOT, five hundred times farewell;
Who (as thy names few letters say) do dwell,
Where now thy Maker thou have long beheld,
(Who by his power Heaven and earth does weld)
In namelesse peace, and joys more manifold
Than by my worthless tongue can ere be told:
Take this small tribute of my love to thee
In retribution of thy love to me.
I to thy ingenuitie appeal,
T'accept this (...) handful of course barly-meale;
And these dark grains of bay salt, pray thee hold
In worth from him, who better would if could:
Could my ability reach thy desert,
The World should know what manner man thou were.
Suffice it me that thus my hearts true love
(However homely) I to thee approve;
Nathlesse (how ever mean) in loss of sleep,
And many private tears, I did them steep;
With much ado together them to save,
Till I could sprinkle them upon thy grave.
Excuse me here, that so unorderly
My flaggie Muse thus in and out does fly.
Indenting to and fro, her winding course,
Much like the brook once parted from his source,
My grief of this disorder is the cause,
And no disorder ever keeps the Laws:
For grief (like love) from reason loves to swerve,
And keeps no mean, ne measure will observe.
And since my plaints for thee (whom I so miss)
Unto thy happiness injurious is,
And bootlesse is for me, to think, and vain
With tears thee hither to recall again;
And since I cannot more (as I wont) walk,
And talk with thee, yet often of thee to talk
It joys my heart; and much it comforts me
To name thee to my self, whom more I may not see:
Receive this payment, and what I owe more
(As more I knowledge) must run on the score:
Yet he that pays both what and when he can
(Which comforts me) is held an honest man.
Much would my love say more; but howsoere,
Thy worth an everlasting subject were,
And with fresh matter could beget my brain,
Nathlesse my grief does barren make my vain,
And shuts up my conceit, that I can say
No more, save Ah, alack, and welladay,
And woe is me, with such like poor rhyme,
And windy interjections spend the time!
Therefore farewell, I never so blessed shall be
As to repair this my dear loss in thee,
A man amongst ten thousand, and a friend
Worthy this precious name; so I commend
My love to thee, and thee (for ever blessed)
To God, and thine eternal happy rest.
Thus (having now performed his Obsequies)
With thanks unto you all, (if please) arise,
And for this time your farther plaints surcease:
Arise ye Mourners all, it is time I you release.
Sit voluisse, Sat valuisse.
MEDITATIONES QUAEDAM DE AMICITIA, DE VITAE FRAGILITATE, DE MORTE, ET DE ANIMA.

IVSTVS VIVET FIDE

DEVS PROVIDEBIT



RY



LONDONI, Excudebat R. Y. impensis G. Lathum. M.DC.XXXIV.

MEDITATIONES DE VITAE FRAGILITATE.
Ricordarsi il Ben Doppia la Noia.
A Gentle friend (by way of comfort) said
Unto a father that did sadly wail
His sons deer loss: Ah Sir; be once apaid,
Since all your mourning nothing can prevail.
Why that is the thing, because I naught avail;
That I (quoth he) so sore his death lament;
Oh that my memory of him could fail:
But, like Lots wife, our eyes still back are bent
Upon those joys, which erst we held most leefe;
The Talia jactantem verbis conabar amicis
Flectere; sed vulnus nil insanabile curat:
Ite procul Medicae, non sum sanabilis, Arts:
Ista tamen quocunque ferar me cura sequetur.

thought of which does double present grief.
Perdre un Amico fidele e sopra o'gni dolor.
OF all the Ovid. ad Pison. Nec te fortuna colentem;
Natalesve movent, probitas spectatur in illis.

cares, and humane misery,
Which from the Cradle to the Beer attend,
Is none of all can touch a man more nigh,
Than the hard Unus amicitiae summos tenor ambit and imos;
Rara domus tenuem non aspematur amicum:
Raraque non humilem caleat fastosa clyentem.

loss of true approved friend;
To whom thy fortune does not thee commend:
But rich or poor, thy winter, and thy spring,
He all alike does tender to the end.
Each bird, while summer lasts, will sweetly sing;
But constant Red-brest pipes his cheerful notes
When frost, and storms dams the others glozing throats. Mant. Egl. 3. Saepe
alios qui spem dederint invenimus ore
Magnisicos, sed re modicos; tibi fidimus uni.


Ben ama chi non oblia.
NO Giants hand, no instrument of Art,
No Anchor in the sea tenacious been
As Love and Hate, once rooted in the heart:
The strange effects of both are daily seen;
Right strong they either are, yet being green,
But when they once wax old, no power, or force
Sufficient is to interpose between;
He never hated who can Sen. Megar. Her. furens. Una res superest mihi fratre
ac parente charior, Regno and Lare, odium tui.
feel remorse:
And in that heart love is but shallow set,
Which time or place can make a friend forget.
Un huomo d'ogni hora.
Homo omnium horarum.
Graci Bibliotheeam, seu obambulans, vivumque Musaeum virum eruditum vocarunt,
and qui velut ex professo respondere, and inextricables Authorum nodos, tanquam
ex secretiore Musarum Adyto cuncta depromere atque dissolvere possit. Erasmus
Chyliad.
OH where is the man that is so truly trained,
And has to purpose so his hours spent,
That (if all company were him restrained)
True solace by himself he can invent,
And with his friend (to whatsoere intent)
Can him adapt, whether in learned discourse,
Facetious wit, and sportive merriment,
Of Hawks, of Hounds, or long Dogs for the Course?
Be the Theme light, or of grave consequent
He for all turns has money in his purse:
This thus conpleat-accomplisht every way,
The man of all hours is, and for all day.
I had a friend (I have I late could say)
Ah but the primest flowers soonest fade,
Who fitted was and furnished every way
In depths and shallows both to swim and wade:
Not like mechanics, in one only trade,
But sooth Ovid. ad Pisonem. Sed virtus numerosa juvat, tu pronus in omne
Pectora ducis opus, seu te graviora vocarunt, Seu leviora juvant, etc.
he multum could in singulis,
And aliquid in omnibus have said;
No subject on the sudden came amiss,
But he to all with profit and delight
An able Artist could himself acquit:
Thine be this Emblem (by thy just desert)
For thou (thrice worthy WELD) this man of all howr's were.
Felice chi puo.
Blessed mote he ever be, who ever can
Compose the joys, and sorrows of his mind,
Choose truth from error, flower from the bran;
Willing obey Gods sacred Laws in kind;
Decline the vice, to which he is most inclined;
Richly contented be, what ere God send;
Slight injuries, as chafe before the wind,
Find a fit wife, and faithful bosom friend:
Who some, nay one, but all these things who can,
Is sure a threefold-blessed, O vos Aetherei cives (quibus esse beatis
Contingit solis) quibus est aeterna voluptas:
Humanas si forte preces attenditis, and si
Non penetus miseros homines avertitis, oro
Egregiam puramque mihi concedite mentem,
A vero falsum discernere quae sciat apt,
Quae bona cognoscat vera, and contraria veris;
Ne stulte fugienda sequar, fugiamve sequenda,
Nam si mortali cuiquam licet esse beato,
Arbitror hoc pacto fieri me posse beatum.

tenfold-happy man.
Il medico al anima e Dio, and al Corpo un Buon Compagno.
VVOe to the man alone (says the wise man)
If chance him fall, who him releeven can?
But where two been, if one in need do stand,
The other still is ready help at hand:
The Great Creator so intended it,
When he for man framed a companion fit,
In Paradise: so help in company,
And comfort does in friendly help rely.
The soul and body als' he tacked together,
To be companions either unto either:
Yea God himself, who is but one alone,
And to that onehood will admit of none,
Yet joys to have the Blessed Unity
Accompan'd with the sacred Trinity.
Loca sola nocent, loca sola caveto.
Quo fugis? in populo tutior esse potes.

Who therefore done admire loneliness
Do rob themselves of wondrous happiness,
And wilfully to many mischiefs run,
Which men in company do fairly shun.
When did the will spirit choose our Lord to tempt,
But when from company he was exempt?
And ever since he does himself intrude
To vacuitie, and Tristis eris si solus eris, dominaeque relictae,
Ante oculos facies stabit ut ipsa tuos:
Tristior idcirco nox est, quam tempora Phoebi,
Quaeque levet luctus turba sodalis abest.

lonely solitude.
Als' privacie begets melancholy,
Which mother is and nurse of lunacie.
But in all states, in poverty, in wealth,
In peace, in war, in sickness, and in health,
In age, in youth, bondage and liberty,
Sweet is the comfort of companionrie:
For, as the soul in all extremities
Only to God her lonely self applies,
Whose sweet Communion if it can but gain,
It takes her off from thinking on her pain:
And with his presence, and kind conference
He works such indolence upon her sense,
That ere she wist, the time and pain at one
With passing pleasure's slipped away and gone.
Such to the body is a hearty friend,
The grief thereof and maladies to mend:
Whose very presence, though he speak no word,
Is physic of it self, and does afford
(Like Jonas Gourd) cool shadow from the heat
Of strong distempers, which the body beat.
Blessed is that soul, that sickness, and that man
Who still have God for their Physician:
And happy manifold I him areed,
Who such companion has, such friend at need.
Who (free from scurvie tricks) is right and straight,
With whom a man may dare deliberate,
And freely to his bosom can impart
The nearest secrets of his very heart:
As knowing in his breast he may them save
Safe* as the dead man's ashes in his grave.
Ovid. ad Pisonem. Asperitate carens, positoque per omnia fastu
Inter ut aequales unus numeraris amicos,
Obsequiumque doces, and amorem quaeris amore.

He in discourse can yield unto his friend
Against his own knowledge (rather than contend)
He mannerly can jest, ne captious is,
Ne yet exceptious, apt to take amiss,
Or peevishly in evil manner wrest
What Is merely spoken merrily in jest;
No babbler, ne no critic in a house,
Unmanly-humerous, nor mutinous.
To him all one the kennill and the wall;
Nathlesse, (all be he affable to all)
To all he will not be fellow, but does ken
To difference himself from other men,
Lest whilst humility he do profess,
He fall into the tax of fillinesse.
He knows his good to all, and how to bow,
And to his greaters due respect allow;
Ne does it hold disparage, or disgrace
His friends (even meanest) favors to embrace
With thankfulness; which is a virtue full
Of strong Attraction, and does pull,
And draw (like loadstone) every heart and mind
With grace and bounty to us be inclined.
All his own Meminisse debet is in quem collatum est beneficium, non
commemorare qui contulit.
actual kindness he forgets,
But passive favors puts amongst the dets,
Which by recognizance he at a day
Upon great penalty is bound to pay:
So fair Ovid. ad Pis. Additur huc and justa fides, and plena pudoris.
Libertas, Animusque mala ferrugine purus,
Ipsaque possesso men's est opulentior auro.

conditioned every way, and good,
That by his outside well is understood,
How ever he been of worldly fortune sped,
That he is doubtless Gentle borne, and bred.
Lo here a friend, well worth his weight in gold,
Though in this durty age his gold prove dross,
And this rare Jewel, every one do hold
(Not set in gold) contemptible as moss.
What can him want now, who for each disease
Such Physic, and Physicians has as these?
Who have a salve for every sort of sore,
And Cordialls for all griefs and pains in store?
Ovid. Semper habe Pyladem aliquem qui curet orestem
Hic quoque amicitiae non levis usus erit.

In health who soul and body then will save,
Let still in store these two Physicians have.
Come il simulacro del Re di Babilone.
Frail O Fragilis nimium innumerisque obnoxia vita
Casibus, O nimium brevis atque incerta recedens
Fumi instar, nunc hic moritur, nunc ille, hodie tu,
Cras ego, sic demum paulatim extinguimur omnes.

flesh (how ever goodly thou appear
In outward show, and glorious as the Sun:)
How can a little sickness change thy cheer?
And thy lives thread, how ever purely spun,
With pain how is it broke and quite undone?
How seem thou like that image over all,
Whereof y'dreamt that King of Babylon,
Whose bulk was Gold and costly Mineral,
But Oh poor prop, the pillars and the basse
Were crumbly clay which did sustain this mighty mass. Natalis Chytr. in
viatico. Quid nisi foetor homo est? foetores inter and alvo
Gignitur, and latitat; tener e foetente favissa
Eruitur foetens; totius tempore vitae
Sese intra foetet, foetores ejicit ex se
Corpus inane animae, tandem foetore maligno
A se abigit cunctos; and cum foetore, sepulchro
Foetenti infertur; quaeso unde superbia tanta
Nos inflat? tanto cur cum torpore, geluque
Coelestem patriam, (expertem foetoris) avemus?


Non temete, la morte solamente e cattiva a cativa Gente.
O Death, the hateful issue of man's sin,
Who since thy birth, do greedily devour
Thy Parents children! Oh what can thou win
In browzing a soft twigge before his hour?
What have thou thereby done, but given him power
(As Justices their passe-ports wont to grant)
To pass hence freely to that sacred bower,
(The bower of bliss,) where blessed Angels haunt?
Henceforth I Mors quasi regia via est in coelum.
One. Tuscul. quaest. Mors non est interitus, omnia tollens atque delens, sed
quaedam quasi migratio, commutatioque vitae quae in claris viris and foeminis
dux in Coelum solet esse.
fear thee less, who do but send
Poor Pilgrims sooner to their weary journeyes end.
L'Huomo e Ampulla fatta del Acqua, and del Aria disfatta.
What thing is man that God should him respect?
Or what is life, that man so tenderly
Should hug it so, or deerly it affect?
Lo here an emblem of mortality,
Whom nor green years could warrant from to die,
Nor innocence (the good man's daily feast)
No privilege, ne no immunitie
That flesh can challenge why to be releast,
Could ere redeem, such is the law of all,
Only like fruit Serius aut citius finem properamus ad unum.

some sooner and some later fall.
I saw this blossom Mors and fugacem persequitur virum
Nee parcit imbellis juventae poplitibus
Tumidoque tergo.

blasted in the spring,
I saw this flower withered in the budde,
And to my hearts eternal sorrowing:
This lamp new lighted, being all too good
Longer to burn in it own oylely blood,
I drowned saw, and quite extinguished:
Such is condition of all fleshlyhood.
Just like a Mant. Egl. 3. Heu miserande puer tenera sublata juventa
Quae tibi nascenti luxerunt Sydera? quae tam
Noxia pars Coeli est, ut te nil tale merentem
Laeserit, and primis infortunaverit annis?

buble that is engendered
Of air and blistred water, which eftsoone
Breaks, and with each small puff of winde's again undone.
Monocchio, non e misero nel presenza del cieco.
When I consult the sacred Neve tam graviter eos casus feramus, quos nullo
consilio vitare possimus, eventisque aliorum memoria repetendis, nihil
accidisse nobis novi cogitemus.
Histories,
And other Stories of inferior sort,
And find therein, what under mysteries,
And plainly what they of man's life report,
Often in the prime, often suddenly cut short,
And every day sad samples thereof see,
Me seems they secretly do me exhort
To fit my self, the very next to be,
And Seneca. Tum sibi foelix pauper videtur, quando foelices cecidisse videt.
meekly more my misery to bear,
Compared with others (greater in degree)
As he, whose one eye perled is, and bleare,
Seems Ovid. Qui miser est aliena suis graviora retractet,
Fortius excipiet quae mala cunque cadent.

blessed to him, who can at all not see.
So Thales interrogatus quo pacto quis ferret infortunium, Si, inquit, quis
videat hosts malis majoribus obnoxios; multi enim ex contemplatione alienae
foelicitatis suam calamitatem exasperant.
they, who others greater grief and moan,
Can call to mind, gain strength to bear their own.
Animali d'ogni sort se trovarno nel Rete della morte.
HOw many a subtle snare and guilefull gin
Has man devised, and daily does devise,
To take all sorts of feathered fowls therein?
Some birds nathlesse, so wary been and wise
Not to be taken for all his subtilties.
But there is a fowler lays his deadly gins
Man to entrap, as man does birds surprise,
Spreading his nets when his life first begins:
And though all things his fatal nets perceive,
Yet never bird this fowler could deceive.
All sorts Owen Epigr. Restituunt furtum fures, vi rapta latrones,
Omnia mors aufert restituitque nihil.

to him been all indifferent,
Ringtailes, Buzzards, Puttocks, Ravens, Crows, Pyes,
The Imperial Eagle, and the Falcon Gent,
Pigions, Parakitoes, Peacocks, and Popingies,
And Nightingales which pipe and minstrelize
By night, to all that (fearful) shun the day;
Yea, and the Phoenix (if yet mortal eyes
Such Phoenix ever saw as Stories say)
In that Aucupis horrendi fatalia retia cerne,
Aucupium cujus nulla fefellit avis.

foule-crab-fac'd-fowlers horrid hands.
Must gasp their last-fetcht-breath; see where he stands.
O'gni dolor nuntio di morte.
SOre sick him chanced a jolly Courtier fall,
Though not to death (as he him surely thought)
But death (unthought of) does upon him call,
And ready was away him to have caught;
Whereat amazed, this Courtier him besought
Not all so suddenly him to surprise,
But respit him some time, that so he might
Prepare himself to die before he dies:
And three days warning prays him send before
He from this light his life did mean to reave,
To which death soon agrees, so takes his leave.
Many years after, as this Courtier sat
(For ought he felt) in perfect strength and health,
Seriously thinking how to antidate
Another life, and seize on all his wealth,
Death suddenly comes skipping in by stealth
Crying away Nemo obitum novit, tempusve, locumve, diemve.
.
The Gallant him upbraids of promise breach:
Not I (quoth death) but thou false to thy self:
Ad mortem omnes maturi sumus, and semper ex quo nati imo antequam nati; multis
namque morbis, tanquam mortis apparitoribus, ac satellitibus, infestatur vita
humana, quos nonnulli Medici ^000 nominarunt, omissis novis morborum generious,
quae nominibus carent.
Five fits o'th stone, four agues, two fevers, each
Gray-haire, the pain and loss of teeth; all these,
With many a wrinkle, since I from thee went,
My warnings, and forerunners I thee sent.
Dopo il Givoco, cosi va nel sacco il Re, come il Pedone.
IF in my weak conceit (for self disport)
The world I sample to a Vita anceps maris est cursus, jactamur in alto,
Saepeque naufragiis nos graviora manent.

Tennis-court,
Where fate and fortune daily meet to play,
I do conceive, I do not much misse-say.
All manner chance, are Rackets, wherewithal
They bandie men like balls, from wall to wall:
Some Incertosque fuo dirigit arbitrio
Adversum his spirans cursum, illisque secundum
(...), sed sub humo, portus utrisque manet.

over Line, to honor and great place;
Some under Line, to infame and disgrace;
Some with a cutting stroke, they nimby send
Into the hazard placed at the end;
Resembling well the rest which all they have,
Whom death has seized, and placed in their grave:
Some over the wall they bandie quite away,
Who never more are seen to come in play:
Which intimates, that even the very best
Are soon forgot of all, if once deceast.
So, (whether silke-quilt ball it be, or whether
Made of course cloth, or of most homely lether;)
They all alike are banded to and fro,
And all at last to self same end do go,
Where is no difference, or strife for place:
No odds between a Trype-wife and your Grace:
The penny-counter's every whit as good,
As that, which in the place of thousands stood.
When once the Audit's full cast up, and made
The Chrysostom. Proficiscamur ad Sepulchrum, ostende mihi patrem, ostende mihi
matrem tuam, ubi est qui purpuram induebat? Nihil video nisi ossa putrida;
differentiam nullam video: Sic omnes in universum, post miserum funus, fumus
and umbra sumus.
learned Arts well as the manual Trade:
The Prisoner and the Judge upon the Bench:
The pampred Lady, and the Kitchin-wench:
The noble Lord, or Counsailor of State,
The botchy-Lazer, begging at the gate,
Like Shrubs, and Cedars-mingled ashes, lie
Without distinction, when they once do dye.
Ah for unpartiall death, and th'homely grave
Look equal on the freeman, and the slave.
So most unpartiall umpires are these twain;
A King with them 's but as a common Swain.
No upper hand, 'twixt dust of poor and rich;
No Marshall there to sentence which is which:
And once Manes servus erat dum vixit, mortuus idem,
Aeque ac Dacicus libera jura tenet.

resolved to powder, none can ken,
The dust of Kings from dust of other men:
But as at Chesse, when once the game is done,
The side which lost, and that as well which won.
The victor King, and conquered pawn together
Jumbled, are tumbled to the same bag of lether,
Without regard, whether the pawn or King
Therein lie uppermost or underling.
Heu vivunt homines tanquam mors nulla sequatur,
Aut velut infernus fabula vana foret.
Quomodo Regi Babyloniorum e summo dignitatis fastigio ad inferos dejecto
insultarunt mortui variis sannis atque laedariis, vide insignem illum locum
apud Esaiam, cap. 24.
Nathlesse all sorts, each sex of purpose wink:
And of this destiny done seldom think:
Living (alack) as life should never fail,
And deem of death but as an old wives tale.
Post mortem nescio cujus.
Why do the mighty bear themselves so high,
And vant their parentage and long descent?
Why do the rich so swell with surquedry
Of their huge wealth, which is but to them lent,
But till their lives uncertain term be spent?
Though where is the odds, or what is the difference
Between the wealthy and the indigent,
When both unto the grave once part from hence?
Within a while their dust so mingled is,
That none can safely say, this dust was his, or his:
So have I seen the boistrous-body'd oak,
That above all, her wide-spred arms enhanc't,
I saw it lopt with many a sturdie stroke,
From side to side I saw it through lanc't,
I saw it fall and headlong disadvanc't:
The silly shrub that there beside was grown,
I likewise saw quite rooted up and rancht:
I saw them both into the fire thrown;
I saw them wasted, and in ashes lie,
But whethers ashes were by no means could discry:
Il sonno e una morte vivente.
When I do weigh how little differing
Life Vix uno passu a morte absumus; uno gradu nos and mors dividimur: quotidie
per fenestras penetrat aedes nostras.
is from death, how little or naught at all
Death is from sleep, when near so small a thing
Can make them all be transubstantiall,
Oh what amazement on my mind does fall!
And I do wonder how I sleep or wake,
Since unto death, in nature they so near partake.
And in the morning after quiet sleep,
When I consider to how weak a guard
My precious life I did commit to keep,
Being for death a thing not very hard
To seize his brothers right, since if compared,
Sleep 's but a Owen. Epigr. Angli Bed vocirant lectum, Cambrique Sepulchrum:
Lectus enim tumuli, mortis imago sopor.

breathing death, death breathless sleep,
I feel a tingling chillness over all my bones to creep.
Prosopopeia Corporis Animae valedicturi: Adios a rivederci.
MY lovely friend, that long have been content
To dwell with me in my poor Tenement,
Whose bulk and all the stuff, both warp and woofe,
Is all of clay, the floor and the roof:
Though yet thou never foundst fault; ne did upbraid
This homely hermitage, so meanly made;
O Animula, vagula, blandula, hospes, comesque corporis, quo nunc abibis in
loca Pallida, horrida, nubila; nec ut soles, dabis jocos.
mine own darling, my dear dainty one,
And will thou now indeed from me be gone?
Ah, for thou see all running to decay
The thatchie Horat. Ep. 2. Singuli de nobis Anni praedantur euntes
Eripuere jocos, Venerem, Convivia, Lusus.

covering 's now nigh fallen away:
The windows, which give light to every room,
Broken, and dim, and mistie been become.
The Juven. Sat. 10. Una senum facies cum voce trementia membra.
Et jam leve caput madidique infantia Nasi
Frangendus misero gingiva panis inermi.

Mill-house, and self Miller's out of frame,
My Kitchen smoakes, my Larder is too blame,
And from the Studds each where the Lome does shrink,
And the breeme cold blows in at every chinke.
The brases and supporters of my house
Tremble, and waxen wondrous ruinous.
So that all be it grieve me to the heart,
To think that thou and I (old friends) must part;
Yet, since my Cabban's all out of repair,
(Darling) farewell, go sojourne now else where,
In some clean place, until that premier Main
That built me first, rebuild me up again,
All of the self same stuff, but with such art,
So polisht, and imbellisht every part,
That it shall never be out of Kilture more:
Then shall thou come again, as heretofore,
And dwell with me for ever and for aye:
(So God us both to bless until that happy day.)
Dal Cielo al Cielo.
SUndry opinions amongst learned men
Have raised been about the means and way,
And 'bout the certain time, and season when
That soul of man, which never can decay,
Into the body does it self convey:
Whether't beginning with the body take,
Or long before: if so, where it does stay:
Which strife the soul it self thus plain does make.
From Owen. epigr. Corporis est Genitor Genitor, men's Numine Divum
Ducit ab ingenito non generata Genus:
Coelitus orta mihi men's est, non extraduce, nam si
Corpore cum reliquo men's oritur; moritur.

Heaven I, not from man's seed proceed,
For with the body if it rise it dies.
Animae Prosopopeia.
Morta la pecora non cresce piu la lana.
Ye gentle friends, who mourning here, attend
My livelesse corpse, unto this Earthie bed,
There leaving it to sleep until the end,
When all shall live again, who now are dead,
Weep not for me, since I can neither see,
Nor hear your tears that here for me are shed:
Ne all your prayers a whit can profit me.
The sheep once dead, the wool never grows again,
But as she dies it lies, all after-helpes are vain.
Agree therefore while ye are in the way
With death the adversary of mankind:
For when he comes, no prayer can make him stay,
But he takes all sorts as he does them find.
If good, it is not in him to make them bad;
If bad, no time to mend by him assigned:
What faith and hope we at our parting had
Is only ours; but all done after death
Nor hurts, nor helps, but passes with the breath.
For whilst we live, though at last gasp we been,
Our own or others prayers mote done us good:
Between the stirrup and the ground, between
The bridge, and headlong downfall to the flood,
Mercy can cause the soul catch hold of grace:
But soon as once the life forsakes the blood,
So fast it posteth to its proper place
Of weal, or woe, where it must ever stay,
No prayer it overtakes, or profit may.
The ardent suite of that great man of meat
Was him denied; a seeming-small request;
One moist cool drop to quench his scalding heat:
Yet, since before his prayer he was possessed
Of his just doom, his due-deserved meed,
His tardie suit forth of the Court was cast:
For as the soul once from the body freed,
No more may be recalled, no more can she
By any humane help relieved be.
In vain therefore done silly souls rely
On prayers of friends at their departure hence:
Since with our last breath, Heaven instantly
Is won or lost, no coming is from thence:
Ne is redemption from the place of Hell.
And Purgatory is a mere nonsense,
Where goodmens souls, till bought from thence, must dwell:
Only his prayers, whose blood for us was shed,
Living, and dying stands our souls in stead.
Divortium Animae.
Have ever known two Elegantissima descriptio duorum amantium valedicentium
apud Ovid. Met. lib. 2. Et laniata comas, complexaque corpus amantis
Vulnera supplevit lachrymis, fletumque cruore:
Miscuit, and gelidis in vultibus oscula figens,
Pyrame clamavit, etc.

faithful bosom friends,
Affected like in all their aims, and ends.
After long absence, have observed their meeting,
Their over-joy, and manner of their greeting:
Silent, long-looking in each others faces,
Whilst each his friend within his arms embraces,
Like April-showr's, and Sunshine mixed together,
Each weeping, and each laughing over either,
Till mutual passions having run their course,
Both by degrees, fall freely to discourse?
Ah, but say now, have ever seen these twain
Upon occasion forced to part again?
Have seen two lovers, new made man and wife,
Enforced to part? how bitter is their strife?
What sighs? what tears? what namelesse Creve-coeur?
What grief unutterable done they endure?
What loud Alewes? what heaviness of heart?
What lamentations when they come to part?
What anguish? and with what a deal of pain
Take these their leave, as never to meet again?
Have seen a man from his dear home exiled?
Have heard Seneca Troas. Brevem moram lagire, dum officium parens
Nato supremum reddo, and amplexu ultimo
Avidos dolores satio;
Lachrymis, Ulysse parva quam petimus mora est
Concede, parvos ut mea condam manu
Viventis oculos.

a mother parting from her child?
What weeping, wailing, and what heaviness?
What contristation, even to excess?
And how unable reason is to sway
Th'unbeveld passion, or it make obey?
Or have thou ere observed that passionate,
And doleful quest, that heart affecting-blate
Of lambs, lamenting their dear dammes restraint?
Or marked the mournful noise and pitteous plaint,
Doubled, and often redoubled by the dammes,
At present parting from their little lambs?
Have ere been present at some Cities sack,
And seen Quis cladem illius noctis, quis funera fando
Explicet, aut possit lachiymis aequare dolorem?

the havocke, and the woeful wrack,
When to the surly soldier once betrayed,
The modest matron, and the untoucht maid,
So most Virgil. Eg. 1. Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit,
Barbaras has segites.

unmannerly, spite of their heart,
With their dear honors are compelled to part?
What reluctation, and what sturdie strife?
What means, what shifts, the jewel of their life
To save from spoil, and loss? what vows, what prayer?
What humble 'haviour? and what speaking fair?
What deep distraction? and what heavy cheer?
How loath to yield (alack) yet never the near.
Like loath, and with as much, or more ado,
Body and soul each other do forgo.
Ah when the soul comes warning once to give,
That she no longer in her house will live:
Ne, not so much as sojourne any more,
Where she has dwelt so many years before,
At this sad news, like fruit with windy blast,
Down in a transe the weakly body 's cast:
Inly, the very bowels yearne with grief,
The stomach nauseats at wont relief,
The straightned lungs breath hardly, short and thick,
The head 's distempred, and the heart is sick,
And every room and corner of the house
Filled with dark steems and vapors nubilous.
In this disconsolate and sickly state,
The soul the body does commiserate;
And through mere sympathy is ill at ease;
Therefore all grief on both sides to appease,
And now resolved no longer while to stay,
She forth of doors slips suddenly away.
Eftsoons all is hushed, and the whole house at rest,
Only the eyes which but they been suppressed
Wide open stand, and their lids upward raise,
Still after her, that was their life and light, to gaze.
O valente huomo chi puo esser misero.
FUll easy Marti. epigr. Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere vitam:
Fortior ille facit, qui miser esse potest.

is for men in misery
Weary of life, t'importune death to die,
Who dare not look misfortune in the face,
Nor grief, nor pain, nor sickness, nor disgrace,
But cowardly with horror, and dismay
Out of themselves, often times do run away.
Like Grasshoppers, that skip, and sing, and dance
While Summer lasts; but as flies, in a transe,
When Winter comes, with storms accompan'ed
In every hole, and corner them do hide,
Quite out of love with life, for such to call
For death, no fortitude it is at all.
But he whose countenance at all assayes,
Is ever one, Prospera non loetum fecere, nec aspera tristem,
Aspera risus erant, prospera terror erant:
Non decor effecit fragilem, non sceptra superbam
Sola potens humilis, sola pudica decens.

in Sun or cloudie days:
Whose mind can bend, as buxom as a twigge
To all estates, be it high, low, small, or big,
If fortune say he must do thus, or thus,
With her the matter he does never discuss.
Who with same Et hoc ipsum est (si intelligamus) solatium aequo animo perdere,
quod periturum erat. Sen. Epist. 99.
freeness, that he wins can lose,
Who with small noise can bear all fortunes blows:
And any part that fortune shall her please
To put him to, can personate with ease;
This is a man, one of a thousand men,
A Gallinae filius albae. Juven. Sat. 13.
right-bred chicken of the milke-white hen.
Right truly wise and valiant is Magnitudinis animi proprium est nihil
extimescere omnia humana dispicere, nihil quod homini possit accidere
intolerandum putare. Cic. Epist. lib. 2. Offic.
this man,
Who self submit to all manner weather can;
Who against it comes, for fortune does provide,
Not moved with Ebb, nor flowing of her tide.
So great the strength of his true temperd mind
To welcome fair and foul in self same kind.
Come good? why well, and good: come bad? why well:
So against all pains, his patience is his spell:
He eekes, nor aggravates his weal, or woe;
Ne takes long farewells of them when they go,
And in his open door still ready stands,
When ere they come, to take them by the hands:
So evenly he knows to bear himself;
Juven. Sat. 13. Dicimus autem
Hos quoque foelices, qui far incommoda vitae,
Nec jactare jugum vita didicere magistra.

He rich in poverty, and poor in wealth;
Either or neither can contented be:
Oh blessed man, how fe^e in bonds is he?
Who though his bread too sow'r of leaven taste,
Can eat and it digest as finest paste:
And water drink, yea vinegar for need.
This is the truly Senec. Qui vultus Acherontis atri
Qui styga tristem, non tristis videt,
Audetque vitae ponere finem,
Par ille Regi, par Superis est.

valiant man indeed.
L'Envoy.
Among all things possible, and yet so hard,
Almost next door t'impossibilitie;
That man or woman is, who having fared
All their life long, and lived deliciously:
Not crossed nor vexed with contrariety
Of chance or fortune, which most men dismay
When death them calls, can answer patiently.
Wherefore my soul, do thou still humbly pray,
Nature of nature, good God, grant, when I
Must leave to live, power willingly to die.
Naturae natura, Deus bone, cum mihi posse
Vivere sustuleris, da mihi velle mori.
FINIS.

