THE SERMON THAT THE Reverend father in Christ, Hugh Latimer, bishop of
worcester, made to the clergy, in the co^uocatio^, before the Parlyament
began, the 9. day of June, the. 28. year of the reign of our Sovereign lord
king Henry the viii. now translated out of latyne into english, to the
intent, that thingis well said to a few, may be understand of many, and do
good to al the^ that desire to be better.

(...) both worthy to be hard in you congregation, and also of such, as
best shall become mine office in this place. That I may do this ye more
commodiously, I have taken, that notable Sentence, in which our lord was not
afraid to pronounce, The chylderne of this world to be Luc. 19.
much more prudent and polytike, than the children of light in their
generation. Neither I will be afraid, trusting that he will aid and guide
me, to use this sentence, as a ground and foundation of al such things, as
hereafter I shall speak of.

Now I suppose, that you see right well, being men of such learning, for what
purpose the lord said this, and that ye have no need to be helped with any
part of my labor in this thing. But yet, if ye will pardone me, I will wade
somewhat deper in this mattier, and as nyghe as I can, fetch it from the
first original beginning. For undoubtedly ye may much marvel at this
saying, if ye well ponder both what is said, and who says it. Define me
first these three things, what prudence is, what the world, what light, and
who be the children of the world, who of the light, see what they sygnifie in
scripture, I marvel, if by and by ye al agree, that the children of the
world, should be wyser, than the chylderne of the light. To come some what
nygher the matter, thus the lord begins.

There was a certain rych man, that had a steward, which was accused unto him,
that he had dissypated and wasted his goodis. This(...)

For Luke says, the Lord spoke these wordis to his disciples. wherefore let
it be out of al doubt, that he spoke the^ to us, which even as we woll be
compted the successors and vycars of Christis disciples, so we be, if we be
good dispensers, and do our duitie. He said these things, partly to us,
which spoke the^ partly of him self. For he is that rich man, which not only
had, but has, and shall have evermore, I say not one, but many stewardes, even
to the end of the world.

He is man, seeing that he is god and man. He is rich, not only in mercy, but
in all kind of richesse. For it is he, that gives us al things abundantly.
It is he, of whose hand, we received both our lives, and other things
necessary for the conservation of the same. What man has any thing I pray
you, but he has received it of his plentyfulnes? To be short, it is he, that
opens his hand, and fylleth all beastis with his blessing, and not only
gives unto us, in most ample wise his benediction. Neither his treasure can
be spente, how much so ever he lasshe out, how much so ever we take of
him, his treasure tarieth still, ever taken, never spente.

He is also the good man of the house. The church is his howseholde, which
ought with all dilygence, to be fed with his word and his sacraments. These
be his goods, most precious, the dispensation and administration whereof, he
would bishops and curates should have. Which thing S. Paul affirms,
saying, Let men esteem (...)

hitherto faithful stewardes or no? Ponder, whether yet many of them be, as
they should be or no. Goo ye to, tell me now, as your conscience leads you (I
wolle let pass to speak of many other) was there not some, that dyspysynge
the money of the lord, as copre, and not currante, either coined new them
selfs, orels vtterde abroad newely coined of other, some time either
adulteratynge the word of god, or else mynglinge it (as tauerners do, which
brewe and utter the euylle and good both in a pot) sometime in the stead of
goddis word, blowynge out the dreams of men: While they thus preched to the
people, the redemption that comes by Christis death to serve only them that
died before his coming, that were in the time of the old testament, and that
now sens redempcyon, and forgyuenesse of sins pourchased by money, and
devised of men, is of efficacye, and not redemption purchased by Christ.

They have a wonderfulle pretty example, to persuade this thing, of a certain
married woman, which when her husband was in purgatory, in that fyry fornays,
that has burned away so many of our pens, paid her husbands ransom, and so
of duty claimed him to be set at liberty: While they thus preached Dead
images.
to the people, that dead images (which at the first, as I think, were set up
only, to represe^t things absent) not only ought to be covered with gold,
but also ought of al faithful and christian people, yea in this scarsenes and
penurye of all things, to be cladde with sylke garme^tis, and those also lade^
with precious gemmes and jewels, And that beside all this, they are to be
lyghted with wax candelles, both within the church and without the church,
yea at noone days, as who should say, here no cost can be to greatte, where
as in the mean time, we see Christis faitheful and lively images, bought with
no less price, tha^ with his most precious blood, alas alas, to be an hungered,
a thirst, acolde, and to lie in darkness wrapped in all wretchedness, yea to
lie there, until death take away their miseries: While they preched, these
wylworkes, that comme but of our own devotion, although they be not so
necessary, as the works of mercy, and the precepts of god, yet they said,
and in the pulpet, that wilworkes were more principal, more excellent, and
(plainly to utter what they mean) more acceptable to god than works of mercy:
as though now man's inue^tions and fancies, could plese god better than goddis
preceptis, or strange things better than his own: while they thus preached,
that more fruit, more devotion comes of the beholding of an image, though it
be but a Pater noster while, than is gotten by redynge and contemplation in
scripture, though ye read and contemplate therein seven years space:

Finally, while they preached thus, sowles tourmented in purgatory, to have
most need of our help, and that they can have no aid, but of us in this
world, of the which two, if the one be not false, yet at the least it is
ambiguous, vncercertayne, doubtefull, and therefore rashly and arrogantly with
such boldness affirmed in the audience of people, The Other by all men's opinions
is manifestly false. I let pass to speak of much other such like
countrefayte doctrine, which has been blasted and blown out by some for the
space of. iii. hours together. Be these the chrystian and dyuyne mysteries,
and not rather the dreams of men? Be these the faithful dispensers of goddis
mysteries, and not rather falls dissipatours of the^? whom god never put in
office, but rather the dyuell set them over a miserable family, over an
house myserably ordered and entreated.

Happy were the people, if such preched More happy, if they preached never.
seldom. And yet it is a wonder to see these, in their generation, to be much
more prudent and polytike, than the faithful ministers at in their generation,
while they go about more prudently to stablysshe men's dreams, than these do,
to hold up Goddis commandments.

Thus it comes to pass, that works lucratiue, wylworkes, men's fancies
reign, and christian works, necessary works, fruitefulle works, be trodden
under the foot. Thus the evil, is much better set out by evil men, than is
the good, by good men: because the euylle be more wise, than be the good in
their generation.

These be the false Stewardes, whom al good and faythefull men every day accuse
unto the rych master of the householde, not without great heaviness, that they
wast his goods, whom he also one day wol call to him, and say to them, as he
did to his steward, when he said, What is this, that I here of the?

Here God partly wondereth at our ingratitude and perfidie, partly chydeth us
for them, and being both full of wonder, and ready to chyde, axeth us, What is
this, that I here of you? As though he should say unto us, All good men in all
places, complain of you, accuse your avarice, your exactions, your tyranny.
They have required in you a long season, and yet require, diligence and
synceritie. I commanded you, that with all industry and labor, ye should
feed my sheep: ye cruestly feed your selfs, from day to day, wallowynge in
delytes and ydelnesse. I commanded you, to teach my commandments, and not
your fancies, and that ye should seek my glory and my vantage: you teache your
own traditions, and seek your own glory and profit. You preach very
seldom, and when ye do preche, ye do nothing but cumber them that preach
truly, as much as lies in you, that it were much better, such not to
preach at all, than so perniciously to preach. Oh, what I here of you? You
that ought to be my preachers, what other thing do you, than apply all your
study hither, to bring all my prechers to envy, shame, contempt, yea more than
this, ye pulle them into perils, into prisons, and as much as in you
lyethe, to cruclle deaths. To be short, I would, that christen people should
here my doctrine, and at their commodity, read it also, as many as would: your
care is not, that al me^ may here it, but al your care is, that no lay man do
read it. Surely being afraid, lest they, by the redynge, should understand
it. and understanding, learn to rebuke our slouthefulnesse. This is your
generation, this is your dispensation. This is your wisdom. In this
generation, in this dispensation, you be most politic, most wyttye. These be
the things that I here of your demeanor. I wysshed to here better report of
you. Have ye thus deceived me? or have ye rather deceived your selves?

Where I had but one house, that is to say, the church, and this so derely
beloved of me, that for the love of her, I put my self forth to be slain,
and to shede my blood: this Church at my departure, I committed unto your
charge, to be fed, to be nourished, and to be made much of. My pleasure was,
ye should occupye my place, my desire was, ye should have borne like love to
this church, like fatherly affection, as I did. I made you my vycars, ye in
mattiers of most importance. For thus I taught openly, Lnc. 10.
He that should here you, should here me: He that should despise you, should
despise me.

I gave you also keys, not erthly Matt. 16.
keys, but heavenly. I left my gods, that I have evermore most highely
esteemed, that is, my word and sacraments, to be dispensed of you. These
benefits, I gave you, and do you give me these thanks? Can ye find in your
hearts, thus to abuse my goodness, my benignity, my gentylnesse? Have ye thus
deceived me? No no, ye have not deceived me, but your selves. My gifts and
benefits toward you, shall be to your greatter dampnation. Because ye have
contempned the lenity and clemency of the master of the house, ye have right
well deserved, to abide the rygour and severity of the Judge. Come forth than,
let us see account of your stewardship. An horrible and fearful sentence.
ye may have no longer my goods in your hands. A voice to weep at, and to
make men tremble.

You se brothern, you se, to what evil, the evil stewardes must come to. your
labor is paid for, if ye can so take heed, that no such sentence be spoken to
you. Nay, we must all take heed, lest these thretninges one day take place in
us.

But lest the length of my sermon offend you to soore, I will leave the
rest of the Parabole, and take me to the handlyng of the end of it, that is,
I woll declare you, how the children of this world be more witty crafty and
subtyle, than Luc. 10.
are the children of the light in their generation. Which sentence, would god
it lay in my poor tongue, to explicate with such light of words, that I
might seem rather to have peynted it before your eyes, than to have spoken it:
and that you might rather seem, to se the thing, than to here it. But I
confess plainly, this thing to be far above my power. Therefore this being
only left to me, I wysshe for that I have not, and am sorry, that that is not
in me, which I would so gladly have: That is, power so to handle the thing,
that I have in hand, that all that I say, may turn to the glory of god, your
soul health, and (...)

was in deed as he had said, but co^playned rather, that it should be so: as
many men speak many things, not that they ought to be so, but that they are
wont to be so. Nay, this grieved Christ, that the children of this world,
should be of more polycie, than the children of light, which thing yet was
true in Christis time, and now in our time is most true. Who is so blind, but
he sees this clearly, except perchance there be any, that can not discern
the children of the world, from the children of light? The children of the
world, conceive and bring forth more prudently, and things conceived and
brought forth, they nouryshe and conserve with much more polycie, than do the
children of light. Which thing is as sorrowful to be said, as it seems
absurd to be herd. When ye here the children of the world, you understand
the world, as a father. For the world is father of many children, not by
first creation and work, but by imitatio^ and love. He is not only a father,
but also the son of an other father. If ye know ones his father, by and by
ye shall know his children. For he that has the dyuelle to his father, must
needs have dyuellyshe children. The dyuelle Prince of the world the dyuell.
is not only taken for father, but also for prince of the world, that is, of
worldly folk. It is either all one thing, or else not much different, to say,
children of the world, and children of the devil, according to that, that
Christ said to the Jews, Joan. 8.
Ye are of your father the dyuel: where as undoubtedly he spoke to childerne of
this world. Now seeing the devil is both author and ruler of the darkness, in
the which the chiiderne of this world walk, or to say better, wander, they
mortally hate both the light, and also the children of light. And hereof it
comes, that the children of light never, or very seldom, lack persecution in
this world, unto which the children of the world, that is of the dyuell,
brings them. And there is no man, but he sees, that these use much more
policy in procuring the hurt and damage of the good, than those in defe^dyng
them selfs.

Therefore brothern, gather you, the disposition and study of the chil dre^, by
the disposition and study of the fathers. You know, this is a proverb much
used, An evil crow, an evil egg. Than, the children of this world, that are
known to have so evil a father, the world, so evil a grandefather, the
dyuell, can not chose but be evil. Surely the first heed of their auncester,
was that deceytfull serpent the dyuell, a monster monstrous above all monsters.
I can not holly express him, I wot not what to call him, but a certain
thing, all together made of the hatrede of god, of mistruste in god, of
lyenges, deceites, periuries, discordes, manslaughters, and to say, at one
word, a thing, concrete, heaped up, and made of al kind of myschiefe. But
what the dyuell mean I, to go about to discriue particularly, the dyuels
nature, when no reason, no power of man's mind, can comprehend it. This alonly
I can say grossly and as in a sum, of the which al we, our hurt is the
more, have experience, the devil to be a stynking sentine of all vices, a foul
filthy channel of al myscheues: and that this world, his son, even a child
mete to have such a parent, is not much unlike his father.

Then this dyuelle being such one, as can never be unlike him self, To of
envy, his well-beloved leminan, he begatte the world, and after left it with
discord at nours. Which world, after that it came to man's state, had of many
concubines, many sounes. He was so fecunde a father, and had gotten so many
children of lady pride, dame glottony, maystres avarice, lady lechery, and of
dame subtilitie: that no we hard and scant, ye may find any corner, any kind
of life, where many of his chylderne be not. In court, in coules, in
cloisters, in rochettes, be they never so white, yea where shall ye not find
them? How be it, they that be secular and lay men, are not by and by children
of the world, ne they chylderne of light, that are called spiritual, and of
the clergy. No no, as ye may find among the laity, many children of light,
so among the clergy (how much so ever we arrogate these holy tytles unto
us, and think them only attributed to us, vos estis Matthew. 5.
lux mundi, peculium Christi. etc. Ye are the light of the world, the chosen
people of Christ, a kyngely priesthode, 1. Per. 2.
an holy nation, and such other) Ye shall find many children of the world,
because in all places, the world gets many children. Among the lay people,
the world cesseth not, to bring to pass, that as they be called worldly, so
they at worldely in deed, driven heedlonge by worldly desires, in so much, that
they may right well seem to have take as well the manners, as the name of
their father. In the clergy, the world also has learned a way, to make of men
spiritual, worldelynges, yea and there also to form worldly children,
wherewith great pretense of holiness, and crafty color of religion, they
utterly desire to hyde and clooke the name of the world, as though they were
ashamed of their father, which do execrate and deteste the world (being never
the less their father) in words and outewarde signs, but in heart and work,
they colle and kiss him, and in all their lives declare them selfs to be his
babes: in so much that in all worldly points, they far pass and surmount
those, that they call seculars, lay men, men of the world. The child so
diligently follows the steps of his father, never destitute of the aid of
his grandfather. These be our holy holy men, that say they are deed to the
world, when no men be more lively in worldly things, tha^ some of them be.
But let them be in profession and name, most farthest from the world, most
alienate from it, yea so far, that they may seem to have no occupienge, no
kynrede, no affinity, nothing to do with it: yet in their life and deeds,
they show them self no bastardes, but right begotten children of the world:
as the which, the world long sythens, had by his dear wife, dan Hypocrisy,
and syns has brought them up and multiplied them to more than a good maynye,
increased them, to much* ^o much, al be it they swear by all he saints and
she saints to, that they know not their father, (...) mother, neither the
world, nor hypocrisy, as in deed they can semble and dissemble all things,
which thing they might learn wonderful well of their parents. I speak not
of all religious men, but of those, that the world has fast knytte at his
gyrdell, even in the mids of their religion, that is, of many, and mo than
many. For I fear, lest in all orders of men, the better, I must say, the
greatter part of them, be out of order, and chylderne of the world. Many of
these might seem ingrate and unkind children, that woll no better aknowledge,
and recognyse their parents in words and outward pretense, but abrenounce
and cast them of, as though they hated them as doggis and serpents. How be
hit they, in this wise, are most grateful to their parents, because they be
most like them, so lively representyng them in countenance, and condytions,
that their parents seem in them to be young again, for as much as they ever
say one, and think an other. They show them self to be as sobre, as
temperate, as Curious the Roman was, and live every day, as though al their
life were a shrouynge time. They be like their parents, I say, in as much as
they in following them seem and make men believe, they hate them. Thus
grandfather dyuell, father world, and mother hypocrisy have brought them up.
Thus good obedient sons, have borne away their parents commandments,
neither these be solitarye, how religious, how mocking, how munkyng, I would
say, so ever they be. O ye woll lay this to my charge, that Monachus and
Solitarius, signifies all one. I grant this to be so, yet these be so
solitary, that they be not alone, but accompanied with great flocks of
fraternities. And I marvel, if there be not a greatte sort of bysshoppes and
prelates, that are brethren germayne unto these, and as a great sort, so even
as right borne, and worlds chylderne by as good title as they.

But because I can not speak of all, when I say prelates, I understand
bishops, abbattes, pryours, archedeacons, deanes, and other, of such sort,
that are now called to this co^uocation, as I se, to entreat hereof nothing,
but of such matters, as both appertain to the glory of Christ, and to the
welthe of the people of England. Which thing I pray god they do as
ernestly, as they ought to do. But it is to be fered, lest as light has many
her children here, so the world has sent some of his whelps hither.

Among the which I know, there Men (...) diverse opnio^s agree (...) (...)
they be toither.
can be no concord nor unity, albeit they be in one place, in one
congregation, I know, there can be no agreement between these two, as long as
they have minds so unlike, and so contrary affections, iugementes so utterly
diverse in all points.

But if the children of this world be either mo in no^bre, or more prudent
than the children of light, what than avails us to have this convocation? Had
it not ben better, we had not ben called together at all? For as the children
of this world be evil, so they bread and bring forth things evil, and yet
there be mo of them in all places, or at the leest they be more politic, than
the children of light in their generation. And here I speak of the generation.
whereby they do engender, and not of that, whereby they are engendered, because
it should be to long to entreat, how the children of light are engendered, and
how they come in at the door: and how the children of the world be engendered,
and come in an other way. How be hit, I think all you that be here, were not
engendered after one generation, neither that ye all came by your promotions
after one manner. God grant, that ye, engendered worldly, do not engender
worldly: And as now I much pass not, how ye were engendered, or by what
means ye were promoted to those dignities, that ye now occupye, so it be
honest, good, and profitable, that ye in this your Consultation shall do, and
ingendre. The end of your Convocation, shall show what ye have done: the
fruit that shall come of your co^sultation, shall show, what generation ye be
of. For what have ye done hitherto I pray you, these. vii. years and mo? what
have ye engendered? what have ye brought forth? what fruit is come of your
long and great assemble? What one thing, that the people of England has been
the better of an hear? or you your selves, either more accepted before God, or
better discharged toward the people, committed unto your cure? For that the
people is better learned and (...)

trewly never hurt any of you, ye would have raked in the coals, because he
would not subscribe to certain articles, that took away the supremetie of the
king. Take away these two noble acts, and there is nothing else left, that
ye went about, that I know, sauying that, I now remember, that somewhat ye
attempted against Erasmus, all be it as yet, nothing is come to light.

Ye have often sytte in consultation, but what have ye done? ye have had many
things in deliberation, but what one is put forth, whereby either Christ is
more glorified, or else Christis people made more holyer? I appele to your own
conscience. How chanced this? how came this thus? because there were no
children of light, no children of god among you, which setting the world
at naught, would study to illustrate the glory of god, and thereby show them
selfs children of light? I think not so, certainly I think not so. God
forbid, that all you, which were gathered together, under the pretense of
light should be chylderne of the world. Than why happened this? Why I pray
you? Perchance either because, the chylderne of the world, were mo in
noumbre, in this your congregation, as it often happens, or at the leest of
more policy, than the children of light in their generation. Whereby it might
very sone be brought to pass, that those were much more stronger, in gendryng
the evil, than these in producynge good. The childerne of light have Chylderne
of sightes polycie
policy, but it is like the polycie of the serpent, and is joined with
douuysshe symplicitie. They ingendre nothing but simply, faithfully, and
plainly, even so doing all that they do. And therefore they may with more
facility be combred in their ingendryng, and be the more ready, to take
injuries. But the children of this world, have worldly policy foxely craft,
lyonlyke cruelty, power to do hurt, more then either aspis or basiliscus,
ingendrynge and doing al things, fraudulently, deceytfully, gylefully. Which
as Nembrothes and such sturdy and stout hunters, being full of simulation and
dissimulation, before the lord, deceive the children of light, and combre
them easily. Hunters go not forth in every man's sight, but do their affairs
closely, and with use of gyle and deceyte, wax every day more craftier than
other. The children of this world be like crafty hunters, they be misnamed
children of light, for as much as they so hate light, and so study to do,
the works of darkness. If they were the children of light, they would not love
darkness. It is no marvel, that they go about to keep other in darkness,
saying they be in darkness, from top to toe overwhelmed with darkness, darker
tha^ is the darkness of hell. Wherefore it is well done, in all orders of men,
but in especial in the order of prelates, to put a difference between children
of light, and children of the world, because great deceyte aryseth in taking
the one for the other. Great imposture comes, when they that the common
people take for the light go about to take the son and the light out of the
world. But these be easyly known, both by the dyuersitie of minds, and also
their armours. For where as the children of light at thus minded, that they
seek their adversaries health welthe and profit, with loss of their own
commodities, and often times with ieoperdie of their life, The children of the
world, contrary wise, have such stomakes, that they woll sooner se them deed,
that does them good, than sustain any loss of temporal things. The armure of
the children Armure of the children of light.
of light, are first the word of god, which they ever set forth, and with all diligence put it abroad, that as much as in them lies, it may bring
forth fruit: after this, patience and prayer, with the which in all
adversities the lord comfort them. Other things they commit to god, unto
whom they leave all reuengemente. The armure of Armure o^ worlds children.
the children of the world, are sometime frauds and deceytes, sometime lies and
money: By the first, they make their dreams, their traditions: by the second,
they stablishe and confirm their dremes, be they never so absurd, never so
against scripture, honestye, reason. And if any man resyste them, even with
these weapons they procure to slay him. Thus they boughte Christis death, the
very light it self: and obscured him after his death. Thus they bye every day
the children of light, and obscure them, and shall so do, until the world be at
an end. So that it may be ever true, that Christ said, The chylderne of the
world be wyser. etc.

These worldlynges pull down the lively faith, and full confidence that men
have in Christ, and set up an other faith, an other confidence of their own
making: the children of light contrary. These worldelynges set little by
such works, as god has prepared for our salvation, but they extol
traditions and works of their own invention: the chylderne of light
contrary. The worldlynges, if they spy profit, gaynes, lucre, in any thing,
be it never such a tryfle, be it never so pernicious, they preach it to the
people, if they preach at any time: and these things they defend with tothe
and nail. They can scarce disalowe the abuses of these, all be it they be
intolerable, lest in disalowynge the abuse, they lose part of their profit.
The children of the light, coutrarye put all things in their degree, best
highest, next, next, the worste lowest. They extol things necessary,
christian, and commanded of god. They pull down wylworkes feyned by men, and
put them in their place. The abuses of all thing they ernestly rebuke. But yet
these things be so done on both parties, and so they both do gendre, that
children of the world show them self wyser than the children of light, and
that frauds and deceytes, lies, and money, seem evermore to have the upper
hand. I hold my peace, I woll not say, how fat feasts and ioly bankettes be
ioly instruments, to set forth worldely matters withal.

Neither the children of the world, be only wyser, than the children of
light, but are also some of them, among them self, much wiser then (...)

light, and also the rest of their company, that they both are but foles, if
ye compare them with these.

It was a pleasant fiction, and from the beginning so profitable to the
feyners of it, that almost, I dare boldly say, there has been no emperor,
that has gotten more by taxes and tallages of them that were alive, than
these the very and right begotten sons of the world got by deed men's
tributes and gifts.

If there be some in England, Purgatory the swe tinge of worldlinges.
that would this sweting of the world to be with no less policy kept still,
tha^ it was borne and brought forth in Rome, who tha^ can accuse Christ of
lyenge? No no, as it has been ever true, so it shall be, that the children of
the world, be much wyser, not only in making their things, but also in
conseruing them. I wot not what it is, but somewhat it is, I wotte, that sum
men be so loath to se the abuse of this monster, purgatory, which abuse is
more than abominable. As who should say, there is none abuse in it, or else
as though there can be none in it.

They may seem heartily to love the old thing, that thus ernestly endeavor
them to restaure him his old name. They would not set an hear by the name
but for the thing. They be not so ignorant (no they be craftye) but that
they know, if the name come again, the thing woll come after. Thereby it
aryseth, that some men make their crakes, that they, maugre of all men's heedes,
have found purgatory. I can not tell, what is found. This, to pray for deed
folks, this (...)

uocation, As our acts shall be, so they shall name us, so that now it lies
in us, whether we woll be called chylderne of the world, or chylderne of light.

Wherefore lift up your heads brotherne, and look about with your eyes, spy
what things are to be reformed in the church of England. Is it so hard, is
it so great a matter for you, to se many abuses in the clergy, many in the
laytye?

What is done in the arches? Nothing The arches.
to be amended? What do they there? Do they evermore rydde the peoples busynes
and matters, or combre and ruffle them? Do they evermore correct vice, or
else defend it, sometime being well corrected in other places? How many
sentences be given there in time, as they ought to be? If men say truth, how
many without brybes? Or if Bishops co^sistories
all things be well done there, what do men in bishops consistoryes? Shall
you ofter se the punysshementes assigned by the laws executed, or else money
redemptions used in their stead?

How think you by the Ceremonies, Ceremon^^^.
that are in England, often times with no little offense of weak consciences,
contempned: more oftener with superstition so defiled, and so depraved, that
you may doubt, whether it were better, some of them to tarry still, or
utterly to take them away? Have not our fore fathers complained of the nombre
of ceremonies, of the superstition, and estimation of them?

Do ye se nothing in our holy Holydaye
days? of the which very few were made at the first, and they to set forth
goodness virtue and honesty. But sythens, in some places, there is neither mean
nor measure in making new holy days: as who should say, this one thing is
serving of god, to make this law, that no man may work. But what The bare is
holy, if we be holy.
does the people on these holidays? Do they give them self to godlynes, or
else ungodliness? Se ye nothing brotherne? If you se not, yet god sees. God
sees all the hole holy days, to be spente miserably, in dronkennes, in
glossynge, in strife, in envy, in daunsynge, dycyng, ideines and glortony. He
sees all this, and threteneth punyshement for it. He sees it, which neither
is deceived in saying, nor deceyueth when he threteneth. Thus men serve the
dyuell, for god is not thus served, all be it ye say, ye serve god. No, the
dyuell has more service done unto him on one holy day, than on many workynge
days. Let all these abuses be compted as nothing, who is he, that is not
sorry, to se in so many holy days, rich and welthy persons to flow in
delicates, and men that live by their trauaylle, poor men, to lack necessary
meat and drink for their wives, and their chylderne, and that they can not
labor upon the holy days, except they woll be cited and brought before our
officials? were it not the office of good prelates, to consult upon these
matters, and to seek some remedy for them? Ye shall se my brotherne, ye shall
see ones, what woll come of this our wynkynge.

What think ye of these images Images.
that are had more than their fellows in reputation? that are goone unto, with
such labor and werynes of the body, frequented with such our cost, sought
out and vysited with such confidence? What say ye by these images, that are
so famous, so noble, so noted, being of them so many and so diverse in
England? Do you think, that this preferrynge of picture to pycture, image to
image, is the right use, and not rather the abuse of images? But you woll say
to me, Why make ye all these interrogations? And why in these your demaundes
do you let and withdraw the good devotion of the people? Be not al things
well done, that are done with good intent, when they be profitable to us? So
surely Covetousness both thinks and speaks. Were it not better for us, more
for estimation, more meter for men in our places, to cut away a piece of this
our profytte, if we will not cut away all, thanne to wynke at such
ungodliness, and so long to wink for a little lucre, specially if it be
ungodliness, and also seem unto you ungodliness?

These be two things, so often to seek Relikes of saints.
mere images, and sometime to visit the relikes of saints. And yet as in
those, there may be much ungodliness committed, so there may here some
superstition be hid, if that sometime we chance to visit pigges bones, instead of saints relics, as in time past it has chanced) I had almost
said) in England.

Than this is to great a blyndenes, a darkness to sensyble, that these should
be so commended in sermons, of sum men, and preached, to be done after such
manner, as though they could not be evil done, which not withstanding are
such, that neither god nor man commands them to be done. No rather, men co^
manded them either not to be done at all, or ess more slowlyer and seldomer to
be done: for as much as our auncetours made this constytution,

we command the priests, that they often admonysshe the people, and in
especial women, that they make no vows, but after long deliberation, consent
of their husbands, and counsel of the priest.

The church of England in time past made this constitution. What saw they,
that made this decree? They saw the intolerable abuses of images. They saw
the peryls, that might ensue, of goinge on pilgremage. They saw, the
superstytious difference that men made between image and image. Surely somewhat
they saw.

The co^stitution is so made that in manner it takes away all such
pylgremages. For it so plucketh away the abuse of them, that it leaves either
none, or else seldom use of them. For they that restreyne making vows, for
going of pylgremage, restreyn also pilgremage. Saying that for the most
part, it is seen, that few go on pilgremage, but vowemakers, and such as by
promise bind them self to goo. And when, I pray you should a man's wife go on
pilgremage, if she went not, before she had well debated the matter with
herself, and obtained the consent of her husband, being a wise man, and were
also cou^selled by a learned priest so to do? When should she go far of, to
these famous images? For this the common people of England think to be goinge
on pilgremage, to go to sum deed and notable image out of town, that is to
say far from their house.

Now if your forefathers made this constitution, and yet thereby did
nothing, the abuses every day more and more increased, what is left for you to
do? Brotherne and fathers, if lie purpose to do any thing, what should ye
sooner do, than take utterly away, these deceytfull and iuglyng images: or else
if ye know any other mean, to put away abuses, to show it, if ye intend to
remove abuses. Me think it should be grateful and pleasant to you, to mark
the ernest mind of your forefathers, and to look upon their desire, where they
say in their constitution, we command you, and not, we counsel you. How
have we ben so long a cold, so long slack in setting forth so wholesome a
precepte of the church of England, where we be so hot in all things, that
have any gaynes in them, all be it they be neither commanded us, nor yet given
us by counsel: as though we had leauer, the abuse of things should tarry
still, than it taken away, lose our profit.

To let pass the solemn and nocturnal bacchanals, the prescript miracles,
that are done upon certain days in the Weste part of England, who has not
hard, I think, ye have hard, of sayncte Blesis heart, which is at Maluerne,
and of saynct Algars bones, how long they deluded the people? I am afraid, to
the loss of many sowles. Whereby men may well conjecture, that all about in
this realm, there is plenty of such iuglynge deceytes. And yet hitherto ye
have sought no remedy. But even still the miserable people is suffered, to take
the false miracles for the true, and to lie still a stepe in all kind of
superstytion. God have mercy upon us.

Last of all, how think you of Matrimonye.
matrimony? Is all well here? What of baptism? Shall we evermore in
ministering of it, speak latin, and not english rather, that the people may
know what is said and done?

What think ye of these mass priests, and of the masses them self? The
abuses reprohe^ded, the reverence of the Mass is not diminisshed, but rather
set forth.
What say ye? Be all things here so without abuses, that nothing ought to be
amended? Your forefathers saw somewhat, which made this constitution, against
the venalitie and sale of Masses, that under peine of suspending, no priest
should sell his saying of trice^nals, or annals. what saw they, that made this
constitution? What pristes saw they? what manner of masses saw they, trow ye?
But at the last, what became of so good a constitution? God have mercy upon us.

If there be nothing to be amended abroad, concerning the holy, let every
one of us make one better. If there be neither abroad nor at home any thing to
be amended, and redressed, My lords, be ye of good chere, be merry: and at the
least because we have nothing else to do, let us reason the mattier, how we
may be rycher. Let us fall to some pleasant communication: after let us goo
home, even as good as we came hither, that is right begotten children of the
world, and utterly worldlynges. And while we live here, let us all make bon
chere. For after this life, there is small pleasure, little myrthe for us to
hoope for, if now there be nothing to be changed in our facions. Let us
say, not as S. Peter did, Our end 1. Petr. 4.
approaches nighe, this is an heuye herynge: but let us say, as the evil
servant said, It woll belong ere Matt. 24. Luc. 12.
my master come. This is pleasant. Let us beat our fellows. Let us eat and
drink with dronkerdes. Surely, as often as we do not take away the abuse of
things, so often, we beat our fellows. As often as we give not the people their
true fode, so often we beat our fellows. As often as we let them dye in
superstition, so often we beat them. To be short, as often as we blind, lead
them blind, so often we beat and grievously stryke our fellows. When we
walter in plesures and idelnes, tha^ we eat and drink with drunkardes. But
God will come, God will come, he woll not tarry long away. He woll come upon
such a day, as we nothing look for him: and at such hour, as we know not.
He woll come, and cut us in pyeces. He woll reward us, as he does the
hypocrites. He woll set us, where wayling shall be my brothern, where gnastyng
of tethe shall be my brotherne. And let here be the end of our tragedy, if ye
woll. These be the delycate dysshes, prepared for worlds well be loved
children.

These be the wafers and to^kettes, provided for worldly prelates, waylynge and
gnasshynge of teethe. Can there be any mirth, where these two courses, last all the feast? Here we lawghe, there we shall weep. Our teeth make merry here, ever
dashing in delicates, there we shall be torn with teeth, and do nothing but
gnashe and grynde our own. To whatte end have we now excelled other in
policy? What have we brought forth at the last?

Ye se brothern, what sorrow, what punyshement is provided for you, if ye be
worldlynges. If ye wol not thus be vexed, be not ye the chylderne of the
world. If ye woll not be the children of the world, be not stryken with the
love of worldelye things, leave not upon them. If ye woll not dye eternally,
live not worldly. Come, go to my brothers, goo to, I say again, and ones
again, go to, leave the love of your profit, study for the glory and profit
of Christ, seek in your consultations, such things as pertayne to Christ,
and bring forth at the last, somewhat, that may please Christ. Feed ye tenderly
with all diligence, the flock of Christ. Preach truly the word of god, Love
the light, walk in the light: and so be ye the children of light, while ye are
in this world, that ye may shine in the world, that is to come, bright as the
son, with the father, the son, and the holy ghost, to whom be all honor
and glory.

Amen.
Imprinted at London by Thomas Berthelet, printer to the kings grace. The year
from the birth of Christ. 1537. the 23. of November.

Cum priuilegio.


