A SERMON PREACHED at White Hall, on the 24. of March, 1621.

Being the day of the beginning of his MAJESTY'S most gracious Reign.

By the Bishop of S. David's.

LONDON Printed by BONHAM NORTON, and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. 1622.

PSALM. 21. 6,7. For thou have set him as Blessings for ever: Or, given him.
thou have made him glad with the joy of thy countenance. Because the King
trusts in the Lord: and in the mercy of the most High he shall not miscary.
Or, not be moved.

MY Text begins, where every good man should end; that is, in Blessing. Not an
Esau; but he cries, when the Blessing is gone, Genes. 27. Genesis 27.34.
This Psalm is a Thanksgiving for David; for the King. In Thanksgiving, two
Blessings: One, in which God blesses us; and bless God: For he that praises
him, and gives him thanks, is said to bless him. Exodus 18. Exodus 18.10.


Now we can no sooner meet Blessing in the Text, but we presently find two
Authors of it, God and the King: For there is God Blessing the King; and the
King Blessing the people. And a King is every way in the Text: For David the
King set the Psalm for the People; and the People, they sing the Psalm
rejoicing for the King. And all this is, that the King may rejoice in thy
strength, O Lord, v. 1. Verse 1.
And when this Psalm is sung in Harmony, between the King and the People,
then there is Blessing.

This Psalm was sung in Jerusalem; But the Music of it is as good in the
Church of Christ, as in their Temple. Nor did the spirit of Prophecy in David,
so fit this Psalm to him, as that it should Honor none but himself: S.
Hieron. S. August. Iansen. Calu. Lorin. ibid.
No; For in this the learned agree; That the letter of the Psalm, reads David;
that the Spirit of the Psalm, eyes Christ: that the Analogy in the Psalm is
for every good King, that makes David his example, and Christ his God.

The Psalm in general is a Thanksgiving for the happy estate of the King. In
particular, it is thought a fit Psalm to be recited when the King has
recovered health; or when a gracious King begins his Reign: Because these
times are Times of blessing from the King: And these are, or ought to be, times
of Thanksgiving from the people. My Text then is in part for the day: For I
hoped well it would have been Tempus restaurationis, a time of perfect
restoring for the Kings health, and thanks were due for that: And it is Dies
creationis, the Anniuersary day of his Crown; and thanks is due for that. And
there is great reason, if you will receive the Blessing, that you give the
Thanks.

The Text it self is a reason of that which is found v. 5. Verse 5.
There it is said, that God has laid great dignity and honor upon the King.
And here is the Means by which, and the Reason why he has laid it there. So
three parts will divide the Text, and give us order in proceeding. The first is
the Means, by which God lays honor upon the King. Not honor only, which
they all have as Kings: but that great honor in his salvation, which attends
good and gracious Kings. And the Means are twofold Dando and Laetificando, By
Giving, and by Ioying. By giving the King as a Blessing to the people; Thou
have given And by Ioying the King for blessing the people: Thou have made him
glad with the joy of thy The second is the Reason both of the Honor and the
Means of laying it upon the King: And that is, Quia sperat; Because the King
puts his trust in the Lord. Success, which his Honor shall have by his Hope,
That in the mercy of the most High he shall not be moved, he shall not
miscarie.

Means by which God adds Honor even to the Maieiestie of Princes. And because
that doubles in the Text, I will take the first in order, which is, Dando: Thou
layest great Honor upon the King, by giving or setting him, as Blessings for
ever. In which Means of laying Honor, the circumstances are three.

And the first of the three tells us what a King is; and that is worth the
knowing: And mark the Holy Ghost, how he begins. He describes not a King by
any of his Humane infirmities, such as all men have: And no mean ones are
registered of David, the particular King spoken of: No, that had been the way
to dishonor the King; which is no part of Gods intention. But he begins at
that which crowns the Crown it self. He is Benedictio, a Blessing, and no
less, to the people. And therefore in all things, and by all men, is to be
spoken of, and used as a Blessing.

Now it is one thing for a King to be blessed in himself, and another thing
to be given or set up, as a Public Blessing to other men. David was both, and
he speaks of both. A King then is a Blessing to, or in himself (as the
Septuagint and Tremellius give the words: Dedisti illi benedictiones; Thou have
given blessings to him) when by Gods grace he is Particeps sanctificationis,
Partaker of Gods hallowing Spirit. For no man, King or Subject, can be blessed
in his soul without Religion and Holiness. And if these be counterfeites,
such also is his Blessedness.

But a King is given as a Blessing to others, when in the riches of Gods grace
upon him, he is made Diuinae Bonitatis fons medius, A mediate fountain of Gods
goodness and bounty streaming to the people; When he turns the graces which
God has given him, to the benefit of them which are committed to him. For
mark the Heavens, and the Earth will learn. God did not place the Sun in
the heavens only for height, but that it might have power to Bless the
inferior world, with Beams, and Light, and Warmth, and Motion. David was
thus, and thus was Christ, and such is every King in his proportion, that sets
up these for his example. It is not easy to match David; but a better example
then Christ cannot be found. And therefore when Clem. Alex. had described a
King indeed, Lib. 1. stro.
One that is Beatus and Benedicens, a blessed and a blessing King; Or, if you
will, as it is here in the Abstract, Ipsa benedictio, Blessing it self, He is
^t Cumsmodi est Dominus: Such as is Christ. There, the perfect example of
Blessing.

Now while the King is said to be a Blessing, let me put you in mind that
there is a double Benediction. Descendens vna; Altera ascendens, One
descending, and another ascending. That which Descends, is the Blessing of
Benefit; That is the Kings blessing. He above, and this drops from him. In
this, like God, whose immediate Vicegerent he is. For Gods Blessings also are
said to come down and descend. Iaco. 1.17.
S. Jacob 1. The Blessing which Ascends, is that of Praise, and Thanks, and
fair interpretation of Princes Actions: And this is the peoples Blessing. And
they are both in Scripture together. 3. Reg. 8.
3. Reg. 8. For there, Verse. 55.
ver. 55. Solomon's blessing comes down upon the people; Verse. 66.
and ver. 66. the peoples blessing goes up back again, to Solomon.

Between these two is the happy commerce that a Prince has with his people:
when they strive to out-blesse one another. When the King labors the Peoples
good: that is his blessing descending upon them. And the people labor his
honor: that is their blessing reaching up to him. And in this sense also as
well as the former, a King is said, Poni in benedictionem, to be set up as a
Blessing, that is, for one whom the people ought to bless. For Gods ordinance,
Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17.
1. S. Pet. 2. does as much, if not more, require the people to bless, that
is, to honor the King, then it does the King to bless, that is, to do good
to his people. And there is no good division between a King and his people,
but this one; That in parting of this great good of a gracious government; The
Kings part be the Honor: The peoples part may be the Benefit: and both meet
again in the Blessing. And it is so in my Text; For, Ar. Mont. renders the
Original by Pones eum. There the King blesses the people: And the Septuagint
and Tremel: by Posuisti ei: There God promises that he will, or rather says he
already has: and ties the people that they do Bless the King.

And you may observe too, that while a King keeps to the two great examples of
the Text, David and Christ; He is not only a Blessing, but he comes as he
writes, Plural. And so it is in the Text. Benedictiones; not one, but many
Blessings. And indeed the Blessings which descend from a King upon a people,
seldom come single and alone: and in this, Kings keep their honor, that they
bless by number. Esau could not believe that his father Isaac (who was far
less then a King to Bless) had but one Blessing in his store. Genesis 27. Genesis
27.38.


But be the Blessings never so many, never so great: Be the Assistants which a
King has, never so deserving: (And David had his Worthies you know. 1. Chro.
11.10.
1. Chron. 11.10.) yet none of them may share with him in his honor of
Blessing the people, nor none ought to steal away the hearts of his people
upon any popular pretenses whatsoever. For these wheels, of what compass
soever they be, move all in his strength, and therefore ought to move to the
conservation of his Honor.

And this is in the Text too: for David, no question, had a wise and a
provident Council, Nobles of great worth; and these wanted not their deserved
Honors: (God forbid they should:) And yet when it came to blessing the people,
that great means of specialtie of Honor to a King; there David stands alone
without a sharer. Dedisti, yea but whom? not eos, but Eum: not them, but Him,
as Blessings to the people. Ezekiel 1.15.
The vision which Ezechiel saw. c. 1. seems to me an expression of this; It
was a vision of Wheels: the Wheels were many: the motion uniform; one wheel
within another, the less within the greater: yet in the apparition, these
vnder-wheeles have no name, but only the great compassing wheel, Rota ecce
vna: One wheel appeared. And in this case, every man is bound to be in the
service, but the best may not look to share in the Honor.

And seldom mean they well to Princes, that against the phrase of the holy
Ghost in this place, Dedisti Eum, thou have given Him as Blessings, will needs
be thought Blessers of the People: For such men do but fish, and bait
troubled waters to their own advantage: yet these men speaking oftentimes with
more freedom, then either Truth, or Temper, so long as they find fault with
the present government, never want (says Hooker) Attentive and favorable
hearers. Lib. 1. verbis primis.
Never: for my part I will keep to the words of my Text: And if there be a
Blessing (as who sees not but there is?) under God, I will go to Dedisti Eum,
Him whom God has given.

If you think I have stayed too long in this circumstance, I hope you will
pardon me: You should be as loath as I, to go from amidst the Blessings: but I
must proceed.

Secondly then, a King, a Blessing; yea, for Ever. For Ever: And so Christ and
David are both in the Letter, Christ a Blessing for ever; and that simply: for
of his Kingdom no end. Luke 1.33.
S. Luc. 1.33. David a blessing for ever: but that not in himself, but as
Christ was to descend from him, as he was Radix Iesse. Esai. 11.1.
Esai. 11. from whence did spring Christ the Blessing for ever. And Christian
Kings in their generations, a blessing for ever too: but that limited; as they
profess Christ, and as they imitate David.

Now David is observed, to have Blessed the people under him three ways; and
to these three generals, all the Blessings of a The true worship of the true
God, that is the first: Preservation from foreign And the third is, Life and
vigor of Justice and judgment among the people. The closer a King keeps to
these three, the larger his Blessings: but if he fall short in any of these, so
much does he lessen his Blessings upon the people.

Religion among them, then his Blessings are not for Ever, but end in the Peace
and Plenty of If he preserve them not from foreign violence; then his
Blessings reach not so far as to the Ever of this life, but are hewn down
by the sword of the Enemy. If he do keep out foreign force, yet if Justice
and Judgment, be not in life and in blood at home, his best Blessings will
be abused, even by them which are trusted with dispensing them, and that for
Ever.

Now this In perpetuum, for ever, was absolute in Christ: but in David and
other Kings, be they never so eminent in their times, it is but respectively
for ever. That is, not for the Ever of eternity: no nor for the Ever of time:
But only for the Ever of perpetuity of their own Reign, in their allotted
time. And this is a large for ever. For you can have no longer Blessings from
the best King, then God gives him time to bless in: for he is constant in
Blessing, that gives it not over but with life, and this was Iosiahs honor. 4.
Reg. 23. 4. Reg. 23.25.


And yet I may not forget, that some times this for ever extends the blessings
of Kings beyond their life. Namely, when they bless their people with a
Blessing successor: for the Septuagint read it here, Iansen. and Copp. ibid.
(...) and that implies Succession: So it is a Present, and an after blessing.
A blessing in himself, and a blessing in his feed. In his person, and in his
posterity a Blessing. And the Text fitted David home. In himself, all his
life: and in Solomon after his life, a blessing for ever. And in this the Text
applies it self, and so will do, I hope, for ever: and I will ever pray, that
the King may be a Blessing long, and his Solomon after him, to his people, even
in seculum seculi, age after age in an Ever of succession, and so proceed.

King is a Blessing to his people, and that for ever: but who makes him so?
yea, now we are come to the great Father of blessings God himself: for if you
mark, the Text begins at Tu dedisti, or Tu posuisti; Thou Lord have given him,
thou have set him for blessings: And God as in other, so in this particular,
very gracious: for no people can merit this at Gods hand, that their King
should be a Blessing to them, and continue so. No, you see Tu dedisti, thou
have given him, makes him Donum, a mere gift, no purchase.

Again, no King can promise and perform this out of his own strength, that
he will be a Blessing to his people, and that for ever. No, you see Tu
posuisti, thou have set him, keeps him at his disposing, leaves him not to his
own. And indeed in this, a Kings felicity is borne as Christ's was, by an
ouershadowing power. And you cannot, no not with a curious eye, search all the
Reasons, how he is set for Blessings: because God in disposing it, has hid
Lumen intra vmbram, and thickened the veil that is drawn over it.

There is much, I confess, in the King, to compass the Affections of his
People: and there is much in the people, not to distaste the heart of their
King for trifles, not to urge him with indignities. But when all is done, and
the blessing stands between the King and the People, ready to descend from the
One to the other; yet you must go to Tu dabis, Thou Lord shall give it: For if
he give it not, it will not be had: There will be a rub where it is not looked
for, and a stop in the Blessing. For is there conquest over enemies, or rest
from them? why that is Tua gratia, Gods favor. So S. Basil. S. Basil. Ib.
Is a King, or a State, famous for the ordering of it? why there is auxilium a
te, All help from God. So Theodor. Theodor. Ib.
And God sells neither his help, nor his favor: It is all at Tu dedisti, his
gift, his free gift, where ere it is.

There is a great Error in the world, I pray God it be not as Common as
Great: And it is, to think that this blessing can be brought about by Policy
only. Policy is necessary; and I deny nothing but the Only. And they which
maintain that, leave no room for Tu dabis, Thou shall give the blessing: But
will carry the world before them whether God will or no: Whereas there is more
in Tu dabis, in Gods gift, then in all the Policies of the world. And it must
needs be so: For all Policy is but a piece of Gods gift, a branch of Gods
wisdom: Therefore not so great as the whole. And no Policy can promise it
self success; there it must needs wait and stay, for Tu dabis: Therefore
not so great as that upon which it attends. And when miserable events dog the
wisest proiects, then Achitophel himself will confess this; 2. Reg. 17.
though perhaps not till he go home to hang himself. 2. Reg. 17.

With this Politic error, went another of Destiny. The former leaves Gods
Altar, and the sacrifice is to their own net. Hab. 1. Haba. 1.16.
This other hampers God in the net; and makes both his Blessings upon Kings,
and his Blessings from Kings to the People, to be all fatal. And this was too
common among the Heathen. So Flau. Vopiscus. Fato Remp. regi satis constat:
Flau. Vop. in vita Cari.
It is evident enough that Kingdoms are governed by fate. And then, where is
Tu dedisti? Thou have given him, if he and his Blessings must be whether God
will or not?

But these blind men had Blessings, and knew not whence they came, unless
perhaps they understood Providence by Fate: (And Minut. Foel. is not much
against it. M. Feel. in Octau. p. 96.
) And if they did, then Providence, and Tu dabis, are all one. For God never
gives a blessing to a King and his people, but he gives it, and orders it by
Providence. Yet here the wisest of the Heathen are inexcusable, in that they
enjoyed the gift, and would not serve the giver, Romans 1. Romans 1.21.
Look right therefore upon The Author of Blessings. And where it is, Tu
dedisti, Thou have given him as Blessings (as it is with us) there know, it is
worth Thanks both from Prince and people. And where it is, Tu dabis, Thou shall
give (and my Text is read both ways) there know, it is worth the asking, both
for Prince and people; that God will give their King unto them as blessings for
ever.

And as it is, Tu dedisti, Thou have given; So that is not all, but, Tu dedisti
prius, Thou have given first. God is first in the work, where ever a gracious
King is a blessing to his people. For that which is simply a gift in the Text,
is a prevention, ver. 3. Ver. 3.
And, Praeuenis eum, preuents the King with blessings first, that he after may
bless the people: So that in this common blessing God is the prime moouer,
as well as in grace given to particular men. And it is true of both, which S.
Augustine delivers but of one: Lib. 1. con. duas epist. Pelag. c. 9.
Auertat Deus hanc amentiam, God turn away this frenzy from us, that in his
own gifts (And here it is, Tu dedisti) we should place our selves first, and
set him after. No; where ever comes, Tu dedisti, Thou have given: God is
evermore first in the work to begin it, yea, and last in the work to
perfect it, or else no blessing.

And therefore mark the Text, and ye shall find, that wheresoever there is,
Tu dedisti, Thou have given, there is still, Posuisti, and disposuisti, Thou
have set him, and disposed him to be so. And these two perfect the gift: For,
Tu pones, Ar. Mon.
that sets and settles the King to be Blessings. And there is his Constancy:
Not a Blessing to day, and none to morrow. And, Dispones eum, (for so
Tremellius will have it) that disposes and orders the King in his blessings.
And there is his wisdom, to sit and steare his Passengers; That he may make
all things suite with the opportunities, and fit the varieties of the people:
For they, do the Governor never so worthily, will not think themselves
blessed, if they be not fitted. And a Commonwealth, when the humors of the
people feel a spring, and are swelling, Flau. Vopis. in Caro.
(as it was once said of that of Rome) suffers almost all those various
motions, Quae patitur in homine vno mortalitas, which mortality it self
suffers in a particular man.

And it should not be passed over neither, for whose mouths David fits this
David speaks it for himself: And there is the King acknowledging Tu dedisti,
Gods gift in making him all the Blessings that he is to his people. Next I
find, Pij loquuntur; they are the faithful that speak it: Not a religious
and a good subject, but he is at Tu dabis, that God would bless his King, and
make him a Blessing for ever.

And therefore when God gives, and the King blesses, and the people take no
notice of it, it is gross ingratitude: when they have a blessing and know it
not, it is a dangerous slumber: when they may have a blessing and will not, it
is a sullen pet, and shows they have no mind to be thankful, either to God
or the King for Blessing them.

Against this: say, The blessings are not perfect. Well, suppose that, what
then? Are not the best actions of the best men mixed? Shall we refuse degrees
of happiness, because they are not Heaven? No sure: for Angels dwell not in
bodies of men. And in the very Text it is not simply, Thou have given
blessings; But the words are, Dedisti Eum: thou have given Him as blessings.
Therefore the Blessings here spoken of, come not immediately from God to the
people, that they should be thought every way perfect. But they are strained
Per eum, through him, through the Man, and therefore must relish a little of
the Strainer, Him and his Mortality: And there cannot be a greater wrong done
unto Princes, in the midst of their care for the people, then for men to
think they are not Blessed by them, upon supposall that some things may be
imperfect. Hook. Lib. 1. Ecc. Pol.. 1 Prin.
For the secret lets, and difficulties in public proceedings, and in the
manageing of great State affairs, are both innumerable, and inevitable: and
this every discreet man should consider.

Gods laying Honor upon the King. The first, ye see, was by giving him as
blessings: And this second is Laetificando, by making him glad with the joy of
his countenance. The Text goes on cheerfully, (and so I hope do you in
hearing it:) from blessing to Joy; And here again the circumstances are three.

Laetificando, by ioying him, while he blesses the people: And the Joy which
God gives cannot but be great; and therefore the Septuagint expresses it by two
words, (...). Thou shall Joy him with Joy: that is, thou shall make him
exceeding glad: and it is requisite a King should have Joy, great Joy, for he
cannot sit at the stearne, without a great deal of Care: And therefore it is
fit he should be rewarded with a great deal of Joy.

Now if a King will not fail of this Joy, he must go to the right Owner of
it, God himself, that both has and gives abundantly. If he seek it in
Himself, if in the very People which he blesses; it will not ever there be
found. For when a King Blesses his people, if the blessing be as discreetly
taken, as it is graciously meant; then there is Joy, great Joy, of al hands. But
when a people has furfetted long upon Peace and Plenty, it is hard to please
them with blessing it self: and every little thing is a burden to the^, that
in long time have felt the weight of none: And in such times, Malcontents are
stirring. And there want not in all States, those that are D^cti in perturbanda
Reipub. pace, very learned in disturbing the Peace of the Commonwealth: And
the factious aim of such men, is either to hinder and divert the blessings
which are ready, and upon the point of descending from the King upon the
People: or else in misinterpreting, or extenuating Blessings already come
down. And these (let the world dote on them while they will) are the hinderers
of mutual Joy between the Prince and the People.

Therefore, if the King will look to the preservation of his own Joy, he must
seek it where these cannot hinder it, at Tu laetificasti, Thou Lord have Joyed
him. And the word in my Text is (...) which signifies a Joy that is inward, and
referred to the mind. And Tu laetificasti, is ever at this Joy; Let the
Intentions be right and honorable, and Joy will follow them. It was David's
case: I will forbear to tell you how scornfully, how unworthily, he was used by
the basest of the people: but God kept close to him, Tu laetificasti, and made
him Joyful.

Tu laetificasti, God ioying David, there the Joy is not like Lightning, a
flash and gone, but a true and a permanent Joy: True in regard of the Author of
it, God; for here is another Tu dedisti, God gave this also; and true in regard
of the Object of it upon which it settles, which is God too; God, and the light
of his countenance. And how can it be other then true Joy, that has God at
both ends of it, as this has? For it begins at God the Author; and it
continues, and ends, in God the Object.

God; but not simply so expressed in the Text, but God and his countenance,
expressing after the manner of men: For a man is Ioyed at the countenance he
loves; And yet not simply so neither, not his Countenance only, but the Joy of
his Countenance. And a man would not see sadness in the face he loves; Joy
there, reioyces him. But no countenance like to Gods; an eye upon the Beauty of
his Countenance fill's with joy.

Now Vultus Dei, Gods Countenance here, signifies Gods presence. Bellarm. ibid.
So Bellarm. It is true; yet not his presence only, but his Favor and his
Love too: So Theodor. Theodor. ibid.
It is true; yet not empty Love only, but succor and protection too: So
Euthym. Euthy. ibid.
It is true, yet is it not these alone, but all these and more.

And this considered, it is no great matter how you read my Text; A, or Cum,
or Iuxta, or Apud vultum: For the King needs all, and God gives all. For when
he is once come to Tu laetificasti; this joy begins at a vultu, from his
Countenance: It goes on cum vultu, in company with his Countenance; It enlarges
it self Iuxta vultum, when it comes near his Countenance; And at the last it
shall be made perfect apud vultum, when it comes to his Countenance, to vision.

And as David's cares were great, so God would answer them with degrees of Joy.
For had God any more Faces then one (as Ar. Mont. renders the Original Cum
faciebus eius) he would hide none of them from David. If any were more
comfortable then other, he shall see that. And indeed though the Countenance of
God be but one and the same, yet it does not look Joy upon all men. But his
Aspects to the creature are Planetary (as it were) and various. And David is
happy, that in the midst of all these various turns of Gods Countenance, A,
and Cum, and Iuxta, and Apud, we find not (nor I hope never shall) that
disasterous Aspect of opposition, which is contra, against: For then all Joy
were gone. For if it should be Rex contra vultum Dei, then it were all sin.
And if it should be vultus Dei contra Regem, (both which God forbid) then it
were all punishment; In neither Joy, in neither Blessing. It is far better in
my Text, if we take care to hold it there, Cum vultu, with, or in, the favor
of his Countenance.

Thirdly, this joy begins at the King, Laetificasti eum; Thou have made him
glad. He must have the greatest care, and therefore the Joy must be first or
chiefest in him: and if you will take a view of my Text, you will find Him
excellently seated for the purpose: for I find Eum, that is David, that is the
King, standing between Laetificasti and Gaudium, as if God would have the
Kings place known, by Joy on the right hand, and Joy on the left, here God
places the King: this is his ordinance to season his cares: therefore if any
attempt to displace him, to plunge him into grief, to make him struggle with
difficulties; it is a kind of Deposing him. The care of Government should be
eased, not discomfited: else doubtless God would never have placed David
between Laetificasti and gaudium, Joy and Joy.

And it is fit for the people, especially the greater, in their families, to
look to this, that David may keep Inter Laetificasti and gaudium, the place
where God has set him: for when all is done, and the brain weary of thinking,
this will be found true; They cannot hold their places in gaudio, in joy, if
David sit not sure in his: and it is an excellent observation made by
Cassidore, Lib. 12. Epist. 19.
(a Senator he was, and Secretary of State to Theodoricus, and after a most
strict and devoted Christian.) He makes all sad that endeauours not the Kings
Joy: Et omnes affligit, qui Regi aliquid necessarium subtrahit: And he
afflicts all men, that withholds necessaries from the King. And certainly it
is the glory of a State, to keep David upright where God sets him: and that you
see is, Inter laetificasti and gaudium, between Joy and Joy, where God ever
keep Him, and His.

Reason both of the Thing, and the Means: of the Honor, and the Manner of
Gods laying it upon Kings. And the Reason is, Quia sperat, because the King
puts his trust in the Lord: In which, may it please you to observe three
circumstances.

The first of these is the Virtue it self, God first gave the Prophet, and for
which he after gave him a Blessing to the People, and Joy in himself. The
Virtue is Hope; That Hope, in the Lord. Now Hope follows the nature of Faith:
And such as the Faith is, such is the Hope: Both must be in Domino, in the
Lord, or neither can be true.

And it is in a sort, with the denial of Hope in any Creature, That the Hope
which is founded upon God alone (I say alone as the prime Author) may be firm,
and not divided. Nulli hominum fidens, trusting upon no man, is Theodoret.
Theodor. ib.
Not in armies, nor in riches, nor in any strength of man, is Euthymius.
Euthym. ib.
Not in sword, nor spear, nor shield, but in the Name of the Lord of hosts,
is David himself, 1. Reg. 17.45.
1. Reg. 17. And David could not lay better hold any where. For since before,
all lies upon God, Tu dedisti, and, Tu laetificasti, Thou have given, and, Thou
have made glad: where could any man fasten better? And indeed the words are a
reciprocal proof, either to other: For because God gives, David hopes: And
because David hopes, God gives more abundantly, Honor, Blessing, and Joy. It
is in the Text, Quia sperat, even because he trusts.

Hope and Trust rightly laid upon God, have ever been in his children, Loco
meriti, in stead of merit. And what ever may be thought of this Hope, it is a
Kings virtue in this place. Lib. 2. de Erudit. prin. cap. 6.
And Thomas proves it; That Hope is necessary for all men, but especially for
Princes. And the more trust in God, Honoratior Princeps, the more honor has
the King, as Apollinarius observes it. Ibid.
And therefore Hope is not here a naked expectation of somewhat to come: But it
is Hope, and the ground of Hope, Faith, as some later Divines think not
amiss. Calu. Musc. Tremell. Moller. ibid.
And Faith embraces the Verity of God, as well as the Promises made upon it:
And this was right: For so God promised, and so David believed, he would
perform, 2 Reg. 7.29. 2. Reg. 7.29.


And since we have found Faith and Hope in this action of Trusting God (as our
English well expresses it) let us never seek to shut out Charity; And if
Faith, Hope and Charity be together, as they love to go, then you may
understand the Text, Quia sperat, because he Hopes, De toto cultu, of the
entire worship of God. Lib. 8. Orig. cap. 2.
For (as S. Isidor observes) in all inward worship, which is the heart of
Religion, are these three, Faith, Hope, and Charity. And in the most usual
phrase of Scripture, (though not ever) scarce one of these is named but all are
understood to be present: and if so, then, because he trusts, is as much as
Quia colit, because he worships. So at last we are come to the cause indeed,
why God set David for such a Blessing to his people: why he filled him with
such joy of his countenance. And all was, Quia culto^, because he was such a
religious worshipper.

It is in the Text then, that a Kings Religion is a great cause of his
happiness. The greatest Politicians that are, have confessed thus far: that
some Religion is necessary, to make a King a Blessing to his People, and a
commonwealth happy: But the matter is not great with them, whether it be a
true, or a false Religion, so it be one. But they are here in a miserable
error: for since they suppose a Religion necessary (as they must) my Text will
turn all the rest upon them; that true Religion is most apt, and most able, to
Bless and Honor both King and People.

Truth is stronger then falsehood, and will so prove it self, wheresoever it
is not prevented or abused: true Religion breeds ever true Faith, and true Hope
in God; which no false Religion promise of God, for the Kings Joy, and the
Peoples Blessing, even Quia sperat, because he trusts: whereas the rest have
only his permission. Therefore it is both: both more apt, and more able, to
bless King and Commonwealth, then any false Religion, or superstition, is, or
can be.

It was but a scoff of Lucian, to describe Christians, simple and easy to be
abused: In morte Peregri.
or if any in his time were such, the weakness of the men, must not be
charged upon their Religion: for Christ himself the founder of Religion,
though he did vnsting the Serpent in all his charge to his Apostles, yet he
left his virtue vncheck'd: nay he commanded that. Be innocent, but yet as wise
as Serpents. Mat. 10.16. Mat. 10.16.
And this Wisdom and Prudence is the most absolute virtue for a
Commonwealth. So that till Christians forsake Christ's rule, Lucians scoff
takes no hold of them.

Thirdly, Since Quia sperat, the Faith and Trust in God, is inter fundamenta
Regum, amidst the very foundations of Kings. And spes is quasi pes, Hope (says
Isidore) is the foot, Lib. 8. Orig. cap. 2.
and the resting place. Now no building can stand, if the foundation be diggd
from under it. The Buildings, are the Blessings of a State. A prime foundation
of them, is the Kings trust in God. Take away the truth of this Hope, Faith
and Religion, and I cannot promise the Blessings to stand: For then there is
never another Quia, or cause in the Text, to move God to give. But if the
cause stand (as Theodor. and Euthym. here make it) all is well. Theodor. and
Euthym. ib.


And here it were sacrilege for me, and no less, to pass by his Majesty,
without thanks both to God and Him. To Him, for, Quia sperat, because he
trusts: For no Prince has ever kept more firm to Religion. And it is
sperans in the present in my Text; he continues it and will continue it. Ar.
Mont.
And to God, for, Quia dedit, because in mercy he has given Him this Blessing
so to Trust, and by this trust in him, to be this, and many other Blessings to
us.

Success which David shall have for trusting in the Lord. It is a Reward, and
Rewards come last. And it is, That in this trust, he shall not sli^^e, he shall
not miscarry. And here (to make all parts even) are three circumstances too.

The first of these, is the Success or Reward Non commouebitur, He shall not
be moved; or at least not removed, not miscarry. And this is a great
Success, To have to do with the greatest mooueables in the world, the people,
and not miscarry. So that trust in the Lord, makes a King in the midst of a
mighty people, Petram in mari turbido, A Rock in a working Sea: Ebb, and
flow, and swell, yet insolent waves dash themselves in pieces of all sides the
Rock, and the King is at Non commouebitur, He shall not be moved.

Secondly, This great Success does not spes in Domino, their trust in the
Lord: yea and this trust too, is not simply upon the Lord; but upon his Mercy.
And indeed to speak properly, Man has no ground of his Hope but Mercy; no
stay upon the slippery, but Mercy. For if he look upon God, and consider him
in Justice; If he look upon himself, and weigh his soul by merit; it is
impossible for a man to Hope, or in Hope not to miscarry. And therefore the
Prophet here, though he promise Non commouebitur, that the King shall not
miscary; yet he dares promise it no where else then In misericordia, in Mercy.

Mercy it is that gives success to Princes; and that is Altissimi, the mercy
of the most high, which is one of Gods usual Names in Scripture. Now Sperat
and non commouebitur; The Kings Hope and his Success, do both meet in the
Highest mercy. It is true, Hope stands below, and out of sight: For, Hope that
is seen is no hope, Romans 8.24.
Romans 8. yet as low as it stands it contemplates God qua Altissimus, as he is
at highest. And this shows the strength of this virtue of Hope: For as Hope
considered in nature is in men that are warm and spirited, so is it also
considered as a virtue. And therefore give it but due footing, which is upon
Mercy, and in the strength of that, it will clime to God, were it possible he
should be Higher then he is.

The footing of Hope is low: therefore it seeks mercy: And the Kings hope
keeps the foot of the hill; Rex humili cord sperat: Ibid.
(so S. August.) And the best hope begins lowest; not at merit, but at
mercy. But then mark how it soars: For the same hope that bears the soul
of man company upon earth, mounts till it comes ad Altissimum, to the most High
in heaven.

Now in this Mercie-seate it is obseruable, three Grandies are met together;
Blessing, Joy, and Hope; and yet there is no strife for precedencie: For
Blessing goes first; Joy comes after, for no man so joyful as he that is
blessed; and then Hope, to supply the defects of both, because nor Blessings
nor Joy, can be perfect in this life.

And they have chosen to themselves an excellent and a safe place in the Mercy
of An excellent place, and all receive virtue from it. For, that David is able
to be a Blessing to the people; that he can Joy in the Blessing; that his Hope
can support him through the cares in ordering the Blessing ere he can come to
the Joy: All is from Mercy.

Conatus impio^^^n, endeavors of wicked men. And the labor of these is, to
turn Blessing it self into a curse: To ouercloude Joy with sorrow at least,
if not Desolation: To crush Hope, or rather, Decollare, to behead it. No place
safe from these attempts, but that which is high, and out of reach. And no
place so high, as Sinus Altissani, the bosom of the Highest, which is his
Mercy.

The reason then why David shall not miscarry, nay, not so much as Nutare,
(...) (as Ar. Mont. renders (...):) why the scepter in his hand shall not be
(...). A shaken reed, S. Matt. 11. (And that is the word here in the
Septuagint, S. Matt. 11.7.
(...)) is the Mercy of the Highest. And when his feet are got upon this, he
shall not slide. And Apollinaris calls the feet of the King, Ibidem.
while they rest upon Gods Mercy, (...), bold and confident feet, that dare
venture, and can stand firm any where. And so no question they can, that are
vpheld by Mercy.

And now to reach down some of the Mercies of the Highest upon our selves: For
when I read David, at Rex sperat, The King trust's in the Lord; and hear him
speaking in the third person, as of another King: me thinks the prophecy is
worth the bringing home to our most gracious Sovereign. For, his constancy in
Religion is known to the world: And the freedom of his life, argues his trust
in the Lord: And the assurance of his Hope shall not vanish. For, let him keep
to the mercy of the Highest, and there he shall not miscarry.

And give me leave to speak a little out of my Spes in Domino, my trust in
the Lord; me thinks I see, Non commouebitur, He shall not miscarrie, three
ways doubling Private; I have two great inducements among many in another
Kingdom, to think that he is so firm in the mercies of God, that he cannot
miscarry. The one is as old as Nouemb. 5. 1605. The powder was ready then, but
the Fire could not kindle. The other is as young as January last, the 9. The
water was too ready then, and he fell into it. Neither of these Elements have
any mercy: but the mercy of the Highest was His Acquittance from both. In the
first, he learned, that when desperate men have sacramented themselves to
destroy, God can prevent and deliver, Act. 24. Act. 24. 12 Psalm. 33.^5.
In the second he learned, that a Horse is but a vain thing to save a man; but
God can take up, take out, and deliver. And in the very Psalms for that day,
Morning prayer, thus I read, Psalm. 46. 1.
Psalm. 46. God is our help and strength, a very present help in trouble. And
I know not what better use he can make of this, then that which follows in
the next verse; Verse. 2.
I will not fear, (nor distrust God) though the earth be moved.

Next, me thinks, I have a Non commouebitur, public affairs. Prophet I am
none, but my Heart is full, that the mercy of the Highest, which has preserved
Him in great sickenesses, and from great dangers, has more work for him, yet
to do: the Peace of Christendom is yet to settle. Will God honor this Island
in him, and by his wisdom, to order the Peace, and settle the distracted
State of Christendom, and edge the sword upon the common Enemy of Christ? Why
should there not be trust in God, that in the mercy of the Highest, he shall
not miscarry?

Thirdly, For that which is greater then Eternal safety of his Soul; here is
a Non commouebitur, he shall not miscarry for this neither: For so some read,
and some expound the word of my Text: Tremel. verse. Angli. vet. Appollinar.

Ibid.


Thou shall give him Everlasting felicity. Therefore, let him be strong and of
a good courage, for in the mercy of the most High there is no miscarrying.

Thus you have seen the Kings blessing, the Kings Joy, the Kings Hope, and the
Assurance. In the first you have seen, that the King is a Blessing to his
People: that a gracious King (such as God has given us) is a Blessing for
Ever. That he is so, Quia tu dedisti, because God has given, and set him to
be so: from to Joy. And there you have seen, that the Joy which follows a
Blessed government, is a great Joy, a true and a permanent Joy, a Joy that is
either first, or Hope: this Hope in the Lord, this Hope includes, Faith, and
Religion, and so this Hope stands amidst Success assured unto him is Non
commouebitur, he shall not miscary, not so long as he rests on Mercy; that
Mercy of the Highest.

Non commouebitur: drive wind and tide, he shall not miscarry. Shall not? what?
is it absolute then, for David, or for any King? No, I say not so neither.
There is a double condition in the Text, if David will not miscary: the one is
Ex part Dauidis, on David's side: and that is at Sperat, a religious heart to
God that cannot but trust in him. The other is Ex part Dei, on Gods
Misericordia, a merciful providence over the King, which knows not how to
forsake, till it be forsaken, if it do then. Let us call in the Prophet for
witness, Psalm. 94.18.
Psalm. 94. When I said, My foot has slipped, thy mercy, O Lord, held me up.
Now the foot of a man slips from the condition, from the trust, (as Cassian
observes) Mobilitate Arbitrij, Collat. 3. c. 12.
by the changings of the will, which is too free to sin, and breach of trust:
the Holder up in the slip is Mercy, therefore it is safest relying upon the
condition which is on Gods side, that is Mercy, for that holds firm, when men
break.

And mark my Text, Hope goes before, and Non commouebitur, he shall not
miscary, follows after: but yet it follows not, till the Mercy of the Highest
be come in between. And indeed to speak properly, all those things which the
Scripture attributes to the Faith and Hope of man, are due only Misericordiae
Altissimi, to the Mercy of the Highest, which both gives and rewards them.

And yet for all this, the Hope of the Believer, and the mercy of God in whom
he trust's, are happily joined in my Text. Because the Hope of Faith can
obtain nothing without the Mercy of the Highest: And that Mercy and goodness
will not profit any man, that does not believe and trust in it. And Hope, and
Mercy are not better fitted to secure David, then Mercy and the Highest are,
to make him apprehensiue of his assurance. For Goodness and Mercy are inualid
without Power: Now that is supplied by Altissimus the Highest. And power is
full of terror when it stands apart from goodness: and that is supplied by
Mercy: When both meet, the Hope of man is full. So David cannot but see all
firm on Gods side; And sure he is not to miscarry, if he look to
performance of his own. And though it be safestelying upon God, yet it is
never safe to disioyne them whom God has put together: And therefore as he is
merciful, so man must be faithful; He must trust.

And now to end at home David is gone long since to his Hope, the Mercy of the
Highest: But a King, a gracious King, is living over us in Peace, and
Happiness, as our eyes see this day.

I know He remembers why God set Him over this great and numerous people: that
is, in Benedictionem, even to bless them: And that he has been a Blessing
unto them, malice it self cannot deny. And I make no question, but he will
go on with the Text, and be Blessings to them for ever: For ever through his
whole time: and for ever in his generous Posterity. Tu dedisti, Gods gift is
through all this; and I will ever pray, that it may never fail.

He has given this people all His time, the Blessing of Peace: And the sweet
Peace of the people, Cassiod. lib. 5. epist. 39.
is Praeconium Regnantium, the Glory of Kings. And Gods gift is in this too:
For though it be the King that Blesses, yet it is God that gives Blessing to
Blessing it self. And suppose Peace end in War, Tu dedisti; Gods gift
reaches thither too: 1. Reg. 17.47.
For the Battle is the Lords. 1. Reg. 17. The Battle, yes, and the Victory.
For (says S. Basil) Dextera victrix, S. Basil. ib.
Whosoever be the Enemy, the right hand that conquers him is the Lords.

Now for his Blessing, it is fit he should receive Joy: But if he will have
that true and permanent, (and no other is worth the having) he must look it in
vultu Dei, in Gods countenance. If he look it any where else, especially
where the Joy of his countenance shines not, there will be but false
representations of Joy that is not.

This day, the Anniuersarie of his Crown, is to all his loving Subjects, Dies
Gaudij, and Dies Spei, A day of Joy, and a day of Hope. A day of Joy: For what
can be greater, then to see a Just, and a gracious King multiplying his years?
And, a day of Hope; And what can be fitter, then to put him in mind even this
day, that a Kings strength is at sperat in Domino, His trust in the Lord, the
preserver of men. Job 7 ^^
Job 7. That as God upon this day did settle His Hope, and His Right to this
Kingdom upon Him; So upon this day, (which in this years revolution proves
His day too, Dies Domini, the Lords day as well as His) he would continue the
settling of his Hope on him, by whom all the Kings of the Earth bear rule.
Prou. 8. Prou. 8.15.


I say, Settle upon Him, and his Mercy: that is the last. The very feet of
Kings stand High. And in high places slippes are dangerous. Nothing so fit, so
able to stand by them, as Misericordia Altissimi, the Mercy of the Highest. In
the goodness and the power of this Mercy he has stood a King now almost five
and fifty years: nay a King He was, before He could stand. Through many
dangers the Mercy of the Highest has brought Him safe. Let Him not go from
under it, and it follows my Text, Verse. 8.
v. 8. His right hand shall find out all that hate Him: And for himself, Non
commouebitur, He shall not be moved, not miscarry.

And so we offer up our Evening sacrifice unto God, for Him, and for our
selves, that God will ever give, and he may ever be a Blessing to his People:
That His years may multiply, and yet not outliue His Joy: That this day may
come about often, and yet never return, but In Gaudio vultus Dei, in the Joy
of Gods countenance upon the King: and, In Gaudio vultus Regis, in the Joy of
the Kings countenance upon the People: That the mercy of the most High may give
Him hope in the Lord, and strengthen it: That His Hope may rest upon the Mercy
that gave it: that in all His businesses, as great as His place, His Success
may be, Non commoueri, not to miscarry: That He may go on a straight course
from Blessing others in this life, to be Blessed Himself in Heaven: And that
all of us may enjoy Temporal Blessings under Him, and AEternall with Him for
evermore. And this CHRIST JESUS for his infinite merit and mercy sake grant
unto us: To whom, with the Father, and the holy Spirit, three persons and one
God, be ascribed all might, Majesty, and Dominion this day, and for ever,
AMEN.

LONDON Printed by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty. M.DC.XXII.


