TEARS ON THE DEATH OF EVANDER Occasioned by the Lamentable loss of the
truly Noble and Generous, SIR. JOHN SVYNTON KNIGHT, Colonel of an Regiment
of 2000 Nedderlanders, going for Venize, who was cast away by storm on the
coast of England upon Goodwin sands the 13 of October. 1630.

By G. LAVDER.

HAGH Anno Dn^i. 1630.

THE Sun in Thetys arms was gone to bed,
And Nights black curtains ore this All were spread,
Through which heavens glimpseing lights began t'appeare,
And weakly sparkle in our Hemyspheere;
When Lysis, vhose free soul far from the snaires
Of Time; and worldly base entangling Cares,
In quiet sleep did prove the wished joye,
Of sueet repose which never dreams annoye,
Whilst lulled into a silence calm and deep,
Deaths Sister did his senses senlesse Keep:
Till rouzd with sudden sound amazed v'th fear,
A voice (he knew full well) did pierce his ear,
And called him forth that dark and gloomie shade,
To see a Ghost stand pale before his bed;
A Ghost much like a Seagod, who did bear
The Brave Evander's face his eyes and hair,
Yet as if drenched into the fatal stood
A woe full sight there droppeing droopeing stood,
And having waked both Lysis ear and eye,
Frist stareing smiled to see him panteing lie,
At last these words did utter, which a groan
Did sadly usher, and he thus went on.
Lysis, whose love and faith I liveing found,
Where mortals move, and Phoebus guilds te ground;
Behold me here thy late Evanders ghost,
A shaddowe of that substance thou have lost.
Who now whilst Night with stars does seed the skies,
Entreats thee open thy sleep shutten eyes:
It is no Demon on his browe that bears
Mischaunce and horror, and such Maddeing fears,
Bot a good soul whom death has late set free,
In love and freyndship that appears to thee,
If ever mortal anguish greeffe and fear
Seas'd any soul which could not find a tear,
Bot senseless made with too much sense of woe,
Poor Lysis in that plight such pain did know,
For not one sighe of breath came from his breast,
And chilleing cold his members did invest,
Tuo passions in his soul did keep a strife,
Fear of him dead and love of him on life,
Bot love at last prevaill'd and called again
His sense and speech in these sad words to plain.
Dear Ghost (said he) the object of my thought,
And has thy love from blessed Elysium brought.
Thee back again; enforceing heavens decree;
Whith ah! too soon has robbed the world of Thee?
O loyal freyndship! o hard povers of fate!
O changing fortune! o wretch'd humane state!
O flattring hopes! o bodies bot of glass!
O lasteing greffes! o Joys which poasting pass!
Evander, once my hope thy cuntryes joy,
The world's regret, and now thy freynds annoye,
And art thou gone ay Me! had Death the pover
To bound thy Time; or haste thy fatal hover?
Ere thou had yett half honnors race outrunne
Which was so bravely but by Thee begun?
Thy summer seemed in riseing heatte to shine,
Still lengthning, bot not yett com'd near that line.
At which thy loungest day should make a stand,
Which now has found her loungest Night at hand.
The Laurells which thy suord should have lopped down,
To bind thy temples for thy merits croune,
Though they there tops both fair and high did stretch
And seemed to be beyond the common reach
Of valors hand were yett too low for thee,
Not fit a garland for thy locks to be.
Bot now the Cypress has usurped that right
Too Soon alace! thine Obsequies to light.
Thy youth which full of courage led thee on
In search of brave Occasions, did it Won
A reputation and a noble Name,
In foreign wars, to prove o dyeing fame!
That with thy life thy Name should buried lie
And last bot like a lightning loungst the sky?
No no, heavens Thee for greatter things ordained,
And thou should have a higher sphere attayn'd'
Thy bright Aurora augur'd greatter heatte
And lounger day before thy Sun should set,
Which in his middayes glory now gone down
Like Phaetons fall has brought thy Night at Noone,
If enuyous fates had not ecclypst thy light
Brave soul, hou had thou shined in Europe's sight?
The actions of thy first and tender years
Astonished Holland yett for strange admeires,
When Iulliers saw thy forduard youth advances,
Where leaders failld and feared the hurt of Chance,
Bohemia's battles saw thee bathed in blood,
Out face all fear where death and horror stood,
So dear Eliza's Croune was unto Thee
That thou did seek a Sacrifice to be
To her good fortune, and would glad appease,
Heavens frouneing browe if it thy blood could please,
To settle on thy slaughtred bones a Throne
For her and hers for aye to sit upon.
The Russian wars, and fierce Polonian fightes
Saw Thee a stranger work such wondrous feattes,
As made thy Name adoar'd, thy person loved,
Thy sword redoubted, and thy deeds approved,
The wild Hungariam did amazed veiue
The terror-stricken misbeleeuing crew,
Fly from thy sight, wholle squadrons all at once,
Whilst thou did offer up the dyeing groans
Of such as durst thy kindled wrath abide:
Unto thy glory, as they fainteing died.
Beseeged Stade where Coesars Eagles spread
There conquering wings, and poverfull armies led
All captive that the Roman pover withstood,
Within her starved walls where want of food,
And invard famine did more bands orethrowe
Then outvard force of an assaulting foe,
Can give records of thy undaunted mind
Who scornd within her fortes to be confind;
Bot bravely sallied out where dangers most
And braveing Enemies did ruin boast,
Yea when all hope was lost of more defense
Knows with what courage and what confidence,
Thou fore'dst the Enemy a treattie yield
And grant thee passage free through open feeld.
These were bot presages of greatter deeds,
Though none more glorious in Times Annalls reads;
For had thy late intentions come to end,
What fortune did thy forduard arms attend?
That City, Neptunes love, had woundring scene
Thy sword enstale her all the Oceans Queen,
To wear a Diadem as proud as Spain
Enriched with Jewels of the land and Main;
Bot ah! fates would it not, who what is brave
As jealous of our good from us still reave.
Bot let them do there worst since thou art gone
In whom, true Honor and fair virtue shone:
Raise whom they list, and whom they list suppress
Change mirth in mourninge, Weell in wretchedness.
Ah! had they yett ordained Thee to die
In Mars his feeld; where in the worlds fair eye
Thou might have left a mark of thy great worth,
For aftertymes to set thy glory forth,
Why was it not, O Greeffe! with suord in hand;
In presence of tuo Armies in command?
Where died in blood and sueatte, rage in thine eyes,
Stern fury in thy looks amongst fainteing Cries
Of bleeding wightes, dismembered unto Death
Who with a deep fetchd sighe, sighe out there breathe
That Thou did end, and in a lawefull war
Thy days with glory which no Time could mar?
Yett what do I (Dear Ghost) thus wish in vain!
Thou have enough, since heavens did so ordain,
With that his eyes now bigg with tears, set open
There Crystal conduits and gave Greeffe free scope.
The Ghost who saw his sorrove in his eyes,
With pity moved did not his love despise,
Bot mildly thus his passion did restrain,
And gently called him to himself again.
Lysis, my liveing freynd, and lover dead
Forbear those playntes and tears in vain to shed,
Since heavens Who lent me life a limite set
Unto my days: and I have reached that
My death is too much honored, in the groans
Of those my freynds, with whom I lived once,
And that which now afflictes my greeved Ghost
Is, that they waille too much what they have lost,
My Time was spent, and life's short spanne was come
To that last point where heavens would call me home,
My days a webb of wandering errors; wrought
With we land woe, me through the world have brought,
Bot still with Hono'r which my loadstarre was,
In all my weyes and actions, still my glass,
For Honors love no danger I eshew'd,
No force I feared, though greatter pover pursued,
Bot still in chase of it, I bold did roame
Throughout the corners of all Christiandome,
What charge I bore when chosen to command,
And with what care performed by this right hand,
Let those for whom I fought be witness all
Who Me almost unknown to charge did call,
Bott that is all past, and now my soul does rest
In peace, and finds the quiet of the Blessed,
I now from heavens high roundes behold this Round,
On which you live, low low, scarce to be found
Bot of clear eye; so small a thing it is,
Compair'd unto the Universe of bless;
There you like Antes do suarme, and still at Iarres
For less then title still wage deadly wars,
And glory to be great, on Earth so small,
As if there were no other world at all;
Poor foolles! one day will let you see what odds
There is betuix Man's Empyrie and Gods,
Bot thou my Lysis; by thy love and faith
Hark I conjure thee, what Evander says,
And let the world hear it again from Thee,
When Time shall give thee opportunity,
Though heavens in suelling waves my grave assignd,
And made my obsequies the blustering wind:
The Tritons and the Nereyds of the main,
To grace my funeral pomp with goodly train,
And Neptunes self cheeffe mourner to deplore
My Death; and bring the show to Britains shore,
I envy not there hap whom Paros stone
Dot shroude in stately Tombs by Time orethrone,
The Crystal tears of those my worthy freynds,
Who now regrett my loss, a tribute lends.
To rear a Monument of love for Me,
Which will perhaps wear with Aeternitie
In some one pairt, which Lysis if it be
My Ghost shall think she owes the same to Thee.
So fare thou weell live honors lover still,
Heavens shield thee with there love and men's goodwill,
This said He vanished, Lysis weeping lay
Until the Sun had brought about the day.
Dignum Laud virum Musa vetat mori,

G. LAVDER.


