A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS MAJESTY, ON TVESday the nineteenth of June, at
Wansted. Anno Dom. 1621.

By D. LAVD Deane of Gloucester, one of his Majesty's Chaplains in ordinary.

Printed by commandment.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by F. K. for Matthew Lownes, dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard, at the sign of the Bishops head, 1621.

PSALM. 122. 6, 7. 6. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; let them prosper that
love thee. 7. Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces.
THe Ark of the Lord was brought out of the house of Obed-edom the Gittite,
with music and great joy into Jerusalem, and there placed, 2. Reg. 6. 2. Reg.
6. 17.
The learned are of opinion, that David composed this Psalm, and delivered it
to be sung at this solemnity. Before this, the Arc was in Gibeah, a high place
in the City Baalah of Judah, 2. Reg. 6. otherwise 2. Reg. 6. 2, 3
called Kiriathiearim, Josh. 15. 9. But Josh. 15. 9
now the presence of it, made the City of David, Domicilium religionis, the
house of Religion, as well as Regni, of the Kingdom. It is Domus Dei, the
house of Religion, Gods House, verse 1. and the last of this Psalm. And it is
the house of the Verse. 1. 9.
kingdom too: for there is the seat of Verse. 5.
Judgment, and there is the house of David, verse. 5. And it is fit, very fit
it should be so: the Court, and the great Temple of Gods service together: That
God, and the King may be neighbors: That as God is always near to preserve
the King, so the King might be near to serve God: and God and the King cannot
meet in Jerusalem without a solemnity.

Now this Psalm was not fitted by David for the people only, when the Arc
was brought to, and placed in, Jerusalem: but also for their coming at their
solemn feasts to Jerusalem, to which they were bound thrice a year by the
Law, Exodus 23. For then (some think) they sung Exodus 23. 17
this Psalm, either in their journey as they came up; or else on the steps as
they ascended to the Temple: so the coming to the Temple was always with joy:
And they were glad when the solemnity came. At this joy the Psalm begins: I
was glad when they said unto me, We will go into the House of the Lord. Glad
they were, but no vanity in the mirth. For as they went up with joy, verse. 1.
so did they with Verse. 1.
prayer here at the 7. And the prayer is Verse. 7.
for the peace of Jerusalem.

Why, but in David's time the Temple was not built; and how then this Psalm
composed by him for this solemnity? Yes, well enough: for though the Temple was
2. Reg. 6. 17.
pattern the Temple was to be built. So all the service was there: and
therefore the solemnity too. Beside, the eye of the Prophet Qui non videbat,
praeuidebat: David that saw not the Temple built, foresaw it was to be built by
his Son, 2. Reg. 7. And so fitted the 2. Reg. 7. 13.
Psalm both to a present Tabernacle, and a future Temple.

And it is not improbable, but that he of both City and Temple. For then the
people assembled as one man to Jerusalem, and kept their wonted ceremonies,
Esra 3. Esra. 3. 1. 2.


Nay, I make no question but that he saw

The words contain two things: an pray for the peace of Jerusalem: and the
Prophets own prayer for it, Los then prosper that love thee: Peace bie within
thy walls, and prosperity within thy Palaces.

In the exhortation to both Princes and by which we should express our love
to it. Our care of it; that is, Prayer. And the Blessing which our prayers
should entreat for it; and that is Peace.

First then, here is the Body, for which, Domus religionis and regni: Gods
House, and the Kings. And so it stands not here for the City and the State
only, (as S. Hierom. Bafil, Theod. Hilar. Arnok. Euthym. Ibid.
many of the Ancient name the City only) nor for the Temple and the Church
only: but jointly for both. For both: Therefore when you sit down to consult,
you must not forget the Church: And when we kneel down to pray, we must not
forget the State: both are but one Jerusalem.

There are some in all ages, (too many in this) which are content to be for
the State, because the liuelihood both of them and theirs, depends upon it: but
it is no matter for the Church, they can live without that. And there are some,
which are all, at least in their outcry, for the Church: as if Templum Domini,
the Church, the Church, might swallow up kingdoms, and State-affaires. But
there is no Religion in the one; And neither that, nor civil wisdom in the
other.

Both then were commended to the Jews, and both are to us. And both under one
name, Jerusalem. One name, and good reason for it. First, because the

Now though in nature the Commonwealth go first: first men, before religious
and faithful men: and the Church can have no being but in the Commonwealth.
Yet in grace the Church goes first: religious and godly men, better then men:
and the Commonwealth can have no blessed and happy being, but by the Church.
For true Religion ever blesses a State: provided that they which profess it,
do not in their lives dishonor both God, and it. And it blesses the State,
(among other) two ways. One by putting a restraint upon the audaciousnesse of
evil. And this the wise men among the Heathen saw. For Seneca tells us, that
this placing L. 2. Not. Q. c. 42.
of an armed Revenger, God, over the head of impious men, (which is an
acknowledgement of Religion) is a great restraint, because against him, Nemo
sibi satis potens videtur, no man can think himself able enough, either to
shun, or resist.

The other way by which it blesses the Sing unto God, O ye kingdoms of the
earth. There is exercise Psalm. 62. 32.
of Religion. And then it follows, verse. 35. and verse. 35.
God will give strength and power unto his people; there is the blessing. And
it is plain in my Text: for here prayer is to obtain blessing for Jerusalem,
for the State. But it is expressly said to be propter domum Domini, for the
House of Gods sake, verse. 9. Now Verse. 9.
I would all States would remember this: that they have a restraint from evil
by, and a blessing for Religion. It would make me hope, that yet at last,
Religion should be honored for it self, and not for pretenses.

Body, as it comprehends both State and Church, to that which the Prophet would
have us do for it. That is, Prayer. Pray for Jerusalem. Pray for it. Why, but
is that all? Can a State be managed, or a Church governed, only by Prayer?
No: the Prophet means not so. You must seek, and endeavor the good of both,
as well as pray for the good of both.

And this is in my Text too. For the word in the Septuagint is (...) ask and
inquire after the good of Jerusalem: labor it. And yet, it is often read in
Scripture for Orato, S. Hierom. Aug. Hilar. Prosp. Ibid.
pray for it. Both then. And the Fathers bear witness to both, in this place.
For S. Hierome, August. Hilar. and Prosp. are for the proper sense of the word.
Quaerite, seek it, follow it. Saint Basil, Theod. and S. Basil. Theodoret,
etc. Ibid.
most of the later Divines, are for the borrowed sense, Orate, pray for it. And
surely God would have the great Ministers of State, and the provident
Governors of the Church, do both: seek, enquire, consult, do all good to
both. And yet when they have done all, he would have them pray too.

And there is good reason for this; for nothing more needful for Jerusalem,
for State and Church, then prayer: for the State necessary. For God is
President of all Counsels of State; and shall he not be so much as called to
Counsel, and desired to fit? And for the Church necessary too. For the Son of
God, Christ Jesus, is Head of the Church; and can the Body do any thing well,
if the Head direct it not?

And yet of the two, the Church has because the consultations of the Church
have more immediate reference to God. And because the Enmity of the world is
Peter that the gates of hell shall not prevail against the Church, Math. 16.
He insinuates withal, Mat. 16. 18.
that those open gates, gape not wider for any thing, then for it: therefore
prayer for the Church very necessary. And certainly, so much danger over it,
and so little prayer for it, agree not.

Now Rogate, pray for Jerusalem reaches every man in particular; and all men
when they are assembled together. For what can a Senate consult upon orderly,
or determine prouidently, if God be not called into the Assembly? If there be
not Deus stat, God stands in the congregation of Princes? Psalm. 82. And such
a superior Psalm. 82. 1.
cannot be called into the Assembly mannerly, but by Prayer.

Nay, solemn State-Assemblies, (because if they err, they err not lightly)
have greatest need of Prayer, both in, and for them. Hence is that ancient
Christian custom, that Parliaments assemble not for the State: Councels meet
not for the Church: but they begin both the first days work, and every
days work with Prayer. And the Heathen which knew not the true God, knew that
this duty was owing to the true God, to pray unto him most solemnly, in their
greatest consultations: and therefore Caesar being to enter the Senate,
sacrificed first: And Appian speaks of that Act, as of a thing of custom. And
it cannot be thought L. 2. Bell. Civil. p. 100. f.
they did sacrifice without prayer: Since Litare, which is to appeace by
Sacrifice, is to please by prayer too. But I leave them. My Text is more
ancient, and more full then their practice. For here verse. 5. the Verse. 5.
Tribes are no sooner gone up to the seats of Judgment, to the house of David;
but they are followed close by my Text, that they pray for Jerusalem: So prayer
their first work, and consultation after. And doubtless the Spirit of God
sees Prayer wonderful necessary for Jerusalem, that he makes that, as it were,
the door of entrance, both into the Seats of Judgment among men, and the
places of divine worship, and Adoration of God.

We have done with the Action, Prayer. Peace.

Peace is one of the greatest temporal blessings, which a State, or a Church
can receive. For where God himself describes the excellency of government, he
describes it by Peace. Esa. 37. The work Esa. 37. 12.
of Justice shall be peace: And my people shall dwell in the Tabernacles of
peace. I will not load you with a long discourse of peace, and the benefits it
brings. It has the same fate, that some other of Gods blessings have. It is
better known by want, then use: and thought most worth the having, by them
that have it not. Look therefore not upon your selves in peace, but upon a
State in blood: upon a Church in persecution. Ask them which are divided by
the sword; which are rosting at the flame: conceive your case theirs. That is
the touchstone which deceiues not. Then tell me whether it be not good
counsel: Rogare pacem, to pray for the peace of both. And I do ill to call it
barely Peace. Our Prophet calls it The blessing of Peace, Psalm. 29. And
doubtless it is to teach the world, that all earthly benefits Psalm. 29. 10.
are, as it were, unblessed, till peace be upon them: for till then, no
inioying of any.

Now Rogate pacem, pray for the peace of Jerusalem, seems but a plain and a
naked Exhortation for peace. I must find more in it then so, and yet offer my
Text no violence, nor be busy with any thing above me, or out of my
profession. Observe then: When David made this Exhortation to pray for peace,
it was Tempus Pacis, A time of peace. For he composed the Psalm when he
carried the Arc to Jerusalem: and before that, he had smote the Philistims
twice, and made all at peace, 2. Sam. 5. A time of Peace? Why then a 2. Reg. 5.
man should think there is least need to pray for it. Yea but the Prophet
thinks not so. He was pleased the State and Church under him should enjoy
Gods benefits longer. And therefore calls for, not Peace, which they had: but
continuance of Peace, which they could not tell how long they might hold. To
give thanks to God for the peace he had given, verse. 4. and to Verse. 4.
pray for the continuance of it, verse. 6. And Verse. 6.
certainly it is one great degree of unworthiness of a blessing, to grow
weary of it.

Why, but there is a time for War, as well as for Peace, is there not? Yes,
there is, Eccles. 3. And this time is in God to fit. Eccles. 3. 8.
I make peace, and create evil, Esa. 45. And in Esa. 45. 7.
the King to denounce and proclaim. But it is not Dies Belli, the day of war
it self that can make void this duty Rogandi pacem, of praying for peace. For
since the eye of nature could see, that the end of all just war, is, but that
men may live in a more just and safe peace: This Rogate pacem, pray for peace,
must be in the heart, even when the sword is in the hand.

I will not meddle with the State: but there are many times, in which God will
punish and afflict his Church. And may we then Rogare pacem, pray peace for it?
Yes, we may, nay, we must, even then pray for peace, when his will is, not to
give it. For first, so much of his will as is revealed, is here expressed to
pray for peace. And that Action, then it is revealed. The secret things belong
to the Lord our God, but the things revealed, belong to us, and our children,
that we may do them, Deuteronomy. 29. And again, Saint Augustine disputes it at
Deuteronomy. 29. 29.
etiam voluntate bona, Enchi. c. 101
with a will that is good, will that which God will not. And whatsoever he may
will voluntate bona, with a good will, that he may pray for: so he submit to
his will, and rest when his will appears.

Besides, who knows (so long as the Rogate pacem, pray for peace, and have it?
For many times that which God will not give without prayer, he will give with
it. And then the cause of Non pax, is non rogant: no peace, because not prayed
for. And in that case, the State and Church have not more misery, in that there
is not peace, then they have sin, in that they might have had peace for
asking, and would not pray for it.

Now this rule varies not: we are never to neglect that which God has revealed
(which here in our case is to pray for peace) upon any presumption of that
which remains secret. Therefore the objection of the Puritan against our
Church Let any, in which we pray to be delivered from Famine, and from
Battle: And against the prayer which follows it, that we may be hurt by no
persecution: as if it were an unlawful prayer, because it is sometimes Gods
will to punish and afflict his Church: is as ignorant as themselves. For in the
old Testament, here is David's call upon us, Rogare pacem, to pray for peace.
And in the new there is Saint Paul's charge, to pray that we may lead a quiet
and a peaceable life, 1. Timoth. 2. And has the Church of 1. Tim. 2. 2.
England such ill luck, that it cannot do as David, and Saint Paul bids it,
but it must anger the Puritan?

Again, while you follow the Prophets exhortation, and pray for peace, every
kind of false worldly peace will not serve the turn. For as Christ was at
Pacem do vobis, sed meam: Peace, but it is my Peace that I give unto you, S.
Ioh. 14. So David, Ioh. 14. 27.
the type of Christ, would have you pray for peace, but his peace for Jerusalem.

And in this relation, the words are general. Rogate, pray for the peace of
Jerusalem: of the whole State: of the whole Church: It must not be broken in
any corner of Jerusalem, if it may be preserved. A sedition, or a schism in a
corner, in a Conuenticle, (which is the place where they are usually hatched)
will fire all if it be suttered. For the State, none doubts this, and it is as
true for the Church. But where peace is truly labored for, and not had, there
the Apostles limitation, Romans 12. will. Romans 12. 18.
help all. Have peace with all men (says the Apostle) but it follows, si
possibile, if it be possible: and Quantum in vobis, as much as lies in you.

When we therefore pray for peace with all men, and cannot get it, Heathonisme,
and Turcisme, and Iudaisme, and Heresy, and Superstition, and Schism, will
not repent, and come in, we are quit by si possibile, if we do what is
possible for their conversion. And again, when any of these that have changed
the truth of God into a lie, would have us come over and make peace with them,
we are quit, though we do it not; by quantum in nobis, as much as lies in us.
For God has not left it in our power, to be at peace against his truth: And
therefore here is never a rogate, no Counsel to pray for that. Indeed peace
against truth is not Pax Jerusalem, a peace fit for the Church. The Church of
Rome challenges us for breach of this peace in our separation from them. But
we say, and justly, the breach was theirs, by their separation not only from
disputable, but from evident truth. Nor are we fallers out of the Church, but
they fallers off from verity. Let them return to primitive truth, and our
quarrel is ended. In the mean time it is possibile, and in nobis: both
possible, and in us, to pray, that God would in his time, fill the Church with
truth first, and then with peace.

Now rogate pacem, pray for peace, is a very full circumstance in the Text; I
cannot leave it yet: For when I consider that he that calls so earnestly for
peace, is David, it filles me with wonder. For David was a sword man with a
witness. One of the greatest warriers that ever was, 2. Sam. 7. and most
victorious. Nay, though God 2. Reg. 7. 9.
had anointed him before to the Kingdom; yet the means which first made him
known to Saul, and afterward famous in Israel, was first his conquest of
Goliath, 1. Reg. 17. and then his sword against 1. Reg. 17.
the Philistims. Therefore if David be come in upon rogate pacem, pray for
peace: it cannot be accounted only the Gowne-mans, or the weake-mans prayer:
but it is the wise, and the stout man's too: for David was both. And certainly
it is not cowardice to pray for peace: nor courage to call for troubles. That
is the spirit of David, that can sing before the Ark of God, rogate pacem,
pray for peace. But if the Philistims will disturb Gods peace, and his, then,
and not before, he will dye them in their own blood.

And Rogate pacem, pray for peace, looks yet another way upon David's person.
For at the first, David was King only over the Tribe of Judah, where he
reigned seven years, and six months, 2. Sam. 5. The other eleven Tribes
followed Jshbosheth the 2. Reg. 5. 5.
son of Saul, 2. Sam. 2. But he did not 2. Reg. 2.
compose this Psalm, till the carrying of the Arc to Jerusalem: at which time
he was King over all, both Israel, and Judah. So Rogate pacem, pray for peace,
was not David's counsel only, when his Territories were less, Judah and
Hebron: but after the great access of the eleven Tribes too; when he was
strong; when God had divided his enemies before him, even as water is divided
asunder: As himself praises God and confesses, 2. Sam. 5. And therefore 2.
Reg. 5. 20.
either David's example is not worth the following: or else, a King in honor,
and a King in plenty; and a King that has added Jerusalem to Hebron, eleven
Tribes to one, may make it his high honor Rogare pacem Jerusalem, to pray to
God, and perperswade with men, for the peace of Christendom.

And David had good reason to be at Rogate pacem, pray for peace. For though
he scarce took any war in hand, but with Gods approbation, and against Gods
enemies: yet we find, 1. Chron. 22. that 1. Chron. 22. 8.
his Battles and his Blood were the cause, why God would not suffer him to
build his Temple. He might sing before the Arc, He might serve him in the
Tabernacle: But no Temple would he have built by hands in blood. Salomons
hands; Hands of peace must do that. What is the reason? What? Why it may be it
is, because when the blood and spirits of a man are heated, be the war never
so just, yet (to say no more) aliquid humani interuenit, some heated passion
strikes where, and as, it should not. And (as Saint James has S. Iaco. 1. 20.
it) The wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God: And the
Historian tells Appian. L. 2. Bell. Cius. p. 504. A.
us they are not a few that are guilty to themselves, parum innocenter exactae
militiae.

Again, I cannot be so unthankful to God and my Text, but that I must fit
one circumstance more to Rogate pacem, pray for peace. And it is, Pray for it
this day: Why this day? Why? Why David brought up the Arc with this Psalm,
and would have built the Temple: But Gods answer to him was: No: But behold, a
son is borne unto thee, which shall be a man of peace, for I will give him
rest from all his enemies round about, therefore his name is Solomon, and I
will send peace and quietness upon Israel in his days, 1. Chron. 22. And had
not David 1. Chron. 22. 9.
then great reason to call upon his people, even all of all sorts to pray for
that Peace, which God would give by Solomon? And surely we have a Jerusalem, a
State, and a Church to pray for, as well as they. And this day was our Solomon,
the very Peace of our Jerusalem borne. And though he were not borne among us,
yet he was borne to us, and for the good and welfare of both State and
Church. And can ye do other then Rogare pacem, pray for peace in the day, nay
Nativity, the very birthday of both Peace, and the Peacemaker? Certainly so
unnatural to your Prince, so unthankful to God you cannot be. I will lead
you the way to pray for Him, his Honor, and his Peace: That this day may
return often, and crown many happy and blessed years upon him.

I had now done with Rogate pacem, pray for peace, but that Jerusalem is come
again in my way. But it is a strange Jerusalem. Not the old one, which is
litterall in my Text. For which David would have prayers: nor that which
succeeded it, Jerusalem of Jew and Gentile converted: for which we must pray.
But a Jerusalem of gold and precious stones, (as is described, Apoc. Apoc. 21.
2. 10. G. devoca. Iudae. page 44.
21.) which shall be built for them again upon earth in greater glory then
ever it was. And this Jerusalem upon earth, is that which is called the
Heavenly Jerusalem, Heb. 12. 22. Page 66. and 79.
And the new Jerusalem, Apoc. 21. 2, 10.

So it is not now sufficient that the Jews shall be (in Gods good time)
converted to the faith of Christ, as the Apostle delivers it, Romans 11. But
these conucrted Jews Romans 11. Posit. 7. page 2.
must meet out of all Nations: the ten Tribes, as well as the rest, and become
a distinct, and a most flourishing Nation again in Jerusalem. And all the
Kings of the Gentiles shall do homage to their King. Good God, what a fine
people Posit. 44. and 45.
have we here? Men in the Moon.

I will not trouble you with any long discourse, wherein this error meets
with, or parts from the Chiliasts: nor is it worth any settled confutation:
Only I cannot desire you Rogare pacem, to pray for any peace to this
Jerusalem. It was an old error of the Jews, (which denied Christ come) that
when their Messiah did come, they should have a most glorious temporal
Kingdom, and who but they? I cannot say the Author of this vanity denies
Christ come. God forbid. But this I must say: that many places of the old
Testament, which concern the Resurrection from the dead, and which look upon
Christ in his first or second coming, are impiously applied to this return of
the jews, which (says he) is to them, as a Resurrection from the dead. And
this exquisite Arithmetician, beside the first coming of Christ in the flesh;
and his second to Judgment: (which are all the personal commings of Christ,
that ever the Scripture revealed, or the Church knew) has found out a Page 48.
Third, between One and Two: namely, his coming to this conversion of the
Jews.

But see a little: I will not be long a passing. Shall Jerusalem be built
again after this euersion by the Romans? The Prophet Esaias says no, Esa. 21.
But this (says our Author) is not meant of Jerusalem, but of her Esa. 25. 2.
Page 105.
enemies. Yes, it is meant of Jerusalem, as well as other Cities; as appears,
verse 6, 7. Verse. 6, 7.
and is confirmed by Saint Hierome, and S. Hierom. and Geneu. Aunot. Ibid.
some Modern Divines. And suppose the place were doubtful, whether meant of
Jerusalem or not, yet that other is unavoidable, Ier. 19. 11. I will break
this City and this people, as one breaks a Potters vessel, that Ier. 19. 11.
cannot be made whole again.

Well: But this new-built Jerusalem, must be the Heavenly, and the new. Yea,
but it is against the received judgment of the Church, that these places
should be understood of any Church upon earth only, whether Jew, or Gentile,
or both. And apparent it is, that there are some circumstances in Apoc. 21.
which cannot possibly Apoc. 21.
be applied to any Church on earth only. Which made Saint Ambrose profess,
that this Exposition is against Scripture. And L. 3. de Virginibus.
suppose they may be meant of a Militant Church only: yet what should lead us
to see this conversion of the Jews there, I see not.

For the Ten Tribes coming in to the rest, the good man should do well to
tell us first; Where those ten Tribes have been ever since before the
Babylonish Captivity: or point out the Story that says they remained a
distinct people. No: they degenerated, and lived mixed with other Nations that
captiued them, till not only their Tribes were confounded; but their name also
utterly lost, for almost two thousand years since. And yet now for sooth we
shall see them abroad again. It is strange we should not know our friends all
this while. For within these seventy four years, they shall have quite rooted
out Page 56. and 75.
both the Pope and the Turk, our two great Enemies. And shall begin to make
both of them stagger within less then these thirty years. I cannot tell here
whether it be Balaam that prophecieth, or the Beast he rode on.

As for the Kings of the Gentiles, that they shall serve this King of
Jerusalem, you need not believe that till you see it. If Christ be King there;
I make no question, but the Kings of the Gentiles will easily submit to him.
But if it be any other; they have reason to hold their own. And it seems it
is not well resolved yet, who shall be King. For page 56. and 102. The Page 56.
and 102.
Author tells us, Christ shall be King there. And page 163. he vnthrones Christ
again, and assures us One shall be King, whom the Page 163.
Jews shall set up among themselves.

I will follow this vanity no further. Only do you not think the Papists will
triumph, that such monstrous opinions are hatched among us? Sure they will: yet
they have little reason; here. For two of their learned Jesuits are of
opinion, (they are Salmer: and Lori:) that the Apostles Sal. To. 4. Tract. 37.
Lorin. in Act. 1. 6.
did not sin, when led with the error of the Jews, they thought Christ's
Kingdom should be temporal, Act. 1. 6. which Act. 1. 6.
is the ground of all this vanity. And Tullius Crispoldus, one of theirs, left
notes behind him (which are yet in Manuscript in the Library at Millain) which
agree in Lorin. in Act. 1. 6.
all things almost with this present folly. So whatsoever is amisle in this
lewish dream, the Primogenitus, the first borne of it, after the Jew, is
theirs. Only herein their care out goes ours. They keep the Frenzy locked up:
and we publish it in Print.

I will leave these men to out-dreame the Jews: And hasten to, and through the
second

First then, whether you read the Text, Hierome, and the Geneua Translation:
S. Hierom.
( Let them prosper that love thee) and so make it a Prayer. Or with Ar. Mon.
Tremel. and of the last Translation, (They Are. Mon. Trem.
shall prosper that love thee,) and so make it a Reason, full of promise, to
induce us to pray for it: It is not much material. It seems both may stand,
and I will not make my Text narrower then it is.

Take the words then first as a Motive. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: for
there is great reason you should do so. For They shall prosper that pray for
it. So the Argument is drawn from prosperity; and prosperity is a reason that
is very potent with men in all things else: why then should it not be
prevailing in this, to make men pray both for the State, and for the Church?
But shall men prosper that do so indeed? Yes: you have no probable cause to
distrust it. The words are, They shall prosper. And if you take them for an
earthly promise, you have a Kings word for it. If for a spiritual, you have a
Prophets word for it. Would you have any man testify that has had experience?
You have David's word for it: And he had often trial in himself, that God made
him prosper for his prayer sake, and his love to that State and Church. And
since you cannot distrust a King, a Prophet, a man of experience; be sure to
pray for the peace of Jerusalem, if it be but that your selves may prosper.

Take the words next as a Prayer: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: For there is
great example to move you to do so. For the Kingly Prophet goes before you;
he asks no more of you, then he does himself. He would have you pray for
Jerusalem, and so does he: Let them prosper that love it. The Prophet is not of
their humor, that care not what burdens they bind upon other men's shoulders,
so themselves may escape the load. No, he prays too: And no marvel. For (as
Saint Leo Saerm. 1. de Ieiu. 10. Men. (...). 19.
observes) Prayer is one, and the first, of the three things, which do most
properly belong to all religious actions.

He prays then, and in his prayer this is remarkable: Prius orat pro orantibus
pro Jerusalem: He prays for them that pray for Jerusalem, before he prays
for Jerusalem it self. First, Let them prosper that love Jerusalem, verse. 6.
And then, Peace be Verse. 6.
within the walls of it, verse. 7. And there is Verse. 7.
a great deal of spiritual wisdom in this too. For while his prayer
strengthens them that pray for Jerusalem, both his, and their prayers meet, and
go stronger to God, then if any (be it David) prayed for it alone. And
therefore Ignatius tells his people at Smyrna, that their prayers Epist. 7. ad
Smyrnen.
reached as far as Antioch, (who no doubt prayed for it self too) and these
joined prayers, obtained peace for that Church.

Secondly, as David prays, as well as he Peace be within thee. And it is an
argument that his exhortation came heartily from him, because he falls to it
so close himself. And it is an excellent thing full of honor to God and
themselves, when Rex and Propheta, the King, and the Prophet, go first in
prayer for the States and the Churches peace.

Now he prays not for the peace of it alone, but for that which follows
peace, the prosperity of it too. He well knew, that God has pleasure in the
prosperity of his servants. Nor does he so pray for the temporal peace of the
State; as that he forgets the spiritual peace of the Church. Nor does he so
pray for the external peace of either: but that he preferres the inward, and
soule-peace of both. Not peace without virtue: For that is but a painted peace:
and therefore Saint Hilar. will have S. Hilar. ibid.
them together. Peace and Virtue Connexa sibi sunt, must be knit together in
Jerusalem. For Virtue is the strength and preservative of Peace. And
wheresoever Virtue is not, there Peace will be the first that will abuse it
self. Not Peace without Faith. For that is but a profane Peace. And therefore
Saint Hierome tells us, it is Dominus S. Hierom. Ibid.
Christus, our Lord Christ, that is the true Peace of both State and Church. As
if he so long before had foreseen and prayed for (in these words, Peace be
within thee) the coming of the Messiah. And foresee it (no question) he did.
And I will not deny, but that he prayed for it: since neither Ierusalems peace
could, nor our peace can, be firm without him. But then if you ask me why so
many States, and Churches, are divided for, and about Christ, and so not at
peace: the cause I must tell you, is the sin of men. They divide and tear
Christ first, and then what wonder if they be divided about him?

Thirdly, here is his prayer for peace for the Church: but whereabouts would
he have these excellent blessings seated? Where? Why every where, but
especially in Muris and Palatiis, about the Wall and the Palace. And they are
excellently fitted. He would have them spread all over Jerusalem: But Loca
Dominu, the places of their exaltation, are these in my Text; the Wall, and the
Palace: For peace that keeps at the wall, and so works inward to calm the
City: But the child of peace, Prosperity, that is borne after in the Palace,
and comes outward, to enrich to the very Wall.

The strength of a City is in the Walls. In Walls that are fenced and
fortified with Turrets, (as Euthymius renders it:) Euthym. Ibid.
therefore if a tempest of war beat upon the walls of it; possess the
strength of it: there cannot be peace. Therefore the Prayer is fit: Sit pax in
muris, peace be within the walls. And David's prayer is as full as fit: For
the Church has the same walls, that the State has. It is in my Text. For it
is in Muris Jerusalem, in the walls of Jerusalem, and the Temple stood within
it. And by reason of the knot which God himself has knit between the bodies:
(which is, that the same men, which in respect of one Allegiance make the
Commonwealth, do in respect of one faith, make the Church) the walls of the
State cannot be broken, but the Church suffers with it: nor the walls and
fences of the Church trampled upon, but the State must be corrupted by it:
therefore the Prayer is full; that Peace may sit upon the Walls, that
Prosperity may fill all that is within them.

Now neither the Walls of the State, nor the Walls of the Church, can keep
or defend themselves, or that which they compass. There must be Men, and they
must keep both the Wall, and the Palace, and the Peace: Viri-Muri, Men-Wals.
And among these, all are not bound to equal care in preserving the Peace. But
as the greatest strength of the dead Walls is in Turribus, in the Towers and
Bulwarks, so Nihil firmius, aut vtilius, aut celfius, Turribus. S. Hilar.
Ibid. S. Hierom. Ibid.
the greatest care in the living Walls lies in Turribus, in the Towers too;
upon those that are eminent in State and Church. Now Saint Hierome tells us
plainly, that for the State, the Noble, and the Wise, and the Valiant men, they
are the Towers. And for the Church, Saint Paul tells us, the Apostles were the
Pillars, Gal. 2. And S Gal. 2. 9. S. Chrysostom. Hom. 10. in S. Mat.
Chrysostom. that the Priests are Muri Ecclesiae, the walls of the Church. Here
therefore the Prayer must go home: David's did: Peace be in these walls too.
For if these walls shake upon their foundations: If these knock one against
another: there can be no firm peace in either Body. A wall-palsie is ever
dangerous.

Fourthly, when there is peace in Muris and Palatiis, in the Wall and the
Palace, stays either the Prayer for it, or the benefit of it, there? No sure.
The benefit stays not. For the peace of the Wall and the Palace, is very
diffusiue. All Jerusalem is the better for it presently. Not the meanest in the
Body of the State, not the lowest in the Body of the Church: but they are the
better, or may be, for this peace. And it is employed in the Text: For in
Palatiis, in the Palaces, names indeed the Kings house, but under that greater,
comprehends the less. And S. Hierome expresses S. Hierom. Ibid.
it so, and reads in Domibus, prosperity in the Houses. For the houses of
Subjects cannot be empty of peace, when the Palace of the King is full. This
for the Benefit; and peace is no niggard of it self. Then the rule is: Where
the benefit goes on and multiplies, there must not be a stop in the prayer;
that must go on to, as David's did; Peace be within the walls.

Fifthly. The form of this prayer, Sit pax in muris, Peace be within the walls,
and prosperity within the Palaces; tells us, that Jerusalem had both these. And
no doubt can be made, but that Jerusalem, that State, that Church had both.
And to this day as little doubt there is of civil States, muros habent, and
Palatia, they have both walls and Palaces. But for the Church, sacrilege (in
many places) makes all the haste it can, to frustrate this prayer, that there
may be nor Palaces, nor walls, for peace, or plenty, to be in. Doubtless, this
ceremonial Church will rise in Judgment against the pillage of Christendom.
For the Children of that Church left not their Mother without Walls for
defense, not without Palaces for honor. Ye see it is plain in my Text. But
many Children of the substantial Church, have showed themselves base and
unnatural. Palaces: no, Cottages are good enough. As if it were a part of
Religion, that Christ and his Priests must have less honor in the substance,
then they had in the ceremony. And yet when I consider better, I begin to
think it is fit the Priests house should be mean, where the Church, which is
Gods House, is let lie so basely. For he that hewed Timber before out of the
thick Trees, was known to bring it to an excellent work; but now they have
beaten down all the carved work thereof with Axes and Hammers, Psalm. 74. So
that now I doubt Psalm. 74. 5. 6.
we must vary the Prayer: from Sit pax, to Sint muri: not presume to pray,
there may be peace and plenty within the walls, but that the very walls
themselves may stand.

But yet I will do the People right too. For as many of them are guilty of
inexcusable sin, both by cunning and by violent sacrilege: so are too many of
us Priests guilty of other as great sins as sacrilege can be; for which, no
doubt, we and our possessions lie open to the waste. It must needs be so. For
the hand of sacrilege it self, though borne a Thief, could never touch
Palatia Ecclesiae, the Palaces of the Church, as long as God kept the wall of
it. But while our sins make God out of peace with the Walls; while he is at
Diruam, I will break the wall thereof, Esai. 5. it is in vain to shift off by
humane policies: for the Palaces cannot Esa. 5. 5.
stand.

Sixthly; I may not omit, that while the Prophet prays here, for the State
and the Church, and them that pray for both; yet his expression is not, Pro
orantibus, but Pro diligentibus; not for them that pray for it, but for them
that love it: Let them prosper that love it, and wish it good: so the payer (as
Euthym. observes) Euthym. Ibid.
did not comprehend the Jews only, but as many of other nations too, as were
Diligentes, lovers of Jerusalem. And indeed these two, to love, and to pray
for the State, and the Church, make one in my Text: For no man can pray heartily
for them, but he, that loves them. And no man that truly loves them, can
abstain from praying for them, and the peace of them. This is certain,
neither love, nor prayer, can stand with practicing against either; nor with
spoil and rapine upon either.

Nor is Diligentibus te, that love thee, an idle or an empty specification in
the prayer of the King. For as Jerusalem had, so has every State, and every
Church, some false members, whose hearts are nearer the enemy, then Jerusalem.
Therefore sit Pax, sed diligentibus, let there be peace, but to them that love
thee. But if any man have a false heart to Jerusalem, let him have no portion
in the prosperity of it.

Thus you see, the Prophets care is for Jerusalem. For this State and Church he
would have you pray. In this prayer he would have you beg for Peace. That which
he would have others do, he does himself: He prays both for Jerusalem, and
for them that pray for it. That which he also prays for, is peace and
prosperity. This peace he would have in the Walls, and this prosperity in the
Palaces. From thence he knows it will diffuse it self to meaner houses. Yet
it seems by the way, that that ceremonial Church had both Walls and Palaces.
And last of all, that this peace, this Prosperity, might be the reward only
Diligentium, of such as love both State and Church.

And now there is little behind. For my Text is an Exhortation, and preaches
it self. Rogate Pacem, pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Pray for it? Why, it
seems strange to me that any age should be weary of peace; or need an
exhortation to pray for it, either in Church or Commonwealth. Yet the age in
which David lived, was such. For though the instant time of the composure of
this Psalm, was a time of Peace: yet it was but a time picked out, in an age
that loved not Peace. David tells us so himself a little before my Text, Psalm.
120. My soul has long dwelt among Psa. 120. 5.
them that are enemies unto Peace: I labor for peace, but when I speak unto
them thereof, they make the^ ready to battle. So there he speaks for peace. And
in my text he exhorts to pray forpeace. And after that, him self prays for
peace. And all this is little enough among them that love not peace.

Howbeit take this with you: They bear not the best minds, ( Cases of
necessity, and honorable safety, always excepted) that desire the waters,
either of the Church, or the Commonwealth, should run troubled, that they may
have the better fishing. And the Historian sets his brand upon Paterc. L. 2. 25.
them. Who are they whom peace cannot please? Who? Why, Quibus pessima est, and
immodica cupiditas: They whose desires are worse then naught, in their Object:
and void of all moderation in their pursuit.

This I am sure of: since David at the placing of the Arc, exhorts all sorts
of men Rogare pacem, to pray for the peace of Jerusalem, he did not intend to
leave out the Priest, whom it concerns most, to preach peace to the people;
neither the High Priest, nor the rest, but they should be most forward in this
duty. This for the Priesthood then. And Christ himself, when he sent out the
Seventy to preach, gave them in charge, to begin at every house in which they
entered, with Peace. Peace be to this house, S. Luke 10. And he that S. Luke 10.
5.
preaches not peace, or labors not for it, must confess one of these two.
Namely, that he thinks David was deceived, while he calls to pray for peace.
Or that himself is disobedient to his call.

Calvin of opinion, that he which will Calu. Ibid.
order his prayers right, must begin, not with himself, but at Dominus
Ecclesiae corpus conseruet: That the Lord would preserve the Body of his
Church. It is just with the Prophet, Peace for Jerusalem. For if any man be so
addicted to his private, that he neglect the common State, he is void of the
sense of piety, and wishes peace and happiness to himself in vain. For
who-euer he be, he must live in the Body of the Commonwealth; and in the Body
of the Church: and if their joints be out, and in trouble, how can he hope to
live in peace? This is just as much as if the exterior parts of the body should
think they might live healthful, though the stomach be full of sick and
swollen humors.

To conclude then: God has blessed this State and Church, with many and happy
years of peace and plenty. To have had peace without plenty, had been but a
secure possession of misery, To have had plenty (if it were possible) without
peace, had been a most uncertain possession of that, which men call
happiness, without inioying it. To have had both these, without truth in
Religion, and the Churches peace, had bin to want the true use of both. Now to
be weary of peace, especially peace in truth, is to slight God that has given
us the blessing. And to abuse peace and plenty to Luxury, and other sins, is
to contemn the blessing it self. And there is neither of these, but will call
apace for vengeance.

My exhortation therefore shall keep even with S. Paul's, 1. Tim. 2. That
prayers and 1. Tim. 2. 1.
supplications be made, especially for Kings, and for all that are in
authority, that under them we may live a quiet, and a peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty. Here S. Paul would you pray for the king (...) the
King would have you pray for the State, and the Church. His peace cannot be
(...) theirs. And your peace cannot be without his. Thus having made my Text
my Circle, I am gone round it, and come back to it; and must therefore end in
the point where I began: Pray for the peace of Jerusalem; Let them prosper that
love it: Peace be within the walls of it, and prosperity within the Palaces:
That the Peace of God which passes our understanding here, may not leave us,
till it possessers of eternal Peace. And this, Christ for his infinite Merit
and Mercy sake grant unto us. To whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit, be
ascribed all Mighty, Majesty, and Dominion, this day, and for evermore.

Amen.
FINIS.

