The copy of a Letter written by the Lord of Themines, Seneschall of Quercy:
to the Lord Marshall Matignon, the Kings Lieuetenant General in Guyenne,
concerning the battle at Villemure, and the victory achieved against the
ennemies of his Majesty.

Also, A Decree of the Court of Parliament sittinge at Chaalons, against a
rescript in form of a Bull, directed to the Cardinal of Plaisance, and
published by the Rebels in Paris, in October last.

Faithfully done into English by E. A.

Heereunto are adjoined, the reports of certain letters, of News out of
France, and Sauoya.

fleur de lis

LONDON Imprinted by John Wolf.

1593.

THE COPY OF A LETTER WRITTEN by the Lord of Themines Seneschall of Quercy, to
the Lord Marshall Matignon, the kings Lieutenant general in Guyenne
concerning the battaille at Villemure, and the victory atchiued against the
ennemies of his Majesty.
MY Lord, I account it my duty to aduertize you, of such occurrences as have
passed before Villemure, together with ye occasion that I entered therinto.
Which was this: Being arrived in the town of Montauban, I found the affairs
in so bad estate, and the said place of Villemure without speedy succor in
such danger of loss: besides all not seeing wherewith to take the field, I
determined to go thither with a hundred of my companions, and three hundred
footmen. Hereof my Lord did I first give you notice, as also of such means as
I made account off to come to relieve me with a sentinel: for I foresaw that
the los of the said Villemure was of very great importance concerning the
kings service, and the good of your government: which (that being taken) all
the towns here about with in Quercy would have forsaken. This necessity would
not give me leisure to attend your permission, according to my duty, and
therefore it may please you my Lord to accept this reason for my excuse.

I will not stand to discourse unto you, the combats and sallyes performed in
one month, the time that I was besieged, as also yt in our sallies, we got
great advantage of the ennemies, besides the taking of their ensigns, and
forcinge of their trenches: for seeing themselves thus molested, they were
forced to make fortes at all the corners of their camp. In the mean time the
Lord of Montmorency, sent the Lord of Leques, of Chambault and of Montoison to
succor the said Villemure, who after eight days purposed to approach toward
the ennemy by a forte that they made show to assail: but the place was by the
ennemies army so succored, that without farther endaungeringe of any thing,
they returned to attend some of my friends: among others the Lord of Messillac,
whom I had employed, and the Lord Giscart, also the Lord of la Land, whom I
had left to gather the forces of the Country. Upon their arriual, they
approached the ennemies upon Monday the nineteenth of this month, and them
assailed at the very trenches, which, not finding all their horsemen in guarde,
were forced. This advantage lost, the ennemy grew into such fear as not
yielding such battle as I expected namely of their strangers, they were
overthrown, and the most part drowned, namely the Lord of Ioyeuse, their
artillery was taken, whereof were five Cannons or Culueringes, There were also
found those of the town of Montaubon, that were taken from the regimente of
the Lord of Espernon, where I was present with twelve horse, and that in good
time, for the sauinge of a Cannon, which they had abandoned. All the said
ennemies Ensigns were taken, also all the leaders of their footmen, either
dead or taken. To be brief my Lord: It was a very great overthrow. There be
dead between twelve and fifteen hundred men, and about a hundred prisoners. It
may please you my Lord in your packet to his Majesty so far to honor me as
to give him to understand of my duty performed in effecting this service, as
also if you please to honor me, as to give him to understand of my duty
performed in effecting this service, as also if you please to honor me with
your commanndements.

From Villemure the twentieth of October 1592.
A Decree of the Court of Parliament, sitting at Chaalons, against a rescript
in form of a Bull, directed to the Cardinal of Plaisance, and published by
the Rebels of Paris in the month of October last past.
IN as much as the Kings Attorney general, has declared unto this court that
the Rebels and seditious persons to the end to execute such wicked and wretched
purposes, as they have long since forecast, for the vsurpinge of this crown,
against the true and lawful successors of the same: not content with
replenishing the Realm with murder, massacre, robbery, and spoil, also with
bringing in the Spanyard, a most cruel and most pernicious ennemy to the
Realm of France, but also perceiving that the inhabitants of the rebellious
towns, began as it were out of a long lethargy and swounde, to recover, and to
enter the path of Obedience, whereto, by God and nature they are bound to their
lawful King: to the end utterly to quench and stop up all pricks and
points of charity toward their country, which in them began to shoot and
waken, and to reduce the Realm into greater trouble and division then before,
do frame themselves to proceed to the election of a new king, for a pretense
whereof, they have procured the publishing of a certain writing in form of a
Bull, importing power and commandment to the Cardinal of Playsance to assist
and auctorize the said pretended election. Wherein the said rebels and
seditious persons do openly reveal that which hitherto they had concealed,
namely that they have taken the pretense of religion to cover their wretched
and damnable enterprise and conspiracy: A matter which every good Frenchman and
Catholic ought to detest and abhor, as being directly repugnant to Gods
word, al holy decrees, all counsels and the liberty of the french Church, which
also opens a gate to the utter ruin and subuertion of al policyes and
human societyes instituted by God, namely of this so famous and flourishinge
Monarchy, the foundamentall law whereof does principally consist in the order
of lawful succession of kings, for the preservation whereof every good man
and true frenchman is to hazard his life rather then to suffer it to be
altered or violated, being the henge whereupon the certainty and peace of the
estate does torn. Desiring provision for the same.

The Court admitting the request made by the kings Attorney general, has
received and does receive it, appealing as of abuse from the grant and
purchase of the said Bull, and the power thereof, therein contayninge the
publication and execution of the same, and whatsoever else has ensued, it has
holden and does hold to be well relieved: does decree that Philip of the title
of Saint Onuphrius, Cardinal of Playsance, shall therein be sommoned, in
defense of the said appeal, and whatsoever the exploites, performed in this
town of Chaalons, by public cry, shall be of force, and in effect and
valor, as if they were performed upon his own person, or habitation. In the
mean time the said Court exhorts all Prelates, Bishops, Princes, Lords
Gentlemen, Officers and the kings subjects, of what estate, condition or
calling so ever, not to suffer themselves, to be led or won with the poison
or charms of such rebels, and seditious persons, but to persiste in the duty
of good and natural Frenchmen, and still to retain that affection and
charity, which they owe to their king and country, neither to cleave to the
subtelties of those who under the coulor of religion, do seek to invade the
estate, and to bring in the barbarous Spanyardes, and other usurpers. It does
also expressly inhibite and forbid all persons, not to retain or keep the
said Bull, neither to publish the same, or therewith to help themselves:
neither to favor the rebels, or to transporte themselves into any such towns
or places as may be appointed for the said pretended election. Under pain to
the noble men to be disgraded of all nobilite and to be denounced Infamous and
Peasants, they and their posterity: to the clergy to be depryued from the
possession of their benefices, and punished together with other the offenders,
as guilty of treason and desturbers of public peace, forsakers and traitors to
their Country: without hope for ever hereafter to obtain pardon, remission or
abolition. It also inhibiteth all towns not to receive the said rebels or
seditious persons to make their said assembly, neither to lodge, foster or
harbor them. The said court also decrees that the place where such
deliberation shall have been taken, together with the town where the said
assembly shall be made, shall be razed topsy turuy, without hope of ever
being reedified, in perpetual remembrance to the posterity of their treason,
treachery and falsehood: It also enioyneth all men at the allarum bell to
overrun all such as shall transport themselves into any such town, to
assist the said assembly. Also there shall be Commission delivered to the said
Attorney general, to inform against those that have been the authors and
promooters of such conspiracies and monopoles, practiced against the state, and
all such as have aided or favored them. And this decree, to be published with
the sound of the trompet, and common cry, in all the quarters of this town,
and sent to all the seas of this resort, there to be read, published and
enrolled with all diligence, by the substitutes of the said Attorney general.
Whereof they shall certifye the Court, within the space of one month, under
pain of suspension from their Offices.

Done in the Parliament the 18. of November 1592. at Chaalons. Saigcot.

By Letters of good credit, received this month of January 1593.
THe Duke of Florence has sent succor by Sea, to the French King, the
which succor has been incountered by king Philip his Galleys, but the
Florentines have given them the overthrow, and are arrived safe to Diepe.

They of the League, have created Lieuetenant general for king Philip in the
kingdom of France, a Spanish Cardinal which is in Paris.

The Parliamentes of France which do hold for the king, have a statute, by the
which it is ordained, that all them which do, and shall adhere to the League,
are declared convinced of high treason, and that therefore, they and their goods
are confiscated to the king, and if any Commonwealth, do adhere thereunto, it
is ordained that the same shall leese all their privileges and libertyes, and
that (the walls of the same being beaten down) it shall be left like a baren
villadge.

They of Paris are in great extremity, so that the Crochetors, and other of
the common sort, were risen against the better sort: but they have appeased
them, by increasing their ordinary: and so they keep them now quiet.

The Duke of Sauoy being in Piemount, to resist the Lord des Diguieres, sent
to the Duke de Terra noua, governor of Myllan for help: who sent him his own
son with many of the nobility of Myllan, very strongly provided, and they being
joined with the Duke, did approach the Lord des Diguiers, who passing little
for them all did take in their sight a strong castle, the which he had
bessieged near Thurin, and after that, he fought with them a very sore
battle in the which, the son to the governor of Myllan was slain. The Duke
of Sauoy put to flight, and his whole army defeated, many of the Dukes men were
slain, and many were taken prisoners.

The Duke of Lorraine has fought lately against the Duke of Bullion, there
were many of the Duke of Lorraine his men slain, and many were taken
prisoners, amongst which were found about four hundred Gentlemen.

The king does aessmble his army about Chartres, to resist the ennemie
stranger, which is entered within France under the conducte of the Earl
Charles Mansfield.

By other Letters that came on the 20. of this month of January 1593.
THe Duke of Espernon, has taken Anthebe, and all the country about the same,
so that all Prouence is now brought under the Kings obedience.

He has sent a hundred horsemen to the Lord des Diguieres in Prouence.

The Lord des Diguieres has brought under the Kings obedience, all the
valley of Angroigne, and the country about it, and has forced the Papists of
that country to contract with him, by which contract, they are bound to pay
every month, thirty thousand french crowns, for the mainetenance of his army.

The Duke of Florence, and the Venetians, have levied six thousand Switzers,
to aid the French King, against his ennemies.

The Mareshall d'Aumont, has taken the town of Dynan in Britany.

COPY DE LA LETTRE DE MONSIeur de Themines Seneschal de Quercy, enuoyee a
Monseigneur le Marshall de Matignon, Lieutenant gen eral du Roy en Guyen,
concernant la bataille de Villemur, and victoire obtenue contre les ennemys de
sa Majesty.
MONSEIGNEVR, ie tiens de mon debuoir, de vous aduertir de ce, qui s'est pass
deuant Villemur, and de l'occasion, qui me fit ietter dedans: C'est, qu'estant
arrive en la ville de Montauban, i'y trouuay les affairs en si mauuais estat,
and ledict lieu de Villemur en tell danger de se predre, s'il n'estoit
promptement secouru, and ne voyant dequoy me mettre a la campaigne, ie me
deliberay de m'y en aller auec ce^t de mes compaignons, and trois cens hommes
de pied. I'en donnay la nouuelle a vous premierement, Monsieur, and apres a
tout ce que i'estimois auoir de moyens, pour me venir releuer de sentinelle:
car ie preuoyois que la perte dudict Villemur estoit tres-importante au service
du Roy, and au bien de vostre gouuernement: car celle-la prinse, toutes les
villes de ces enuirons, qui sont dansle Quercy eussent quitte. Ceste necessite
ne m'eust peu donner loisir d'attendre vostre permission: car c'estoit ce que
ie deuois. Vous receurez en ce subject, s'il vous plaist, Monsieur, mon excuse.
Ie ne m'arresteray a vous discourir des combats and sorties, qui se sont
faictes durant un mois, que i'ay este assiege, and que en noz sorties nous
auons gaigne grand advantage sur l'ennemy, prins des drappeaux, force des
trenchees, tellement que se voyant trauaillez de ceste sort, ils auroyent este
contraints fair des forts a tous les coings de leur camp. Durant ce temps
Monsieur de Mommorency enuoya Monsieur de Leques, de Chambault, and de
Montoyson pour secourir ledict Villemur: and au bout de huict iours ils
sevoulure^t approcher des ennemis par un fort, qu'ils firent semblant de
vouloir attaquer, mais ce lieu fust secouru de l'armee desdicts ennemis,
tellement que sans vouloir rien hazarder, ils s'en retournerent pour attendre
de mes amiss: enter autres Monsieur de Messillac, que i'auois employe, and
lesieur Giscart, and lesieur de la Land, que i'auois laisse dehors pour
assembler les forces du pays. Lors qu'ils ont este arriuez, ils s'en sont venuz
aux ennemis le lundy dixneufiesme de ce mois, and apres les auoir attaquez par
le haut de leurs trenchees, and n'y trouuant toute leur caualerie en guard, ils
ont este forcez. Cest advantage perdu, l'armee ennemie se mit en tell effroy,
que sans render tant de combat, que ie croyois, mesmes des estrangers, ils ont
este deffaicts, and la pluspart noyez, mesmes monsieur de Ioyeuse, l'artillerie
prinse, ou ily a cinq pieces de canon ou coleuurines, celles de la ville de
Montauban y ont este trouuees qui auoyent este prinses au regiment de Monsieur
d'Esperno^, ou ie me trouuay auec douze cheuaux, and bien a propos pour sauuer
un canon, qu'ils auoyent abandonne, tous les drappeaux desdits ennemis prins,
tous les chefs de gens de pied morts ou prins. Bref, Monsieur, c'est vne
tres-grande deffaicte, il y a de morts, de douze a quinze ce^s hommes, and
enuiron de cent prisonniers. Vous me ferez bien l'honneur, s'il vous plaist,
Monsieur, que lors que vous despecherez a sa Majeste, vous luy ferez entendre
le debuoir, que i'ay rendu a l'effaict de ce service: and meferez aussi, s'il
vous plaist, l'honneur de me commander. De Villemur, le vingtiesme d'Octobre,
mil cinq cens nonante deux.

ARREST DELA COVR DE Parliament seant a Chaalons contre le Rescrit en form de
Bule, adresse au Cardinal de Plaisance, publie par les rebels de Paris, au
mois a Octobre dernier.
SVR ce que le Procureur general du Roy a remonstre a la Cour, queles rebels
and seditieux pour executer les meschans and malheureux desseings qu'ils ont de
longue main proiettez pour usurper ceste Couronne sur les vrais and legitimes
successeurs d'icelle, non contens d'auoir remply le Royaume de meurtres,
massacres, brigandages, and pilleries, and auoir d'abondant introduit
l'Espagnol trescruel and trespernicieux ennemy de la France, voyans que les
habitans des villes rebels co^mencoient comme d'vne longue lethargy and
pamoison a retourner a soy and reprendre le chemin de l'obeissance don't Dieu
and Nature les obligent enuers leur Roy legitime pour du tour amortir and
reboucher les points and aigullions de la charity verse leur Patrie, qui se
reueilloient en eux and remettrece Royaume en plus grand trouble and division
que deuant, se disposent de proceder a l'eslection d'vn Roy. Pour a laquelle
donner quelque couleur, ils ont fait publier certain escrit en form de Bule
portant pouuoir and mandement au Cardinal de Plaisance d'assister and
authoriser ladite pretendue eslection. En quoy lesdits rebels and seditieux
descouurent apertement ce qu'ils ont iusques icy tenu cache, and qu'ils n'ont
fait que prendre le pretexte de la religion pour couurir leur malheureuse and
damnable enterprise and coniuration. Chose que tout bon Francois and Catholic
doit detester and abhorrer comme directement con traire a^ la parole de Dieu,
aux saints decrets, conciles and libertez de l'Eglise Gallicane, and qui ouure
la port a l'entiere ruin and euersion de toutes polices and societez humaines
instituees de Dieu, mesmement de ceste tant renommee and florissante Monarchy,
la loy fondame^tale de laquelle consiste principalement en l'ordre de la
succession legitime de nos Rois, pour la conservation de laquelle tout homme de
bien and vray Francois, doit exposer savie plustost que souffrir qu'elle soit
alteree and viollee, comme le gond sur lequel turn toute la certitude and
repos de l'Estat requerant y estre pourueu.

LA COVR en entherinant larequeste faicte par le Procureur general du Roy, l'a
receu and recoit, appellant comme d'abus de l'octroy and impetration de ladicte
Bule, and pouuoir y co^tenu publication, execution d'icelle, and tout ce qui
s'en est ensuiui, l'a tenu and tient pour bien releue, ordonne que Philippes du
titre de S. Onuphre Cardinal de Plaisance, ser a assign en icelle, pour
defendre audit appel, and vaudro^t les exploits faits en ceste ville de
Chaalons, a cry public, and seront de tell effect and valeur comme si faits
estoient a person ou domicile. Et cependant exhort ladicte Cout tous
Prelates, Euesques, Princes, Seigneurs, Gentilshommes, Officiers and subiets du
Roy, de quelque estat, condition and qualite qu'ils soient, de ne se laisser
aller ou gagner aux poisons and ensorcellemens de tells rebels and seditieux,
ains demourer au deuoir de bons and naturels Francois, retenir tousiours
l'affection and charity qu'ils doiuent a leur Roy and Patrie, sans adherer aux
artifices de ceulx qui soubs couleur de religion veuillent enuahir l'Estat, and
y introduire les barbares espagnols and autres vsurpateurs, faict tresexpresses
inhibitions and deffences a toutes persons, de te nir ny auoir chez soy
ladite Bule, icelle publier, s'en aider, ou fauoriser lesdits rebels, ny se
transporter aux villes and lieux qui pourroient estre assignez pour ladite
prete^due election, Sur peine aux Nobles d'estre degradez de Noblesse, and
declarez insames and roturiers eux and leur posterite, and aux Ecclesiastiques
d'estre decheuz du possessoire de leurs benefices, and punis ensemble tous
contreuenans, comme criminels de leze Majesty, and perturbateurs du repos
public, deserteurs and traistres a leur pays, sans esperance de pouuoir obtenir
a l'aduenir pardon, remission ou abolition, and a toutes Villes de receuoir
lesdits rebels and seditieux, pour fair ladicte assemblee, les loger,
retirer, ou heberger.

Ordonne ladicte Cour que le lieu ou la deliberation aur a este prise, ensemble
la Ville ou ladicte assemblee se fera, seront rasez de fonds en comble, sans
esperance d'estre redifiez, pour perpetuelle memoire a la posterite de leur
trahison, perfidie, and infidelite, enioinct a toutes persons de courir sus a
son de toxain, contre ceux qui se transporteront en ladicte ville, pour
assister a icelle assemblee, and sera commission deliuree audict Procureur
general, pour informer contre ceux qui ont este autheurs and promotheurs de
tells monopoles and coniurations faictes contre l'Estat, and qui leur ont aid
ou fauorise. Et sera le present arrest publie a son de trompe and cry public
par les carefours de cest Ville, and envoye par tous les sieges de ce ressort,
pour y estre leu, publie, and enregistre a la diligence des substituds du
Procureur general, don't ils certifieront la Cour dans un mois, a peine de
suspension de leurs estats.

Faict en Parliament le XVIII. Nouembre M. D. XCII. A Chaalons.

