Reddite ergo que sunt Cesaris Cesari, et que sunt dei, deo.

Give that that is Cesars to Caesar and that that is gods to god.


This Doctrine is grievous, heui, and irkesom to couetouse herts rebellyouse and
sedyciouse hertes. Give, give, they can not away with it, it ca^ not stick
in their minds, nor sattell in their stomakes: they would rather be taking,
scraping, and catchinge, then geuinge. But godly persons will well accept and
take it, for it is to them a great pleasure, Joy and comfort. For the better
understanding of this place, ye shall understand, Christ came to bring us out
of bondage and to set us at liberty: not from civil burden as from obaying
the magistrates, from paying tax and try but, but from a greater burden, and
a more greuouser burden, the burth^^ (...), the burden not of (...) but of
the soul, to make us fre from it, and to redeem us from the curse and
malediccion of the law unto the honorable state of the children of God. But
as for the civil burdens, he delivered us not from them, but rather
commanded us to pay them: give, give, says he to Caesar obedience, tribute,
and al things dew too Caesar. For the understanding of this text, it shall be
needful to consider the circumstance going before: which thing dewlye
considered, gives a great light to al places of ye scripture: who spoke
these words, to whom they were spoken, upon what occasyon, and before whom.
Therefore I will take the whole fragmente and shred, taken out of gods book
for the gospel of this day, written in the gospel of Mathewe the.xxii. Chapter.

Tunc abierunt Pharisei.

Then went the Pharisees and took a counsel. Luke has Obseruantes,
marckinge, spyinge, lookynge, totinge, watchynge: like suttel, crafty and
sleyghtie fellows they took a council and sent to him their disciples, which
should fain the^ selfs just me^, godly me^, glad to learn his doctrine And with
the^ Herod's servants to trap him in his words: and they said to him: Master
we know yt thou art a true man, and teach the way of God, in ueritate,
truly, and carest for no man. For thou regardest not the personage of man.
Tell us therefore, what thinckest thou? Is it lawefull to give Caesar tribute money
or no? This was their question that they would have snarled him with. In
answeryng to this they would have caught him by the foot. But Jesus Cognita
malicia eo rum, knowing their malice, their wyckednes, their uncharitableness,
he said to them: hypocrytes whi do ye tempt me? Show me a piece of ye tribute
money. And they brought him a penye. And he said to them: whose image is this,
and the writing? They answered: Cesars. He said to them. Give to Caesar that
that belongs to Caesar, and to god that that is gods.

Thus ye may perceive, it was our sauyoure Christ that spoke these words,
and they were spoken unto the Pharyseis that tempted him. But they be a doctrine
unto us that are Christ's Dyscyples. For whose words should we delight to hear
and learn, but the words and doctrine of our savior Christ? And that I may
at this time so declare them, as may be for gods glory, your edifying, and
my dyscharge: I pray you all to help me with your prayer.

In the which prayer. etc. For ye universal church of Christ through the whole
world. etc. For the preservation of our Sovereign Lord King Edward the.vi.
sole supreme head under God and Christ of ye churches of Inglande and of
Irelande. etc. Secondly for the kings most honorable council? Thirdly I
commend unto you the souls departed this life in the faith of Christ, that
ye remember to give lauds, praise, and thanks to almightye God for his great
goodness and mercy showed unto them in that great need and conflicte
ageynste the devil and sin. To give them at the hour of death faith in his
sins death and passion, where by they might conquer and overcome, and get
the vyctorye. Give thanckes I say for this, adding prayers and supplycations
for your selves, that it may please god to give you the like faith and grace,
to trust only unto the death of his dear son, as he gave unto the^. For as
they be gone, so must we: and the devil will be as ready to tempt us as he
was them, and our sins will light as heavy upon us as theirs did upon the^: and
we are as weak and unable to resyst as were they. Pray therefore that we may
have grace to dye in the same faith of Christ as they did, and at the latter
day be raised with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and be partaker with Christ in
the kingdom of heaven: for this and grace, let us say the Lords prayer. Tunc
abcuntes. Tunc, then* It hangs on a text before. Christ told them a
similitude that the kingdom of heaven is like to a king that made a bridal to
his son, he married his son, and sent his servants out to bid his
gestes. Well they would not come although he had made great preparing and much
cost for them: ambycion, covetousness, and crueltye would not let them come.
Then he sent his warryoures and destroyed them: and again sent other
servants to bydde gestes to his brydal, hand over head come who would. They
did his bydding, and the house was full of gestes. The king now would vewe his
gests: and fyndyng there one not cladde in Mariyng garments, he asked him:
friend how cammest thou here, not having a marriage garmente? And commanded to
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness: there was
wayling and gri^ding of teeth. For many be chosen and few be called. Now
Christ expounds this. The kingdom of heaven is preaching of the Gospel. This
marriage is the joining of Christ and his church, which was begun by Christ,
here in earth, and shall continue to ye end of ye world. The bidders of his
gestes are preachers, but here are so many lets and hindrances: couetise is a
let, ambicio^ is a let, cruelty is ye greatest let. For they bett his
servants, brake their heads, yea murdered them, which bad them to this
brydal. With this the king was angrye, and sent his men of war to destroy
those unthankful people. Was he not angrye with couetousenes and with ambition?
Yes he is angrye with couetouse men, with ambiciouse men: But most of all with
crueltye. This is an anger above commune anger, when men be not only
unthankful but also add crueltye to persecute the preachers, that comes to
call us to this marriage. This touches god so nyghe, that he says. Qui uos
audit me audit. This crueltye the king would not leave unpunished, but sent
furthe his men of war. They are called his men of war, his men, his men,
for wars come at his commandment. Titus and Uaspasian were sent of god to
punyshe those couetouse Jews, Ambiciouse Jews, cruel Jews, that would not
credit Christ, nor believe the preachinge of salvation. Now in war, what part
soever get the victory, that is Gods part, that is Gods host.
Nabuchodonosor was an evil manne, a wicked ma^ne, yet was he sent of God to
punyshe the stubbourne and Couetouse Jews for their ambicion, and crueltye,
and forsakyng gods most holy word: And he is called in scripture gods
servant. It is no good argument He has the vyctorye, Ergo he is a good
manne. But this is a good argument. He has the vyctorye, ergo God was on his
side, and by him punyshed the contrary part. The preachers called good and
bad. They can do no more but call, God is he that must bring in, god must
open the hertes, as it is in the Acts of the Apostles. When Paul preached to
the womenne, there was a silk woman Cuius cor deus aperuit, whose heart god
opened. None could open it but god. Paul could but only preach, god must
work, god must do the thing inwardelye. But good and bad came. Therefore the
preaching is lykened to a Fyshers net, that takes good fysh and bad, and
draws all too the shoore. In the whole multitude that profess the gospel,
all be not good, all can not away with the mortyfyinge of their flesh, they
will with good will bear the name of Chrystians, of gospellers, but to do the
deeds they grudge, they repyne, they ca^ not away with it. Among the
Apostles, al were not honest, nay, one was a devil: So among so great
number of gospellers, some ar Card gospellers, some are dyse gospellers, some
pot-gospellers: all are not good, all seek not amendmente of life. Then
comes the king to se his gestes. And finds one not having the marriage
garment, and says to him: Friend how cammest thou hither, and haste not ye
marriage garment? Faith is the marriage garmente, not a feigned faith without good
living, but faith that works by love. He was blamed because he professed one
thing, and was in deed another. Whi did he not blame the preachers? There was
no fault in them, they did their dewtyes, they had no further commandment
but to call them to the marriage. The garmente he should have provided him
self. Therefore he quarrelleth not with the preachers: what does this fellow
here? Why suffered ye him to enter. etc. for their commission extended no
further but only to call him.

Many are grieved that there is so little fruit of their preaching. And when
as they are asked: why do you not preach having so great gifts given you of
God? I would preach say they, but I se so little fruit, so little amendmente
of life, that it makes me werye. A noughty answer, a very noughty answer.
Thou art troubled with that god gave the no charge of, and leauest undone,
that thou art charged with. God commands the to preach, and Si non
locutus fueris. If thou speak not, if thou warn not the wicked that they turn
and amend, they shall perish in their iniquityes. Sanguinem autem eius de manu
tua requiram. This text nippeth, this pyncheth, this touches the quick. He
shall dye in his wickedness, but I will require his blood at thy hand. Harken
well to this, mark it well ye curates I will ask his blood at thy hand. If
you do not your office, if ye teach not the people, and warn them not. You
shall be dampened for it. If you do your office, you are dyscharged: Tuanimam
tuam liberasti. Warn the^ therefore to leave their wickedness, their couetyse,
their ambycyon, their crueltye* vnmercyfulnesse. etc. and thou haste saved
thine own soul. For there was no quarrel with the preachers, but he was
cast in prison, where was weeping and waylynge, and gryndynge of teathe: these
were his delycates. Multi sunt uocati, many are called, but few are chose^.
To this parable now ioineth this gospel.

Tunc Pharisei abeuntes.

Pharisei was a sect of religion among the Jews most exquisite, perfect,
holy, and learned, and were reputed most godly men, even such as in holiness
excelled all other, as our Monks were of late among us, and be yet in other
places. They were in gods bosom, even at heaven gates in the sight of the
world: But inwardelye supersticious, fained, holow herted, dissimulers. Now
at this time I know none more like the^ than the hypocritical holow herted
papystes. The name is changed, but the thing remains: Therefore they may well
be called by the name, that keep the thing. These were enemies to Christ and
his doctrine. They would be ordered by old wont, customs, forfathers: and to
maynteyne their tradicions set aside the commandments of God, refused
Christ, and his word. S Luke has obseru^^es obseruauntes, yt is watchers,
tote^s, spies, much like the obseruaunt friars, the barefote friars, that were
here, which in deed were ye Bishop of Romes spies, watchynge in every
country, what was said or done against him. He had it by and by, by one or
other of his spies, they were his men all together, his posts to work
against the Regalitie. In the court, in the noble men's houses, at every
merchants house, those obseruauntes were spyinge, totynge, and lookynge,
watchynge and catchinge what they might hear or se against the sea of Rome.
Take heed of these obseruauntes. To understand the word obseruauntes mark
what the poet says in his Comedi. Obserua Danu^. Take heed, beware and mark
Danum, for they will be styrrynge in every town, in every gentelmannes house,
yea at their very tables: well, be wise, beware of them.

Inierunt Concilium.

They took a counsel, some goodlye thing, some wayghty matter, I am sure,
that these holy fathers consulte upon. It must needs be for the commune
wealth, and the profit of many, that these holy fathers come together for. It
was to snarle or trappe him in his words. This was their device this was their
counsel. To this end they gather such a company of holy fathers. A
counsel, a council. Bonum est concilium said one. Yea marye quod another:
Sed bonorum A council is good, yea sir if it be of good men. For else what is
a council, if it be wicked, of wicked men. If they say: This was done by a
counsel, determined in a counsel, what is it the better if ye council be
wicked? Nicene council was gathered of a great number of Bishops and learned
men, yet had not one man have been, they had determined contrary to gods word.
They were minded, and ernest lie bente to make a decree that no priest should
marye: but one old man, and unmarried him self withstode that act, and turned
the councels mind: so that they meddled not with that decre. And why, more
credence is to be given to one man having the holy word of God for him, then
to.x. thousand without the word. If it agree with gods word, it is to be
received: if it agree not, it is not to be received, though a Council, yea
though an aungel from heaven had determined it. Truth it is that Christ
grants to a congregacyon gathered in his name, to be amongs them, yea though
it be but.ii. or.iii. There is as much granted to.ii. or three, as to ten
thousand, so they come in Christ's name. Vbi duo uel tres congregati sunt in
nomine meo, Ibi sum in medio eorum. In nomine meo. much wickedness is done In
nomine domini when they come together seeking their own pryuate lust,
pleasures, and ambycyouse desires, it is not in in nomine domini, But to seek
gods glory Christ's glory, Christ's true relygyon, that is in nomine
Christi, and then they are to be heard. But what was these men's counsel?

Vt illa quearent eum in sermon.

To snarle or tangle him in his words, toters and watchers to catch him in
his word, that they might enforce some what against him: Non est concilium
aduersus dominum: These were wylye pyes, sleyghtye children, children of the
world, and craftyly they handled their matters. Miserunt discipulos suos cum
Herodianis. They would not go them selves, lest they might have been known,
but he knew not their Dyscyples as they thought. And they went not alone,
but had with them Herodes Sowdiers, Herodes favorers. This Herod was an
Idumean, and was appointed by the Romans to govern ye Jews and to gather
the trybute money. Therefore he was hated among the Jews, and so were those ye
favored the Romans part, and in dysdayne they were called Herodians. Now
was the time come, that the holy Patryarke Prophesied, that the Scepter and
kyngedome was removed, and Christ was born. This they should have marked, and
received his doctrine. But they went about to destroy him, and therefore
they brought the Herodians with them. Here now is an agremente in
wickedness between the Phariseis and the Herodyans against truth, against
Christ, against gods word they agree together, where as in deed neither
loved other, but hated each other as a toode. So many now adays of our
Phariseis papystes in destroyinge the truth, they agree wonders well: where as
in pryuate matters, they hate one another as a toode.

Here commes me now these holy fathers from their council, and send their
Dyscyples with the Herodians: mark their behauyoure, and mark Christ's
behauyoure. They come lowtynge and with low curtesye, as though they would
creape into his boosome: as for Herod's men, they meddle not, but stand by to
hear the tale as witnesses, and if he should speak any thing amysse, be
ready to lay hands upon him. They would feign ryd him and destroy him, but
they would turn the envy of the deed upon Herod, so that they would be seen
fautelesse. It had been more meet for the^ to have cou^celd how to amend their
fautes and to have come to christ, to learn his doctrine, then to study
malycyouslye to trappe him, and to destroy him. what said they?

Magister scimus quod ueraxes. etc.

Master we know that thou art a true manne, and teach the way of God
truly, master we know that thou art Tomme truth, thou tellest the very
truth, and sparest for no man. Thou art plain Tomme truth. Goodly words,
but out of a Cancarde stomach and maliciouse heart. Smyling speakers crepe
into a man's bosom, they love and al to love him, they favor his word,
and call him Master, and yet would gladlye se him hanged. These are in dead
Hipocrites, one in heart and another in mouth. We know thou art a true manne.

Et uiam dei in ueritate doces.

Yea this is gods way taught truly. There is gods way and man's way.
Many teach men's way, but that should not be: we should lern uiam dei,
gods way, and that truly, without mixture, temperature, blau^chi^g,
powdering. Many teach gods way, and shall preach a very good and godly
Sermon, but at the last they will have a blaunched almonde. One little peace of
Popery patched in, to powder there matter with, for their own lucre and glory.
They make a minglinge of the way of God and man's way to gether, a mingle
ma^gle as men serve pigges in my country. Christ did not so. He taught the
way of God truly without myxture, temperature, powderynge, or blaunchynge.

These be the properties of al true preachers, that these confess to be in
Christ. It was true every word that they spoke. Christ is our master
appointed of God, he was true and taught gods way, not man's way* truly,
not blaunchinge it with man's doctrine. So should we preachers be true men.
Preachers of gods way, truly, truly, without regard of person: That is
for no man's pleasure, corruptinge the word, or mingle mangle the word with
man's inuencyons and traditions.

Here may patrons of benefices learn upon what manner a man they should
bestow their benefice. Upon a true man, a teacher. He may not be to learn and
a scholar when he should teach other, but one learned, hable to teach, hable
and well willinge to discharge his cure. But what do patrons? Sell your
benefices, or give them to your servants for their service, for keeping of
hounds, hawks, for making of your gardennes. These patro^s regard no
souls, neither their own, nor other men's, what care they for souls, so they
have money, though they peryshe, though they go to the Devil. Where as in
deed the office of a patron is to have a care, a zeal, a vigilante eye for
soul health, and to provide for his churches, that he is patron of, that they
might be taught in gods word. Truly many now a days, strive to be
patrons of benefices, and goo too the law who should be patron. And what
strive they for think ye? Even which of them shall goo to the Devil first.
For they regard not soul health, nor the office of preaching, the office of
salvation: where as in deed therefore are they patrons, to look to it and to se
it be provided for. God of his goodness and almightye power, might ordein
other ways and means of salvation: but this office of preaching is it that
god has ordained, as Saint Paul says. Cum non cognouerit mundus per
sapientiam deum, placuit deo per stultitiam predicationis saluos facere
Credentes. Where as the world by his wisdom knew not god, it pleased god by
folish preching to save, credentes, those yt believe, per stultitiam
predicationis, by folishnes of preaching, or folyshe preaching, it makes no
matter. Not that it was folyshe in deed, but that the wisemen of the world
did so essteme and take the preaching of the Gospel, whereas in deed it is
most godly wisdom, and the preaching office, is the office of salvation,
and the only means that God has appointed too salvation. Credentes. Those
that believe be saved by this holy office of prechynge. I would wyshe it were
better looked unto, and provided for, and that patro^s and Bishops should se
more diligently to it, then has been done before time. I would ask no more
dylygence to this office of salvation: then men ar wont to bestow upon these
worldly pleasures and lu^er or commodityes. Nay would they bestow but the
half labor and pains, and some litell part of the expenses, it were well.

To consider what has been pluckte from Abbayes, colleges, and chantryes: it
is meruel no more too be bestowed upon this holy office of salvation. It may
well be said by us that the Lord complayneth by his prophet. domus mea
deserta, uos fegtinatis unus quisque in domum sua, What is Christ's house but
Christen souls but who makes any provision for them, every man scrapeth and
gets together for this bodily house, but the soul health is neglected,
scooles are not maynteyned, scolers have not exhybicion, the preaching office
decays, men provide lands and riches for their children, but this most
necessary office, they for the most part, neglecte. Uerye few there be that
helps poor scolers, that sets their children to scole, to learn the
word of God, and to make a provision for the age to come. This
notwithsta^dinge is the only way to salvation, God will not deuyse any new
way as far as I perceive, but would have us to use this way ordained all
ready. This preaching way we ought to use, and not too look for any new
way, this office of salvation we ought to maynteine, and not look for any
other. My request is yt he would bestow as much to ye mayntenaunce of this
necessary office of salvation, as ye were wont to bestow in times paste upon
Romish trifels and things of man's tradicions. Nether do I now speak for my
self and my couente, as the beggynge Friars were wont to do, I have enough, I
thyncke God, and I neade not to beg. I would every preacher were as well
provided as my self through this realm, as in deed I thyncke the^ as well
worthy as my self. I wish (I say) ye would bestow as much upon this
necessary office of salvation, as in times paste ye bestowed in pilgrimage, in
images, in gildynge, paynetinge, in Masses, Diriges, Trentals, chau^tryes and
such vain things of the Romyshe Pharisees and Papists inuentinge. Ye would
do that without calling, and to this will you not be ready when ye be,
called. If it be no better in time too come, hitherto looked unto, the^
England will at the last bewail it. Christ knew what a charge hangs upon
this necessary office of preaching, the office of salvation, and therefore
most earnestlye applied it him self. And when he chose his twelve Apostles
to send them forth unto this office, he first prayed all the night. He
being God almighty with the father, might have given al gifts fit for this
office, but to teach us he would first pray all night. Here is good matter
for Bishops and patrons to look upon, and not to regard so little whom they
give their benefice unto, or whom they admit to cure the souls they have
charge of. A notable example. Christ prayed al night, or he would send
them forth, or he would put them in this preaching office, this most
necessary office of salvation. For he saw that they had neade of great zeal
to God, and to soul health, that should take upon them to keep souls, and
a bold courage and spirit that should rebuke the world of their sin and
wickedness* Many will chose now such a curate for their souls as they may
call fool, rather then one that shall rebuke their couetyse ambytyon,
unmercifulness, vncharytablenes. That shall be sober, dyscrite, apt to reprove,
and resyste the again sayers, with the word of God. These be the propertyes
of every good preacher, to be a true manne, to teach, not dreams, nor
inuencyons of men, but uiam dei in ueritate, the way of God truly. And not
to regard the personage of man. Not to creape into his bosom, to clawe his
back, to say to the wicked, he doothe well, for filthy lukers sake. Ah
these flatterers, no greater mischife in the commune wealth then these
flatterers.

But who would have discerned this but our sauyoure Jesus Christ? he spread
them out and knew al their maliciouse hearts, their uncharitable hearts,
their dissimulynge hearts and said: Quid me tentatis hipocrita.

Hipocrites, hipocrites, hipocrites, one in heart, a another in mouth, far
in pretense, but full of mischeife, and malycious hearted within. He saw what
was within. Then have at ye, ye hipocrites, they put forth their question.

Licet censum dare Cesari an non?

A perilous question to answer to* This was the fruit of their counsel, and
this was the snare laid for him, what should he do now? hold his peace? That
had been a slander too his doctrine. They would have said: loo, how
ignoraunte he is in the law that has no answer to this simple and plain
questyon. If he affirm and did pay the tribute, he shall incur the hatred
of the people, and seem to speak in the favor of the Romans. If he would
have a denied it. Then had they that they sought, The Herodians were ready
too lay hands upon him, to have him to Bourdo, to prison with him, a traitoure
that speaks against Ceaser, away with this sedicious fellow. O Lord what
perell is it to have to do with these Hipocrites? Who could have escaped this
snare but Christ only which is the wisdom of the father, and knew al their
maliciousenes and craftye sleyghtes? And as he then by his wisdom overcame
them, so now doutles he gives wisdom to al his, to spy out and beware of
their sutle crafts. For such trains, traps, snares and sutleties, as these
pharisees laid for Christ, such have our Pharisaical papystes laid for
Christ's preachers. But he mercyfully ever fulfilled his promise, dabo os and
sapientiam, cui non possunt pesistere omnes aduersarii uestri.

I will (says Christ) give mouth and wisdom, which all your adversaries
shall not be able too resyste. They shall not be tongue tied, they have their
answer, yea so wise* that their adversaries shall not be hable to resyste.
They may well oppress it here in this world with power, but they can not
be hable to overcome it with arguments of truth, no, all the pack of
adversaries with all their subtelties snares, and gynnes. They may rail upon
it, as in many places leude fellows do against priests marriages. That dame
his wife, his whore. etc. But they can not deny it by any scripture, but
that the marriage of priests is as good and godly, as the marriage of any other
manne. For wedlock is honorable among all men. And the wedded bed
undefiled. And to avoid fornicacion let every man have his own wife, well,
let them rail, let them do what they can against truth* Respice finem:
mark the end. Look upon the end. The end is, all adversaries of the truth
must be counfounded and come to naught, neither shall they be able to resist
it. And though the pore Disciples be troubled, vexed, and persecuted, mark
the end. The hyeste promocyon that God can bring his unto in this life, is
to suffer for his truth. And it is the greateste, setting forth of his
word, it is godds seed, And one sufferynge for the truth, turns more then
a thousand Sermons. I will tell you an example of this how God gives mouth
and wisdom. I was once in examinacion before.v. or, vi. Bishops, where I had
much turmoilinge, every weak thrice came to exminacions, and many snares and
trappes were laid to get some thing. Now God knoweh I was ignoraunte of the
law, but that God gave me answer and wisdom, what I should speak. It was God
in deed, for elsse I had never escaped them. At the last I was brought
forth to be examyned into a chamber hanged with Arras, where I was before wont
to be examined, but now at this time the chamber was some what aultered. For
where as before there was wont ever too be a fire in the chymney, now the fire
was taken away, and an Arrace hangyng hanged over the chymnie, and the table
stood near the chimnies end, so that I stood between the table and the
chymnyes end. There was among these bishops that examyned me, one with who^ I
have been very familiar, and took him for my great freynde, an aged man, and
he satte next the table end.

Then among all other questions, he put forth one, a very subtyl and crafty
one, and such one in deed as I could not thyncke so great danger in. And
when I should make answer, I pray you Master Latymer said he, speak out,
I am very thick of hearing, and here be many that sytte far of. I
merueled at this that I was bydden speak out, and began to mysdeme, and gave
an ear to the chymnye. And sir there I heard a pen walking in the chymney,
behind the cloth. They had appointed one there to write all mine aunswers,
for they made sure work that I should not starte from them, there was no
startynge from them.

God was my good Lord, and gave me answer, I could never elsse have escaped it.
The questyon was thy^: Master Latymer, do you not thyncke on your
conscience that you have been suspected of heresye? A subtle question, a very
subtle question. There was no holding of peace would serve. To hold my peace
had been to grant my self fauti. To answer, it was every way full of danger.
But god which always has given me answer, helped me, or elsse I could never
have escaped it, and delivered me from their hands. Many one have had the
like gracious deliverance and been endued with gods wisdom and gods spirit,
which al their adversaries ca^ not be able to resist, Ostenditie mihi minumi
suia censis.

Show me said he a penye of the trybute monye. They laid snares to destroy
him, but he ouerturneth them in their own trappes. Qui comprehendit aut^tos in
Galulia eorum. He takes the craftye in their own subtle ginnes and snares,
but not maliciously to destroy them, as they maliciouslye would have seen him
hanged, but mercifullye too turn them from their wicked imaginacions, that
they might consider that no wisdom, no subtyle crafts, nor counsel is
against the Lord, and so repent and become new men.

At illi obtulerunt illi denarium,

And they brought him a de nari, a peace of their Current Quoine, that was
worth.x. of our usual pence, such another peace as our Testorne. And he
said.

Cuius est imago hec and super scriptio? dicunt ei Cesaris. whose image is this
and superscrypcio^? they said Ceasers, for now was the Iewrye brought under
the bondage of the Romans, and therefore used they the Romayne quoine, that had
upon it both Ceasers image and Ceasers superscription.

Then answered Jesus Reddite ergo que sunt Cesaris Cesari, et que sunt dei deo.

Pay to Ceaser that is due to Ceaser and to God that which is due to God. Make
not a myngel mangel of them, but give to God his own, give to Ceaser his own.
To God give thy soul, thy faith, thy hoope, thy obedyente mind to keep his
word and frame thy life there after, To Ceaser give tribute, tax, subside, and
all other duties perteynynge to him, as to have him in thy honor and
reverence, to obey his just laws and right wise commandments. etc. But
because the time is paste I will hear make an end for this forenone,
desirynge you to pray to God for his healpe, For at after none I purpose to be
gynne again at this text, and to goo forth as God shall give me his grace.
Now let us all say together the Lords prayer. Our father which art in
heaven. etc.

The residue of the Gospel declared at after none by Master Latimer.
Reddite Cesari que sunte Cesaris and que sunt, dei, deo.
Yield to Ceser, that belongs to Caesar and too God that belongs to god, ye
may perceive by that we have said who spoke these words, and upon what
occasyon they were spoken. Our Savior Christ spoke them, too the temptynge
Pharisees, too the crafty and subtle holowe hearted Pharisees, willing them to
know their duty by their own confession, and to give to Ceaser his duty,
and too God his duty. Our sauyoure Christ spoke them, If he spoke them, we
ought to regard them. Regard them I say and make much of them, for though
they were then spoken too them, yet in them they were spoken to all the world, I
use too make a rehearsal of that I spoke before, but because the time is
short I will omyt it. The service must be done, and the day gooeth fast
away. Therefore I will to my matter, and leave the rehearsal.

This words be words of great impertaunce, and would well be considered: for
he that does this, receives great benefits by it, but he that does it not
incurreth great damage and danger, The occasyon was a counsel taken among
these holy fathers to snarle Christ* A good and charitable dead, yet were
they holy men, holy fathers, full of charity up to the heard ears. This
they learned in their counsel, and this now they set on broche. But Christ
now causes them to make answer to their own questyon, as he also did a
little before, When he was come up into Jerusalem, and had dryue^ out ye biers
and sellers in the temple. The Arch Pharisees, prouincials and Abbots pharisees,
came stoutli to him as he was preachi^g in ye temple, and said to him: Qua
authoritate ista facis? aut quis dedit tibi istam authoritatem? By what
authority dooest you these things? who has given ye this authoryty? We have
the rule of the people of God, we have given the no such authoryty. A wondrous
thing, Christ had testimoni of his father. This is my beloved son hare him,
Iho^ had born him witness, saying: Behold the lamb of god, that takes away the
sins of the world, his works and miracles were testimonies yt his doctrine was
of god, well, all this will not serve. He must have license of these holy fathers,
or else al is no thing worth, Christ answered not directly to their questyon,
but asked the^ a another question and made the^ give answer against the^ selves,
and as it were with one wedge driued out a another The baptysme of Ihon was it
of God: or of man? Was Ihon sent of God, had he his authority of god or of
man? Here he dryueth them to confess his doctrine to be of God. For Ihon whom
they could not deny to have been sent from God, bare wytnes that his
doctryn was true. If they had confessed this, he would have inferred, why
believe ye him not? If they should have said Ihon was not sent of God: then
would all the people have been against them, yea in a whorlye burlye have stoned
them. This they considered wtin themselves, and yet their malicious hertes
would not bear it to co^fes ye truth, nay rather like wise gentlemen they
answered. We know not, we cannot tell. These Arche Pharisees thought nothing
moughte be done, or taught without their lycense, nor otherwise but as they
plesed to interpreate. They were like our religion and clergy, that thought
nothing might be taught, but as they pleased. They would pay no trybute,
tax nor trbut. They had their Inuminities priuyledge and grauntes from the
Romayne Bishop. And to maintain this they alleged maniscriptures as thus
Noliti tangere Chrstios meos which is touch not mine anointed or consecrated
people, which words ye lord spoke by the Israelits in Egypt, warninge king
Pharao to leave and cease from persecutinge the Israelites, and makes as much
for our cleargies innumitie and proves it as well as if a man aledged Que
terra po^thus to prove that an ape has a tail. Well they answered. Cesaris,
Cesers, they confessed it was Cesers money and Cesers image and writynge upon
it: hear Christ compelled the^ to make answer unto their own question. And if
envy should arise, to take it the^ self. For they confessed it to be
Ceasers. Then said he. Give to Ceser that which is Ceasers, and to God that
is due to God. This answer of Christ I would have you al to learn: give to
your Ceaser to your king, to our most noble king Edward our Ceaser,
our king and Magystrate appointed, and given to us of God, give to him that
which is due to him.

This is a commandment of God, as are these: Thou shall not murder, thou
shall not steal, nor bear false witness against thy neighbors. And as thou
art bound upon peril of thy soul to obey the other, so upon peril of thy
soul thou art bound to obey and keep this. Look well upon it, for it is
upon peril of thy soul. date, give, give, a heuye word to a couetouse
heart, to a rebellyouse heart, they would not hear Reddite or date, pay or
give, but take, catch, keep fast.

We are al bound to live in obedyence unto our king, under his just and
rightwise laws and commaundeme^ts. Christ came in deed too deliver us from
burdens and bondage, but that was not from Civil and politik laws and
obedience. He came to deliver us from the greatest bondage that can be, from
sin and damnacion. The heuiest burden that can be, is sin, and in
comparison of it, al other burdens ar but light and easy matters to bear.
Therefore Christ came too deliver us from that, and gave his body to be torn
upon the cross for that. Neither could any work, or law, or sacrifice, redeem
us from that, but Christ only* I never preached in Lyncolne shyre before, nor
came here before, save once when I went to take orders at Lyncolne, which was a
good while ago, therefore I can not say much of Lyncolne shyre, for I know it
not, but I dare say, if Lincoln shire be as other places that I know, this
text condemns a great many of Lyncolne shyre, and dryueth them down to hell
for breaking of this commandment: Give to Ceaser that which is dew to
Ceasar, and to God that which is dew to God.

The office of a Magistrate is grounded upon Gods word, and is playnelye
descrybed of Saint Paul, writing unto the Romans, where he shows that al
souls, that is to say al men ought to obey the magystrates, for they are
ordained of God, and to resist them is to resyst against God. For he is gods
minister ordained to punysh the wicked, and to maintain the good. Wherefore we
ought to pay to him trybute, custom, taxes and other things that he
requires upon us, as Christ says here, Reddite give to Ceasar. How much we
should give, he defines not, but leueth it to Cesars officers to determine, and
to his counsel to apoint. Christ was not the Emperors treasurer, therefore he
meddled not with yt point, but left it ye tresurer to define and determine. He
went a boute anothe vocacio^, to preach unto ye people their deutye, and to
obey their Princes, Kings, Emperors and magistrates, and to bid the^ give that
the king requires of the^, not to apointe a king what he shall require of
the^. It is mete for every man to keep his own vocacion, and dylygently walk
in it, and with faithfulness to study to be occupied in that God has called
him unto, and not to be busye in that God has not called him unto. Therefore
says Christ: give to Ceasar, but apointeth not how much, for that should his
treasurar know, and should warn him of it when he has enough, that the
people be not oppressed with vnnecessarye burdens, nor that the kings
treasures be to seek when they should be occupied. The king must have his
treasures before hand, what chance so ever come suddenly. It is no reason when
the king should occupy his treasure in mayntenau^ce of a common wealth, in
defense of a country, in maintayning of his wars, that then his money should be
in thy purs to s^ake and ungathered. Nay he must have it in a redynes, at hand
that it be not to seek. And he must have as much as is necessary for him. For
so much is dew to a king as is necessary, and so much may he require by the
law of God, and take of his commons as is necessary. And that must not thou
nor I that are subjects appoint, but the king him self must appointe it,
his couysel must appoynte it, we must give it, we must pay it, for it is due
to the king, and upon peril of thy soul thou must pay it. And as he that
takes my typpet or my cloak does me wrong and is a thief: so he that does
not pay to the king that is his due without fraud or gyle, does the king
wrong, and is in perell of his soul for so doing.

Well, mark it well now and se whyther this text be a nypping text for
couetouse men or no: Give to Ceaser, that is due to Ceaser. When the
Parlyamente the high court of this realm is gathered together, and there it
is determined that every manne shall pay a fyfteth part of his goods to the
king. The^ commissio^s comes forth, and he that in sight of men in his cattle,
corn, sheep, and other goods is worth an. C. mark or an. C. pound, will set
him self at.x. pound, he will be worth no more to the king but after.x. pound.
Tell me now whether this be theft or no? His cattle, corn, sheep in every
man's eyes shall be worth.ii.C. pound besides other things as monye and
plate, and he will marye his daughter and give with her.iiii. or.v.C. marks,
and yet at the valuacio^ he will be a.xx. pound man Does he give to Ceser yt
which is due to Ceaser? does he not rather rob ye king of his bound duty and
debt that he ought to ye king? yes it is very theft, and thou mighteste with as
good conscience take my cloak or my tippet from me, as so unjustly take or
withhold from the king that which the parliament has given unto the king, it
is thy bond duty to pay him truly that which is granted, for it is due
debte and upon peril of thy soul thou art bound to obey it. Yea I will say
more. If the king should require of the an unjust request, yet art thou
bound to pay it, and not resyste nor rebel against the king. The king in
deed is in perel of his soul for aski^g of an unjust request, and God will in
his due time reken with him for it, but thou must obey thy king and not take
upon you to judge him, god is ye kings judge, and doutlesse will greuouslye
punish him if he do any thing vnrightuouslye. Therefore pray thou for thy
king and pay him his duty, and dysobeye him not, And know this, that when so
ever there is any iniust exaccyon laid upon the, it is a plage and
punyshmente for thy sin, as all other plages are, as are hunger, dearthe,
pestylence and such other. We meruell, we are plaged as we be, and I thyncke
verily this unjust and unfaithful dealing with our Princes is one great
cause of our plage, look therefore every man up on his conscience. Ye shall not
be judged by worldly pollycye at the latter day, but by gods word, Sermo
quem Locutus sum uobis ipse iudicabit uos in no uissimo die. The word that I
have spoken to you, that shall judge you at the latter day. Look well now
every man upon his conscience and see whether he have done this commandment
of God, Give to your king that which is due to him, and he that fynedeth him
self gilti, let him amend in time to come. This is hard gere and sore gere you
wilt sai, give give, I have wife and children and great charge, well I shall tell
the, it mynysheth not thy stock one farthing at ye years end. Hearken what God
says Si audieritis uerba mea. If you will hear my words says God and keep
that I co^mau^d the, I will bless the and, Si non audicritis. If ye will not
hear my words and do my commandments, thou shall be cursed. etc. What is
blessinge, not wagginge of ye fingers as our bishops were wont, but it is, I
will favor the and increase thy goods, thy corn, thy cattle, thy Ox, thy
sheep and in all thy business thou shall prosper and go forward. And what is the
curse, but to be out of gods favor, I will empouerishe the, thy corn thy
cattle* thy Ox, thy sheep shall not prospere, what thou take in hand it,
shall not go forward. This was not taught in times past, men had pilgrimage,
Images, masses Tretals. etc. but I would have you muse of these.ii. points
cursed, if thou hear not gods word, commau^ding the to pay thy duty to the
king, and blessed if thou hear it and keep it, I would have you to muse o^
these.ii. things.

That it shall not minish thy stock. Show me one man in all England that is the
poorer for paying the king his duty, for being a true dealyng ma, a good alms
man. etc. Mani have come to pouertye by dysyng, cardyng, riot, horedome and
such like* But never no man by truth, mercy, Alms, right dealyng with the
king. In the Cardynalles time me^ were put to their oaths to swer what they were
worth. It was a sore thing, and a thing I would wish not to be followed. O lord
what perjury was in England by that swearynge, I thyncke this Realm fares the
worsse yet for that perjury. For doutles many one wyllynglye and wyttyngly for
swear the^ selves at that time. It is a dear time thou wylt say, and men have
much a do too live, therefore it is a good pollycye to set my self much les
then I am, well that is thy worldly pollici, and with it thou rennest into the
curse of God for breaking his word and commandment: Give to Ceasar that which
is deue to Ceasar. I will tell the a good policy to keep the stock and to
mayntayn thine estate, not a policy of ye world, but of Gods word, and it is
this. Queri te primum regnum deo, and iustiam eius, and hec omnia adiicientur
uobis, seek first the kingdom of God and the ryghtuousenesse of it, and al
these things shall be plenteously given to you.

Do thou not believe this to be true? is Christ an holowe man, an untrue man,
a dyssembler? The pharisees make him a true man, and we make him a false harlot.
He is a true man, and his words and promise are true. Nay we be false holow
hearted, and therefore justly punished. For if we would credit his words, it
should without dout be given us abundantly upon heaps, yea more then we could
desire.

When we pray for things unto almyghtye God, what ask we, do we ask forth
with at ye first chop our necessaries? Nay Christ taught us first to pray, Our
father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy name, thy kingdom come, thy will be
don in earth as it is in heaven. etc First we pray these peticions, for faith,
hope and charity, that gods honor may in all things beset out among us, and
then we pray after for bodily things.

But we now leave these peticions, and would be in panem nostrum at the first
dashe, we would have our daily bread at the first chop, and so we have that we
forse little of the other. We will not say in words that we think God false,
but in deeds we plainlye affirm it, for we trust him not, neither believe
his promise when he bids us give give, I will bless ye, I will make good my
word, Nay nay, we will scrape and scraule and cratche and pull to us all that we
may get, Alii diuidunt sua, and ditiores fiunt, alii rapiunt non sua et semper
in egestate sunt, Some men (says Salomo^) deuides their own goods, they pay
the king his deuty, every man his own, give alms, and yet are more richer,
they have enoughe and enough. Other rob other men cratch and scrape all that
they may come by, never content, never enough, heap to heap, and yet are
they al way beggars. Qui benedicit impignabitur.

He that blesses shall be fat and wealthye. He that blessethe not with
waggynge his fingers, but helping the poor people, he shall be blessed and
ever have enough, god will bless him, God will increase him, And in deed so
ought men to consider their gifts and goods to be given Vt illorum copia,
aliorum succurrat in opi^, That their abundance might succor the necessity,
poverty, and mysery of their pore neighbors, and not to waste it, consume it
in riot and excess, but in deeds of mercy, in deds of charity and pitye upon
the poor. Qui miseretur pauperis, fenera tur domino. He that has mercy upon
the poor, he lends up vsurye unto the Lord. This is a good vsurye, to make
god thy debtor. Many lends upon worldly usury, which surely is a very
wicked thing, and God forbyddeth it. But this usury God commands and
promyseth to supply the lack of it in thy cofers. He will be debtor, he will
be pay master. Thou shall not find thy stok deminished at the years end by
keeping Gods commandment, but rather blessed and increased. Give therefore
unto the king, that is due unto the king, Et que sunt dei deo, and give to God
that which is Gods. What is Gods? That I give at Gods bidding. The tithes,
oblacio^s, first borne of beasts, and sacrifice cattle, which all God
appointed unto ye Jews to the mayntenaunce of their church ministers of the
clergy, poor widows, fatherles children, mayntenaunce of poor scolers. This
was the cause that god assigned the Jews to pay their tithes, and until the
coming of Christ, they were due by gods law, and might by the law given
to Moses be claymed. But now that law is at an end, nether can they be claimed
any more by that law. Notwithsta^dinge now in the time of the new Testamente,
the Princes be bound to provide a sufficient living for the ministers, as
Saint Paul says, Qui euangelium predicant, de euangelio uiuant: They that
preach the gospel, this is the ministry of salvation, preaching of the gospel,
and unto such ministers, ye be bound to give a sufficient living* Comunicate
Catechizanti in omnibus bonis, Give part to him that teaches you in all good
things, give him part of all your goods, se he have sufficient living. But who
shall appoint him a sufficient living? him self? nay, who then, you? nay
another. The king must apoynt him sufficiently to live upon. For I think
verelye there are a great many which if ye ministers should have no living, but
at their apointme^t: he should not have cloutyng lether to piece his shoes with,
no not clouting lether to his shoes. The king therefore must apoynt ye ministers
their liui^gs by his law, and that living that the king appoynteth, they
must claim, and you must pay it to them truly, for it is there duty and
it is theft to withdraw it or hold it from them. For God commands you to
obei your kings laws, and by the same laws the king gives the minister his
tithes and other duties, therefore upon peril of thy soul thou art bound to
obey thy king and to pay to thy curate that tithe that thou art commanded.

But some will say, our curate is naught, an Assehead, a dodipoll, a lack
latin and can do nothing. Shall I pay him my tithes that does us no good
nor none will do? Yea I say thou must pay him his duti, and if he be such a
one complain to the Bishop. We have complained to the ordinarye, and he is as
negligent as he. Complain to the council, sir so have we done but no remedy
can be had. Well I can tell where thou shalt complain. Complain to God, he
will surely hear the, he will remedy it. Christ saw the people lyinge,
Tanquam oues non habentes pastores. As sheep having no shepeheard. They had
Bishops, scrybes and Pharyses, curates in name a great many, yet were they
Tanquam oues non habentes pastorem, as sheep having no sheapheard, what is
that to say? they had no true teachers, they had no preachers of the law of
God to them. What remedy taught Christ for it, wythdrawe their livings?
Nay. Make tumults? nay, but Rogate dominum messis, pray the Lord of the
harvest. Prai, pray. Prayer is the remedy that never fails, when al other
fails this never fails. Therefore pray unto God and he will either turn
his heart and make him better, or remove him from the and send a better in his
place, or else take him away all to gether. So will the lord do with any other
oppressor of ye pore, either he will turn their hearts, and make them better,
or else remove them and take the^ quyte away. Therefore let men be pacient and
suffer, and prai unto god for deliverance from their troubles, and not think
to remedy it them selves, but pray to god, and he will remedy it. Pray I
say, and ^ake patience, and you shall see the lord will in due time remedy
it. There be many that turn this text clean contrary. For they yield to
Ceaser that which is gods, and to God that which is Ceasers. They had money
enough to build monystaryes chauntries, Masses, year days Trentals, to gilde
images. etc. And al this they did (say they) to honor God with. They would
worship god with copes, torches, tapers, candels, and an hundred things mo yt God
never required at thetr hands. God requires the hertes to fear him, and love
him, and studiously to walk before him: But this inward service we will not
give him. Nay, we give Ceasar our heart, and God our outewarde service, as
all such do as have received the Interim. God should possess our hole
hearts, and we should most studyouslye walk every man in his vocation,
according to the word of God, according to his commandments, obeyinge our
king, and succouringe the poor and neadye, as he has commanded us. And
this is true gods service, and the thing that belongs to God.

If this be true, what is become of our forefathers? I answer it is a vain and
unprofitable question* other it needs not, or it botes not. What so ever they
did, let us do well. Let us keep gods biddinge, gods commandment, and then
are we safe. When one dies we must have belles ryngynge, synginge and much a
do. But to what purpose. Those that dye in the favor of God are well, those
that dye out of the favor of God, this can do them no good. Vbi ceciderit
lignu^ ibi erit, Where ye tree falls, there it shall remain. Studi therefore to
live in the favor and grace of God, in repentance, in amendment of life, and
then dyeste thou well. Further to the question of our forfathers. God knows
his elect, and diligently watches and keeps them, so that all things serve
to their salvation. The nature of fire is to bre^ all that is laid in it, yet
God kept ye.iii. young men in Babylon, that they burnte not. And Moses saw a
bush on fire, but it burnt not. So false doctrine, as fire burnethe, it
corrupts. But god kept his elect that they were not corrupt with it, but al
ways put their trust i^ one ever living god, through the death of Jesus Christ
our lord. In Elias time Idolatry and superstition reigned, so that Elias
said, domine altaria tua subuer terunt, Lord they have destroyed thine
altares, and slain thy prophets and preachers, and I am left alone. But the
lord answered him, I have reserved to my self.vii.M. men that have not
bowed the knee to Baal, So god I trust reserved our forefathers, in so perlouse
times, more graciouslye then we can think. Let us tha^k god then for ye
gracious light of his word sent unto us, and pray for our graciouse king and
his council, that set it forth unto us. And as for our forefathers, seeing we
have no charge given us of god, leave them. and comend them unto gods mercy, who
disposes better for the^ then we can wysshe. But some will say now, what
neade we preachers then, God can save his elect without preachers. A goodly
reason. God can save my life without meat and drink, need I none therefore? God
ca^ save me from burninge, if I were in the fire, shall I run into it
therefore? no no, I must keep ye way yt god has ordained, and use the ordinary
means that God has assygned, and not seek new ways. This office of preaching
is the only ordynary ways that God has appointed to save us all by. Let us
maintayn this, for I know none other, neither thyncke I God will apoint or
devise any other. Pay therefore to Ceasar that which is dew to Ceasar. And this
said Christ by an hei the^ king, a painim, how much more ought we to pay to
our C^aser, our liege Lord and king a Christen king, and so godly and virtuous
a learned king. And pay to God that is due to God, tithes and al duties lo^ging
to the ministers and preachers of this office of salvation, give it them
without dissimulyng, without with drawinge or abridgynge of their duties.
Take heed of lyinge, and settinge thy self at less then thou art. Mark the
example of Ananias and zaphira his wife* They dyed suddenly for their lying
and dissimulacion in the like matter, well this was Christ's doctrine. This was
his answer: give to Ceser that which is Ceasers, and to God that which is Gods.

Et non potuerunt reprehendere uerbum eius coram populo. And they could not
find fault in his word before the people, it was so just, so consonaunte
with scriptures and with reason, Yet after ward they falsyfyed his word before
Pylate accusing him. Hunc deprehendimus euertentem gentem, et uetantem
tributadari (...)


