A SERMON PREACHED before His MAJESTY, On Sunday the XIX. of June, At
WHITE HALL.

Appointed to be preached at the opening of the PARLIAMENT.

By the Bishop of S. DAVID'S.

LONDON, Printed by BONHAM NORTON and JOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings most
Excellent Majesty.

M. DC. XXV.

PSALM. 75. 2, 3. When I shall receive the Congregation, ( or, when I shall
take a convenient time) I will judge according unto right. The earth is
dissolved, ( or, melted) and all the inhabitants thereof; I bear up the
pillars of it.
THIS Psalm is accounted a kind of Dialogue between God and the Prophet. For
David sometimes speaks in his own person, and sometimes in Gods. Some think
the time, when he sung this Psalm, was, when he was now ready to be crowned
king over Israel, as well as 2. Reg 5.
Judah. The occasion of this his solemn devotion was, not only the care which
he had of the world in general, the earth, but much more, and much nearer the
care which he took of the Kingdom of Israel, now committed by God unto his
Government. That Kingdom was then filled with civil combustions; and the
Church (as it uses to be in a troubled State) was out of order too.

The Learned, both the Fathers, and the later Divines, differ much about my
Text. For some will read it Time; and some, The Congregation. And the best is,
there is warrantable authority for both. Again, some will have it, that this
speech ( I will judge acoording unto right) is David's promise to God, of his
just administration of the Kingdom; and some, that it is Gods promise to
David, of his Grace and Assistance, to enable him so to govern. If it be Gods
speech, they are not all agreed, neither whether it be meant of his temporary
execution of Judgment in this life; or of his great and final judgment. Nor
do they all agree, whether by the Earth, be meant the whole world, and the
Church spread over it; or the kingdom of the Jews, and the Church, as then
contained in it. But the matter is not great. For the Scripture is not only
true, but full in all these senses; and all of them come in close upon the
letter of the Text. And therefore for ought I know, it is the safest way, which
shuts out nothing that the Text includes. And my Text will easily take in all,
if you consider the words, as David's speech; yet so, as that one way David be
understood to speak in his own person; and another way in Gods.

And this is no news. For usually in the Psalms, one and the same speech is
meant of David, and Christ; and one and the same action applied to God and the
King. And the reason of this is plain: For the King is Gods immediate
Lieutenant upon earth; and therefore one and the same action is Gods by
ordinance, and the Kings by execution. And the power which resides in the King,
is not any assuming to himself, nor any gift from the people, but Gods power,
aswellin, as over him. Romans 13. 1.


So God and the King stand very near together. And it is an infinite blessing
both upon the King, and the people, when the Kings heart keeps as near unto
God, as Gods power is to the King. For then it is but reading of my Text, and
you both see and enjoy the blessing presently.

For then the Congregation that comes up, the great Congregation; great in
number, great in place, and great in power, it shall not loose it is labor.
For, I will receive it, says God; and I, says the King. The Congregation,
whether it be to serve God, or the State, or both, comes up at an appointed
time; and, I will make a convenient time for it; says God; and I will take a
convenient time for it, says the King. When I have received it, and in this
time, I will judge in it, and by it, according unto right, says God; and I,
says the King. If Justice and Judgment be not executed, the Earth will
dissolve, the Kingdoms will melt away, all things will sink and fall; but I
will bear up the pillars of it, says God; and I, says the King. If the Earth
dissolve, the Militant Church which dwells upon it shakes presently. It must
needs bear part with the State in which it is; but I will bear up the pillars
of that too, says God; and I, says the King. So blessed a thing it is, where
God and the King keep near, and work together.

The Text has Two parts. The one Earth, of the Kingdoms, and the Inhabitors
thereof; and they, when the Prophet wrote this, were in weak estate, melted,
and dissolved. The Remedy, which God and the King will take to settle it. And
concerning this Remedy, here are Three things expressed. First, the Execution
of Justice, I will judge according unto right. of the Pillars, I bear top the
pillars of it. Thirdly, the Time for both these, and a convenient Time, even
when He shall receive the Congregation.

I begin at the state in which David, Earth, the world in general; the
Kingdom of Judah in particular; and the Church of God.

And surely my Text gives me no hope, but Liquefacta est, weakness,
dissolution, and melting in them (...)
all.

For the world first, that so far as the Assyrian Monarchy prevailed, in
those days of David, melted between riot and cruelty. And the rest of the
world which was not under them, was broken and dissolved into petty Dynasties
and Gouernements; which did nothing almost but prey one upon another. And for
the Kingdom of Judah, (the special aim of my Text) that melted first in the
great disobedience of Saul, 1. Reg. 15. 23.
and after that in civil dissentions between David, and Ishbosheth the son
of Saul, for diverse years together. And as for the Church, that had no
public room then given it, but in Judea; and there it could not stand fast
when the Earth melted under it. And we find toward the end of Saul, 85.
Priests were 1. Reg. 22.
put to the sword at once, and unjustly all. And the Church cannot choose but
melt when her Priests are slain: for the speediest melting that is, is to melt
in blood.

Now this melting, whether it be in men or Kingdoms, uses the word melting,
or dissoluing. And that shows that their honor and strength drops away and
decays, till they become as nothing, or quite another thing. In trouble, the
heart of David melted like wax, Psalm 22. When their Psalm. 22. 18.
enemies prevailed, The heart of the people melted like water, Ios. 7. In the
time Joshua 7. 5.
of vengeance, The ungodly of the Earth shall melt and consume away like a
snaile, Psalm. 58. And that is melting indeed: Put Psalm. 58. 7.
but a little falt upon a snaile, and he will drop out of his house presently.

Melting then is a great Calamity upon a Kingdom. And it is not Judah only, but
all Kingdoms of the Earth are subject to melting. The many changes of the
world have Preached this over and over; That whatsoever has Earth to the
foundation, is subject to dissolution. And the Sermon is still made upon this
Text, Terra liquefacta est: The Earth is dissolved.

Now usually before melting there goes a Heat: And so it was, Hos. 8. A fire
Hos. 8. 14.
first, and then the melting of Israel. There neither is, nor can be any
Kingdom, but it has many Heates. These are most felt by them, that are at the
working of the State. But these are all quite above me, save to pray for their
temper: and I will not further meddle with them. Heates then there are, but all
Heates are not by and by a Furnace; nor are all Furnaces able to melt and
dissolve States. No God forbid.

Not all, but yet some there are, that can melt any kingdom, especially two.
The one of these Heates is Sin, great sin. For (says S. Augustine)
delinquere, est de liquido fluere. To In Text.
sin, is to melt, and drop away from all steadiness in virtue, from all
foundation of Justice. And here a State melts inward, there is little seen yet.
The other punishment for these sins. For that makes empty cities, and a
desolate Ezech. 12. 20.
Land. And there a State melts outwardly, and in view.

And by this we have found what, and who it is that melts great and glorious
Kingdoms. In the Text there is no more then liquefacta est, the earth is
dissolved; not a word by whom, or for what. But it is expressed Verse. 7. that
it is by God. And Verse 7.
it is too well known, that it is for sin, and for great sin too. For as
there goes sin, before God heates; so there go great and multiplied sins,
before God makes his fire so hot, as to melt, or dissolve a Kingdom. The
sins of the Amorite not yet full, therefore not yet cast Genesis 15. 16.
into the melting pot. But so soon as their sins were full, their State
melted. The fruit of it from above, and the root Amos 2. 9.
of it from beneath, all destroyed. And this was not the Amorites case only;
for all Stories are full of it, That when States have melted into wanton, and
lustful sins, they have not long after dissolved into desolation. For (as S.
Jerome observes). In Amos 9.
that course God holds with impious, and impenitent Kingdoms, as well as men,
absque discretione personarum, without any difference of persons, or places.

Well, when it is Terra liquefacta, when dissolues and melts, what then? What?
why then no man is in safety, till it settle again; not a man. For the Text
goes on: The earth is dissolved, and all that dwell therein. All men then to
seek what to do; the wisest to seek, and the strongest to seek, All. And it
must needs be so. For so long as a State is Terra, like solid ground, men
know where to set their footing; and it is not every Earthquake, that
swallows the place. But when it is once Terra liquefacta, molten and
dissolved, there is no footing, no foundation then. I stick fast in Psalm. 69.
2.
the mire, where no ground is, Psalm. 69. and mire is but terraliquefacta,
molten and dissolved earth. All foul then, and no foundation.

And when a Kingdom melts indeed, that is, both ways, In sin, and under
punishment, there is great reason the inhabitants should melt with it into
fear, into danger, into ruin. For God never puts his fire to the melting of a
State, but for sin, and sin, that is never committed by the dead State, but
by the living. For when a fruitful land is made barren, it is for the
wickedness of them that dwell therein. Psalm 107. 34.
And therefore there is great reason, when the earth dissolues, that the
inhabitants should all sweat, and melt too.

When David came to the Crown it was thus. How is it now? Why, if you take the
earth at large, for the Kingdoms about you, out of question there has been
liquefactio; a melting in the earth, and many Kingdoms have swet blood. But if
you take the earth for the State at home, then it is high time to magnify God:
First, for the Renowned, melting: And secondly, that melt) we live to see a
miracle, Change Prou. 28. 2.
without Alteration. Another King; but the same life-expression of all the
Royal and Religious Virtues of his Father; and no sinews shrinking, or
dissoluing in the State.

If you ask me the cause of this happiness, I can direct you to no other but
God, and God in mercy. For as for the Kingdom, that is made of the same Earth
with others, and is consequently subject to the same dissolution. And as for us
that dwell therein, I doubt our sins have been as clamorous upon God to heat
his fire, and make it fall on melting, as the sins of them that inhabit other
Countries.

And though I doubt not but God has the sure mercies of David in store for the
King, and will never fail him, yet if Habitatores in ed, they that dwell in
this good and happy soil, will burden it and themselves with sin, great
sin, multiplied sin, unrepented sin; it will not be in the power, or
wisdom, or courage, or piety of a King, to keep the State from melting. For
David was all these, and yet liquefacta est terra, the Earth was as good as
dissolved for all that. And therefore that this Kingdom is not a melting too,
I can give no firm reason, but God and his Mercy. For he is content to give
longer day for repentance, and repentance is able to do all things with God.
And the time calls apace for repentance: The Heavens they melt into
unseasonable weather; and the Earth melts and dissolues her Inhabitants into
infectious humors; and there is no way to stay these meltings, but by melting
our selves, in, and by true repentance.

Would you then have a settled and a flourishing State? Would you have no
melting, no dissolution in the Church? I know you would, it is the honorable
and religious design of you all: Why, but if you would indeed, The King must
Tene magis salnum populus velit, an populum Tu.
trust, and indeere his people: The people must honor, obey, and support their
Seruat in ambiguo qui consulit and Tibi, and vrti Jupiter. Horat. li. 1. ep. 16.
King: Both King, and Peers, and People must religiously serve and honor God;
shut out all Superstition on Gods Name, the farther the better; but let in no
profaneness therewhile. If this be not done, take what care you can, God is
above all humane wisdom, and in some degree or other there will be
Liquefactio terrae, a melting, or a waste, both in Church and State.

And this falls in upon the second Remedy, as it was then with the Jews, The
Prevention, as it is now with us; which God and the King will use to keep the
State and the Church from melting. This Remedy (and the Prevention is just the
same) is expressed first in the Execution of Justice. And this God promises for
the King; and the King promises under God. I will judge according unto right,
says God; and I, says the King.

Now Justice and Judgment is the greatest binder up of a State; The great
dissoluing sinews in a Kingdom, that is governed by Justice. For if the King
flourish, the Kingdom cannot melt: And the Kings Throne, Prou. 19. 12.
that is established by Justice. Nay farther; Nothing but Justice can establish
the Throne, and make it firm indeed. But when God blesses the King with a
heart full of Justice, when God strengthens the King in the Execution of
Justice, when the King follows God as close as he can, with Ego iudicabo, I
my self will look to the administration of Justice, with which God has
trusted me; there can be no melting about the Throne of the King, none in the
State, none in the Church.

But then this Justice, which preserues the King, and blesses the people, must
be Justice casually, though the thing done be just, yet the doing of it is not
Justice. The State may melt for all that, because the Remedy is but casual.

Again, since the whole State has interest in the Justice of the King, his
Justice must be spreading over all persons, and in all causes. And so it is
plural in the Text, I will judge, Iusticias, for every Septnag. S. Hier. Ar.
Mont.
man's cause, so far as it is just.

Why, but then must the King do all this himself? No, God forbid that burden
Moses was Erod. 18. 18.
not able alone for that. It was, and it is too heavy. What then? why then
Iethro's counsel must be followed. There must be inferior Judges and
Magistrates deputed by the King for this: V. 21.
Men of courage, fearing God, and hating Couetousness. These must quit Moses
from the inferior trouble, that he may be active, and able for the great
affairs of State. For if they be suffered to melt and drop downward, there
can be no standing dry or safe under them.

And hence it follows, that, Ego iudicabo, I will judge according unto right,
is not only the Kings engagement between God, and the People; but it is the
engagement of every Judge, Magistrate, and Officer between God, the King, and
the State. The Kings power, that is from God. The Judges, and the subordinate
Magistrates power, that is from the King. Both are for the good of the people,
That they may lead a peaceable life in 1. Tim. 2. c.
all godliness, and honesty.

All Judges, and Courts of Justice, even this great Congregation, this great
Council, now ready to sit, receive influence and power from the King, and are
dispensers of his Justice, as well as their own, both in the Laws they make,
and in the Laws they execute: in the Causes which they hear, and in the
Sentences which they give. The King, Gods High Steward, and they Stewards under
him. And so long as Justice and Judgment sits upon all the Benches of a
Kingdom, either it is not possible for Fluxes and Meltings to begin in the
State; or if they do begin, their Drip will be cured presently.

Now while the King keeps close to Ego judicabo, I will judge that which comes
to me according unto right; if inferior Judges (which God forbid) judge other
then right, they sin against three at once, and against God in all, For first,
Justice. Secondly, calling, but by sentencing Good Exill, and Evil Good.
Thirdly, Esaias 5. 20.
they sin against the King, the fountain of Justice under God, in slandering
of his Justice to the people, with the administration whereof they are trusted
under him.

And once again for Inferior Governors of all sorts. The King is the Sun.
He draws up some vapors, some support, some supply from us. It Is true: he
must do so. For, if the Sun draw up no vapors, it can power down no rain,
and the Earth may be too hard, as well as too soft and too melting. Now this
Rain which descends, and is first caused by the Sun, is prepared in the
Clouds before it falls on the Earth. And all Great Men that are raised higher
then the rest, especially Judges and Magistrates of all sorts, they are the
Clouds. They receive the more immediate influence from the King; and if they
be Gods Clouds, and retain what he gave them, thev drop fatness upon the
people. But, Psalm. 65. 12.
if they be clouds without water, they Iudev. 12.
transmit no influence. If they be light clouds in the wind, then no certain
influence. If they be cloud, driven (...) 1. Pet. 2. 17.
by a whirlewind, then it is passionate, and violent influence. And the Clouds,
I hope, are not, I am sure, should not be thus, between the King, and his
people.

There is then Ego judicabo, I will judge according unto right, both for the
King, Ego judicabo, and I will judge according to right, for God too. For many
of the S. Basil, Hier. Russin. Aug. Theod. Euthym. Ibid. and S. Bern. sermon. 15.
in Cant.
Fathers will have this to be Gods speech, or David's in the person of God. And
then whatsoever men do with Justice and Judgment, God comes two ways in upon
the judgments of men to reuiew them.

For first, God comes in, when the Earth is melting by violence, and injustice.
And then Gods Ego judicabo, I will judge, is either in Mercy to repair the
breaches, to stay the melting of the State; or else in Judgment to punish the
debasers of Justice. And this God sometimes does in this life. But if he do
it not here, yet he never fails to do it at the last, and final Judgment;
to which diverse of the S. Basil. Hier. Aug. Euthym. Theod. Ibid. Greg. 10.
moral. 21. Bear. cp. 1.
Fathers refer this passage of my Text.

Secondly, God comes in when the Seats of Justice, supreme and inferior, are
all entire. And then Gods Ego judicabo, I will judge, is always to confirm,
and countenance the proceedings of Justice, and to bless the Instruments. And
my Text has it full. For it is not here said, I will judge the causeonely, or
the men only whose cause it is, or the Judges only that sentence the cause;
but Ego iustitias, I will judge the very Judgments themselves, how right, or
otherwise they pass. And then this must needs be to confirm and honor them,
if they be just; or to condemn and dissolve them, if they be unjust, rather
then they shall melt, or dissolve the State, or sometimes to send a melting
into that State in which Justice is perverted.

Now, howsoever men sometimes break from their duty in judging according to
right, yet there can be no question of Gods proceedings. He will be sure to
judge all things, and all men according to right, who ever do not. Shall Genesis
15. 25.
not the Judge of all the world do right? Yes, no question. And therefore even
Kings themselves, and all mighty men of the Earth, and Judges of all sorts
have need to look to then ways. For God is over them with Ego iudicabo, I
will one day call for an account. I will judge all the Executions of Justice,
with which I have trusted them. And this is the first Prevention of the melting
of a kingdom; the first Remedy when it begins to melt: The maintenance and
Execution of Justice.

The second follows; and it is the establishing of the Pillars of the Earth. I
bear up the Pillars of it. I, says God, and I, says the king.

Where first, it is not amiss to consider, Pillars of the earth are. The Earth
it self, that has but one Pillar, and that is the poize, and aequilibre of
the Center. And that is borne up by the Word and Ordinance of God. Thou Psalm.
33. 9.
commandedst, and it stood fast; And (says S. Ambrose) it needs no other
thing to Hexam. l. 1. c. 6.
stay it.

The kingdoms of the Earth, they have more Pillars then one. This one, which
is Gods ordinance for government, they have; but they have diverse
Administratours of this ordinance. And these Pillars are Kings, and Peers, and
Judges, and Magistrates. Not one of these under the nature of a Pillar: not
one; but yet with a great deal of difference. For though there be many
Pillars, yet there is but Vnus Rex, one King; one great and Center-pillar; and
all the rest in a kingdom do but bear up under, and about him.

The Church, that is not without Pillars neither. No, God forbid. And it
resembles in this the kingdoms among which it soiournes. The great Master
pillar Christ, he is the Foundation of all the rest; and other foundation 1.
Cor. 3. 10.
can no man lay of the Church. Next to Christ, the Apostles and the Disciples
are Pillars too, and so called, Gal. 2. After Gal. 2. 9.
these their Successors, Bishops, and Russ. Aug Exib, m. ibid.
Priests, the Fathers of the Church in their several ages, they came to be S.
Bern. cp. 77.
Pillars. And shall so successively continue Ephesians. 4. 11.
to the end of the world. And so soon as Emperors and Kings were converted to
the Faith, they presently came into the nature of Pillars to the Church too. If
any man doubt this truth, I Will call in the Pope himself to witness it. There
are too great Props, or Pillars of the Church (says Leo) Ep. 31.
The Kings authority, and the Priests; both these: And the Pope was content
then to put the Kings first. And Kings (says S. Augustine) are indeed great
Pillars 5. De Cimit. Des. 24.
of the Church, especially if they use their power, ad cultum Dei dilat andum,
to enlarge (and support) the true religious worship of God.

You have seen what these Pillars Pillar is known well enough what it is.
It Is Justinere, to prop, and bear up the Earth. Quantum est columnarum nihil
sustinentium, Seuec. Ep. 86.
sed in ornamentum tantum. I know in luxurient buildings many Pillars stand
only for ornament, but bear no weight. It is not so with Pillars that are
crowned. Honor and ornament they have, and they deserve it, but they are
loaded too. Kingdoms and States, the greatest, the strongest in the world, are
as mouldring Earth, as men. Judah at this time was Terra liquefacta, like a
dissoluing Body. They cannot stand sine Columnis, without their pillars to
bear them. And therefore the king has ever been accounted, and truly,
columna stare faciens Ar. Mont.
terram, the maine pillar, and stay of the Pro. 29. 4.
State. And (...) quasi (...) the king is the pillar, the foundation of the
people. So S. Gregory; for he bears subiectorum Lib. 9. Mor. 13.
(...), not only his subjects, but their burdens too.

The office then of the Pillars is to bear; but when is there use of them?
meks presently. We read it four times repeated in Scripture, but upon two
great occasions only, Idolatry, and Abominable lust, that there was no King
Judge. 17. 6. and 13. 1. and 19. 1. and 21. 25.
in Israel, Judge. 17. and 19. no King. And still there followed a melting and a
dissoluing of the State. Every man did what seemed good in his own eyes; and
the punishment was great. At this time David was King of Judah, and Ishbosheth
would 2. Reg. 2.
be King of Israel: Ioab was for the one, and Abnor with the other. The
Pillars here, in stead of bearing, fell a iustling: What followed? Why you
see, Liquefacta est terra, that kingdom melted.

The Pillars then can never be spared from their work, continual use of them;
but yet at one time more need then another. And the time of the greatest
necessity of these Pillars is, when there is any Liquefaction, or weakening of
the Earth. And that is in the Text, the Earth dissoluing; and then by and by
recourse to the Pillars.

To the Pillars; and therefore they which weaken the government; nay, which
do but offer to impair the honor and reputation of the Governors, are
dangerous and unworthy members of any Commonwealth. For to murmr, and make
the people believe, there are I know not what cracks and flawes in the Pillars;
to disesteeme their strength; to undervalue their bearing: is to trouble the
earth, and the Inhabitants of it; To make the people fear a melting, where
there is none. And what office that is, you all know.

Continual use there is then of the Pillars. But what then? Can the Pillars
melting time, by their own strength? No sure, that they cannot; not at any
time; and therefore least at a melting time. But what then? Why then here is
Ego and Ego, I bear up the Pillars that are about me, says David; and I,
says God, bear up both these and David too. And indeed all Pillars are too
weak, if they be left to themselves. There must be one to bear them, or
else they can never bear the Earth. One, and it can be none under God: Ego
confirmani, it is I that in all times have borne up the Pillars of it. And it is
per me, by me, says God, Prou. 8. that Kings Pro. 8. 15.
reign. And per me, by me, is not only by Gods ordination, once set, and then
no more, but by his preservation, and his supportation too. And (as S.
Augustine In Psalm. 74. A Deo (...) rebus sessis, languentibusque (...). Arnob.
lib. 1. contra Gent.
observes) Quid essent ipsae columnae? What could the Pillars themselves do,
if they were not borne up by God? But when it once comes to Ego confirmaui, I
bear up the Pillars, there is nothing then to be feared.

Now these of which we speak, are not stony or insensible, but living and
Pillars: understanding, therefore they feel Onus terrae, the burden of the
Earth which lies upon them, when the dull earth feels not it self; therefore
as they feel, so are they able to compare their strength, and the burden, and
the difference of the burden at several times; therefore while they compare
they are sensible of the difference between supporting of earth, and Terrae
liquefactae, dissolved, or dissoluing earth: For this latter is heavier a great
deal; therefore in the difference they can tell where they are likeliest to
shrink under the burden, if God come not in to bear them up.

And in all these cases, and many more, the Pillars of the earth must go to
God, as fast as the Inhabitants of the earth come to them. They must pray for
themselves. And the Church, and the 1. Tim. 2. 2.
people must pray for them too. And the cloze of the prayers must still be,
that God would bear up the Pillars, that they may be able to bear up the
earth.

And for the honor of Kings and their great Assistants; mark it, God I bear
up the Earth, and the inhabitants of it, though he does that too, and they
cannot subsist without him; but as if he had quite put them over to the King,
and the great Governors under him, he says, I bear up the pillars; and then,
I look and will require of them, that they bear up the State, and the people.

Let me speak a little boldly, (says G. Nazianz.) Show your selves gods to
Ocat. 27. n. 13.
your subjects; gods, and no less: Gods; why then you must do Gods work. And
Gods work ever since the Creation, is to preserve, and bear up the world.
Therefore as God bears up you, so you must bear up the Earth, and the people.
God reteines his own power over you; but he has given you his own power
over them, Romans 13. His Romans 13. 1.
own power, and that is to bear up the people at home; and in all just
quarrels to force enemies abroad. And in all this it is Gods power still, but
yet he will exercise it by the Pillars.

Therefore in the first great leading of his people, himself went before them
in the form of a pillar, Exodus 13. And Exodus 13. 21.
when he smote the army of Egypt, he looked out of the pillar while he struck
it, Exodus 14. And because this was an Exodus 14. 24.
extraordinary pillar, and therefore can be no principle for ordinary
conclusions, He makes Moses, which was the ordinary pillar, not bear only,
but strike too. He must stretch out his band upon the Sea, Exodus 14. Exodus 14.
26.


Now this great work of God in supporting pillars, kings and mighty Potentates
of the Earth, is so manifest, that no reason can be brought to deny it.

First, in that the wisest, and mightiest

Secondly, in that even those kings, bear them up. And this is a full proof,
that this principle is naturally printed in the heart of man, that God is Basis
Columnarum, the foundation of the pillars.

Thirdly, in that very many times, Julius 2. To ascribe this to Fortune only,
worldly wisdom it self would condemn for folly. To give it to Destiny, is
to bind up God in chains unworthy for men: For worldly wisdom knows this,
that God in his works ad extra, must be most free, or no God. To worldly
wisdom it self; it cannot be ascribed: For she has Sitatum man. (...) Deus,
qui (...), gubernat, quo in loco, vel sui creaturae Casus, and (...), and
Fortunae dominabitur. Paulin. Ep 38.
openly disclaymed many of their Actions, which have prospered best. Therefore
of necessity so much be ascribed to Gods blessing and protecting them.

And certainly there is no true reason can be given of it, but this. First, Ego
confirm, I establish and bear up the pillars. For so long the world cannot
shake them. And secondly, Ego apto, I make fit the Pillars, (as Tremel.
reads it;) Tremel. ibid.
for so long they bear, even above their strength. And out of doubt, there is
very much in the fitting of the Pillars. It Is not the great massinesse of a
Pillar, but the clean, and true working of him, that makes him bear; the
fitting of him in time, and to his place.

And here, as for many other, so especially for two things, we have great
cause to bless and magnify God. First, Royal Pillar, which had stood now
under the weight of this Government full 22. years, yet he would not do it,
till he had prepared another, and brought him to full strength, to bear up
this kingdom, to Gods great honor, and his own. Secondly, that by Gods great
Royal Fathers prudent education, he is, and was from the first hour,
confirmata columna, an established, and a settled Pillar. And I make no
question, but aptata Columna too, A Pillar every way fitted to the State he
bears; fitted to the difficulties of the time; fitted to the State, and fitted
to the Church.

Now the Church, no question, for Pillars too. At this time a great Pillar of
this Church is fallen; and doubtless a great part of the edifice had fallen with
it, if God had not made supply of another, and a very able Pillar.

I find Genesis 28. that there was an Gea. 28. 18.
Anointed Pillar; that it was anointed by Jacob. The place was Bethel, the
house of God. In it the Ladder of heaven, by which the Angels go and come. But
out of doubt this Pillar is here. This Pillar not yet anointed by the hand of
the Priest; but anointed already to the inheritance and by the blessing of
Jacob. The place where Jacob left him behind is the Church of God, and he left
him a Pillar, for so he rested on him, and well he might. Old Jacob is gone
by the Angels way to heaven, but he left the Pillar here behind at Bethel, for
the house of God. And all the blessings of Heaven and Earth be upon him all the
days of his life.

The Church in all times of her dissensions, when schism and faction have made
great Rents in her buildings, has still had recourse to her Pillars, to her
Civil and his Ecclesiastical Pillars; and she goes right. For her Pillars
must support her, or she cannot be borne up.

This very time is a time of Church division. What follows upon it? what? why
the Church is become Terra liquefacta, there is melting almost in every part of
it Christendom through, melting in all places, but not at the same Fire. For
in one place Truth melts away from the doctrine of the Church. In another
devotion and good life melt away from the practice of the Church. In a third
all external means, and necessary supply melts away from the maintenance of
the Church. And but that I know Hell S. Matt. 16. 18.
gates cannot prevail against it, it melts so fast sometimes, that I should
think it is, as the world takes it, for a house of butter against the Sun.

Well, what is the cause that there should be such melting in the Church? what?
why surely there are many causes, would I complain to you of them. But there
are two in the very letter of my Text, and them I cannot bauk. But I speak of
the Church in general, and still hope the best of our own.

The One is, that the Ecclesiastical Pillars, bearers, are in many places of
Christendom but hollow Pillars. And there is no trusting of hollow Pillars with
such a weight as the Church is. And therefore here where God in mercy will stay
the melting, it is (...) I will make the pillars solid. I will not leave the
Church any longer upon hollow; hypocritical, and deceiptfull Pillars.

The Other is, that the Church ofttimes Pillars, upon the wisdom, and the
power of them. And so far, that sometimes Ego confirmani, God that hears up
the pillars is quite forgotten. And then whenever she and her Pillars leave
to rest up on God, they fall on melting presently, and no wonder.

But whatsoever the Churches Error be, this I am sure will concern the State,
and You. It is not possible in any Christian Commonwealth, that the Church
should melt, and the State stand firm. For there can be no firmenes without
Law; and no Laws can be binding if there be no conscience to obey them;
penalty alone could never, can never do it. And no school can teach conscience
but the Church of Christ. For whereeuer you find the Church melt and dissolve,
there you shall see conscience decay. Therefore be Pillars to the Church, and
you shall be Pillars, strong Pillars to the State, and to your selves.

The Third and last Circumstance of Justice, and establishing the Pillars. And
that is a set, and a convenient time, even when he shall receive the
Congregation. For that time I Will take, says God, and I, says the King.

The first instant of this time set or taken is Opportunity. It Is (...) in the

Now a man would think that for these things in the Text, all times were times
of opportunity. For can any time be unfit to do justice, to judge according to
right, to bear up the pillars of State and Church? no sure, there cannot. And
yet, even for these, here is both God and the King for opportunity. For here
David promises both for God and himself, that he will take a convenient time.

But then there is a great deal of difference between God and the King in
taking of it. For when the King comes to bear up the State, it is simply cum
accepero tempus, when I shall take a convenient time. For no regal power has
any command over tim. It can neither force on, nor draw back, nor make stay of
opportunity. He must take it when God offers it, or not have it. And if it be
let slip, he cannot promise it shall return to his hand again. Nor can this
great Court make an Act of Parliament, to stay or reduce it.

But when God comes to do justice and to bear up the pillars themselves; then
cum accepero tempus is not simply the taking of a convenient time, but the
making of it too. And it stands not for eligere but statuere, not for a choice
of time, as if God must wait upon it; but for appointing of time; and making
it fit to serve both God and the King.

For (says S. Augustine) Deus non In Text.
accipit (proprie,) sed gubernat tempora. God does not attend opportunities of
time, as if he could not work without them, but he gouernes and disposes of
time, and occasion, and makes them ready for us to take them. Otherwise
obsequiae Lib. 1. (...) Gert.
temporum (as Arnobius calls them) the pliantnes of time, will not attend, nor
be commanded by us. So that here God's taking of the time is nothing but God's
fitting of the time to us, and us to it. And when he is said to take it, it is
for us, not for himself.

Now though God be at this taking of the time, yet it is not in men to give it
Quum ego, when I shall take it. Not I and you, not I from you. But out of his
own wisdom he finds it, and out of his own goodness he takes it, and by his
own power he uses it, to bear up the pillars of the Earth. And therefore here
in the Text is never a Quum tu das, when thou give me an opportunity, but
when I take and order time by my self.

And yet let me tell you, that where man's strength can do nothing to give God
an opportunity to preserve the Earth, and the kingdoms of it from melting,
there his weakness can. For as weakness is the thing that needs, so the time of
melting is the opportunity of establishing the pillars of the earth. And so God
in mercy is often pleased to make it. It Was so Psalm. 9. The Lord will Psalm. 9.
9. Per desolationem (...) ad solidam consolationem. Gers n. Lib 1. de consol.
Theol. pros. 4.
minister true judgment unto the people: He will be a defense for the
oppressed. When will he do this? in opportunitatibus, in the needful time of
trouble; and that is the melting time. And it is so in the Text, I bear up the
Pillars of the Earth. When does he bear them? Quum terra liquefacta est, when
States shake and seem to be dissoluing.

And since our sufficiency can give Gods wisdom no opportunity; but yet our
weakness gives his mercy opportunity enough; it is manifest, that no one thing
is more necessary for preservation against the melting of a kingdom, then
humble and hearty prayer, that God will come always in to that opportunity
which our weakness makes.

And now because God does often pillars of the Earth comes. And that is (as S.
Basil and some others read it) at the Receiving S. Bas. (...) verse. Angl. (...)
of the Congregation, that is, when the people shall meet in the Synagogue to
pray, and praise God: or, when the Honorable and the selected of the people
shall be summoned, and gathered together in the name of the Lord, for Counsel or
Justice. For no time so fit to honor God, none to execute Justice; none to
bear up the pillars of the Earth; as when the Congregation is received to
meet, and consider and weigh all those things which make for the honor and
safety of a kingdom And beginning that service with Gods: For God forbid this
Honorable Council of State should sit down and begin any where else then at
God.

Now the great Congregation among the Jews was the Sanedrim. And the going up
of the Tribes to Jerusalem, was first to give thanks unto the Lord, and then to
sit down on the seat of judgment. Psalm. Psalm. 122. 4, 5. Ians. ibid.
122. And Jerusalem at that time was the seat both of Religion and the State.
Differences I know there are many between us and them, our government and
theirs, but not in this, That the Tribes are assembled and come up to one
place; Nor in this, That they come up first to give thanks to God, before they
possess the seat of judgment; Nor in this much, that there is a Session, a
Convocation for Religion, as well as Parliament for State. But to leave them,
and come to our own.

This great Council of the Kingdom, this Congregation is never received to
meeting, but about the Pillars of the State, the Laws, and the Government.
That by the Laws there might be Judgment according to right; and by the
Government the Pillars may both bear and be borne. I say bear, and be
borne. For though in the text it be, I bear up the Pillars. That is, I at al
times; and I in some cases, where none can but I; and I when all forsake save
I; yet that is not so to be taken, as if the people were not bound to bear up
the Pillars, as well as the Pillars them. No, for there is no question but they
are bound, and strictly bound too, Romans 13. And certain it is no State can
Romans 13. 6, 7.
flourish, if there be not mutual support between the Earth and the Pillars:
if it fail of either side, there is some melting or other presently.

For the strength of a King is in the multitude of his people. Prou. 14. His
supply, Prou. 14. 28.
and his defense is there. And the strength of a People is in the honor and
renown of their King: His very name is their shield among the Nations; and
they must make account to bear, if they will be borne. And this is read in the
very Dictates of Nature for government. For no man cuer saw a building of
State, but the Pillars which bear up it, are borne by the Earth.

Now God and the King do both receive this Congregation, and in fitness of
time, and yet with a difference too. For the King receives the Congregation to
consult, and a duise with it; but God receives it, to direct, and to bless it.
And God with his blessing is never wanting to us at these and the like times,
if we be not wanting to Him, and our selves.

And thus you have seen in what state the kingdom of Israel was in David's
time; and how easy it is for any kingdom to be in the like; in a melting, and
a dissoluing estate. You have likewise seen what Remedy was then, and what
Prevention is now to be thought of against this melting.

This both Remedy, and Prevention consists especially in impartial distribution
of Justice to the people; and in Gods gracious and powerful supporting of the
pillars of the State. The time for this never so fit, as when the Congregation
is received by the King to consultation, and by God to blessing.

It is not much which I have more to say. The Congregation is now ready to be
received. The very Receiving it ioynes it with the fitness of opportunity. For
it is the Kings opportunity to bless his people with Justice and Judgment;
and it is Gods opportunity to bear up both King and Peers, both greater, and
lesser pillars of the State. My text delivers a promise of both. For'tis David's
speech for himself, and for God. I Will do both, says God, and I, says the
King.

Now you may not distrust this promise on either side; neither on Gods, nor
David's. Not on Gods side. For that is Infidelity. Nor on the Kings. For what
has he done that can cause misbeliefe? or what has he not done, and that
above his years, that may not merit, and challenge belief of all?

And for the comfort of this Kingdom, and all that dwell therein, the service
of the day, which was first designed for this business, seems to me to
prophecy, that another Hezekiah, a wise, and a religious King has begun his
Reign. For the first Lesson appointed in the Church for Evening Prayer that
day, is 4. Reg. 18. which begins the story of Hezekiah. Hezekiah was twenty 4.
Reg, 18. 2.
five years old when he began to reign. There Is his age. What did he when
he came first into the Throne? Why one of his first works was, He gathered
the 2. Chro. 29. 20.
Princes of the City (there was the receiving of the Congregation) and so went
up to the house of the Lord. After this, what was the course of his life? It
follows; He claue to the Lord, and departed not from him. (And I hope I may
make a prophecy 4. Reg. 18. 5.
of that which follows.) So that there was none like him among the kings of
Judah, neither were there any such before him. And thus is our Hezekiah come
this day to receive this great Congregation in the Name of the Lord.

Let us therefore end with Prayer unto God. That he would bless both the King
and the State. That this Kingdom may never be Terra liquefacta, like molten
and dissolved Earth. That if at any time for our sins it begin to melt, and
wash away, the remedy may be forth with applied. That Justice and Judgment may
be given according to right. That the pillars of the Earth may be borne up;
the inferior and subordinate pillars by the King, and both the King as the
Master-pillar, and they by God. That all this may be done in fit and convenient
time. That God would make fit the time, and then give the King and the State,
and this great Council all wisdom to lay hold of it. That this great
Congregation may be in the fitness of time. That God would be pleased to
receive and bless it. That the King will be pleased to receive and grace it.
That it will be pleased to receive the King, according to his desert, and their
duty, with love, honor, and necessary supplies. That so he may bear up this
Kingdom, and the honor of it with comfort; and be a strong and a lasting
pillar, to support both it and us, in the true worship of God, and all
inferior blessings. That he may dwell before God for ever; and that God would
Psalm. 61. 7.
prepare his loving mercy and faithfulness, that they may preserve him. That
all the blessings of Grace may attend him and this Congregation in this life;
and all the blessings of Glory crown both Him and us in the life to come. And
this Christ for his infinite mercy grant unto us: To whom, etc.

FINIS.

