TWO SERMONS THE FIRST PREACHED AT St MARY'S in OXFORD July 13. 1634. being
Act-Sunday. THE SECOND, IN THE CATHEDRAL CHVRCH OF SARVM, AT THE Visitation of
the most Reverend Father in God WILLIAM Archbishop of Canterbury, May 23. 1634.

By THOMAS LAVRENCE Dr of Divinity, and late Fellow of Allsoules College, and
Chaplain to his MAJESTY in ORDINARY.

OXFORD, Printed by JOHN LICHFIELD Anno Dom. 1635.

EXODUS 20.21. And the people stood a far off, and Moses drew near unto the
thick darkness, where God was.


GOD made man, placed him in Eden, spoke to him, in the second of Genesis, and
man was not afraid. God came in a walking voice, Votem itantem Iun. and Trem.
in the third of Genesis, and man was afraid: because he had not sinned in the
second chapter, and had sinned in the third. For where no sin is, there is no
fear: perfect love, says S. John, casts out fear, which therefore is not
fit company for heaven, because love is perfect there. The happiness of that
place consists in the vision of God, in whose presence is the fullness of joy,
says David: which therefore the souls under the Altar, as S. John; or in
their chambers, as Esdras speaks, long to see, saying, when comes the fruit
of our reward? in the second of that story, the fourth chapter, at the five and
thirtieth verse? And who desires what he trembles at, or joys in that he
fears? But it is otherwise here. In Heaven we shall be ravished with God, not
afraid of him; in earth, we are afraid of any messenger from heaven. An Angel
appeared to Iud. 6.22.
Gedeon, and he was afraid; an Angel appeared to C. 13.22.
Manoah, and he was afraid; an Angel appeared to the Luc. 2.10.
Sheapheards, and these were afraid; an Angel appeared to the Mat. 28.5.
Mary's, and they were afraid. Afraid all of those Angels, which brought the
message of joy. For, because, ever since an Angel guarded Paradise with a
drawn sword, we have deserved no good news from above, we conceive no other
design of such Messengers, but to strike. And what shall Israel fear from God
himself, if these imagined no less then death from the sight of an Angel?
That glorious just Lord, cannot bespeake my damnable vileness but in thunder;
and therefore, if Moses intend they shall live to keep the Law, Moses himself
must deliver the Law: God must speak no more least they dye, v. 19 He
comforted the^ indeed, and said fear not, v. 20. which is all one, as if he
should say, sin not: for while they were guilty of sin, they must be
subject to fear. Bounds were defined, unto which they came not, and yet they
came too near. Gods command remoues them far, and their own fear remoues
them farther; And the people stood a far.

The words represent the duty of the Laity in Israel the people, and the
privilege of the Clergy in Moses their Priest. So the holy Ghost esteemed him
Moses and Aron among the Priests, Psalm. 99.6. so those Apostolical
constitutions esteemed him, L. 6. c. 3.
(...), L. 2. c. 29. so he esteemed himself; sanctifying the assembly, Exodus
19.14.
dedicating the Tabernacles, hallowing the vessels, offering sacrifice,
consecrating Aron with his Sons, and officiating both for the Scepter and the
Mitre too, the Prince and the Priest; to show that there is no natural
repugnancie, betwixt the Ephod and the Maze, the Tribunal and the Altar, but
that both thrive the better for the vicinity of each other, as the Vine helps
the Elm, and by this neighborhood climbes the higher.

The duty of the Laity requires, 1 An obsequious attention to God; the people
stood. 2 An humble distance from God; The people stood a far off.


The privilege of the Clergy discovers, 1 The approximation, or immediatnesse
of their access, Moses drew near. 2 The limitation of this approximation;
Moses drew near unto the thick darkness. 3 The condition of this limitation,
Moses drew near unto the thick darkness, where God was.


1 Vox vagina sensus, Language is the sheath of sense, Bell. de not. Ecc. l. 4.
c. 12.
says the Cardinal; and words are the attire of the mind, says the Orator,
he therefore (whose tongue is too big for his heart, that speaks more then he
thinks) cases a needle in a scabberd, and presents little David in great
Goliahs armor, or rather araies a child with the clothes of a giant, and so
invests him not with a suit but enstates in a house. God is no friend to the
hypocrisy of complement, and therefore in Scripture ever means more then he
speaks: Psalm. 12.6.
the words of the Lord are pure words, as silver tried seven times in the
fire, says the Psalmist, calcined and sublimated from this dross: for he is a
God of truths, not of varnishes; of realities not of shadows. He hates that
mouth which belies the mind, and likes men on earth best, when they resemble,
the Saints in Heaven; where souls commerce per verbum mentis, without tongues;
and thoughts are seen without the mediation of words; it is so in my Text, where
a syllable of Gods signifies more then a volume of man's; a word of His then a
Library of mine; and the peoples standing here comprehends as much as the
people should do, and much more indeed then they would.

First standing is a posture of respect; we kneel and stand to our
superiors: Kneel to show our subjection, and stand to show our obedience:
that we are ready to execute, what these are to command. See thou a man
diligent in his business, he shall stand before Kings, Prove. 22.29. and
although the Angels turned their faces to Sodom, Abraham stood yet before the
Lord, Genesis 18.22. Standing and Kneeling then become inferiors, sitting does
not, the Lord said to my Lord, sit thou at my right hand: there is an equality of
nature betwixt the Father and the Son, and therefore one sits by the other,
Psalm. 110.11. and when the son of man shall sit on the Throne of his glory,
then shall ye also sit upon twelve Thrones, Judging the twelve Tribes of
Israel: there is an equality of grace or favor, betwixt the Judge and his
Assessors, and therefore these have Thrones together, Mat. 19.18. so that those
Antipodes which tread cross to the World, which fast at the birth of our
Savior, and feast at his passion, which will not say Christmas, and yet will
call a Christian Demas, which sit at the Altar, because we kneel; say not with
the Syrophaenician, Lord I am not worthy to eat the crummes under thy table;
but Lord I am worthy to sit at thy table, I am as good as thy self.

Standing then is a posture of respect, and respect is, a preparatiue to
attention, for no man listens to what he scorns. Lydias affection must be
warmed, before she can attend; regard S. Paul she must, before she can hear
him; when God shall open her heart, then will she open her ears, Act. 16.14.
nor wonder I, the conversions of this Apostle were so many, seeing his honors
were so great; Veni, vidi, vici.
like that Roman commander he conquered as many Nations as he saw,
wheresoever he came, his Savior followed him: and therefore his stay was not
so long any where, his travailes more frequent and farther then those of
others: in labors more abundant he was, and in iourneying often, 2. Cor.
11.23.26. For God blessed him with such as would pull out their own eyes in his
behalf: their own eyes, not his such as had humility enough to learn, had
not pride enough to teach the Apostle: such as believed his eyes so much, that
they thought they had no use of their own, Galat. 4.15. hear therefore the
word of the Lord, ye that tremble at his word, Esa. 66.3. as if none were fit
to hear but such, the rest not worth the looking after, as indeed they are
not: for to him will I look that trembles at my word: such I will look
after, and I will not look after those, that are not such; in the second verse
of that chapter.

2 Paral. 6.3.
2 Standing is a posture of attention, the posture of hearers; when Ezra opened
the Law, all the people stood up, Nehem. 8.5. there is no duty oftener enjoined
then this: Four times in two chapters, the second and the third of the
Apocalypse; nay four times in one chapter, the five and fiftieth of Esaiah:
more, three times in one line, give ear, and come unto me, hearken, and your
soul shall live. Heaven is the reward of your attention, hell of your scorn,
in the third verse of that chapter: behold I stand at the door and knock, if
any man hear my voice, and open the door, I will come in: behold, because he
knocks not often, for he that stands is going away: especially if he stand at
the door without a shelter; if he stand only to knock, and not to knock
neither, after he is slighted; this were to awake the deaf, or speak to the
dumb, Apocal. 3.20.

But Lord, who has believed our report, or to whom has the arm of the Lord
been revealed? Where are those throngs now, and presses upon Christ? Where is
that early coming in the Gospel? how soon are we up to sport, and how late
to pray? Luke. 21.38. Io. 8.2.
how small in many places, is the gleaning of their Churches to the vintage of
their Cities? how low is the ebb in those courts of the Lord, when it is full
sea in their Streets? Psalm. 50.17.
how do we look the Priest in the face, and cast his words behind our backs,
as David complains? his ordinary entertainment resembling that of Music,
Ezekiel. 33.32.
which serves only to fill our ears, when discourse is done. Good women there
were, which consecrated their looking glasses to the tabernacle, Exodus 38.8.
and will ye know, how ye may do so now? By using ^^ther ^ Bible on the
Sunday, and coming hither with half a dress, then losing half a prayer.
Wherefore libera ab homine malo, says David, that is a meipso says S. Aug.
deliver me from my self o God, that I may come hither, and from my self,
while I am here; from my covetous self, least the thought of my purchase shut
out my Lord; and from my proud self, when he honors, or worships me; from my
malicious self, when an injury heates my blood; and from my wanton self, when
the assembly discloses a beauty, a well attired piece of hansome clay; from my
intemperate self, when the thought of Egypt brings on me a lothing of
Canaan; and from my profane self, when some incarnate Satan assailes my
attention, by whispering in his vanities at my ears, and clothing his Atheism
with the Scripture.

3 Standing is a posture of action, the posture of servants: GehaZi went in,
and stood before his Master; the readier therefore to come, or go at his
command, 2. Reg. 5.25. Practice is the life of attention, and he that hears,
but does not, is a monster in religion, that has two ears, and no hands. The
Jews were taught this by their meats, and the Ceremonial law was but a shadow
of the Moral. What poisonous temper in the hare? What dangerous nourishment in
the swine? Why might they not as freely feed on the rabbet, as the sheep? Or
what Philosophy makes the goat more wholesome then the crab or the swan? he
showed by this, O man, what is good, and what the Lord requires of thee: thy
effeminatenesse is forbidden in the hare; which changes his sex, as Gesner
writes, and is, at several times, both he and she: and thy laziness in the
down of the Levit. 11.18 Deuteronomy. 14.16. Cygnum secundum Vulg. Sept Vatabl.
Ariam. Mont. Anglican. novissimam: alij aliter reddunt vt Tremel. Leo Judas,
Munster, Castal.
Swan. Thy oppression is interdicted in the Eagle, and thy drunkenness in the
Swine. Thy gluttons prey on Cormorants, and thy night-walkers on owls: for God
instructed them what they should do, by what they might eat, and every
prohibited meat was a menace against sin; Or least this light should seem
too dim, he describes the same with the rays of the Sun: he that lifts
not his eyes to idols, defiles not his neighbors wife, spoileth none by
violence, gives not upon usury, restores the pledge, bestows his bread on the
hungry, walks in my statutes, he shall surely live: he is not just that has
faith, unless he have works too, nor does the Gospel save without the law,
Ezekiel. 18.6.7.8. it is S. Aug: Cont. Faust. l. 22. c. 24.
speech of the ancient Prophets, illorum non tantum linguam, sed vitam fuisse
Propheticam: that they prophesied as well by their lives as their writings, and
their six days contained a commentary on the seventh. For if I cry the
Temple of the Lord, but obey not the Lord of the Temple, and am like that Idol
in Daniel, that had his head of gold, and his feet of clay; If I run upon a
precipice, while my eyes are open, and the light of my profession se^ me not to
keep me up, but to show how dangerous I fell; if I am only Sermon-sicke,
while I am rockt in a Church-tempest abroad, and presently recover again, as
soon as Hye at hull at home; If my voice be Jacobs, but my hands Esau's, and I
wear Elias mantle without his spirit; if I acknowledge God with my tongue, but
deny him in my life, profess a Christian, and live a Pagan, go from Church to
a brothelhouse, join the spirit of Chastity and the spirit of whoredoms
together, the holy, and unholy Ghost, Christ and Belial, the Temple of God, and
the Temple of Devils; if I run to Heaven one day, to hell six, and
contradict the truth of my Sermons by the error of my life, what the Prophet
said to Amaziah, the Priest may say to me: I know that the Lord has
determined to destroy thee, because thou have done this thing, and have not
hearkened to my counsel, 2. Chron. 25.16.

Nevertheless, when the Son of man shall come, will he find faith on earth,
says our Savior, Luc. 18.8? C. 2.18. quidam discipuli cuiusdam Almarici
nomine students Parifiis dixerunt quod illud quod alias est peccatum mortale,
vt stuprum, factum in charitate non est peccatum condemnati and combusti: ad
sin. Lomb. c. 29.
yes: faith enough, but no works. Faith that remoues mountains, that pulls
down Churches, and clothes not the poor: faith that hates Idols, and loves
Sacrilege, a tun of faith for a dram of charity, show me thy faith by thy
works, says S. James, not so, my works must be judged by my faith: to the
pure all things are pure; and if God see my faith, he is not angry with my
sins; my tree must be esteemed by the leaves, not by the fruit; and my watch
must rule the Sun: heretics there were, styled by the Church praedestinati,
which presumed upon a fatallity of their election, and would needs have Heaven
promised, without the condition of works: for they dreamt of a conveyance
without a proviso, and thought themselves able to ascend Jacobs Ladder, without
climbing by the rounds. But such as make themselves of Gods counsel, are
usually none of his friends: he will profess himself a stranger to these
intruders, and a friend to those which observed their distance: to those that
said we have eaten with thee, I know you not: but such as said, when saw we
thee hungry, and fed thee, or thirsty, and gave thee drink? Come ye blessed
of my Father, inherit a Kingdom; these which pretended least acquaintance,
were those only which observed him, Math. 25.34. where is the Wise? Where is
the Scribe? Where is the disputer of this World, 1. Cor. 1.20.? surely neither
in Heaven, nor here. The fear of God was amongst these, this fear wrought
respect; this respect attention, this attention obedience: and all this,
because they more observed what God said, then searched what he was: they were
near enough to receive his command, but not near enough to pry into his
nature: near enough to obey, but not near enough to see him. God commanded
them to stand off, and therefore they stood a far off; their humble distance
from God, and my second general.

2 God was unwilling the people should forget themselves, and therefore
shadowed forth this duty so often, in Paradise; by permitting Adam, the tree of
life, and interdicting the tree of knowledge, to show he rather desires to
make us Saints, then Rabbis, or Doctors. In the wilderness, Moses was hardly
permitted a glimpse, or dawning of his glory, and what red sea have thou
divided, what Multitudes have thou fed from heaven, or watered out of a rock,
that thou shouldste look as high as he? At the giving of the law, that
King-priest only entered the clouds, Aron came almost to it; the Elders farther
of; and at a remoter site the people: Limits are defined, and if they
transgress these; if they break through to gaze on God, they must die, in the
nineteenth of this story, at the one and twentieth verse. In the service of the
Tabernacle, who were conversant but the Levites? who carried, who kept, who
covered, who uncovered but these? in the disposal of the Tabernacle, the Laity
had a distinct court from the Priests, as anciently in the Church, the chancell
as appropriated to the Clergy; the rest to the people. Hence communio Laica,
from the place, vid. Sozomen. l. 7. c. 24. Theodoret. l. 5. c. 16.17. 1. Reg.
6.31.33.
In the building of the temple, the door into the oracle, was but a fifth part
of the wall, in the Kings, that into the Sanctum a fourth; to show, that more
come into the Church, then unto the Arohe many tread the Courts of the Lord,
that were never admitted to his counsel. In the waters of the Sanctuary, that
rose to the ankles for the people, and when they were swollen above the loins,
became too deep for the Priests. In the law, communicated to all; the Cabala,
as the Rabbis say, or traditionall exposition, from God to Moses only, and
from Moses only to the seventy: for although Mirandula tell us, Apology for
his 900 conclusions.
that Sixtus the fourth procured the translation of this, and call God to
witness, that he read there the Misteryes of our faith, as clearly unfolded,
as if S. Matthew, or S. Luke had delivered it, not as a paraphrase on the law,
but a commentary on the Gospel: yet we know, from Esdras, 2 Esd. 14.45.46.
what a concealment this Cabala was under what Hierogliphicks the Trinity, and
the resurrection, and the life, to come; and the Messiah lay buried under the
law: how general and implicit the faith of S. Peter, and Martha, and the
Eunuch, and those worthies to the Hebrews was: which occasioned that hesitancy
at Ephesus, Math. 16.16.17. Io. 11.27. Act. 8.37. c. 11. Act. 19. Act.
15.21.20. Mar. 6.11.13. c. 9.10. c. 8.31.32. Luc. 24.11. c. 9.44.45. Ioh. 10.9.
Mat. 16.10.17.22.
concerning the reality of the Holy Ghost: that consistency for a time of the
law, and the Gospel together, Moses and Christ: that irresolution of the
Apostles, about the passion, and the resurrection, and the ascension of our
Lord: that design of all upon the external glory of a temporal Dominion,
admitting no Sovereignty of God, unless he change his cross into a throne, his
reed into a scepter. In the glory of our Savior on the mount, where Moses and
Elias attended him: in his bloody sweat in the garden, where an Angel
comforted him, beyond the ken of the multitude, with the priuity only of Peter,
James, and John. In their diet, Milk, 1. Cor. 3.2. 1. Pet. 2.2. Ioh.
21.15.16.17.
and not meat, easy positive divinity: in their appellations, lambs and
sheep; the in apprehensiuest creatures of any: Children and Babes, which move
not a foot, but by the direction of a hand; and sooner cry for what offends,
then what profits them; for poison, then an Antidote. In the essential measure
of faith: Romans 12.9. Ioh. 17.3.
no larger then a verse in s S. Paul's Creed: if thou confess with thy mouth
the Lord Jesus, and believe with thy heart, that God raised him from the dead,
thou shall be saved: no larger then a verse in t S. John's; Ioh. 4.13.2. c.
5.15.
this is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and whom
thou have sent, Jesus Christ: nor much larger in that of all the Apostles,
being dilated thus in that (...). Catech. 4. (...). Epiphan. in exp. fid.
catech. n. 19. ed. Petau. regula fidei. Aug. ser. 181. de temp. clauis
caeloru^. Amb. Ser. 38. de Ieiun. and quadrag. sin.
foundation of faith, as Cyrill of Jerusalem, Epiphanius, and S. Ambrose call
it; in futurae praedicationis normam, says S. Aug. as the compass and square
of their Sermons, that all might beat those paths to Heaven easier, by tracing
the same steps; and teach but one, though they went several ways: for the
Apostles is but an exposition of S. Paul's; and S. John's Creed, the Nicene, and
Athanasian, but a paraphrase on this, says (...). Catech. 4. (...). Epiphan.
in exp. fid. catech. n. 19. ed. Petau. regula fidei. Aug. ser. 181. de temp.
clauis caeloru^. Amb. Ser. 38. de Ieiun. and quadrag. sin.
AZor: the same faith in weight, and substance, though not in bulk or size: as
it is the same piece in a bullet and a sheet of gold; that being thronged into
a mould, which beaten and expanded by an Artificer, may anon cover and gild all
the leaves of my Bible.

But o the unnatural Chimistry of this age! how infinite are the extractions
from this simple, this single breviary? What seas are derived from this drop?
Into how general a flame have those fiery breathes blown this spark? How
soon has avapour, when once it came to a hand, like that in the Kings, raged
into a cloud, and this cloud grown too big for Heaven? How have some resolved
all the heresies S. Aug. or Epiphanius, or Philastrius mentions, all those
disputes, which disquiet the World, into this quintessence, this spirit of
faith: and thence as if that Catechism in our Liturgy were not long enough to
reach from Earth to Heaven, have cast into the mint of the Church the dross of
their own phansies, and lead their Catechumeni through all the Roman, and the
Belgicke controversies, as disquisition of necessary belief, De vit. Constable. or
at. et he warnes them, (...).
giving way to the saucy liberty of their tongues and pens, against all our
Ecclesiastical Hierarchies, for interdicting such Polemicall discourses in
popular assemblies (which yet is no more then Constantine in Eusebius did) with
those Mutiners in Number. 16.3.14.
Numbers, ye put out the eyes of the assembly, ye take too much upon you
Moses and Aron, and forsaking the waters of Siloe, that mildly and generally
flow in the radical Doctrines of our Church, rejoice only in Rezin and
Remaliahs son, which always angle in the troubled waters of Jury, and would
feign translate the Throne of Israel to Damascus from Samaria? Nay have they
not charged her wisdom with sloth and Apostasy too, because she will not
impose an absolute faith upon the aerie proiections of their distempered
brains: because themselves cannot be believed in as well as God: because she
thinks heaven was made for some besides; because she fears their clamorous
zeal might at length importune such assemblies for the anathematization of ego
currit, and tu currit, like those at the end of Lombard, if a Synod should be
called for such: but I must tell them, that as S. Paul says, Ephesians. 4.4.5.
there is but one God; so he says there is but one faith too: and Physicians
tell us, Paracelsus administered as much in a drop, as Galen in a pottle: nor
can there be any other way to Heaven, then what has been trodden from the
Apostles: neither circumcision, Gal. 6.15.
nor uncircumcision, but a new creature, says the Doctor of the Gentiles:
neither Controversy, nor Schoole-Divinity, but a new life, say I. God intends
not to lay traps for my soul in such nicities as these: nor will I make that
yoke heavy, which himself made easy and light. It will not be said, Mat.
11.30.
at the last assise, come ye blessed, for ye have disputed, for ye have
preached, for ye have understood well: but I was naked, and ye clothed me, I
was hungry and ye fed me, I was sick and ye visited me, in the Gospel of S.
Matthew. I shall not be judged by my writings, C. 25.34.
but by my works: devotion will then turn the scale against learning; an
ounce of goodness out-weighe^ a pound of talk. And I must tell them again,
if they direct to those happy regions, they have discovered a north-west
passage thither; a passage concealed from the ancient; a passage our Savior,
and S. Paul knew not. When S. Peter enquires, Lord what shall this man do? The
Lords reply is only a reproof, What is that to thee, Ioh. 21.22. And when the
twelve demand, Lord will thou at this time restore the kingdom to Israel?
He returns no resolution, but a check: come you may to that kingdom above,
and yet never come to such curiosity below: a saving voyage may be made by
the Merchandise of iuory and gold, without fraiting your vessels thus with
Apes and Peacocks: I will not tell you, because it is not for you to know, Act.
1.7. but when the young man enquired. What shall I do, that I may have
Eternal life, when he seeks for nothing but this, how plain then, how gently
does he run? noe clouds, nor eclipse there, but he writes his mind with the
light of the Heavens; if thou will enter into life keep the commandments; he
says unto him, which? Jesus said unto him, these: he answers to necessary
queries, to impertinent he answers not: speaks nothing but mysts and
storms, when their demands are curious; nothing but light and smiles, when
their demands are requisite: he that would not show his disciples, when they
should be delivered, will show this stranger how he may be saved Mat.
19.17.18. And when the Apostle is pressed with some cobweb divinity, the Holy
Ghosts stubble and straw, that fuel for the last fire in the first Epistle to
the Corinthians; the frothy agitations of unquiet heads, materials vile in
themselves, costly alone in the texture, but strawn hats, where the labor may
be worth a pound, the stuff not worth a farthing: he only controles their
folly: o man, who art thou that reply against God? Romans 9.20. bids them be
amazed and wounder, o the depth of the wisdom and knowledge of God: in the
eleaventh of that Epistle, at the three and thirtieth verse! but when the
foundations are destroyed, what should the righteous do but lighten and
thunder? as he does every very where against the drunkard, the murderer; the
fornicator, and tells them, that whatsoever their pleasure, or content may be
on earth, they can expect no inheritance in Heaven. God requires more practice
then most men have, less knowledge then most men brag of. It Is but a confessing
with the mouth the Lord Jesus, and a believing in the heart, in the tenth of
the same Epistle at the ninth verse: nay it is but a calling on the name of the
Lord, at the 13. verse. For his part therefore he will not distract them with
any needless speculations, his intent being not to puzle, but to save them, in
the first verse of that chapter: and o that there were such a heart in this
people, says God, that they would endure sapientius stulte scere, as S. Greg.
speaks, this foolishness of preaching, this knowing nothing save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified, watring themselves with the streams of Nile,
without searching after the head. For it is usually seen when a man runs on
the discovery of some newer, some neater way then the ordinary rode, he meets
with briars and ditches, and so falls short of his journey. Wherefore I rather
like that Mercury, which directs me the straitest, the nearest cut, then the
other which leads me about through Gardens, and Meadows, and had rather
meet with dirt in the way, then out of it with violets and roses. I am content
to be saved, and desire others should be so too: and therefore I say to my
hearers, turn from your evil ways, for why will ye dye, o ye house of
Isarel? To my self, o wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this
body of sin? To Priest and People, come let us walk, not let us discourse in
the light of the Lord: to God for all, turn us o Lord, so shall we be
turned, thou will turn us so, that we shall need turning no more: or, least
we should, when we are turned, draw us too, so shall we run after thee; do
not lead us, do not follow our humors; bring us not that easy speculatiue way
we like, (for then we shall never come to thee) but draw us that hard, that
narrow way, the way of obedience and practice: Who is sufficient for these
things, says S. Paul? the Apostle was not, how then am I? Why should my
ignorance presume farther then Aron did, or think to view the face of God,
when Moses saw only his hinder parts; to gaze on this sun, when he saw
nothing but a cloud? And Moses drew near unto the thick darkness where God
was.

3 Moses as an extraordinary Priest (for the hereditary succession resided in
the posterity of Aron) discharged the parts of an agent, and did both carry and
recarry betwixt Earth and Heaven: a Master of Requests he was to God, the
peoples petitions were his lading up an Ambassador he was from God, the Lords
commands were his carriage down, as our Savior prayed on the Mount, and
preached in the villages of Jury.

1 The approximation therefore, or immediatenesse of the Priests access, Exodus
4.16.
depends in the first place upon their employment upwards: they have his ears
before the rest, because they are the mouths of the rest; and designed from
God to commence the suites of the people. For, although the eyes of the Lord
are over the righteous, whatsoever those righteous are: and his cares are open
to their prayers, Psalm. 34.14.
wheresouer those prayers are made: every faithful soul in the world, being a
Priest; every angle of the world a Temple and an Altar; yet are his ears more
open, 2. Chron. 6.20.
his eyes more attent to the prayers here, and a Collect from the Priests mouth
goes further, then a Liturgy from the peoples: as the blessing of any is good,
but the blessing of my parents is better, Psalm. 110.4.
and when that Priest after the order of Melchizedech had sanctified the diet,
every crumme was augmented into a batch; every fish multiplied into a shole;
nor was the assembly fed, but feasted. His presence is indeed every where, but
his residence especially there, and though his essence be diffused through
Heaven and Earth in Jeremy; his glory, in Exodus, C. 23.24.
is peculiar to the Tabernacle; the ladder which Jacob saw, C. 40.34.
that ascent and descent of Angels, that thorough-fare betwixt earth and
heaven, was at Bethel, the house of God; Genesis 28.12.
and in Jury, the propitiatory or mercy-seate was only in the Temple: which
occasiond that general concourse thither, under any pressure or calamity,
Exodus 9.18.
men using us, as fruit trees are used by us, which we cudgel in the sun,
and run to for shelter, in a storm: pray for me, says Pharaoh to Moses:
Act. 8.24.
Pray for me, says Simon Magus to the Apostles: Let the^ pray over him, says
S. James: though I may, C. 5.14.15.
and must come by my self, my coming by these is more effectual, as my suite
is less gracious to my Prince from ordinary hands, then his Secretaries;
because the way is by such Mediators, as best know how to bespeake the King,
and when.

2 And, as the approximation or immediatenes of the Priests access depends, in
the first place, upon their employment upwards, so does it in the second upon
their employment downwards, according to their double aspect, on God and the
people. They are his Stewards: So S. Paul calls them in one place, 1. Cor. 4.1.
Stewards to discharge us of our service to lock heaven against us; and
Stewards to admit us into service again, to unlock heaven for us: The gates
of hell shall not prevail against such as keep these keys of heaven, in the
16 of S. Matthew: and, what need I a safer conduct, a surer warrant then this?
they are his Ambassadors, so S. Paul calls them in a second; 2. Cor. 5.20.
and with Moses in this story, must deliver man in the Tabernacle, what on Sina
they receive from God; and by whom may we expect the Kings mind, if not by the
Kings Ambassador? Act. 20.27.
they are his Counselors, so S. Paul calls them in a third; and, as they are
designed to Thrones hereafter, in the Evangelist; so are they, in the Apostle,
Math. 19.28. 1. Cor. 6.1.2.
to Tribunalls here: They are his Friends, so our Savior calls them in a
fourth; the Lord does nothing which he reueales not to such, says the Holy
Ghost; that is, nothing which concerns them, or others to know: Servants are
strangers to their Lords actions, friends are not: Servants must not interpret
their counsels, friends may, John. 15.15. I wish from my heart, as Moses did,
That all the Lords people were Prophets, and that the Lord would power out his
spirit upon them: But I wish, they would forbear prying into the Arc, with
the Bethshemites, till then: 1 Cor. 16.19.
that all would not preach, which can speak: and, because S. Paul calls every
family a Church, would not turn every tables end, into a Pulpit: That the feet
in this body would not presume to see, nor the hands to speak: that the clew
of predestination might not be reeled up at the spindle, nor the decrees of God
vnraualled at the lome: That our Lay-divines would see themselves, as well as
the Clergy; leaving with Iehosaphat, and Valentinian, and Constantine, and
Martian, and Justinian, the disputes of religion to the decision of the Church:
that the people would not presume beyond their bounds, least the Lord break
forth upon them, as he threatens in the former chapter; nor, with VZZa,
sustain the Arc with unlawful hands, though to the diffidence of their
indiscretion, it seem in danger of falling: this is the employment of Moses
and Aron, nor is the whole congregation so holy, as it seems: ye take too much
upon you ye sons of Reuben: wherefore get ye out of the Sanctuary, for ye
have trespassed; neither shall it be for your honor from the Lord, 2. Chron.
26.18.

And if any now say of Jerusalem, Psalm. 137.7.
as formerly Edom did, down with it, down with it, even to the ground; I must
pray against this Atheism, as Moses did, arise o Lord; into thy resting place,
thou, and the arc of thy strength: thou have said, this shall be thy rest for
ever, and, o Lord, let it ever be so. It Was the Sacrilegious zeal of those
times, What use have we of Churchmen now? Who ever wore a Cope for armor, or
in a pitcht-field exchanged a head-peece for a Miter? And my reply shall be
that of Moses to the Rebels, seems it a small thing unto you, that the God
of Israel has separated these from the congregation of Israel, to bring them
near to himself, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Lord, and to
stand before the congregation to minister unto them? Number. 16.9. there is use of
these, while there are prayers to be heard, or sins to be pardoned, or God
to be served, or men to be saved. Those only have no use of these Liegers,
that desire no correspondency, or intercourse with Heaven: fewer victories have
been won by swords then by prayers; and therefore in most of Iuries wars,
the Arc followed the Camp, the ensign was attended with the Ephod: my
Father, my Father, 2. Reg. 2.12.
the Chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof, says Elisha to Eliah:
Lay-devotions are the infantery, the foot; but the strength of the battle,
the Chariots and the horse are the oraisons of the Clergy: the land was better
secured by this man of peace, then those men of war; nor was it Ioshuahs hand
overcame Amalek, Nah. 1.15. Am. 5.18.
but Moses prayer: the day of the Lord, says the Prophet, is darkness; all
we see of him being evening and night, a perception only that we cannot see
him; and who walks safely in the dark, without the guidance of a light? For
how gloomy a midnight is this to thee, that was a thick darkness to Moses?
the limitation of his access, and my fourth general.

4 The Lord concealed not himself only from Moses in thick darkness, but
threatened also in lightning and thunder; and although he climbed the Mount by
especial command; and that to receive the Law by his appointment, and the
Cabala or exposition, as the Rabbis say, to dispense such fundamental truths
on earth, which might conveigh them to Heaven being entertained as an
Ambassador extraordinary by the joynt-commission of God, and the people, rated
him yet out of a a tempest too: Moses being rapt out of himself, So does (...)
signify the word of the 70, and the Apostle. Heb. 12.18. (...). Arist.
by the assault of a sudden, and impetuous wind; for nothing so much hinders
the sight, and apprehension as this: The Lord admits him not into his presence,
while he is himself, least he should fall a longing for his glory, as once he
did; nor must he discourse with God, while he is Moses.

And all this to show, what Cato afterward said, rebus divinis magnam inesse
caliginem; that the nature and counsels of God are not only a great depth, as
David calls them, but a thick darkness besides; deep and dark too: so to
the best eyes: his footsteps unknown to the Psalmist, that continually traced
them; his ways unsearchable to S. Paul, that was rapt into the third Heaven,
and to Moses, that talked with God: so in one aspect, and yet not so in another:
for religion is meat and milk, 1. Cor. 3.12.3
says the Apostle; and has provision both for men and babes: there are arcana
Dei, secret things, that belong unto the Lord; and there are revelata Dei, 1.
Tim. 3.15.9. Heb. 3.3.5.6.1.2.5. c. 4.17. Ephesians. 2.21.
revealed things, that belong to us. Every faithful soul is a building, and
every true Church a house, says the holy Ghost: Wherefore as in a house, so in
the Church, like the foundation and the pillars, some are necessary or
essential parts and some are like the imagery or sculpture, unnecessary and
accidental: there ensues no ruin of the pile upon the absence of those; no
hazard to the soul on the ignorance of these. Quid opus est vt vel
affirmentur, vel negentur vel definiantur cum discrimine, quae sine discrimine
nesciuntur. Aug Ench. ad Laur. c. 59. Psalm. 119.105 2. Pet. 1.19.
Every man has eyes for one, but every man has not eyes for the other; and
what an Artizan values at a talent, I may not prize at a Crown: thy word is a
light unto my feet says David; and a light shining in a dark place, says S.
Peter; it discovers essential, radical truths to my faith; as this does
present greater objects to my sight, a bed, or a table, a cubbord, or a stool:
but it discovers not metaphysicall, accidental truths, as this shows not the
less, a cobweb, an atome, a gnat, or a pin. I use a light to search for
books, or money; I use not a light to search for a hair, or fly. God being to
us in our journey to heaven, as he was to Israel, in their journey to Canaan:
where we need direction, a fire; where we need no direction a cloud; a fire by
night, and a cloud by day.

And as according to that modesty of the Hebrew proverb, the expectation of
Elias must adiourne our longings in accessories, or superstructions; so must it
after some circumstantiall respects, in substantialls and fundamentalls too:
for although we know as much as we must, because it were unreasonable to
inuit us to heaven, without showing the way; we know not as much as we may;
because God is a voluntary glass, and discloses himself no further then he
will: some he brings by the Peripherie, or bow; others by the Diameter, or
string: as the same Period was but a few weeks journey, when Israel went for
the necessary provision of bread; many years pilgrimage, when Israel lusted
for the unnecessary curiosity of flesh, being led thus from Marah to Rephidim,
from Rephidim, to Meribah, from thence to Taberah, from the heat and
bitterness of one contention to another, till at length, after many
discontented and wrangling steps, the children grew wiser by the misery of
their Fathers; and, with the price of their blood purchased the inheritance of
Canaan. For as every profession is a mystery, so is religion too; Romans 16.25.
nor am I commanded to believe, what I am able to know: the birth of God is a
mystery, says S. Paul here; 1. Cor. 2.7.
and the death of God a mystery, says the same Apostle there; the Sacrament a
mystery, in a third place; C. 4.1. C. 15.51.
and the resurrection a mystery, in a fourth; our election in Christ a mystery,
now, and our union with Christ a mystery then; God the Father a mystery, Ephesians.
3.9. C. 5.32.
in this place; and God the son a mystery in another. And yet I am the bright
morning Star, Colos. 2.2. C. 4.3.
says our Savior, which all see, but such as are asleep: and his coming
brought the day with it, in S. Luke. C. 1.28.
Exposed to all eyes, but such as are shut. Behold I show you a mystery, 1.
Cor. 15.51.
says S. Paul to the Corinthians; A mystery, and yet shown. Great is the
mystery of godliness, God was manifested in the flesh, 1. Tim. 3.16.
says S. Paul to Timothy. A mystery, and yet manifest too. The (...) is
plain, that they are so; but the (...) is not, why they are so; the (...) is
not, how they are so; nor the (...) what they are: mysteries all, in respect of
the manner; and, yet no mysteries in respect of the matter; how they were done,
is a mystery; that they were done, is none. For example I believe the
generation of the Son, without the Father; the continuation of a virgin, with
the conception of a mother: I believe the procession of the Holy Ghost from
God, which is yet but one essence with God; that he came forth, and yet is
always there: I believe two natures in one hypostasis; one, and yet another:
I believe the Omnipotency of God created all out of nothing, and that the same
can resolve all into nothing again: I believe all received beginning from that
God which is without beginning; to whom the infinite vastness of heaven and
earth is but a point; those everlasting successions of ages but an instant;
that was not yesterday, nor shall not be to morrow; but yesterday and to
morrow, before the world and after the world eternally I am. In aeternum and
vltra. Vulg. Exodus 15.18. a day of eternity, which God enioyes. 2. Pet. 3.18.
I believe this body shall live, after it is dead, and laugh at Plato for
defending a revolution, and yet not seeing a resurrection. I believe, though I
bar my doors I lock not my God in: though I close my windows, I shut not my
God out. If I seek to lose him in a Labyrinth by unchaste embraces, he wants
no clew to find me there: if I flee into the wilderness by a solitary sin,
he needs no perspectiue to discover me here: that he is in my closet, when I
exchange him for a bribe; and in my bed, when I wish him out. That he is as
essentially in that place, where I provoke him by my drunkenness, as I that am
drunk; and the only reason, why my surfets bespatter him not, is not because
this wants pollution, but because he wants dimension: not because this falls
where he is not, but because it falls, where he is without a body. But how a
Licet scire quod natus sit non licet discutere quomodo natus sit. ex Ambros.
Lomb. sent. l. 1. d. 9. a. 7. Pater de seipso genuit illud quod ipse est. Lomb.
Sent. 1. d. 5. a. 4. Deus pater genuit deu^, qua non Pater, est d. 4. a. 2. c.
d. 19. a. 9.
Son without a Father, how a virgin, and yet a mother; how the Creator of all
was borne, or God should die. How the Holy Ghost came from the Father, and yet
may not be called the Son of the Father; how he descended thence, and yet is
always there: What the Divine essence is, how it is communicated, the formal
cause by which one receives from another: How the Father himself begat that
which is himself; and yet God the father begat God which is not the Father:
How the Persons are the Trinity, and yet no Person is a part of the Trinity:
How there is one essence of Vna essentia trium personarum, and tres personae
vnius essentiae non Deus trium personarum, vel tres personae vnius Dei. d. 34.
a. 5.
three Persons, and three Persons of one essence; and yet not one God of three
Persons, or three Persons of one God. 3. Sent. d. 21. a. 1. d. 22. a. 4.
How the Deity was united to the flesh by the mediation of the soul: and yet
was not divided from the flesh, by the separation of the soul: how all the
world together can but make some thing of some thing, and yet God made all the
world of nothing: How this body of mine shall first be earth, and the^ grass;
then digested by worms, and then incorporated into man: how I shall have my
own flesh, and he that eats me, shall have it too at the last day. How the
Lord can be (...), and yet not (...) or (...): How he was not, and yet is
eternal, is everlasting, and yet shall not be. How every where, and yet
without expansion; of an infinite presence, without an infinite place. Here I
say with Lombard out of Hilarie, Lomb. 1. sent. d. 12. a. 5. D. 32. a. 2.9. d.
33. a. 5.
Et si sensu non percipiam teneo conscientia; I believe though I cannot see,
and there, that they are, Nimiae profunditatis altitudines, and insolubiles,
sensumque superantes humanum; beyond my reason, Sent. 4. d. 22. a. 2. Sent. 3.
d. 2. a. 2. Sent. 1. d. 4. a. 2. d. 2. a. 1. d. 31. a. 4. D. 19. a. 14. d. 40.
a. 3. lib. 4. d. 43. a. 5. Sent. 4. d. 48. a. 5.
though not against it. It Is enough for me, Micas edere sub mensa domini, and
indignum soluere corrigiam; in one place. And I call them Garrulos
ratiocinatores, which forfeit thus their interest in the tree of life, by this
sinful affectation of the tree of knowledge, in another, now I tell them, I
had rather hear others, then my self; and Fateor me ignorare, I know that I
know not, anon. Say I am that I am has sent me, says God to Moses; or, if thy
curiosity desire more, know it is beyond thy reach, do not venture thy wings
about this flame; as my name is secret, so is my nature infinite, thou can
not know, that thou can not; for I am that I am, no matter to thee, Exodus
3.14. Credo quia impossible, says Tertull. I believe it is so, because it is
impossible it should be so; and learn by reading to speak more timerously,
but not more understandingly of God. For the Lutheran Churches have better
preserved the honor of the Altar by the generality of their Con, then the
Roman by the particularity of their Trans; Kech. syst. Theolog.
although i will justify neither; and that Systematist, in his demonstration of
the Trinity, by making it so easy, has made some of his country perchance
believe there is none: nor is it alike profitable to the Church to deliver a
Rationale in matters of faith, as in matters of fact; Mat. 7.29.
to teach with authority, as our Savior did, is safest here; for he that
speaks thus, gives commands, but gives no reason of his commands, says it is
so, but says not why. This labor might be spared by such as write the truth
of religion, it being not the way to Christen infidells, out to make infidells
of Christians: for in things of this nature, Piscatoribus credo, non
dialecticis, they are the object of my faith, because incompetible with my
reason. I was not won by the sages of Athens, but by the refuse of Jury, not
convinced by a Philosopher, but caught by a Fisher.

Nor is this for want of light in God, but for want of sight in us; and
therefore as he is called the Father of lights in one Apostle; so is he said
to dwell in that light, which no man can approache unto in another. The
darkness is under his feet below, Ia. 1.17. Io. 1.5. 1. Tim. 6.16. 2. Esd.
4. Io. 6.46.
not about his throne above; when it is midnight in respect of us, it is no one in
respect of him* while that gloominesse is about him, brightness at the same
time is before him, Psalm. 18.9.11.12. So that as the Sun is never the less
visible, though my weakness dare not look on it; for though I cannot, the
Eagle can. Or as the earth is naturally moveable, although it never moved yet.
God laid not the foundations thereof that it should not be moveable, but that
it should not move, says the Psalmist: and therefore Archimedes thought he had
Art enough to do it, could he find a place for his Engine: that wanted not
possibility to suffer, but he wanted ability to act it. So are these mysteries
visible, though not seen, comprehensible though not understood. The default is
not in the object, but in the intellect, nor for want of light, but of eyes.
For, as it is impossible to sound the sea with my bandstring, or measure the
world with an Ell; because whatsoever measures, must be equal to that which
is measured; or, to come nearer, as my eye has a sphere of actiuity, sees at
once, but thus far, and no farther: and my ear has a sphere of actiuity,
hears some founds at once, and no more: and my touch has a sphere of
actiuity, feels some objects now, and no other; and my taste has a sphere of
actiuity, can distinguish this, at this time, and not that: and my smell has a
sphere of actiuity, receives but single odours at this instant, cannot (with
distinction) receive several; there being limits defined, to every sense,
beyond which they cannot work: every one receiving objects, and species,
according to the proportion of their nature and condition. In like manner, my
understanding being of a finite, and determinate capacity, can receive no
imagination or idea but what is finite and determinate, and therefore is of too
narrow a size, or bore to comprehend the secrets, and infinitude of God. I am
the Sun of righteousness, says God; Mat. 4.2.
and our God is a consuming fire, says the Apostle. Heb. 12.29.
I am permitted to know (...), the hinder parts of God, in the heaven and
earth, the volumes of his creatures; which therefore, at the last day, shall
be gathered together as a scrowle, because I shall then see him as he is, face
to face. I may enjoy the light, while I look obliquely on the Sun, and
securely become warm, at a competent distance from the fire; but if I pry into
the mysteries of the Trinity, if I fathom the abyss of his judgments, if I
thrust away the hand that covers my eyes, if I desire to out face the one, or
enter into the other, I am instantly blind, or burnt, because it is too
vehement an intelligible for my understanding: I can see something, when I
look on inferior objects, where is nothing but darkness, but when I look on
this, where is nothing but light, I see nothing: there being a greater luster
in God, then can, without death, be comprehended by man; Exodus 33.20.21.
as the eye of a needle admits a thread, but is splitten with a wyar.

O the height, and the depth; the maze, and riddle of this ineffable God! What
Vatican, what Library of the world has a key for this lock? This
incomprehensible infinitude is above the pitch of my flesh, because this
incomprehensible infinitude is my incomprehensible God; for whatsoever is his,
is he: and what respect then is great enough for him, that is greater then I
can think? Or why should I repine to seek God here, whom I can never
sufficiently find, or vilify that glory with my tongue, which is too large for
my understanding? their zeal was too impudent that said, show us the Father,
and it suffices us; and therefore I only say, show me but a glimpse, but a
twilight of the Father, and it suffices me: the least dawning of that vision
is as much as I am capable of, and infinitely enough to bless and ravish me;
a minute of thee is worth a million of ages in all the Courtship, and bravery
of the World.

Again, thou wast, o Lord, in nubibus, under the Law; Exodus 14.24. c. 19.16.
c. 33.10. c. 4.33. c. 16.2.13. Number. 4.19.20. c. 9.16. c. 11.25. c. 16.43. Deuteronomy.
31.15.
and appearedst oftener in dreams then visions, and why should I then dream of
visions, under the Gospel? Where thou intendest night, why should I look for
noone? Why should I long to see, what the Cherubins saw not, which covered
their faces, and opened their mouths at once; were hoodwinkt, while they
honored thee, Esa. 6.1.2.3. Thou have told me by Arnobius, vt intelligaris,
tacendum est, L. 1. p. 28.
that the greatest knowledge of thee is a confession. I cannot know thee: as he
commends a beauty more, that says he cannot, then he that labors to express
it, because this thinks he can: and thou have told me by S. Hilarie: non tam
veniam habet quam praemium ignorare quod credas, De Trin. l. 8.
quia maximum stipendium fidei est, sperare quae nescias: my bodily eyes shall
hereafter see those joys, that eye has not seen, because my spiritual eyes
perceive those mysteries here, they cannot see: and thou have told me, by S.
Aug. non negandum est, quod apertu^ est quia co^prehendi non potest, quod
occultu^ est, De bon. perseu: c. 14.
know this, corruptible shall put on incorruption, though o Lord God thou
know, I know not how: and thou have told me by S. Greg. ibi praecipue fides
habet meritum, vbi humana ratio non praebet experimentum, that the Laver of
Regeneration makes me not a Rational man, but a faithful for thou art a God
as well of the valleys, as of the hills, Confidera quod voceris fidelis, non
rationalis: denique accepto baptismo hoc dicimus, fidelis factus sum, credo
quod nescio Aug. Ser. 189. de temp. Esa. 7.9.
and entertainedst the Sheapheards as kindly as the Magi, of the East: and thou
have told me this by Esaiah, nisi credideritis, no^ intelligetis: that I must
believe, before I understand, though I understand that I cannot know thee, and
thou, have told me this by the meanest of thy creatures, by the spider: I see
this screw himself up by a thread which I cannot see; and I wonder how so many
else of bread, so much tiffany should be piled up in so little a shop, that
this miracle of nature should spin courtaines for a large window, out of a
bottom no bigger then a pins head: and thou have told me this by the vilest of
thy creatures, by my self: it is beyond my guess to say, how joy dilates my
heart, how sorrow contracts it: how pride swells, and envy wastes me; by what
way I remember or dream; how fear should infect my cheeks with palenesse,
and shame should dye them with red: and seeing I understand not what I see, how
shall I think to see, what I cannot understand? Thou art, o God, a center
without a circumference, and a line without an extremity, and a breadth without
bounds, and a depth without bottom, and an original which cannot be coppied,
and a beauty which cannot be drawn, and a way which is not known, and a light
which is not seen. He that sets me upon a farther discovery, may as well
advise me to ram the earth into a musket, or empt the sea into a violl, or
weight he fire, or measure the wind, or recall a day that is gone as the Angel
bad Esdras; to enclose the world in my hand, or comprehend the Heavens with my
span. It may suffice that this God is a light, and because so great a light,
therefore of us not seen: that this darkness is no darkness to him, because
he understands, what we cannot: that he hates not the modesty of ignorance, but
the tympany of knowledge; and, although there be no darkness in him, he may
be in it; the condition of this limitation, and my last general.

5 God was especially with Moses, here which is essentially every where, as my
soul is diffused through every fraction of my body, which yet principally
resides in my heart: and what an honor was it for the Priest to be company for
God? That presence consecrated this cloud, and this consecration caused that
reverentiall distance, that supple adoration of the people: for as the chair
of State, and court is, where is the King; so where God is, there is a
Propitiatory, and an Altar. We are therefore no more idolatrous by our
prostration toward the table of the Lord, then the Jews were by theirs
toward the Tabernacle of the Lord; toward the cloud in the desert here, or
the mercy seat in the Temple, because we do it (...); not (...), as that
Constantinopolitane Council speaks upon another occasion, to God, which is
there, not to a similitude of God, which is not there; and our faith points at
Heaven, while our eyes are fixed on the Altar: nor know I any which applaude
that base, damnable metaphor, that resemblance of this to a dresser, but such
as stumble in a level, not because the rode of the Church is uneven, I. P.
but because their discretion is lame; such as would feign slay their beasts,
and set on their crocks again, in the courts of the Lord, as the Jews once
did; or lay their Savior in a cratch, by translating his Chapels into stables.

2 God was in a cloud and in a shower; mists and thunderings and tempests there
were, Heb. 12.18. c. 19.16.
and seldom these without rain* for ever since the spirit of God moved on
those waters, the spirit of God has been moved by these waters. because the
Lord forgives my transgressions, by blotting them out, says the Prophet; what
my impenitency has written being wiped out by my tears: and is then most
affected with the wounds of my soul, when they bleed at my eyes: but Lord,
what Libertines are we grown to the severity of elder times? five years
penance for consulting witches; seven years for adultery; ten years for
voluntary abortion; twenty years for some offenses, in the Ancyrane counsel,
c. 19.20.23. con. Nic. c. 12.
during life for others: and it is to be feared, we are out, if they were in;
for why should it be thought such a prodigy to see man in a dew, when God was
so often in a cloud?

c. 19.9.18. Heb. 12.18.
3. God was in a shower, and in a fire: in a fire, to show he can be enflamed;
and in a shower to show this flame may be quenched; in a fire against
presumption, and in a shower against despair: for he never inflicts a wound,
before he provides a remedy; draws not a sword, which he rebates not first;
proclaims not war, before he profers conditions of peace: and is therefore
usually deciphered in Scripture by his justice and his mercy together; nor
mean I to divorce those attributes the Holy Ghost has married, by making him
all mercy to my self, 1. Cor. 3.9. Romans 15.26.
all justice to others: every hearer is a building, and every teacher is a
builder, says the Holy Ghost: and he shall meddle with no house of mine, that
throws down my walls because they want pointing; that cannot repair, Exodus
4.3.4.
and mend, unless he ruin, and destroy: for I can with Moses endure a rod,
though I flee from a Serpent. God was in a fire and in a darkness; to show, c.
19.18. c. 20.18. Heb. 12.18. Dan. 3.49. Secund. vulg. ed Io. 10.22.
that as there was a fire without heat, so there may be a fire without light:
and such is the fire of that Land of darkness, ignis sine luce fluvius, a
darkness wherein they shall see nothing that can comfort; and yet wherein they
shall see any thing that may torment them: God coming here at the giving of
the Law, as he will come against the transgressors of the Law, in flames to
punish, but no light to refresh them, so that vision in Bid, so our Savior
shows: L. 3. c. 19.
go ye cursed into outer darkness, Math. 8.12. and yet go ye cursed into
everlasting fire too, in the five and twentieth of that Gospel, at the one and
fortieth verse.

5 God was in a darkness and a thick darkness too: demanding thereby what a
madness it is, from that omniscient God, which is in the thickest darkness to
hide in the dark; or present this sinful flesh in the arreare of plushes, and
tishues; for impotent man to embroider, and bespangle himself with the orient
brightness of firmament, and stars, whereas that omnipotent God was
apparelled with the gloominesse of a cloud. Shall the creature arrogate more
glory then the Creator; or this shadow, then that Sun? Must I that am all
vileness expose the luxury of my pride to the ostentation of a public view,
and my God, that is all glory, hide in a shade? Must the Lord of light bury
himself in darkness? And these sons of darkness sparkle in the light?
shall earth be so high, and Heaven so low? Let me rather be like my God that
commanded out of darkness, on mount Sina here: and my Savior, that concealed
his glory under darkness, on mount Olivet there: Mat. 16.6.
the higher I am, the less may my shadow be. Let me never confute my humble
penitential Sermon by my proud vaineglorious Cassocke, nor attend my Lord, by
being dislike my God: let my oraisons be without noise in the dark; and my
dominion without imperiousness, in the dark: and my goodness without
proclamation in the dark; and my charity without vaineglory, in the dark: and
my honor, without bravery, in the dark; and my retinue, without prodigality
in the dark; let this darkness disguise my light here, as it did his; that
this darkness may raise me to light hereafter, as it did him (for a cloud,
says the Evangelist, Act. 1.9.
received him out of their sight) let me creep on earth, that I may clime to
Heaven. Whether the Father of Mercies bring us all, for the merits of his
Son: to whom with the blessed spirit, be ascribed all honor, and praise,
dominion, and power, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
1. COR. 1.12. Now that I say, that every one of you says, I am of Paul, and I
of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ.


HOW little have the best to glory in, which are bad enough to abuse the
chiefest blessings? or what confidence is it, to purchase heaven by our selves,
which are hardly drawn thither by the labors of others; which make the
readiest means of our salvation, the greatest hinderance from it, and pretend
such as exhort us to peace, for the authors of a schism? It Is the disease of
our times, and it was Corinths too, an inveterate malady, and therefore the
more incurable. She fell asunder into as many divisions as her Church had
teachers (happy lights in conjunction, but in opposition most dangerous)
wherein every faction sails by a several card, and is carried by a peculiar
bias. Praefat. de gubern.
This side admires Paul's plains, and mistrusts Apollos structures for the
gaudy varnish, non lenocinia volumus, sed remedia, as Salvian speaks; they
desire the cure, nothing to sweeten their physic: and could wish Apollo were
confined to the deske, Paul to the temple. Another magnifies the powerful
eloquence of Apollo, sleighting St Paul, as too flat and heavy, Caiet. and
Musculus think these entitled Ct. to their faction.
nor can any thing charm this evil spirit, but the spells of Apolloes
rhetorique, a third is taken with S. Peter's keys, and because he is called a
rock, supposes all the rest laid their foundation on the Sand: and a fourth
likes none, their sublimated judgment thinks meanly of Paul, because he
persecuted Christ; and of Peter, because he denied him, their faith shall not
shipwreck on that rock, nor their souls be committed to Cephas keys. The
cunning disputes of Gamaliels scholar shall not sway them, nor the commanding
strains of the Alexandrian orator; Christ only redeemed, and therefore no
reason, any else should dispose them. May others miscall themselves, as they
list, these will be nothing but christians. Well resolved, were ye as
charitable as wise; did ye love your brother with your Savior, did ye not
entitle Christ to your faction, and hazard your interest in the head, by
disioynting your selves from the members. It Is well ye think Christ your own,
but ill ye think, he belongs to none besides you: for he that says, I am of
Christ, divides himself, as well as he that says, I am of Paul, and I of
Apollo, in the next verse of this chapter. This was Corinths distemper, and
until it be cured, the Apostle can proceed no farther: greater mysteries
were to be imparted, had not these divisions disabled them to hear. For then
the contentious man none says more or understands less: and contentious they
were, their business and employment now being little else. It Is no private
jealousy of his own, Chloes family says so, nay themselves say so, and
therefore he says so too. Now this I say, that every one of you says, etc. My
Apostle charge Corinth with a schism, wherein he discovers.

1 The pretended leaders. Paul, Apollo, Cephas, and Christ.

2 The parties, some Paul's disciples, others Apolloes: a third multitude
appropriated to Cephas, and a fourth to Christ.

3 The cause, this was the issue of contention v. 11. and contention the spawne
of the flesh. Gal. 5.20. for while they are so, they are nothing but carnal:
in the third of this epistle, at the fourth verse ambition, or gain, or pride,
or envy overruled their wills, and misguided them into factions: sensual they
are and such are their actions.

1 I begin with the pretended leaders of this Schism; Paul, Apollo, Cephas,
and Christ.

It has ever bin the policy of Satan to gild schisms, and heresies with the
names of specious leaders, intressing the learnedest and best of the Church, in
the worst opinions, and desperatest factions; as men do great persons in
broken titles, that being unable to bear a trial in themselves, they might
receive esteem, from the credit of their Patrons, this was the cheat which
gulled Corinth: a Church enriched with the grace and knowledge of Christ,
settled and confirmed in the same. v. 4.5.6. unlikely to miscarry, unless by
that fondness and dotage on her Pastors. Men they were of extraordinary worth,
and greatest eminency in the Church. Paul for his learning, his zeal, the
multitude of his sufferings, his miraculous conversion, his heavenly rapture,
where he saw that he could not speak. He, out of an humble modesty,
acknowledges himself the least of the Apostles, and yet, believe but his own
relation, and you must confess him the greatest Apollo for his sanctified
rhetorique, eloquent, mighty in the Scriptures: for his fiery devotion, fervent
in spirit: for his unwearied industry, he taught the way of the Lord
diligently: for his powerful disputations, he mightily convinced the Jews.
Act. 18.24.25.28. Cephat deservedly styled princeps Apostolorum, as Catalog.
Script.
Saint Jerome, or (...), as Saint Chrysostom. calls him; the primate and chief
of the Apostles: either for the privilege of his age, or the liberty of his
speech, or the honors conferred upon him by our Savior, his individual
companion in raising the dead, his transfiguration on the mount, his last
vigils in the garden; his speeches ever directed to him, as a person
representing the rest, his favorite, and darling. So that, if the Devil
entitle these to a division, he cannot want proselites: the grossest error
will pass, if their seal be on it, for it is impossible hypocrisy should
lodge with so much zeal, or deceit with such knowledge and illumination. Each
man thinks his own opinions canonical, because his supposed leader is so,
nor can he endanger his faith, while he steeres by such a star: he is first
persuaded of the truth of his leader, then of his own understanding, and
lastly his respect to this makes him undervalue the rest, because he thinks
none can speak so truly, or so powerfully, or so profoundly, or so eloquently
as the other. For faction disorders a man as love does, where affection is not
ruled by judgment, but judgment by affection, nor is the person loved because
worthy, but seems worthy because beloved: the eye is jealous of one only, and
therefore the man esteems none fair besides. There had then been danger
enough, had the Schism been led by Paul, Apollo, and Cephas: but if Christ
himself be made a party, if the son of God seem a patron to either, What
frozen heart will not thaw at this Sun? What patient cowardice can moderate the
tongue, or the hand? no marvel Corinth is divided, 'twere apostasy to be
otherwise; for how should I forsake Christ, and not renounce my Savior? Nor
has this project been confined to S. Paul's time, or to Corinth, but has
gained abetters in all ages: some divisions in the Church laying claim to
Cephas, others to Paul, a third sort dispersing their errors under Apolloes
name, all under Christ. (...) as Naz. Orat. 14. p. 221. Paris 1609.
speaks of the Novatians: ensnaring their auditors by the fame of their
patrons, and venting their ridiculous fancies as Presses do their pamphlets,
under the counterfeit name of some reverenced author, or by a leaf of title to
scarce a line of sense. Thus did Novatus cover his ambition by the repute of
his followers, and obtained credit to his own dreams from their piety and
learning. He knew his poisonous errors could not purchase admission, while
they appeared in their natural attire, and therefore it was his subtlety to
present them to the world, Hist eccles. l. 6. c. 43. graec. ed. Paris? 1544.
not as his own inventions, but clothed with the names, and patronage of his
associates: for, if it be thought to come from thence, an English blade may
sell as dear, as another of spain: he had in his retinue, as Eusebius
relates, Maximus a learned and religious Presbyter: he had vrbanus, (...): one
that twice grew into the esteem of the Church by a free confession of his
faith, and bad fair for martyrdom: he had Sidonius, and Celerinus: both of
especial note, but the last of the greatest: a man (...) (...): that fulfilled
in his body the passions of his Savior; and to obtain the mercy of God,
showed no mercy on himself: that wore in his flesh the marks of the Lord
Jesus, and might count his years by his martyrdomes. (...), as the same author
goes on: that strengthened the weakness of his flesh, by the valor of his
faith, and endured torments with such scornful patience, (...): as if he had
no body at all, or none of his own. Naz. orat. cont. Iul. p. 36. ed. Eton. of
the primitive, martyrs.
Novatus therefore may disguise the most divelish project under such
seraphicall doctors as those. For it is unlikely God would reform the will, and
leave the intellect irregular, that he would loose their fetters and not open
their eyes; that those which sufferd so much for the truth should perish in an
error, or could walk so well, without the benefit of light? The rebels Number.
16.2. the Arrians sozom. l. 3. c. 18. graec. Par. 1544.
it would be easy to deduce this truth through every age of the Church, were it
not so visible in our own. For Novatus is yet alive, and although he has no
confessors in his retinue, professors he has many; men of mean parts, and
yet of mighty gifts, such as are not watered by the foot as Egypt was, but as
Canaan with a dew from Heaven. no Schismatic fancy shall want a S. Peter, or
a S. John to own it, nor can you dissent from this, but you err from the holy
Ghost, which spoke by S. Paul or Esaiah. They hate those Micaiahs of elder
times, because they speak no good of them, but evil, nor can you hear a
discourse, but you may know who ownes it, by the rebaptization of Cyp. or the
Montanisme of Tertullian. Scripture shall be the rule, and only they
interpreters: for it is not canonical, though it has the stamp of the Church,
unless it has theirs besides; and so become themselves that infallible
Antichrist they declaime so much against, and are, upon the point, both the old
Testament, and the new: thus do they expose their fondness under a
counterfeit veil of the spirit, as courser beauties draw the beholders from
their deformities, by the sumptuous art of their dressing, that the face might
be lost by gazing on the cloths: (...). Naz. orat. 14. p. 216.
They paint out their ignorance with a tedious catalogue of abused authorities,
and cover mischiefs with religion: the wolf must be concealed under a Lambs
fleece, and their foul errors perfumed with the Myrrh, and cassia of holy
writ no^ios succos medicaminum vocabulis praecolorant: as Lirinensis speaks,
they disperse their poisons under the name of medicines, for who can think
that a druggist would write conserues over a box of ratsbane, or rosewater over
Mercury? opinions usually gaining credit, according to the esteem of such, as
countenance or deliver them: as a man receives gold without enquiry from his
acquaintance, but has weights and a touchstone for a stranger, you see how the
worst of the Church, have strengthened themselves by pretending to the best; do
thus, and thou shall encourage truth, yet give no advantage to error.

Let thy industry and care enable thee to give example, and credit thy
profession: leave no doubt vnassailed; and, as Jacob, wrestle with God in thy
prayers, that thou may understand him in his Scriptures. Fear not those
sons of Anak, those Giganticke writers of elder and later times; nor be
content with learning, which only supplies for sermons: like wild oats, the
fruit whereof serves only for the next years seeds, falling into the earth,
before the corn is brought into the barn: thus says the Lord, stand in the
ways, and see and ask for the old paths, and walk therein, and ye shall
find rest for your souls: so that as it was once an omen, or sign of victory
in the * Chronicles when ye hear a noise in the tops of the trees, 1 Paralip.
14.15. 2 Samuel 5.24.
go on with confidence, for God is gone before you: in like manner here, the
voice of God must be our compass, and the voice of God in the tops of the
trees too, in the heavenlier, and higher, and purer ages of the Church. Because
to say I say so, every heretic ever did; but to say the Church ever said so,
so did every true member of the Church. Scripture must be the rule, but
antiquity the applyer of this rule; Scripture the Law, but antiquity the
expositor; he that goes another way, goes out of the way: cite the words of
God he may, the word of God he cannot; find mazes he shall, truths he shall
not: there is no rest to him that follows his own phansies in expounding
this; there is rest to those, which follow the traces of the Church; with the
Church there is, against the Church there is not Ier. 6.16.

Again, let thy life keep pace with thy industry, and show thou enioynest not
impossibilities, by acting what thou command. Do not prostitute the Church
by thy lewd example, which should be presented as a pure virgin to Christ, thy
life being a contradiction of thy doctrine, and the whole week a confutation
of the Sunday. It Is one of the reasons Lactantius gives, De ver. sap. l. 4. c.
24.
why Christ assumed humane flesh; and it may be the reason too, why, in the
government of his Church, he rather used the ministry of men then of Angels;
that they might perfect their doctrine by their practice, that all might know
their precepts were feasible, by seeing them done, and they intended obedience,
since they taught it by their own examples: for who will think, that
Physician can cure a disease in another, which is always sick of the same?

Lastly, carry thy self so warily, that no side may claim thee but thy own;
or, if any shall, thou may free thy conscience, by the blamelesnesse of thy
conversation, thanking God with S. Paul at the fourteenth verse of this
chapter, that, although some of Corinth pretend thee for their leader, thou
have given them no occasion. Leave Novatus to the censure of the world, with
Vrbanus and Celerinus, as soon as thou perceivest the Church misguided by thy
example, redeeming with them thy former injury, by thy future repentance and
carfulness. Do not enhance the repute of a faction, by setting on it the
price of thy own worth, nor encourage a peevish Schismatique by christning his
babe without the cross or the Surplesse: if they say lo here is Christ, in the
plausible disputes of one division; or lo there, in the zealous phrensy of
another: behold he is in the secret chambers, in the uncharitable Conventicles
of the Puritan; or behold in the desert, in the wild multitudes of
Separatists; believe it not: for he is the God of peace; and, as his garment
was, one, and undivided. Let them honor God with the rest, or honor him alone
without thy protection: mark such as make contentions, and avoid them:
beseech them, with S. Paul, that they nourish them not; or, if they do,
protest against them: tell them how heinous they are in themselves; of what
dangerous consequence; how near that Church is to ruin; upon how weak
grounds that commonwealth relies, in which every one says, I am of Paul, and I
of Apollo, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ: the parties in this Schism, and
my second general.

The Church of Corinth lately but one, II.
is multiplied now into several factions, as formerly the west, some adhering
to his holiness at Rome, and others to a second at Avignion. Judge of the
danger by the Apostles gradation, in the third chapter, at the third verse
(...): this dissension about their pastors hatched contentions in secular
affairs: their contentions settled into malice, and their malice is dissolved
again by a devout and impetuous envy; this envy makes them impatient one of
the other, driving every side upon a peculiar bottom; they all fight for the
truth, and yet one against the other. Nor is this division private, but
professed, and that with a contempt of the adverse parties, they live no longer
in common, but in several, every one says I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and
I of Cephas, and I of Christ: a monstrous distemper any where, especially at
Corinth, sanctified she was v. 2. confirmed in Christ, v. 6. called into the
fellowship of his son, v. 9. what, sanctified, and yet profane? partaker of
the holy and the unholy Ghost? in, and against Christ? together, and asunder?
in a communion, and a division? you that are thus, to be so? yes, for it is the
nature of Schism to make a discontinuation of parts, to cause a resolution in
the body of the Church, and therefore the nature of Schism is contrary to the
nature of God.

1 As he is the measure of perfection, which consists in unity; and therefore
those creatures which come nearest to him, are more changed into his nature,
more simple, and one; and on the contrary, then are they at greatest opposition
with this essential unity, and life, when they become less one, and tend to
privation: for this reason are the Angels of a nearer alliance with God,
because more simple and one, not only in their particular natures; but in the
general agreement of their wills: and man, because of a grosser composition,
of dissenting affections, less resembles God though he be styled his image;
and therefore is of lesser perfection. The militant Church then is most
pleasing to God, when it most resembles the triumphant, 1. Ioh. 4.8.16.
when it is perfect as this is perfect; that it is, when it is most united: for
therefore is he in Scriptures usually called peace and love, to show that the
speediest way to set thee at opposition with God, is to divide thee from thy
brother: this may be seen by a similitude; consider some rare piece of
extraordinary beauty, how leads it every beholder, while the parts are fitly
united? How does it command a general love? But mangled by some ruder hand,
and sliced into several pieces, how soon becomes it the object of our scorn
and pity? Every part mutually graceth each other, while they are lovingly
married, and pleases not more by his own goodness, then what it borrows.
The head is more comely for the silky fleece it bears; and the forehead
honored for the majesty of the brow. The brawny arms are adorned by well
proportioned hands, and the legs decently joined to suiteable feet: let the
Levites sword divorce these limbs, and divide the body but into twelve parts,
which is capable of as many hundreds: and where is the beauty which but now
enflamed so many Beniamites, the common ambition, and quarrel of a whole city?
Nor is it otherwise in the body mystical, and therefore S. Paul usually
expresses this by the other, as the Levites wife was, so is the Church united,
the fairest amongst women: as the Levites wife is, so is the Church divided;
and every part in a Schism rents a limb from this body: this division is more
ugly in the Allmighties sight, then the other is in thine; nor is it unseen of
thee for want of truth, but of eyes: the body is really mangled, and if thou
feel it not, thou art not of it, he that dwells in the beauty of holiness,
loathes this deformity, he detests a Church so unlike himself; and Christ is
departing, though blind Bartimeus cannot see it.

2 As he is the measure of goodness, which is as diffusiue as his presence,
not vertually only, as Vorstius blasphemes, Declar. Fran. Land. 1622. Spec.
contr. Belg. Lugd. Bat. 1618. art. 1. prop. 4.
but essentially every where: and his mercy not confined to the best creatures,
but extended to the worst, even his enemies. It Is his precept to us, love your
enemies; and the reason follows, that ye may be the children of your father
which is in heaven, Mat. 5.44.45. For this cause has he made every part of the
habitable world accessible: the Scythian may embrace the tawny Moors; and
Persia join hands with the western Indian: And has planted in the heart of
man a natural desire of communion, he is (...), as Aristotle speaks; of a
more sociable nature then the Ant or the Be: and a reason is there given by
the Philosopher, (...), God only enioyes all, and his desire is, that we, by
this commerce, might be like him. Wherefore he there opposes (...), the man
alone to the man perfected: understanding by the first, him that is divided
from, by the second him that is joined in a communion. While then thou nursest
hatred and envy in thy bosom, thou sweruest from his mercy and compassion.
While with Donatus, thou appropriatest him to some Africa of thine, thou
swervest from his diffusiue goodness, which shines every where: being besides,
injurious to thy self, and thy neighbor: to thy self, by refusing their
goodness; to thy neighbor, by not communicating thy own. He is perchance a
great Linguist, and has erected a Babel of languages, and then thou want a
tongue; or well seen in the Fathers and controversies, and then thou want
an eye. He is a valiant Ioshuah, and then thou want a hand; or a wise
Solomon, and then thou want a brain: please thy self therefore as thou will, as long as thou want so many limbs, thou art no better then a cripple.

3 As he is the measure of truth, which is essential to him, and is not his,
but he. An enemy this God is to falsehood, and error: nor to this only, but
even to that which occasions it, and this is Schism, envy, or faction
interposing, and by advantage of some dislike in the person, hindering the
intellect from assenting to the thing. S. Paul implies as much, I hear there
are dissentions amongst you, and I partly believe it, but why so credulous,
happy Apostle? For there must be heresies, c. 11.18.19. he knew there must be
heresies, and therefore believed, there might be Schisms. Those usually
making way for these, and these attending upon those, and he assumes the same
in the third chapter: told they are, the fault was theirs, why he taught them
not deeper mysteries: I have fed you with milk, and not with meat, because
ye were not able to bear it, v. 2. not able because carnal, and carnal
because contentious in the third verse of that chapter. So true is that of S.
John, he that hates his brother, walks in darkness, in the second of the
first Epistle; a darkness, that occasions stumbling v. 10. the disordred
intellectualls stumbling on the affections; A darkness, that leads us in a
maze (as willing to run any several way from our adversaries, but finding no
way) and a darkness that blindes the eyes, verse. 11. a mist coming betwixt
the understanding, and the object which keeps it out of sight. I would this
truth wanted examples, or that the needle in this compass always pointed
right: but, Lord, what variations are there, according to the several climats
we pass? How do we fall off, or gain the hill, according to a greater or a
lesser bias? (...): Naz. orat. 14. p. 216.
into what contradictions do our affections engage us? after a several sway
of love or hatred, how do the poorest toys oppress us? how heavy are motes?
And presently anon, how light are beams? how is the same fact compared to
HeZechias or Nehemiahs repair of the Temple, if this man does it: to Ieroboams
golden calves, or Ahaz brazen Altar, if enterprised by another? Thus does the
distance or neerenesse of our affections occasion the same in the judgment,
which the remotenes or approximation of an object does in the sense: when this
is within a convenient proportion, it is seen in its just magnitude, as it is:
when farther of, in a lesser, as it is not; the distance of place deluding our
sight: So are we cheated by our passions, and judge not alike of the same, when
we are enemies and friends.

Nor is this only in opposition to God, because contrary to his nature, but
because it hinders the progress of his Church. The best way to choke the
corn, being with the enemy in the Gospel, to sever it by dispersing such
tares. It has ever been the wiliness of Satan, first to divide the Church,
and then to assault her single, as the last of the Horatij dealt with the two
Curatij in the Addito ad virtutem dolo vt distraheret hoste^, simulat fugam,
singulosque (prout sequi poterant) adortus exuperat, Flor. l. 1. c. 3.
Roman story: because, if the adversary be opposed by some, the conquest is
easier against a hundred, then against a thousand: and usually in such
divisions, the common enemy is neglected, our tongues and pens being worse
bestowed at home: S. Paul's metaphor well expresses as much, I beseech you
brethren, (...), that ye be set again, in the tenth verse of this chapter; for
(...) signifies properly to set a bone that is out of joint, reducing the same
to its natural place. Factions and Schisms disjoynting the parts of the
mystical body, and as luxation does in the natural, disabling them from other
actions, then such as wrong and grieve it. The Apostle calls these Corinthians
the temple of God; one, not many: and (...) too, not (...), no Church but a
Temple; showing what this must be, by what the other was, that being built
without noise, to teach what most furthers the edification of this; neither the
hammer of one faction, nor the axe and block of another, but the spirit of
meeknes in the bond of peace: she is terrible to her opposers, but while she
is like an army with banners, in the Canticles; if rou^^d once by Schisms, if
distracted into factions, if the enemy has seized on her ensigns and colors,
how soon is the glory departed from Israel, and the Ark of God taken? For you
know how slowly the building went on, when those poor remains of the
captivity were forced to build with one hand, and defend with the other.

And as it hinders the progress of his Church by dividing her forces, so by
laying a scandal upon her professors. For either such as are without, are
indifferent; and then they are deterd from our communion by our dissentions.
For why should I believe the direction of either, seeing they point several
ways, the surest course to detect a falsehood, being to discover a
contradiction in the relators: and if the peaceful be only the children of
God, what madness is it to join hands with such sons of Belial? Or else
they are resolved of a different religion, and then (...), they excuse a
calenture by an ague; Naz. orat. 13. p. 206.
nor are they encouraged so much by their own strengths, as the weakness of
their adversaries: their hands seldom joining, whose hearts are divided, and
ruin being the issue of Schism. It Is so in other bodies (...), Naz. orat. 12.
p. 198.
every part of the world subsisting by a peaceable temper, and dissoluing by
the contrary. Nay farther; (...), Ibid.
the Deity is therefore eternal, because subject to no division; and the
ambition of those apostate Angels no sooner distinguished them from the rest,
but it excluded them from heaven: as long as the humors in our body are at a
fair agreement, choler being proportionably allaid with fleame, and the
sprightfull blood ballast with melancholy, the whole is preserved by the
harmony of its parts. Strain this to a higher, or set it to a lower key; add
more weights to the scale; and the foot of the balance goes up, the tongue
goes down: the strong men bow them selves, and the grinders cease: either it
is parched by the raging fire of a tormenting fever, or shiverd and torn by
the violent wind of an insufferable cholique; or misshapen and rackt by the
earthquake of a prodigious convulsion: and anon the Lord comes in a still
voice, what do thou here Eliah? Set thy house in order for thou must dye and
not live. It Is so in the Church, for yea are the body of Christ and members in
particular, in the twelfe of this epistle, at the 27. verse. Know therefore
that Satan assaults not this body, while it is healthy and strong, (...), Naz.
orat. 14. p. 218.
as long as the parts are nearly compacted and condensated by charity: but
like a wily enemy, takes advantage by some dangerous breach, and enters through
the disbanded troops of our armies: nor stays this evil here, but ascends
from a neglect of the rochet, to a contempt of the Scepter; and a Schism
against the Church, Math. 12.25.
leads usually to a disturbance of the state. Such popular tribunitiall
Midianites having their swords oftener drawn against themselves, then a
public enemy: because they think their souls engaged in one quarrel, only
their fortunes in the other: here they fight in Gods cause, there in their
own: and he that draws for religion, strikes with a rasor, the other thrusts
with a foil: nor does the battle ever proceed with greater cruelty, then
when it is fought by the sword of the Lord, and of Gedeon.

That therefore this may ever stand may it never be divided. Let the Priests
mouth never want a prayer for the safety of the King, This consideration made
Constantine so careful to compose differences in the Church, as himself
witnesses, in his letter to Alexander and Arrius; (...). Eusebius. de vit.
Constant. fol. 134. See how he labored for peace by the conclusion of that
Epistle. (...).
nor the Kings hand a sword for the defense of the Priest. When David sends an
embassy, with peace be to thee, and peace be to thy house, and peace be to all
that thou have; let no churlish discontented Nabal requite him with a scorn,
who is David, and who is the son of Iesse? Let the meanest enrich the
Kingdoms treasury by a mite, and the rest weary the receivers with these
sacred jewels devoted to the maintenance of Church and state. Let them
consecrate to the building of the Tabernacle, until the Magistrates command
restrain them; and before Moses proclaim, let not Israel leave offering. If
any unquiet Sheba tempt thee to a Schism, ere thou consentest, weigh what it
is; think how it deformes the Church; how it sterues the members by hindering
their commerce; how it clouds the understanding, in the disquisition of the
truth: and what likelihood is there, that the Son of God will espouse such
deformity, that the God of mercy will lodge with envy, or essential truth with
error? Think again how he detests Schism by his longing for peace. God the
Father will have but one Altar at Jerusalem, to show that such as sacrificed
there, must be of one mind: and our Savior shows himself the Son of God
the Father, it was the Herald of his birth, and the blessed antheme of that
quire of Angels Luc. 2.14. his baptism was a doctrine of this, when the holy
Ghost descended on him in the form of a Dove, an emblem of mildness and
peace: his carriage to the Apostles taught them to be one, speaking usually to
one for the rest, and singling forth Peter, when his message concerned the
twelve. It was his affectionate prayer for them: holy Father keep through thy
own name, those whom thou have given me, that they may be one as we are one,
Ioh. 17.11. but how is the Trinity one? Orat. 12. page 198.
(...), as Naz. explaines it, as well in respect of agreement as essence: it
was the legacy he bequeathed them in the fourteenth of S. John. v. 27. his
salutation after his resurrection, in the twentieth of that Gospel, v. 21.26.
and S. Paul's in the beginning of most his Epistles: as if this were the badge of
his inspiration, and none were Canonical, but such as contained a prayer for
peace. Think again that thy goodness is sinful, if sowred with this leaven,
and thy prayers turned into sin: thy sighs, nor thy tears regarded; thy
oraisons must not profane his temple, nor his Altar be guilty of thy sacrifice,
Math. 5.23. though thou have tired thy enemies cruelty with thy patience and
sealed thy profession with thy blood: though thou have given thy body to be
burnt as S. Paul speaks, 1 Cor. 13.3.
and each element has shared in thy ashes: occidi potes, De simpile. praelat.
coronari non potes, says Cyp. die thou may, thou can not be crowned, for
thy death is an execution, no Martyrdom. Think again how he lothes, what he
so severely punished; and because it suffered a greater vengeance, whether it
may not be a greater sin, then Idolatry, or sacrilege. The greatest
idolatry of Israel was rewarded but with the sword, Exodus 32. and Achans
sacrilege but with stoning, Ios. 7. and yet mandata est terrae fames in populi
divisores, L. 1. p. 26. ed. Lugd. Bat. 1613. Numb. 16.30.
says Optatus; the Lord made a new thing, as Moses speaks, and the earth,
which fed the peaceful, devoured the factious Israelites: They went down
quick into the grave, buried before dead, for being so unworthy to live, they
were hardly permitted to die. Think again what a scandal it is to those
without, what a hindrance to those within, how it keeps many from us, opens
the mouths of many against us, weakens the hands of such as remain with us,
encourages some to leave us, and woe to the man by whom offenses come, Mat.
11.7. neither the strictness of his fasts, nor the example of his actions, nor
the ardor of his prayers, his continual labors in the Gospel, his sufferings
for the same, his whole life's penance cannot satisfy the Church for an hours
stay in a Schism. Think again, that those thou hate as enemies to God, are
still his children; that all are thy brethren which can say our Father: that
both point to Heaven; though a several way: that the difference of many is not
in the foundation, but some subtleties of the Schools, some unnecessary
superstructions; nay not so much perchance, but a mere (...), contrariorum
verborum non discors sententia, as 1. Sent. d. 11. q. 1.
Scotus censures the difference betwixt the Eastern and the Western Churches,
a concent of opinions in contrary terms; (...), as Constantine speaks in
Eusebius, Of the Arrians de vit. Constable. 2. fol. 134. ed. citat. (...), the
dissension being (...). ib. (...). Fol. 135. (...). ib.
an idle wrangling, and a controversy in words: or, if of greater danger,
though thou only truly honor God, because thou truly believe, the other
thinks he does so. It Is error in him, no irreligion; and an error too, non
odio Dei, sed affectu, as De Guber. l. 5. p. 162. 163. ed. Actorfii 1611
Salvians charity pittieth the Arrians: he loves God, though he misbelieues,
and erres, least he should dishonor him. Leave him not therefore, until God
has left him; and this thou can not know until the day of judgment, the
event whereof none knows besides the Judge. While the Church is calm,
disquiet her not; when it is tempestuous, awake thy Savior, that his power may
appease those winds which trouble her: As long as Jerusalem is at peace in her
self, may every hand brandish a sword, every heart sigh out a prayer to
maintain it! may peace be the study, which in our Liturgy is the petition of
all! Though factions disvnite other Churches, may this be (...), as Naz.
speaks of his, without the least seame of division, as Noah's arc, safe in a
general deluge. May that peaceful wisdom, which S. James says, is from
heaven, possess the brestplate and the Ephod, no seditious Corah invade those
sacred ornaments, that seckes them only for the Bells, and the Pomegranats, to
satiate his ambition and avarice. When the Church is divided, and the worship
of God distracted betwixt Jerusalem and Bethel; sell all thou have to buy this
pearl, with that Merchant in the Gospel; thou can not purchase it at too
high a rate, nor pursue it with hear enough: Part. 1.
tanto zelo quaerenda est, vt vix possit esse sobria, as Gerson speaks. Thou
art not zealous in the prosecution of peace, while thou art sober. If some
violence has severed thee from the body, as plants wrested from their natural
place, return with greater violence, and, because unity has been once lost,
preserve it so, that it be lost no more. Naz. orat. 14. p. 215.
What a shame is it (...), that thieves and murderers should go more friendly
to hell, then Christians do to Heaven? Let it be the glory of others (...) to
divide themselves from their Savior, by their dissension from his Church, and
to belly each other in defense of the truth: but upon David, and upon his seed,
and upon his house, and upon his Throne, and upon his Church, may there be
peace for ever from the Lord: may righteousness and peace kiss each other, in
Church and State, all rowing the same, though they look several ways. If any
had rather be out of Charity with a whole Kingdom, then seen in a Cap or a
Surplesse; may the mildness of one side cure the madness of the other; and
though the Donatist will to Heaven alone, may every one pity, and say with
Optatus, that it is my brother Parmenian. Meddle not with such as are given to
change; for the Kings rode is the surest way: whereas other sneaking passages
are accustomed only to the feet of thieves, and murderers. Believe not rashly,
but try the spirits, whether they are of God, or of man, refined, or debased
still: Whether those which boast so much of the spirit, have not continually
some alloy of the flesh, wholly or parcel sanctified: Whether they believe in
God, or themselves; are regenerate fully or carnal: the cause of this Schism
and my last general.

Schisms are so far from God, that they have nothing of God in them; and if
the induction were not beyond an Auditories patience, 'twere easy to derive
all, from the concupiscible or irascible appetite, and resolve them either into
ambition, or avarice, or envy, or pride. Lean therefore to none, until thou
have examined their tempers, and consider what they are, before thou dotest on
what they say.

Io. 3.9.
1 For perchance first they love to be honored before the people, as Diotrephes
did; and like the Pharisees, measure their worth by their seat of praeeminence,
as fools do their bodies by their shadows: rapere malunt quam expectare,
Flor. l. 1. c. 7.
as the Historian speaks of the worst Tarquinius; they wait not the Angels
coming to stir the waters, but prevent it, and with Ahimaaz 2. Sam. 18. will
needs be sent, though they know not what to say. It Is not the cleanest way they
seek but the nearest, which therefore they maintain by worse courses then
they found it, men, seldom building well on such bad foundations, or improuing
ill purchased honors to the Churches good. And if ambition be their aim, why
may they not use this with Corah, Number. 16.
as a means to gain a Diocese, if not a Prelacy; and make them
Superintendents, though not Bishops: Or if not so, to requite the loss of that
which they were not to have, with Aerius in S. Aug. (...), as Eusebius. speaks of
Montanus, Ad quod vult. haer. 53. Hist. eclest. l. 5. c. 16.
out of an excessive ambition to disturb the peace of the Church, for missing
an honor in it, and because he cannot be a Prelate he will be an Arrian.

2 If not thus, possibly they are of a baser condition, and desire not honors
for their glory but their gain: It Is the wedge of Gold they long for, more
then the Babylonish garment, and so they enjoy the golden crown of the
Priesthood, could wish another had the Mitre. If this be their temper, thou
may justly distrust their Tenants: for what a servant will he be to another,
that is a slave to himself: (...), To. 6. orat. 105. p. 906.
as Chrysostom. speaks; a captive to his riches, and a prisoner to what he keeps.
there is no temptation more powerful then this, and therefore 'twas the
Devils last assault: for, if any promise can seduce our Savior, it is that of
the earths kingdom and glory: he is the son of God indeed, which for such a
gain will not cast himself, from the pinnacles of the Temple.

3 Perhaps they are sick of an envious (...), nor can their eyes bear any
luster in another: it is not so much the opinion they oppose, as their
corrivall: and because Alexander prevented him in a Bishopric, L. 1. c. 2.
(...), as Theodoret speaks, Arrius cannot stifle his envy, but will show how
weak his Lordship is by opposing his tenants; (...). Bas. Append. orat. 18.
Paris 1618.
venting his fury against the Bishop by accusing his innocent truths of
absurdity, and error; by calumniating his writings, as the Leopard shows his
natural hatred to man, by rending his image in paper. If so, suspend thy
judgment, for such envious malignants as these, square not their Creed by
their conscience, but their malice.

4 If none of the former, they may be of a too high spirited, and stately a
temper; and then, having possessed the world, with the conceit of their
abilities, they afterward study to defend, what formerly they delivered, Ad
Quod vult haer. 33.
and read not to maintain the truth, but their reputation. This was the cause
of Theodotio's heresy, as S. August. relates: for, by the heat of persecution,
being driven to a denial of his Savior, he thought it a disparagement to
confess his fault, and therefore labored to defend it, maintaining one
denial by another. It had been a strange sin to deny a God, none to deny a
man, and therefore this was an argument of Theodotio's judgment, no proof of
his Apostasy: he is wise and innocent too, si non Deum negasse sed hominem
videretur; if he deny not the son of God, but the son of Mary. Follow not
easily men of this nature, for such Achabs as these, desire Micaiah to prophesy
good, though never so false: nor do they, when their religion and credit lie
in the scale, incline ever to what weighs most, but what advantageth.

5 Lastly, if free from the rest, they are not unlikely (...), Naz. orat. 26.
p. 444.
great fiery spirits, and then if their heat be joined with ignorance, their
zeal is wildfire, and like mettle in an vnway'd horse, serves only to tire and
endanger the rider. Or, if with learning, this makes not their errors less,
but more dangerous: for then you shall have (...): Ib. p. 458.
charms of eloquence, and curious agitations, though unusual: because they
are not sworn to any man's expression; keep they must that good thing
committed to their trust; 2 Timothy 1.14.
and the same faith may be preserved in different terms; for so they mean
well, it matters not what they speak; the trodden way is too easy for them;
these must go where other cannot, and S. Paul's form of sound words, was not
prescribed to the strong, 2 Timothy 1.13.
but the crazy. If the Church have modestly delivered her self at large, these
will undertake to misinterpret her meaning by their own; and force her to
speak for their particular phansies, which studied to express her self in
general. Where there is such presumption on our own strength, the field is
maintained to the last man: for like illiterate Advocates, when their arguments
are spent, these Rabshakehs begin to rail, and that in the Jewish language,
to the shame and weakening of such, as stand on the walls; betaking themselves
ad argutam malitiam, Inst. l. 1. c. 1.
as Lactantius speaks, to the saucy liberty of a scolding pen; as if they
wrote by the Churne or the Distaffe; Polla argentaria Luc. vit. ex claris.
auctor. Bersm.
or that Lucans wife corrected Lucans Pharsalia. When thou have thus examined
their temper, suspect their disease, and fear their infection: or least thy
self should begin a Schism, avoid the occasions. Think godliness the
greatest gain, and let it be thy ambition to be Orthodoxe: know that the
safest treasure is in Heaven, and the surest honor: think how short thy life
is; how near thy sun is to the West; and be not so childish to cry for thy
best clothes when thou art going to bed. Do not make thy envy a means of thy
error, nor trip thy brothers heels, when he is running to preferment: for
every man may have entrance, if one give way to another; whereas in a throng
all stick at the door. If through weakness thou have erred, be willing to
retract it; be not always mad, because thou wast once blind: allay thy choler
with the mildness of the spirit, and though thou writest and speak for the
truth, forbear thy brother. Leave that womanish eloquence to such as have
nothing to defend them but invectiues: for know, there is a murder without
bloodshed; Iugulast is non membra, L. 2. p. 69.
sed nomina, says Optatus, ye slay not their bodies but their names; and what
credit or joy is it to outline the decease of their honor, and reputation?
Besides, this is not the way to cure a patient, but to distemper him; the
means to calm these storms, being for the strong to bear the infirmities of
the weak: Romans 15.1.
So have I seen a lesser fire (by reason of a too violent suppression) break
forth into unquenchable flames; whiles a greater not stirred, nor meddled with,
though it threatened for a while, ere long sunk into ashes. If thou art a
hearer, long not for meats above thy digestion: if a teacher, learn (...),
rightly to divide the word, and to suit thy discourse to thy auditory. Corinth
can inform us, that, as a disproportionate diet causes a mutiny in the body;
so does it in the Church, the usual fruit of such School discourses, in
popular auditories, either for thy deficiency in expression, or theirs in
apprehension, being Schism or blasphemy; as Constantine observes in his letter
to De vit. Constant. Orat. 2. (...). The cause of most schisms being (...).
Alexander and Arrius Naz. orat. 26. p. 416.
(...), keep thy self to those ancient hereditary expressions, and remove not
those Landmarkes thy Fathers have set: for what likelihood is there one man
should be wiser then so many thousands? Think meanly of thy own wit, and
mistrust even what thou know: for, how hardly can man wade into those
inscrutable mysteries, which is ignorant of those motions he every day feels,
which is a stranger to himself? if (...) be in thy Creed, admit not the
change of a letter with Athanasius in L. 3. c. 4.
Sozomene, this strange attire of faith, or as Eusebius. de vit. Constable. orat. 2.
Constantine styles it, (...), this ^oyish idle curiosity, this patching an old
garment with a new piece has ever been the cognizance of heresy, and such
contentious Ephramites may still be discerned by their lisping Sibboleth.
Again, (...). When the Church has spoken in general, make her modesty an
example for thine: be not wiser then her Canons, nor streighter then her
rules. It Is enough for thee to hold the foundation: or, if thou buildest
thereon, take heed thou preparest nor fuel for the last fire. The Apostle
assures thee, that, if thou shall confess Jesus Christ, and believe that God
raised him from the dead, thou shall have eternal life, Naz. orat. 26. p. 446.
Naz. ib. p. 438.
and what would thou more then this? (...), there is nothing more unjust,
more dangerous then thy faith, if thou measurest it by the daring subtleties of
refined wits, by the cleanely conveyance of some cheating distinctions: though
in the modus thy own reason sway thee another way, keep it to thy self;
better an unnecessary truth should be lost, then the unity of the Church:
deliver not a novity, though in the reservedst terms; for what can we expect
but a Babell, when one understands not another Language? Believe only what the
Lord requires, and his Church: consider what the rest, for to follow man's
direction is (...), in S. Paul's phrase, 1. Cor. 3.3.
to walk in a circle, to go about, not to go forward, and in matters of this
nature, the safest way is to be a skeptic; Naz. 16. p. 446.
if some turbulent zelots (...), through a fiery precipitation run out of
themselves first, and then out of the Church: beseech them, with S. Paul, that
they be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and the same judgment,
that all speak the same things, v. 10. if thy prayers are slighted, conjure
them with the same Apostle, if there be any consolation in Christ, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels and mercy, be
like minded, having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind,
Philip. 2.1.2. if they yet persist, threaten, and let them know, that we have
no such custom, neither the Churches of God, c. 11.16. and if after all this,
they resolve to leave thee, leave them not without S. Paul's Prayer, Romans
15.5.6. the God of patience, and consolation grant unto them to be like minded
one toward another, according to Christ Jesus; that they may with one mind
and one mouth, glorify God, even the father of our Lord Jesus Christ: to whom
with the blessed Spirit, be ascribed all honor and glory, dominion and power,
now and for ever. Amen.

FINJS.

