A SERMON PREACHED Before His MAJESTY, On Wednesday the fifth of July, AT
WHITE HALL.

At the solemn FAST then held.

By the Bishop of S. DAVID'S. Wm Laud.

LONDON, Printed for RICHARD BADGER.

M. DC. XXVI.

PSALM. 74. 22. Arise, O God (plead or) maintain thine own Cause: Remember how
the foolish man (reprocheth or) blasphemeth thee daily.
THis Psalm in the very Letter is a complaint of the waste that was made upon
the City of Jerusalem; and the profanation of the Temple that was in it. And
these go together. For when did any Man see a Kingdom, or a great City
wasted, and the Mother Church left standing in beauty? sure I think never. For
Enemies when they have possessed a City seldom think themselves Masters of
their own possessions, till they have (as they think) plucked that God out of
his House, which defended the city. As you may see in that brag of the
Heathen in In Octau. Indaeorum Deum suisse Romans numinibus vna cu^ gente
Captiuum.
Minu. Foelix. And so 'twas here. The Enemies roared in the City, and
displayed their Banners, verse 5. And then Verse 5.
by and by follows the defiling of the holy Place. Down goes the carved work
with Axes and Hammers, and Fire on the rest, verse 6. Verse 6.


A profanation upon the Temple, and upon all the Rights of Religion there was.
All agree upon that. But it was yet but in Prophecy, not come. And the learned
which lived after, and looked back upon the Prophecy, and the accomplishment
of it, are not agreed. For some say, the Text refers to the first great
desolation by Nebuchadonozor; some, to the last by Titus: some, to that which
came between by Antiochus Epiphanes: and some indefinitly to all. The best is
you cannot refer the Text amiss. For ineuery of these, the City and the
Temple; the State and the Church were threatened alike. And I for my part see no
great reason yet, why the Prophet should not mean all, since certain it is
both State and Church did suffer in all.

This Psalm as in the Letter it looks back upon the State and Church of the
Jews, so in the Figure it looks forward upon the whole course of the Church
of Christ, entertained in any State: For if the State come to suffer it is
madness to think the Church can be free. And therefore this Psalm certainly
was penned to be Documentum perpetuum an everlasting document to the Church of
Christ, to labor and pray for the safety of the State; Because if any violence
threaten the Kingdom with Wast, it must needs at once threaten the Church with
both Profanation and Persecution.

Well: This danger is usually threatened before it come. And so 'twas here. But
upon that threatening what remedy has the State? What? why wisely to foresee,
carefully to provide against, and unanimously and stoutly to resist the
Insolence and the violence of the Enemy. And to this work every Subject is
bound by all Law, of God, of Nature, and of Nations, to put hand, and means,
life and liuely-hood. But what remedy has the Church? What? Why a Remedy
beyond all this. Maiora arma as Saint Chrysostom Hom. 14. in Ep. ad Hebr.
calls them, greater, sharper weapons. For foresight, and care, and unanimity,
and courage, sometimes come all too short. For all these may dwell in greater
proportion in the Enemies Camp. Whither goes the Church then? Whither? Why
doubtless to God. For when all things else fail, The help that is done upon
Earth, he does it himself, verse 13. Verse 13.


To God; and to God by Prayer. That Is the Church way. And the Church way is Via
Regia the Kings way (as Epiphan: calls it). The Prophet here is all Haeres. 59.
upon this way. For here in the Psalm is a Noise of Enemies coming. There Is
a Prophecy what they will do if they get the better. What does the Church?
Does she stay till the Enemies be come? No sure. It Is no wisdom in the
State; It Is no Religion in the Church to do so. No: nor did the Church so
here. But she called to mind what strange things God had done of old for his
Servants, verse 14. Upon that mercy Verse 14.
she grounds her confidence; That upon the same Repentance, she shall have the
like deliver ance. And upon this Faith and hope she repents and prays, verse
20. Verse 20.


My Text is the conclusion of this Prayer: And it has two parts. The one
Invocation, That God would bestur himself. Arise O God. The other is what the
Prophet would have him do Risen: And they are two things which he does
expressly desire of him. The one is that he would plead and maintain his own
cause. The other foolish man reproaches, or blasphemes him daily. Arise O God,
maintain thine own cause: Remember how the foolish man blasphemeth thee daily.

The Text it self is all as it begins a Prayer.

It must needs fit the work of the day; Proclaims for Prayer. No time is or
can be unfit to call upon God; But such Times as this are necessary. And there
cannot more well be said, then such Times as this. The Prophet David where he
points out opportunity for Prayer goes not so far. Call upon me in the day of
trouble, so will I hear thee, and Psalm. 50. 15.
thou shall glorify me, Psalm. 50. There 'twas but the day of Trouble. But
these Times, might I be bold to put them under their just character, for
difficulties both at home, and abroad, are more then the day of trouble.

For, beside that they have made up a long Day of Trouble already: These Times
are the very concurse of Fear and Danger. The Clouds have threatened from
heaven now many days together, to destroy a hopeful and a plentiful Harvest
in the Day of Possession. As the Prophet speaks, Esaias 17. The Pestilence as
Esa. 17. 11.
if it were angry that God had driven it out of this great City of the
Kingdom, wastes and destroys far and near in other places of it. The Sword
of a foreign Enemy threatens to make way for it self: And if it enter, it is
worse then Famine and the Pestilence. The Prophet calls it a Rasor, Esaias 7. But
such as is reddier Esa. 7. 20.
to cut the Throat, then shave the Beard.

Can ye tell where to sue out remedy against these, but at God? Perhaps you
may think upon second and subordinate Helps; And it is fit ye should: For
these are simply necessary too. And it is Gods great blessing upon the Kingdom,
that to meet with the Distractions of the Time, he has placed over us in the
Throne, a wise, a stout, a vigilant, and a most provident King. Well: But can
you always have these second helps at hand? Can you always by them effect
your end? Have you them ready at this time? Have you the Sinews that move
them? It Is well if you have. But I doubt it is a great part of the sorrow and
trouble of the time that you have not. And howsoever, have, or have not, there
is a commanding power both over you and these. And therefore this is a time for
Humiliation under that power, that he which gives Grace to the Humble, would
resist the Pride of our Enemies: S. Iaco. 4. S. Jacob. 4.


I need not press this any further. The necessity of these Times speaks out.
It Is past whispering now that this is a day of Trouble. Of Trouble: therefore it
ought to be a day of Prayer, humble and devout prayer, which may Outcry our
sins to God. And as it ought to be, so Authority in a most religious hand
commands it. And a powerful Edict has made that duty public, which else
perhaps would have been, as much neglected in the private, as the time it
self and the danger both have been.

Will ye say: we see by the threatenings, Prayer is necessary, and the ready
way to bring God into the Battle on our side. Will ye see how? First, God
gives Grace: In the strength of Grace do you repent, and God cannot continue
angry. In your repentance pray, and God cannot but hear; and some way or
other come in to help. And it was never a Church Conclusion; God is angry,
therefore I will not pray. No, But therefore I will, was the Churches voice.
First, pray to appease his anger, and then pray again to obtain his love, and
those blessings which he gives, where he loves.

And the Church of old often did upon great apprehensions, as we do this day,
Fast and Pray together. That is, labor by all means to make God for the
State. First, because if there be any evil Spirit, as you lately heard, got in
between Abimelech and the Men of Sechem, between the King and his People.
Iud. 9. There Is no Exorcisme so sovereign Iud. 9. 33.
to cast him out, as Fasting and Prayer. For some Devils, you know, will not
otherwise out. S. Mat. 17. And Mat. 17. 21.
because a soul, humbled by Fasting, grows hungry after God. And that hunger
shall be satisfied; S. Mat. 5. But Mat. 5. 6.
one Fast there is, take heed of it. It Is a mighty Enemy both to Prayer and him
that prays. It Is to Fast from sustenance while we are in the Church: and to
fall greedily like hungry Men, upon all our old sins, so soon as we are out
of the Church door. God himself cries out against this Fast, and will none of
it, Esaias 58. Esa. 58. 5.


Well: Fasting then and Prayer's this Prayer of the Prophet fit us? How? Why
sure it fits us every way. And we have as much need, every way as much, to
power out our prayers to God, as Israel had. The Prayer is Exurge Deus, Arise,
O God.

When the Priests of Baall had prayed long and were not heard, Elias bid them
cry louder: Their God was asleep, and must be awaked, ere he could help them.
3. Reg. 18. Asleep: Yes, dead asleep. 3. Reg. 18. 27.
And it was in just scorn of their gross Idolatry, that he bid them cry
louder upon a deaf Idol. But that God that watches over Israel, does neither
slumber nor sleep. Psalm. 121. Psalm. 121. 4.
As appears in the speedy return which he there made to the prayers of Elias.

Why but then, if the God of Israel does neither flumber nor sleep; why does
the Prophet call upon him to arise, and take care of the People? Why? Surely
not because he was laid down to rest: But because this is one of the many
speeches which are uttered of God in Scripture, (...), after the manner of men.
Not to express any such thing in God, but to make us understand some thing of
God by our selves. So that while the Prophet prays, that God would arise;
here is no signification of any slumber in God: But it is to to teach us, that God
sometimes in his providence over us, is Dormienti fimilis, like to a man that
sleeps. As some in S. Bafil render that, in the Psalm 44. 23. Psalm. 44. 23.
S. Basil in Psalm. 23.


For, as he that sleeps must have some call to awaken him. So when God S.
Ierom in Habac. 3. Uelut ad dormientem loquimur.
either for our sins, or for trial of our Faith and Patience, or for some
other cause best known to himself, shall suspend or draw in the sensible
comfort of his providence, by which we are presently exposed to Fear or
Danger, our Prayers must be the Call, to make it appear by the Actiuenesse of
his providence that he sleeps not. And God is then said to Arise, when after
long withdrawing, as it were his Act of Power and providence, (For so it is
called ver. 12. Why with-drawest thou thy Verse 12.
hand?) he at last shows he was waking over his people. And to manifest this
to their comfort is the Prophets prayer: Arise, O God.

Now the Prophet prayed here in Church and of the State. And the manner of the
Prayer tells me, both were in danger, great danger: as they must ever be when
God withholds his mercy, as here he did. For, Nisi Dominus, except the Lord
keep the City, the watchman waketh but in vain, Psalm. 127. And Nisi homo,
except Men Psalm. 127. 2.
have some sensible experience of Gods favor that he does keep the City:
they are apt to doubt and distrust his goodness. And very ready to think he
sleeps. Whereas he does but as earthly Parents sometimes do with their lesser
children, hide themselves that they may be sought. And the more their children
cry at their absence, the stronger Argument they draw of their love; and Joy
in their very Tears, to see they cannot call but Crying. And poor Infants
they cry, because they know no safety but in their Mothers Arms. And
certainly no safety for us, but in the hand of God: And therefore it is time to
call, that God would be found of us, and Arise to succor us.

But you will say. Though God cannot, yet Christ as man could and did sleep.
And it is in vain for us to make any address to God, if Christ be a sleep and
not with us. For, the well-pleasing of God is in him, not in us, S. Matt. 3.
Yea, S. Mat. 3. 17.
but mark. Though Christ could and did sleep while his body was passible: yet
after his Resurrection, that his body was glorified, as he can dye no more,
Romans 6. So can he sleep no more. And he is Romans 6. 9.
more vigilant, a great deal, over all the Prayers we make, then we are to
make them: Else we must deny him to be God. For (as S. Austin tells us) Aures
S. Aug. in Psalm. 129.
Dei in Cord Precantis sunt, The ears of God are in the heart of him that
prays. Not a motion in the heart, but the ear of God has it presently. And
so of Christ, or he cannot be God: So, no fear that Christ is a sleep neither.

And even in the time while he carried about him our flesh mortal, we never
read that he slept but once, And that was at Sea: and at Sea in a Tempest S.
Mat. 8. An ill time chosen, you will S. Mat. 8. 28.
say, to sleep in; But that is not so neither. For he took opportunity only
of the Tempest, to show his Disciples that his Command could lay the Sea. If
any Enemy come upon us, he must come by Sea. It Is therefore fit for us to
pray, that though CHRIST now slumber not, yet that he would remember where he
once slept, but Arose to make a Calm. We have been in one Tempest, and we
have cause to fear another. Let us in any case get Christ to Sea, and a board
our Ships. That no Tempest may vntackle them, or rent their Keeles; or hew
down their Masts. That no enemy may come near them with safety; nor slide
from them by escape. This is the way, and you are now upon it, to make God and
Christ arise together. And this very Prayer here in the Text is grounded upon
a wonderful deliver ance at Sea, Ver. 14. Ver. 14.


Well: we are safe enough at Sea and at Land, if we can but get God to Arise
on our part. But how shall we be able to do it? How? why never dream, (for it
is a Dream indeed, and a fond one too) that ye can ever be able without Gods
Grace, to make God yours. But know that he has Grace for you, and gives it,
and he is half yours already: He will Arise and be all yours, if you pray
in Graee. But here two things are especially to be taken heed of, if we will
have our Fasting and our Prayers prevail. And I doubt we are guilty of both:
and have taken heed of neither.

The one is Pride: and the worst of it Rising against God. For, we must Arise
to help us, if we arise to oppose and vnglorie him. And mark the phrase of
Scripture. God resists the proud, S. Iac. 4. S. Jacob. 4. 6.
Resists: therefore that time which we would have God spend to defend us, our
Pride forces him to use to Resist us. And certainly Rising against God, and
raising our sins with us, even above Mercy, were it possible, is not the way
to make God Arise for us but against us. If we will have God Arise, we must
fall low on our face before his Footstool, for he is Holy, Psalm. 99. And
humble our selves as we have begun this day, that Psalm. 99. 5.
he which is all Mercy and Power, may be as willing, as we know him able to
deliver us.

The other is Security. And the worst Security in and under danger. For we
must not look that God should Arise and take care of us, if we will sleep on
in Security, without care of our selves. And no destruction so sudden as that
which comes when security sings Peace and Safety, 1 These. 5. Nay, 1 These. 5. 3.
which is worse, the Apostle there tells us, that in the time of security God
threatens it shall come. So Security is both a means to bring danger, and a
disinabling to resist it. And therefore if you will have God Arise, you must
arise too. Arise in soul by devotion: Arise in life by the works of
Sanctification. And arise in prudence and in provident care to be up, and not
found sleeping in riot and excess when an Enemy is, or ought to be feared.

I know it is hard to make you confess that you have been or are, either secure
amongst men, or proud against God. And I am sorry it is so. For the very
difficulty of confession makes me doubt you are guilty of both, and so
continue. For he was a wise Man, that gave this reason why a man does not
confess his faults, namely, Quia etiam nunc in illis est; because he continues
in them still. And Sen. Ep. 53.
you know Somnium narrare, vigilantis est. It Is a proof that a man is awaked,
when he can tell, and does acknowledge how his dreaming fancy fooled him
while he slept. But if after all this you do not yet see you have binne in a
dream, I must crave leave to think you are secure and asleep still. Let us
therefore confess and amend these and all our other sins, that have made God
stand a loose from us, and then God will Arise before we can call him up.

This for the Invocation. The second Text is, What the Prophet would have God
do when he is Risen. And they are two things.

The first is, that God when he is would plead and maintain his own cause.
In which the circumstances are many and important.

And first I find acknowledged here the Prophet, that God has a cause in
hand; not always the same, but still a cause; and a cause in continual
agitation among the Sons of Men. So it is always Term with God; some cause
still, and a trying. And yet the opinion which some of the Heathen had, that
God could not work in providence Min. Foel. in Octau.
over us, but he must be unquiet and troubled in himself, is as weak as
false. Christ tells us otherwise, S. Ioh. 5. S. Ioh. 5. 17.
My Father works hitherto, and I work.

For (as the School observes) though he Tho. sup. q. 88. A. 1.
ceased the Seventh day from the work of the general Creation of the kinds of
things; yet there is another work from which he ceased not. That work is in
gubernatione Creaturarum, in his providence and government of the world. But
this work of God is questioned too. For many things in the works of
providence, many Men, yea and sometimes the best, are a great deal to busy
with.

For instance. They would feign know why many wicked Men prosper in the world;
And why many virtuous Men suffer? This secret has exercised the world in all
Ages, and the Church ever since it had a being. It put such a stresse upon the
Prophet, that it crushed these words out of him. It is in vain that I have
cleansed my heart and washed my hands in Innocence, Psalm. 73. In vain; No,
Psalm. 73. 12.
God forbid. And the Prophet corrects his passion after, verse 16. In the mean
Verse 16.
time, here is the cause of God at trial; And men apt to quarrel that for
Injustice, which is not against the Rule, but above their reach: As at the day
of Judgment shall plainly appear says Lib. 20. de Ciuit. Dei. cap. 1.
S. Augustine.

Again; They would feign know all the secrets of Predestination. But it is one
of Gods foundations: And such a foundation as he has set a Seal upon it, 2 Timothy 2. The Lord knows who are his. 2 Timothy 2. 19.
It Is very dangerous breaking up of Seals, especially Gods. The indorcement is
enough for us, and very plain to be read. It follows. And let every Man that
calls on the name of Christ, depart from Iniquity. If he do not that, he is
not Christ's; Let him talk of Predestination while he will. And in these and
all other causes of God try them where you will, and how you can; David and
Saint Paul agree upon it: He will be Justified in his sayings and clear and
overcome when he is Judged, Psalm. 51. and Psalm. 51. 4.
Romans 3. Romans 3. 4.


Well: Gods cause is at trial: But what Gods, it is worth the knowing what ere
it be. And no cause of his can be here, but Men owe it, as well as him, some
duty. And therefore necessary to be known, that due may be performed unto it.

Now the Cause of God meant here though it be proposed, as Causa vna, one
cause, yet it is very large, and comprehends many particulars under it. Some
directly concern God, and some only by reflex. But God is so tender of his
Justice and his Honor, that nothing can so much as touch upon him, but it is
Gods cause presently: In as much as ye have done it, or not done it, to one of
these little ones, you have done it, or not done it to me, S. Matt. 25. And so
goes the Text, S. Mat. 25. 45.
Gods Cause, all, and but one, whether it be directed against him, or reflected
upon him. Whether it be the Reproach which the Son of God suffered for us,
Or the troubles, and afflictions which we suffer for him; it is Gods Cause
still, and accounted as one.

As one: And yet I find three things agreed upon, to be principally contained
in this Cause of God. First, the Magistrate and his Power and Justice. And
resist either of these, and ye resist Calvin 4. Inst. 20.. 23.
the power, and the ordinance of God. Romans 13. There Is Gods cause plain. And
the Eye of nature could see Aliquid Romans 13. 2. Arist. 1. Eth. c. 2.
diuinum, somewhat that was divine in the Governors and Orderers of
Commonwealths. In their very Office: In as much as they are singled out, to be
the Ministers of diuiue Providence upon Earth: And are expressly called the
Officers of Gods Kingdom Sap. 6. And therefore the Sap. 6. 4. Tho. 2. 2. q. 99.
School concludes, that any the least irreuerence of a King; as to dispute of
his Judgments: A. 1. Primu^.
And whether we ought to follow and obey him: Sacrilegium dicitur, is justly
extended to be called Sacrilege. And since all Sacrilege is a violation of
some thing that is Holy; it is evident that the Office and Person of the King
is sacred. Sacred; and therefore cannot be violated by the Hand, Tongue, or
Heart of any Man, that is, by deed, word or thought. But it is Gods cause, and
he is violated in him. And here Kings may learn if they will, I am sure it is
fit they should, That those Men which are sacrilegious against God and his
Church, are for the very Neigbour-hood of the sin, the likeliest men to offer
violence, to the Honor of Princes first, and their Persons after.

Secondly: the cause of the Church Truth, or in the cause of Unity; or in the
cause of Right and means, it is Gods cause too: And it must needs be so. For
Christ and his Church are Head and Body, Ephesians. 1. And therefore they must
Ephesians. 1. 22. 23.
needs have one common cause. One cause: And you cannot corrupt the Church in
her Truth, or persecute her for it, nor distract her from her Unity, nor
impouerish and abase her in her means, but God suffers in the oppression. Nay
more: no man can wilfully corrupt the Church in her doctrine, but he would have
a false God. Nor persecute the profession of the Church, but he would have no
God. Nor rent the Church into Sects, but he would have many Gods. Nor make the
Church base, but he would pluck GOD as low, Were God as much in his power as
the Church is. And therefore the Churches Cause, is Gods Cause. And as Eusebius
tells us, when by Stephen Bishop Lib. 7. Hist. cap. 32.
of Laodicea, the state of that Church was much hazarded; it, and the means of
it, were mightily vpheld by God himself. And Elias Cretensis In. G. Naz. Orat.
4.
goes full upon it in the general. It Is Gods cause, any controversy that he
debates against his Enemies.

Now this ever holds true, in whatsoever the Church suffers for the name of God
and Christ. And therefore if either State or Church will have their cause Gods,
the State must look their proceedings be just, and the Church must look their
Devotions and Actions be pious. Else, if the State be al in vvorme-wood and
Injustice: if the Church savor of impurity and irreligion: If either of these
threaten either Body, neither can call up God then. For sin is their own
and the devils cause, no cause of Gods, who punishes sin ever, but never
causes it.

Thirdly: It Is Gods cause, which is directly Injustice that he will not, or
weakness that he cannot, Arise and Help, are most unworthily, nay
blasphemously cast upon him. The very Text you see calls it no less then
Blasphemy. And as S. Basil Ibid.
tells us 'twas audacter effusa, most audaciously cast into the face of God.
But how I pray? How? why they persecuted the Church of Christ with great
extremities, and then because God did not always, and in all particulars,
deliver it, Deum vt infirmum traducebant, they accused God of Impotencie.
Rabsaches case before Christ in the flesh: which of the Gods have delivered the
Nations that serve them, that the Lord should deliver Jerusalem? 4. Reg. 18.
Pilates case 4 Reg. 18. 25
to Christ. Have not I power to crucify S. Ioh. 19. 10 Elias Cret. in Naz.
Orat. 4.
thee, and power to loose thee? S. Ioh. 19. Iulians case after Christ. For
while he raged against the Christians, he turned the contumely upon God: And
charged omnipotence with weakness. So you see the Cause of God what it is,
and withal that it is many and but one. Many in the circumference of his
creatures, which fill up the State and the Church: and yet but one in the point
of that indivisible Center which is himself.

Well, we have found Gods cause as it is Prophet would have God do to it? What?
Why that follows. Iudica. Plead it, Judge it, Maintain it Lord. For the King
and the State; For thy Church and Service; For thy self and thine honors
sake. Thou have made their cause thine own, therefore maintain it, as thou
do thine own.

Now this God is never wanting to do, nor never will be. So far as Justice and
Religion make the cause his, he will Plead it first, and Maintain it after.
But yet he does not this always with a Judgment that is visible to us. Nor
with such a one as will make enemies confess that Gods maintenance is on our
Ibid.
part. And therefore as Ruffinus thinks, these words are not only a Prayer,
that God would Arise, and maintain his cause: but that he would so plead it,
that he would make the Justice and Right of it appear to Enemies and
Opposers; and the maintenance evident to friends and defenders of it. So,
maintain thy Cause, is as much in effect, as make the world know it is thine,
and thou will maintain it. That from Gods maintenance, the cause may have
safety: And from our hope of maintenance, we may receive Comfort.

Why, but why should God plead, judge, and maintain his own Cause? Is the
Prayer of the Prophet just? Yes no question. For, the Cause of God is ever
just, and therefore ought ever to be maintained. Nor is it any partiality in
God to his own Cause, that he comes to judge it. But he is forced, as it
were, to the maintenance of it himself, partly, because some men will not, and
some men cannot defend his Cause. And partly, because it must be judged at some
Tribunal. Now there lie many Appeals in the cause of God. And all Appeal is
to a superior Court. The highest is Gods. Therefore when Malice and Tyranny
has done what it can to Gods cause, if his Servants do but Appeal, as they
ever do; The Cause must in the end reuolue to God himself, who alone has no
superior. Yet his very Enemies need not fear. For he will so plead and judge
his own Cause, that their own Consciences shall tell them his Iudgement's
right.

Now one thing which lays a kind of Necessity upon God to maintain his own
cause, is as I told you, that some Men will not, and some men cannot maintain
it. I find both these touched in the Text.

First, they that will not. For these Arise, O God, and maintain thine own
Cause, are a grievous tax upon all them to whom God has given means and
ability, yet will not stir to succor his cause. For'tis as if he had said, Men
vvil not maintain thy cause: If thou vvilt have it defended thou must do it
thy self. The Jews it seems were now very guilty of this, else the Prophet
would never have run with that earnestness to God. He would have prayed
to God had Men bin never so vvilling; yes, God forbid else; but had they done
their duty, the extremity had not been feared. And mark and tremble at the
curse of God which was called for upon some of that People for this sin,
Judge 5. Curse ye Meroz, (says Judge. 5. 23.
the Angel of the Lord) curse the Inhabitants thereof. Why? beause they came
not up to help the Lord, to help the Lord against the mighty. To help the
Lord: Why, What cause of God was this? What? Why'twas his cause of War
against Sisera; as appears, Judge. 4. Against Sisera; yet to help the Lord.
Judge. 4.


And certainly it is a great and a grievous error in any People as well as in
Israel: and in any age of the world as well as in that; to fast, and pray, and
call upon God to Arise and Maintain his cause and their own joined with it;
if in the mean time they will put nor hand nor purse to maintain either
their own, or Gods. Their own in the State; Or Gods in the Church. These Men
perhaps are of Tiberius his mind Tacit. Lib. 1. Anal.
Deorum iniuriae Dijs curae; And what that Oracle meant, when he writ so to
the Senate; whether; It belongs to God to vindicate his own cause; Or, God
will be sure to do it, Or let his cause sink if he will not defend it; I am
not certain. This I am sure of, God can defend himself sine Patrocinio
nostro, without Call. 3. Inst. c. 23.. 2.
any aid of ours. But yet if we come not in to help when the Cause of God is
deposited with us; the fear is, and it is Just, that God will Maintain his
cause, and leave us to maintain our own.

Secondly: They that cannot. For these words, Arise, O God, Maintain thine
own cause, imply disability in Man, as well as malice. For it is as if he had
said; Men cannot at all times maintain thy cause. If thou vvilt have it
defended, thou must do it thy self. And this is true of the strongest of the
Sons of Men, if they be left to themselves. But this, though it puts us in
more fear, yet it makes us not half so guilty. For Guilt follows malice more
then Impotency. And our weakness and disability is such, that we are not able
to hold it up against so many and great Enemies, as the cause of God bath. This
was the case of Hezekiah; He durst not trust to himself, and his own strength
against the Host of Assiria. Therefore to his Prayers he went, 4. Reg. 19. O
Lord our 4. Reg. 19. 19.
God, do thou save us out of his hand: which is all one with the Text. Arise,
and maintain thine own cause. But I pray take this with you. When Hezekiah
prayed 2 Chronicles. 32. 6.
thus, the People were in Arms. No deserting the cause though no selfe-ability
could hold it up.

But what Enemies had the cause of Arise and maintain it? Do you ask what
Enemies? I Will tell you; Perhaps I shall not be able to tell you all. But what
my Text tells me, I Will show you. First, the Text tells me, the Enemies that
came up against Gods cause were fierce, and had got some hope of Advantage;
Employed in this, that the Israelites were feign to call for maintenance, and
supply against them. Next the Text tells me, these Enemies were thought too
cunning and too strong for Israel, to whom the defense of Gods Cause was then
committed: Implied in this, that they were feign to fly to God, and call him
in to his own defense. A sign, that all seconds were too weak. Thirdly, the
Enemies were many, beaten or mastered at once. And that is expressed, ver. 20. A
Verse 20.
multitude of Enemies. And last of all, cruel, as strong and numerous. For so
we read, ver. 5. Where Verse 5.
they are called Roaring Enemies. A name which ever had some affinity with
the Devil, 1. S. Peter 5. So in all 1 S. Pet. 5. 8.
likelihood nothing remained but to get God to be absent, and then they might
easily swallow his People and his Cause together. To prevent this was the
Prophets prayer, and so it is ours this day. For so the Psalm begins: O God
(considering how thy cause is streitned) Wherefore art thou absent from us so
long? And it ends at Arise and maintain thy Cause against them.

And the form of the Prophets Prayer Prayer is, that God would Arise, and
maintain his Cause. The first thing the Prophet aims at is the Cause; the
equity and right that belongs to it, not the respect it had to Persons. And
this out of question is the way of Justice, to honor the person for the
Cause, not to esteem the cause for the person. Now men for the most part go a
cross way to this, and therefore, when they will come into the way of
lustice I cannot tell. For usually all business is sided into parties. It Is no
matter for the Cause, let who will maintain that simply for it self. If it
make for us and our party, so far we will maintain it; else be it Gods
cause or whose it will, whether it sink or swim, it shall not trouble us.
And I doubt as the practice of too many men is, so is their Prayer. For the
Faction and the Party all; not the cause, either as it is Gods, the Churches, or
the States. And parties are ever private ends. The Cause as it is Gods, the
Churches, or the Kingdoms is ever common. Ever fit to be made the Object of our
Prayers.

Yet this advantage may here be had. If ever you may safely prefer the
person before the cause, and yet be just, you may do it here. God before his
own cause. And the Reason is, because God as he can never tender an unjust
cause to his People, so is he Justice it self: And ever Iuster then any cause
of his that is without him. Therefore whatsoever others do, Arise, O God, and
maintain thy self, and thine own cause. Maintain it even from heaven,
there is no great trust to the Earth: for that is full of darkness and cruel
habitations, verse 21. Verse 21.


Now all this while we have almost Hierom tells me, and he is not Epist.
Fabio. de 42. Man's. Ma. 3. and Elias Cret. in Naz. Orat. 4.
alone in the opinion, the Psalm was David's, and therefore the Prayer too. As
a Prophet he foresaw the danger, and as a King he went on directly to the
highest remedy. And though Kings now are not Prophets, yet it is a great
blessing upon any Kingdom to have the King a Seer so far as is possible. To
have him with both eyes open. His right eye open and up to heaven, for God to
maintain him; And his other eye downwards, but open, upon his People to take
care of them, and maintain them, with the same support that he has received
from God. And herein above other Nations we are blessed this day, I say again,
Above other Nations; if we can see our blessing, and be thankful. For the
King keeps his eye as steady upon God, as if he had no help below him: And
yet at the same time as gracious an eye upon his People to relieve their just
grieuances, as if he were more ready to help them, then to receive help from
them.

Let not your hearts be troubled, neither fear, S. Ioh. 14. Here are two Kings
S. John 14. 1.
at once at Prayer for you, David and your own King. They are up and calling
up on God to Arise. For shame Lagge not behind God and your King. You have
been and I hope are, a valiant Nation, let nothing dead your spirits, in Gods
and your Countries Service. And if any man drop malignant poison into your
Ears, power it back into his own bosom.

And Sir, as you were first up, and sumon'd the Church to awake, and have
sounded an Alarm in the Ears of your People; Not that they should Fast and
Pray, and serve God alone, but go with you into the House of the Lord; so go
on to serve your Preserver. Your Merit, and the Nobleness of your heart will
glue the hearts of your People to you. And your Religious care of Gods Cause
and service, will make him (I doubt not) Arise, and haste to the maintenance of
your Cause, as of his own. Only in these, and all times of difficulty, be
strong and of a good courage, keep close to the Law of the Lord. Be full of
Counsel, and then resolute to Act it. Else, if you shall not be firm to
deliberated Counsels, they which are bound to serve you, may seek and find
opportunities to serve themselves upon you. This do, and God Arise and be with
you, as he was with Moses; Ios. 1. This do, Iosuah 1. 7. 17.
and as S. Chrysostom. speaks. Aut non habebis Inimicum, aut irridebis eum:
Either Homil. 14. in Epist. ad Hebr.
you shall have no Enemy, or you shall be able to scorn him the world over.

The second thing which the Prophet Remember how the Foolish man blasphemeth
him daily.

The Enemies of Gods Truth, and of his Cause, but base and uncivilly
irreligious as they are, they fly upon his person too. For so you see the Text
changes from the thing to the person. Maintain thy cause: but remember, the
Reproach runs against thy self: They blasphemethee. And by this you may see
how dangerous a thing it is for any Men; or any States, to become Enemies to
the Cause of God. For sin will not stay till it have wrought them farther,
even into enmity against God himself. And therefore this sin here, a high and
a presumptuous sin, is not called the presumption of them that hate Gods
Cause, but of them which hate God himself, Ver. 24. Verse 24.


Presumption easily falls to Reproach Reproach is it these Enemies cast upon
God? What? Why, 'twas in the highest degree. 'Twas Blasphemy. For so Saint
Basil renders my Ibid.
Text. And so it is called again, Ver. 11. Verse 11. and 19.
and 19. You may be sure the Prophet mistook it not: It went not single, there
were more then one; and Theoderet calls them Execrationes, Cursings and
Reuilings Ibid.
of God.

And men of all sorts, as well as usurping Enemies, had need be watchful
over this sin. For a man may quickly be within the borders of it, before he
be aware; especially, if he be bold and busy with the Cause of God, as it is
reserved and secret in himself. For since all Blasphemy is a Derogation of
some Excellency chiefly in God: the School collects and Tho. 2. 2. q. 13. A.
1. c.
truly, That whosoever denies to God any attribute that is due unto him: or
affirms any of God that is not agreeable to his Nature: is within the Confines
of Blasphemy. Entered, though perhaps not so far gone. But these Enemies, it
seems, stuck at no degree of Blasphemy: Spared God himself no more then his
Cause. And what reason can this State or Church have, to think these Enemies,
or their like, that spared not God nor his Cause, will if they have power
enough, spare them or theirs.

But I pray, who or what manner of Enemy was it, that made thus bold with
God? Who? why, my Text answers that too. Sculous fuit, it was the foolish
Man: And you may know so much by his boldness. We find, Psalm. 14. There Psalm.
14. 1.
was a Fool that blasphemed God. But 'twas in his heart. Out of his mouth he
durst not let it go: not once. And this Fool was in the same fear at first.
For his Blasphemy kept in his heart, verse 9. Verse 9.
But now he was grown impudent, it Ibid.
brake out at his Lips: For as S. Basil, and Call 3 Inst. c. 23.. 2.
others observe; he did Palam maledicere, Blaspheme at large.

The Prophet no question knew these Enemies what they were, and that they had
other names beside Fools. But he fits them with their Name of Merit: That
they deserved, that he gives them. I told you these Enemies were cunning,
subtle Enemies. And it is true: But Malignity against Gods cause, and
Blasphemy against his Person, will make the greatest Wisdom in the world
turn Fool. And Folly dares adventure any thing against Man: Nay, against God
too: which is a like true of the Fool at home, and the Fool abroad.

The Prophet prayed against their Enemies, as we do now against ours. O my
God make them as a wheel, Psalm. 83. And see Psalm. 83. 13.
in what a wheel they are: The worst that ever moved. For their Blasphemy
carries their Wisdom round into Folly. And their Folly turns their malice
round into heigher degrees of Blasphemy. Thus is this Enemy no sooner a
Blasphemer but a Fool: And no sooner a Fool, but a greater Blasphemer. So
Blasphemy is punished with Folly, and Folly with Blasphemy. There Is the
wheel, both in the sin, and the punishment.

And I pray observe: These Enemies that beset Gods Cause at Jerusalem were a
Nation. And so some read here; Not the Foolish man, but the Foolish People.
And a powerful Nation they were, were they Babilonians, Syrians, or Romans.
And one of them they were. And yet you see the Prophet gives them, no other, no
better name, then Fool, when they violently persecute Gods Cause. Indeed they
deserve it. And this Sin is as able to Fool a whole Nation, as a particular
Man. Nay the holy Ghost here speaks of them as of one Man. As if Blasphemy
could change a whole Nation into one Fool. And surely, it is no hard thing with
God to make the wisdom of the whole world Foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. And it is 1
Cor. 1. 20.
as easy with him, to confound the wisdom of a whole Nation, as of one
Achitophell. 2 Samuel 17. 14.


And see I beseech you how their sins a Fool in this kind, and an Enemy to
Gods Cause, and a Blasphemer of his Person ever after, without a great deal of
mercy. And this is noted in the circumstance Tota Die, and Quotidie, Daily, and
all the day long at this Blasphemy: And it is usual this with Enemies; All the
day: For their Studdie is upon it. And every day: For these Enemies were the
same in Blasphemy, The day of their preparation: The day of their Fight; and
the day of their Victory. And Ruffinus observes that this Blasphemy grew in the
Ibid.
continuance. And either it derided God in his Servants, or it menaced men for
serving God How it flattered it self there while against both Man and God, is
thus far apparent in the Text: That they never durst have bin daily Blasphemers
against God, if they had not bin Opinators at least, that God could never have
maintained and made good his cause against them.

It is too much to see the cause of God opposed: To hear the Name of GOD
Blasphemed, were it but once: But all the day long, and every day is a
Tentation almost unsupportable to Christian and religious hearts. Yet this we
must be Inured to hear against King and Church, and God himself, if we take
not better course then hitherto we have done to keep out the Enemy and his
Blasphemy.

Against this 'twas time for the Prophet, and it is time for us to pray. The
Blasphemy of an Enemy is a very urgent Motive to make Men pray. And the Prayer
of the Prophet here, that God would remember the Blasphemer, was very fervent.
For he begins this Prayer, at Remember the Rebuke of the Enemy, verse 20. And
Verse 20.
he ends his Prayer with Remember the Blasphemy of this Fool, v. 23. Remember
and Verse 23.
forget it not, verse 24. This was the Prophet's Zeal for Gods Cause, and you
Verse 24.
may learn by it, that cold Prayers are not they which remove the Blasphemy of
Enemies. The Prayers indeed of but one righteous Man does much, but it is when
they are fervent, S. Iaco. 5. S. Iaco. 5. 16.


But you will say: What needs all this calling upon God to Remember? Is it
possible he should forget? not possible S. Hierom in Thren. 5.
certainly. But then as before: Though God cannot sleep: Yet to awaken not him
but our poor understanding concerning him the Prayer was, Arise, O God. So
here, though God cannot forget, yet because in his providence, he sometimes
carries himself to our sense and apprehension, Ad modum obliuiscentis, as if
he did forget; and threatens that he will forget; Obliuione obliuiscar eorum,
Ose. 1. Ose 1. 6.
Forgetting, I will forget them. Therefore here again the Prayer runs after
the manner of men: Arise, O Lord, yes, and Remember too.

Why, but since here is Enmity against the Cause of God, and Blasphemy against
himself, why does the Prophet ask no more of God, but that he would remember
this? Why? why certainly'tis, because there is abundantly enough of that. He
knew if God did Remember, he would punish? And (as S. Jerome observes) Ibid.
he therefore Remembers, that he may confound in Judgment.

And indeed in Gods Language to Mark and Remember, is many times to punish:
and not to Remember, is to forgive Innocen. 3. (...) L. 2. Mist. Miss. c. 6.
sin. If thou Lord should be extreme to mark and observe; that is, to
punish, What is done amiss, Psalm. 130. And the Psalm. 130. 3.
Church has learned not only to speak, but to pray of the Prophet. For so the
Church prays in the Letanie: Not, punish not, but Remember not Lord our
Offenses. And therefore the Prophets Prayer was home enough, Remember Lord:
Yes, do but that, and we either have, or shall have enough and our enemies too.
We, I hope of deliverance and preservation, and they of punishment.

Thus you have heard the Prophets prayer, and I hope made your own, that God
would Arise and bestir himself. And what he desired God would do, both for
State and Church when he was Risen. That is; That he would plead and
maintain his own Cause. And Remember, that is, punish, in his own time the
Blasphemy of all them, that reproach or detract from it or him.

One thing yet remains and it is fit to be thought upon this day, every day,
all the day long. And that is, what it is that makes God a Protector of any
King, any State, any National Church, against either in bred or foreign
Enemies. Against the Fox at home and the Lion abroad. And that certainly is;
for the State to go on with Honor and Justice. And for the Church to labor
Devotion as much at least, if not more then knowledge. For else Gods cause and
ours may be two. And then God may Arise, and maintain his own, but leave us
to the Famine, to the Pestilence, to the Sword, to any other Judgment.

The only way to make God Arise as soon as ever we call: Nay, to prevent our
call and come in to help before we pray, is, for both King and People, State
and Church, to weaue their Cause and Gods together. To incorporate them so,
that no cunning of the Devil may be able to separate them. For then the benefit
is apparent. God cannot Arise and maintain his own cause, but he must
maintain ours too: because it is one with his. And his own (doubt you not) he
will maintain, against the proudest Enemy that can come against it. And
certainly the greatest hope and confidence of Gods Assistance to any Nation, to
any Man, that can preceed deliverance itself, is to make their Cause all one
with Gods. And that is done by upholding his, and conforming theirs.

Our safety then is when our cause is one with Gods: Our danger when they
differ. But what is it that puts the difference between them? What? why that
which put the first Enmity between God and Man, Sin. And therefore if we
will quit the Enmity and be made friends, the only way to reconcile us with
God, and our Cause with his, is by Faith and Repentance to banish Sin. The
sooner this is done, the sooner we are safe: which cannot be till our Cause be
one with Gods: One, and yet when it is one the pre-eminence is still with Gods
Cause, we must not suffer ours to step on before him.

For our Cause as it is spiritual and concerns our souls, if it be never so
good, never so close joined with Gods, yet God's is to have the precedence.
For be ours never so good, I must beg of your humility to Remember, that Gods
Grace did both prevent and follow, to make it so. And therefore we are to put
his cause first, and to pray chiefly for the maintenance of that which gave
worth to ours.

And for our cause as it is tempor all and concerns this life only, Our
safety, life, and liuely-hood; Gods cause is to have the precedence of that
much more. Father and Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, Life and
all, must be accounted as nothing to Gods Cause, S. Luke 14. And it has ever
been a sign that the Soul of a Man S. Luke 14. 26.
goes right: That a whole People keep upon Gods path; when they seek first
the Kingdom of GOD and the righteousness thereof, and leave God to minister
and maintain the rest, S. Mat. 6. When they are S. Mat. 6. 33.
more tenderly affected to the Cause of God, and more sensible of the Reproach
or Blasphemy of his Name, then of any calamities, that might or malice can
bring upon their persons.

And yet our giving Gods Cause the precedence, in our love to it, and our
Prayers for it, is no exclusion of our own Cause: Nay, the preferring of Gods
before our own, And the making of our own conformable to Gods, Is the way to
make God as jealous of our safety from all extremity, as he is to vindicate his
own honor from Reproach and Blasphemy. And therefore though the Prophet here
(as Theodoret observes) does not say Arise, Ibid.
O God, and maintain Causam meam, my cause, but thine own. Yet the same God
that will have us prefer his cause, will have us pray for our own like wise.
And so the Prophet did: For though he be here all for Gods cause; yet we
have hime very earnest for his own too. Plead thou my cause O Lord with them
that strive with me, and fight thou against them, Psalm. 15. 31. 1.
that fight against me, Psalm. 35. And defend my cause, O God, against the
ungodly People, Psalm. 43. 1.
Psalm. 43. 1. Well then: Thy cause O God; and my Cause O God. But the Rule of
Practice goes here; Gods cause must lead, that ours may follow it, under the
protection of God.

As we have therefore now begun, so let us pray on as the Prophet did. That God
even our Gracious Father will be no longer like unto one that sleeps: That
he will Arise, and blow over these fears from us. It Is but his Breath, and he
can dry the Clouds, that they drop not Rottenness upon our Harvest. It Is but
his Breath, and he can clear the Air of Infection, as well all over the
Kingdom, as he has, beyond admiration, done it in our chief City. And it is
but the same Breath, and he can shake our Enemies to pieces in the Sea.

That God being Arisen and come near in providence, will plead first, and
after maintain his own Cause. His own in the hand of the King: His own in
the heart of the Church: And his own in the Holiness of his Name. That he
will give this State and Church, and every Member of both such grace, that our
cause may be his, and his Maintenance ours. That he will remember and that is
enough, that if his Cause be ours, our Enemies are his. That we may so order
our lives by his Grace, that if these or any Enemies will Blaspheme, it may not
be Him for our sins, but Us for his service. That our Enemies and his,
how-wise soever in other things, yet in their plots and practices against us
may be written in the Text-Letters FOOLS. That we, being preserved from them
and all other Adversity, may take warning in time to mend our lives, and so
hereafter live to honor and serve him, that the world may see he has been
merciful, and we labor to be Thankful. That after the maintenance of his
and our Cause here, we may in our several times be received up to him in
Glory, Through Jesus Christ our Lord: To whom with the Father, etc.

FINIS.

