VIA REGIA AD GEOMETRIAM.

THE WAY TO GEOMETRY.

Being necessary and useful, FOR Astronomers. Geographers. Land-meaters.
Seamen. Engineres. Architecks. Carpenters. Paynters. Carvers, etc.


Written in Latin by PETER RAMVS, and now Translated and much enlarged by the
Learned Mr. WILLIAM BEDVVELL.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Cotes, And are to be sold by Michael Spark; at the
blew Bible in Green Arbor, 1636.





TO THE WORSHIPFVL M. JOHN GREAVES, Professor of Geometry in Gresham College
London; All happiness.
SIR,
YOur acquaintance with the Author before his death was not long, which I have
often heard you say, you counted your great unhappiness, but within a short time
after, you knew not well whether to count your self more happy in that you
once knew him, or unhappy in that upon your acquaintance you so suddenly lost
him. This his work then being to come forth to the censorious eye of the
world, and as the manner usually is to have some Patronage. I have thought good
to dedicate it to your self; and that for these two reasons especially.

First, in respect of the sympathy betwixt it, and your studies; Labors of
this nature being usually offered to such persons whose profession is that way
settled

Secondly, for the great love and respect you always showed to the Author,
being indeed a man that would deserve no less, humble, void of pride, ever
ready to impart his knowledge to others in what kind soever, loving and
affecting those that affected learning.

For these respects then, I offer to you this Work of your so much honored
friend. I my self also (as it is no less my duty) for his sake striving to
make you hereby some part of a requital, least I should be found guilty of
ingratitude, which is a solecisme in manners, if having so fit an opportunity,
I should not express to the world some Testimony of love to you, who so much
loved him. I desire then (good Sir) your kind acceptance of it, you knowing so
well the ability of the Author, and being also able to judge of a Work of this
nature, and in that respect the better able to defend it from the fury of
envious Detractours, of which there are not few. Thus with my best wishes to
you, as to my much respected friend, I rest.

Yours to be commanded in any thing that he is able. JOHN CLERK.

To the Reader.
FRiendly Reader, that which is here set forth to thy view, is a Translation
out of Ramus. Formerly indeed Translated by one Mr. Thomas Hood, but never
before set forth with the Demonstrations and Diagrammes, which being cut before
the Authors death, and the Work it self finished, the Coppie I having in mine
hands, never had thought for the promulgation of it, but that it should have
died with its Author, considering no small prejudice usually attends the
printing of dead men's Works, and we see the times, the world is now all ear
and tongue, the most given with the Athenians, to little else than to hear and
tell news: And if Apelles that skillful Artist always found somewhat to be
amended in those Pictures which he had most curiously drawn; surely much in
this Work might have been amended if the Author had lived to refine it, but
in that it was only the first draught, and that he was prevented by death of a
second view, though perused by others before the Press; I was ever unwilling
to the publication, but that I was often and much solicited with iteration of
strong importunity, and so in the end overruled: persuading me from time to
time unto it, and that it being finished by the Author, it was far better to
be published, though with some errors and escapes, than to be only
moths-meat, and so utterly lost. I would have thee, Courteous Reader know, that
it is no conceit of the worth of the thing that I should expose the name and
credit of the Author to a public censure; yet I durst be bold to say, had he
lived to have fitted it, and corrected the Press, the work would have pointed
out the workman. For I may say, without vain ostentation, he was a man of
worth and note, and there was not that kind of learning in which he had not
some knowledge, but especially for the Eastern tongues, those deep and
profound Studies, in the judgment of the learned, which knew him well, he has
not left his fellow behind him; as his Works also in Manuscript now extant in
the public Library of the famous University of Cambridge; do testify no
less; for him then being so grave and learned a Divine to meddle with a work
of this nature, he gives thee a reason in his own following Preface for his
principal end and intent of taking this Work in hand, was not for the deep
and Judicial, but for the shallowest skull, the good and profit of the ^impler
sort, who as it was in the Latin, were able to get little or no benifite from
it. Therefore considering the worth of the Author, and his intent in the
Work. Read it favorably, and if the faults be not too great, cover them with
the mantle of love, and judge charitably offenses unwillingly committed, and
do according to the terms of equity, as thou would be done unto, but it
is a common saying, as Printers get Copies for their profit, so Readers often
buy and read for their pleasure; and there is no work so exactly done that
can escape the malevolous disposition of some detracting spirits, to whom I
say, as one well, Facilius e^t unicuivis nostrum aliena curiose observare: quam
proproia negotia recte agere. It is a great deal more easy to carpe at other
men's doings, than to give better of his own. And as Arist. (...); omnibus
placere difficilimum est. But wherefore, Gentle Reader, should I make any doubt
of thy courtesy, and favorable acceptance; for surely there can be nothing
more contrary to equity, than to speak evil of those that have taken pains
to do good, a Pagan would hardly do this, much less I hope any good
Christian. Read then, and if by reading, thou reapest any profit, I have my
desire, if not, the fault shall be thine own, reading happily more to judge and
censure, than for any good and benefit which otherwise may be received from it;
let but the same mind toward thine own good possess thee in reading it, as
did the Author in writing it, and there shall be no need to doubt of thy
profit by it.

Thine in the common bond of love, JOHN CLERK.
The Authors Preface.
TWo things, I fear me, will here be objected against me: The one concerns
my self, directly: The other mine Author, and the work I have taken in hand
the translating of him. Concerning my self, I suppose, some will ask, Why I
being a Divine; should meddle or busy my self with these profane studies?
Geometry may no way further Divinity, and therefore is no fit study for a
Divine? This objection seems to smell of Brownisme, that is, of a rank
peevish humor overflowing the stomach of some, whereby they are caused to
loath all manner of solid learning, yea of true Divinity it self, and
therefore it does not deserve an answer: And this we in our Title before
signified. For we have not taken this pains for Turks and others, who by the
laws of their profession are bound to abandon all manner of learning. But if
any man shall propose it, as a question, with a desire of satisfaction, we are
ready to answer him to the best of our ability. First, that Theologia vera e^t
^rs artium and scientia scientiarum, Divinity is the Art of Arts, and Science
of Sciences; or Divinity is the Mistress upon which all Arts and Sciences are
to attend as servants and handmaides. And why then not Geometry? But in what
place she should follow her, I dare not say: For I am no herald, and therefore
I meddle not with precedencie: But if I were, she should be none of the
hindermost of her train.

The Orator says, and very tr^ly doubtless, That, Omnes arts, quae
humanitate^ pertinent, habent commune quoddam vinculum, and cognatione quadam
inter se continentur. All Arts which pertain unto humanity, they have a
certain common b^nd, and are knit together by a kind of affinity. If then any
Arts and Sciences may be thought necessary attendants upon this great Lady:
Then surely Geometry amongst the rest must needs be one: For otherwise her
train will be but loose and shattered.

Plato says (...), That God does always work by Geomet^y, that is, as the
^^iseman does interpret it, SAP. XI. 21. Omnia in mensura and numero and
pondere disponere. Dispose all things by measure, and number, and weight: Or,
as the learned Pl^tarch speaks, He adorneth and l^yeth out all the parts of
the world according to rate proportion, and similitude. Now who, I pray you,
understands what these terms mean, but he which has some mean skill in
Geometry? Therefore none but such an one, may be able to declare and teach
these things unto others.

How many things are there in holy Scripture which may not well be understood
without some mean skill in Geometry? The Fabric and bigness of Noah's Ark:
The Sciagraphy of the Temple set out by Ezechiel, Who may understand, but he
that is skillful in these Arts? I speak not of many and sundry words both in
the New and Old Testaments, whose genuine and proper signification is m^rely
Geometrical: And cannot well be conceived but of a Geometer.

And here, that I may speak it without offense, I would have it observed, how
many men, much magnified for learning, not only in their speeches, which
always are not premeditated, but even in their writings, exposed to the view
and c^nsure of all men, do often paralogizein, speak much, and little to the
purpose. This they could not so easily and often do, if they had been but
meanly practiced in these kind of studies. Wherefore that Epigramme which
was used to be written over their Philosophy School doors, (...), No man
ignorant of Geometry come within these doors: Now written over our Divinity
Schools. And if any man shall think this an hard sentence, let him hear what
Saint Augustine says in the same case, Nemo ad divinarum humanarumque rerum
cognitione^m accedar, nisi prius annumerandi artem addiscat: Let no man come
neither within the Divinity nor Philosophy Schools, except he have first
learned Arithmeticke. Now that the o^e of these Arts cannot be learned without
the other; Euclide our great Master, who made but one of both, has
sufficiently demonstrated.

If I should allege the like practice of famous Divines, greatly admired for
their great skill in this profession, as T. Peckham Archbishop of Canterbury,
Maurolycus Bishop of Messana in Sicilia, Cusanus Cardinal of Rome, and many
others^ before indifferent judges, I am sure I should not be condemned. Who
does not greatly magnify the grave Seb. Munster, the nimble Ph. Melanchthon,
and the noble Bernardino Baldo Abbot of Guastill, and the painful Barth.
Pitiscus of Grunberg, for their knowledge and pains in these Arts and
Sciences? And thus much shall at this time suffice, to have spoken unto the
first Question: If any shall require further satisfaction, those I refer unto
the forenamed Authors, whose authority peradventure may more prevail with
them, then my reasons may.

The next is concerning mine Author, and the work in hand Geometry, it must
needs be confessed we are beholden to Euclides Elements for: And he that would be
rich in that profession, may have, if he be not covetous, his fill there, if he
will labor hard, and take pains for it, it is true. But in what time think
yau, may a man learn all Euclide, and so by him be made skillful in this Art?
By himself I know not whether ever or never: And with the help of another,
although very expert, I will not promise him that he shall attain to
perfection in many years.

Hippocrates the Prince of Physicians has, as they say, in his works laid out
the whole Art of Physic; but I marvel how long a man should study him alone,
and read him over and over, before he should be a good Physician? I fear me
all the friends that he has, and neighbors round about him, yea, and himself
too, would all die before he should be able to help them, or peradventure ere
he should be able to know what they ailed; and after 30, or 40. years of such
his study, I would be very loath to commit my self unto him. How much
therefore are the students of this noble Science beholding unto those men, who
by their industry, practice, and painful travells, have showed them a ready
and certain way through this wilderness?

The Elements of Euclide they do contain generally the whole art of Geometry:
But if you will offer to travel through them alone, you shall find them, I
will warrant you, Elements indeed: for there you may walk through the spacious
Air, and over the great and wide sea, and in and about the vaste and arid
wilderness many a day and night, before you shall know where you are. This
Ramus, my Author in reading him found to be true; and confesses himself
often to have been at a stand: Often to have lost himself: Often to have
hitte upon a rock, when he had thought he had touched land.

Least therefore other men, in this journ^y do not likewise loose themselves,
for the benefit and safety, I mean, of others he has pricked them out a
charde or chack'd out a way, which if thou shall please to follow, it shall
lead thee to thy ways end, as directly, and in as s^ort time, as conveniently
may be. Yet in what time I cannot warrant thee: For all men's capacity,
especially in these Arts, is not alike: All are not a like painful,
industrious, or diligent: All are not of the same ability of body, to be able
to continue or ^it at it: Or all not so free from other employments or
business calling them from their study, as some others are. For know this for
certain, Thou shall here make no great progress, except thou do make it as
it were a continued labor, Here you must observe that rule of the great
Painter, Nulla dies sine linea, Let no day pass over your head, in which you
draw not some diagram or figure or other.

One other thing let me also advise thee of, how capable soever thou art,
refuse not, if thou may have it, the help of a teacher: For except thou be
another Hippocrates or Forcatelus, who^ our Author mentions, thou can not
in these Arts and Sciences attain unto any great (...) great loss of most
(...), For they are therefore called (...) Ma^^ (...) is, doctrina^or
disciplinary Arts, because they are not to be (...) unto by our own
information and industry; but by the help and instruction of others.

This Work gentle Reader, was in part above 30. years since published by M.
Thomas Hood, a learned man, and loving friend of mine, who teaching these Arts,
in the Staplers Chapel in. Leadenhall London, for the benefit of his
Scholars and Auditory, did set out the Elements apart by themselves. The whole
at large, with the Diagrammes, and Demonstrations, he^ promised, as appears
in the Preface to that his Work, at his convenient leisure to send out
shortly, after them. This for ought we know or can learn, is not by him or any
other performed: And yet are those alone, without these of small use or none to
a learner, where a teacher is not always at hand. Wherefore we are bold being
(encouraged thereunto by some private friends, and especially by the learned M.
H. Brigges, professor of Geometry in the famous University of Oxford) to
publish this of ours long since finished and ended.

The usual terms, whether Latin or Greek, commonly used by the Geometers,
we have set down and expressed in English, as well as we could, as others,
writing of this argument in our language, have done before us. These terms, I
doubt not, may by some in English otherwise be expressed, but how harsh those
terms, may unto Mathematical ears, at the first appear, I will not say; and
use in short time will make these familiar, and as pleasing to the ear as
those possibly may be.

Our Author, in the declaration of the Elements has many passages, which in
our judgment do not make so much for the understanding of the matter in hand,
as for the d^fence of the method here used, against Aristotle, Euclide,
Proclus, and others, which we have therefore wholly ^^red. Some other things,
which in our opinion, might in some respect illustrate any particular in this
business, we have here and there inserted. Out of the learned Finkins's
Geometria Rotundi, We have added to the fifth Book certain Propositions with
their Consectaries out of Ptolomi's Almagest. The painful and diligent Rod^
Snellius out of the Lectures and Annotations of B. Salignacus, I. Tho.
Freigius, and others, has illustrated and altered here and there some few
things.

The Contents.
Book I. Of a Magnitude. Page 1 Book II. Of a Line. p. 13 Book III. Of an
Angle. p. 21 Book IV. Of a Figure. p. 32 Book V. Of Lines and Angles in a
plain Surface. p. 51 Book VI. Of a Triangle. p. 83 Book VII. The comparison of
Triangles. p. 94 Book VIII. Of the diverse kinds of Triangles. p. 106 Book IX.
Of the measuring of right lines by like right-angled Triangles. p. 113 Book X.
Of a Triangulate and Parallelogramme. p. 136 Book XI. Of a Right-angle. p. 148
Book XII. Of a Quadrate. p. 152 Book XIII. Of a Oblong. p. 167 Book XIV. Of a
right line proportionally cut: And of other Quadrangles, and Multangles. p. 174
Book XV. Of the Lines in a Circle. p. 201 Book XVI. Of the Segments of a
Circle. p. 201 Book XVII. Of the Adscription of a Circle and Triangle. p. 215
Book XVIII. Of the adscription of a Triangulate. p. 221 Book XIX. Of the
measuring of ordinate Multangle, and of a Circle. p. 252 Book XX. Of a Bossed
surface. p. 257 Book XXI. Of Lines and Surfaces in solids. p. 242 Book XXII. Of
a Pyramid. p. 249 Book XXIII. Of a Prisma. p. 256 Book XXIV. Of a Cube. p. 264
Book XXV. Of mingled ordinate P^lyedra's. p. 171 Book XXVI. Of a Sphere. p.
284 Book XXVII. Of the Cone and Cylinder. p. 290
VIA REGIA AD GEOMETRIAM.
THE FIRST BOOK OF Peter Ramus's Geometry, Which is of a Magnitude.
1. Geometry is the Art of measuring well.

THE end or scope of Geometry is to measure well: Therefore it is defined of
the end, as generally all other Arts are. To measure well therefore is to
consider the nature and affections of every thing that is to be measured: To
compare such like things one with another: And to understand their reason and
proportion and similitude. For all that is to measure well, whether it be that
by Congruency and application of some assigned measure: Or by Multiplication of
the terms or bounds: Or by Division of the product made by multiplication: Or
by any other way whatsoever the affection of the thing to be measured be
considered.

But this end of Geometry will appear much more beautiful and glorious in the
use and geometrical works and practice then by precepts, when thou shall
observe Astronomers, Geographers, Land-meaters, Seamen, Enginers, Architects,
Carpenters, Painters, and Carvers, in the description and measuring of the
Stars, Countries, Lands, Engines, Seas, Buildings, Pictures, and Statues or
Images to use the help of no other art but of Geometry. Wherefore here the
name of this art comes far short of the thing meant by it. (For Geometria,
made of Ge, which in the Greek language signifies the Earth; and Metron, a
measure, imports no more, but as one would say Land-measuring. And Geometra,
is but Agrimensor, A land-meter: or as Tully calls him Dec^mpedator, a
Pole-man: or as Plautus, Finitor, a Marke-man.) when as this Art teaches not
only how to measure the Land or the Earth, but the Water, and the Air, yea and
the whole World too, and in it all Bodies, Surfaces, Lines, and whatsoever else
is to be measured.

Now a Measure, as Aristotle does determine it, in every thing to be measured,
is some small thing conceived and set out by the measurer; and of the Geometers
it is called Mensura flamosa, a known measure. Which kind of measures, were
at first, as Vitruvius and Herodo teach us, taken from man's body: whereupon
Protagoras said, That man was the measure of all things, which speech of his,
Saint John, Apoc. 21. 17. does seem to approve. True it is, that beside those,
there are some other sorts of measures, especially greater ones, taken from
other things, yet all of them generally made and defined by those. And because
the stature and bigness of men is greater in some places, then it is
ordinarily in others, therefore the measures taken from them are greater in
some countries, then they are in others. Behold here a catalogue, and
description of such as are commonly either used amongst us, or some times
mentioned in our stories and other books translated into our English tongue.

Granum hordei, a Barley corn, like as a wheat corn in weights, is no kind
of measure, but is quiddam minimum in mensura, some least thing in a measure,
whereof it is, as it were, made, and whereby it is rectified.

Digitus, a Finger breadth, contains 2. barley corns length, or four laid
side to side:

Pollex, a Thumb breadth; called otherwise Vucia, an ynch, 3. barley corns in
length:

Palmus, or Palmus minor, an Handbreadth, 4. fingers, or 3. inches.

Spithama, or Palmus major, a Span, 3. hands breadth, or 9. inches.

Cubitus, a Cubit, half a yard, from the elbow to the top of the middle
finger, 6. hands breadth, or two spannes.

Vlna, from the top of the shoulder or arme-hole, to the top of the middle
finger. It is two fold; A yard and an Elne. A yard, contains 2. cubits, or
3. foot: An Elne, one yard and a quarter, or 2. cubits and.

Pes, a Foot, 4. hands breadth, or twelve inches.

Gradus, or Passus minor, a Step, two foot and an half.

Passus, or Passus major, a Stride, two steps, or five foot.

Pertica, a Pertch, Pole, Rod or Lugge, 5. yardes and an half.

Stadium, a Furlong; after the Romans, 125. pases: the English, 40. rod.

Milliare, or Milliarium, that is mill passus, 1000. passes, or 8. furlongs.

Leuca, a League, 2. miles: used by the French, spaniards, and seamen.

Parasanga, about 4. miles: a Persian, and common Dutch mile; 30. furlongs.

Schoenos, 40. furlongs: an Egyptian, or swedland mile.

Now for a confirmation of that which has been said, hear the words of the
Statute.

It is ordained, That 3. grains of Barley, dry and round, do make an Ynch: 12.
inches do make a Foot: 3. foot do make a Yard: 5. yardes and do make a
Perch: And 40. perches in length, and 4. in breadth, do make an Aker: 33.
Edwar. 1. De terris mensurandis: and De compositione ulnarum and Perticarum.

Item, Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid; That a Mile shall be taken
and reckoned in this manner, and no otherwise; That is to say, a Mile to
contain 8. furlongs: And every Furlong to contain 40. lugges or poles: And
every Lugge or Pole to contain 16. foot and ^. 25. Eliza. An Act for
restraint of new building, etc.

These, as I said, are according to diverse countries, where they are used,
much different one from another: which difference, in my judgment; arises
especially out of the difference of the Foot, by which generally they are all
made, whether they be greater or lesser. For the Hand being as before has
been taught, the fourth part of the foot whether greater or lesser: And the
Ynch, the third part of the hand, whether greater or lesser.

Item, the Yard, containing 3. foot, whether greater or lesser: And the Rod
5. yardes and, whether greater or lesser, and so forth of the rest; It must
needs follow, that the Foot being in some places greater then it is in other
some, these measures, the Hand, I mean, the Ynch, the Yard, the Rod, must
needs be greater or lesser in some places then they are in other. Of this
diversity therefore, and difference of the foot, in foreign countries, as
far as mine intelligence will inform me, because the place does invite me, I
will here add these few lines following. For of the rest, because they are of
more special use, I will God willing, as just occasion shall be administered,
speak more plentifully hereafter.

Of this argument diverse men have written somewhat, more or less: But none to
my knowledge, more copiously and curiously, then James Capell, a Frenchman, and
the learned Willebrand, Snellius, of Leiden in Holland, for they have compared,
and that very diligently, many and sundry kinds of these measures one with
another. The first as you may see in his treatise De mensuris intervallorum
describes these eleven following:
of which the greatest is Pes Babylonius, the Babylonian foot; the least, Pes
Toletanus, the foot used about Teledo in Spain: And the mean between both,
Pes Atticus, that used about Athens in Greece. For they are one unto another as
20. 15. and 12. are one unto another. Therefore if the Spanish foot, being the
least, be divided into 12. inches, and every inch again into 10. parts, and
so the whole foot into 120. the Atticke foot shall contain of those parts
150. and the Babylonian, 200. To this Atticke foot, of all other, does ours
come the nearest: For our English foot comprehends almost 152. such parts.

The other, to wit the learned Snellius, in his Eratosthenes Batavus, a book
which he has written of the true quantity of the compass of the Earth,
describes many more, and that after a far more exact and curious manner.

Here observe, that besides those by us here set down, there are certain
others by him mentioned, which as he writes are found wholly to agree with
some one or other of these. For Rheinlandicus, that of Rheinland or Leiden,
which he makes his base, is all one with Romanus, the Italian or Roman foot.
Lovaniensis, that of Lovane, with that of Antwerpe: Bremensis, that of Breme in
Germany, with that of Hafnia, in Denmark. Only his Pes Arabicus, the Arabian
foot, or that mentioned in Abulfada, and Nubiensis: the Geographers I have
overpassed, because he dares not, for certain, affirm what it was.

Look of what parts Pes Tolitanus, the spanish foot, or that of Toledo in
Spain, contains 120. of such is the Pes. Heidelbergicus, that of Heidelberg,
137. Hetruscus, that of Tuscan, in Italy, 138. Sedanensis, of Sedan in France,
139. Romanus, that of Rome in Italy, 144. Atticus, of Athens in Greece, 150.
Anglicus, of England, 152. Parisinus, of Paris in France, 160. Syriacus, of
Syria, 166. AEgyptiacus, of Egypt, 171. Hebraicus, that of Iudaea, 180.
Babylonius, that of Babylon, 200.


Look of what parts Pes Romonus, the foot of Rome, (which is all one with the
foot of Rheinland) is 1000. of such parts is the foot of Toledo, in Spain,
864. Mechlin, in Brabant, 890. Strausburgh, in Germany, 891. Amsterdam, in
Holland, 904. Antwerpe, in Brabant, 909. Bavaria, in Germany, 924. Coppen-haun,
in Denmark, 934. Goes, in Zeland, 954. Middleburge, in Zeland, 960. London, in
England, 968. Noremberge, in Germany, 974. Ziriczee, in Zeland, 980. The
ancient Greek, 1042. Dort, in Holland, 1050. Paris, in France, 1055. Briel, in
Holland, 1060. Venice, in Italy, 1101. Babylon, in Chaldaea, 1172. Alexandria,
in Egypt, 1200. Antioch, in Syria, 1360.


Of all other therefore our English foot comes nearest unto that used by the
Greeks: And the learned Master To. Hues, was not much amiss, who in his book
or Treatise De Globis, thus writes of it Pedem nostrum Angli cum Graecorum
pedi aequalem invenimus, comparatione facta cum Graecorum pede, quem Agricola
and alijex antiquis monumentis tradi derunt.

Now by any one of these known and compared with ours, to all English men well
known the rest may easily be proportioned out.

2. The thing proposed to be measured is a Magnitude.

Magnitudo, a Magnitude or Bigness is the subject about which Geometry is
busied. For every Art has a proper subject about which it does employ al his
rules and precepts: And by this especially they do differ one from another. So
the subject of Grammar was speech; of Logic, reason; of Arithmeticke,
numbers; and so now of Geometry it is a magnitude, all whose kinds,
differences and affections, are hereafter to be declared.

3. A Magnitude is a continual quantity.

A Magnitude is quantitas continua, a continued, or continual quantity. A
number is quantitas discreta, a disjoined quantity: As one, two, three, four;
do consist of one, two, three, four unities, which are disjoined and severed
parts: whereas the parts of a Line, Surface, and Body are contained and
continued without any manner of disjunction, separation, or distinction at all,
as by and by shall better and more plainly appear. Therefore a Magnitude is
here understood to be that whereby every thing to be measured is said to be
great: As a Line from hence is said to be long, a Surface broad, a Body solid:
Wherefore Length, Breadth, and solidity are Magnitudes.

4. That is continuum, continual, whose parts are contained or held together
by some common bound.

This definition of it self is somewhat obscure, and to be understand only in
a geometrical sense: And it depends especially of the common bound. For the
parts (which here are so called) are nothing in the whole, but in a potentia or
power: Neither indeed may the whole magnitude be conceived, but as it is
compact of his parts, which notwithstanding we may in all places assume or
take as contained and continued with a common bound, which Aristotle names a
Common limit; but Euclide a Common section, as in a line, is a Point, in a
surface, a Line: in a body, a Surface.

5. A bound is the outmost of a Magnitude.

Terminus, a Term, or Bound is here understood to be that which does either
bound, limite, or end actu, in deed; as in the beginning and end of a
magnitude: Or potentia, in power or ability, as when it is the common bound of
the continual magnitude. Neither is the Bound a part of the bounded
magnitude: For the thing bounding is one thing, and the thing bounded is
another: For the Bound is one distance, dimension, or degree, inferior to the
thing bounded: A Point is the bound of a line, and it is less then a line by
one degree, because it cannot be divided, which a line may. A Line is the
bound of a surface, and it is also less then a surface by one distance or
dimension, because it is only length, whereas a surface has both length and
breadth. A Surface is the bound of a body, and it is less likewise then it is
by one dimension, because it is only length and breadth, whereas as a body
has both length, breadth, and thickenesse.

Now every Magnitude actu, in deed, is terminate, bounded and finite, yet the
geometer does desire some time to have an infinite line granted him, but no
otherwise infinite or farther to be drawane out then may serve his turn.

6. A Magnitude is both infinitely made, and continued, and cut or divided by
those things wherewith it is bounded.

A line, a surface, and a body are made gemetrically by the motion of a point,
line, and surface: Item, they are contained, continued, and cut or divided by a
point, line, and surface. But a Line is bounded by a point: a surface, by a
line: And a Body by a surface, as afterward by their several kinds shall be
understood.

Now that all magnitudes are cut or divided by the same wherewith they are
bounded, is conceived out of the definition of Continuum, e. 4. For if the
common band to contain and couple together the parts of a Line, surface, and
Body, be a Point, Line, and Surface, it must needs be that a section or
division shall be made by those common bands: And that to be dissolved which
they did contain and knitt together.

7. A point is an undivisible sign in a magnitude.

A Point, as here it is defined, is not natural and to be perceived by sense;
Because sense only perceives that which is a body; And if there be any thing
less then other to be perceived by sense, that is called a Point. Wherefore a
Point is no Magnitude: But it is only that which in a Magnitude is conceived
and imagined to be undivisible. And although it be void of all bigness or
Magnitude, yet is it the beginning of all magnitudes, the beginning I mean
potentia, in power.

8. Magnitudes commensurable, are those which one and the same measure does
measure: contrariwise, Magnitudes incommensurable are those, which the same
measure cannot measure. 1, 2. d. X.

Magnitudes compared between themselves in respect of numbers have Symmetry or
commensurability, and Reason or rationality: Of themselves, Congruity and
Adscription. But the measure of a magnitude is only by supposition, and at the
discretion of the Geometer, to take as pleases him, whether an ynch, an hand
breadth, foot, or any other thing whatsoever, for a measure. Therefore two
magnitudes, the one a foot long, the other two foot long, are commensurable;
because the magnitude of one foot does measure them both, the first once, the
second twice. But some magnitudes there are which have no common measure, as
the Diagony of a quadrate and his side, 116. p. X. actu, in deed, are
Asymmetra, incommensurable: And yet they are potentia, by power, symmetra,
commensurable, to wit by their quadrates: For the quadrate of the diagony is
double to the quadrate of the side.

9. Rational Magnitudes are those whose reason may be expressed by a number
of the measure given. Contrariwise they are irrationalls. 5. d. X.

Ratio, Reason, Rate, or Rationality, what it is our Author (and likewise
Salignacus have taught us in the first Chapter of the second book of their
Arithmetickes: Thither therefore I refer thee.

Data mensura, a Measure given or assigned, is of Euclide called Rhete, that is
spoken, (or which may be uttered) definite, certain, to wit which may be
expressed by some number, which is no other then that, which as we said, was
called mensura famosa, a known or famous measure.

Therefore Irrational magnitudes, on the contrary, are understood to be such
whose reason or rate may not be expressed by a number or a measure assigned:
As the side of the side of a quadrate of 20. foot unto a magnitude of two
foot; of which kind of magnitudes, thirteen sorts are mentioned in the tenth
book of Euclides Elements: such are the segments of a right line
proportionally cut, unto the whole line. The Diameter in a circle is
rational: But it is irrational unto the side of an inscribed quinquangle: The
Diagony of an ^cosahedron and Dodecahedron is irrational unto the side.

10. Congruall or agreeable magnitudes are those, whose parts being applied or
laid one upon another do fill an equal place.

Symmetria, Symmetry or Commensurability and Rate were from numbers: The next
affections of Magnitudes are altogether geometrical.

Congruentia, Congruency, Agreeableness is of two magnitudes, when the first
parts of the one do agree to the first parts of the other, the mean to the
mean, the extremes or ends to the ends, and lastly the parts of the one, in
all respects to the parts, of the other: so Lines are congruall or agreeable,
when the bounding, points of the one, applied to the bounding points of the
other, and the whole lengths to the whole lengthes, do occupy or fill the
same place. So Surfaces do agree, when the bounding lines, with the bounding
lines: And the plots bounded, with the plots bounded do occupy the same
place. Now bodies if they do agree, they do seem only to agree by their
surfaces. And by this kind of congruency do we measure the bodies of all both
liquid and dry things, to wit, by filling an equal place. Thus also do the
moniers judge the moneys and coins to be equal, by the equal weight of the
plates in filling up of an equal place. But here note, that there is nothing
that is only a line, or a surface only, that is natural and sensible to the
touch, but whatsoever is natural, and thus to be discerned is corporeal.

Therefore

11. Congruall or agreeable Magnitudes are equal. 8. ax.j.

A lesser right line may agree to a part of a greater, but to so much of it, it
is equal, with how much it does agree: Neither is that axiom reciprocal or
to be converted; For neither in deed are Congruity and Equality reciprocal or
convertible. For a Triangle may be equal to a Parallelogramme, yet it cannot
in all points agree to it: And so to a Circle there is sometimes sought an
equal quadrate, although in congruall or not agreeing with it: Because those
things which are of the like kind do only agree.

12. Magnitudes are described between themselves, one with another, when the
bounds of the one are bounded within the bounds of the other: That which is
within, is called the inscript: and that which is without, the Circumscript.

Now follows Adscription, whose kinds are Inscription and Circumscription;
That is when one figure is written or made within another: This when it is
written or made about another figure.

Homogenea, Homogenealls or figures of the same kind only between themselves
rectitermina, or right bounded, are properly adscribed between themselves, and
with a round. Notwithstanding, at the 15. book of Euclides Elements
Heterogenea, Heterogenealls or figures of diverse kinds are also adscribed, to
wit the five ordinate plain bodies between themselves: And a right line is
inscribed within a periphery and a triangle.

But the use of adscription of a rectilineall and circle, shall hereafter
manifest singular and notable mysteries by the reason and means of adscripts;
which adscription shall be the key whereby a way is opened unto that most
excellent doctrine taught by the subtenses or inscripts of a circle as Ptolomey
speaks, or Sines, as the latter writers call them.

The second Book of Geometry.
Of a Line.
1. A Magnitude is either a Line or a Lineate.

THe Common affections of a magnitude are hitherto declared: The Species or
kinds do follow: for other then this division our author could not then
meet withal.

2. A Line is a Magnitude only long.

As are a e. i o. and u y. such a like Magnitude is conceived in the measuring
of ways, or distance of one place from another: And by the difference of a
lightsome place from a dark: Euclide at the 2 d j. defines a line to be a
length void of breadth: And indeed length is the proper difference of a line,
as breadth is of a face, and solidity of a body.

3. The bound of a line is a point.

Euclide at the 3. d j. says that the extremities or ends of a line are
points. Now seeing that a Periphery or an hoope line has neither beginning nor
ending, it seems not to be bounded with points: But when it is described or
made it begins at a point, and it ends at a point. Wherefore a Point is
the bound of a line, sometime actu, in deed, as in a right line: sometime
potentia, in a possibility, as in a perfect periphery. Yea in very deed, as
before was taught in the definition of continuum, 4 e. all lines, whether they
be right lines, or crooked, are contained or continued with points. But a line
is made by the motion of a point. For every magnitude generally is made by a
geometrical motion, as was even now taught, and it shall afterward by the
several kinds appear, how by one motion whole figures are made: How by a
conversion, a Circle, Sphere, Cone, and Cylinder: How by multiplication of the
base and height, rightangled parallelogrammes are made.

4. A Line is either Right or Crooked.

This division is taken out of the 4 d j. of Euclide, where rectitude or
straightnes is attributed to a line, as if from it both surfaces and bodies
were to have it. And even so the rectitude of a solid figure, here-after shall
be understood by a right line perpendicular from the top unto the center of
the base. Wherefore rectitude is propper unto a line. And therefore also
obliquity or crookedness, from whence a surface is judged to be right or
oblique, and a body right or oblique.

5. A right line is that which lies equally between his own bounds: A
crooked line lies contrariwise. 4. d. j.

Now a line lies equally between his own bounds, when it is not here lower,
nor there higher: But is equal to the space comprehended between the two
bounds or ends: As here a e. is, so he that makes rectum iter, a journey in a
straight line, commonly he is said to tread so much ground, as he needs must,
and no more: He goes obliquum iter, a crooked way, which goes more then he
needs, as Proclus says.

Therefore

6. A right line is the shortest between the same bounds.

Linea recta, a straight or right line is that, as Plato defines it, whose
middle points do hinder us from seeing both the extremes at once; As in the
eclipse of the Sun, if a right line should be drawn from the Sun, by the
Moon, unto our eye, the body of the Moon being in the midst, would hinder
our sight, and would take away the sight of the Sun from u^^ which is taken
from the Optics, in which we are taught, that we see by straight beams or
rays. Therefore to lie equally between the bounds, that is by an equal
distance: to be the shortest between the same bounds; And that the midst
does hinder the sight of the extremes, is all one.

7. A crooked line is touched of a right or crooked line, when they both do so
meet, that being continued or drawn out farther they do not cut one another.



Tactus, Touching is propper to a crooked line, compared either with a right
line or crooked, as is manifest out of the 2. and 3. d 3. A right line is said
to touch a circle, which touching the circle and drawn out farther, does not
cut the circle, 2 d 3. as here a e, the right line touches the periphery i o
u. And a e. does touch the helix or spirall. Circles are said to touch one
another, when touching they do not cut one another, 3. d 3. as here the
periphery does a e j. does touch the periphery o u y.

Therefore

8. Touching is but in one point only. e 13. p 3.

This Consectary is immediately conceived out of the definition; for otherwise
it were a cutting, not touching. So Aristotle in his Mechanickes says; That a
round is easiliest moved and most swift; Because it is least touched of the
plain underneath it.

9. A crooked line is either a Periphery or an Helix. This also is such a
division, as our Author could then hitte on.

10. A Periphery is a crooked line, which is equally distant from the midst
of the space comprehended.

Peripheria, a Periphery, or Circumference, as e i o. does stand equally
distant from a, the midst of the space enclosed or contained within it.

Therefore

11. A Periphery is made by the turning about of a line, the one end thereof
standing still, and the other drawing the line.

As in e i o. let the point a stand still: And let the line a o, be turned
about, so that the point o do make a race, and it shall make the periphery e o
i. Out of this fabric does Euclide, at the 15. d. j. frame the definition of
a Periphery: And so does he afterward define a Cone, a Sphere, and a
Cylinder.

Now the line that is turned about, may in a plain, be either a right line or
a crooked line: In a sphericall it is only a crooked line; But in a conicall
or Cylindraceall it may be a right line, as is the side of a Cone and
Cylinder. Therefore in the conversion or turning about of a line making a
periphery, there is considered only the distance; yea two points, one in the
center, the other in the top, which therefore Aristotle names Rotundi
principia, the principles or beginnings of a round.

12. An Helix is a crooked line which is unequally distant from the midst of
the space, howsoever enclosed.

Haec tortuosa linea, This crankled line is of Proclus called Helicoides. But
it may also be called Helix, a twist or wreath^ The Greeks by this word do
commonly either understand one of the kinds of Ivy which windeth it self
about trees and other plants; or the strings of the vine, whereby it catches
hold and twisteth it self about such things as are set for it to clime or run
upon. Therefore it should properly signify the spirall line. But as it is here
taken it has diverse kinds; As is the Arithmetica which is Archimede'es Helix,
as the Conchois, Cockleshell-like: as is the Cittois, Iuylike: The
Tetragonisousa, the Circle squaring line, to wit that by whose means a circle
may be brought into a square: The Admirable line, found out by Menelaus: The
Conicall Ellipsis, the Hyperbole, the Parabole, such as these are, they
attribute to Menechmus: All these Apollonius has comprised in eight Books;
but being mingled lines, and so not easy to be all reckoned up and expressed,
Euclide has wholly omitted them, says Proclus, at the 9. p. j.

13. Lines are right one unto another, whereof the one falling upon the other,
lies equally: Contrariwise they are oblique. e 10. dj.

Hitherto straightness and crookedness have been the affections of one sole
line only: The affections of two lines compared one with another are
Perpendiculum, Perpendicularity and Parallelismus, Parallel equality; Which
affections are common both to right and crooked lines. Perpendicularity is
first generally defined thus:

Lines are right between themselves, that is, perpendicular one unto another,
when the one of them lighting upon the other, stands upright and inclines or
leans neither way. So two right lines in a plain may be perpendicular; as
are a e. and i o. so two peripheries upon a sphearicall may be perpendiculars,
when the one of them falling upon the other, stands indifferently between,
and does not incline or lean either way. So a right line may be perpendicular
unto a periphery, if falling upon it, it do reele neither way, but do ly
indifferently between either side. And in deed in all respects lines right
between themselves, and perpendicular lines are one and the same. And from the
perpendicularity of lines, the perpendicularity of surfaces is taken, as
hereafter shall appear. Of the perpendicularity of bodies, Euclide speaks
not one word in his Elements, and yet a body is judged to be right, that is,
plumme or perpendicular unto another body, by a perpendicular line.

Therefore,

14. If a right line be perpendicular unto a right line, it is from the same
bound, and on the same side, one only. e 13. p. xj.

Or, there can no more fall from the same point, and on the same side but that
one. This consectary follows immediately upon the former: For if there should
any more fall unto the same point and on the same side, one must needs reele,
and would not ly indifferently between the parts cut: as here thou see in
the right line a e. i o. e u.

15. Parallel lines they are, which are every where equally distant. e 35. dj.

Parallelismus, Parallell-equality does now follow: And this also is common to
crooked lines and right lines: As here thou see in these examples following.



Parallell-equality is derived from perpendicularity, and is of near affinity
to it. Therefore Posidonius did define it by a common perpendicle or plum-line:
yea and in deed our definition intimates as much. Parallell-equality of bodies
is no where mentioned in Euclides^ Elements: and yet they may also be
parallells, and are often used in the Optickes, Mechanickes, Painting and
Architecture.

Therefore,

16. Lines which are parallel to one and the same line, are also parallel one
to another.

This element is specially propounded and spoken of right lines only, and is
demonstrated at the 30. p. i. But by an addition of equal distances, an equal
distance is known, as here.

The third Book of Geometry.
Of an Angle.
1. A lineate is a Magnitude more then long.

A New form of doctrine has forced our Author to use often times new words,
especially in dividing, that the logical laws and rules of more perfect
division by a dichotomy, that is into two kinds, might be held and observed.
Therefore a Magnitude was divided into two kinds, to wit into a Line and a
Lineate: And a Lineate is made the genus of a surface and a Body. Hitherto a
Line, which of all bignesses is the first and most simple, has been described:
Now follows a Lineate, the other kind of magnitude opposed as you see to a
line, follows next in order. Lineatum therefore a Lineate, or Lineamentum, a
Lineament, (as by the authority of our Author himself, the learned Bernhard
Salignacus, who was his Scholar, has corrected it) is that Magnitude in which
there are lines: Or which is made of lines, or as our Author here, which is
more then long: Therefore lines may be drawn in a surface, which is the proper
soil or plots of lines: They may also be drawn in a body, as the Diameter in
a Prisma: the axis in a sphere; and generally all lines falling from aloft:
And therefore Proclus makes some plain, other solid lines. So Conicall lines,
as the Ellipsis, Hyperbole, and Parabole, are called solid lines because they
do arise from the cutting of a body

2. To a Lineate belongs an Angle and a Figure.

The common affections of a Magnitude were to be bounded, cut, jointly
measured, and ascribed: Then of a line to be right, crooked, touched, turned
about, and wreathed: All which are in a lineate by means of a line. Now the
common affections of a Lineate are to be Angled and Figured. And surely an
Angle and a Figure in all Geometrical businesses do fill almost both sides of
the leaf. And therefore both of them are diligently to be considered.

3. An Angle is a lineate in the common section of the bounds.

So Angulus superficiarius, a superficial Angle, is a surface consisting in
the common section of two lines: So angulus solidus, a solid angle, in the
common section of three surfaces at the least.

[But the learned B. Salignacus has observed, that all angles do not consist
in the common section of the bounds, Because the touching of circles, either
one another, or a rectilineal surface does make an angle without any cutting of
the bounds: And therefore he defines it thus: Angulus est terminorum inter se
invicem inclinantium concursus: An angle is the meeting of bounds, one leaning
toward another.] So is a e i. a superficial angle: [And such also are the
angles o u y. and b c d.] so is the angle o. a solid angle, to wit
comprehended of the three surfaces a e i. i o e. and a o e. Neither may a
surface, of 2. dimensions, be bounded with one right line: Nor a body, of three
dimensions, be bounded with two, at lest being plain surfaces.

4. The shankes of an angle are the bounds compreding the angle.

Scele or Crura, the Shankes, Legs, H. are the bounds insisting or standing
upon the base of the angle, which in the Isosceles only or Equic^urall triangle
are so named of Euclide, otherwise he names them La^era, sides. So in the
examples aforesaid, e a. and e i. are the shankes of the superficiary angle e^
And so are the three surfaces a e i. i e o. and a e o. the shankes of the said
angle o. Therefore the shankes making the angle are either Lines or Surfaces:
And the lineates formed or made into Angles, are either Surfaces or Bodies.

5. Angles homogeneall, are angles of the same kind, both in respect of their
shankes, as also in the manner of meeting of the same: [Heterogeneall, are those
which differ one from another in one, or both these conditions.]

Therefore this Homogenia, or similitude of angles is two-folde, the first is
of shanks; the other is of the manner of meeting of the shankes: so
rectilineall right angles, are angles homogeneall between themselves. But
^ight lined right angles, and oblique-lined right angles between themselves,
are heterogenealls. So are neither all obtusangles compared to all obtusangles:
Nor all acutangles, to all acutangles, homogenealls, except both these
conditions do concur, to wit the similitude both of shanke and manner of
meeting. Lunularis, a Lunular, or Moonlike corner angle is homogeneall to a
Systroides and Pelecoides, Hatchet formelike, in shankes: For each of these are
comprehended of peripheries: The Lunular of one convexe; the other concave; as
i u e. The Systroides of both unequal, as i a o. The Pelecoides of both concave,
as e a u. And yet a lunular, in respect of the meeting of the shankes is both
to the Systroides and Pelecoides heterogeneall: And therefore it is absolutely
heterogeneall to it.

6. Angels congruall in shankes are equal.

This is drawn out of the 10. e j. For if twice two shanks do agree, they are
not four, but two shankes, neither are they two equal angles, but one angle.
And this is that which Proclus speaks of, at the 4. p j. when he says, that
a right lined angle is equal to a right lined angle, when one of the shankes
of the one put upon one of the shankes of the other, the other two do agree:
when that other shanke fall without, the angle of the out-falling shanke is the
greater: when it falls within, it is lesser: For there is comprehends; here
it is comprehended.

Notwithstanding although congruall or agreeable angles be equal: yet are not
congruity and equality reciprocal or convertible: For a Lunular may be equal
to a right lined right angle, as here thou see: For the angles of equal
semicircles i e o. and a e u. are equal, as application does show. The angle a
e o. is common both to the right angle a e i. and to the lunar a u e o. Let
therefore the equal angle a e o. be added to both: the right angle a e i.
shall be equal to the Lunular a u e o.

The same Lunular also may be equal to an obtusangle and Acutangle, as the
same argument will demonstrate.

Therefore,

7. If an angle being equicrurall to an other angle, be also equal to it in
base, it is equal: And if an angle having equal shankes with another, be
equal to it in the angle, it is also equal to it in base. e 8. and 4. pj.

For such angles shall be congruall or agreeable in shanks, and also congruall
in bases. Angulus isosceles, or Angulus oequicrurus, is a triangle having
equal shankes unto another.

8. And if an angle equal in base to another, be also equal to it in shankes,
it is equal to it.

For the congruency is the same: And yet if equal angles be equal in base,
they are not by and by equicrurall, as in the angles of the same section will
appear, as here. And so of two equalities, the first is reciprocal: The
second is not. [And therefore is this Consectary, by the learned B. Salignacus,
justly, according to the judgment of the worthy Rud. Snellius, here cancelled;
or quite put out: For angles may be equal, although they be unequal in
shankes or in bases, as here, the angle a. is not greater then the angle o,
although the angle o have both greater shankes and greater base then the angle
a.

And

9. If an angle equicrurall to another angle, be greater then it in base, it is
greater: And if it be greater, it is greater in base: e 52 and 24. pj.

As here thou see; [The angles e a i. and u o y. are equicrurall, that is
their shankes are equal one to another; But the base e i is greater then the
base u y: Therefore the angle e u i, is greater then the angle u o y. And
contrary wise, they being equicrurall, and the angle e a i. being greater then
the angle u o y. The base e i. must needs be greater then the base u y.]

And

10. If an angle equal in base, be less in the inner shankes, it is greater.

Or as the learned Master T. Hood does paraphrastically translate it. If being
equal in the base, it be lesser in the feet (the feet being contained
within the feet of the other angle) it is the greater angle. [That is, if one
angle enscribed within another angle, be equal in base, the angle of the
inscribed shall be greater then the angle of the circumscribed.]

As here the angle a e i. within the angle a o i. And the bases are equal, to
wit one and the same; Therefore a o i. the inner angle is greater then a e i.
the outter angle. Inner is added of necessity: For otherwise there will, in the
section or cutting one of another, appear a manifest error. All these
consectaries are drawn out of that same axiom of congruity, to wit out of
the 10. e j. as Proclus does plainly affirm and teach: It seems says he,
that the equalities of shankes and bases, does cause the equality of the
vertical angles. For neither, if the bases be equal, does the equality of the
shankes leave the same or equal angles: But if the base be lesser, the angle
decreaseth: If greater, it increases. Neither if the bases be equal, and the
shankes unequal, does the angle remain the same: But when they are made
less, it is increased: when they are made greater, it is diminished: For the
contrary falls out to the angles and shankes of the angles. For if thou shall
imagine the shankes to be in the same base thrust downward, thou make them
less, but their angle greater: but if thou do again conceive them to be pulled
up higher, thou make them greater, but their angle lesser. For look how much
more near they come one to another, so much farther off is the oppe removed
from the base; wherefore you may boldly affirm, that the same base and equal
shankes, do define the equality of Angels. This Poclus.

Therefore,

11. If unto the shankes of an angle given, homogeneall shankes, from a point
assigned, be made equal upon an equal base, they shall comprehend an angle
equal to the angle given. e 23. p j. and 26. p xj.

[This consectary teaches how unto a point given, to make an angle equal to
an Angle given. To the effecting and doing of each three things are required;
First, that the shankes be homogeneall, that is in each place, either straight
or crooked: Secondly, that the shankes be made equal, that is of like or
equal bigness: Thirdly, that the bases be equal: which three conditions if
they do meet, it must needs be that both the angles shall be equal: but if
one of them be wanting, of necessity again they must be unequal.]

This shall hereafter be declared and made plain by many and sundry practices:
and therefore here we bring no example of it.

12. An angle is either right or oblique.

Thus much of the Affections of an angle; the division into his kinds
follows. An angle is either Right or Oblique: as before, at the 4 e ij. a line
was right or straight, and oblique or crooked.

13. A right angle is an angle whose shankes are right (that is perpendicular)
one unto another: An Oblique angle is contrary to this.

As here the angle a i o. is a right angle, as is also o i e. because the
shanke o i. is right, that is, perpendicular to a e. [The instrument whereby
they do make trial which is a right angle, and which is oblique, that is
greater or lesser then a right angle, is the square which carpenters and
joyners do ordinarily use: For lengthes are tried, says Vitruvius, by the
Rular and Line: Heighths, by the Perpendicular or Plumbe: And Angles, by the
spuare. Contrariwise, an Oblique angle it is, when the one shanke stands so
upon another, that it inclines, or leans more to one side, then it does to
the other: And one angle on the one side, is greater then that on the other.

Therefore,

14. All straight-shanked right angles are equal.

[That is, they are alike, and agreeable, or they do fill the same place; as
here are a i o. and e i o. And yet again on the contrary: All straight shanked
equal angles, are not right-angles.]

The axioms of the equality of angles were three, as even now we heard, one
general, and two Consectaries: Here moreover is there one special one of the
equality of Right angles.

Angles therefore homogeneall and recticrurall, that is whose shankes are right,
as are right lines, as plain surfaces (For let us so take the word) are equal
right angles. So are the above written rectilineall right angles equal: so are
plain solid right angles, as in a cube, equal. The axiom may therefore
generally be spoken of solid angles, so they be recticruralls; Because all
semicircular right angles are not equal to all semicircular right angles: As
here, when the diameter is continued it is perpendicular, and makes twice two
angles, within and without, the outter equal between themselves, and inner
equal between themselves: But the outer unequal to the inner: And the angle
of a greater semicircle is greater, then the angle of a lesser. Neither is this
affection any way reciprocal, That all equal angles should be right angles.
For oblique angles may be equal between themselves: And an oblique angle may
be made equal to a right angle, as a Lunular to a rectilineall right angle,
as was manifest, at the 6 e.

The definition of an oblique is understood by the obliquity of the shankes:
whereupon also it appears; That an oblique angle is unequal to an
homogeneall right angle: Neither indeed may oblique angles be made equal by
any law or rule: Because obliquity may infinitely be both increased and
diminished.

15. An oblique angle is either Obtuse or Acute.

One difference of Obliquity we had before at the 9 e ij. in a line, to wit
of a periphery and an helix; Here there is another dichotomy of it into obtuse
and acute: which difference is proper to angles, from whence it is translated
or conferred upon other things and metaphorically used, as Ingenium-obtusum,
acutum; A dull, and quick wit, and such like.

16. An obtuse-angle is an oblique angle greater then a right angle. 11. dj.

Obtusus, Blunt or Dull; As here a e i. In the definition the genus of both
Species or kinds is to be understood: For a right lined right angle is greater
then a sphearicall right angle, and yet it is not an obtuse or blunt angle: And
this greater inequality may infinitely be increased.

17. An acutangle is an oblique angle lesser then a right angle. 12. dj.

Acutus, Sharp, Keen, as here a e i. is. Here again the same genus is to be
understood^ because every angle which is less then any right angle is not an
acute or sharp angle. For a semicircle and sphericall right angle, is less
then a rectilineall right angle, and yet it is not an acute angle.

The fourth Book, which is of a Figure.
1. A figure is a lineate bounded on all parts.

SO the triangle a e i. is a figure; Because it is a plain bounded on all
parts with three sides. So a circle is a figure: Because it is a plain every
way bounded with one periphery.



2. The center is the middle point in a figure.

In some part of a figure the Center, Perimeter, Radius, Diameter and Altitude
are to be considered. The Center therefore is a point in the midst of the
figure; so in the triangle, quadrate, and circle, the center is, a e i.



Centrum gravitatis, the center of weight, in every plain magnitude is said to
be that, by the which it is handled or held up parallel to the horizon: Or it
is that point whereby the weight being suspended does rest, when it is carried.
Therefore if any plate should in all places be alike heavy, the center of
magnitude and weight would be one and the same.

3. The perimeter is the compass of the figure.

Or, the perimeter is that which incloseth the figure. This definition is
nothing else but the interpretation of the Greek word. Therefore the perimeter
of a Triangle is one line made or compounded of three lines. So the perimeter
of the triangle a, is e i o. So the perimeter of the circle a is a periphery,
as in e i o. So the perimeter of a Cube is a surface, compounded of six
surfaces: And the perimeter of a sphere is one whole sphaericall surface, as
hereafter shall appear.

4. The Radius is a right line drawn from the center to the perimeter.

Radius, the Ray, Beam, or Spoake, as of the sun, and cart wheel: As in the
figures under written are ae, ai, a^. It is here taken for any distance from
the center, whether they be equal or unequal.

5. The Diameter is a right line inscribed within the figure by his center.

As in the figure underwritten are a e, a i, a o. It is called the Diagonius,
when it passes from corner to corner. In solids it is called the Axis, as
hereafter we shall hear.

Therefore,

6. The diameters in the same figure are infinite.

Although of an infinite number of unequal lines that be only the diameter,
which passes by or through the center notwithstanding by the center there may
be diverse and sundry. In a circle the thing is most apparent: as in the
Astrolabe the index may be put up and down by all the points of the periphery.
So in a spear and all rounds the thing is more easy to be conceived, where
the diameters are equal: yet notwithstanding in other figures the thing is the
same. Because the diameter is a right line inscribed by the center, whether
from corner to corner, or side to side, the matter skilleth not. Therefore that
there are in the same figure infinite diameters, it issues out of the
difinition of a diameter.

And

7. The center of the figure is in the diameter.

As here thou see a, e, i, this arises out of the definition of the
diameter. For because the diameter is inscribed into the figure by the center:
Therefore the Center of the figure must needs be in the diameter thereof: This
is by Archimedes assumed especially at the 9, 10, 11, and 13 Theoreme of his
Isorropicks, or AEquiponderants.

This consectary, says the learned Rod. Snellius, is as it were a kind of
invention of the center. For where the diameters do meet and cut one
another, there must the center needs be. The cause of this is for that in
every figure there is but one center only: And all the diameters, as before was
said, must needs pass by that center.

And

8. It is in the meeting of the diameters.

As in the examples following. This also follows out of the same definition
of the diameter. For seeing that every diameter passes by the center: The
center must needs be common to all the diameters: and therefore it must also
needs be in the meeting of them: Otherwise there should be diverse centers of
one and the same figure. This also does the same Archimedes propound in the
same words in the 8. and 12 theoremes of the same book, speaking of
Parallelogrammes and Triangles.

9. The Altitude is a perpendicular line falling from the top of the figure
to the base.

Altitudo, the altitude, or height, or the depth: For that, as hereafter shall
be taught, is but Altitudo versa, an height with the heels upward.] As in
the figures following are a e, i o, u y, or s r. Neither is it any matter
whether the base be the same with the figure, or be continued or drawn out
longer, as in a blunt angled triangle, when the base is at the blunt corner, as
here in the triangle, a e i, is a o.

10. An ordinate figure, is a figure whose bounds are equal and angles equal.

In plains the Equilater triangle is only an ordinate figure, the rest are
all inordinate: In quadrangles, the Quadrate is ordinate, all other of that
sort are inordinate: In every sort of Multangles, or many cornered figures one
may be an ordinate. In crooked lined figures the Circle is ordinate, because it
is contained with equal bounds, (one bound always equal to it self being
taken for infinite many,) because it is equ^angled, seeing (although in deed
there be in it no angle) the inclination notwithstanding is every where alike
and equal, and as it were the angle of the perphery be always alike unto it
self: whereupon of Plato and Plutarch a circle is said to be Polygonia, a
multangle; and of Aristotle Holegonia, a totangle, nothing else but one whole
angle. In mingled-lined figures there is nothing that is ordinate: In solid
bodies, and pyramids the Tetrahedrum is ordinate: Of Prismas, the Cube: of
Polyhedrum's, three only are ordinate, the octahedrum, the Dodecahedrum, and
the Icosahedrum. In oblique-lined bodies, the sphere is concluded to be
ordinate, by the same argument that a circle was made to be ordinate.

11. A prime or first figure, is a figure which cannot be divided into any
other figures more simple then it self.

So in plains the triangle is a prime figure, because it cannot be divided
into any other more simple figure although it may be cut many ways: And in
solids, the Pyramid is a first figure: Because it cannot be divided into a more
simple solid figure, although it may be divided into an infinite sort of other
figures: Of the Triangle all plains are made; as of a Pyramid all bodies or
solids are compounded^ such are a e i. and a e i o.



12. A rational figure is that which is comprehended of a base and height
rational between themselves.

So Euclide, at the 1. d. ij. says, that a rightangled parallelogramme is
comprehended of two right lines perpendicular one to another, videlicet one
multiplied by the other. For Geometrical comprehension is sometimes as it were
in numbers a multiplication: Therefore if ye shall grant the base and height
to be rationalls between themselves, that their reason I mean may be
expressed by a number of the assigned measure, then the numbers of their ^ides
being multiplied one by another, the bigness of the figure shall be expressed.
Therefore a Rational figure is made by the multiplying of two rational sides
between themselves.

Therefore,

13. The number of a rational figure, is called a Figurate number: And the
numbers of which it is made, the Sides of the figurate.

As if a Right angled parallelogramme be comprehended of the base four, and
the height three, the Rational made shall be 12. which we here call the
figurate: and 4. and 3. of which it was made, we name sides.

14. Isoperimetrall figures, are figures of equal perimeter.

This is nothing else but an interpretation of the Greek word; So a triangle
of 16. foot about, is a isoperimeter to a triangle 16. foot about, to a
quadrate 16. foot about, and to a circle 16. foot about.

15. Of isoperimetralls homogenealls that which is most ordinate, is greatest:
Of ordinate isoperimetralls heterogenealls, that is greatest, which has most
bounds.

So an equilater triangle shall be greater then an isoperimeter inequilater
triangle; and an equicrurall, greater then an unequicrurall: so in quadrangles,
the quadrate is greater then that which is not a quadrate: so an oblong more
ordinate, is greater then an oblong less ordinate. So of those figures which
are heterogeneall ordinates, the quadrate is greater then the Triangle: And the
Circle, then the Quadrate.

16. If prime figures be of equal height, they are in reason one unto another,
as their bases are: And contrariwise.

The proportion of first figures is here twofold; the first is direct in those
which are of equal height. In Arithmeticke we learned; That if one number do
multiply many numbers, the products shall be proportional unto the numbers,
multiplied. From hence in rational figures the content of those which are of
equal height is to be expressed by a number. As in two right angled
parallelogrammes, let 4. the same height, multiply 2. and 3. the bases; The
products 8. and 12. the parallelogrammes made, are directly proportional unto
the bases 2. and 3. Therefore as 2. is unto 3. so is 8. unto 12. The same shall
afterward appear in right Prismes and Cylinders. In plains, Parallelogramms
are the doubles of triangles: In solids, Prismes are the triples of pyramides:
Cylinders, the triples of Cones. The converse of this element is plain out of
the former also: First figures if they be in reason one to another as their
bases are, then are they of equal height, to wit when their products are
proportional unto the multiplied, the same number did multiply them.

Therefore,

17. If prime figures of equal height have also equal bases, they are equal.

[The reason is, because then those two figures compared, have equal sides,
which do make them equal between themselves; For the parts of the one
applied or laid unto the parts of the other, do fill an equal place, as was
taught at the 10. e. j. Sn.] So Triangles, so Parallelogrammes, and so other
figures proposed are equalled upon an equal base.

18. If prime figures be reciprocal in base and height, they are equal: And
contrariwise.

The second kind of proportion of first figures is reciprocal. This kind of
proportion rational and expressible by a number, is not to be had in first
figures themselves: but in those that are equally manifold to them, as was
taught even now in direct proportion: As for example, Let these two right
angled parallelogrammes, unequal in bases and heighths 3, 8, 4, 6, be as here
thou see: The proportion reciprocal is thus, As 3 the base of the one, is
unto 4, the base of the other: so is 6. the height of the one is to 8. the
height of the other: And the parallelogrammes are equal, viz. 24. and 24.
Again, let two solids of unequal bases and heights (for here also the base is
taken for the length and height) be 12, 2, 3, o, 3, 4. The solids themselves
shall be 72. and 72, as here thou see; and the proportion of the bases and
heights likewise is reciprocal: For as 24, is unto 18, so is 4, unto 3. The
cause is out of the golden rule of proportion in Arithmeticke^ Because twice
two sides are proportional: Therefore the plots made of them shall be equal.
And again, by the same rule, because the plots are equal: Therefore the
bounds are proportional; which is the converse of this present element.

19. Like figures are equiangled figures, and proportional in the shankes of
the equal angles.

First like figures are defined, then are they compared one with another,
similitude of figures is not only of prime figures, and of such as are
compounded of prime figures, but generally of all other whatsoever. This
similitude consists in two things, to wit in the equality of their angles,
and proportion of their shankes^

Therefore,

20. Like figures have answerable bounds subtended against their equal angles:
and equal if they themselves be equal.

Or thus, They have their terms subtended to the equal angles correspondently
proportional: And equal if the figures themselves be equal; H. This is a
consectary out of the former definition.

And

21. Like figures are situate alike, when the proportional bounds do answer
one another in like situation.

The second consectary is of situation and place. And this like situation is
then said to be when the upper parts of the one figure do agree with the upper
parts of the other, the lower, with the lower, and so the other differences of
places. Sn.

And

22. Those figures that are like unto the same, are like between themselves.

This third consectary is manifest out of the definition of like figures. For
the similitude of two figures does conclude both the same equality in angles
and proportion of sides between themselves.

And

23. If unto the parts of a figure given, like parts and alike situate, be
placed upon a bound given, a like figure and likely situate unto the figure
given, shall be made accordingly.

This fourth consectary teaches out of the said definition, the fabric and
manner of making of a figure alike and likely situate unto a figure given. Sn.

24. Like figures have a reason of their homologallor correspondent sides
equally manifold unto their dimensions: and a mean proportional less by one.

Plain figures have but two dimensions, to wit Length, and Breadth: And
therefore they have but a doubled reason of their homologall sides. Solids have
three dimensions, videl. Length, Breadth, and thickness: therefore they shall
have a treabled reason of their homologall or correspondent sides. In 8. and
18. the two plains given, first the angles are equal: secondly, their
homolegall side 2. and 4. and 3. and 6. are proportional Therefore the reason
of 8. the first figure, unto 18. the second, is as the reason is of 2. unto 3.
doubled. But the reason of 2. unto 3. doubled, by the 3. chap. ij. of
Arithmeticke, is of 4. to 9. (for is 4/9) Therefore the reason of 8. unto 18,
that is, of the first figure unto the second, is of 4. unto 9. In Triangles,
which are the halfes of rightangled parallelogrammes, there is the same truth,
and yet by it self not rational and to be expressed by numbers.

Said numbers are alike in the trebled reason of their homologall sides; As for
example, 60. and 480. are like solids; and the solids also comprehended in
those numbers are like-solids, as here thou see: Because their sides, 4.3.5.
and 8.^.10. are proportional between themselves. But the reason of 60. to
480. is the reason of 4. to 8. trebled, thus 444/888 (64/512; that is of 1.
unto 8. or octupla, which you shall find in the dividing of 480. by 60.

Thus far of the first part of this element: The second, that like figurs
have a mean, proportional less by one, then are their dimensions, shall be
declared by few words. For plains having but two dimensions, have but one
mean proportional, solids having three dimensions, have two mean
proportionalls. The ca^se is only Arithmeticall, as before. For where the
bounds are but 4. as they are in two plains, there can be found no more but
one mean proportional, as in the former example of 8. and 18. where the
homologall or correspondent sides are 2. 3. and 4. 6.

Therefore,



Again by the same ru^e, where the bounds are 6. as they are in two solids,
there may be found no more but two mean proportionalls: as in the former
solids 30. and 240. where the homologall or correspondent sides are 2. 4. 3. 6.
5. 10.

Therefore,



Therefore,) 25. If right lines be continually proportional, more by one then
are the d^mensions of like figures likelily situate unto the first and second,
it shall be as the first right line is unto the last, so the first figure shall
be unto the second: And contrariwise.

Out of the similitude of figures two consectaries do arise, in part only, as
is their axiom, rational and expressable by numbers. If three right lines be
continually proportional, it shall be as the first is unto the third: So the
rectineall figure made upon the first, shall be unto the rectilineall figure
made upon the second, alike and likelily situate. This may in some part be
conceived and understood by numbers. As for example, Let the lines given, be 2.
foot, 4. foot. and 8 foot. And upon the first and second, let there be made
like figures, of 6. foot and 24. foot; So I mean, that 2. and 4. be the
bases of them. Here as 2. the first line, is unto 8. the third line: So is 6.
the first figure, unto 24. the second figure, as here thou see.



Again, let four lines continually proportional, be 1. 2. 4. 8. And let
there be two like solids made upon the first and second: upon the first, of
the sides 1. 3. and 2. lee it be 6. Upon the second, of the sides 2. 6. and 4.
let it be 48. As the first right line 1. is unto the fourth 8. So is the figure
6. unto the second 48. as is manifest by division. The examples are thus.

Moreover by this Consectary a way is laid open leading unto the reason of
doubling^ treabling, or after any manner way whatsoever assigned increasing of
a figure given. For as the first right line shall be unto the last: so shall
the first figure be unto the second.

And

26. If four right lines be proportional between themselves: Like figures
likelily situate upon them, shall be also proportional between themselves:
And contrariwise, out of the 22. pvj. and 37. pxj.

The proportion may also here in part be expressed by numbers: And yet a
continual is not required, as it was in the former.



In Plains let the first example be, as follows.

The cause of proportional figures, for that twice two figures have the same
reason doubled.



In Solids let this be the second example. And yet here the figures are not
proportional unto the right lines, as before figures of equal height were
unto their bases^ but they themselves are proportional one to another. And yet
are they not proportional in the same kind of proportion.

The cause also is here the same, that was before: To wit, because twice two
figures have the same reason trebled.

27. Figures filling a place, are those which being any way set about the same
point, do leave no void room.

This was the definition of the ancient Geometers, as appears out of
Simplicius, in his commentaries upon the 8. chapter of Aristotle's iij. book
of Heaven: which kind of figures Aristotle in the same place deemeth to be
only ordinate, and yet not all of that kind^ But only three among the Plains,
to wit a Triangle, a Quadrate, and a Sexangle: amongst Solids, two; the
Pyramid, and the Cube. But if the filling of a place be judged by right
angles, 4. in a Plain, and 8. in a Solid, the Oblong of plains, and the
Octahedrum of Solids shall (as shall appear in their places) fill a place; And
yet is not this Geometry of Aristotle accurate enough. But right angles do
determine this sentence, and so does Euclide out of the angles demonstrate,
That there are only five ordinate solids; And so does Potamon the Geometer, as
Simplicus testifies, demonstrate the question of figu^es filling a place.
Lastly, if figures, by laying of their corners together, do make in a Plain
4. right angles, or in a Solid 8. they do fill a place.

Of this problem the ancient geometers have written, as we heard even now: And
of the latter writers, Regiomontanus is said to have written accurately; And of
this argument Maucolycus has promised a treatise, neither of which as yet it
has been our good hap to see.

Neither of these are figures of this nature, as in their due places shall be
proved and demonstrated.

28. A round figure is that, all whose rays are equal.

Such in plains shall the Circle be, in Solids the Globe or Sphere. Now this
figure, the Round, I mean, of all Isoperimeters is the greatest, as appeared
before at the 15. e. For which cause Plato, in his Timaeus or his Dialogue of
the World said; That this figure is of all other the greatest. And therefore
God, says he^ did make the world of a sphearicall form, that within his
compass it might the better contain all things: And Aristotle, in his
Mechanical problems, says; That this figure is the beginning, principle, and
cause of all miracles. But those miracles shall in their time God willing, be
manifested and shown.

Rotundum, a Roundle, let it be here used for Rotunda figura, a round figure.
And in deed Thomas Finkius or Finche, as we would call him, a learned Dane,
sequestring this argument from the rest of the body of Geometry, has entitled
that his work De Geometria rotundi, Of the Geometry of the Round or roundle.

29. The diameters of a roundle are cut in two by equal rays.

The reason is, because the halfes of the diameters, are the rays. Or because
the diameter is nothing else but a doubled ray: Therefore if thou shall cut off
from the diameter so much, as is the radius or ray, it follows that so much
shall still remain, as thou have cut of, to wit one ray, which is the other
half of the diameter. Sn.

And here observe, That Bisecare, does here, and in other places following,
signify to cut a thing into two equal parts or portions^ And so
Bisegmentum, to be one such portion^ And Bisectio, such a like cutting or
division.

30. Rounds of equal diameters are equal. Out of the 1. d. i^^.

Circles and Spheres are equal, which have equal diameters. For the rays,
which do measure the space between the Center and Perimeter, are equal, of
which, being doubled, the Diameter does consist. Sn.

The fifth Book, of Ramus his Geometry, which is of Lines and Angles in a
plain Surface.
1. A lineate is either a Surface or a Body.

LIneatum, (or Lineamentum) a magnitude made of lines, as was defined at 1. e.
iij. is here divided into two kinds: which is easily conceived out of the said
definition there, in which a line is excluded, and a Surface and a body are
comprehended. And from hence arose the division of the art Metriall into
Geometry, of a surface, and Stereometry, of a body, after which manner Plato in
his vij. book of his Commonwealth, and Aristotle in the 7. chapter of the
first book of his Posteriorums, do di^tinguish between Geometry and
Stereometry: And yet the name of Geometry is used to signify the whole art of
measuring in general.

2. A Surface is a lineate only broad. 5. dj.

As here a e i o. and u y s r. The definition of a Surface does comprehend the
distance or dimension of a line, to wit Length: But it adds another
distance, that is Breadth. Therefoce a Surface is defined by some, as Proclus
says, to be a magnitude of two dimensions. But two do not so specially and so
properly define it. Therefore a Surface is better defined, to be a magnitude
only long and broad. Such, says Apollonius, are the shadows upon the earth,
which do far and wide cover the ground and champion fields, and do not
enter into the earth, nor have any manner of thickness at all.

Epiphania, the Greek word, which imports only the outter appearance of a
thing, is here more significant, because of a Magnitude there is nothing
visible or to be seen, but the surface.

3. The bound of a surface is a line. 6. dj.

The matter in Plains is manifest. For a three cornered surface is bounded
with 3. lines: A four cornered su^face, with four li^es, and so forth: A
Circle is bounded with one line. But in a Sphearicall surface the matter is not
so plain: For it being whole, seems not to be bounded with a line. Yet if
the manner of making of a Sphearicall surface, by the conversio^ or turning
about of a semiperiphery, the beginning of it, as also the end, shall be a line,
to wit a semiperiphery: And as a point does not only actu, or indeed bound and
end a line: But is potentia, or in power, the midst of it: So also a line
boundeth a Surface actu, and an innumerable company of lines may be taken or
supposed to be throughout the whole surface. A Surface therefore is made by the
motion of a line, as a Line was made by the motion of a point.

4. A surface is either Plain or Bowed.

The difference of a Surface, does answer to the difference of a Line^ in
straightness and obliquity or crookedness.

Obliquum, oblique, there signified crooked; Not righ^ or straight: Here,
uneven or bowed, either upward or downward. Sn.

5. A plain surface is a surface, which lies ^qually between his bounds, out
of the 7. dj.

As here thou see in a e i o. That therefore a Right line does look two
contrary ways, a Plain surface does look all about every way, that a plain
surface should, of all surfaces within the same bounds, be the shortest: And
that the midst thereof should hinder the sight of the extremes. ^astly, it
is equal to the dimension between the lines: It may also by one right line
every way applied be tried, as Proclus at this place does intimate.

Planum, a Plain, is taken and used for a plain surface: as before Rotundum,
a Round, was used for a round figure.

Therefore,

6. From a point unto a point we may, in a plain surface, draw a right line. 1
and 2. post. j.

Three things are from the former ground begged: The first is of a Right line.
A right line and a periphery were in the ij. book defined: But the fabric or
making of them both, is here said to be properly in a plain.

The fabric or construction of a right line is the 1. petition. And justly is
it required that it may be done only upon a plain: For in any other surface
it were in vain to ask it. For neither may we possibly in a sphericall
between two points draw a right line: Neither may we possibly in a Conicall
and Cylindraceall between any two points assigned draw a right line. For from
the top unto the base that in these is only possible:
And then is it the bound of the plain which cutteth the Cone and Cylinder.
Therefore, as I said, of a right plain it may only justly be demanded: That
from any point assigned, unto any point assigned, a right line may be drawn,
as here from a unto e.

Now the Geometrical instrument for the drawing of a right plain is called
Amussis, and by Petolemey, in the 2. chapter of his first book of his Music,
Regula, a Rular, such as here thou see.

And from a point unto a point is this justly demanded to be done, not unto
points; For neither do all points fall in a right line: But many do fall out
to be in a crooked line. And in a Sphere, a Cone and Cylinder^ a Ruler may be
applied, but it must be a sphearicall, Conicall, or Cylindraceall. But by the
example of a right line does Vitellio, 2 p j. demand that between two lines a
surface may be extended: And so may it seem in the Elements, of many figures
both plain and solids, by Euclide to be demanded; That a figure may be
described, at the 7. and 8. e ij. Item that a figure may be made up, at the 8.
14. 16. 23.28. p.vj. which are of Plains. Item at the 25. 31. 33. 34. 36. 49.
p.xj. which are of Solids. Yet notwithstanding a plain surface, and a plain
body do measure their rectitude by a right line, so that jus postulandi, this
right of begging to have a thing granted may seem primarily to be in a right
plain line.

Now the Continuation of a right line is nothing else, but the drawing out
farther of a line now drawn, and that from a point unto a point, as we may
continue the right line a e. unto i. wherefore the first and second Petitions
of Eu^lde do agree in one.

And] 7. To set at a point assigned a Right line equal to another right line
given: And from a greater, to cut off a part equal to a lesser. 2. and 3. pj.

As let the Right line given be a e. And to i. a po^nt assigned, grant that i
o. equal to the same a e. may be set. Item, in the second example, let a e.
be greater then i o. And let there he cut off from the same a e. by applying
of a rular made equal to i o. the the lesser, portion a u. as here For if any
man shall think that this ought only to be don in the mind, he also, as it
were, bears a ruler in his mind, that he may do it by the help of the
ruler. Neither is the fabric in deed, or making of one right equal to
another: And the cutting off from greater Right line, a portion equal to a
lesser, any whit harder, then it was, having a point and a distance given, to
describe a circle: Then having a Triangle, Parallelogramme, and semicircle
given, to describe or make a Cone, Cylinder, and sphere, all which
notwithstanding Euclide did account as principles.

Therefore,

8. One right line, or two cutting one another, are in the same plain, out of
the 1. and 2. p xj.

One Right line may be the common section of two plains: yet all or the whole
in the same plain is one: And all the whole is in the same other: And so the
whole is the same plain. Two Right lines cutting one another, may be in two
plains cutting one of another; But then a plain^ may be drawn by them:
Therefore both of them shall be in the same plain. And this plain is
geometrically to be conceived: Because the same plain is not always made the
ground whereupon one oblique line, or two cutting one another are drawn, when
a periphery is in a sphearicall: Neither may all peripheries cutting one
another be possibly in one plain.

And

9. With a right line given to describe a peripherie.

This fabric or construction is taken out of the 3. Petition which is thus.
Having a center and a distance given to describe, make, or draw a circle. But
here the term or end of a circle is only sought, which is better drawn out
of the definition of a periphery, at the 10. e ij. And in a plain only may
that conversion or turning about of a right line be made: Not in a
sphearicall, not in a Conicall, not in a Cylindraceall, except it be in top,
where notwithstanding a periphery may be described. Therefore before (to wit
at the said 10. e ij.) was taught the general fabric or making of a
Periphery: Here we are informed how to discribe a Plain periphery, as here.

Now as the Rular was the in^trument invented and ^sed for the drawing of a
right line: so also may the same Rular, used after another manner, be the
instrument to describe or draw a periphery withal. And indeed such is that
instrument used by the Coopers (and other like artists) for the rounding of
their bottomes of their tubs, heads of barrells and otherlike vessels: But the
Compasses, whether straight shanked or bow-legg'd, such as here thou see, it
skilleth not, are for all purposes and practices, in this case the best and
readiest. And in deed the Compasses, of all geometrical instruments, are the
most excellent, and by whose help famous Geometers have taught: That all the
problems, of geometry may be wrought and performed: And there is a book
extant, set out by John Baptist, an Italian, teaching, How by one opening of
the Compasses all the problems of Euclide may be resolved: And Ieronymus
Cardanus, a famous Mathematician, in the 15. book of his Subtilties, writes,
that there was by the help of the Compasses a demonstration of all things
demonstrated by Euclide, found out by ^im and one Ferrarius.

Talus, the nephew of Daedalus by his sister, is said in the viij. book of
Ovids Metamorphosis, to have been the inventour of this instrument: For there
he thus writes of him and this matter: -- Et ex uno duo ferrea brachia nodo:
Iunxit, ut aequali spatio distantibus ipsis: Altera pars staret, pars altera
duce^et orbem.

Therefore

10. The rai^s of the same, or of an equal periphery, are equal.

The reason is, because the same right line is every where converted or turned
about. But here by the Ray of the ^eriphery, must be understood the Ray the
figure contained within the periphery.

11. If two equal perip^eries, from the ends of equal shankes of an assigned
rectilineall angle, do meet before it, a right line drawn from the meeting
of them unto the top or point of the angle, shall cut it into two equal
parts. 9. pj.

Hitherto we have spoken of plain lines: Their affection follows, and first
in the Bisection or dividing of an Angle into two equal parts.

Let the right lined Angle to be divided into two equal parts be e a i.
whose equal shankes let them be a e. and a i. (or if they be unequal, let
them be made equal, by the 7 e.) Then two equal peripheries from the ends e
and i. meet before the Angle in o. Lastly, draw a line from ^. unto a. I say
the angle given is divided into two equal parts. For by drawing the right
lines o e. and o i. the angles o a e. and o a i. equicrurall, by the grant, and
by their common side a o. are equal in base e o. and i o. by the 10 e (Because
they are the rays of equal peripheries.) Therefore by the 7. e iij. the
angles o a e. and o a i. are equal: And therefore the Angle e a i. is equally
divided into two parts.

12. If two equal peripheries from the ends of a right line given, do meet
on each side of the same, a right line drawn from those meetings, shall divide
the right line given into two equal parts. 10. pj.

Let the right line given be a e. And let two equal peripheries from the ends
a. and e. meet in i. and o. Then from those meetings let the right line i o.
be drawn. I say, That a e. is divided into two equal parts, by the said line
thus drawn. For by drawing the rays of the equal peripheries i a. and i e.
the said i o. does cut the angle a i e. into two equal parts, by the 11. e.
Therefore the angles a i u. and u i e. being equal and equicrurall (seeing the
shankes are the rays of equal peripheries, by the grant.) have equal bases a
u. and u e. by the 7. e iij. Wherefore seeing the parts a u. and u e. are
equal, a e. the assigned right line is divided into two equal portions.

13. If a right line do stand perpendicular upon another right line, it makes
on each side right angles: And contrary wise.

A right line stands upon a right line, which cutteth, and is not cut again.
And the Angles on each side, are they which the falling line makes with that
underneath it, as is manifest out of Proclus, at the 15. pj. of Euclide; As
here a e. the line cut: and i o. the insisting line, let them be perpendicular;
The angles on each side, to wit a i o. and e i o. shall be right angles, by
the 13. e iij.

The Rular, for the making of straight lines on a plain, was the first
Geometrical instrument: The Compasses, for the describing of a Circle, was the
second: The Norma or Square for the true ^recting of a right line in the same
plain upon another right line, and then of a surface and body, upon a surface
or body, is the third. The figure therefore is thus.

Now Perpendiculu^, an instrument with a line and a plumme^ of lead appendant
upon it, used of Architects, Carpenters, and Masons, is merely physical:
because heavy things naturally by their weight are in straight lines carried
perpendicularly downward. This instrument is of two sorts: The first, which
they call a Plumbe-rule, is for the trying of an erect perpendicular, as
whether a column, pillar, or any other kind of building be right, that is
plumbe unto the plain of the horizont and does not lean or reele any way. The
second is for the trying or examining of a plain or floor, whether it do lie
parallel to the horizont or not. Therefore when the line from the right angle,
does fall upon the midst of the base, it shall show that the l^ngth is
equally poysed. The Latins call it Libra, or Libella, a balance: of the
Italians Livello, and vel Archipendolo, Achildulo: of the French, Nivelle, or
Niueau: of us a Levill.

Therefore

14. If a right line do stand upon a right line, it makes the angles on each
side equal to two right angles: and contrariwise out of the 13. and 14. pj.

For two such angles do occupy or fill the same place that two right angles
do: Therefore they are equal to them by the 11. e j. If the insisting line be
perpendicular unto that underneath it, it then shall make 2. right angles, by
the 13. e. If it be not perpendicular, and do make two oblique angles, as here
a i o. and o i e. are yet shall they occupy the same place that two right
angles do: And therefore they are equal to two right angles, by the same.

The converse is forced by an argument ab impossibli, or ab absurdo, from the
absurdity which otherwise would follow of it: For the part must otherwise
needs be equal to the whole. Let therefore the insisting or ^standing line
which makes two angles a e o. and a e u. on each side equal to two right
angles, be a e. I say that o e. and e i. are but one right line. Otherwise let
o e. be continued unto u. by the 6.e. Now by the 14.e. or next former element,
a e o. and a e u. are equal to two right angles; To which also o e a. and a e
i. are equal by the grant: Let a e o. the common angle be taken away: then
shall there be left a e u. equal to a e i. the part to the whole, which is
absurd and impossible. Herehence is it certain that the two right lines o e,
and e i, are in deed but one continual right line.

And

15. If two right lines do cut one another, they do make the angles at the
top equal and all equal to four right angles. 15. pj.

Anguli ad verticem, Angles at the top or head, are called Vertical angles
which have their tops meeting in the same point. The Demonstration is:
Because the lines cutting one another, are either perpendiculars, and then all
right angles are equal as here: Or else they are oblique, and then also are
the verticalls equal, as are a u i, and o u e: And again, a u o, and i u e.
Now a u i, and o u e, are equal, because by the 14.e. with a u o, the common
angle, they are equal to two right angles: And therefore they are equal
between themselves. Wherefore a u o, the said common angle being taken away,
they are equal one to another.

And

16. If two right lines cut with one right line, do make the inner angles on
the same side greater then two right angles, those on the other side against
them shall be lesser then two right angles.

A here, if a u y, and u y i, be greater then two right angles e u y, and u y
o, shall be lesser then two right angles.

17. If from ^ ^oint assigned of an infinite right line given, two equal parts
be on each side cut off: and then from the points of those sections two equal
circles do meet, a right line drawn from their meeting unto the point
assigned, shall be perpendicular unto the line given. 11. pj.

As let a, be the point assigned of the infinite line given: and from that on
each side, by the 7. e^ cut off equal portions a e, and a i, Then let two
equal peripheries from the points e, and i, meet, as in o, I say that a right
line drawn from o, the point of the meeting of the peripheries, unto a. the
point given, shall be perpendicular upon the line given. For drawing the right
lines o e, and o i, the two angles e a o, and i a o, on each side, equicrurall
by the construction of equal segments on each side, and o a, the common side,
are equal in base by the 9. e. And therefore the angles themselves shall be
equal, by the 7. e iij. and therefore again, seeing that a o, does lie equal
between the parts e a, and i a, it is by the 13. e ij. perpendicular upon it.

18. If a part of an infin^te right line, be by a periphery from a point given
without, cut off a right line from the said point, cutting in two the said
part, shall be perpendicular upon the line given. 12. pj.

Of an infinite right line given, let the part cut off by a periphery of an
external center be a e: And then let i o, cut the said part into two parts by
the 12. e. I say that i o is perpendicular unto the said infinite right line.
For it stands upright, and makes a o i, and e o i, equal angles, for the
same cause, whereby the next former perpendicular was demonstrated.

19. If two right lines drawn at l^ngth in the same plain do never meet,
they are parallell^. e 35. dj.

Thus much of the Perpendicularity of plain right lines: Parallelissmus, or
their parallel equality does follow. Euclid did justly require these lines so
drawn to be granted paralels: for then shall they be always equally distant,
as here a e. and i o.

Therefore

20. If an infinite right line do cut one of the infinite right parallel
lines, it shall also cut the other.

As in the same example u y. cutting a e. it shall also cu^ i o. Otherwise, if
it should not cut it, it should be parallel unto it, by the 18 e. And that
against the grant.

21. If right lines cut with a right line be pararellells, they do make the
inner angles on the same side equal to two right angles: And also the alterne
angles equal between themselves: And the outter, to the inner opposite to it:
And contrariwise, 29,28,27. p 1.

The paralillesme, or parallell-equality of right lines cut with a right line,
concludes a threefold equality of angles: And the same is again of each of
them concluded. Therefore in this one element there are six things taught; all
which are manifest if a perpendicular, do fall upon two parallel lines. The
first sort of angles are in their own words plainly enough expressed. But the
word Alternum, alterne [or alternate, H.] here, as Proclus says, signifies
situation, which in Arithmeticke signified proportion, when the antecedent was
compared to the consequent; notwithstanding the metaphor answers fitly. For
as an acute angle is unto his successively following ob^use; So on the other
part is the acute unto his successively following obtuse: Therefore alternly,
As the acute unto the acute: so is the obtuse, unto the obtuse. But the outter
and inner are opposite, of the which the one is without the parallels; the
other is within on the same part not successively; but upon the same right line
the third from the outter.

The cause of this threefold propriety is from the perpendicular or plumb-line,
which falling upon the parallells breeds and discovers all this variety: As
here they are right angles which are the inner on the same part or side: Item,
the alterne angles: Item the inner and the outter: And therefore they are
equal, both, I mean, the two inner to two right angles: and the alterne
angles between themselves: And the outter to the inner opposite to it.

If so be that the cutting line be oblique, that is, fall not upon them plumbe
or perpendicularly, the same shall on the contrary befall the parallels. For by
that same obliqua^ion or slanting, the right lines remaining and the angles
unaltered, in like manner both one of the inner, to wit, e u y, is made obtuse,
the other, to wi^, u y o, is made acute: And the alterne angles are made acute
and obtuse: As also the outter and inner opposite are likewise made acute and
obtuse.

If any man shall notwithstanding say, That the inner angles are unequal to
two right angles; By the same argument may he say (says Ptolome in Proclus)
That on each side they be both greater than two right angles, and also lesser:
As in the parallel right lines a e and i o, cut with the right line u y, if
thou shall say that a u y and i y u, are greater then two right angles, the
angles on the other side, by the 16 e, shall be lesser then two right angles,
which selfsame notwithstanding are also, by the gainesayers grant, greater
then two right angles, which is impossible.

The same impossibility shall be concluded, if they shall be said, to be lesser
than two right angles^

The second and third parts may be concluded out of the first. The second is
thus: Twice two angles are equal to two right angles o y u, and e u y, by the
former part: Item, a u y, and e u y, by the 14 e. Therefore they are equal
between themselves. Now from the equal, Take away e u y, the common angle,
And the remainders, the alterne angles, at u, and y shall be least equal.

The third is thus; The angles e u y, and o y s, are equal to the same u y i,
by the second propriety, and by the 15 e. Therefore they are equal between
themselves.

The converse of the first is here also the more manifest by that light of the
common perpendicular, And if any man shall think, That although the two inner
angles be equal to two right angles, yet the right may meet, as if those
equal angles were right angles, as here; it must needs be that two right
lines divided by a common perpendicular, should both lean, the one this way,
the other that way, or at least one of them, contrary to the 13 eij.

If they be oblique angles, as here, the lines one slanting or liquely crossing
one another, the angles on one side will grow less, on the other side greater.
Therefore they would not be equal to two right angles, against the grant.

From hence the second and third parts may be concluded. The second is thus:
The alterne angles at u and y, are equal to the foresaid inner angles, by the
14 e: Because both of them are equal to the two right angles: And so by the
first part the second is concluded.

The third is therefore by the second demonstrated, because the outter o y s,
is equal to the vertical or opposite angle at the top, by the 15 e. Therefore
seeing the outter and inner opposite are equal, the alterne also are equal.

Wherefore as Parallelismus, parallell-equality argues a threefold equality
of angels: So the threefold equality of angles does argue the same
parallel-equality.

Therefore,

22. If right lines knit together with a right line, do make the inner angles
on the same side lesser than two right Angles, they being on that side drawn
out at length, will meet.

As here a e, and i o, knit together with e o, do make two angles a e o, and i
o e, lesser than two right angles: They shall therefore, I say, meet if they
be continued out that wayward. The assumption and complexion is out of the 21
e, of right lines in the same plain. If right lines cut with a right line be
parallels, they do make the inner angles on the same part equal to two
right-angles. Therefore if they do not make them equal, but lesser, they
shall not be parallel, but shall meet.

And

23. A right line knitting together parallel right lines, is in the same
plain with them. 7 p xj.

As here u y, knitting or joining together the two parallels a e, and i o, is
in the same plain with them as is manifest by the 8 e.

And

24. If a right line from a point given do with a right line given make an
angle, the other shanke of the angle equalled and alterne to the angle made,
shall be parallel unto the assigned right line. 31 pj.

As let the assigned right line be a e: And the point given, let it be i. From
which the right line, making with the assigned a e, the angle, i o e, let it be
i o: To the which at i, let the alterne angle o i u, be made equal: The right
line u i, which is the other shanke, is parallel, to the assigned a e.

An angle, I confess, may be made equal by the first propriety: And so
indeed commonly the Architects and Carpenters do make it, by erecting of a
perpendicular. It may also again in like manner be made by the outter angle:
Any man may at his pleasure use which he shall think good; But that here
taught we take to be the best.

And

25. The angles of shanks alternly parallel, are equal. Or Thus, The angles
whose altenate feet are parallells, are equal. H.

This consectary in drawn out of the third property of the 21 e. The thing is
manifest in the example following, by drawing out, or continuing the other
shanke of the inner angle. But Lazarus Schonerus it seems does think the
adverbe alterne, ( alternely or alternately) to be more then needs: And
therefore he delivers it thus: The angles of parallel shankes are equal.

And

26 If parallels do bound parallels, the opposite lines are equal e 34 p.j.
Or thus: If parallels do enclose parallels, the opposite parallels are equal.
H.

Otherwise they should not be parallel. This is understood by the
perpendiculars, knitting them together, which by the definition are equal
between two parallells: And if of perpendiculars they be made oblique, they
shall notwithstanding remain equal, only the corners will be changed.

And

27. If right lines do jointly bound on the same side equal and parallel
lines, they are also equal and parallel.

This element might have been concluded out of the next precedent: But it may
also be learned out of those which went before. As let a e, and i o, equal
parallels be bounded jointly of a i, and e o: and let e i be drawn. Here
because the right line e i, falls upon the parallels a e, and i o, the
alterne angles a e i and e i o, are equal, by the 21 e. And they are equal in
shankes a e, and i o, by the grants, and e i, is the common shanke: Therefore
they are also equal in base a i, and e o, by the 7 e iij. This is the first:
Then by 21 e, the alterne angles e i a, and i e o, are equal between
themselves: And those are made by a i, and e o, cut by the right line e i:
Therefore they are parallel; which was the second.

On the same part or side it is said, least any man might understand right
lines knit together by opposite bounds as here.

28. If right lines be cut jointly by many parallel right lines, the segments
between those lines shall be proportional one to another, out of the 2 p vj
and 17 p x j.

Thus much of the Perpendicle, and parallel equality of plain right lines:
Their Proportion is the last thing to be considered of them.

The truth of this element depends upon the nature of the parallells: And
that throughout all kinds of equality and inequality, both greater and lesser.
For if the lines thus cut be perpendiculars, the portions intercepted between
the two parallels shall be equal: for common perpendiculars do make parallel
equality, a^ before has been taught, and here thou see.



If the lines cut be not parallels, but do lean one toward another, the
portions cut or intercepted between them will not be equal, yet shall they be
proportional one to another. And look how much greater the line thus cut is:
so much greater shall the intersegments or portions intercepted be. And
contrariwise, Look how much less: so much lesser shall they be.

The third parallel in the top is not expressed, yet must it be understood.

This element is very fruitful: For from hence do arise and issue, First the
manner of cutting a line according to any rate or proportion assigned: And then
the invention or way to find out both the third and fourth proportionalls.

29. If a right line making an angle with another right line, be cut according
to any reason [or proportion] assigned, parallels drawn from the ends of the
segments, unto the end of the said right line given and unto some contingent
point in the same, shall cut the line given according to the reason given.

Schoner has altered this Consectary, and delivers it thus: If a right
making an angle with a right line given, and (...) it unto it with a base, be
cut according to any rate assigned, a parallel to the base from the ends of
the segments, shall cut the line given according to the rate assigned. 9 and 10
p v j.

Punctum contingens, A contingent point, that is falling or lighting in some
place at al adventurs, not given or assigned

This is a marvelous general consectary, serving indifferently for any manner
of section of a right line, whether it be to be cut into two parts, or three
parts, or into as many patts, as you shall think good, or generally after what
manner of way soever thou shall command or desire a line to be cut or divided.

Let the assigned Right line to be cut into two equal parts be a e. And the
right line making an angle with it, let it be the infinite right line a i. Let
a o, one portion thereof be cut off. And then by the 7 e, let o i, another part
thereof be taken equal to it. And lastly, by the 24 e, draw parallels from the
points i, and o, unto e, the end of the line given, and to u, a contingent
point therein. Now the third parallel is understood by the point a, neither is
it necessary that it should be expressed. Therefore the line a e, by the 28, is
cut into two equal portions: And as a o, is to oi: So is a u, to u e. But a o,
and o i, are half parts. Therefore a u, and u e, are also half parts.

And here also is the 12 e comprehended, although not in the same kind of
argument, yet in effect the same. But that argument was indeed shorter,
although this be more general.

Now (...) be cut into three parts^ (...) which the first let it be the half
of the second: And the second, the half of the third: And the conter minall or
right line making an angle with the said assigned line, let it be cut one part
a o: Then double this in o u: Lastly let u i be taken double to o u, and let
the whole diagramme be made up with three parallels i e, u y^ and os, The
fourth parallel in the top, as a fore-sayd, shall be understood. Therefore
that section which was made in the conterminall line, by the 28 e, shall be in
the assigned line: Because the segments or portions intercepted are between
the parallels.

And

30. If two right lines given, making an angle, be continued, the first equally
to the second, the second infinitely, parallels drawn from the ends of the
first continuation, unto the beginning of the second, and some contingent point
in the same, shall intercept between them the third proportional. 11. p v j.

Let the right lines given, making an angle, be a e, and a i: and a e, the
first, let it be continued equally to the same a i, and the same a i, let it be
drawn out infinitely: Then the parallels e i, and o u, drawn from the ends of
the first continuation, unto i, the beginning of the second: and u, a
contingent point in the second, do cut off i u, the third proportional
sought. For by the 28 e, as a e, is unto e o, so is a i, unto i u.

And

31. If of three right lines given, the first and the third making an angle be
continued, the first equally to the second, and the third infinitely; parallels
drawn from the ends of the first continuation, unto the beginning of the
second, and some contingent point, the same shall intercept between them the
fourth proportional. 12. p vj.

Let the lines given be these: The first a e, the second e i, the third a o,
and let the whole diagramme be made up according to the prescript of the
consectary. Here by 28. e, as a e, is to e i so is a o, to o u. Thus far
Ramus.

Lazarus Schonerus, who, about some 25. years since, did revise and augment
this work of our Author, has not only altered the form of these two next
precedent consectaries: but he has also changed their order, and that which is
here the second, is in his edition the third: and the third here, is in him the
second. And to the former declaration of them, he adds these words: From
hence, having three lines given, is the invention of the fourth proportional;
and out of that, having two lines given, arises the invention of the third
proportional.

2 Having three right lines given, if the first and the third making an angle,
and knit together with a base, be continued, the first equally to the second;
the third infinitely; a parallel from the end of the second, unto the
continuation of the third, shall intercept the fourth proportional. 12. pvj.

The Diagramme, and demonstration is the same with our 31. e or 3 c of Ramus.

3 If two right lines given making an angle, and knit together with a base, be
continued, the first equally to the second, the second infinitely; a parallel
to the base from the end of the first continuation unto the second, shall
intercept the third proportional. 11. p v j.

The Diagramme here also, and demonstration is in all respects the same with
our 30 e, or 2 c of Ramus.

Thus far Ramus: And here by the judgment of the learned Finkius, two
elements of Ptolomey are to be adjoined.

32 If two right lines cutting one another, be again cut with many parallels,
the parallels are proportional unto their next segments.

It is a consectary out of the 28 e. For let the right lines a e. and a i, cut
one another at a, and let two parallel lines u o, and e i, cut them; I say, as
a u, is to u o, so a e, is to e i. For from the end i, let i s, be erected
parallel to a e, and let u o, be drawn out until it do meet with it. Then
from the end s, let s y, be made parallel to a i: and lastly, let e a, be
drawn out, until it do meet with it. Here now a y, shall be equal to the
right line i s, that is, by the 26. e, to u e: and at length, by the 28. e, as
u a, is to u o; so is a y, that is, u e, to o s. Therefore, by composition or
addition of ptoportions, as u a, is unto u o, so u a, and u e, shall be unto u
o, and o s, that is, e i, by the 27. e.

The same demonstation shall serve, if the lines do cross one another, or do
vertically cut one another, as in the same diagramme appears. For if the
assigned a i, and u s, do cut one another vertically in o, let them be cut
with the parallels a u, and s i: the precedent fabric or figure being made
up, it shall be by 28. e. as a u, is unto a o, the segment next unto it: so a
y, that is, i s, shall be unto o i, his next segment.

The 28. e teaches how to find out the third and fourth proportional: This
affords us a means how to find out the continually mean proportional
single or double.

Thefore

33. If two right lines given be continued into one, a perpendicular from the
point of continuation unto the angle of the squire, including the continued
line with the continuation, is the mean proportional between the two right
lines given.

A squire ( Norma, Gnomon, or Canon) is an instrument consisting of two
shankes, including a right angle. Of this we heard before at the 13.e. By the
means of this a mean proportional unto two lines given is easily found:
whereupon it may also be called a Mesolabium, or Mesographus simplex, or single
mean finder.

Let the two right lines given, be a e, and e i. The mean proportional between
the^e two is desired. For the finding of which, let it be granted that as a e,
is to e o, so e o, is to e i: therefore let a e, be continued or drawn out
unto i, so that e i, be equal to the other given. Then from e, the point of
the continuation, let e o, an infinite perpendicular be erected. Now about this
perpendicular, up and down, this way and that way, let the squire a o, be
moved, so that with his angle it may comprehend at e o, and with his shanks it
may include the whole right line a i. I say that e o, the segment of the
perpendicular, is the mean proportional between a e, and e i, the two lines
given. For let e a, be continued or drawn out into u, so that the continuation
a u, be equal unto e o: and unto a, the point of the continuation, let the
angle u a s, be made equal, and equicrurall to the angle o e i, that is, let
the shanke a s, be made equal to the shanke e i. Wherefore knitting u, and s,
together, the right lines u s, and o i, shall be equal; and the angles e o i,
a u s, by the 7. e i i j. And by the 21. e, the lines s a, and o e, are
parallel: and the angle s a o, is equal to the angle a o e. But the angles s
a e, and a o i, are right angles by the Fabric and by the grant; and
therefore they are equal, by the 14. e iij. Wherefore the other angles o a e,
and e o i, that is, s u a, are equal. And therefore by the 21. e. u s, and a o
are parallel; and u s, and e o, continued shall meet, as here in y: and by
the 26. e. o y, and a s are equal. Now, by the 32. e. as u e, is to u a, so is
e y, to a s. Therefore by subduction or subtraction of proportions, as e a, is
to u a, so is e o, that is, u a, to o y, that is a s.

And

34 If two assigned right lines joined together by their ends right anglewise,
be continued vertically; a square falling with one of his shankes, and another
to it parallel and moveable upon the ends of the assigned, with the angles
upon the continued lines, shall cut between them from the continued two means
continually proportional to the assigned.

The former consectary was of a single mesolabium; this is of a double, whose
use in making of solids, to this or that bigness desired is notable.

Let the two lines assigned be a e, and e i; and let there be two mean right
lines, continually proportional between them sought, to wit, that may be as a
e, is unto one of the lines found; so the same may be unto the second line
found. And as that is unto this, so this may be unto e i. Let therefore a e,
and ei, be joined rightanglewise by their ends at e; and let them be infinite
continued, but vertically, that is, from that their meeting from the lines
ward, from e i, toward u, but a e, toward o. Now for the rest, the
construction; it was Plato's Mesographus; to wit, a squire with the opposits
parallel. One of his sides a u, moveable, or to be done up and down, by an
hollow riglet in the side adjoining. Therefore thou shall make thee a
Mesographus, if unto the squire thou do add one moveable side, but so that
how so ever it be moved, it be still parallel unto the opposite side [which is
nothing else, but as it were a double squire, if this squire be applied unto
it; and indeed what is done by this instrument, may also be done by two
squires, as hereafter shall be showed.] And so long and often must the moveable
side be moved up and down, until with the opposite side it contain or touch
the ends of the assigned, but the angles must fall precisely upon the continued
lines: The right lines from the point of the continuation, unto the corners of
the squire, are the two mean proportionals sought.

As if of the Mesographus a u o i, the moveable side be a u; thus thou shall
move up and down, until the angles u, and o, do hit just upon the infinite
lines; and jointly at the same instant u a, and o i, may touch the ends of the
assigned a, and i. By the former consectary it shall be as e i, is to e o, so e
o, shall be unto e u: and as e o, is to e u, so shall e u, be unto ^ a.

And thus we have the composition and use, both of the single and double
Mesolabium.

35. If of four right lines, two do make an angle, the other reflected or
turned back upon themselves, from the ends of these, do cut the former; the
reason of the one unto his own ^egment, or of the segments between
themselves, is made of the reason of the so jointly bounded, that the first of
the makers be jointly bounded with the beginning of the antecedent made; the
second of this consequent jointly bounded with the end; do end in the end of
the consequent made.

Ptolomey has two special examples of this Theorem: to those Theon adds
other four.

Let therefore the two right lines be ^ e, and a i: and from the ends of these
other two reflected, be i u, and e o, cutting themselves in y; and the two
former in u, and o. The reason of the particular right lines made shall be as
the draught following does manifest. In which the antecedents of the makers are
in the upper place: the consequents are set under neathe their own antecedents.



The business is the same in the two other, whether you do cross the bounds
or invert them.

Here for demonstrations sake we crave no more, but that from the beginning of
an antecedent made a parallel be drawn to the second consequent of the
makers, unto one of the assigned infinitely continued: then the multiplied
proportions shall be,

The Antecedent, the Consequent; the Antecedent, the Consequent of the second
of the makers; every way the reason or rate is of Equallity.

The Antecedent the Consequent of the first of the makers; the Parallel; the
Antecedent of the second of the makers, by the 32. e. Therefore by
multiplication of proportions, the reason of the Parallel, unto the Consequent
of the second of the makers, that is, by the fabric or construction, and the
32. e. the reason of the Antecedent of the Product, unto the Consequent, is
made of the reason, etc. after the manner above written.

For examples sake, let the first special example be demonstrated. I say
therefore, that the reason of i a, unto a o, is made of the reason of i u, unto
u y, multiplied by the reason of y e, unto e o. For from the beginning of the
Antecedent of the product, to wit, from the point i, let a line be drawn
parallel to the right line e y, which shall me^te with a e^ continued or
drawn out infinitely in n. Therefore, by the 32. e, as i a, is to a o: so is
the parallel drawn to e o, the Consequent of the second of the makers.
Therefore now the multiplied proportions are thus i u, u y, i u, e y, by the
32. e: y e, e o, e y, e o. Therefore as the product of i u, by y e, is unto the
product of u y, by e o: So i n, is to e o, that is, i a, to a o.

So let the second of Ptolomey to be taught, which in our Table before going is
the fifth. I say therefore that the reason of i o, unto o a; is made of the
reason of i y, unto y u, and the reason of u e, unto e a. For now again, from
the beginning of the Antecedent of the Product i, let a line be drawn
parallel unto e a, the Consequent of the second of the Makers, which shall
meet with e o, drawn out at length in n: therefore, by the 32. e. as i o, is
to a o; so is i ^, unto e a. Therefore now again the multiplied proportions are
thus: by the 32. e. Therefore, by multiplication of proportions, the reason of
i u, unto e a, that is, of i o, unto ^ a, is made of the reason of i y, unto y
u, by the reason of u e, unto ea.

It shall not be amiss to teach the same in the examples of Theon. Let us take
therefore the reason of the Reflex, unto the Segment; And of the segments
between themselves; to wit, the 4. and 6. examples of our foresaid draught: I
say therefore, that the reason of o e, unto e y, is made of the reason o a,
unto a i, by the reason of i u, unto u y. For from the end o, to wit, from the
beginning of the Antecedent of the product, let the right line n o, be drawn
parallel to u y. It shall be by the 32. e. as o e, is to e y: so the parallel
n o, shall be to u y: but the reason of n o, unto ^ y, is made of the reason of
o a, unto a i, and of i u, unto ^ y: for the multiplied proportions are, by the
32. e.

Again, I say, that the reason of e y, unto y o, is compounded of the reason
of e u, unto u a, and of a i, unto i ^.

Theon here draws a parallel from o, unto u i. By the general fabric it
may be drawn out of e, unto o i.

It shall be therefore as e y, is unto y o, so e n, shall be unto o i. Now the
proportions multiplied are, by the 32. e.

Therefore the reason of e n, unto i o, that is of e y, unto y o, shall be made
of the foresaid reasons.

Of the segments of diverse right lines^ the Arabians have much under the name
of The rule of six quantities. And the Theoremes of Althin^us, concerning this
matter, are in many men's hands. And Regiomontanus in his Algorithmus: and
Maurolycus upon the 1 piij. of Menelaus, do make mention of them; but they
contain nothing, which may not; by any man skillful in Arithmeticke, be
performed by the multiplication of proportions. For all those ways of theirs
are no more but special examples of that kind of multiplication.

Of Geometry, the sixth Book, of a Triangle.
1 Like plains have a double reason of their hom^logall sides, and one
proportional mean, out of 20 p vj. and xj. and 18. p viij.

OR thus; Like plains have the proportion of their corespondent proportional
sides doubled, and one mean proportional: Hitherto we have spoken of plain
lines and their affections: Plain figures and their kinds do follow in the
next place. And first, there is premised a common corollary drawn out of the
24. e, iiij. because in plains there are but two dimensions.

2 A plain surface is either rectilineall or obliquelineall, [or rightlined,
or crookedlined. H.]

Straightness, and crookedness, was the difference of lines at the 4. e, i j.
From thence is it here repeated and attributed to a surface, which is
geometrically made of lines. That made of right lines, is rectileniall: that
which is made of crooked lines, is Obliquilineall.

3. A rectilineall surface, is that which is comprehended of right lines.

A plain rightlined surface is that which is on all sides enclosed and
comprehended with right lines. And yet they are not always right between
themselves, but such lines as do lie equally between their own bounds, and
without comparison are all and every one of them right lines.

4 A rightilineall does make all his angles equal to right angles; the inner
ones generally to paires from two forward: the outter always to four.

Or thus: A right lined plain makes his angles equal unto right angles:
Namely the inward angles generally, are equal unto the even numbers from two
forward, but the outward angles are equal but to 4. right angles. H.

The first kind I mean of rectilineals, that is a triangle does make all his
inner angles equal to two right angles, that is, to a binary, the first even
number of right angles: the second, that is a quadrangle, to the second even
number, that is, to a quaternary or four: The third, that is, a Pentangle, or
quinqueangle to the third, that is a senary of right angles, or 6. and so far
forth as thou see in this Arithmeticall progression of even numbers,

Notwithstanding the outter angles, every side continued and drawn out, are
always equal to a quaternary of right angles, that is to four. The former
part being granted (for that is not yet demonstrated) the latter is from thence
concluded: For of the inner angles, that of the outter, is easily proved. For
the three angles of a triangle are equal to two right angles. The four of a
quadrangle to four of a quinquangle, to six: of a sex angle, to eight: Of
septangle, to ten, and so forth, from a binarie by even numbers: Whereupon,
by the 14. e. V. a perpetual quaternary of the outer angles is concluded.

5 A rectilineall is either a Triangle or a Triangulate.

As before of a line was made a lineate: so here in like manner of a triangle
is made a triangulate.

6 A triangle is a rectilineall figure comprehended of three rightlines. 21. dj.

Therefore

As here a e i. A triangular Figure is of Euclide defined from the three sides;
whereupon also it might be called Trilaterum, that is three sided, of the
cause: rather than Trianglum, three cornered, of the effect; especially seeing
that three angles, and three sides are not reciprocal or to be converted. For
a triangle may have four sides, as is Acidoides, or Cuspidatum, the barbed
form, which Zonodorus called Coelogonion, or Cavangulum, an hollow cornered
figure. It may also have both five, and six sides, as here thou see. The
name therefore of Trilaterum would more fully and fitly express the thing
named: But use has received and entertained the name of a triangle for a
trilater: And therefore let it be still retained, but in that same sense:

7 A triangle is the prime figure of rectilineals.

A triangle or threesided figure is the prime or most simple figure of all
rectilineals. For amongst rectilineall figures there is none of two sides: For
two right lines cannot enclose a figure. What is meant by a prime figure, was
taught at the 7. e. iiij.

And

8 If an infinite right line do cut the angle of a triangle, it does also cut
the base of the same: Vitell. 29. t j.

9 Any two sides of a triangle are greater than the other.

Thus much of the difinition of a triangle; the reason or rate in the sides and
angles of a triangle does follow. The reason of the sides is first.

Let the triangle be a e i; I say, the side a i, is shorter, than the two sides
a e, and e i, because by the 6. e ij, a right line is between the same bounds
the shortest.

Therefore

10 If of three right lines given, any two of them be greater than the other,
and peripheries described upon the ends of the one, at the distances of the
other two, shall meet, the rays from that meeting unto the said ends, shall
make a triangle of the lines given.

Let it be desired that a triangle be made of these three lines, a e i, given,
any two of them being greater than the other: First let there be drawn an
infinite right; From this let there be cut off continually three portions, to
wit, o u, u y, and y s, equal to a e, and i, the three lines given. Then upon
the ends y, and u, at the distances o u, and y s; let two peripheries meet in
the point r. The rays from that meeting unto the said ends, u, and y, shall
make the triangle u r y: for those rays shall be equal to the right lines
given, by the 10. ev.

And

11 If two equal peripheries, from the ends of a right line given, and at his
distance, do meet, li^es drawn from the meeting, unto the said ends, shall
make an equilater triangle upon the line given. 1 p.j.

As here upon u e, there is made the equilater triangle, a e i; And in like
manner may be framed the construction of an equicrurall triangle, by a common
ray, unequal unto the line given; and of a scalen or various triangle, by
three diverse rays; all which are set out here in this one figure. But these
specialls are contained in the general problem: neither do they declare or
manifest unto us any new point of Geometry.

12 If a right line in a triangle be parallel to the base, it does cut the
shankes proportionally: And contrariwise. 2 p v j.

Such therefore was the reason or rate of the sides in one triangle; the
proportion of the sides follows.

As here in the triangle a e i, let o u, be parallel to the base; and let a
third parallel be understood to be in the top a; therefore, by the 28. e.v.
the intersegments are proportional.

The converse is forced out of the antecedent: because otherwise the whole
should be less than the part. For if o u, be not parallel to the base e i,
then y u, is: Here by the grant, and by the antecedent, seeing a o, o e, a y, y
e, are proportional: and the first a o, is lesser than a y, the third: o e,
the second must be lesser than y e, the fourth, that is the whole then the part.

13 The three angles of a triangle, are equal to two right angles. 32. p j.

Hitherto therefore is declared the comparison in the sides of a triangle. Now
is declared the reason or rate in the angles, which jointly taken are equal to
two right angles.

The truth of this proposition, says Proclus, according to common notions,
appears by two perpendiculars erected upon the ends of the base: for look
how much by the leaning of the inclination, is taken from two right angles at
the base, so much is assumed or taken in at the top, and so by that requital
the equality of two right angles is made; as in the triangle a e i, let, by the
24. ev, o u, be parallel against i e. Here three particular angles, i a o, i a
e, e a u, are equal to two right lines; by the 14. e v. But the inner angles
are equal to the same three: For first, e a i, is equal to it self: Then the
other two are equal to their alterne angles, by the 24. e v.

Therefore

14. Any two angles of a triangle are less than two right angles.

For if three angles be equal to two right angles, then are two lesser than
two right angles.

And

15 The one side of any triangle being continued or drawn out, the outter
angle shall be equal to the two inner opposite angles.

This is the rate of the inner angles in one and the same triangle: The rate of
the outter with the inner opposite angles does follow. As in the triangle a e
i, let the side e i, be continued or drawn out unto o; the two angles on each
side a i o, and a i e, are by the 14 e v. equal to two right angles: and the
three inner angles, are by the 13. e. equal also to two right ang^es; take
away a i e, the common angle, and the outter angle a i o, shall be left equal
to the other two inner and opposite angles.

Therefore

16 The said outter angle is greater than either of the inner opposite angles.
16. p j.

This is a consectary following necessarily upon the next former consectary.

17 If a triangle be equicrurall, the angles at the base are equal: and
contrariwise, 5. and 6. p.j.

The antecedent is apparent by the 7. e iij. The converse is apparent by an
impossibility, which otherwise must needs follow. For if any one shanke be
greater than the other, as a e: Then by the 7. e v, let o e, be cut off equal
to it: and let o i, be drawn: then by 7. e iij. the base o i, must be equal to
the base a e; but the base o i, is lesser than a e. For by the o. e, i a; and a
o, (to which a e, is equal, seeing that o e, is supposed to be equal to the
same a i: and a e, is common to both) are greater than the said o i; therefore
the same, o i, must be equal to the same a e, and lesser than the same, which
is impossible. This was first found out by Thales Milesius.

Therefore

18 If the equal shankes of a triangle be continued or drawn out, the angles
under the base shall be equal between themselves.

For the angles a e i, and i e o: Item a i e, and e i u, are equal to two
right angles, by the 14. e v. Therefore they are equal between themselves:
wherefore if you shall take away the inner angles, equal between themselves,
you shall leave the outter equal one to another.

And

19 If a triangle be an equilater, it is also an equiangle: And contrariwise.

It is a consectary out of the condition of an equicrurall triangle of two,
both shankes and angles, as in the example a e i, shall be demonstrated.

And

20 The angle of an equilater triangle does countervaile two third parts of a
right angle. Regio. 23. p j.

For seeing that 3. angles are equal to 2. 1. must needs be equal to

And

21 Six equilater triangles do fill a place.

As here. For. of a right angle six lines added together do make 12/3. that
is four right angles; but four right angles do fill a place by the 27. e.
iiij.

22 The greatest side of a triangle subtendeth the greatest angle; and the
greatest angle is subtended of the greatest side. 19. and 18. p j.

Subtendere, to draw or strain out something under another; and in this place
it signifies nothing else but to make a line or such like, the base of an
angle, arch, or such like. And subtendi, is to become or made the base of an
angle, arch, of a circle, or such like: As here, let a i, be a greater side
than a e, I say the angle at e, shall be greater than that at i. For let there
be cut off from a i, a portion equal to a e,; and let that be i o: then the
angle a e i, equicrurall to the angle o i e, shall be greater in base, by the
grant. Therefore the angle shall be greater, by the 9 e iij.

The converse is manifest by the same figure: As let the angle a e i, be
greater than the angle a i e. Therefore by the same, 9 e iij. it is greater in
base. For what is there spoken of angles in general, are here assumed
specially of the angles in a triangle.

23 If a right line in a triangle, do cut the angle in two equal parts, it
shall cut the base according to the reason of the shankes; and contrariwise. 3.
p v j.

The mingled proportion of the sides and angles does now remain to be handled
in the last place.

Let the triangle be a e i; and let the angle a e i, be cut into two equal
parts, by the right line a o: I say, as e a, is unto a i, so e o, is unto o i.
For at the angle i, let the parallel i u, by the 24. e v. be erected against a
o; and continue or draw out e a, infinitely; and it shall by the 20. e v. cut
the same i u, in some place or other. Let it therefore cut it in u. Here, by
the 28. e v. as e a, is to a u, so is e o, to o i. But a u, is equal to a i,
by the 17. e. For the angle u i a, is equal to the alterne angle o a i, by the
21. e v. And by the grant it is equal to o a e, his equal: And by the 21. e
v. it is equal to the inner angle a u i; and by that which is concluded it is
equal to u i a, his equal. Therefore by the 17. e, a u, and a i, are equal.
Therefore as e a, is unto a i, so is e o^ unto o i.

The Converse likewise is demonstrated in the same figure. For as e a, is to a
i; so is e o, to o i: And so is e a, to a u, by the 12 e: therefore a i, and a
u, are equal, Item the angles e a o, and o a i, are equal to the angles at u,
and i, by the 21. e v^ which are equal between themselves by the 17. e.

Of Geometry, the seventh Book, Of the comparison of Triangles.
1 Equilater triangles are equiangles. 8. p.j.

Thus forre of the Geometry, or affections and reason of one triangle; the
comparison of two triangles one with another does follow. And first of their
rate or reason, out of their sides and angles: Whereupon triangles between
themselves are said to be equilaters and equiangles. First out of the equality
of the sides, is drawn also the equality of the angles.



Triangles therefore are here jointly called equilaters, whose sides are
severally equal, the first to the first, the second, to the second, the third
to the third; although every several triangle be inequilaterall. Therefore the
equality of the sides does argue the equality of the angles, by the 7. e iij.
As here.

2 If two triangles be equal in angles, either the two equicrurals, or two of
equal either shanke, or base of two angles, they are equilaters, 4. and 26. p
j.

Oh thus; If two triangles be equal in their angles, either in two angles
contained under equal feet, or in two angles, whose side or base of both is
equal, those angles are equilater. H.

This element has three parts, or it does conclude two triangles to be
equilaters three ways. 1. The first part is apparent thus: Let the two
triangles be a e i, and o u y; because the equal angles at a, and o, are
equicrurall, therefore they are equal in base, by the 7. e iij.

2 The second thus: Let the said two triangles a e i, and o u y, be equal in
two angles a piece, at e, and i, and at u, and y. And let them be equal in the
shanke e i, to u y. I say, they are equilaters. For if the side a e, (for
examples sake) be great or than the side o u, let e s, be cut off equal unto
it; and draw the right line i s. Here by the antecedent, the triangles s e i,
and o u y, shall be equiangles, and the angles s i e, shall be equal to the
angle o y u, to which also the whole angle a i e, is equal, by the grant.
Therefore the whole and the part are equal, which is impossible. Wherefore the
side a e, is not unequal but equal to the side o u: And by the antecedent or
former part, the triangles a e i, and o u y, being equicrurall, are equal, at
the angle of the shanks: Therefore also they are equal in their bases a i, and
o y.



3 The third part is thus forced: In the triangles a e i, and o u y, let the
angles at e, and i, and u, and y, be equal, as before: And a e. the base of the
angle at i, be equal to o u, the base of angle at y: I say that the two
triangles given are equilaters. For if the side e i, be greater than the side u
y, let e s, be cut off equal to it, and draw the right line a s. Therefore by
the antecedent, the two triangles, a e s, and o u y, equal in the angle of
their equal shankes are equiangle; And the angle a s e, is equal to the angle
o y u, which is equal by the grant unto the angle a i e. Therefore a s e, is
equal to a i e, the outter to the inner, contrary to the 15. e v. j. Therefore
the base e i, is not unequal to the base u y, but equal. And therefore as
above was said, the two triangles a e i, and o u y, equal in the angle of
their equal shankes, are equilaters.

3. Triangles are equal in their three angles.

The reason is, because three angles in any triangle are equal to two right
angles, by the 13. e v j. As here, the greatest triangle, all his corners
jointly taken, is equal to the least.

And yet notwithstanding it is not therefore to be thought to be equiangle to
it: For Triangles are then equiangles, when the several angles of the one, are
equal to the several angles of the other: Not when all jointly are equal to
all.

Therefore

4. If two angles of two triangles given be equal, the other also are equal.

All the three angles, are equal between themselves^ by the 3 e. Therefore if
from equal you take away equal, those which shall remain shall be equal.

5. If a right triangle equicrurall to a triangle be greater in base, it is
greater in angle: And contrariwise. 25. and 24. pj.

Thus far of the reason or rate of equality, in the sides and angles of
triangles: The reason of inequality, taken out of the common and general
inequality of angles, does follow. The first is manifest, by the 9 eiij. as
here thou see in a e i, and o u y.

6. If a triangle placed upon the same base, with another triangle, be lesser
in the inner shankes, it is greater in the angle of the shankes.

This is a consectary drawn also out of the 10 e iij. As here in the triangle
a e i, and a o i, within it and upon the same base. Or thus: If a triangle
placed upon the same ba^e with another triangle, be less then the other
triangle, in regard of his feet, (those feet being contained within the feet
of the other triangle) in regard of the angle contained under those feet, it
is greater: H.

7. Triangles of equal height, are one to another as their bases are one to
another.

Thus far of the Reason or rate of triangles: The proportion of triangles
does follow; And first of a right line with the bases. It is a consectary out
of the 16 e iiij.

Therefore

8. Upon an equal base, they are equal.

This was a general consectary at the 16 e iiij: From whence Archimedes
concluded, If a triangle of equal height with many other triangles, have his
base equal to the bases of them all, it is equal to them all: as here thou
see a e i to be equal to the triangles a e o, u o y, s y r, l r m, n m i.
Here hence also thou may conclude, that Equilater triangles are equal;
Because they are of equal height, and upon the same base.

9. If a right line drawn from the top of a triangle, do cut the base into
two equal parts, it does also cut the triangle into two equal parts: and it
is the diameter of the triangle.

As here thou see: For the bisegments, or two equal portions thus cut are
two triangles of equal height (that that is to say, they have one top
common to both, within the same parallels) and upon equal bases: Therefore
they are equal: And that right line shall be the diameter of the triangle, by
the 5 e iiij, because it passes by the center.

10. If a right line be drawn from the top of a triangle, unto a point given
in the base (so it be not in the midst of it) and a parallel be drawn from
the midst of the base unto the side, a right line drawn from the top of
the said parallel unto the said point, shall cut the triangle into two equal
parts.

Let the triangle given be a e i: And let a o, cut the base e i, in o
unequally: And let u y be parallel from u, the midst of y base, unto the
said e i. I say that y o shall divide the triangle into two equal portions.
For let a u be knit together with a right line: That line, by the 9 e, shall
divide the triangle into two equal parts. Now the two triangles a y u, and y o
u, are equal by the 8 e; because they are of equal height, and upon the same
base. Take away y s u, the common triangle; And you shall leave a s y, and o s
u, equal between themselves: The common right lined figure y s u i, let it be
added to both the said equal triangles: And then ^ y i, shall be equal to a u
i, the half part: And therefore a e o y, the other right lined figure, shall
be the half of the triangle given.

11 If equiangled triangles be reciprocal in the shankes of the equal angle,
they are equal: And contrariwise. 15. p. vj. Or thus, as the learned M^.
Brigges has conceived it: If two triangles, having one angle, are reciprocal,
etc.

Direct proportion in triangles, is such as has in the former been taught:
Reciprocal proportion follows. It is a consectary drawn out of the 18 e
iiij; which is manifest, as often as the equal angle is a right angle: For then
those shankes, [comprehending the equal angles,] are the heights and the
bases: As here thou see in the severed triangles. Notwithstanding in
obliquangle triangles, although the shankes are not the heights, the cause of
the truth hereof is the same. Yet if any man shall desire a demonstration of
it, it is thus: Let therefore the diagramme or figure be in the triangles a e
i, and a o u: And the angles o a u, and e a i, let them be equal: And as u a
is to a e, so let i a be unto a o: I say that the triangles a o u, and e a i,
are equal. For e o being knit together with a right line, u a o is unto o a e,
as u a is unto a e, by the 7 e: And i a, unto a o, by the grant, is as e a i is
unto e a o. Therefore u a o, and e a i, are unto e a o proportional: And
therefore they are equal one to another.

The converse, is concluded by the same sorites, but by saying all backward.
For u a unto a e is, as u a o is unto o a e, by the 7 e: And as e a i, by the
grant: Because they are equal: And as i a is unto a o, by the same. Wherefore
u a is unto a e, as i a is unto a o.

12 If two triangles be equiangles, they are proportional in Shankes: And
contrariwise: 4 and 5. p. vj.

The comparison both of the rate and proportion of triangles has in the former
been taught: Their similitude remains for the last place. Which similitude
of theirs consists indeed of the reason, or rate of their angles and
proportion of the shankes. Therefore for just cause was the reason of the
angles set first: Because from thence not only their reason, but also their
latter proportion is gathered. Let a e i and i o u, be two triangles
equiangled: And let them be set upon the same line e i u, meeting or touching
one another in the common point i. Then, seeing that the angles at e and i, are
granted to be equal, the lines ^ i, and a e, are parallel, by the 21 e v.
Therefore by the 22 e v u o and e a, being continued, shall meet. Item, The
right lines a i^ and y u, by the 21 e v, are parallel, because the angle a i e
is equal to o u i, the inner opposite to it. Therefore seeing that a i is
parallel to the base y u, by the 21 e v, e a shall be to a y, that is, by the
26 e v, to i ^, as e i is to i u: And alternly, or cross ways, e a shall be
to e i, as i o is to i u. This is the first proportion. Item, seeing that i o
is parallel to the base y e; y o, that is, by the 26 ^ v, au shall be unto o
u, as e i, is unto i u: And cross wise, as a i is unto i e, so is o u unto u
i. This is the second proposition. Lastly, equiordinately: a e is to a i, as o
i is to o u: wherefore if triangles be equiangled, they are proportional in
shankes.

This converse is thus demonstrated. Let there be two triangles a e i, and o u
y, proportional in shankes ^ And as a e is to e i; so let o u, be to u y: And
as a i is to ^ e; so let o y be to y u. Then at the points u and y, let angles
be made by the ^ ^ e iij. equal to the angles at e and i, and let the triangle
u y s, be made: for the other angles at a and s, shall be equal by the 4 e.
And the triangle y a ^, shall be equiangled to the assigned a e i. And by the
an^ecedent, it shall be proportional to it in shankes. Thus are two triangles
o u y, by the grant; and ^ y s, by the construction, proportional in shanks to
the same triangle a e i: And as a e, is to e i, so is e u, to u y; so is s u,
to u y. Therefore seeing o u and s u, are proportional to the same y u, they
are equal; Item, as a i is to i e: so is o y unto y u: so also is s y unto y
u. Therefore o y and s y, seeing they are proportional to the same y u, are
equall^ ( y u is the common side.) The triangle therefore o u y, is equilater
unto the triangle s y u: And by the i e, it is to it equiangle: And therefore
it is equiangled to the triangle a e i, which was to be prooved. This was
generally before taught at the 20 e iiij, of homologall sides subtending equal
angles.

Therefore,

13. If a right line in a triangle be parallel to the base, it does cut off
from it a triangle equiangle to the ^hole^ but less in base.

As in the triangle a e i, the right line o u, does cut off the triangle a o u,
equiangle, by the 21 e v, to the whole a e i; But the base o u, is less than
the base e i, as appears by the 21 e, and by the alternation of the sides.

14. If two trangles be proportional in the shankes of the equal angle, they
are equiangles: 6 p vj.

Let therefore the triangles given be a e ^, and o u y^ equal in their angles
a and oe And in their shankes let e a, be unto a i, as o u is to o y: And by
the ^ e iij, let the angles s o y^ and o y s, be equal to the angles e a i,
and e i a: The other at s and e, shall be equal, by the 4 e. Here thou see
that the triangle a e i, is equiangle unto ^ y s. Now, by the 12 e. as e a is
to a i: so is s o to o y: and therefore, by the grant, so is u o to o y.
Therefore seeing that u o, and o s, are proportional to o y, they are both
equal. Lastly, if the common shanke o y be added to both the shankes o u, and
o y, are equal to the shankes s o and o y. [But by the construction the angles
^ ^ ^ and a i e are equal. And, by the 4 e, the other at s and e are equal
Therefore the first triangle a e i, is made equiangled to the third. Now seeing
the second triangle u o y is to the third s o y, equal in the shanks of the
equal angle, it is to the same equilater, and by the i e, equiangled: Shon.]
Wherefore the second triangle o u y shall likewise be equiangled to o s y, the
third: And therefore if two triangles proportional in shankes be equal in the
angle of their shankes, they are equiangles.

15 If triangles proportional in shankes, and al^ernly parallel, do make an
angle between them, their bases are but one right line continued. 32 p. vj.

Or thus: If being proportional in their feet, and alternately parallels, they
make an angle in the midst between them, they have their bases continued in a
right line: H.

The cause is out of the 14 e v. For they shall make on each side, with the
falling line a i, two angles equal to two right angles.

Let the triangles a e i and o i u, be proportional in shanks: As a e is to a
i, so let i o be to o u: And let e a be parallel to i o: And a i to ou: Item,
let them make the angle a i o^ between them, to wit, between their m^^dle
shankes a i, and o i, I say their bases e i, and i u, are bu^^ one right line
continued. For seeing that by the grant a e, and o i, are parallels: Item a i
and u o, the right line a i and o i, shall make, by the 21 e v, the angles at
a, and o, equal to the alterne angle a i o: And therefore they are equal
between themselves: And then, by the 14 e, the triangles given are equiangles:
Therefore the angle o u i^ is equal to the angle a i e: Wherefore the three
angles o i u, o i a, and a i e, by the 3 e, are equal to the three angles of
the triangle e a i, which are equal by the 13 e vj. Unto two right angles: And
therefore they themselves also are equal to two right angles. Wherefore, by
the 14 e v, e i, and i u, are one right line continued.

16 If two triangles have one angle equal, another proportional in shankes,
the third homogeneall, they are equiangles. 7. p. v. j.

Let a e i, and o u y, the triangles given be equal in their angles a, and o:
and proportional in the shankes of the angles e, and u: and their other
angles, at i, and y, homogeneall, that is, let them be both, either acute, or
obtuse, or right angles. But first let them be acute, I say, the other at e,
and u, are equal. Otherwise let a e s, by the 11 e iij. be made equal to the
same o u y; Then have you them by the 4 e, equiangles; and the angles a s e,
shall be equal to the angle o y u; and both are acute angles: and by the 12.
e, a e s, and o u y, are proportional in fides: and as a e, is to e s; so
shall o ^, be to u y, that is, by the grant, so shall a e, be to e i. Therefore
because the same e a, has unto two, to wit, e s, and e i, the same reason, the
said e s, and e i, are equal one to another: And therefore, by the 17. e. v.j.
the angles at the base in s and i, are equal. Therefore both of them are acute
angles: And in like manner a s e, is an acute angle, contrary to the 14. e v.
The same will fall out altogether like to both the other, being either obtuse
or right angles. The last part of a right angle is manifest by the 4 e of this
Book.

Of Geometry the eight Book, of the diverse kinds of Triangles.
1 A triangle is either right angled, or obliquangled.

The division of a triangle, taken from the angles, out of their common
differences, I mean, does now follow. But here first a special division, and
that of great moment, as hereafter shall be in quadrangles and prismes.

2 A right angled triangle is that which has one right angle: An obliquangled
is that which has none. 27. d j.

A right angled triangle in Geometry is of special use and force; and of the
best Mathematicians it is called Magister matheseos, the master of the
Mathematickes.

Therefore

3 If two perpendicular lines be knit together, they shall make a right angled
triangle.

As here in a e i. This construction and manner of making of a right angled
triangle, is drawn out of the definition of a right angle. For right lines
perpendicular are the makers of a right angle, as is manifest by the 13. e iij.

4 If the angle of a triangle at the base, be a right angle, a perpendicular
from the top shall be the other shanke^ [and contrariwise Schon.]

As is manifest in the same example.

5 If a right angled triangle be equicrurall, each of the angles at the base is
the hal^e of a right angle: And contrariwise.

As in the triangle a e i: For they are both equal to one right angle, by the
13. e v. j. And between themselves, by the 17. e, v j.

Therefore

6 If one angle of a triangle be equal to the other two, it is a right angle
[And contrariwise Schon.]

Because it is equal to the half of two right angles, by the 13. e v.j.

And

7 If a right line from the top of a triangle cutting the base into ^wo
equal parts be equal to the bisegment, or half of the base, the angle at the
top is a right angle: [And contrariwise Schon.]

As in the triangle a e i, the right line a o, cutting the base e i, in o, into
two equal parts, is equal to e o, or o i, the half of the base makes two
equicrural triangles; and the several angles at the top equal to the angles
at the ends, viz. e, and i, by the 17. e, v j. Therefore the angle at the top
is equal to the other two: wherefore by the 6 e, it is a right angle.

8 A perpendicular in a triangle from the right angle to the base, does cut it
into two triangles, like unto the whole and between themselves, 8. p v. j. [
And contrariwise Schon.]

As in the triangle a e i, the perpendicular a o, does cut the triangles a o e,
and a o i, like unto the whole a e i, because they are equiangles to it; seeing
that the right angle on each side is one, and another common in i, and e:
Therefore the other is equal to the remainder, by 4. e v. ij. Wherefore the
particular triangles are equiangles to the whole: As proportional in the
shankes of the equal angles, by the 12. e vij. But that they are like between
themselves it is manifest by the 22. e iiij.

Therefore

9 The perpendicular is the mean proportional between the segments or
portions of the base.

As in the said example, as i o, is to o a: so is o a, to o e, because the
shankes of equal angles are proportional, by the 8.e. From hence was Platoes
Mesographus invented.

And

10 Either of the shankes is proportional between the base, and the segment
of the base next adjoining.

For as e i, is unto i a, in the whole triangle, so is a i, to i o, in the
greater. For so they are homologall sides, which do subtend equal angles, by
the 23.e, iiij. Item, as i e, is to e a; in the whole triangle, so is a e, to e
o, in the lesser triangle.

Either of the shankes is proportional between the sum, and the difference
of the base and the other shanke. And contrariwise. If one side be
proportional between the sum and the difference of the others, the triangle
given is a rectangle. M. H. Brigges.

This is a consectary arising likewise out of the 4 e. of very great use.

In the triangle e a d, the shanke a d, 12. is the mean proportional between
b d, 18. (the sum of the base a e, 13. and the shanke e d, 5.) and 8. the
difference of the said base and shanke: For if thou shall draw the right lines
b a, and a c, the angle b ac, shall be by the 6.e, a rectangle; (because it is
equal to the angles at b, and c, seeing that the triangles b e a, and e a c,
are equicrurall.) And by the 9 e, b d, d a, and d e, are continually
proportional.

If a quadrate of a number, given for the first shanke, be divided of another,
the half of the difference of the divisour, and quotient shall be the other
shanke, and the half of the sum shall be the base. Or thus, The side of
divided number doubled, and the difference of the divisour and quotient, shall
be the two shankes, and the sum of them shall be the base.

Let the number given for the first shanke be 4. And let 8. divide 16. the
quadrate of 4. by 2. The half of 8 -- 2, that is 3. shall be the other shanke:
And the half of 8 -- 2, that is 5. shall be the base.

Therefore

If any one number shall divide the quadrate of another, the side of the
divided, and the half of the difference of the divisour and the quotient,
shall be the two s^ankes of a rectangled triangle, and the half of the sum
of them shall be the base thereof.

Let the two numbers given be 4. and 6. The square of 6. let it be 36. and the
quotient of 36. by 4. be 9: And the side it 6. for the one shanke. Now 9 -- 4.
that is, 5. is the difference of the divisour and quotient, whose half 2., is
the other shanke. And 9 -- 4. that is 13. is the sum the said devisour and
quotient, whose half 6., is the base.

Again let 4. and 8. be given. The quadrate of 8. is 64. And the quient of 64
is 16. and the side of 64. is 8. for the one shanke. The half 16 -- 4. that is
6. is the other shanke. And the half of 16 -- 4. that is 10, is the base.

11. If the base of a triangle do subtend a rightangle, the rectilineall
fitted to it, shall be equal to the like rectilinealls in like manner fitted
to the shankes thereof: And contrariwise, out of the 31. p. v j.

Or thus: If the base of a triangle do subtend a right angle, the right lined
figure made upon the base, is equal to the right lined figures like, and in
like manner situate upon the feet: H.

Let the right angled triangle be a e i: and let there be also the triangles e
a u, and a i y, and to them upon the base of the said right angle, by the 23 e
iiij. let the triangle i e s, be made like, and in like manner situate. I say,
that e i s, is equal jointly to e a u, and a i y. Let a o, a perpendicular
fall from the right angle a, to the base e i: This by the i o e, does yield us
twice three proportionals, to wit, ie, e a, e o: Item, e i, i a, i o:
Therefore, by the 25. e, iiij, as i e, is to e o: so is the triangle i e s, to
the triangle e a u; And as e i, is to o i, so is the triangle e i s, to the
triangle a i y: But e i, is equal to e o, and o i, the whole, to wit, to his
parts. Wherefore by the second composition in Arithmeticke (9.c.ij.) the
triangle e i s, is equal to the triangles e a u, and i a y.

The Converse is thus proved: Let the triangle be a e i: And let the
perpendicular e o, be erected upon a e, equal to e i: And draw a right line
from o to a: Here by the former, the rectilinealls situate at o e, and e a,
that is by the construction, at a e, and i e, are equal to the rightilineall
at a o, made alike and situate a like: And by the grant they are equal, to
the rectilineall at a i, made a like and situated alike. Therefore seeing the
like rectilineals at a o, and a i, are equal; they have by the 20 e iiij,
their homologall sides equal: And the two triangles are equiliters: And by the
1 e vij, equiangles. But a e o, is a right angle, by the construction: And a e
i, is proved to be equal to the same a e o: Therefore, by the 13 e v. a e i,
also is a right angle.

12 An obliquangled triangle is either Obtusangled or Acutangled.

The division of an obliquangled triangle is taken from the special
differences of an oblique angle. For at the 15 e iij, we were taught that an
oblique angle was either obtuse or acute: Therefore an obliquangled triangle is
an obtuseangle, and an Acutangle.

13 An obtusangle is that triangle which has one blunt corner, 28. di.

There can be but one right angle in a triangle, by the 2 e. Therefore also in
it there can be but one blunt angle.

Therefore

14. If the obtuse or blunt angle be at the base of the triangle given, a
perpendicular drawn from the top of the triangle, shall fall without the
figure: And contrariwise.

As here in a e i, the perpendicular i o, falls without: This is manifest by
the 4 e.

And

15. If one angle of a triangle be greater than both the other two, it is an
obtuse angle: And contrariwise.

This is plain by the 6 e.

And

16. If a right line drawn from the top of the triangle cutting the base
into two equal parts, be less than one of those halfes, the angle at the
top is a blunt-angle. And contrariwise.

As in a e i, the perpendicular e o, cutting the base a i into two equal parts
a o, and o i: And the said e o is less than either a o, or o i: Therefore the
angle a e i, is a blunt angle by the 7 e.

17. An acutangled triangle is that which has all the angles acute. 29 dj.

Therefore

18 A perpendicular drawn from the top falls with out figure: And
contrariwise.

As in a e i, the perpendicular a o falls without as is plain by the 4 e.

And

19. If any one angle of triangle be less then the other two, it is acute: And
contrariwise.

As is manifest by the 6 e.

And

20. If a right line drawn from the top of the triangle; cutting the base
into two equal parts, be less than either of those portions, the angle at the
top is an acute angle: And contrariwise.

As in a e i, let a o cutting the base e i into two equal parts, be less than
any one of those parts, the angle at the top is an acute angle, as apreareth
by the 7 e.

The ninth Book, of P. Ramus Geometry, which entreats of the measuring of
right lines by like right-angled triangles.
THe Geometry of like right-angled triangles, amongst many other uses that it
has, it does especially afford us the geodaesy or measuring of right lines:
And that mastery, which before (at the 2 e viij) attributed the right angled
triangles, shall here be found to be a true mastery indeed. For it shall
contain the geodesy of right lines; and afterward the geodesy of plains and
solides, by the measuring of their sides, which are right lines.

1. For the measuring of right lines; we will use the Jacobs staff, which is a
squire of unequal shankes.

Radius, commonly called Baculus Jacob, Jacobs staff, as if it had been long
since invented and practiced by that holy Patriarch, is a very ancient
instrument, and of all other Geometrical instruments, commonly used, the best
and fittest for this use. Archimedes in his book of the Number of the sand,
seems to mention some such thing: And Hipparchus, with an instrument not much
unlike this, boldly attempted an heinous matter in the sight of God, as Pliny
thinks, namely to deliver unto posterity the number of the stars, and to
assign of fix them in their true places by the Norma, the squire or Jacobs
staff. And indeed true it is that the Radius is not only used for the
measuring of the earth and land: But especially for the defining or limiting of
the stars in their places and order: And for the describing and setting out
of all the regions and ways of the heavenly city. Yea and Virgill the famous
Poet, in his 3 Ecloge, Ecquis fuit alter, Descripsit radio totum, qui gentibus
orbem? and again afterward in the 6 of his Eneiades, has noted both these
uses. Coelique meatus. Describent radio and surgentia sidera dicent. Long after
this the Jews and Arabians, as Rabbi Levi; But in these latter days, the
Germans especially, as Regiomontanus; Werner, Schoner, and Appian have graced
it: But above all other the learned Gemma Phrisius in a several work of that
argument only, has illustrated and taught the use of it plainly and fully.

The Jacobs staff therefore according to his own, and those Geometrical
parts, shall here be described (The astronomicall distribution we reserve to
his time and place.) And that done, the use of it shall be showed in the
measuring of lines.

This instrument, at the discretion of the measurer may be greater or lesser.
For the quantity of the same can no other ways be determined.

2 The shankes of the staff are the Index and the Transome.

The principal parts of this instrument are two, the Index, or Staff, which
is the greater or longer part: and the Transversarium, or Transome, and is the
lesser and shorter.

3 The Index is the double and one tenth part of the transome.

Or thus: The Index is to the transversary double and 1/10 part thereof. H. As
here thou see.

4 The Transome is that which rides upon the Index, and is to be slid higher
or lower at pleasure.

Or, The transversary is to be moved upon the Index, sometimes higher,
sometimes lower: H. This proportion in defining and making of the shankes of
the instrument is perpetually to be observed: as if the transome be 10. parts,
the Index must be 21. If that be 189. this shall be 90. or if it be 2000. this
shall be 4200. Neither does it skill what the numbers be, so this be their
proportion. More than this, That the greater the numbers be, that is the lesser
that the divisions be, the better will it be in the use. And because the Index
must bear, and the transome is to be borne; let the index be thicker, and the
transome the thinner.



But of what matter each part of the staff be made, whether of brass or wood
it skilleth not, so it be firm, and will not cast or warpe. Notwithstanding,
the transome will more conveniently be moved up and down by brazen pipes, both
by it self, and upon the Index higher or lower right angle wise, so touching
one another, that the alterne mouth of the one may touch the side of the other.
The third pipe is to be moved or slid up and down, from one end of the
transome to the other; and therefore it may be called the Cursor. The fourth
and fifth pipes, fixed and immovable, are set upon the ends of the transome,
are unto the third and second of equal height with ^innes, to restrain when
need is, the opticke line, and as it were, with certain points to define it
in the transome.

The three first pipes may, as occasion shall require, be fastened or stayed
with brazen scrues. With these pipes therefore the transome may be made as
great, as need shall require, as here thou see.

The fabric or manner of making the instrument has hitherto been taught,
the use thereof follows: unto which in general is required: First, a just
distance. For the sight is not infinite. Secondly, that one eye be closed: For
the optic faculty conveyed from both the eyes into one, does aim more
certainly; and the instrument is more fitly applied and set to the cheek
bone, then to any other place. For here the eye is as it were the center of the
circle, into which the transome is inscribed. Thirdly, the hands must be
steady; for if they shake, the proportion of the Geodesy must needs be
troubled and uncertain. Lastly, the place of the station is from the midst of
the foot.

5 If the sight do pass from the beginning of one shanke, it passes by the
end of the other: And the one shanke is perpendicular unto the magnitude to be
measured, the other parallel.

These common and general things are premised. That the sight is from the
beginning of the Index by the end of the transome: Or contrariwise, From the
beginning of the transome, unto the end of the Index. And that the Index is
right, that is, perpendicular to the line to be measured, the transome
parallel. Or contrariwise. Now the perpendicularity of the Index, in
measurings of lengthts, may be tried by a plummet of lead appendent^ But in
heights and breadths, the eye must be trusted; although a little varying of the
plummet can make no sensible error. By the end of the transome, understand
that which is made by the line visuall, whether it be the outmost finne, or the
Cursour in any other place whatsoever.

6 Length and Altitude have a threefold measure; The first and second kind of
measure require but one distance, and that by granting a dimension of one of
them, for the third proportional: The third two distances, and such only is
the dimension of Latitude.

Geodesy of right lines is two fold; of one distance, or of two. Geodesy of one
distance is when the measurer for the finding of the desired dimension does not
change his place or standing. Geodesy of two distances is when the measurer by
reason of some impediment lying in the way between him and the magnitude to be
measured, is constrained to change his place, and make a double standing.

Here observe, That length and height, may be jointly measured both with one,
and with a double station: But breadth may not be measured otherwise than with
two.

7 If the sight be from the beginning of the Index r^ght or plumbe unto the
length, and unto the father end of the same, as the segment of the Index is,
unto the segment of the transome, so is the height of the measurer unto the
length.

Let therefore the segment of the Index, from the top; I mean, unto the
transome be 6. parts. The segment of the transome, to wit, from the Index unto
the opticke line be 18. The Index, which here is the height of the measurer,
4. foot: The length, by the rule of three, shall be 12. foot. The figure is
thus, for as a e, is to e i, so is a o, unto o u, by the 12. e vij. For they
are like triangles. For a e i, and a o u, are right angles: And that which is
at a is common to them both: Wherefore the remainder is equal to the
remainder, by the 4. e v ij.



The same manner of measuring shall be used form an higher place; as out of y,
the segment of the Index is 5. parts; the segment of the transome 6: and then
the height be 10 foot: the same Length shall be found to be 12 foot.

Neither is it any matter at all, whether the length in a plain or level
underneath: Or in an ascent or descent of a mountain, as in the figure under
written.

Thus may thou measure the breadths of Rivers, Valleys, and Ditches. For the
Length is always after this manner, so that one may measure the distance of
ships on the Sea, as also Thales Milesius, in Proclus at the 26 pj, did
measure them. An example thou have here.



Hereafter in the measuring of Longitude and Altitude, fight is unto the top
of the height. Which here I do now forewarne thee of, least afterward it
should in vain be reitered often.

The second manner of measuring a Length is thus:

8. If the sight be from the beginning of the index parallel to the length to
be measured, as the segment of the transome is, unto the segment of the index,
so shall the height given be to the length.

As if the segment of the Transome be 120 parts: the height given 400-foot:
The segment of the Index 210 parts: The length, by the golden rule shall be 700
foot. The figure is thus. And the demonstration is like unto the former; or
indeed more easier. For the triangles are equiangles, as before. Therefore as o
u is to u a: so is e i to i a.



This is the first and second kind of measuring of a Longitude, by one single
distance or station: The third which is by a double distance does now follow.
Here the transome, if there be room enough for the measurer to go far
enough back, must be put lower, in the second distance.

9. If the sight be from the beginning of the transverie parallel to the
length to be measured, as in the index the difference of the greater segment is
unto the lesser; so is the difference of the second station unto the lenth.

This kind of Geodaesy is somewhat more subtle than the former were. The
figure is thus; in which let the first aiming be from a, the beginning of the
transome, and out of a i the length sought by o, the end of the Index, unto e,
the top of the height: And let the segment of the Index be o u: The second
aiming let it be from y, the beginning of the transome, out of a greater
distance by s, the end of the Index, unto e, the same note of the height: And
let the segment of the Index be s r.



Here the measuring performed, is the taking of the difference between o u and
s r. The rest are feigned only for demonstrations sake. Therefore in the first
station let a m l, be from the beginning of the transome, be parallel to y e.
Here first m u, is equal to s r. For the triangle^ m u a, and s r y, are
equal in their shankes u a, and r y, by the grant (Because the transome
stands still in his own place:) And the angles at m u a, u a m, are equal
to the angles: And all right angles are equal, by the 14 e iij. These are the
outter and inner opposite one to another: And such are equal by the 1. e. v.)
Therefore they are equilaters, by the 2 e vij; And o m, is the difference of
the segments of the Index. Then as o m is to m u, so is e l, to l i; as the
equation of three degrees does show. For, by the 12 e vij, as o m is to m a: so
is e l to l a: And as m a is to m u; so is l a, to l i. Therefore by right, as
o m, is to m u: so is e l, to l i: And by the 12 e v j, so is y a, to a i: As
if the difference of the first segment be 36 parts: The second segment be 72
parts: The difference of the second s^ation 40 foot. The length sought shall
be 80 foot. And here indeed is no height definitely given, that may make any
bound of the principal proportion. Notwithstanding the Height, although it be
of an unknown measure, is the bound of the length sought: And therefore it is
an help and means to argue the question. Because it is conceived to stand
plumbe upon the outmost end of the length.

Therefore that third kind of measuring of length is oftentimes necessary,
when by neither of the former waye^ the length may possibly be taken, by reason
of some impediment in the way, to wit of a wall, or tree, or house, or
mountain, whereby the end of the length may not be seen, which was the first
way: Nor an height next adjoining to the end of the length is given, which is
the second way.

Hitherto we have spoken of the threefold measure of longitude, the first and
second out of an height given the third out of a double distance: The
measuring of height follows next, and that is also threefold. Now height is
a perpendicular line falling from the top of the magnitude, unto the ground
or plain whereon the measurer does stand, after which manner Altitude on
height was defined at the 9 e iiij. The first geodesy or manner of measuring
of heighths is thus.

10. If the sight be from the beginning of the transome perpendicular unto the
height to be measured, as the segment of the transome, is unto the segment of
the Index, so shall the length given be to the height.

Let the segment of the transome be 60 parts: the segment of the Index 36: the
Length given 120 foot: the height sought shall be, by the golden rule, 72
foot.



The Figure is thus: And the demonstration is by the 12 e vij, as before: but
here is to be added the height of the measurer; which if it be 4 foot, the
whole height shall be 76 foot.

Therefore in an eversed altitude

11. If the sight be from the beginning of the Index parallel to the height,
as the segment of the transome is, unto the segment of the index, so shall the
length given be, unto the height sought.

Eversa altitudo, An eversed altitude (Reversed, H;) is that which we call
depth, which indeed is nothing else, in the Geometers sense, but height turned
topsie turvie, as we say, or with the heels upward. For out of the height
concluded by subducting that which is above ground, the height or depth of a
Well shall remain.

Let the segment of the transome a e, be 5 parts: the segment of the Index e i,
be 13: the diameter of the Well (which now stands for the length:) be 10
foot, which at top is supposed to be equal to that at bottom: the opposite
height, by the 21 e vij, and the golden rule sh^^^ be 26 foot: From whence you
must take the segment of the Index reaching over the mouth of the Well: And the
true height (or depth) shall remain; as if that segment of 13 parts be as much
as 2 foot, the height sought shall be 24 foot. The second manner of measuring
of heights follows.

12. If the sight be from the beginning of the Index perpendicular to the
height to be measured, as the segment of the Index is unto the segment of the
Transome, so shall the length given be to the height.

As if the segment of the Index be 60 parts: and the segment also of the
transome be 60: And the Length given be 250 foot: By the Rule of three, the
height also shall be 250 foot; as thou see in the example underneath: For as
a e is to e i; so is a e o to o u, by the 12 e vij. But here unto the height
found, you must add the height of the measurer: Which if it be 4 foot, the
whole height shall be 254 foot.

Therefore

13. If the sight be from the beginning of the Index (perpendicular to the
magnitude to be measured) by the names of the transome, unto the ends of some
known part of the height, as the distance of the Names is, unto the rest of the
transome above them, so shall the known part be unto the part sought.

Or thus: If the sight pass from the beginning of the Index being right, by
the vanes of the transversary, to the terms of some parts; as the distance of
the vanes is unto the rest of the transversary above the index, so is the part
known unto the remainder: H.

This is a consectary of a known part of an height, from whence the rest may
be known, as in the figure.

As o u is unto u y, so is e i to i s. For as o u, is unto u a: so is e i unto
i a, by the 12 e vij. And as u a, is to u y, so is i a unto i s; and by right,
as o u, is to u y, so is e i, to i s. Here thou have three bounds of the
proportion. Let therefore o u, be 20 parts: u y 30: And e i, the known part,
let it be 15 foot: Therefore thou shall conclude i s, the rest to be 22.

The first and second kind of measuring of heights is thus: The third
follows.

14 If the sight be from the beginning of the Index perpendicular to the
height, as in the Index the difference of the segmeut, is unto the difference
of the distance or station; so is the segment of the transome unto the height.

Hitherto you must recall that subtilty, which was used in the third manner of
measuring of lengths.



Let the first aim be taken from a, the beginning of the Index perpendicular
unto the height to be measured: And from an unknown length a i, by o, the end
of the transome, unto e, the top of the height e i: And let the segment of
the Index be u a. The second aim, let it be taken from y, the beginning of the
same Index; and out of a greater distance, by s, the end of the transome, unto
the same top e. And the segment of the Index let it be r l.

Here, as before, the measuring is performed and done, by the taking of the
difference of the said y r, above a u: Now the demonstration is concluded, as
in the former was taught. Let the parallel l s m, be erected against a o e.

Here first the triangles o u a, and s r l, are equilaters, by the 2 e vij.;
(seeing that the angles at a, and l, the external and internal, are equal in
bases o u, and s r: for the segment in each distance is the same still:)
Therefore u a, is equal to r l. Now the rest is concluded by a sorites of
four degrees: As y r, is unto y u: so by the 12. e vij. is s r, that is, o u,
unto e i: And as o u, is unto e i, so is a u, that is, l r, unto a i. Therefore
the remainder y l, unto the remainder y a; shall be as y r, is unto the whole y
i, and therefore from the first unto the last, as s r, is to e i.

Therefore let the difference of the Index be 23: parts^ The difference of the
distance 30. foot: The segment of the transome 23. parts: The height shall be
57. 9/23. or foot.

Therefore

15 Out of the Geodesy of heights, the difference of two heights is manifest.

Or thus: By the measure of one altitude, we may know the difference of two
altitudes: H.

For when thou have taken or found both of them, by some one of the former
ways, take the lesser out of the greater; and the remain shall be the height
desired. From hence therefore by one of the towers of unequal height, you may
measure the height of the other. First out of the lesser, let the length be
taken by the first way: Because the height of the lesser, wherein thou art, is
easy to be taken, either by a plumbe-line, let fall from the top to the
bottom, or by some one of the former ways. Then measure the height, which is
above the lesser: And add that to the lesser, and thou shall have the whole
height, by the first or second way. The figure is thus, and the demonstration
is out of the 12. e vij. For as a e, is to e i, so is a o, to o u. Contrariwise
out of an higher Tower, one may measure a lesser.

16 If the sight be first from the top, then again from the base or middle
place of the greater, by the vanes of the transome unto the top of the lesser
height; as the said parts of the yards are unto the part of the first yard; so
the height between the stations shall be unto his excess above the height
desired.

Let the unequal heights be these, a s, the lesser, and u y, the greater: And
out of the assigned greater u y, let the lesser, a s, be sought. And let the
sight be first from u, the top of the greater, unto a, the top of the
lesser, making at the shankes of the staff the triangle u r m. Then again let
the same sight be from the base, or from the lower end of u y, the height
given, unto a, the same top of the lesser, making by the shankes of the
staff the triangle y l n; so that the segments of the yard be, the upper one,
I mean, u r, the nether one u l: I say the whole of u r, and n l, is unto u
r: so is the u y, greater height assigned, unto a s, the lesser sought.



The Demonstration, by drawing of a o, a perpendicular unto u y, is a
proportion out of two triangles of equal height. For the forth of the total
equally heighted triangles u a o, and y a s, although they be reciprocal in
situation, they have their bases u o, and a s, as if this were o y. Then they
have the same with the whole triangles; as also the subducted triangles u r m,
and y n l, of equal height; to wit whose common height is the segment of the
transome remaining still in the same place, there r m, here y l. And therefore
the bases of these, namely, the segments of the yards u r, and n l, have the
same rate with u o, unto o y. As therefore u o, is unto o y: so is, u r, unto n
l. And backward, as n l, is to u r; so is, y o, unto o u, as here thou see:
Therefore furthermore by composition of the Antecedent with the Consequent unto
the Consequent, by the 5 c 9 ij. Arith. As n l, and u r, are unto u r: so are y
o, and o u, unto o u, that is y u, unto o u, on this manner. there is given n
l, and u r, for the first proportional: u r, for the second: and y u, for the
third: Therefore there is also given o u, for the fourth: Which o u, subducted
out of u y, there remains o y, that is, a s, the lesser altitude sought.

For let the parts of the yard be 12. and 6. and the sum of them 18. Now as
18. is 12. so is the whole altitude u y, 190. foot, unto the excess 126
foot. The remainder therefore 63 foot, shall be a s, the lesser height
sought.

But thou may more fitly dispose and order this proportion thus: As u r, is
unto n l: so is u o unto o y. Therefore by Arithmeticall composition, as u r,
and n l, are unto n l: so u o, and o y, that is, the whole u y, is unto o y,
that is, unto a s. For here a subduction of the proportion, after the
composition is no way necessary, by the cross rule of societia, thus:

The second station might have been in o, the end of the perpendicular from a.
But by taking the aim out of the top of the lesser altitude, the
demonstration shall be yet again more easy and short, by the two triangles at
the yard a e i, and a e f, resembling the two whole triangles a o u, and a o y,
in like situation, the parts of the shanke cut, are on each side the segments
of the transome.

One may again also out of the top of a Turret measure the distance of two
turrets one from another: For it is the first manner of measuring of
longitudes, neither does it here differ any whit from it, more than the yard is
hanged without the height given. The figure is thus: And the Demonstration is
by the 12. e vij. For as a e, the segment of the yard, is unto e i, the segment
of the transome: so is the assigned altitude a o, unto the length o u.

The geodesy or measuring of altitude is thus, where either the length, or some
part of the length is given, as in the first and second way: Or where the
distance is double, as in the third.

17 If the sight be from the beginning of the yard being right or
perpendicular, by the vanes of the transome, unto the ends of the breadth; as
in the yard the difference of the segment is unto the difference of the
distance, so is the distance of the vanes unto the breadth.



The measuring of breadth, that is, of a thwart or cross line, remains. The
Figure and Demonstration is thus: The first aiming, let it be a e i, by o, and
u, the vanes of the transome o u. The second, let it be y e i, by s, and r, the
vanes of the transome s r. Then by the point s, let the parallel l s m, be
drawn against a o e. Here first, the triangles o u a, and s i l, are
equilaters, by the 2 e vij. Because the angles at n and j, are right angles:
And u a o, and j l s, the outter and inner, are equal in their bases o u, and
s j, by the grant: Because here the segment of the transome remains the same:
Therefore u a, is equal to j l. These grounds thus laid, the demonstration of
the third altitude here taken place. For as y l, is unto y a: so is s j, unto e
r: And, because parts are proportional unto their multiplicants, so is s r,
unto e i: for the rest do agree.



The same shall be the geodesy or manner of measuring, if thou would from
some higher place, measure the breadth that is beneath thee, as in the last
example. But from the distance of two places, that is, from latitude or
breadth, as of Trees, Mountains, Cities, Geographers and Chorographers do
gain great advantages and helps.

Wherefore the geodesy or measuring of right lines is thus in length, height,
and breadth, from whence the Painter, the Architect, and Cosmographer, may view
and gather of many famous place the windows, the statues or imagery,
pyramides, signs, and lastly, the length and height, either by a single or
double: the breadth by a double dimension only, that is, they may thus behold
and take of all places the nature and symmetry; as in the example next
following thou may make trial when thou please.

The tenth Book of Geometry, of a Triangulate and Parallelogramme.
ANd thus much of the geodesy of right lines, by the means of rectangled
triangles: It follows now of the triangulate.

1. A triangulate is a rectilineall figure compounded of triangles.

As before (for the dichotomies sake) of a line was made a Lineate, to signify
the genus of a surface and a Body: so now is for the same cause of a triangle
made a Triangulate, to declare and express the genus of a Quadrilater and
Multilater, and indeed more justly, then before in a Lineate. For triangles do
compound and make the triangulate, but lines do not make the lineate.

Therefore

2. The sides of a triangulate are two more than are the triangles of which it
is made.

As the sides of a Quadrangle are 4. Therefore the triangles which do make the
same foure-sided figure are but 2. The sides of a Quinquangle are 5, Therefore
the triangles are 3, and so forth of the rest, as here thou see. And that
indeed is the least: For even a triangle it self, may be cut into as many
triangles as one please.

That both the inner and outter are equal to right angles, in every kind of
right line figure, it was manifest at the 4 e vj. The inner is a Quadrangle,
are equal to 4. In a Quinquangle, to 6: In an Hexangle, to 8; and so forth.
But the outter, in every right-lined figure, are equal to 4 right angles: as
here may be demonstrated, by the 14 e v and 13 e vj.

And

3. Homogeneall Triangulates are cut into an equal number of triangles, e 20 p
vj.

For if they be Quadrangles, they be cut into two triangles: If Quinquangles,
into 3. If Hexangles, into 4, and so forth.

4. Like triangulates are cut into triangles alike one to another and
homologall to the whole e 20 p vj.

Or thus: Like Triangulates are divided into triangles like one unto another,
and in porportion correspondent unto the whole: H.

As in these two quinqualges. First the particular triangles are like between
themselves. For the shankes of a e u and y s m, equal angles are
proportional, by the grant. Therefore the triangles themselves are equiangles,
by 14 e vij. And therefore alike, by the 12 e vii. and so forth of the rest.



The middle triangles, the equal angles being subtracted shall have their
other angles equal: And therefore they also shall be equiangles and alike, by
the same.

Secondarily, the triangles a e u, and y s m: e i o and s r l; e o u, and s l
m, to wit, alike between themselves, are by the 1 e vj, in a double reason of
their homologall sides e u, s m, e o, s l, which reason is the same, by means
of the common sides. Therefore three triangles are in the same reason: And
therefore they are proportional: And, by the third composition, as one of the
antecedents is, unto one of the consequents^ so is the whole quinquangle to the
whole.

5. A triangulate is a Quadrangle or a Multangle.

The parts of this partition are in Euclide, and yet without any show of a
division. And here also, as before, the species or several kinds have their
denomination their angles, although it had been better and truer to have been
taken from their sides; as to have been called a Quadrilater, or a Multilater.
But in words use must be followed as a master.

6. A Quadrangle is that which is comprehended of four right lines. 22 d j.

As here thou see. But a Quadrangle may also be a sphearicall, and a
conicall, and a cylindraceall, and that those differences are common^ we do
foretell at the 3 e v. And a Quadrangle may be a plain, which is not a
quadrilater, as here.

7. A quadrangle is a a Parallelogramme, or a Trapezium.

This division also in his parts is in the Elements of Euclide, but without any
form or show of a division. But the difference of the parts shall more fitly
be distinguished thus: Because in general there are many common parallels.

8. A Parallelogramme is a quadrangle whose opposite sides are parallel.

As in the example, the side a e, is parallel to the side i o: And the side e
i, is parallel to opposite side a o.

Therefore

9. If right lines on one and the same side, do jointly bound equal and
parallall lines, they shall make a parallelogramme.

The reason is, because they shall be equal and parallel between themselves,
by the 26. e v.

And

10 A parallelogramme is equal both in his opposite sides, and angles, and
segments cut by the diameter.

Or thus; The opposite, both sides, and angles, and segments cut by the
diameter are equal. Three things are here concluded; The first is, that the
opposite sides are equal: This manifest by the 26 e v. Because two right lines
do jointly bound equal parallells.

The second, that the opposite angles are equal, the Diagonall a i, does show.
For it makes the triangles a e i, and i o a, equilaters: And therefore also
equiangles: And seeing that the particular angles at a, and i, are equal, the
whole is equal to the whole. This part is the 34. p j^

The third: The segments cut by the diameter are always equal, whether they
be triangles, or any manner of quadrangles, as in the figures. For the Diameter
does cut into two equal parts, the parallelogramme by the Angles, or by the
opposite sides, or by the alernall equal segments of the sides.

And

11 The Diameter of a parallelogramme is cut into two by equal rays.

As in the three figures a e i, next before: This a parallelogramme has common
with a circle, as was manifest at the 28. e iiij.

And

12 A parallelogramme is the double of a triangle of a trinangle of equal base
and height, 41. p j.

The comparison first in rate of inequality of a parallelogramme with a
triangle, does follow: As here thou see in this diagramme. For a
parallelogramme is cut into two equal triangles, by the antecedent. Therefore
it is the double of the half.

And

13 A parallelogramme is equal to a triangle of equal height and double base
unto it: e 42. p j.

As to a e i, the triangle, the parallelogramme a o i u, is equal: because
half of the parallelogramme is equal to the triangle: Therefore the halfes
being equal, the whole also shall be equal.

From whence one may

14 To a triangle given, in a rectilineall angle given, make an equal
parallelogramme.

As here to the triangle, a e i, given in s, the right lined angle given, you
may equal the parallelogramme o u y i.

15 A parallelogramme does consist both of two diago^als, and complements, and
gnomons.

For these three parts of a parallelogramme are much used in Geometrical
works and businesses, and therefore they are to be defined.

16 The Diagonall is a particular parallelogramme having both an angle and
diagonall diameter common with the whole parallelogramme.

First the Diagonall is defined: As in the whole parallelogramme a e i o, the
diagonals are a u y s, and y l i r: Because they are parts of the whole, having
both the same common angles at a, and i: and diagonall diameter a i, with the
whole parallelogramme: Not that the whole diagonie is common to both^ But
because the particular diagonies are the parts of the whole diagony. Therefore
the diagonal^s are two.

17 The Diagonall is like, and alike situate to the whole parallelogramme: e
24. p vj.

There is not any, either rate or proportion of the diagonall propounded, only
similitude is attributed to it, as in the same figure, the Diagonall a u y s,
is like unto the whole parallelogramme a e i o. For first it is equianglar to
it. For the angle at a, is common to them both: And that is equal to that
which is at y, (by the 10. e x:) And therefore also it is equal to that at i,
by the 10. e x. Then the angles a u y, and a s y, are equal, by the 21. e v.
to the opposite inner angles at e, and o. Therefore it is equiangular unto it.

Again, it is proportional to it in the shankes of the equal angles. For the
triangles a u y, and a e i, are alike, by the 12 e vij, because u y is
parallel to the base. Therefore as a u is to u y; so is a i to e i: Then as u
y is to y a; so is e i to i a. Again by the 21 e v, because s y is parallel
to the base i o, as a y is to y s: so is a i, to i o: Therefore equiordinately,
as u y is to y s: so is e i to i o: Item as s y is to y a, so is i o to i a:
And as y a is to a s: so is i a to a o. Therefore equiordinately, as y s is to
s a: so is i o to o a. Lastly as s a is unto a y; so is o a unto a i: And as a
y is to a u; so is a i unto a e. Therefore equiordinately, as s a is to a u: so
is a o, to a e. Wherefore the Diagonall s u is proportional in the shankes of
equal angles to the parallelogramme o e.

The demonstration shall be the same of the Diagonall r l. The like situation
is manifest, by the 21 e iiij. And from hence also is manifest, That the
diagonall of a Quadrate, is a Quadrate: Of an Oblong, an Oblong: Of a Rhombe, a
Rhombe: Of a Rhomboides, a Rhomboides: because it is like unto the whole, and a
like situate.

Now the Diagonalls seeing they are like unto the whole and a like situate,
they shall also be like between themselves and alike situate one to another,
by the 21 and 22 e iiij.

Therefore

18. If the particular parallelogramme have one and the same angle with the
whole, be like and alike situate unto it, it is the Diagonall. 26 p vj.

This might have been drawn, as a consectary, out of the former: But it may
also as it is by Euclide be forced, by an argument ab impossibili^ For
otherwise the whole should be equal to the part, which is impossible.

As for example, Let the particular parallelogramme a u y s, be coangular to
the whole parallelogramme a e i o: And let it have the same angle with it at a;
like unto the whole and alike situate unto it; I say it is the Diagonall.

Otherwise, let the diverse Diagony be a r o: And let l r be parallel against
a e: Therefore a l r s, shall be the Diagonall, by the 6 e [15.] Now therefore
it shall be, by 8 e [16 e,] as e a is to a i: so is s a unto a l: Again, by
the grant, as e a is unto a i: so is s a to a u: Therefore the same s a is
proportional to a l, and to a u: And a l is equal to a u, the part to the
whole, which is impossible.

19. The Complement is a particular parallelogramme, comprehended of the
conterminall sides of the diagonals.

Or thus: It is a particular parallelogramme contained under the next adjoining
sides of the diagonals.

As in this figure, are ^ r, and s y: For each of them is comprehended of the
continued sides of the two diagonals. And therefore are they called
Complements, because they do with the Diagonals complere, that is, fill or
make up the whole parallelogramme. Neither indeed may the two diagonals be
described, but withal the complements must needs be described.

20. The complements are equal. 43 p j.

As in the same figure, are the said u r, and s r: For the triangles a e i, and
a o i, are equal, by the 12 e. Item, so are a s l, and a u l: Item, so are l u
i, and l r i. Therefore if you shall on each side take away equal triangles
from those which are equal, you shall leave the Complements equal between
themselves.

Therefore

21. If one of the Complements be made equal to a triangle given, in a
right-lined angle given, the other made upon a right line given shall be in
like manner equal to the same triangle. 44 p j.

As if thou should desire to have a parallelogramme upon a right line given,
and in a right lined angle given, to be made equal to a triangle given, this
proposition shall give satisfaction.

Let a e i be the Triangle given: The Angle be o: And the right line given be i
u: And the Parallelogramme a y is equal to a e i, triangle given in the angle
assigned, by the 13 e. Then let the side a y, be continued to r, equally to i
u, the line given: And let r u be knit by a right line: And from r drawn out a
diagony until it do meet with a s, infinitely continued; which shall meet
with it, by the 19 e v, in l. And the sides y i, and r u, let them be continued
equally to s l. in m and n. And knit l n together with a right line. This
complement m u, is equal to the complement y s, which is equal to the
Triangle assigned, by the former, and that in a right lined angle given.

And

22 If parallelogrammes be continually made equal to all the triangles of an
assigned triangulate, in a right lined angle given, the whole parallelogramme
shall in like manner be equal to the whole triangulate. 45 p j.

This is a corollary of the former, of the Reason or rate of a Parallelogramme
with a Triangulate; and it needs no father demonstration; but a ready and
steady hand in describing and working of it.

Take therefore an infinite right line; upon the continue the particular
parallelogrammes, As if the Triangulate a e i o u, were given to be brought
into a parallelogramme: Let it be resolved into three triangles, a e i, a i o,
and a o u: And let the Angle be y: First in the assigned Angle, upon the
Infinite right line, make by the former the Parallelogramme a e, in the angle
assigned, equal to a e i, the first triangle. Then the second triangle, thou
shall so make upon the said Infinite line, that one of the shankes may fall
upon the side of the equal complement; The other be cast on forward, and so
forth in more, if need be.

Here thou have 3 complements continued, and contin^ing the Parallelogramme:
But it is best in making and working of them, to put out the former, and one of
the sides of the inferior or latter Diagonall, lea^t the confusion of lines
do hinder or trouble thee.

Therefore

23. A Parallelogramme is equal to his diagonals and complements.

For a Parallelogramme does consist of two diagonals, and as many complements:
Wherefore a Parallelogramme is equal to his parts: And again the parts are
equal to their whole.

24. The Gnomon is any one of the Diagonall with the two complements.

There is therefore in every Parallelogramme a double Gnomon; as in these two
examples. Of all the space of a parallelogramme about his diameter, any
parallelogramme with the two complements, let it be called the Gnomon.
Therefore the gnomon is compounded, or made of both the kinds of diagonall and
complements.

In the Elements of Geometry there is no other use, as it seems of the
gnomons than that in one word three parts of a parallelogramme might be
signified and called by three letters a e i. Otherwise gnomon is a
perpendicular.

25. Parallelogrames of equal height are one to another as their bases are. 1
p vj.

As is apparent, by the 16 e iiij. Because they be the double of Triangles, by
the 10 e, of first figures: As a e, and e i.

Therefore

26 Parallelogrammes of equal height upon equal bases are equal. 35. 36 p j.

As is manifest in the same example.

27 If equiangle parallelogrammes be reciprocal in the shankes of the equal
angle, they are equal: And contrariwise. 15 p vj.

It is a consectary drawn out of the 11 e v ij: As here thou see: And yet
indeed both that (as there was said) and this is rather a consectary of the 18
e iiij, which here also is more manifest.

Therefore

28 If four right lines be proportional, the parallelogramme made of the two
middle ones, is equal to the equiangled parallelogramme made of the first and
last: And contrariwise, e 16 p vj.

For they shall be equiangled parallelogrammes reciprocal in the shankes of
the equal angle.

And

29 If three right lines be proportional, the parallelogramme of the middle
one is equal to the equiangled parallelogramme of the extremes: And
contrariwise.

It is a consectary drawn out of the former.

Of Geometry, the eleventh Book, of a Right angle.
1. A Parallelogramme is a Right angle or an Obliquangle.

HItherto we have spoken of certain common and general matters belonging unto
parallelogrammes^ specials do follow in Rectangles and Obliquangles, which
difference, as is aforesaid, is common to triangles and triangulates. But at
this time we find no fitter words whereby to distinguish the generals.

2. A Right angle is a parallelogramme that has all his angles right angles.

As in a e i o. And here hence you must understand by one right angle that all
are right angles. For the right angle at a, is equal to the opposite angle at
i, by the 10 e x.

And therefore they are both right angles, by the 14 e iij. The other angle at
e, and o, by the 4 e v j, are equal to two right angles: And they are equal
between themselves, by the 10 e x. Therefore all of them are right angles.
Neither may it indeed possible be, that in a parallelogramme there should be
one right angle, but by and by they must be all right angles.

Therefore

3 A rightangle is comprehended of two right lines comprehending the right
angle 1. d ij.

Comprehension, in this place does signify a certain kind of Geometrical
multiplication. For as of two numbers multiplied between themselves there is
made a number: so of two sides ( ductis) driven together, a right angle is
made: And yet every right angle is not rational, as before was manifest, at
the 12. e iiij. and shall after appear at the 8 e.

And

4 Four right angles do fill a place.

Neither is it any matter at all whether the four rectangles be equal, or
unequal; equilaters, or unequilaters; homogeneals, or heterogenealls. For
which way so ever they be turned, the angles shall be right angles: And
therefore they shall fill a place.

5 If the diameter do cut the side of a right angle into two aquall parts, it
does cut it perpendicularly: And contrariwise.

As here appears by the 1 e vij. by drawing of the diagonies^ of the
bisegments. The converse is manifest, by the 2 e v ij. and 17. e vi j.

Therefore

6 If an inscribed right line do perpendicularly cut the side of the right
angle into two equal parts, it is the diameter.

The reason is, because it does cut the parallelogramme into two equal
portions.

7 A right angle is equal to the rightangles made of one of his sides and the
segments of the other.

As here the four particular right angles are equal to the whole, which are
made of a e, one of his sides, and of e i, i o, o u, u y, the segments of the
other.

The Demonstration of this is from the rule of congruency: Because the whole
agrees to all his parts. But the same reason in numbers is more apparent by an
induction of the parts: as four times eight are 32. I break or divide 8. into
5. and 3. Now four times 5. are 20. And four times 3. are 12. And 20. and 12.
are 32. And 32. and 32. are equal. Therefore 20. and 12. are also equal to 32.

Lastly, every arithmeticall multiplication of the whole numbers does make the
same product, that the multiplication of the one of the whole numbers given, by
the parts of the other shall make; yea, that the multiplication of the parts by
the parts shall make. This proposition is cited by Ptolomey in the 9. Chapter
of the 1 book of his Almagest.

8 If four right lines be proportional, the rectangle of the two middle ones,
is equal to the rectangle of the two extremes. 16. p vj.

It is a special consectary out of the 28 e x. As here are four right lines
proportional between themselves: And the rectangle of the extremes, or first
and last let it by a y: Of the middle ones, let it be s e.

9 The figurate of a rational rectangle is called a rectinall plain. 16. d
vij.

A rational figure was defined at the 12. e iiij. of which sort amongst all
the rectilineals hitherto spoken of, we have not had one: The first is a Right
angled parallelogramme; And yet not every one indifferently: But that only
whose base is rational to the highest: And that reason of the base and height
is expressable by a number, where also the Figurate is defined. A rectangle of
irrational sides, such as were mentioned at the 9 e j. is irrational.
Therefore a rectangled rational of rational sides, is here understood: And
the figurate thereof, is called, by the general name, A Plain: Because of all
the kinds of Plains, this kind only is rational.

If therefore the Base of a Rectangle be 6. And the height 4. The plot or
content shall be 24. And if it be certain that the rectangles content be 24.
And the base be 6. It shall also be certain that the height is 4. The example
is thus.

And this multiplication, as appeared at the 13. e iiij. is geometrical: As if
thou do multiply 5. by 8. thou make 40. for the Plain: And the sides of
this Plain, are 5. and 8. it is all one as if thou had made a rectangled
parallelogramme of 40. square foot content, whose base should be 5. foot, and
the height 8. after this manner.

This manner of multiplication, say 1, is Geometrical: Neither are there here,
of lines made lines, as there of unities were made unities; but a magnitude one
degree higher, to wit, a surface, is here made.

Here hence is the Geodesy or manner of measuring of a rectangled triangle made
known unto us. For when thou shall multiply the shankes of a right angle, the
one by the other, thou do make the whole rectangled parallelogramme, whose
half is a triangle, by the 12. e x.

Of Geometry the twelfth Book, Of a Quadrate.
1 A Rectangle is a Quadrate or an Oblong.

THis division is made in proper terms: but the thing it self and the subject
difference is common out of the angles and sides.

2 A Quadrate is a rectangle equilater 30. dj.

Quadraetum, a Quadrate, or square^ is a rectangled parallellogramme of equal
sides: as here thou see a e a o, to be.

Plains are with us, according to their diverse natures and qualities,
measured with diverse and sundry kinds of measures. Board, Glass, and
Paving-stone are measured by the foot: Cloth, Wainscote, Painting, Paving, and
such like, by the yard: Land, and Wood, by the Perch or Rod,

Of Measures^ and the sundry sorts thereof commonly used and mentioned in
histories we have in the former spoken at large: Yet for the farther
confirmation of some thing then spoken, and here again now upon this
particular occasion repeated, it shall not be amiss to hear what our Statutes
speak of these three sorts here mentioned.

It is ordained, says the Statute, That three Barley-cornes dry and round, do
make an Ynch: twelve inches do make a Foot: three foot do make a Yard: Five
yards and an half do make a Perch: Forty perches in length, and four in
breadth do make an Aker. 33. Edwardi 1. De Terris mensurandis. Item, De
compositione Vlnarum and Perticarum.

Moreover observe, that all those measures there spoken of were only lengths:
These here now last repeated, are such as the magnitudes by the measured are,
in Planimetry, I mean, they are Plains: In Stereometry they are solids, as
hereafter we shall make manifest. Therefore in that which follows, An ynch is
not only a length three barley-cornes long: but a plain three barley-cornes
long, and three broad. A Foot is not only a length of 12. inches: But a
plain also of 12. inches square, or containing 144. square ynches^ A yard is
not only the length of three foot: But it is also a plain 3. foot square
every way. A Perch is not only a length of 5. yards: But it is a plot of
ground 5. yards square every way.

A Quadrate therefore or square, seeing that it is equilater that is of equal
sides: And equiangle by means of the equal right angles, of quandrangles that
only is ordinate.

Therefore

3 The sides of equal quadrates, are equal.

And

The sides of equal quadrates are equally compared: If therefore two or more
quadrates be equal, it must needs follow that their sides are equal one to
another.

And

4 The power of a right line is a quadrate.

Or thus: The possibility of a right line is a square H. A right line is said
posse quadratum, to be in power a square; because being multiplied in it self,
it does make a square.

5 If two conterminall perpendicular equal right lines be closed with
parallells, they shall make a quadrate. 46. p.j.

Or thus: If two equal perpendicular lines, joining one with another, be
enclosed together by parallel lines they will make a square. H. As in ae i o,
let the perpendiculars a e, and e i, equal between themselves, be closed with
two parallells, a o, against e i: And o i, against a e; they shall make the
quadrate or square a e i o. For it is a parallelogramme, by the grant: Because
the opposite sides are parallel: And it is rectangled: because seeing the
angle a e i, of the perpendicular lines, is a right angle, they shall be all
right angles by the 2 e x j. Then one side e i, is equal to all the rest.
First to a o, that over against it, by the 8 e x. And then to e a, by the
grant: And therefore to o i, to that over against it, by the 8 e x.

6 The plain of a quadrate is an equilater plain.

Or thus: The plain number of a square, is a plain number of equal sides, H.

A quadrate or square number, is that which is equally equal: Or that which is
comprehended of two equal numbers, A quadrate of all plains is especially
rational; and yet not always: But that only is rational whose number is a
quadrate. Therefore the quadrates of numbers not quadrates, are not rationalls.

Therefore

7 A quadrate is made of a number multiplied by it self.

Such quadrates are the first nine. 1,4,9, 16,25,36,49,64, 81, made of once
one, twice two, thrice three, four times four, five times five, six times
six, seven times seven, eight times eight, and nine times nine. And this is
the sum of the making and invention of a quadrate number of multiplication of
the side given by it self.

The sides given. The quadrates found.

Hereafter diverse comparisons of a quadrate or square, with a rectangle, with
a quadrate, and with a rectangle and a quadrate jointly. The comparison or rate
of a quadrate with a rectangle is first.

8 If three right lines be proportional, the quadrate of the middle one, shall
be equal to the rectangle of the extremes: And contrariwise: 17. p v j. and
20. p vij.

Or thus: If three lines be proportional, the square made of the middle line
is equal to the right angled parallelogramme made of the two outmost lines: H.

It is a corallary out of the 28. e x. As in a e, e i, i o.

9 If the base of a triangle do subtend a right angle, the power of it is as
much as of both the shankes: And contrariwise 47,48. p j.

It is a consectary out of the 11. e viij. But it is sometime rational, and to
be expressed by a number: yet but in a scalene triangle only. For the sides of
an equicrurall right-angled triangle are irrational; Whereas the sides of a
scalene are sometime rational; and that after two manners, the one of
Pythagoras, the other of Plato, as Proclus te^cheth, at the 47. p j.
Pythagora's way is thus, by an odd number.

10 If the quadrate of an odd number, given for the first shanke, be made
less by an unity; the half of the remainder shall be the other shanke;
increased by an unity it shall be the base.

Or thus: If the square of an odd number given for the first foot, have an
unity taken from it, the half of the remainder shall be the other foot, and
the same half increased by an unity, shall be the base: H.

As in the example: The sides are 3,4, and 5. And 25. the square of 5. the
base, is equal to 16. and 9. the squares of the shanks 4. and 3.

Again, the quadrate or square of 3. the first shanke is 9. and 9 -- 1. is 8,
whose half 4, is the other shanke. And 9 -- 1, is 10. whose half 5. is the
base. Plato's way is thus by an even number.

11 If the half of an even number given for the first shanke be squared, the
square number diminished by an unity shall be the other shanke, and increased
by an unity it shall be the base.

As in this example where the sides are 6, 8. and 10. For 100. the square of
10. the base is equal to 36. and 64. the squares of the shankes 6. and 8.

Again, the quadrate or square of 3. the half of 6, the first shanke, is 9.
and 9 -- 1, is 8, for the second shanke. And out of this rate of rational
powers (as Vitruvius, in the 2. Chapter of his IX. book) says Pythagoras
taught how to make a most exact and true squire, by joining of three rulers
together in the form of a triangle, which are one unto another as 3,4. and 5.
are one to another.

From hence Architecture learned an Arithmeticall proportion in the parts of
ladders and stayres. For that rate or proportion, as in many businesses and
measures is very commodious; so also in buildings, and making of ladders or
stairs, that they may have moderate rises of the steps, it is very speedy. For
9 -- 1. is, 10, base.

12. The power of the diagony is twice as much, as is the power of the side, and
it is unto it also incommensurable.

Or thus: The diagonall line is in power double to the side, and is
incommensurable unto it, H.

As here thou see, let the first quadrate be a e i o: Of whose diagony a i,
let there be made the quadrate a i u y: This, I say, shall be the double of
that: seeing that the diagonies power is equal to the power of both the equal
shankes. Therefore it is double to the power of one of them.

This is the way of doubling of a square taught by Plato, as Vitruvius tells
us: Which notwithstanding may be also doubled, trebled, or according to any
reason assigned increased, by the 25 e iiij, as there was foretold.

But that the Diagony is incommensurable unto the side it is the 116 p x. The
reason is, because otherwise there might be given one quadrate number, double
to another quadrate number: Which as Theon and Campanus teach us, is impossible
to be found. But that reason which Aristotle brings is more clear which is
this; Because otherwise an even number should be odd. For if the Diagony be 4,
and the side 3: The square of the Diagony 16, shall be double to the square of
the side: And so the square of the side shall be 8. and the same square shall
be 9, to wit, the square of 3. And so even shall be odd, which is most absurd.

Hither may be added that at the 42 p x. That the segments of a right line
diversely cut; the more unequal they are the greater is their power.

13 If the base of a right angled triangle be cut by a perpendicular from the
right angle in a doubled reason, the power of it shall be half as much more,
as is the power of the greater shanke: But thrice so much as is the power of
the lesser. If in a quadrupled reason, it shall be four times and one fourth
so much as is the greater: But five times so much as is the lesser, At the 13,
15, 16 p x iij.

Or thus: If the base of a right angled triangle be cut in double proportion,
by a perpendicular coming from the right angle, it is in power sesquialter to
the greater foot; and treb^e to the lesser: But if the base be cut in
quadruple proportion, it is sesquiarta to the greater side, and quintuple to
the lesser.

As in a e i, let the base a e, be so cut that the segment a o, be double to
the segment o e, to wit, as 2 is to 1. The whole a e, shall be unto a o,
sesquialtera, that is, as 2 is to 3. And therefore by the 10 e viij, and 25 e
iiij, the square of a e, shall be sesquialterum unto the square of a i.

And by the same argument it shall be treble unto the quadrate or square of e i.

The other, of the fourefold or quadruple section, are manifest in the figure
following, by the like argument.

14 If a right line be cut into how many parts so ever, the power of it is
manifold unto the power of segment, denominated of the square of the number of
the section.

Or thus: if a right be cut into how many parts so ever it is in power the
multiplex of the segment, the square of the number of the section, being
denominated thereof: H.

So if it be cut into two equal parts, the power of it shall be four times so
much, as is the power of the half, taking demonstration from 4, which is the
square of 2, according to which the division was made: If it be cut into three
equal parts, the power of it shall be nine fold the power of the third part.
If into four equal parts, it shall be 16 times so much as is the power of the
quarter: As here thou see in these examples.

15. If a right line be cut into two segments, the quadrate of the whole is
equal to the quadrats of the segments, and a double rectanguled figure, made
of them both. 4 p ij.

The third rate of a quadrate is hereafter with two rectangles, and two
quadrates, and first of equality.

This is a consectary out of the 22 e x: Because a parallelogramme is equal to
his two diagonals and complements. If the right a e, be cut in i, it makes the
quadrate a e u o, greater than e y i, and y u s, the quadrates of the segments,
by the two rectangles a y and y o. This is the rate of a quadrate with a
rectangle and aquadrate. But the side of a quadrate proposed in a number is often
times sought. Therefore by the next precedent element and his consectaries, the
analysis or finding of the side of a quadrate is made and taught.

Therefore

16. The side of the first diagonall, is the side of one of the complements;
And being doubled, it is the side of them both together: Now the other side of
the same complements both together, is the side of the other diagonall.

The side of a quadrate given is many times in numbers sought. Therefore by the
former element and his consectaries the resolution of a quadrates side is
framed and performed.

Let therefore the side now of the quadrate number given be sought: And first
let the Genesis or making be considered, such as you see here by the
multiplication of numbers in the numbers themselves: Or thus

This is the rate of a quadrate with a rectangle and a quadrate from whence is
had the analisis or resolution of the side of a quadrate expressable by a
number. For it is the same way from Cambridge to London, that is from London to
Cambridge. And this use of geometrical analysis remains, as afterward in a
Cube, when as otherwise through the whole book of Euclides Elements there is
no other use at all of that.

Here therefore thou shall note or mark out the several quadrates, beginning
at the right hand and so proceeding toward the left; after this manner, 144.
These notes do signify that so many several sides to be found, to make up
the whole side of the quadrate given. And here first, it shall not be amiss to
warn thee, before thou come to practice, that for help of memory and speed
in working, thou know the Quadrats of the nine single numbers of figures; which
are these

Then beginning at the left hand, as in Division, Or thus:
that is where we left in multiplication, and I seek amongst the squares the
greatest contained in the first periode, which here is 1^ And the side of it,
which is also 1, I place with my quotient: Then I square this quotient, that is
I multiply it by it self, and the product 1, I sect under the same first
periode: Lastly, I subtract it from the same periode, and there remains not
any thing. Then as in division I set up the figures of the next periode one
degree higher.

Secondly double the side now found, and it shall be 2, which I place in manner
of a Divisor, on the left hand, within the semicircle: By this I divide the 40,
the two complements or Plains, and I find the quotient or second side 2;
which I place in the quotient by 1, This side I multiply first quadrate like,
that is by it self; and I make 4, the lesser Diagonall: And therefore I place
under the last 4: Then I multiply the said Divisor 2, by the same 2 the
quotient, Or thus:
and I make in like manner, 4 which I place under the dividend, or the first 4.
Lastly I subtract these products from the numbers above them, and remains
nothing. Therefore I say first, That 144, the number given is a quadrate: And
more-over, That 12 is the true side of it.

Again, let the side of 15129 be sought. First divide it into imperfect
periods as before was taught; in this manner: 15129. Then I seek amongst the
former quadrates, for the side of 1, the quadrate of the first periode; and I
find it to be 1: This side I place within the quotient or lunular on the right
side: Lastly I subtract 1 from ^, and nothing remains. Then I double the said
side found; and I make 2: This 2, I place for my divisor within the lunular or
semicircle on the left hand: By which I divide 5; And I find the quotient 2,
which I place by the former quotient: Then I multiply the same 2, first
quadratelike by it self, and I make 4. Then I multiply the said divisour by 2,
the quotient, and I make likewise 4: which I place underneath 51. Lastly, I
subtract the same 44, from 51, and there remain 7, over the head of 1; By
which I place 29, the last periode remaining.

Again I double 12, my whole quotient, and I make 24. By this double I divide
72, the double Complement remaining, and I find 3 for the side or quotient:
First this side I multiply quadratelike by it self, and I make 9, which I
place underneath 9, the last figure of my dividende. Then again, by the same
quotient, or side 3, I multiply 2^: my divisour, and I make 72; which I place
under 72, the two figures of my Dividende: Lastly I subtract the under figures,
from the upper, and there is likewise nothing remaining: Wherefore I say, as
before; that the figurate 15129 given, is a square: And the side thereof is 123.

Sometime after the quadrate now found, in the next places, there is neither
any plain nor square to be found: Therefore the single side thereof shall be
O. As in the quadrate 366025, the whole side is 605, consisting of three
several sides, of which the middle one is o.

Sometime also the middle plain does contain a part of the quadrate next
following: Therefore if the other side remaining be greater than the side of the
quadrate following, it is to be made equal unto it: As for example, Let the
side of the quadrate 784, be sought; Or thus:
The side of the first quadrate shall be 2, and there shall remain 3, thus:
Then the same side doubled is 4 for the quotient; Which is found in 38, the
double plain remaining 9 times, for the other side: But this side is greater
than the side of the next following quadrate: Take therefore 1 out of it: And
for nine take 8, and place it in your quotient; Which 8 multiplied by it self
makes 64, for the Lesser quadrate: And again the same multiplied by 4 the
divisour makes 32; The sum of which two products 384, subtracted from the
remain 384, leave nothing: Therefore 784 is a Quadrate: And the side is 28.

And from hence the invention of a mean proportionll, between two numbers
given, (if there be any such to be found) is manifest. For it the product of
two numbers given be a quadrate, the side of the quadrate shall be the mean
proportional, between the numbers given; as is apparent by the golden rule:
As for example, Between 4. and 9. two numbers given, I desire to know what is
the mean proportion. I multiply therefore 4 and 9. between themselves, and
the product is 36: which is a quadrate number; as you see in the former; And
the side is 6. Therefore I say, the mean proportional between 4. and 9. is
6, that is, As 4. is to 6. so is 6. to 9.

If the number given be not a quadrate, there shall no arithmeticall side, and
to be expressed by a number be found: And this figurate number is but the
shadow of a Geometrical figure, and does not indeed express it fully,
neither is such a quadrate rational: Yet notwithstanding the numerall side of
the greatest square in such like number may be found: As in 148. The greatest
quadrate continued is 144 and the side is 12. And there do remain 4.
Therefore of such kind of number, which is not a quadrate, there is no true or
exact side: Neither shall there ever be found any so near unto the true one;
but there may still be one found more near the truth. Therefore the side is
not to be expressed by a number.

Of the invention of this there are two ways: The one is by the Addition of
the gnomon; The other is by the Reduction of the number assigned unto parts of
some greater denomination. The first is thus:

17 If the side found be doubled, and to the double a unity be added, the whole
shall be the gnomon of the next greater quadrate.

For the sides is one of the complements, and being doubled it is the side of
both together. And an unity is the latter diagonall. So the side of 148 is 12
4/25.

The reason of this depends on the same proposition, from whence also the
whole side, is found. For seeing that the side of every quadrate lesser than
the next follower differs only from the side of the quadrate next above
greater than it but by an 1. the same unity, both twice multiplied by the side
of the former quadrate, and also once by it self, does make the Gnomon of the
greater to be added to the quadrate. For it does make the quadrate 169. Whereby
is understood, that look how much the numerator 4. is short of the
denominatour 25. so much is the quadrate 148. short of the next greater
quadrate. For it thou do add 21. which is the difference whereby 4 is short
of 25. thou shall make the quadrate 169. whose side is 13. The second is by the
reduction, as I said, of the number given unto parts assigned of some great
denomination, as 100. or 1000. or some smaller than those, and those quadrates,
that their true and certain may be known: Now look how much the smaller they
are, so much nearer to the truth shall the side found be.

Let the same example be reduced unto hundreds squared parts, thus:
1480000/10000. The side of 10000. by grant is 100. But the side of 1480000. the
numerator by the former is 1216. and beside there do remain 1344: thus,
1216/100. that is, 12 16/100, or 4/25 which was discovered by the former way.
But in the side of the numerator there remained 1344. By which little this
second way is more accurate and precise than the first. Yet notwithstanding
those remains are not regarded, because they cannot add so much as 1/100.
part unto the side, found: For neither in deed do 1344/2426. make one hundred
part.

Moreover in lesser parts, the second way beside the other, does show the side
to be somewhat greater than the side, by the first way found: as in 7. the side
by the first way is 3/25. But by the second way the side of 7. reduced unto
thousands quadrates, that is unto 7000000/1000000, that is, 2645/1000, and
beside there do remain 3975. But 645/1000. are greater than 3/5. For. reduced
unto 1000. are but 600/1000. Therefore the second way, in this example, does
exceed the first by 45/1000. those remains 3975. being also neglected.

Therefore this is the Analysis or manner of finding the side of a quadrate, by
the first rate of a quadrate, equal to a double rectangle and quadrate.

The Geodesy or measuring of a Triangle.

There is one general Geodesy or way of measuring any manner of triangle
whatsoever in Hero, by addition of the sides, halving of the sum, subduction,
multiplication, and invention of the quadrates side, after this manner.

18 If from the half of the sum of the sides, the sides be severally
subducted, the side of the quadrate continually made of the half, and the
remains shall be the content of the triangle.

As for example, Let the sides of the triangle a e i, be 6. 8. 10: The sum
24. the half of the sum 12. From which half subduct the sides 6. 8. 18. and
let the remains be 6. 4. 2. Now multiply continually these four numbers
12.6.4. 2. and thou shall make first of 12. and 6. 72. Of 72. and 4. 288.
Lastly, of 288. and 2. 576. And the side of 576. by the 16.e. shall be found to
be 24. for the content of the triangle: which also here will be found to be
true, by multiplying the sides a e, and e i, containing the right angle, the
one by the other; and then taking the half of the product.

This general way of measuring a triangle is most easy and speedy, where the
sides are expressed by whole numbers.

The special geodesy of rectangle triangle was before taught (at the 9 e x j.)
But of an oblique angle it shall hereafter be spoken. But the general way is
far more excellent than the speciall^ For by the reduction of an obliquangle
many frauds and errors do fall out, which caused the learned Cardine merrily
to wish, that he had but as much land as was lost by that false kind of
measuring.

19 If the base of a triangle do subtend an obtuse angle, the power of it is
more than the power of the shankes, by a double right angle of the one, and of
the continuation from the said obtusangle unto the perpendicular of the top.
12. p ij.

Or thus: If the base of a triangle do subtend an obtuse angle, it is in power
more than the feet, by the right angled figure twice taken, which is contained
under one of the feet and the line continued from the said foot unto the
perpendicular drawn from the top of the triangle. H.

There is a comparison of a quadrate with two in like manner triangles, and as
many quadrates, but of unequality.

As in the triangle a e i, the quadrate of the base a i, is greater in power,
than the quadrates of the shankes a e, and e i, by double of the rectangle ar,
which is made of a e, one of the shankes, and of e o, the continuation of the
same a e, unto o, the perpendicular of the top i.

For by 9. e, the quadrate of a i, is equal to the quadrates of a o, and o i,
that is, to three quadrates of i o, o e, e a, and the double rectangle
aforesaid. But the quadrates of the shankes a e, e i, are equal to those three
quadrates, to wit, of a i, his own quadrate, and of e i, two, the first i o,
the second o e, by the 9. e. Therefore the excess remains of a double
rectangle.

Of Geometry, the thirteenth Book, Of an Oblong.
1 An Oblong is a rectangle of inequall sides, 31. d j.

OR thus: An Oblong is a rectangled parallelogramme, being not equilater: H. As
here is a e, i o.

This second kind of rectangle is of Euclide in his elements properly named
for a definitions sake only.

The rate of Oblongs is very copious, out of a threefold section of a right
line given, sometime rational and expresable by a number: The first section is
as you please, that is, into two segments, equal or unequal: From whence a
five-fold rate arises.

2 An Oblong made of an whole line given, and of one segment of the same, is
equal to a rectangle made of both the segments, and the square of the said
segment. 3. p ij.

It is a consectary out of the 7 e xj. For the rectangle of the segments, and
the quadrate, are made of one side, and of the segments of the other.

As let the right line a e, be 6. And let it be cut into two parts a i, 2. and
i e, 4. The rectangle 1 2. made of a e, 6. the whole, and of a i, 2. the one
segment, shall be equal to i u, 8. the rectangle made of the same a i, 2. and
of i e, 4. And also to a o, 4. the quadrate of the said segment a i, 2.

Now a rectangle is here therefore proposed, because it may be also a quadrate,
to wit, if the line be cut into two equal parts.

Secondarily,

3 Oblongs made of the whole line given, and of the segments, are equal to the
quadrate of the whole 2 p ij.

This is also a Consectary out of the 4. e xj.

As let the line a e, 6. be cut into a i, 2.10.2. and o e, 2. The Oblongs a s,
12. i r, 12. and o y, 12. made of the whole a e, and of those segments, are
equal to a y, the quadrates of the whole.

Here the segments are more than two, and yet notwithstanding from the first
the rest may be taken for one, seeing that the particular rectangle in like
manner is equal to them. This proposition is used in the demonstration of the
9. e xviij.

Thirdly,

4 Two Oblongs made of the whole line given, and of the one segment, with the
third quadrate of the other segment, are equal to the quadrates of the whole,
and of the said segment. 7 p ij.

As for example, let the right line a e, 8. be cut into a i, 6. and i e, 2. The
oblongs a o, and i u, of the whole, and 2. the segments, are 32. The quadrate
of 6. the other segment is 36. And the whole is 68. Now the quadrate of the
whole a e. 8. is 64. And the quadrate of the said segment 2, is 4. And the
sum of these is 68.

5 The base of an acute triangle is of less power than the shankes are, by a
double oblong made of one of the shankes, and the one segment of the same, from
the said angle, unto the perpendicular of the top. 13. p.ij.

As in the triangle a e i, let the angle at i, be taken for an acute angle.
Here by the 4. e, two oblongs of e i, and o i. with the quadrate of e o, are
equal to the quadrates of e i, and o i. Let the quadrate of a o, be added to
both in common. Here the quadrate of e i, with the quadrates of i o, and o a,
that is the 9 e xij, with the quadrate of i a, is equal to two oblongs of e i,
and o i, with two quadrates of e o and o a, that is by the 9 e xij, with the
quadrate of e a. Therefore two oblongs with the quadrate of the base, are
equal to the quadrates of the shankes: And the base is exceeded of the shankes
by two oblongs.

And from hence is had the segment of the shanke toward the angle, and by that
the perpendicular in a triangle.

Therefore

6. If the square of the base of an acute angle be taken out of the squares of
the shankes, the quotient of the half of the remain, divided by the shanke,
shall be the segment of the dividing shanke from the said angle unto the
perpendicular of the top.

As in the acute angled triangle a e i, let the sides be 13, 20, 21. And let a
e be the base of the acute angle. Now the quadrate or square of 13 the said
base is 169: And the quadrate of 20, or a i, is 400: And of 21, or e i, is 441.
The sum of which is 841. And 841, 169, are 672: Whose half is 336. And the
quotient of 336, divided by 21, is 16, the segment of the dividing shanke e i,
from the angle a i e, unto a o, the perpendicular of the top. Now 21, 16, are
5. Therefore the other segment or portion of the said e i, is 5.

Now again from 169, the quadrate of the base 13, take 25, the quadrate of 5,
the said segment: And the remain shall be 144, for the quadrate of the
perpendicular a o, by the 9 e x ij.

Here the perpendicular now found, and the sides cut, are the sides of the
rectangle, whose half shall be the content of the Triangle: As here the
Rectangle of 21 and 12 is 252; whose half 126, is the content of the triangle.

The second section follows from whence arises the fourth rate or comparison.

7. If a right line be cut into two equal parts, and otherwise; the oblong of
the unequal segments, with the quadrate of the segment between them, is
equal to the quadrate of the bisegment. 5 p ij.

As for example, Let the rig^t line a e 8, be cut into two equal portions, a i
4, and i e 4. And otherwise that is into two unequal portions, a o 7, and o e
1: The oblong of 7 and 1, with 9, the quadrate of 3, the intersegment, (or
portion cut between them) that is 16; shall be equal to the quadrate of i e
4, which is also 16. Which is also manifest by making up the diagramme as here
thou see. For as the parallelogramme is by the 24 e x, equal to the
parallelogramme i u; And therefore by the 19 e x, it is equal to o y. For o u,
is common to both the equal complements, Therefore if ^ s o be added in common
to both; the a r, shall be equal to the gnomon m n i: Now the quadrate of the
segment between them is s l. Wherefore a r, the oblong of the unequal
segments, with s the quadrate of the intersegment, is equal to i y the
quadrate of the said bisegment.

The third section does follow, from whence the fifth reason arises.

8. If a right line be cut into equal parts; and continued; the oblong made of
the continued and the continuation, with the quadrate of the bisegment or
half, is equal to the quadrate of the line compounded of the bisegment and
continuation. 6 p ij.

As for example, let the line a e 6, be cut into two equal portions a i 3, and
i e 3: And let it be continued unto e o 2: The oblong 16, made of 8 the
continued line, and of 2, the continuation; with 9 the quadrate of 3, the
half, (that is 25.) shall be equal to 25, the quadrate of 3, the half and 2,
the continuation, that is 5. This as the former, may geometrically, with the
help of numbers be expressed. For by the 24 e x, as is equal to i y: And by
the 19 e x, it is equal to y r, the complement. To these equals add s o. Now
the oblong a u, shall be equal to the gnomon n j u. Lastly, to the equals
add the quadrate of the bisegment or half. The Oblong of the continued line
and of the continuation, with the quadrate of the bisegment, shall be equal to
the quadrate of the line compounded of the bisegment and continuation. These
were the rates of an oblong with a rectangle.

From hence arises the Mesographus or Mesolabus of Heron the mechanicke; so
named of the invention of two lines continually proportional between two
lines given. Whereupon arose the Deliacke problem, which troubled Apollo
himself. Now the Mesographus of Hero is an infinite right line, which is
stayed with a scrue-pinne, which is to be moved up and down in riglet. And it
is as Pappus says, in the beginning of his 111 book, for architects most fit,
and more ready than the Plato's mesographus. The mechanical handling of this
mesographus, is described by Eutocius at the 1 Theoreme of the 11 book of the
sphere; But it is somewhat more plainly and easily thus laid down by us.

9. If the Mesographus, touching the angle opposite to the angle made of the
two lines given, do cut the said two lines given, comprehending a right angled
parallelogramme, and infinitely continued, equally distant from the center, the
intersegments shall be the means continually proportionally, between and two
lines given.

Or thus: If a Mesographus, touching the angle opposite to the angle made of
the lines given, do cut the equal distance from the center, the two right
lines given, containing a right angled parallelogramme, and continued out
infinitely, the segments shall be mean in continual proportion with the line
given: H.

As let the two right-lines given be a e, and a i: And let them comprehend the
rectangled parallelogramme a o: And let the said right lines given be continued
infinitely, a e toward u; and a i toward y. Now let the Mesographus u y, touch
o, the angle opposite to a: And let it cut the said continued lines equally
distant from the Center.

(The center is found by the 8 e iiij, to wit, by the meeting of the diagonies:
For the equidistance from the center the Mesographus is to be moved up or
down, until by the Compasses, it be found.)

Now suppose the points of equidistancy thus found to be u, and y. I say, That
the portions of the continued lines thus are the mean proportionalls sought:
And as a e is to i y: so is i y, to e u, so is e u, to a i.

First let from s, the center, s r be perpendicular to the side a e: It shall
therefore cut the said a e, into two parts, by the 5 e x j: And therefore
again, by the 7 e, the oblong made of a u, and u e, with the quadrate of r e,
is equal to the quadrate of r u: And taking to them in common r s, the oblong
with two quadrates e r, and r s, that is, by the 9 e x ij, with the quadrate s
e is equal to the quadrates r u, and r s, that is by the 9 e x ij, to the
quadrate s u. The like is to be said of the oblong of a y, and y i, by drawing
the perpendicular s l, as before. For this oblong with the quadrates l i, and s
l, that is, by the 9 e x ij, with the quadrate i s, is equal to the quadrates
y l, and l s, that is, by the 9 e 12, to y s. Therefore the oblongs equal to
equals, are equal between themselves: And taking from each side of equal
rays, by the 11 e x, equal quadrates s e and s i, there shall remain
equals. Wherefore by the 26 e x, the sides of equal rectangles are
reciprocal: And as a u is to a y: so by the 13 e vij, o i, that is, by the 8 e
x, e a, to i y: And so therefore by the concluded, y i, is to u e; And so by
the 13 e vij, is u e, to e o, that is, by the 8 e x, unto a i. Therefore as e a
is to y i: so is y i to u e; and so is u e, to a i. Wherefore e u, i y, the
intersegments or portions cut, are the two mean proportionals between the two
lines given.

The fourteenth Book, of P. Ramus Geometry: Of a right line proportionally
cut: And of other Quadrangles, and Multangels.
THus far of the threefold section, from whence we have the five rational
rates of equality: There follows of the third section another section, into
two segments proportional to the whole. The section it self is first to be
defined.

1. A right line is cut according to a mean and extreme rate, when as the
whole shall be to the greater segment; so the greater shall be unto the lesser.
3. d vj.

This line is cut so, that the whole line it self, with the two segments, does
make the three bounds of the proportion^ And the whole it self is first bound:
The greater segment is the middle bound: The lesser the third bound.

2. If a right line cut proportionally be rational unto the measure given, the
segments are unto the same, and between themselves irrational e 6 p xiij.

Euclide calls each of these segments (...) that is, Residuum, a Residuall or
remain: And surely these cannot otherwise be expressed, then by the name
Residuum: As if a line of 7 foot should thus be given or put down: The
greater segment shall be called a line of 7 foot, from whence the lesser is
subtracted: Neither may the lesser otherwise be expressed, but by saying, It
is the part residuall or remnant of the line of 7 foot, from which the greater
segment was subtracted or taken.

A Triangle, and all Triangulates, that is figures made of triangles, except a
Rightangled-parallelogramme, are in Geometry held to be irrationalls. This is
therefore the definition of a proportional section: The section it self
follows, which is by the rate of an oblong with a quadrate.

3. If a quadrate be made of a right line given, the difference of the right
line from the midst of the conterminall side of the said quadrate made, above
the same half, shall be the greater segment of the line given proportionally
cut: 11 p ij.

Or thus: If a square be made of a right line given, the difference of a right
line drawn from the angle of the square made unto the midst of the next
side, above the half of the side, shall be the greater segment of the line
given, being proportionally cut: H.

Let the right line gived be a e. The quadrate of the same let it be a e i o:
And from the angle e, unto u, the midst of the conterminal side, let the
right line eu, be drawn: Then compare or lay it to the half u a; The
difference of it above the said half shall be a y, This a y, say I, is the
greater segment of a e, the line given, proportionally cut.

For of y a, let the quadrate a y s r, be made: And let s r, be continued unto
l. Now by the 8 e, xiij. the oblo^g of o y, and a y, with the quadrate of u a,
is equal to the quadrate of u y, that is by the construction of u e: And
therefore, by the 9 e xij. it is equal to the quadrates e a, and a u: Take
away from each side the common oblong a l, and the quadrate y r, shall be
equal to the oblong r i. Therefore the three right lines, e a, a r, and r e,
by the 8 e xij. are continual proportional. And the right line a e, is cut
proportionally.

Therefore

4 If a right line cut proportionally, be continued with the greater segment,
the whole shall be cut proportionally, and the greater segment shall be the
line given. 5 p xiij.

As in the same example, the right line o y, is continued with the greater
segment, and the oblong of the whole and the lesser segment is equal to the
quadrate of the greater. And thus one may by infinitely proportionally cutting
increase a right line; and again decrease it. The lesser segment of a right
line proportionally cut, is the greater segment, of the greater proportionally
cut. And from hence a decreasing may be made infinitely.

5 The greater segment continued to the half of the whole, is of power
quintuple unto the said half, that is, five times so great as it is: and if
the power of a right line be quintuple to his segment, the remainder made the
double of the former is cut proportionally, and the greater segment, is the
same remainder. 1. and 2. p x iij.

This is the fabric or manner of making a proportional section. A threefold
rate follows: The first is of the greater segment.

Let therefore the right line a e, be cut proportionally in i; And let the
greater segment be i a: and let the line cut be continued unto i o, so that o
a, be the half of the line cut. I say, the quadrate of i o, is in power five
times so great, as y s, the power of the quadrate of a o. Let therefore of a o,
be made the quadrate i o s r: We do see the quadrate u a, to be once contained
in the quadrate s i. Let us now teach that it is moreover four times
comprehended in l m n, the gnomon remaining: Let therefore the quadrate a e i
u, be made of the line given: And let r i, be continued unto f. Here the
quadrate a e, is (14. e ^xij.) four times so much as is that a u, made of the
half: and it is also equal to the gnomon l m n: For the part i u, is equal
to r y; first by the grant, seeing that a i, is the greater segment, from
whence r y, is made the quadrate, because the other Diagonall is also a
quadrate: Secondarily the complements s y, and y i, by the 19. e x, are equal:
And to them is equal a f. For by the 23. e x. and by the grant, it is the
double of the complement y i. Therefore it is equal to them both. Wherefore
the gnomon l m n, is equal to the quadruple quadrate of the said little
quadrate: And the greater segment continued to the half of the right line
given is of power five fold to the power of a o.

The converse is apparent in the same example: For seeing that i o, is of power
five times so much as is a o; the gnomon l m n, shall be four times so much as
is u a: Whose quadruple also, by the 14. e xij, is a v. Therefore it is equal
to the gnomon. Now a j, is equal to a e: Therefore it is the double also of a
o, that is of a y: And therefore by the 24. e x. it is the double of a t: And
therefore it is equal to the complements i y, and y s: Therefore the other
diagonall y r, is equal to the other rectangle i v. Wherefore, by the 8 e xij.
as e v, that is, a e, is to y t, that is a i: so is a i, unto i e; Wherefore by
the ^ e, a e, is proportional cut: And the greater segment is a i, the same
remain.

The other propriety of the quintuple does follow.

6 The lesser segment continued to the half of the greater, is of power
quintuple to the same half e 3 p x iij.

As here, the right line a e, let it be cut proportionally in i: And the lesser
i e, let it be continued even unto o, the half of the greater a i. I say, that
the power of o e, shall be five times as much as is the power of i o. Let a
quadrate therefore be made of a e: And let the figure be made up (as you see:)
And let the quadrate of the half be noted with s u: And the gnomon r l m. Here
the first quadrate o y, is five times as great, as the second s u. For it do
contain it once: And the gnomon r l m, remaining contains it four times.
For it is equal to the Oblong i n; because o s, the complement is equal to s
y, by the 19 e x; And therefore also it is equal to i n; seeing the whole
complement a s, is equal to the whole complement s n: And a v, is equal to o
s, by the construction, and 23. e x: And adding to both the common oblong i y,
the whole gnomon is equal to the whole oblong. But the oblong i n, is equal to
the quadrate a i, by the grant, and 8 e xij. which by the 14. e xij. is four
times as great, as the quadrate s u. Wherefore the lesser segment i e,
continued to i o, the half of the greater segment, is of power five times as
much as is the half of the same.

The rate of the triple follows.

7 The whole line and the lesser segment are in power treble unto the greater.
e 4 p xiij.

Let the right line a e be proportionally cut in i, and let the figure be made
up: The oblong a y, and i o, with the quadrate s u, by the 4 e x iij, are
equal to the quadrates of a e, and i e, whose power is treble to that of a i.
For they do once contain the quadrate s u; And each of the oblongs is equal
to the same quadrate s u, by the grant, and 8 e x ij. Therefore they do
contain it thrice.

8 An obliquangled parallelogramme is either a Rhombus, or a Rhomboides.

9 A Rhombus is an obliquangled equilater parallelogramme 32 dj.

Whereupon it is apparent that a Rhombus is a square having the angles as it
were pressed, or thrust nearer together, by which name, both the Byrt or
Turbot, a Fish; and a Wheel or Reele, which Spinners do use; and the quarrels
in glass windows, because they are cut commonly of this form, are by the
Greeks and Latins so called.

It is otherwise of some called a Diamond.

10 A Rhomboides is an obliquangled parallelogram^e not equilater 33. dj.



And a Rhomboides is so opposed to an oblong, as a Rhombus is to a quadrate.

So also look how much the straightening or pressing together is greater, so
much is the inequality of the obtuse and acute angles the greater. As here.

And the Rhomboides is so called as one would say Rhombuslike, although beside
the inequality of the angles it has nothing like to a Rhombus. An example of
measuring of a Rhombus is thus.

11 A Trapezium is a quadrangle not parallelogramme. 34. dj.

Of the quadrangles the Trapezium remains for the last place: Euclide
entreats this fabric to be granted him, that a Trapezium may be called as
it were a little table: And surely Geometry can yield no reason of that name.

The examples both of the figure and of the measure of the same let these be.

Therefore triangulate quadrangles are of this sort.

12 A multangle is a figure that is comprehended of more than four right
lines. 23. dj.

By this general name, all other sorts of right lined figures hereafter
following, are by Euclide comprehended, as are the quinquangle, sexangle,
septangle, and such like inumerable taking their names of the number of their
angles.

In every kind of multangle, there is one ordinate, as we have in the former
signified, of which in this place we will say nothing, but this one thing of
the quinquangle. The rest shall be reserved until we come to Adscription.

13 Multangled triangulates do take their measure also from their triangles.

As here, this quinquangle is measured by his three triangles. The first
triangle, whose sides are 9. 10. and 17. by the 18. e xij. is 36. The second,
whose sides are 6, 17, and 17. by the same e, is 50. 20/101^ The third, whose
sides are 17, 15. and 8. by the same, is 60. And the sum of 36. 50 20/101,
and 60. is 146. 20/101, for the whole content of the Quinquangle given.

14 If an equilater quinquangle have three sides equal, it is equiangled. 7 p
13.

This of some, from the Greek is called a Pentagon; of others a Pentangle, by
a name partly Greek partly Latin.

As in the Quinquangle a e i o u, the three angles at a, e, and i, are equal:
Therefore the other two are equal: And they are equal unto these. For let e
u, a i, i a, be knit together with right lines. Here the triangles a e i, and e
a u. by the grant, and by the 2 and 1 e vij. are equilaters and equiangles: And
the Bases a i, and e u, are equal: And the Angles, e a i, and a u e, are
equal: Item a e u. and e i a. Therefore a y, and y e, are equal, by the 17 e
vj. Item the remainder u y, is equal to the remainder y i, when from equals
equals be subtracted. Moreover by the grant, and by the 17 e vj. o u i, and o i
u, are equal. Wherefore three are equal; And therefore the whole angle is
equal at u, to the whole anlge at i. And therefore it is equal to those which
are equal to it.

I say moreover that the angle at o, is likewise equal, if a o, and o e, be
knit together with a right line, as here: For three in like manner do come to
be equal.

But if the three angles non deinceps not successively following be equal, as
a i o, the business will yet be more easy, as here: For the angles e u a, and
e o i, are equal by the grant: And the inner also e o u, and e u o. Therefore
the wholes of two are equal. Of the other at e, the same will fall o^t, if i
u, be knit together with e right line i u, as here: For the wholes of two shall
be equal.

The fifteenth Book of Geometry, Of the Lines in a Circle.
AS yet we have had the Geometry of rectilineals: The Geometry of Curvilineals,
of which the Circle is the chief, does follow.

1. A Circle is a round plain. ^ 15 dj.

As here thou see. A Rectilineall plain was at the 3 e vj, defined to be a
plain comprehended of right lines. And so also might a circle have been
defined to be a plain comprehended of a periphery or bought-line, but this is
better.

The means to describe a Circle, is the same, which was to make a Periphery:
But with some difference: For there was considered no more but the motion, the
point in the end of the ray describing the periphery: Here is considered the
motion of the whole ray, making the whole plot contained within the periphery.

A Circle of all plains is the most ordinate figure, as was before taught at
the 10 e iiij.

2 Cir^les are as the quadrates or squares made of their diameters 2 p. x ij.

For Circles are like plains. And their homologall sides are their diameters,
as was foretold at the 24 e iiij. And therefore by the 1 e vj, they are one to
another, as the quadrates of their diameters are one to another, which indeed
is the double reason of their homologall sides. As here the Circle a e i, is
unto the Circle o u y, as 25, is unto 16, which are the quadrates of their
Dieameters, 5 and 4.

Therefore

3. The Diameters are, as their peripheries Pappus, 5 l x j, and 26 th. 18.

As here thou see in a e, and i o.



4. Circular Geometry is either in Lines, or in the segments of a Circle.

This partition of the subject matters howsoever is taken for the
distinguishing and severing with some light a matter somewhat confused; And
indeed concerning lines, the consideration of secants is here the foremost, and
first of Inscripts.

5. If a right line be bounded by two points in the periphery, it shall fall
within the Circle. 2 p iij.

As here a e, because the right within the same points is shorter, than the
periphery is, by the 5 e ij.

From hence does follow the Infinite section, of which we spoke at the 6 e j.

This proposition teaches how a Rightline is to be inscribed in a circle, to
wit, by taking of two points in the periphery.

6. If from the end of the diameter, and with a ray of it equal to the right
line given, a periphery be described, a right line drawn from the said end,
unto the meeting of the peripheries, shall be inscribed into the circle, equal
to the right line given. 1 p iiij.

As let the right line given be a: And from e, the end of the diameter e i: And
with e o, a part of it equal to a, the line given, describe the circle e u: A
right line e u, drawn from the end e, unto u, the meeting of the two
peripheries, shall be inscribed in the circle given, by the 5 e, equal to the
line given; because it is equal to e o, by the 10 e v, seeing it is a ray of
the same Circle.

And this proposition teaches, How a right line given is to be inscribed into
a Circle, equal to a line given.

Moreover of all inscripts the diameter is the chief: For it shows the
center, and also the reason or proportion of all other inscripts. Therefore the
invention and making of the diameter of a Circle is first to be taught.

7. If an inscript do cut into two equal parts, another inscript
perpendicularly, it is the diamiter of the Circle, and the midst of it is the
center. 1 p iij.

As let the Inscript a e, cut the inscript i u, perpendicularly: dividing it
into two equal parts in o. I say that the once inscript thus halfing the
other, is the diameter of the Circle: And that the midst of it is the center
thereof: As in the circle, let the Inscript i s, cut the inscript a e, and that
perpendicularly dividing into two equal parts in o. I say that i u, thus
dividing a e, is the Diameter of the Circle: And y, the midst of the said i
u, is the Center of the same.

The cause is the same, which was of the 5 e x j. Because the inscript cut into
halfes if for the side of the inscribed rectangle, and it does subtend the
periphery cut also into two parts; By the which both the Inscript and Periphery
also were in like manner cut into two equal parts: Therefore the right line
thus halfing in the diameter of the rectangle: But that the middle of the
circle is the center, is m^nifest out of the 7 e v, and 29 e iiij.

Euclide, thought better of Impossible, than he did of the cause: And thus he
forces it. For if y be not the Center, but s, the part must be equal to the
whole: For the Triangle a o s, shall be equilater to the triangle e o s. For a
o, oe, are equal by the grant: Item s a, and s e, are the rays of the circle:
And s o, is common to both the triangles. Therefore by the 1 e vij, the angles
no each side at o are equal; And by the 13 e v, they are both right angles.
Therefore s o e is a right angle; It is therefore equal by the grant, to the
right angle y o e, that is, the part is equal to the whole, which is
impossible. Wherefore y is not the Center. The same will fall out of any other
points whatsoever ^ut of y.

Therefore

8. If two r^ght lines do perpendicularly half two inscripts, the meeting of
these two bisecants shall be the Center of the circle e 25 p iij.

As here a e, and i o, let them cut into halfes the right lines u y, and y s.
And let them meet, that they cut one another in r. I say r is the center of
the circle a y o s e i u. For before, at the 6, and 7 e v, it was manifest that
the Center was in the Diameter. And in the meeting of the diameters. [Therefore
two manner of ways is the Center found; First by the middle of the diameter:
And then again by the concourse, or meeting of the diameters, in the midst
of the lines halfed or cut into two equal portions.] Here is no need of the
meeting of many diameters, one will serve well enough

And one may

9. Draw a periphery by three points, which do not fall in a right line.

As here, by a e i, (First from a, to e, let a right line be drawn; And
likewise from e to i. Then, by the 12 e v, let both these lines be cut into
equal parts, by two infinite right lines: These halfing lines also shall
meet: And in their meeting shall be the Center, by the 8 e. And therefore from
that meeting unto any of the said points given is the ray of the periphery
desired.)

10. If a diameter do half an inscript, that is, not a diameter, it does cut
it perpendicularly: And contrariwise: 3 p iij.

As let the diameter a e, half the inscript i o, which is not a diameter: And
let the rays of the circle be u i, and u o. The cause in all is the same,
which was of the 5 e x j.

11. If inscripts which are not diameters do cut one another, the segments
shall be unequal. 4 p iij.

This is a consectary drawn out of the 28 e iiij. For if the inscripts were
halfed, they should be diameters, against the grant.

But rate has been hitherto in the parts of inscripts: Proportion in the same
parts follows.

12 If two inscripts do cut one another, the rectangle of the segments of the
one is equal to the rectangle of the segments of the other. 35 p iij.

If the inscripts thus cut be diameters, the proportion is manifest, as in the
first figure. For the Rectangle of the segments, of the one is equal to the
rectangle of the segments of the other, seeing they be both quadrates of equal
sides. If they be not diameters let them otherwise as a e, and i o: I say the
Oblong of a u, and u e, is equal to the Oblong of o u, and u i. For let the
rays from the Center y, be y e, and y i. To the quadrate of each of these both
the rectangles of the segments shall be equal. For by the 7 e, let the
diameter y u, fall upon the point of the common section u; And let y s, and s
r, be perpendiculars. Here by the 5 e x j. the inscripts are cut equally in the
points r and s: And unequally in the point u: Therefore by the 7 e xiij, the
oblong, of o u, and u i, with the quadrate s u, is equal to the quadrates s i:
And adding y s, the same oblong, with the quadrates u s and s y, that is, by
the 9 e x i j, with the quadrate y u, is equal to the quadrates i s and s y,
that is, by the 9 e xij, to the quadrate i y, that is, by the 5 e xij, to y e,
to the which by the same cause it is manifest the other oblong with the
quadrate y u is equal. Let the quadrate y u, be taken from each of them: And
then the oblongs shall be equal to the same: And therefore between themselves.

And this is the comparison of the parts inscripts. The rate of whole inscripts
does follow, the which whole one diameter does make:

13 Inscripts are equal distant from the center, unto which the perpendiculars
from the center are equal 4 d iij.

As it appears in the next figure, of the lines a e and i o, unto which the
perpendiculars u y, and u s, from the Center u, are equal.

14. If inscripts be equal, they be equally distant from the center: And
contrariwise. 13 p iij.

The diameters in the same circle, by the 28 e iiij^ are equal: And they are
equally distant from the center, seeing they are by the center, or rather are
no whit at all distant from it: Other inscripts are judged to be equal,
greater, or lesser one than another, by the diameter, or by the diameters
center.

Euclide does demonstrate this proposition thus: Let first a e and i o be
equal; I say they are equidistant from the center. For let u y, and u y, be
perpendiculars: They shall cut the assigned a e, and i o, into halfes, by the 5
e xj: And y a and s i a^e equal, because they are the halfes of equals. Now
let the rays of the circle be u a, aund u i: Their quadrates by the 9 e xij,
are equal to the pair of quadrates of the shankes, which paires are therefore
equal between themselves. Take from equals the quadrates y a, and s i, there
shall remain y u and u s, equals: and therefore the sides are equal, by the
4 e 12.

The converse likewise is manifest: For the perpendiculars given do half them:
And the halfes as before are equal.

15 Of unequal inscripts the diameter is the greatest: And that which is next
to the diameter, is greater than that which is farther off from it: That which
is farthest off from it, is the least: And that which is next to the least, is
lesser than that which is farther off: And those two only which are on each
side of the diameter are equal e 15 e iij.

This proposition consists of five members: The first is, The diameter is the
greatest iuscript: The second, That which is next to the diameter is greater
than that which is farther off: The third, That which is farthest off from the
diameter is the least: The fourth, That next to the least is lesser, than that
farther off: The fifth, That two only on each side of the diameter are equal
between themselves. All which are manifest out of that same argument of
equality, that is the center the beginning of decreasing, and the end of
increasing. For look how much farther off you go from the center, or how much
nearer you come unto it, so much les^er or greater do you make the inscript.

Let there be in a circle many inscripts, of which one, to wit, a e, let it be
the diameter: I say, that it is of them all the greatest or longest. But let i
o, be nearer to the diameter, (or as in the former Elements was said) nearer to
the center, than u y. I say that i o, is longer than u y. Moreover, let u y, be
the farthest off from the same diameter or center; I say the same u y, is the
shortest of them all. Now to this shortest u y, let i o, be nearer than a e^ I
say therefore that i o, also is lesser than a e. Let at length i o, be not the
diameter: I say that beyond the diameter a e, there may only a line be
inscribed equal unto it, such as is s r. And those equal between themselves
on each side of the diametry may only be given, not three, nor more. And after
the same manner also, only one beyond the diameter, may possibly be equal to
u y, to wit, that which is as far off from the diameter as it is; and so in
others.

But Euclides conclusion is by triangles of two sides greater than the other;
and of the greater angle.

The first part is plain thus: Because the diameter a e, is equal to i l, and
l o, viz. to the rays: And to those which are greater than i o, the base by
the 9. e v j etc.

The second part of the nearer, is manifest by the 5 e vij. because of the
triangle i l o, equicrurall to the triangle u l y, is greater in angle: And
therefore it is also greater in base.

The third and fourth are consectaries of the first.

The fifth part is manifest by the second: For if beside i o, and s r, there be
supposed a third equal, the same also shall be unequal, because it shall be
both nearer and farther off from the diameter.

16 Of right lines drawn from a point in the diameter which is not the center
unto the periphery, that which passes by the center is the greatest: And that
which is nearer to the greatest, is greater than that which is farther off: The
other part of the greatest is the lest. And that which is nearest to the least,
is lesser than that which is farther off: And two on each side of the greater
or least are only equal. 7 p iij.

The first part of a e, and a i, is manifest, as before, by the 9 e v j. The
second of a i, and a o; Item of a o, and a u, is plain by the 5 e vij.

The third, that a y, is lesser than a u, because s y, which is equal to s u,
is lesser than the right lines s a, and a u, by the 9 e v j: And the common s
a, being taken away, a y shall be left, lesser than a u.

The fourth part follows of the third.

The fifth let it be thus: s r, making the angle a s r, equal to the angle a s
u, the bases a u, and a r, shall be equal by the 2 e v ij. To these if the
third be supposed to be equal, as a l, it would follow by the 1 e v ij. that
the whole angle s a, should be equal to r s a, the particular angle, which is
impossible. And out of this fifth part issues this Consectary.

Therefore

17 If a point in a circle be the bound of three equal right lines determined
in the periphery, it is the center of the circle. 9 p iij.

Let the point a, in a circle be the common bound of three right lines, ending
in the periphery and equal between themselves, be a e, a i, a u. I say this
point is the center of the Circle.

Otherwise from a point of the diameter which is not the center, not only two
right lines on each side should be equal. For by any point whatsoever the
diameter may be drawn. Such was before observed in a quinquangle; If three
angles be equal, all are equal; so in a Circle: If three right lines falling
from the same point unto the perephery be equal, all are equal.

18 Of right lines drawn from a point assigned without the periphery, unto the
concavity or hollow of the same, that which is by the center is the greatest;
And that next to the greatest, is greater than that which is farther off: But
of those which fall upon the convexiti^ of the circumference, the segment of
the greatest is least^ And that which is next unto the least is lesser than
that is farther off: And two on each side of the greatest or least are only
equal. 8 piij.

The demonstration of this is very like unto the above mentioned, of five
parts. And thus much of the secants, the Tangents do follow.

19 If a right line be perpendicular unto the end of the diameter, it does
touch the periphery: And contrariwise e 16 p iij.

As for example, Let the circle given a e, be perpendicular to the end of the
diameter, or the end of the ray, in the end a, as suppose the ray be i a: I
say, that e a, does touch, not cut the periphery in the common bound a.

This was to have been made a postulatum out of the definition of a
perpendicle: Because if this should lean never so little, it should cut the
periphery, and should not be perpendicular: Notwithstanding Euclide does force
it thus: Otherwise let the right line a e, be perpendicular to the diameter a
i. And a right line from o, with the center i, let it fall within the circle at
o, and let o i, joined together. Here in the triangle a o i, two angles,
contrary to the 13. e v j. should be right angles at a, by the grant: And at o,
by the 17 e vj.

The demonstration of the converse is like unto the former. For if the tangent,
or touch-line a e, be not perpendicular to the diameter i o u, let o e, from
the center o, be drawn perpendicular: Then shall the angle o e i, be right
angle: And o i e an acutangle: And therefore by the 22 e vj, o i, that is o y,
shall be greater then o y e, that is the part, then the whole.

Therefore

20 If a right line do pass by the center and touch-point, it is
perpendicular to the tangent or touch-line. 18 p iij.

And

Or thus, as Schoner amendeth it: If a right line be the diameter by the touch
point, it is perpendicular to the tangent.

21 If a right line be perpendicular unto the tangent, it does pass by the
center and touch-point. 19. piij.

Or thus: if it be perpendicular to the tangent, it is a diameter by the touch
point: Schoner.

For a right line either from the center unto the touch-point; or from the
touch point unto the center is radius or semidiameter.

And

22 The touch-point is that, into which the perpendicular from the center does
fall upon the touch line.

23 A tangent on the same side is only one.

Or touch line is but one upon one, and the same side: H. Or. A tangent is but
one only in that point of the periphery Schoner.

It is a consectary drawn out of the xiij. e ij. Because a tangent is a very
perpendicular.

Euclide propounds this more specially thus; that no other right line may
possibly fall between the periphery and the tangent.

And

24 A touch-angle is lesser than any rectilineall a^ute angle, e 16 p ij.

Angulus contractus, A touch angle is an angle of a straight touch-line and a
periphery. It is commonly called Angulus contingentiae: Of Proclus it is named
Cornicularis, an hornelike corner^ because it is made of a right line and
periphery like unto a horn. It is less therefore than any acute or sharp
right-lined angle: Because if it were not lesser, a right line might fall
between the periphery and the perpendicular.

And

25 All touch-angles in equal peripheries are equal.

But in unequal peripheries, the cornicular angle of a lesser periphery, is
greater than the Cornicular of a greater.

26 If from a ray out of the center of a periphery given, a periphery be
described unto a point assigned without, and from the meeting of the assigned
and the ray, a perpendicular falling upon the said ray unto the now described
periphery, be tied by a right line with the said center, a right line drawn
from the point given unto the meeting of the periphery given, and the knitting
line shall touch the assigned periphery 17 p iij.

As with the ray a e, from the center a, of the periphery assigned, unto the
point assigned e, let the periphery e o, be described: And let i o, be
perpendicular to the ray unto the described periphery. This knit by a right
line unto the center a, let e u, be drawn. I say, that e u, does touch the
periphery i u, assigned: Because it shall be perpendicular unto the end of the
diameter. For the triangles e a u, and o a i, by the 2 e v i j, seeing they are
equicrurall; And equal in shankes of the common angle; they are equal in the
angles at the base. But the angle a i o, is a right angle: Therefore the angle
e u a, shall be a right angle. And therefore the right line e u, by the 13 e
ij, is perpendicular to a o.

Thus much of the Secants and Tangents severally: It follows of both kinds
jointly together.

27 If of two right lines, from an assigned point without, the first do cut a
periphery unto the concave, the other do touch the same; the oblong of the
secant, and of the outter segment of the secant, is equal to the quadrate of
the tangent: and if such a like oblong be equal to the quadrate of the other,
that same other does touch the periphery: 36, and 37.p iij.

If the secant or cutting line do pass by the center, the matter is more easy
and as here, Let a, cut; And a i, touch: The outter segment is a o, and the
center u, Now u i, shall be perpendicular to the tangent a i, by the 20. e:
Then by 8 e xiij, the oblong of e a, and a o, with the quadrate of a u, that
is, of i u, is equal to the quadrate of a u, that is, by the 9 e x i j. to the
quadrates of a i, and i u. Take i u, the common quadrate: The Rectangle shall
be equal to the quadrate of the tangent.

If the secant do not pass by the center, as in this figure, the center u,
found by the 7 e, i u, shall be by the 20 e perpendicular unto the tangent a i^
then draw u a, and uo, and the perpendicular halving o e, by the 10 e. Here by
the 8 e xiij, the oblong of a e, and a o, with the quadrate o y, is equal to
the quadrate a y: Therefore y u, the common quadrate added, the same oblong,
with the quadrates o y, and y u, that is by the 9 e xij. with the quadrate o u,
is equal to the quadrates a y, and u y, that is, by the 9 e xij, to a u, that
is, again, to a i, and i u. Lastly, let u r, and i u, two equal quadrates be
taken from each, and there will remain the oblong equal to the quadrate of the
tangent.

The converse is likewise demonstrated in this figure. Let the Rectangle of a
e, and a y, be equal to the quadrate of a i. I say, that a i does touch the
circle. For let, by the 26 e, a o the tangent be drawn: Item let a u, u i, and
u o be drawn. Here the oblong of e a, and a y, is equal to the quadrate of a
o, by the 27 e: And to the quadrate of a i, by the grant. Therefore a i, and a
o, are equal. Then is u o, by the 20 e, perpendicular to the tangent. Here the
triangles a u o, and a u i, are equilaters: And by the ^ e vij, equiangles. But
the angle at o is a right angle: Therefore also a right angle and equal to it
is that at i, by the ^ 3 e iij, wherefore a i is perpendicular to the end of
the diameter: And, by the 19 e, it touches the periphery.

Therefore

28. All tangents falling from the same point are equal.

Or, Touch lines drawn from one and the same point are equal: H.

Because their quadrates are equal to the same oblong.

And

29. The oblongs made of any secant from the same point, and of the outter
segment of the secant are equal between themselves. Camp. 36 p iij.

The reason is because to the same thing.

And

30. To two right lines given one may so continue or join the third, that the
oblong of the continued and the continuation may be equal to the quadrate
remaining. Vitellio 127 p j.

As in the first figure, if the first of the lines given be e o, the second i
a, the third o a.

Now are we come to Circular G^ometry, that is to the Geometry of Circles or
Peripheries cut and touching one another: And of Right lines and Peripheries.

31. If peripheries do either cut or touch one another, they are eccentrickes:
And they do cut one another in two points only, and these by the touch point
do continue their diameters, 5. 6. 10,11, 12 p iij.

All these might well have been asked: But they have also their
demonstrations, ex impossibili, not very dissicult.

The first part is manifest, because the part should be equal to the whole, if
the Center were the same to both, as a. For two rays are equal to the common
raie a o: And therefore a e and a i, that is, the part and the whole, are
equal one to another.

The second part is demonstrated as the first: For otherwise the part must be
equal to the whole, as here a e and a i, the rays of the lesser periphery;
And a e, and a o, the rays of the greater are equal. Wherefore a i, should be
equal to a o, the Part to the whole.

If the Peripheries be outwardly contiguall, the matter is more easy, and by
the judgment of Euclide it deserved not a demonstration, as here.

The third part is apparent out of the first: Otherwise those which cut one
another should be concentrickes. For, by the 7 e, the center being found: And
by the 9 e, three right lines being drawn from the center unto three points of
the sections, the three rays must be equal, as here.

The fourth part is demonstrated after the same manner: Because otherwise the
Part must be greater then the whole. For let the right line a e i o, be drawn
by the centers a and e: And let the particular rays be e u, and a u. Here two
sides u e, and e a, of the triangle u e a, by the 9 e vj, are greater than u a:
And therefore also then a o; Take away a e, the remainder u e, shall be greater
than e o. But e i is equal to e u. Wherefore e i is greater than e o, the
part, than the whole.

The same will fall out, if the touch be without, as here: For, by the 9 e vj,
e a and i a, are greater than i e. But e o and i u, are equal to e a, and i a.
Wherefore e o, and i u, are greater than i e, the parts than the whole.

Of right lines and Peripheries jointly the rate is but one.

32. If inscripts be equal, they do cut equal peripheries: And contrariwise,
28,29 p iij.

Or thus: If the inscripts of the same circle or of equal circles be equal,
they do cut equal peripheries: And contrariwise B.

Or thus; If lines inscribed into equal circles or to the same be equal, they
cut equal peripheries: And contrariwise, if they do cut equal peripheries,
they shall themselves be equal: Schoner^

The matter is apparent by congruency or application: a^ here in this example.
For let the circles agree, and then shall equal inscripts and peripheries
agree.

Except with the learned Rodulphus Snellius, you do understand as well two
equal peripheries to be given, as two equal right lines, you shall not
conclude two equal sections, and therefore we have justly inserted of the
same, or of equal Circles; which we do now see was in like manner by Lazarus
Schonerus.

The sixteenth Book of Geometry, Of the Segments of a Circle.
1. A Segment of a Circle is that which is comprehended outterly of a
periphery, sand innerly of a r^ght line.

THe Geometry of Segments is common also to the sphere: But now this same
general is hard to be declared and taught: And the segment may be comprehended
within of an oblique line either single or manifold. But here we follow those
things that are usual and commonly received. First therefore the general
definition is set foremost, for the more easy distinguishing of the species and
several kinds.

2. A segment of a Circle is either a sectour, or a s^ction.

Segmentum a segment, and Sectio a section, and Sector a sectour, are almost
the same in common acceptance, but they shall be distinguished by their
definitions.

3. A Sectour is a segment innerly comprehended of two right lines, making an
angle in the center; which is called an angle in the center: As the periphery
is, the base of the sectour, 9 d iij.

As a e i is a sectour. Here a sectour is defined, and his right lined angle,
is absolutely called The greater Sectour, which notwithstanding may be cut into
two sectours, by drawing of a semidiameter, as after shall be seen in the
measuring of a section.

4. An angle in the Periphery is an angle comprehended of two right lines
inscribed, and jointly bounded or meeting in the periphery. 8 d iij.

This might have been called The Sectour in the ^eriphery, to wit,
comprehended innerly of two right lines jointly bounded in the periphery; as
here a e i.

5. The angle in the center, is double to the angle of the periphery standing
upon the same base, 20 p iij.

The variety of the example in Euclide is threefold, and yet the demonstration
is but one and the same: As here e a i, the angle in the center, shall be
prooved to be double to e o i, the angle in the periphery, the right line o u
cutting it into two triangles on each side equicrurall; And, by the 17 e vj, at
the base equiangles: Whose doubles severally are the angles, e a u, of e o a:
And i a u, of i ^ a, For seeing it is equal to the two inner equal between
themselves by the 15 e vj; it shall be the double of one of them. Therefore the
whole e a i, is the double of the whole e o i.

The second example is thus of the angle in the center a e i: And in the
periphery a o i. Here the shankes e o, and e i, by the 28 e iiij, are equal:
And by the 17 e vj, the angles at o and i are equal: To both which the angle
in the center is equal, by the 15 e vj. Therefore it is double of the one.

The third example is of the angle in the center, a e i, And in the periphery a
o i, Let the diameter be o e u. Here the whole angle i e u, by the 15 e v j, is
equal to the two inner angles e o i, and e i o. which are equal one to
another, by the 17 e v j: And therefore it is double of the one. Item the
particular angle a e u, is equal by the 15 e vj, to the angles e o a, and e a
o, equal also one to another, by the 17 e vj. Therefore the remainder a e i,
is the double of the other a o i, in the periphery.

Therefore

6. If the angle in the periphery be ^quall to the angle in the center, it is
double to it in base. And contrariwise.

This follows out of the former element: For the angle in the center is
double to the angle in the periphery standing upon the same base: Wherefore if
the angle in the periphery be to be made equal to the angle in the center, his
base is to be doubled, and thence shall follow the equality of them both: S.

7. The angles in the center or periphery of equal circles, are as the
Peripheries are upon which they do insist: And contrariwise. e 33 p vj, and
26, 27 p iij.

Here is a double proportion with the periphery underneath, of the angles in
the center: And of angles in the periphery. But it shall suffice to declare it
in the angles in the center.



First therefore let the Angles in the center a e i, and o u y, be equal: The
bases a i, and o y, shall be equal, by the 11 e vij: And the peripheries a i,
and o y, by the 32 e x v, shall likewise be equal. Therefore if the angles be
unequal, the peripheries likewise shall be equal.

The same shall also be true of the Angles in the Periphery. The Converse in
like manner is true: From whence follows this consectary:

Therefore

8. As the sectour is unto the sectour, so is the angle unto the angle: And
Contrariwise.

And thus much of the Sectour.

9. A section is a segment of a circle within comprehended of one right line,
which is termed the base of the section.

As here, a e i, and o u y, and s r l, are sections.



10. A section is made up by finding of the center.

The Invention of the center was manifest at the 7 e xv: And so here thou see
a way to make up a Circle, by the 8 e xv.

11 The periphery of a section is divided into two equal parts by a
perpendicular dividing the base into two equal parts. 20. p iij.

Let the periphery of the section a o e, to be halfed or cut into two equal
parts. Let the base a e, be cut into two equal parts by the pendicular i o,
which shall cut the periphery in o, I say, that a o, and o e, are bisegments.
For draw two right lines a o, and o e, and thou shall have two triangles a i o,
and e i o, equilaters by the 2 e v ij. Therefore the bases a o, and o e, are
equal: And by the 32. e xv. equal peripheries to the subtenses.

Here Euclide does by congruency comprehend two peripheries in one, and so do
we comprehend them.

12 An angle in a section is an angle comprehended of two right lines jointly
bounded in the base and in the periphery jointly bounded 7 d iij.

Or thus: An angle in the section, is an angle comprehended under two right
lines, having the same terms with the bases, and the terms with the
circumference: H. As a o e, in the former example.

13 The angles in the same section are equal. 21. p iij.

Let the section be e a u o, And in it the angles at a, and u: These are
equal, because, by the 5 e, they are the halfes of the angle e y o, in the
center: Or else they are equal, by the 7 e, because they insist upon the same
periphery.

Here it is certain that angles in a section are indeed angles in a periphery,
and do differ only in base.

14 The angles in opposite sections are equal to two right angles. 22. p iij.

For here the opposite angles at a, and i, are equal to the three angles of
the triangle e o i, which are equal to two right angles, by the 13 e v j. For
first i, is equal to it self: Then a, by parts is equal to the two other.
For e a i, is equal to e o i, and i a o, to o e i, by the 13 e. Therefore the
opposite angles are equal to two right angles.

The reason or rate of a section is thus: The similitude does follow.

15 If sections do receive [or containe] equal angles, they are alike e 10. d
iij.

As here a e i, and o u y. The triangle here inscribed, seeing they are
equiangles, by the grant; they shall also be alike, by the 12 e vij.

16 If like sections be upon an equal base, they are equal: and contrariwise.
23,24. p iij.

In the first figure, let the base be the same. And if they shall be said to
unequal sections; and one of them greater than another, the angle in that a o
e, shall be less than the angle a i e, in the lesser section, by the 16 e vj.
which notwithstanding, by the grant, is equal.



In the second figure, if one section be put upon another, it will agree with
it: Otherwise against the first part, like sections upon the same base, should
not be equal. But congruency is here sufficient.

By the former two propositions, and by the 9 e x v. one may find a section
like unto another assigned, or else from a circle given to cut off one like
unto it.

17 An angle of a section is that which is comprehended of the bounds of a
section.

As here e a i: And e i a.

18 A section is either a semicircle: or that which is unequal to a semicircle.

A section is two fold, a semicircle, to wit, when it is cut by the diameter:
or unequal to a semicircle, when it is cut by a line lesser than the diameter.

19 A semicircle is the half section of a circle.

Or it is that which is made the diameter.

Therefore

20 A semicircle is comprehended of a periphery and the diameter 18 dj.

As a e i, is a semicircle: The other sections, as o y u, and o e u, are
unequal sections: that greater; this lesser.

21 The angle in a semicircle is a right angle: The angle of a semicircle is
lesser than a rectilineall right angle: But greater than any acute angle: The
angle in a greater section is lesser than a right angle: Of a greater, it is a
greater. In a lesser it is greater: Of a lesser, it is lesser, e 31. and 16. p
iij.

Or thus: The angle in a semicircle is a right angle, the angle of a semicircle
is less than a right rightlined angle, but greater than any acute angle: The
angle in the greater section is less than a right angle: the angle of the
greater section is greater than a right angle: the angle in the lesser section
is greater than a right angle, the angle of the lesser section, is lesser than
a right angle: H.

There are seven parts of this Element: The first is that The angle in a
semicircle is a right angle: as in a e i: For if the ray o e, be drawn, the
angle a e i, shall be divided into two angles a e o, and o e i, equal to the
angles e a o, and e i o, by the 17 e v j. Therefore seeing that one angle is
equal to the other two, it is a right angle, by the 6 e viij. Aristotle says
that the angle in a semicircle is a right angle, because it is the half of two
right angles, which is all one in effect.

The second part, That the angle of a semicircle is lesser than a right angle;
is manifest out of that, because it is the part of a right angle. For the angle
of the semicircle a i e, is a part of the rectilineall right angle a i u.

The third part, That it is greater than any acute angle; is manifest out of
the 23. e x v. For otherwise a tangent were not on the same part one only and
no more.

The fourth part is thus made manifest: The angle at i, in the greater section
a e i, is lesser than a right angle; because it is in the same triangle a e i,
which at a, is right angle. And if neither of the shankes be by the center,
notwithstanding an angle may be made equal to the assigned in the same section.

The fifth is thus: The angle of the greater section e a i, is greater than a
right angle; because it contains a right-angle.

The sixth is thus, the angle a o e, in a lesser section, is greater than a
right angle, by the 14 e x v j. Because that which is in the opposite section,
is lesser than a right angle.

The seventh is thus. The angle e a o, is lesser than a right-angle: Because it
is part of a right angle, to wit of the outter angle, if i a, be drawn out at
length

And thus much of the angles of a circle, of all which the most effectual and
of greater power and use is the angle in a semicircle, and therefore it is not
without cause so often mentioned of Aristotle. This Geometry therefore of
Aristotle, let us somewhat more fully open and declare. For from hence do
arise many things.

Therefore

22 If two right lines jointly bounded with the diameter of a circle, be
jointly bounded in the periphery, they do make a right angle.

Or thus: If two right lines, having the same terms with the diameter, be
joined together in one point, of the circomference, they make a right angle. H.

This corollary is drawn out of the first part of the former Element, where it
was said, that an angle in a semicircle is a right angle.

And

23 If an infinite right line be cut of a periphery of an external center, in
a point assigned and contingent, and the diameter be drawn from the contingent
point, a right line from the point assigned knitting it with the diameter,
shall be perpendicular unto the infinite line given.

Let the infinite right line be a e, from whose point a, a perpendicular is to
be raised.

The right line a e, let it be cut by the periphery a e i, (whose center o, is
out of the assigned a e,) and that in the point a, and a contingent point, as
in e: And from e, let the diamiter be e o i: The right line a i, from a, the
point given, knitting it with the diameter i o e, shall be perpendicular upon
the infinite line a e; Because with the said infinite, it makes an angle in a
semicircle.

And

24 If a right line from a point given, making an acute angle with an infinite
line, be made the diameter of a periphery cutting the infinite, a right line
from the point assigned knitting the segment, shall be perpendicular upon the
infinite line.

As in the same example, having an external point given, let a perpendicular
unto the infinite right line a e, be sought: Let the right line i o e, be made
the diameter of the peripherie; and withal let it make with the infinite right
line giyen an acute angle in e, from whose bisection for the center, let a
periphery cut the infinite, etc.

And

25 If of two right lines, the greater be made the diameter of a circle, and
the lesser jointly bounded with the greater and inscribed, be knit together,
the power of the greater shall be more than the power of the lesser by the
quadrate of that which knitteth them both together. ad 13 p. x.

As in this example; The power of the diameter a e, is greater than the power
of e i, by the quadrate of a i. For the triangle a e i, shall be a rectangle:
And by the 9 e xij. a e, the greater shall be of power equal to the shankes.
Out of an angle in a semicircle Euclide raises two notable fabrickes; to wit,
the invention of a mean proportional between two lines given: And the Reason
or rate in opposite sections. The genesis or invention of the mean
proportional, of which we heard at the 9 e viij. is thus:

26 If a right line continued or continually made of two right lines given, be
made the diameter of a circle, the perpendicular from the point of their
continuation unto the periphery, shall be the mean proportional between the
two lines given. 13 p vj.

As for example, let the assigned right lines be a e, and e i^ of the which a e
i, is continued. And let e o, be perpendicular from the periphery a o i, unto
e, the point of continuation or joining together of the lines given. This e o,
say I, shall be the mean proportional: Because drawing the right lines a o,
and i o, you shall make a rectangled triangle, seeing that a o i, is an angle
in a semicircle: And, by the 9 e viij. o e, shall be proportional between a
e, and e i.

So if the side of a quadrate of 10. foot content, were sought; let the sides
1, foot and 10, foot an oblong equal to that same quadrate, be continued;
the mean proportional shall be the side of the quadrate, that is, the power
of it shall be 10. foot. The reason of the angles in opposite sections does
follow.

27 The angles in opposite sections are equal in the alterne angles made of
the secant and touch line. 32. p iij.

If the sections be equal or alike, then are they the sections of a
semicircle, and the matter is plain by the 21 e. But if they be unequal or
unlike the argument of demonstration is indeed fetched from the angle in a
semicircle, but by the equal or like angle of the tangent and end of the
diameter.

As let the unequal sections be e i o, and e a o: the tangent let it be u e y:
And the angles in the opposite sections, e a o, and e i o. I say they are
equal in the alterne angles of the secant and touch line o e y, and o e u.
First that which is at a, is equal to the alterne o e y: Because also three
angles o e y, o e a, and a e u, are equal to two right angles, by the 14 e v.
Unto which also are equal the three angles in the triangle a e o, by the 13 e
vj. From three equals take away the two right angles a u e, and a o e: (For a o
e, is a right angle, by the 21 e; because it is in a semicircle:) Take away
also the common angle a e o: And the remainders e a o, and o e y, alterne
angles, shall be equal.

Secondarily, the angles at a, and i, are equal to two right angles, by the
14, e: To these are equal both o e y, and o e u. But e a o, is equal to the
alterne o e y. Therefore that which is at i, is equal to the other alterne o e
u. Neither is it any matter, whether the angle at a, be at the diameter or not:
For that is only assumed for demonstrations sake: For wheresoever it is, it is
equal, to wit, in the same section. And from hence is the making of a like
section, by giving a right line to be subtended.

Therefore

28 If at the end of a right line given a right lined angle be made equal to
an angle given, and from the top of the angle now made, a perpendicular unto
the other side do meet with a perpendicular drawn from the midst of the line
given, the meeting shall be the center of the circle described by the equalled
angle, in whose opposite section the angle upon the line given shall be made
equal to the assigned e 33 p iij.

This you may make trial of in the three kinds of angles, all ways by the
same argument: as here the angle given is a: The right line given e i: at the
end e, the equalled angle, i e o: The perpendicular to the side e o, let it be
e u: But from the midst of the line given let it be y u. Here u, shall be the
center desired. And from hence one may make a section upon a right line given,
which shall receive a rectilineall angle equal to an angle assigned.

And

29 If the angle of the secant and touch line be equal to an assigned
rectilineall angle, the angle in the opposite section shall likewise be equal
to the same. 34. piij.

As in this figure underneath. And from hence one may from a circle given cut
off a section, in which there is an angle equal to the assigned. As let the
angle given be a: And the circle e i o. Thou must make at the point e, of the
secant e o, and the tangent y u, an angle equal to the assigned, by the 11 e
iij. such as here is o e u: Then the section o e i, shall contain an angle
equal to the assigned.

Of Geometry the seventeenth Book, Of the Adscription of a Circle and Triangle.
HItherto we have spoken of the Geometry of Rectilineall plains, and of a
circle: Now follows the Adscription of both: This was generally defined in
the first book 12 e. Now the periphery of a circle is the bound thereof.
Therefore a rectilineall is inscribed into a circle, when the periphery does
touch the angles of it 3 d iiij. It is circumscribed when it is touched of
every side by the periphery; 4 d iij.

1. If a rectilineall ascribed unto a circle be an equilater, it is equiangle.

Of the inscript it is manifest; And that of a Triangle by it self: Because if
it be equilater, it is equiangle, by the 19 e vj. But in a Triangulate the
matter is to be prooved by demonstration. As here, if the inscripts o u, and s
y, be equal, then do they subtend equal peripheries, by the 32 e x v. Then
if you do omit the periphery in the midst between them hoth, as here u y,
and shall add o i e s the remainder to each of them, the whole o i e s y,
subtended to the angle at u: And u o i e s, subtended to the angle at y, shall
be equal. Therefore the angles in the periphery, insisting upon equal
peripheries are equal.

Of the circumscript it is likewise true, if the circumscript be understood to
be a circle. For the perpendiculars from the center a, unto the sides of the
circumscript, by the 9e xij, shall make triangles on each side equilaters, and
equiangls, by drawing the semidiameters unto the corners, as in the same
example.

2. It is equal to a triangle of equal base to the perimeter, but of height
to the perpendicular from the center to the side.



As here is manifest, by the 8 e vij. For there are in one triangle, three
triangles of equal height.

The same will fall out in a Triangulate, as here in a quadrate: For here shall
be made four triangles of equal height.

Lastly every equilater rectilineall ascribed to a circle, shall be equal to a
triangle, of base equal to the perimeter of the adscript. Because the
perimeter contains the bases of the triangles, into the which the
rectilineall is resolved.

3. Like rectilinealls inscribed into circles, are one to another as the
quadrates of their diameters, 1 p. x i j.

Because by the 1 e vj, like plains have a doubled reason of their homologall
sides. But in rectilineals inscribed the diameters are the homologall sides, or
they are proportional to their homologall sides. As let the like rectangled
triangles be a e i, and o u y; Here because a e and o u, are the diameters, the
matter appears to be plain at the first sight. But in the Obliquangled
triangles, s e i, and r u y, alike also, the diameters are proportional to
their homologall sides, to wit, e i and u y. For by the grant, as s e is to r
u: so is e i to u y, And therefore, by the former, a s the diameter e a and u o.

In like Triangulates, seeing by the 4 e x, they may be resolved into like
triangles, the same will fall out.

Therefore

4. If it be as the diameter of the circle is unto the side of rectilineall
inscribed, so the diameter of the second circle be unto the side of the second
rectilineall inscribed, and the several triangles of the inscripts be alike
and likely situate, the rectilinealls inscribed shall be alike and likely
situate.

This Euclide did thus assume at the 2 p xij, and indeed as it seems out of
the 18 p vj. Both which are contained in the 23 e iiij. And therefore we also
have assumed it.

Adscription of a Circle is with any triangle: But with a triangulate it is
with that only which is ordinate: And indeed adscription of a Circle is common
to all.

5. If two right lines do cut into two equal parts two angles of an assigned
rectilineall, the circle of the ray from their meeting perpendicular unto the
side, shall be inscribed unto the assigned rectilineall. 4 and 8. p. iiij.

As in the Triangle a e i, let the right lines a o, and e u, half the angles a
and e: And from y, their meeting, let the perpendiculars unto the sides be y o,
y u, y s; I say that the center y, with the ray y o, or y a, or y s, is the
circle inscribed, by the 17 e x v. Because the halfing lines with the
perpendiculars shall make equilater triangles, by the 2 e vij. And therefore
the three perpendiculars, which are the bases of the equilaters, shall be
equal.

The same argument shall serve in a Triangulate.

6. If two right lines do right anglewise cut into two equal parts two sides
of an assigned rectilineall, the circle of the ray from their meeting unto the
angle, shall be circumscribed unto the assigned rectilineall. 5 p iiij.

As in the former figures. The demonstration is the same with the former. For
the three rays, by the 2 e vij, are equal: And the meeting of them, by the 17
ex, is the center.

And thus is the common adscription of a circle: The adscription of a
rectilineall follows, and first of a Triangle.

7. If two inscripts, from the touch point of a right line and a periphery, do
make two angles on each side equal to two angles of the triangle assigned be
knit together, they shall inscribe a triangle into the circle given,
equiangular to the triangle given e 2 p iiij.

Let the Triangle a e i be given: And the circle o, into which a Triangle
equiangular to the triangle given, is to be inscribed. Therefore let the right
line u y s, touch the periphery y r l: And from the touch y, let the inscripts
y r, and y l, make with the tangent two angles u y r, and s y l, equal to the
assigned angles a e i, and a i e: And let them be knit together with the right
line r l: They shall by the 19 e xvj, make the angle of the alterne segments
equal to the angles u r l, and y r l. Therefore by the 4 e vij seeing that two
are equal, the other must needs be equal to the remainder.

The circumscription here is also special.

8 If two angles in the center of a circle given, be equal at a common ray to
the outter angles of a triangle given, right lines touching a periphery in the
shankes of the angles, shall circumscribe a triangle about the circle given
like to the triangle given. 3 p iiij.

Let there be a Triangle, and in it the outter angles a e i, and a o u: The
Circle let it be y s r; And in the center l, let the angles y l r, and s l r;
at the common side l r, be made equal to the said outter angles a e i, and a
o u. I say the angles of the circumscribed triangle, are equal to the angles
of the triangle given. For the four inner angles of the quadrangle y l r m,
are equal to the four right angles, by the 6 e x: And two of them, to wit, at
y and r, are right angles, by the construction: For they are made by the secant
and touch line, from the touch point by the center, by the 20 e x v. Therefore
the remainders at l and m, are equal to two right angles: To which two a e i
and a e o are equal. But the angle at l, is equal to the outter: Therefore
the remainder m, is equal to a e o. The same shall be said of the angles a o
e, and a o u. Therefore two being equal, the rest at a and i, shall be equal.

Therefore

9. If a triangle be a rectangle, an obtusangle, an acute angle, the center of
the circumscribed triangle is in the side, out of the sides, and within the
sides: And contrariwise. 5 e iiij.



As, thou see in these three figures underneath, the center a.

Of Geometry, the eighteenth Book, Of the adscription of a Triangulate.
SVch is the Adscription of a triangle: The adscription of an ordinate
triangulate is now to be taught. And first the common adscription, and yet out
of the former adscription, after this manner.

1. If right lines do touch a periphery in the angles of the inscript ordinate
triangulate, they shall unto a circle circumscribe a triangulate homogeneall to
the inscribed triangulate.

The examples shall be laid down according as the species or several kinds
do come in order. The special inscription therefore shall first be taught,
and that by one side, which reiterated, as often as need shall require, may fill
up the whole periphery. For that Euclide did in the quindecangle one of the
kinds, we will do it in all the rest.

2. If the diameters do cut one another right-anglewise, a right line
subtended or drawn against the right angle, shall be the side of the quadrate.
e 6 p iiij.

As here, For the shankes of the angle are the rays whose diameters knit
together shall make four rectangled triangles, equal in shankes: And by the 2
e v i j, equal in bases. Therefore they shall inscribe a quadrate.

Therefore

3. A quadrate inscribed is the half of that which is circumscribed.

Because the side of the circumscribed (which here is equal to the diameter of
the circle) is of power double, to the side of the inscript, by the 9 e x i j.

An^

4. It is greater than the half of the circumscribed Circle.

Because the circumscribed quadrate, which is his double, is greater than the
whole circle.

For the inscribing of other multangled odde-sided figures we must needs use
the help of a triangle, each of whose angles at the base is manifold to the
other: In a Quinguangle first, that which is double unto the remainder, which
is thus found.

5. If a right line be cut proportionally, the base of that triangle whose
shankes shall be equal to the whole line cut, and the base to the greater
segment of the same, shall have each of the angles at the base double to the
remainder: And the base shall be the side of the quinquangle inscribed with the
triangle into a circle. 10, and 11. p i i i j.

Here first thou shall take for the fabric or making of the Triangle, for the
ray the right line a e, by the 3 e x iiij, cut proportionally in o: A circle
also shall thou make upon the center a, with the ray a e: And then shall thou
by the 6 e xv, inscribe a right line equal to the greater segment: And shall
knit the same inscript with the whole line cut with another right line. This
triangle shall be your desire. For by the 17 e v j, the angles at the base e i
are equal, so that look whatsoever is prooved of the one, is by and by also
prooved of the other^ Then let o i be drawn; And a Circle, by the 8 e xvij,
circumscribed about the triangle a o i. This circle the right line e i, shall
touch, by the 27 e xv. Because, by the grant, the right line a e, is cut
proportionally, therefore the Oblong of the secant and outter segment, is
equal to the quadrate of the greater segment, to which by the grant, the base
e i, is equal. Here therefore the angle a i ^ is the double of the angle at a:
because it is equal to the angles a i o, and o a i, which are equal between
themselves. For, by the 7 e xvj it is equal to the angle o a i, in the alterne
segment. And the remainder a i o, is equal to it self. Therefore also the
angle a e i, is equal to the same two angles, because it is equal to the
angle a i e. But the outter angle e o i, is equal to the same two, by the 15 e
vj. Therefore the angles i o e and ^ e i (because they are equal to the same)
they are equal between themselves. Wherefore by the 17 e vj, the sides o i
and e i are equal: And therefore also a o and o i: And the angles o a i, and o
a i^ are equal, by the 17 e vj. Wherefore seeing that to both the angle a i e
is equal, it shall be the double of there of the equals.

But the base e i, is the side of the equilater quinquangle. For if two right
lines halfi^g both the angles of a triangle which is the double of the
remainder, be knit together with a right line, both one to another, and with
the angles, shall inscribe unto a circle an equilater triangle, whose one side
shall be the base it self: As here seeing the angles e o a, e o i, u i o, u i
a, i a o, are equal in the periphery, the peripheries, by the 7 e, x vj.
subtending them are equal: And therefore, by the 32 e, xv. the subtenses a e,
e i, i o, o u, u a, are also equal. Now of those five, one is a e. Therefore a
right line proportional cut, does thus make the adscription of a quinquangle:
And from thence again is afforded a line proportionally cut.

6 If two right lines do subtend on each side two angles of an inscript
quinquangle, they are cut proportionally, and the greater segments are the
sides of the said inscript e 8, p x iij.

As here, Let a i, and e u, subtending the angles on each side a e i, and e a
u: I say, That they are proportionally cut in the point s: And the greater
segments s i, and s u, are equal to a e, the side of the quinquangle. For here
two triangles are equiangles: First a e i, and u a e, are equal by the grant,
and by the 2 e, v i j. Therefore the angles a i e, and a e s, are equal. Then
a e i, and a s e, are equal: Because the angle at a, is common to both:
Therefore the other is equal to the remainder, by the 4 e, 7. Now, by the 12.
e, vij. as i a, is unto a e, that is, as by and by shall appear, unto i s: so
is e a, unto a s: Therefore, by the 1 e, xiiij. ia, is cut proportionally in s.
But the side e a, is equal to i s: Because both of them is equal to the side
e i, that by the grant, this by the 17. e, vj. For the angles at the base, i s
e, and i e s, are equal, as being indeed the doubles of the same. For i s e,
by the 16. e v j. is equal to the two inner, which are equal to the angle at
u, by the 17 e vj. and by the former conclusion. Therefore it is the double of
the angles a e s: Whose double also is the angle u e i, by the 7 e. xvj.
insisting indeed upon a double periphery.

And from hence the fabric or construction of an ordinate quinquangle upon a
right line given, is manifest.

Therefore

7 If a right line given, cut proportional, be continued at each end with the
greater segment, and six peripheries at the distance of the line given shall
meet, two on each side from the ends of the line given and the continued, two
others from their meetings, right lines drawn from their meetings, and the
ends of the assigned shall make an ordinate quinquangle upon the assigned.

The example is thus.

8 If the diameter of a circle circumscribed about a quinquangle be rational,
it is irrational unto the side of the inscribed quinquangle. e 11. p xiij.

So before the segments of a right line proportionally cut were irrational.

The other triangulates hereafter multiplied from the ternary, quaternary, or
quinary of the sides, may be inscribed into a circle by an inscript triangle,
quadrate, or quinquangle. Therefore by a triangle there may be inscribed a
triangulate of 6. 12,24,46, angles: By a quadrate, a triangulate of 8.
16,32,64. angles. By a quinquangle, a triangulate of 10, 20. 40,80. angles etc.

9 The ray of a circle is the side of the inscript sexangle e 15 p iiij.

A sexangle is inscribed by an inscript equilaterall triangle, by halfing of
the three angles of the said triangle: But it is done more speedily by the ray
or semidiameter of the circle, six times continually inscribed. As in the
circle given, let the diameter be a e: And upon the center o, with the ray i e,
let the periphery u i o, be described: And from the points o and u, let the
diameters be o y, and u s; These knit both one with another, and also with the
diameter a e, shall inscribe an equilaterall sexangle into the circle given,
whose side shall be equal to the ray of the same circle. As e u, is equal to u
i, because they both equal to the same ie, by the 29 e, iiij. Therefore eiu,
is an equilater triangle: And likewise e i o, is an equilater. The angles also
in the center are. of one right angle: And therefore they are equal. And by
the 14. e v, the angle s i o, is. of two rightangles: And by the 15. e v. the
angles at the top are also equal. Wherefore six are equal: And therefore,
by the 7 e xvj. and 32. e, xv, all the bases are equal, both between
themselves, and as was even now made manifest, to the ray of the circle given.
Therefore the sexangle inscript by the ray of a circle is an equilater: And by
the 1 e x vij. equiangled.

Therefore

10 Three ordinate sexangles do fill up a place.

As here. For they are six equilater triangles, if you shall resolve the
sexangles into six triangls: Or else because the angle of an ordinate sexangle
is as much as one right angle and. of a right angle.

Furthermore also no one figure amongst the plains does fill up a place. A
Quinquangle does not: For three angles a quinquangle may make only 3 ^/5 angles
which is too little. And four would make 4 ^/5. which is as much too great.
The angles of a septangle would make only two rightangles, and 6/7 of one:
Three would make 3, and 9/7, that is in the whole 4. 2/7, which is too much,
etc. to him that by induction shall thus make trial, it will appear, That a
plain place may be filled up by three sorts of ordinate plains only.

And

11 If right lines from one angle of an inscript sexangle unto the third angle
on each side be knit together, they shall inscribe an equilater triangle into
the circle given.

As here: Because the sides shall be subtended to equal peripheries: Therefore
by the 32 e x v. they shall be equal between themselves: And again, on the
contrary, by such a like triangle, by halfing the angles, a sexangle is
inscribed.

12 The side of an inscribed equilater triangle has a treble power, unto the
ray of the circle 12. p xiij.

As here, with a e, one side of the triangle a e i, two third parts of the
half periphery are employed: For with one side one third of the whole e u, is
employed: Therefore e u, is the other third part, that is, the sixth part of
the whole periphery. Therefore the inscript e u, is the ray of the circle, by
the 9 e. Now the power of the diameter a o u, by the 14 e xij. is four times
so much as is the power of the ray, that is, of e u: And by 21. e xvj, and 9 e
xij, a e, and e u, are of the same power; take away e u, and the side a e,
shall be of treble power unto the ray.

13 If the side of a sexangle be cut proportionally, the greater segment shall
be the side of the decangle.

Pappus lib. 5. ca. 24. and Campanus ad 3 p xiiij^ Let the ray a o, or side of
the sexangle be cut proportionally, by the 3 e xiiij: And let a e, be equal to
the greater segment. I say that a e, is the side of the decangle. For if it be
moreover continued with the whole ray unto i, the whole a e i, shall be by the
4 e xiiij. be cut proportionally: and the greater segment e i, shall be the same
ray. For if the right line iea, be cut proportionally, it shall be as i a, is
unto i e, that is to o a, to wit, unto the ray: so a o, shall be unto a e.
Therefore. by the 15. e vij. the triangles iao, and o a e, are equiangles: And
the angle a o e, is equal to the angle o i a. But the angle u o e, is four
times as great as the angle a o e: for it is equal to the two inner at a, and
e, by the 15 e v j: which are equal between themselves, by the 9 e v. and by
the 17 e vj. And therefore it is the double of a e o, which is the double, for
the same cause, of a i o, equal to the same a o e. Therefore u o e, is the
quadruple of the said a o e. Therefore a e, is the quadruple of the periphery e
a. Therefore the whole u e a, is the quintuple of the same e a: And the whole
periphery is decuple unto it. And the subtense a e, is the side of the decangle.

Therefore

14 If a decangle and a sexangle be inscribed in the same circle, a right line
continued and made of both sides, shall be cut proportionally, and the greater
segment shall be the side of a sexangle; and if the greater segment of a right
line cut proportionally be the side of an hexagon, the rest shall be the side
of a decagon. 9. p xiij.

The comparison of the decangle and sexangle with the quinangle follows.

15 If a decangle, a sexangle, and a pentangle be inscribed into the same
circle the side of the pentangle shall in power countervaile the sides of the
others. And if a right line inscribed do countervaile the sides of the sexangle
and decangle, it is the side of the pentangle. 10. p xiiij.

Let the side of the inscribed quinquangle be a e: of the sexangle, e i: Of the
decangle a o. I say, the side a e, does in power countervaile the rest. For let
there be two perpe^diculars: The first i o, the second i u, cutting the sides
of the quinquangle and decangle into halves: And the meeting of the second
perpendicular with the side of the quinquangle let it be y. The syllogism of
the demonstration is this: The oblongs of the side of the quinquangle, and the
segments of the same, are equal to the quadrates of the other sides. But the
quadrate of the same whole side, is equal to the oblongs of the whole, and the
segments, by the 3 e, xiij. Theresore it is equal to the quadrates of the
other sides.

Let the proportion of this syllogism be demonstrated: For this part only
remains doubtful. Therefore two triangles a e i, and y e i, are equiangles,
having one common angle at e: And also two equal ones a e i, and e i y, the
halfes, to wit, of the same e i s: Because that is, by the 17 e, vj: one of the
two equals, unto the which e i s, the out angle, is equal, by the 15 e. vj.
And this does insist upon a half periphery. For the half periphery a l s, is
equal to the half periphery a r s: and also a l, is equal to a r. Therefore
the remnant l s, is equal to the remnant r s: And the whole r l, is the double
of the same r s: And therefore e r, is the double of e o: And r s, the double
of o u. For the bisegments are manifest by the 10 e, xv. and the 11 e, xvj.
Therefore the periphery e r s, is the double of the periphery e o u: And
therefore the angle e i u, is the half of the angle e i s, by the 7 e, xvj.
Therefore two angles of two triangles are equal: Wherefore the remainder, by
the 4 e vij, is equal to the remainder. Wherefore by the 12 e, vij, as the
side a e, is to e i: so is e i, to e y. Therefore by the 8 e xij, the oblong of
the extremes is equal to the quadrate of the mean.

Now let o y, be knit together with a straight: Here again the two triangles a
o e, and a o y, are equiangles, having one common angle at a: And a o y, and o
e a, therefore also equal: Because both are equal to the angle at a: That by
the 17 e, vj: This by the 2 e, vij: Because the perpendicular halfing the side
of the decangle, does make two triangles, equicrurall, and equal by the right
angle of their shankes: And therefore they are equiangles. Therefore as e a, is
to a o: so is e a, to a y. Wherefore by the 8 e, xij. the oblong of the two
extremes is equal to the quadrate of the mean: And the proposition of the
syllogism, which was to be demonstrated. The converse from hence as manifest
Euclide does use at the 16 p xiij.

16. If a triangle and a quinquangle be inscribed into the same Circle at the
same point, the right line inscribed between the bases of the both opposite to
the said point, shall be the side of the inscribed quindecangle. 16. p. iiij.

For the side of the equilaterall triangle does subtend of the whole
pheriphery. And two sides of the ordinate quinquangle do subtend ^/^ of the
same. Now -- is 1/^^: Therefore the space between the triangle, and the
quinquangle shall be the 1/^^ of the whole periphery.

Therefore

17. If a quinquangle and a sexangle be inscribed into the same circle at the
same point, the periphery intercepted between both their sides, shall be the
thirtieth part of the whole periphery.

As here. Therefore the inscription of ordinate triangulates, of a Quadrate,
Quinquangle, Sexangle, Decangle, Quindecangle is easy to be performed by one
side given or found, which reiterated as often as need shall require, shall
subtend the whole periphery. Iun. 4. A. C. MDCXXII Campana pulsante pro. H. W.

Of Geometry the ninteenth Book; Of the Measuring of ordinate Multangle and of
a Circle.
OVt of the Adscription of a Circle and a Rectilineall is drawn the Geodesy of
ordinate Multangles, and first of the Circle it self. For the meeting of two
right lines equally, dividing two angles is the center of the circumscribed
Circle: From the center unto the angle is the ray: And then if the quadrate of
half the side be taken out of the quadrate of the ray, the side of the
remainder shall be the perpendicular, by the 9 e xij. Therefore a special
theoreme is here thus make:

1. A plain made of the perpendicular from the center unto the side, and of
half the perimeter, is the content of an ordinate multangle.

As here; The quadrate of 10, the ray is 100. The quadrate of 6, the half of
the side 12, is 36: And 100. 36 is 64, the quadrate of the Perpendicular, whose
side 8, is the Perpendicular it self. Now the whole periphery of the
Quinquangle, is 60. The half thereof therefore is 30. And the product of 30,
by 8, is 240, for the content of the said quinquangle.

The Demonstration here also is of the certain antecedent cause thereof. For
of five triangles in a quinquangle, the plain of the perpendicular, and of
half the base is one of them, as in the former has been taught: Therefore
five such do make the whole quinquangle. But that multiplication, is a
multiplication of the Perpendicular by the Perimeter or bout-line.

In an ordinate Sexangle also the ray, by the 9 e xviij, is known by the side
of the sexangle^ As here, the quadrate of 6, the ray is 36. The quadrate of 3,
the half of the side, is 9^ And 36 -- 9. are 27, for the quadrate of the
Perpendicular, whose side 5 12/11 is the perpendicular it self. Now the whole
perimeter, as you see, is 36. Therefore the half is 18. And the product of 18
by 5 2/11 is 93 3/11 for the content of the sexangle given.

Lastly in all ordinate Multangles this theoreme shall satisfy thee.

2 The periphery is the triple of the diameter and almost one seav^nth part of
it.

Or the Periphery contains the diameter three times and almost one seventh of
the same diameter. That it is the triple of it, six rays, (that is three
diameters) about which the periphery, by the 9 e xviij, is circumscribed does
plainly show: And therefore the continent is the greater: But the excess is
not altogether so much as one seventh part. For there does want an unity of one
seventh: And yet is the same excess far greater than one eighth part.
Therefore because the difference was nearer to one seventh, than it was to one
eighth, therefore one seventh was taken, as nearest unto the truth, for the
truth it self.

Therefore

3. The plain of the ray, and of half the periphery is the content of the
circle.

For here 7, the ray, of half the diameter 14, Multiplying 22, the half of
the periphery 44, makes the oblong 154, for the content of the circle. In the
diameter two opposite sides, and likewise in the perimeter the two other
opposite sides of the rectangle are contemed. Therefore the halfes of those two
are taken, of the which the rectangle is comprehended.

And

4. As 14 is unto 11, so is the quadrate of the diameter unto the Circle.

For here 3 bounds of the proportion are given in potentia: The fourth is found
by the multiplication of the third by the second, and by the Division of the
product by the first: As here the Quadrate of the diameter 14, is 196. The
product of 196 by 11 is 2156. Lastly 2156 divided by 14, the first bound,
gives in the Quotient 154, for the content of the circle sought. This arises
by an analysis out of the quadrate and Circle measured. For the reason of 196,
unto a 154; is the reason of 14 unto 11, as will appear by the reduction of
the bounds.

This is the second manner of squaring of a circle taught by Euclide as Hero
tells us, but otherwise laid down, namely after this manner. If from the
quadrate of the diameter you shall take away 3/14 parts of the same, the
remainder shall be the content of the Circle. As if 196, the quadrate be
divided by 14, the quotient likewise shall be 14. Now thrice 14, are 42: And
196 -- 42, are 154, the quadrate equal to the circle.

Out of that same reason or rate of the pheriphery and diameter arises the
manner of measuring of the Parts of a circle, as of a Semicircle, a Sector, a
Section, both greater and lesser.

And

5. The plain of the ray and one quarter of the periphery, is the content of
the semicircle.

As here thou see: For the product of 7, the half of the diameter,
multiplied by 11, the quarter of the periphery, does make 77, for the content
of the semicircle.

This may also be done by taking of the half of the circle now measured.

And

6. The plain made of the ray and half the base, is the content of the Sector.

Here are three sectours, a e the base of 12 foot: And e i in like manner of
12 foot. The other or remainder i a of 7 f. and 3/7 of one foot. The diameter
is 10 foot. Multiply therefore 5, half of the diameter, by 6 half of the
base, and the product 30, shall be the content of the first sector. The same
shall also be for the second sectour. Again multiply the same ray or
semidiameters 5, by 3 5/7, the half of 7 3/7, the product 18 4/7 shall be the
content of the third sector. Lastly, 30 -- 30 -- 18 4/7 are 78 4/7, the content
of the whole circle.

And

7. If a triangle, made of two rays and the base of the greater section, be
added unto the two sectors in it, the whole shall be the content of the greater
section: If the same be taken from his own sector, the remainder shall be the
content of the lesser.

In the former figure the greater section is a e i: The lesser is a i. The base
of them both is as you see, 6. The perpendicular from the top of the
triangle, or his height is 4. Therefore the content of the triangle is 12.
Wherefore 30 -- 30 -- 12, that is 72, is the content of the greater section a e
i. And the lesser sectour, as in the former was taught, is 184/7. Therefore
184/7 -- 12, that is, 6 4/7, is the content of a i, the lesser section.

And

8. A circle of unequal isoperimetrall plains is the greatest.

The reason is because it is the most ordinate, and comprehended of most
bounds; see the 7, and 11 e iiij. As the Circle a, of 24 perimeter, is greater
then any rectilineall figure, of equal perimeter to it, as the Quadrate e, or
the Triangle i.



Of Geometry the twentieth Book, Of a Bossed surface.
1. A bossed surface is a surface which lies unequally between his bounds.

IT is contrary unto a Plain surface, as we heard at the 4 e v.

2. A bossed surface is either a sphericall, or varium.

3. A sphericall surface is a bossed surface equally distant from the center of
the space enclosed.

Therefore

4 It is made by the turning about of an half circumference the diameter
stands still. e 14 d x j.

As here if thou shall conceive the space between the periphery and the
diameter to be empty.

5. The greatest periphery in a sphericall surface is that which cutteth it
into two equal parts.

Those things which were before spoken of a circle, the same almost are hither
to be referred. The greatest periphery of a sphericall does answer unto the
Diameter of a Circle.

Therefore

6. That periphery that is nearer to the greatest, is greater than that which
is farther off: And on each side those two which are equally distant from the
greatest, are equal.

The very like unto those which are taught at the 15,16, 17, 18. e. xv. may
here again be repeated: As here.

7 The plain made of the greatest periphery and his diameter is the sphericall.

So the plain made of the diameter 14. and of 44. the greatest periphery,
which is 616. is the sphericall surface. So before the content of a circle was
measured by a rectangle both of the half diameter, and periphery. But here, by
the whole periphery and whole diameter, there is made a rectangle for the
measure of the sphericall, four times so great as was that other: Because by
the 1 e vj. like plains (such as here are conceived to be made of both half
the diameter, and half the periphery, and both of the whole diameter and whole
periphery) are in a doubled reason of their homologall sides.

Therefore

8 A plain of the greatest circle and 4, is the sphericall.

This consectarium is manifest out of the former element.

And

9 As 7 is to 22. so is the quadrate of the diameter unto the sphericall.

For 7, and 22, are the two least bounds in the reason of the diameter unto the
periphery: But in a circle, as 14, is to 11. so is the quadrate of the diameter
unto the circle. The analogy does answer fitly: Because here thou multipliest
by the double, and dividest by the half: There contrariwise thou multipliest
by the half, and dividest by the double. Therefore there one single circle is
made, here the quadruple of that. This is, therefore the analogy of a circle
and sphericall; from whence arises the hemispherical, the greater and the
lesser section.

And

10 The plain of the greatest periphery and the ray, is the hemisphericall.

As here, the greatest periphery is 44. the ray 7. The product therefore of 44.
by 7. that is, 308. is the hemisphericall.

11 If look what the part be of the ray perpendicular from the center unto the
base of the greater section, so much the hemisphericall be increased, the whole
shall be the greater section of the sphericall: But if it be so much decreased,
the remainder shall be the lesser.

As in the example, the part of the third ray, that is, of 3/7, is from the
center: such like part of the hemispherical 308, is 132. (For the 7, part of
308. is 44. And three times 44. is 132.) Therefore 132. added to 308. do make
440. for the greater section of the sphericall. And 132. taken from 308. do
leave 176. for the lesser section of the same.

12 The varium is a bossed surface, whose base is a periphery, the side a right
line from the bound of the top, unto the bound of the base.

13 A varium is a conicall or a cylinder like form.

14 A conicall surface is that which from the periphery beneath does equally
wax less and less unto the very top.

Therefore

15 It is made by turning about of the side about the periphery beneath.

16 The plain of the side and half the base is the conicall surface.

As in the example next before going, the side is 13. The half periphery is 15
5/7: And the product of 15. 5/7. by 13. is 204. 2/7. for the conicall surface.
To which if you shall add the circle underneath, you shall have the whole
surface.

17 A cylinder like form is that which from the periphery underneath unto the
upper one, equal and parallel unto it, is equally raised.

Therefore

18 It is made by the turning of the side about two equal and parallel
peripheries.

19 The plain of his side and height is the cylinder like surface.

As here the periphery is 22. as is gathered by the Diameter, which is 7. The
height is 12. The base therefore is 38.. And 38. by 12. are 462. for the
cylinderlike surface. To which if you shall add both the bases on each side,
to wit, 38.. twice, or 77. once, the whole surface shall be 539.

Geometry, the one and twentieth Book. Of Lines and Surfaces in solids^
1 A body or solid is a lineate broad and high 1 d xj.

FOr length only is proper to a line: Length and breadth, to a surface: Length
breath, and height jointly, belong unto a body: This threefold perfection of a
magnitude, is proper to a body: Whereby we do understand that are in a body,
not only lines of length, and surfaces of breadth, (for so a body should
consist of lines and surfaces.) But we do conceive a solidity in length,
breadth and height. For every part of a body is also a body. And therefore by
a solid we do understand the body it self. As in the body a e i o, the length
is a e; the breadth, a i, And the height, a o,

2 The bound of a solid is a surface 2 d xj.

The bound of a line is a point: and yet neither is a point a line, or any part
of a line. The bound of a surface is a line: And yet a line is not a surface,
or any part of a surface. So now the bound of a body is a surface: And yet a
surface is not a body, or any part of a body. A magnitude is one thing; a bound
of a magnitude is another thing, as appeared at the 5 e j.

As they were called plain lines, which are conceived to be ^^ a plain, so
those are named solid both lines and surfaces which are considered in a solid;
And their perpendicle and parallelisme are hither to be recalled from simple
lines.

3 If a right line be unto right lines cut in a plain underneath,
perpendicular in the common intersection, it is perependicular to the plain
beneath: And if it be perpendicular, it is unto right lines, cut in the same
plain, perpendicular in the common intersection e 3 d and 4 pxj.

Perpendicularity was in the former attributed to lines considered in a
surface. Therefore from thence is repeated this consectary of the perpendicle
of a line with the surface it self.

If thou shall conceive the right lines, a e, i o, u y, to cut one another in
the plain beneath, in the common intersections: And the line r s, falling from
above, to be to every one of them perpendicular in the common point s, thou
have an example of this consectary.

4 If three right lines cutting one another, be unto the same right line
perpendicular in the common section, they are in the same plain 5. p x j.

For by the perpendicle and common section is understood an equal state on all
parts, and therefore the same plain: as in the former example, a s, y s, o s,
suppose them to be to s r, the same lofty line, perpendicular, they shall be
in the same nearer plain a i u e o y.

5 If two right lines be perpendicular to the underplaine, they are parallells:
And if the one of two parallells be perpendicular to the under plain, the
other is also perpendicular to the same. 6.8 p xj.

The cause is out of the first law or rule parallells. For if two right lines
be perpendicular to the same under plain, being joined together by a right
line, they shall make their inner corners equal to two right angles: And
therefore they shall be parallells, by the 21. e v. And if in two parallells
knit together with a right line, one of the inner angles, be a right angle: the
other also shall be a right angle. Because they are divided by a common
perpendicular; As in the example. If the angles at a, and e, be right angles, a
i, and e o, are parallells, and contrariwise, if a i, and e o, ^be parallells,
and the angle at a, be a right angle, the angle at e, also shall be a right
angle.

6 If right lines in diverse plains be unto the same right line parallel,
they are also parallel between themselves. 9 p xj.

As here a e, and u y, right lines in diverse plains suppose them to be
parallel to i o: I say, they are parallel one to another. For from the point
i, let i a, and i u, be parallells, by the 17. e v. Therefore, by the 3 e, o i,
seeing that it is perpendicular to i a, and i u, two lines cutting one another,
it is perpendicular to the plain beneath. Therefore by the 6 e, y u, and e a,
are perpendicular to the same plain: And therefore, by the same, they are
parallel.

7 If two right lines be perpendiculars, the first from a point above, unto a
right line underneath, the second from the common section in the plain
^nderneath, a third, from the said point perpendicular to the second, shall be
perpendicular to the plain beneath. e 11 p xj.

It is a consectary out of the 3 e. As for example, if from a lofty point a, a
e, be by the 18 e v, perpendicular to e, a point of the right line i o
underneath: And from e the common section, by the 17 e v, there be e u, another
perpendicular: Lastly a y, a lofty right line, be by the 18 e v, perpendicular
unto e u, at the point y, a y shall be perpendicular unto the plain
underneath. For that a e is perpendicular to io, the same a e declineth neither
to the right hand, nor to the left, by the 13 e ij. And in that again ay is
perpendicular to e u, it leans neither forward nor backward. Therefore it
lies equally or indifferently, between the four quarters of the world.

If the right line i o, do with equal angles agree to r, the third element.

8. If a right line from a point assigned of a plain underneath, be parallel
to a right line perpendicular to the same plain, it shall also be
perpendicular to the plain underneath. e x 12 p xj.

As for example let the plain be a e i o: And the assigne^ point in it u: From
this point a lofty perpendicular is to be erected. Let there be made from the
point y, the perpendicular y s, unto the plain underneath, by the 7 e. And to
it let u r, be made parallel, by the 24 e v. Now u r, seeing it is parallel
to a perpendicular upon the plain underneath, it shall be perpendicular to the
same, by the 6 e.

9. If a right line in one of the plains cut, perpendicular to the common
section, be perpendicular to the other, the plains are perpendicular: And if
the plains be perpendicular, a right line in the one perpendicular to the
common section is perpendicular to the other e 4 d, and 38 p xj.

The perpendicularity of plains, is drawn out of the former condition of the
perpendicle: And the state of plains on each side equal between themselves,
is fetched from a perpendicularity of a right line falling upon a plain.
Because from hence it is understood that the plain it self does lie
indifferently between all parts signified by right lines: Which in a Book
with the pages each way opened, is perceived by the verses or lines of the
pages, both to the section and plain underneath, perpendicular as here thou
see.

10. If a right line be perpendicular to a plain, all plains by it, are
perpendicular to the same: And if two plains be unto any other plain
perpendiculars, the common section is perpendicular to the same. e 15, and 19
p. xj.

The first is a consectary drawn out of the 9 e. And the latter is from hence
manifest, because that same common section is a right line, in any manner of
lofty plains intersected, perpendicular both to the common section and plain
underneath. For if the common section, were not perpendicular to the plain
underneath, neither should the plains cutting one another be perpendicular to
the plain underneath, but some one should be oblique, against the grant, as
here thou see.

11. Plains are parallel which do lean no way. 8 d x j.

And

12. Those which divided by a common perpendicle. 14 p xj.

It is a consectary out of the 3, and 6 e. For if the middle right line be
perpendicular to both the plains, it is also to the right lines on either side
cut, perpendicular in the common intersection: And the innner angles on each
side, being right angles, will evince them to be parallels.

It is also out of the definition of parallels, at the 17 e i j.

And

13. If two paires of right in them be jointly bounded, they are parallel. 15
p xj.

Such are the opposite walls in the top or ridge of houses. As let a e i, and
u o y, be plain which have two payres of right lines, e a, and i a: Item u o,
and y o, jointly bounded in a, and o: And parallels, to wit e a, against u o:
and i a^ against y o. I say that the plains themselves are parallels: For the
right lines u e, and o a: item y i, and o a, do knit together equal
parallels, they shall by the 27 e v, be equal and parallels: And so they shall
prove the equidistancie.

The same will fall out if thou shall imagine the jointly bounded to infinitely
drawn out; for the plains also infinitely extended shall be parallell^

14. If two parallel plains are cut with another plain, the common sections
are parallels, 16 p xj.

As here thou see the parallel plains a e i o, and u y s r, cut by the
plain l j v f, the common sections l j, and f v, shall also be parallel:
Otherwise they themselves, and therefore also the plains in which they are,
shall meet, as in the point t, which is against the grant.

The twenty second Book, of P. Ramus Geometry, Of a Pyramid.
1. The axis of a solid is the diameter about which it is turned, e 15,19,22 d
x j.

THe Axis or Axeltree is commonly thought to be proper to the sphere or globe,
as here a e: But it is attributed to other kinds of solids, as well as to that.

2. A right solid is that whose axis is perpendicular to the center of the base.

Thus Serenus and Apollonius do define a Cone and a Cylinder: And these only
Euclide considered: Yea and indeed stereometry entertaineth no other kind of
solid but that which is right or perpendicular.

3. If solids be comprehended of homogeneall surfaces, equal in multitude and
magnitude, they are equal. 10 d x j.

Equality of lines and surfaces was not informed by any peculiar rule; farther
than out of reason and common sense, and in most places congruency and
application was enough and did satisfy to the full: But here the congruency of
Bodies is judged by their surfaces. Two cubes are equal, whose six sides or
plain surfaces, are equal, etc.

4. If solids be comprehended of surfaces in multitude equal and like, they
are equal, 9 d x j.

This is a consectary drawn out of the general difinition of like figures, at
the 19 e. iiij. For there like figures were defined to be equiangled and
proportional in the shankes of the equal angles: But in like plain solids
the angles are esteemed to be equal out of the similitude of their like
plains: And the equal shankes are the same plain surfaces, and therefore
they are proportional, equal and alike.

5 Like solids have a treble reason of their homologall sides, and two mean
proportionalls. 33. p xj. 8 p xij.

It is a consectary drawn out of the 24 e. iiij. as the example from thence
repeated shall make manifest.

6 A solid is plain or embosed.



7 A plain solid is that which is comprehended of plain surfaces.

8 The plain angles comprehending a solid angle, are less than four right
angles. 21. p x j.

For if they should be equal to four right angles, they would fill up a
place, by the 22 e, vj. neither would they at all make an angle, much less
therefore would they do it if they were greater.

9 If three plain angles less than four right angles, do comprehend a solid
angle, any two of them are greater than the other^ And if any two of them be
greater than the other, then may comprehend a solid angle, 21. and 23. p xj.

It is an analogy unto the 10 e vj. and the cause is in a readiness. For if
two plain angles be equal to the remainder, they shall with that third
include no space between them: But if thou shall conceit to fit the plain to
the shankes, with their congruity they should of two make one: but much less
if they be lesser.

The converse from hence also is manifest.

Euclide does thus demonstrate it: First if three angles are equal, then by
and by two are conceived to be greater than the remainder. But if they be
unequal, let the angle a e i, be greater than the angle a e o: And let a e u,
equal to a e o, be cut off from the greater a e i: And let e u, be equal to e
o. Now by the 2 e, vij. two triangles a e u, and a e o, are equal in their
bases a u, and a o. Item a o, and e i, are greater than a i, and a o: And a o,
is equal to a u. Therefore o i, is greater than i u. Here two triangles, u e
i, and i e o, equal in two shankes; and the base o i, greater than the base i
u. Therefore, by the 5 e vij. the angle o e i, is greater than the angle i e u.
Therefore two angles a e o, and o e i, are greater than a e i.

10 A plain solid is a Pyramid or a Pyramidate.

11 A Pyramid is a plain solid from a rectilineall base equally decreasing.

As here thou conceivest from the triangular base a e i, unto the top o, the
triangles a o e, a o i, and e o i, to be reared up.

In the pyramid a e i o u, thou see from the quadrangular base a e i o, unto
the top u, four triangles in like manner to be raised.

Therefore

12 The sides of a pyramid are one more than are the base.

The sides are here named Hedrae.

And

13 A pyramid is the first figure of solids.

For a pyramid in solids, is as a triangle is in plains. For a pyramid may be
resolved into other solid figures, but it cannot be resolved into any one more
simple than it self, and which consists of fewer sides than it does.

Therefore

14 Pyramides of equal height, are as their bases are 5 e, and 6. p xij.

And



15 Those which are reciprocal in base and height are equal 9 p xij.

These consectaries are drawn out of the 16, 18 e. iiij.



16 A tetraedrum is an ordinate pyramid comprehended of four triangles 26. d
xj.

As here thou see. In rectilineall plains we have in the former signified,
in every kind there is but one ordinate figure: Amongst the triangles the
equilater: Amongst the quadrangles, the Quadrate: so now of all kind of
Pyramides, there is one kind ordinate only, and that is the Tetraedrum And
yet not every Tetraedrum is such, but that only which is comprehended of
triangles, not only severally ordinate, but equal one to another altogether
alike.

Therefore

17 The edges of a tetraedrum are six, the plain angles twelve, the solid
angles four.

For a Tetraedrum is comprehended of four triangles, each of them having three
sides, and three corners a piece: And every side is twice taken: Therefore the
number of edges is but half so many.

And

18 Twelve tetraedra's do fill up a solid place.

Because 8. solid right angles filling a place, and 12. angles of the
tetraedrum are equal between themselves, seeing that both of them are
comprehended of 24. plain right-angles. For a solid right angle is
comprehended of three plain right angles: And therefore 8. are comprehended of
24. In like manner the angle of a Tetraedrum is comprehended of three plain
equilaters, that is of six third of one right angle: and therefore of two
right angles: Therefore 12 are comprehended of 24.

And

19 If four ordinate and equal triangles be joined together in solid angles,
they shall comprehend a tetraedrum.

This fabric or construction is very easy, as you may see in these examples:
For if thou shall join or fold together these triangles here thus expressed,
thou shall make a tetraedrum.

20. If a right line whose power is sesquialter unto the side of an equilater
triangle, be cut after a double reason, the double segment perpendicular to the
center of the triangle, knit together with the angles thereof shall comprehend
a tetraedrum. 13 p xiij.

For a solid to be comprehended of right lines understand plains comprehended
of right lines, as in other places following.

As here, Let first a e be the right line whose power is sesquialter unto a i
the side of the equilater triangle, as in the form was manifest at the 13 e
xij. And let it be by the 29 e v. be cut in a double reason in o: And let the
double segment a o, be perpendicular to the equilater triangle u y s, unto the
center r, by the 7 e xxj. And let l r be knit with the angles, by l u, l s, l
y. I say that the triangles u y s, u s l, u y l, are equilater and equal,
because all the sides are equal. First the three lower ones are equal by the
grant: And the three higher ones are equal by the 9 e xij. And every one of
the higher ones are equal to the under one. For if a Circle be supposed to
be circumscribed about the triangle, the side shall be of treble power to the
ray u r, by the 12 e x viij. But the higher one also is of treble power to the
same ray, as is manifest in the first figure of the ray o i, which is for the
ray of the second figure u r. For as a o, is to o i, so by the 9 e viij, is o
i, unto o e: And by the 25 e iiij, as the first rect line a o, is unto the
third o e: so is the quadrate a o, unto the quadrate o i. And by compounding a
o with o e; As a e is to o e^ so are the quadrates a o: and o i, that is, by 9
e xij, the quadrate a i, unto the quadrate o i, But a e is the triple of o e.
Therefore the quadrate a i, is the triple of the quadrate o i. Wherefore the
higher side equal to a i, is of treble power to the ray: And therefore also
all the sides are equal: And therefore again the triangles themselves are
equal.

The twenty third Book of Geometry, of a Prisma,
1 A Pyramidate is a plain solid comprehended of pyramides.

2. A pyramidate is a Prisma, or a mingled polyedrum.

3. A prisma is a pyramidate whose opposite plains are equal, alike, and
parallel, the rest parallelogramme. 13 dxj.

As here thou see. The base of a pyramid was but one: Of a Prisma, they are
two, and they opposite one against another, First equal; Then like: Next
parallel. The other are parallelogramme.

Therefore

4. The flattes of a prisma are two more than are the angles in the base.

And indeed as the augmentation of a Pyramid from a quaternary is infinite: so
is it of a Prisma from a quinary: As if it be from a triangular, quadrangular,
or quinquangular base; you shall have a Pentaedrum, Hexaedrum, Heptaedrum, and
so in infinite.

5. The plain of the base and height is the solidity of a right prisma.

6. A prisma is the triple of a pyramid of equal base and height. e 7 p. x i
j.

As in the example a prisma pentaedrum is cut into three equal pryramides. For
the first consisting of the plains a e i, a e o, a o i, e i o; is equal to
the second consisting of the plains a o i, a o u, a i u, a u y, by the 10 e
vij. Because it is equal to it both in common base and height. Therefore the
first and second are equal. And the same second is equal to it self, seeing
the base is i o u, and the top a. Then also it is equal to the third
consisting of the plains a i u, a i y, u i y, a u y. Therefore three are
equal.

If the base be triangular, the Prisma may be resolved into prisma's of
triangular bases, and the theoreme shall be concluded as before.

Therefore

7. The plain made of the base and the third part of the height is the
solidity of a pyramid of equal base and height.

The height of a pyramid shall be found, if you shall take the square of the
ray of the base out of the quadrate of the side: for the side of the remainder,
by the 9 e xij, shall be the altitude or height, as in the example following.

Here the content of the triangle by the 18 e xij, is found to be 62 44/125 for
the base of the pyramid. The altitude is 9 15/19: Because by the 6 e xviij, the
side is of treble power to the ray. But if from 144, the quadrate of 12 the
side, you take the subtriple i. 48, the remainder 96, by the 9 e x ij, shall be
the square of the height. And the side of the quadrate shall be 9 15/19. Now
the third part of 9 15/19 is 3 5/19. And the plain of 62 44/125 and 3 5/19,
shall be 203 1103/2375 for the solidity of the pyramid.

So in the example following, Let 36, the quadrate of 6 the ray, be taken out
of 292 9/1156 the quadrate of the side 17 3/34 the side 16 3/34 of 256 9/1156
the remainder shall be the height, whose third part is 5 37/102; the plain of
which by the base 72 shall be 387 11/24 for the solidity of the pyramid given.

If the pyramid be unperfit, first measure the whole, and then that part which
is wanting: Lastly from the whole subtract that which was wanting, and the
remain shall be the solidity of the unperfect pyramid given: As here, let a o,
the side of the whole be 16 5/12: e o, the side of the particular be 8 1/16.
Therefore the perpendicular of the whole o u, shall be 15 5/32: Whose third
part is 5 5/96: Of which, and the base 93 3/11 the plain shall be 471 134/1056
for the whole pyramid. But in the lesser pyramid, 9 the square of the ray 3,
taken out of 65 1/256 the quadrate of the side 8 1/16 the remain shall be 56
1/256; whose side is almost 7 for the height. The third part of which is 2.
The base likewise is almost 22. The plain of which two is 55, for the solidity
of the lesser pyramid: And 471 -- 55 is 416, for the imperfect pyramid.

After this manner you may measure an imperfect Prisma:

8. Homogeneall Prisma's of equal height are one to another as their bases
are one to another, 29, 30,31, 32 p xj.

The reason is, because they consist equally of like number of pyramides. Now
it is required that they be homogeneall or of like kinds; Because a Pentaedrum
with an Hexaedrum will not so agree.

This element is a consectary out of the 16 e iiij.

And

9. If they be reciprocal in base and height, they are equal.



This is a Consectary out the 18 e iiij.

And

10. If a Prisma be cut by a plain parallel to his opposite flattes, the
segments are as the bases are. 25 p. xj.

The segments are homogeneall because the prismas. Therefore seeing they are of
equal height (by the height I mean of plain dividing them) they shall be
as their bases are: And here the bases are to be taken opposite to the height.

11. A Prisma is either a Pentaedrum, or Compounded of pentaedra's.

Here the resolution shows the composition.

12 If of two pentaedra's, the one of a triangular base, the other of a
parallelogramme base, double unto the triangular, be of equal height, they
are equal 40. p xj.

The canse is manifest and brief: Because they be the halfes of the same
prisma: As here thou may perccive in a prisma cut into two halfes by the
diagoni's of the opposite sides.



Euclide does demonstrate it thus: Let the Pentaedra's a e i o u, and y s r l
m, be of equal height: the first of a triangular base e i o: The second of a
parallelogramme base s l, double unto the triangular. Now let both of them be
double and made up, so that first be a e i o u n^ The second y s r l v f. Now
again, by the grant, the base s l, is the double of the base e i o,: whose
double is the base e o, by the 12 e x. Therefore the bases s l, and e o, are
equal: And therefore seeing the prisma's, by the grant, here are of equal
height, as the bases by, the conclusion are equal, the prisma's are equal;
And therefore also their halfes a e i o u, and y s n l r, are equal.

The measuring of a pentaedrall prisma was even now generally taught: The
matter in special may be conceived in these two examples following.

The plain of 18. the perimeter of the triangular base, and 12, the height is
216. This added to the triangular base, 15 18/3^. or 15,, almost twice taken,
that is, 31, does make 247. for the sum of the whole surface. But the plain
of the same base 15, and the height 12. is 187, for the whole solidity.



So in the pentaedrum, the second prisma, which is called Cuneus, (a wedge) of
the sharpness, and which also more properly of cutting is called a prisma, the
whole surface is 150, and the solidity 90.

13 A prisma compounded of penta^dra's, is either an Hexaedrum or Polyedrum:
And the Hexaedrum is either a Parallelepipedum or a Trapezium.

14 A parallelepipedum is that whose opposite plains are parallelogrammes e
24. p xj.

Therefore a Parallelepipedum in solids, answers to a Parallelogramme in
plains. For here the opposite Hedrae or flattes are parallel: There the
opposite sides are parallel.

Therefore

15 It is cut into two halfes with a plain by the diagonies of the opposite
sides. 28 p xj. It answers to the 34. pj.

Let the Prisma be of six bases a i, y o, y e, u i, r i, a u. The diagonies
do cut into halfes, by the 10. ex. the opposite bases: And the other opposite
bases or the two prisma's cut, are equal by the 3 e. Wherefore two prisma's are
comprehended of bases, equal both in multitude and magnitude: therefore they
are equal.

And

16 If it be halfed by two plains halfing the opposite sides, the common
bisection and diagony do half one another 39. p xj.

Because here the diameters (such as is that bisection) are halfed between
themselves [or do half one another.] Let the parallelepipedum a e i o u y, be
cut in to y the halfs by two plains, from s r l m, u i v f, halfing the
opposite sides: Here the common section t s, and the diagony a o, do cut one
another.

17 If three lines be proportional, the parallelepipedum of mean shall be
equal to the equiangled p^rallelepipedum of all them. e 36. p x j.

It is a consectary out of the 8 e.

18 Eight rectangled parallelepiped's do fill a solid place.

19 The Figurate of a rectangled parallelepipedum is called a solid, made of
three numbers 17. d vij.

As if thou shall multiply 1,2,3. continually, thou shall make the solid 6.
Item if thou shall in like manner multiply 2,3,4. thou shall make the solid 24.
And the sides of that solid 6 solid shall be 1,2,3. Of 24, they shall be 2,3,4.

Therefore

20 If two solids be alike, they have their sides proportionalls, and two mean
proportionalls 21 d vij, 19. 21. p viij.

It is a consectary out of the 5 e xxij. But the mean proportionalls are made
of the sides of the like solids, to wit, of the second, third, and fourth: Item
of the third, fourth, and fifth, as here tho^ see.



Of Geometry the twenty fourth Book. Of a Cube.
1 A Rightangled parallelepipedum is either a Cube, or an Oblong.

2 A Cube is a right angled parallelepipedum of equal flattes, 25. d xj.

As here thou see in these two figures.



Therefore

3 The sides of a cube are 12. the plain angles 24. the solid 8.

Therefore

4 If six equal quadrates be joined with solid angles, they shall comprehend
a cube.

As here in these two examples.



Therefore

5 If from the angles of a quadrate, perpend^culars equal to the sides be tied
together aloft, they shall comprehend a Cube. e 15 p xj.

It is a consectary following upon the former consectary: For then shall six
equal quadrates be knit together:

6 The diagony of a Cube is of treble power unto the side.

For the Diagony of a quadrate is of double power to the side, by the 12 e,
xij. And the Diagony of a Cube is of as much power as the side the diagony of
the quadrate, by the same e. Therefore it is of treble power to the side.

7 If of four right lines continually proportionally the first be the half of
the fourth, the cube of the first shall be the half of the Cube of the second
e 33 p xj.

It is a consectary out of the 25 e, iiij. From hence Hippocrates first found
how to answer Apollo's Problem.

8 The solid plain of a cube is called a Cube, to wit, a solid of equal
sides. 19, d vij.

Therefore

9 It is made of a number multiplied into his own quadrate.

So is a Cube made by multiplying a number by it self, and the product again
by the first. Such are these nine first cubes made of the nine first
Arithmeticall figures.



This is the general invention of a Cube, both Geometrical and Arithmeticall.

10 If a right line be cut into two segments, the Cube of the whole shall be
equal to the Cubes of the segments, and a double solid thrice comprehended of
the quadrate of his own segment and the other segment.

As for example, the side 12, let it be cut into two segments 10 and 2. The
cube of 12. the whole, which is 1728, shall be equal to two cubes 1000, and 8
made of the segments 10. and 2. And a double solid; of which the first 600. is
thrice comprehended of 100. the quadrate of his segment 10. and of 2. the other
segment: The second 120. is thrice comprehended of 4, the quadrate of his own
segment, and of 10. the other segment. Now 1000 -- 600 -- 120. -- 8, is equal
to 1728: And therefore a right etc.

But the genesis of the whole cube will make all this whole matter more
apparent, to wit, how the extreme and mean solids are made. Let therefore a
cube be made of three equal sides, 12, 12, and 12: And first of all let the
second side be multiplied by the first, after this manner: And not adding the
several figures of the same degree, as was taught in multiplication, but
multiply again every one of them by the other side; and lastly, add the
figures of the same degrees severally, thus:

Therefore

11. The side of the first several cube is the other side of the second
solid: And the quadrate of the same side is the other side of the first
solid, whose other side is the side of the second cube; and the quadrate of
the same other side is the other side of the second solid.

In that equation therefore of four solids with one solid, thou shall consider
a peculiar making and composition: First that the last cube be made of the last
segment 2^ Then that the second solid of 4, the quadrate of his own segment,
and of 10, the other segment be thrice comprehended: Lastly that the first
solid of 100, the square of his own segment 10 and the other segment 2, be
also thrice comprehended: Lastly, that the Cube 1000, be made of the greater
segment 10. Out of this making etc.

And thus much of the Cube: Of other sorts of parallelepipedes, as of the
Oblong, the Rhombe, the Rhomboides, and of the Trapezium, and many flatted
pentaedra's there is no peculiar stereometry. The measuring of a Prisma has in
the former been generally declared, and is now only farther be made more
plain by special examples; as here:

The plain of the perimeter of the base 20, and the altitude 5 is 100. This
added to 25 and 25, both the bases that is to 50, makes 150, for the whole
surface. Now the plain of 25 the base, and the height 5 is 125, for the whole
solidity.

So in the Oblong, the plain of the base's perimeter 20, and the height 11,
is 220, which added to the bases 24 and 24, that is 48, makes 268, for the
whole surface. But the plain of the base 24, and the height 11, is 264, for
the solidity.

The same also Geodesie or manner of measuring is used in the measuring of
rectangled walls or gates and doors, which have either any window, or any
hollow or void space cut out of them, if those void places be taken out of
them; as here thou see in the next following example. The thickenesse is 3
foot; the breadth 12, the height 11. Therefore the whole solidity is 396. Now
the Gate way is of thickenesse 3 foot, of breadth 4: of height 6. And
therefore the whole solidity of the Gate is 72 foot. But 396 -- 72 are 3^4.
Therefore the solidity of the rest of the wall remaining is 324.

In the second example, the length is 10. The breadth 8, the height 7.
Therefore the whole body if it were found, were 560 foot. But there is an
hollow in it, whose length is 6, breadth 4, height 7. Therefore the cavity or
hollow place is 168. Now 560 -- 168 is 492, for the solidity of the rest of the
sound body.

Thus are such kind of walls whether of mudde, brick, or stone, of most large
houses to be measured. The same manner of Geodesy is also to be used in the
measuring of a Rhombe, Rhomboides, Trapezium or mensall, and any kind of
multangled body. The base is first to be measured, as in the former: Then out
of that and the height the solidity shall be manifested: As in the Rhombe the
base is 24, the height 4. Therefore the solidity is 96.

In the Rhomboides, the base is 64 3^/12^: The heigh 11. Therefore the solidity
is 1028 44/1^9.

The same is the geodesy of a trapezium, as in these examples: The surface of
the first is 198: The solidity 192.

The surface of the second is 158 3/49; The solidity is 91 29/4^.



The same shall be also the geodesy of a many flatted Prisma: As here thou
see in an Octoedrum of a sexangular base: The surface shall be 762 6/11: The
solidity 1492 4/11.

And from hence also may the capacity or content of vessels or measures, made
after any manner of plain solid be esteemed and judged of as here thou see.
For here the plain of the sexangular base is 41 1/7; (For the ray, by the 9 e
xviij, is the fide:) and the height 5, shall be 205 5/7. Therefore if a
cubicall foot do contain 4 quarters, as we commonly call them, then shall
the vessel contain 822 6/7 quartes, that is almost 823 quartes.

Of Geometry the twenty fifth Book; Of mingled ordinate Polyedra's.
1. A mingled ordinate polyedrum is a pyramidate, compounded of pyramides with
their tops meeting in the center, and their bases only outwardly appearing.

SEeing therefore a Mingled ordinate pyramidate is thus made or compounded of
pyramides the geodesy of it shall be had from the Geodesy of the pyramides
compounding it: And one Base multiplied by the number of all the bases shall
make the surface of the body. And one Pyramid by the number of all the
pyramides; shall make the solidity.

2 The height of the compounding pyramid is found by the ray of the circle
circumscribed about the base, and by the semidiagony of the polyedrum.

The base of the pyramid appears to the eye: The height lies hid within,
but it is discovered by a right angle triangle, whose base is the semidiagony
or half diagony, the shankes the ray of the circle, and the perpendicular of
the height. Therefore subtracting the quadrate of the ray, from the quadrate
of the half^ diagony the side of the remainder, by the 9 e x ij. shall be the
height. But the ray of the circle shall have a special invention, according
to the kinds of the base, first of a triangular, and then next of a
quinquangular.

3 A mingled ordinate polyedrum has either a triangular, or a quinquangular
base.

The division of a Polyhedron arises from the bases upon which it stands.

4 If a quadrate of a triangular base be divided into three parts, the side of
the third part shall be the ray of the circle circumscribed about the base.

As is manifest by the 12 e. xviij. And this is the invention or way to find
out the circular ray for an octoedrum, and an icosoedrum.

5 A mingled ordinate polyedrum of a triangular base, is either an Octoedrum,
or an Icosoedrum.

This division also arises from the bases of the figures.

6 An octoedrum is a mingled ordinate polyedrum, which is comprehended of eight
triangles. 27 d xj.



As here thou see, in this Monogrammum and solidum, that is lined and solid
octahedrum.

Therefore

7 The sides of an octoedrum are 12. the plain angles 24, and the solid 6.

And

8 Nine octoedra's do fill a solid place.

For four angles of a Tetraedrum are equal to three angles of the Octoedrum:
And therefore 12. are equal to nine. Therefore nine angles of an octaedrum do
countervaile eight solid right angles.

And

9 If eight triangles, equilaters and equal be joined together by their edges;
they shall comprehend an octaedrum.

This construction is easy, as it is manifest in the example following: Where
thou see as it were two equilater and equal triangles of a double pentaedrum
to cut one another.

10 If a right line on each side perpendicular to the center of a quadrate and
equal to the half diagony be tied together with the angles, it shall
comprehend an octaedrum, 14. d xiij.

For the perpendicular y u, and s u, with the semidiagoni's, u a, u o, u i, u
e, shall be made equal by the a e v ij, the eight sides y a, y e, y o, y i, s
e, s i, s a, s o; And also eight triangles.

Therefore

11 The Diagony of an octaedrum is of double power to the side.

As is manifest by the 9 e xij.

And

12 If the quadrate of the side of an octaedrum, be doubled, the side of the
double shall be the diagony.

As in the figure following, the side is 6. The quadrate 36. the double is 72.
whose side 8 8/17. is the diagony.

And from hence does arise the geodesy of the octaedrum. For the semidiagony is
4 4/17. whose quadrate is 17 271/28^. And the quadrate of 6, the side of the
equilater triangle, being of treble power to the ray, by the 6 e, xviiij. is
36. And the side of 12. the third part 3 3/7. is the ray of the circle.
Wherefore 8 ^/17. that is 5 21/289. is the quadrate of the perpendicular, whose
side 21/5 is the height of the same perpendicular: whose third part again
11/25. mulliplied by 15 18/31. the triangular base do make 11 66/1^^ for one
of the eight pyramides: Therefore the same 11 60/155 multiplied by eight, shall
make 91 ^^/155 for the whole octoedrum.

13 An Icosaedrum is an ordinate polyedrum comprehended of 20 triangles 29 d xj.

Therefore



14 The sides of an Icosaedrum are 30. the plain angles 60. the solid 12.

15 If twenty ordinate and equal triangles be joined with solid angles, they
shall comprehend an Icosaedrum.

This fabric is ready end easy, as is to be seen in this example following.

16 If ordinate figures, to wit, a double quinquangle, and one decangle be so
inscribed into the same circle, that the side of both the quinquangle do
subtend two sides of the decangle, six right lines perpendicular to the circle
and equal to his ray, five from the angles of one of the quinquangles, knit
together both between themselves, and with the angles of the other
quinquangle; the sixth from the center on each side continued with the side of
the decangle, and knit therewith the five perpendiculars, here with the angles
of the second quinquangle, they shall comprehend an icosaedrum. e 15 p xiij.

For there shall be made 20 triangles, both equilaters and equal. Let there be
therefore two ordinate quinquangles, the first a e i o u; The second y s r l m;
each of whose sides let them subtend two sides of a decangle; to wit, u t y m,
let it subtend y a, and a m. Then let there be five perpendidiculars from the
angles of the second quinquangle y j, s y, r v, l f, m t. And let them be knit
first one with another, by the lines n j, j v, v f, f t, t n. Secondarily, with
the angles of the first quinquangle, by the lines n e, e j, j i, i v, o f, f u,
u t, t a, a n. The sixth perpendicular from the center d, let it be b g, the
ray d c, continued at each end with the side of the decangle, c g, and d b,
tied together about with the perpendiculars, as by the lines n g, t g: Beneath
with the angles of the first quinquangle, as by the lines b e, b i, and in
other places in like manner, and let all the plains be made up. This say I, is
an Icosaedrum; And is comprehended of 20. triangles, both equilaters and
equal. First, the ten middle triangles, leaving out the perpendiculars, that
they are equilaters and equal, one shall demonstrate, as n a t. For m t, and y
u, because they are perpendiculars, they are also, by the 6 e x xj. parallells:
And by the grant, equal. Therefore by the 27 e, v, n t, is equal to y m, the
side of the quinquangle. Item n a, by the 6 e x i j. is of as great power, as
both the shankes n y, and y a, that is, by the construction, as the sides of
the sexangle and decangle: And, by the converse of the 15. e xviij. it is the
side of the quinquangle. The same shall fall out of o t. Wherefore n a t, is an
equilater triangle. The same shall fall out of the other nine middle triangles,
n a e, n e j, e j i, j i v, i v o, v o f, f o u, f u t, u t a, t a n.

In like manner also shall it be proved of the five upper triangles, by drawing
the right lines d y, and c n, which as before (because they knit together equal
parallells, to wit, d c, and y n) they shall be equal. But d y, is the side of
a sexangle: Therefore c n, shall be also the side of a sexangle: And c g, is
the side of a decangle: Therefore a n, whose power is equal to both theirs, by
the 9 e xij. shall by the converse of the 15 e xviij, be the side of a
quinquangle: And in like manner g t, shall be concluded to be the side of a
quinquangle. Wherefore n g t, is an equilater: And the four other shall
likewise be equilaters.

The other five triangles beneath shall after the like manner be concluded to
be equilaters. Therefore one shall be for all, to wit, i b e, by drawing the
rays d i, and d e. For i b, whose power, as before, is as much as the sides of
the sexangle, and decangle, shall be the side of the quinquangle: And in like
sort b e, being of equal power with d e, and d o, the sides of the sexangle
and decangle, shall be the side of the quinquangle. Wherefore the triangle e b
i, is an equilater: And the four other in like manner may be showed to be
equilaters. Therefore all the side of the twenty triangles, seeing they are
equal, they shall be equilater triangles: And by the 8 e, vij. equal.

17 The diagony of an icosaedru^ is irrational unto the side.

This is the fourth example of irrationality, or incommensurability. The first
was of the Diagony and side of a square or quadrate. The second was of the
segments of a line proportionally cut. The third of the Diameter of a circle
and the side of a quinquangle.

And

18 The power of the diagony of an icosaedrum is five times as much as the ray
of the circle.

For by the 13 e, xviij. the line continually made of the side of the sexangle
and decangle is cut proportionally, and the greater segment is the side of the
sexangle: As here. Let the perpendicular a e, be cut into two equal parts in
i. Then e o, that is the lesser segment continued with the half of the
greater, that is, with i e. it shall by the 6 e xiiij, be of power five times
so great as is the power of the same half. Therefore seeing that i o, the
half of the diagony is of power fivefold to the halfe^ the whole diagony shall
be of power fivefold to the whole cut.

And from hence also shall be the geodesy of the Icosaedrum. For the finding
out of the height of the pyramid, there is the semidiagony of the side of the
decangle and the half ray of the circle: But the side of the decangle is a
right line subtending the half periphery of the side of the quinquangle, or
else the greater segment of the ray proportionally cut. For so it may be taken
Geometrically, and reckoned for his measure. Therefore if the quadrate of the
side of the decangle, be taken out of the quadrate of the side of the
quinquangle, there shall by the 15 e xviij, remain the quadrate of the
sexangle, that is of the ray. The side of the decangle (because the side of the
quinquangle here is 6) shall be 3 3/35 to wit a right line subtending the half
periphery. Now the half ray shall thus be had. The quadrates of the
quinquangle and decangle are 36, and 9 639/1225 And this being subducted from
that, the remain 26.586/1225 by the 15 e xviij, shall be the quadrate or
square of the sexangle: And the side of it, 5, and almost 5/7 shall be the ray:
The half ray therefore shall be 2 6/7. To the side of the decangle 3 3/35 add
2 6/7; the whole shall be 5 33/35 for the semidiagony of the Icosaedrum. The ray
of the circle circumscribed about the triangle, is by the 12 e xv iij, the same
which was before 3 3/7 to wit of the quadrate 12. Therefore if the quadrate of
the circular ray, be taken out of the quadrate of the half diagony, there
shall remain the quadrate of the height and perpendicular: the quadrate of
the halfe-diagony is 35 389/1225: the quadrate of the circular ray is 12. This
taken out of that beneath 23 ^89/1225: whose side is almost 5, for the
perpendicular and height proposed: From whence now the Pyramid is esteemed.
The base of a triangular pyramid is 15 18/31. The Plain of this base and the
third part of the height is 25 30/31 for the solidity of one Pyramid. This
multiplied by 20 makes 519 11/31 for the sum or whole solidity of the
Icosaedrum. And this is the geodesy or manner of measuring of an Icosaedrum.

19. A mingled ordinate polyedrum of a quinquangular base is that which is
comprehended of 12 quinquangles, and it is called a Dodecaedrum.



Therefore

20. The sides of a Dodecaedrum are 30, the plain angles 60. the solid 20.

And

21. If 12 ordinate equal quinquangles be joined with solid angles, they shall
comprehend a Dodecaedrum.



As here thou see.

22. If the sides of a cube be with right lines cut into two equal parts, and
three bisegments of the bisecants in the abbuting plains, neither meeting one
the other, nor parallel one unto another, two of one, the third of that next
unto the remainder, be so proportionally cut that the lesser segments do bound
the bisecant: three lines without the cube perpendicular unto the said plains
from the points of the proportional sections, equal to the greater segment
knit together, two of the same bisecant, between themselves and with the next
angles of cube; the third with the same angles, they shall comprehend a
dodecaedrum. 17 p xiij.

Let there be two plains for a cube for all, that one quinquangle for twelve
may be described, and they abutting one upon another, a e i o, and e u y i,
having their sides halfed by the bisecantes, s r, l m, r n, j v: And the three
bisegments or portions of the bisegments l m, and r n, neither concurring or
meeting, nor parallel one to another; two of the said l m, to wit, f l, and f
m: The third next unto the remainder, that is l r. And let each bisegment be
cut proportionally in the points d, c, g; so that the lesser segments do bound
the bisecant, to wit, d l, c m, and g r. Lastly let there be three
perpendiculars from the points d b, c g, to the said d, c p, g z: And the two
first knit one to another, by b p: And again with the angles of the cube, by b
e, and p i: The third knit with the same angles, by z e, and z i: And let all
the plains be made up. I say first, that the five sides b p, p i, i z, z e and
e b. are equal; Because every one of them severally are the doubles of the
same greater segment. For in drawing the right lines d e and e g, i g, it shall
be plain of two of them And after the same manner of the rest. First
therefore o d, and b p, are equal by the 6 e xxj, and by the 27 e v. Therefore
b p, is the double of the greater segment. Then the whole f l, cut
proportionally, and the lesser segment d l, they are by the 7 e x iiij, of
treble power to the greater f d, that is, by the fabric d b. Therefore le
which is equal to l f, the line cut, and l d, are of treble power to the same d
b: But by the 9 e xij, d e is of as much power as l e, and l d too. Therefore d
e is of treble power to d b. Therefore both e d, and d b, are of quadruple
power to d b. But b e, by the 9 e xij, is of as much power as e d, and d b. And
therefore b e, is of quadruple value to e b: And by the 14 e x i j, it is the
double of the said e b. Therefore the two sides e b, and b p, are equal: And
by the same argument p i, i z, and z e, are equal. Therefore the quinquangle
is equilater.

I say also that it is a Plain quinquangle: For it may be said to be an
oblique quinquangle; and to be seated in two plains. Let therefore f h be
parallel to d b, and c p: and be equal unto them. And let h z, be drawn:
This h z shall be cut one line, by the 14 e vij. For as the whole tr, that is r
f, is unto the greater segment that is to f h: so f h, that is z g, is unto g
r. And two pair of shankes f h, g r, f c, g z, by the 6 e xxj, are alternely
or crosse-wise parallel. Therefore their bases are continual.

Hitherto it has been prooved that the quinquangle made is an equilater and
plain: It remains that it be prooved to be Equiangled. Let therefore the
right lines e p, and e c, be drawn: I say that the angles, p b e, and e z i,
are equal: Because they have by the construction, the bases of equal shankes
equal, being to wit in value the quadruple of l e. For the right line l f, cut
proportionally, and increased with the greater segment d f, that is f c, is cut
also proportionally, by the 4 e xiiij, and by the 7 e xiiij, the whole line
proportionally cut, and the lesser segment, that is c p, are of treble value to
the greater f l, that is of the said l e. Therefore e l, and l c, that is e c,
and c p, that is e p, is of quadruple power to e l: And therefore by the 14 e
xij, it is the double of it: And e i, it self in like manner, by the fabric
or construction, is the double of the same. Therefore the bases are equal. And
after the same manner, by drawing the right lines i d, and i b, the third angle
b p i, shall be concluded to be equal to the angle e z i. Therefore by the 13
e xiiij, five angles are equal.

23. The Diagony is irrational unto the side of the dodecahedrum.

This is the fifth example of irrationality and incommensurability. The first
was of the diagony and side of a quadrate or square. The second was of a line
proportionally cut and his segments: The third is of the diameter of a Circle
and the side of an inscribed quinquangle. The fourth was of the diagony and
side of an icosahedrum. The fifth now is of the diagony and side of a
dodecahedrum.

24 If the side of a cube be cut proportionally, the greater segment shall be
the side of a dodecahedrum.

For that has been told you even now. But from hence also does arise the
geodesyor manner of measuring of a dodecahedrum. For if the quadrate of the
line subtending the angle of a quinquangle be trebled, the half of the treble
shall be the side of the semidiagony of the dodecahedrum: Because by the 6 e
xxiiij, the diagony of the cube, that is of the dodecahedrum is of treble power
to the side of the cube. But if the quadrate of the side of the decangle be
taken out of the quadrate of the side of the quinquangle; The side of the
remainder shall be the ray of the circle circumscribed about a quinquangle.
Lastly if the quadrate of the ray, be taken of the quadrate of the
half-diagony; the side of the remainder shall be the height of perpendicular.
As if the side of the decangle be 7 3/5: The quadrate of that shall be 57
19/25: the treble of which is 173 7/25 whose side is about 13 107/131 for the
side of the Dodecahedrum, therefore 6 119/131 the half shall be the
semidiagony of the dodecahedrum. The ray of the Circle shall now thus be found.
If the quadrate of the side of the decangle be taken out of the quadrate of the
side of the sexangle; the side of the remainder, shall be the Ray of the
Circle, by the.15 and 9 e xviij. As here the side of the Quinquangle is 4. The
side of the Decangle 2 2/5: And the quadrates therefore are 2^ 7/9. and 5
19/25. This s^bducted from that leaves 16 4/225 whose side is 4 2/55 for the
Ray of the Circle.

The semidiagony and ray of the circle thus found, the altitude remains. Take
out therefore the quadrate of the ray of the circle, 16 4/225 out of the
quadrate of the semidiagony 47. 12458/17161. the side of the remainder 3^
2^14406/3861225 is for the altitude or height: whose is 5/3. The quinquangled
base is almost 38. Which multiplied by 5/3 does make 63 for the solidity of one
Pyramid; which multiplied by 12, does make 760. for the soliditie of the whole
dodetacedrum.

25 There are but five ordinate solid plains.

This appears plainly out of the nature of a solid angle, by the kinds of
plain figures. Of two plain angles a solid angle cannot be comprehended. Of
three angles of an ordinate triangle is the angle of a Tetrahedrum
comprehended: Of four, an Octahedrum: Of five, an Icosahedrum: Of six none
can be compr^hended: For six such like plain angles, are equal to 12 thirds
of one right angle, that is to four right angles. But plain angles making a
solid angle, are lesser than four right angles, by the 8 e xxij. Of seven
therefore, and of more it is, much less possible. Of three quadrate angles the
angle of a cube is comprehended: Of 4. such angles none may be comprehended for
the same cause. Of three angles of an ordinate quinquangle, is made the angle
of a Dodecahedrum. Of 4. none may possibly be made: For every such angle: For
every one of them severally do countervaile one right angle and 1/5 of the
same, Therefore they would be four, and three fifths. Of more therefore much
less may it be possible.

This demonstration does indeed very accurately and manifestly appear,
Although there may be an innumerable sort of ordinate plains, yet of the
kinds of angles five only ordinate bodies may be made; From whence the
Tetrahedrum, Octahedrum, and Icosahedrum are made upon a triangular base: the
Cube upon a quadrangular: And the Dodecahedrum, upon a quinquangular.

Of Geometry the twenty sixth Book; Of a Sphere.
1 AN imbossed solid is that which is comprehended of an imbossed surface.

2. And it is either a sphere or a Mingled form.

3. A sphere is a round imbossement.

It may also be defined to be that which is comprehended of a sphearicall
surface. A sphearicall body in Greek is called Sphaera, in Latin Globus, a
Globe.

Therefore

4. A Sphere is made by the conversion of a semicircle, the diameter standing
still. 14 d xj.



As here thou see:

5. The greatest circle of a sphere, is that which cutteth the sphere into
two equal parts.

Therefore

6. That circle which is nearest to the greatest, is greater than that which is
farther off.

And

7. Those which are equally distant from the greatest are equal.

As in the example above written.

8. The plain of the diameter and sixth part of the sphearicall is the
solidity of the sphere.

As before there was an analogy between a Circle and a Sphericall: so now is
there between a Cube and a sphere. A cubicall surface is comprehended of six
quadrate or square and equal bases: And a sphere in like manner is
comprehended of six equal sphearicall bases compassing the cubicall bases. A
cube is made by the multiplication of the sixth part of the base, by the side:
And a sphere likewise is made by multiplying the sixth part of the sphearicall
by the diameter, as it were by the side: so the plain of 616/6, and 1 4, the
diameter is 1437 for the solidity of the sphere.

Therefore

9. As 21 is unto 11, so is the cube of the diameter unto the sphere.

As here the Cube of 14 is 2744. For it was an easy matter for him that will
compare the cube 2744, with the sphere, to find that 2744 to be to 1437 in
the least bounds of the same reason, as 21 is unto 11.

Thus much therefore of the Geode^y of the sphere: The geodesy of the Setour
and section of the sphere shall follow in the next place.

And

10. The plain of the ray, and of the sixth part of the sphearicall is the
hemispheare.

But it is more accurate and preciser cause to take the half of the sphere.

11. Spheres have a trebled reason of their diameters.

So before it was told you; That circles were one to another, as the squares of
their diameters were one to another, because they were like plains: And the
diameters in circles were, as now they are in spheres, the homologall sides.
Therefore seeing that spheres are figures alike, and of treble dimension, they
have a trebled reason of their diameters.

12 The five ordinate bodies are inscribed into the same sphere, by the
conversion of a semicircle having for the diameter, in a tetrahedrum, a right
line of value sesquialter unto the side of the said tetrahedrum; in the other
four ordinate bodies, the diagony of the same ordinate.

The adscription of ordinate plainebodies is unto a sphere, as before the
Adscription plain surfaces was into a circle; of a triangle, I mean, and
ordinate triangulate, as Quadrangle, Quinquangle, Sexangle, Decangle, and
Quindecangle. But indeed the Geometer has both inscribed and circumscribed
those plain figures within a circle. But these five ordinate bodies, and over
and above the Polyhedrum the Stereometer has only inscribed within the
sphere. The Polyhedrum we have passed over, and we purpose only to touch the
other ordinate bodies.

13 Out of the reason of the axeltree of the sphearicall the sides of the
tetraedrum, cube, octahedrum and dodecahedrum are found out.

The axeltree in the three first bodies is rational unto the side, as was
manifested in the former. For it is of sesquialter value unto the side of the
tetrahed^um; of treble, to the side of the cube: Of double, to the side of the
Octahedrum. Therefore if the axis a e, be cut by a double reason in i: And the
perpendicular i o, be knit to a, and e, shall be the side of the tetrahedrum;
and o e, of the cube, as was manifest by the 10 e viij, and 25 iiij: And the
greater segment of the side of the cube proportionally cut, is by the 24 e, xxv.

If the same axis be cut into two halfes, as in u: And the perpendicular u y,
be erected: And y, and a, be knit together, the same y a, thus knitting them,
shall be the side of the Octahedrum, as is manifest in like manner, by the said
10 e, viij. and 25 e iiij.

The side of the Icosahedrum is had by this means.

14 If a right line equal to the axis of the sphearicall, and to it from the
end of the perpendicular be knit unto the center, a right line drawn from the
cutting of the periphery unto the said end shall be the side of the Icosahedrum.

As here let the Axis a e; be the diameter of the circle a u e^ and a i, equal
to the same axis, and perpendicular from the end, be knit unto the center, by
the right line i o: A right drawn from the section u, unto a, shall be the
side of the Icosahedrum. From u, let the perpendicular u y, be drawn: Here the
two triangles i a o, and u y o, are equiangles by the 13 e, vij. Therefore by
the 12 e, vij. as i a, is unto a o: so is u y, unto y o. But i a, is the double
of the said a o: Therefore u y, is the double of the same y o: Therefore by the
14 e, xij. it is of quadruple power unto it: And therefore also u y, and y o,
that is, by the.9 e xij, u o, that is again by the 28 e, iiij. a o. is of
quintuple power to y o. But y o, is lesser than a o, that is, than o e: Let
therefore o s, be cut off equal to it. Now as the half of a o, is of
quintuple value to the half of y o: so the double a e, is of quintuple power
to the double y s. Therefore, by the 18 e xxv. seeing that the diagony a e, is
of quintuple power to y s; the said y s, shall be the side of the sexangle
inscribed into a circle, circumscribing the quinquangle of the Icosahedrum. But
the perpendicular u y, is equal to y s; because each of them is the double of
y o. Wherefore u y, is the side of the sexangle. But a y, is the side of the
Decangle: For it is equal to s e: Because if from equal rays a o, and o e,
you take equal portions o y, and o s: There shall remain equal, y a, and s
e. And the Diagony of an Icosahedrum by the 16 e xxv, is compounded of the side
of the sexangle, continued at each end with the side of the decangle. Wherefore
a y, is the side of the decangle. Lastly, u a, whose power is as much as the
sides of the sexangle and decangle, by the 15. e, xviij. shall be the side of
an Icosahedrum.

15 Of the five ordinate bodies inscribed into the same sphere, the
tetrahedrum in respect of the greatness o^ his side is first, the Octahedrum,
the second; the Cube, the third; the Icosahedrum, the fourth; and the
Dodecahedrum, the fifth.

As it will plainly appear, if all of them be gathered into one, thus. For a
i, the side of the Tetrahedrum, subtendeth a greater periphery than a o, the
side of the Octahedrum; And a o, a greater than i e, the side of the Cube;
because it subtendeth but the half: And i e, greater than u e, the side of the
Icosahedrum: And u e, greater than y e, the side of Dodecahedrum.

The latter, Euclide does demonstrate with a greater circumstance. Therefore
out of the former figures and demonstrations, let here be repeated, The
sections of the axis first into a double reason in s: And the side of the
sexangle r l: And the side of the Decangle a r, inscribed into the same circle,
circumscribing the quinquangle of an icosahedrum: And the perpendiculars i s,
and u l.

Here the two triangles a i e, and i e s, are by the 8 e, viij. alike; And as s
e, is unto e i: So is i e, unto e a: And by 25 e, iiij, as s e, is to e a: so
is the quadrate of s e, to the quadrate of e i: And inversly or backward, as a
e, is to s e: so is the quadrate of i e, to the quadrate of s e. But a e, is
the triple of s e. Therefore the quadrate of i e, is the triple of s e. But the
quadrate of a s, by the grant, and 14 e xij, is the quadruple of the quadrate
of s e. Therefore also it is greater than the quadrate of i e: And the right
line a s, is greater than i e, and a l, therefore is much greater. But a l, is
by the grant compounded of the sides of the sexangle and decangle r l, and a r.
Therefore by the 1 c. 5 e, 18. it is cut proportionally: And the greater
segment is the side of the sexangle, to wit, r l: And the greater segment of i
e, proportionally also cut, is y e. Therefore the said r l, is greeter than y
e: And even now it was showed u l, was equal to r l. Therefore u l. is greater
than y e: But u e, the side of the Icosahedrum, by 22. e vj. is greater than u
l. Therefore the side of the Icosahedrum is much greater, then the side of the
dodecahedrum.

Of Geometry the twenty seventh Book; Of the Cone and Cylinder.
1 A mingled solid is that which is comprehended of a variable surface and of a
base.

FOr here the base is to be added to the variable surface.

2 If variable solids have their axes proportional to their bases, they are
alike. 24. d xj.

It is a Consectary out of the 19 e, iiij. For here the axes and diameters are,
as it were, the shankes of equal angles, to wit, of right angles in the base,
and perpendicular axis.

3 A mingled body is a Cone or a Cylinder.

The cause of this division of a varied or mingled body, is to be conceived
from the division of surfaces.

4 A Cone is that which is comprehended of a conicall and a base.

Here the base is a circle.

Therefore

5 It is made by the turning about of a rightangled triangle, the one shanke
standing still.

As it appears out of the definition of a variable body.

And

6 A Cone is rightangled, if the shanke standing still be equal to that turned
about: It is Obtusangeld, if it be less: and acutangled, if it be greater. e
18 d xj.

Here a threefold difference of the height of a Cone is professed, out of the
threefold difference of the angles, whereby the top of the halfed cone is
distinguished: Notwithstanding this consideration belongs rather to the
Optickes, than to Geometry. For a Cone a far off does seem like a triangle.
Therefore according to the difference of the height, it appears with a right
angled, or obtusangled or acutangled top: As here the least Cone is
obtusangled: the middle one rightangled: and the highest acutangled. But the
cause of this threefold difference in the angles from of the difference of the
shankes, is out of the consectaries of the threefold triangle of a right line
cutting the base into two equal parts, as appears at the end of the viij
Book.

And

7 A Cone is the first of all variable.

For a Cone is so the first in variable solids, as a triangle is in
rectilineall plains: As a Pyramid is in solid plains; For neither may it
indeed be divided into any other variable solids more simple.

And

8 Cones of equal height are as their bases are 11. p xij.

As here you see.



And

9 They which are reciprocal in base and height are equal, 15 p x ij.

These are consectaries drawn out of the 12 and 13 e, iiij. As here you see.



10 A Cylinder is that which is comprehended of a cyliudricall surface and the
opposite bases.

For here two circles, parallel one to another are the bases of a Cylinder.

Therefore

11 It is made by the turning about of a right angled parallelogramme, the one
side standing still. 21. dxj.

As is apparent out the same definition of a varium.

12. A plain made of the base and height is the solidity of a Cylinder.

The geodesy here is fetched from the prisma: As if the base of the cylinder be
38; Of it and the height 12, the solidity of the cylinder is 462.

This manner of measuring does answer, I say, to the manner of measuring of a
prisma, and in all respects to the geodesy of a right angled parallelogramme.

If the cylinder in the opposite bases be oblique, then if what thou cuttest
off from one base thou do add unto the other, thou shall have the measure
of the whole, as here thou see in these cylinders, a and b.



From hence the capacity or content of cylinder-like vessel or measure is
esteemed and judged of. For the hollow or empty place is to be measured as if
it were a solid body.

As here the diameter of the inner Circle is 6 foot: The periphery is 18 6/7:
Therefore the plot or content of the circle is 28 2/7 Of which, and the height
10, the plain is 282 6/7 for the capacity of the vessel. Thus therefore shall
thou judge, as before, how much liquour or any thing esle contained, a cubicall
foot may hold.

13. A Cylinder is the triple of a cone equal to it in base and height. 10 p
xij.

The demonstration of this proposition has much troubled the interpreters. The
reason of a Cylinder unto a Cone, may more easily be assumed from the reason of
a Prisme unto a Pyramid: For a Cylinder does as much resemble a Prisme, as the
Cone does a Pyramid: Yea and within the same sides may a Prisme and a Cylinder,
a Pyramid and a Cone be contained: And if a Prisme and a Pyramid have a very
multangled base, the Prisme and Clinder, as also the Pyramid and Cone, do seem
to be the same figure. Lastly within the same sides, as the Cones and
Cylinders, so the Prisma and Pyramides, from their axeletrees and diameters may
have the similitude of their bases. And with as great reason may the Geometer
demand to have it granted him, That the Cylinder is the treble of a Cone^ As it
was demanded and granted him, That Cylinders and Cones are alike, whose
axletees are proportional to the diameters of their bases.

Therefore

14. A plain made of the base and third part of the height, is the solidity of
the cone of equal base and height,

The height is thus had. If the square of the ray of the base, be taken out of
the square of the side, the side of the remainder shall be the height, as is
manifest by the 9 e xij. Here therefore the square of the ray 5, is 25. The
square of 13, the side is 169. And 169 -- 25, are 144; whose side is 12 for the
height: The third part of which is 4. Now the circular base is 78 4/7: And the
plain of these is 314 2/7 for the solidity of the Cone^

But the analogy of a conicall unto a Cylinder like surface does not answer,
that the Conicall should be the subtriple of the Cylindricall, as the Cone is
the subtriple of the Cylinder.

Of two cones of one common base is made Archimede's Rhombus, as here, whose
geodaesy shall be cut of two cones.

And

15. Cylinder of equal height are as their bases are. 11 p xij.

Sackes in which they carry corn, are for the most part of a cylinderlike
form. If an husbandman therefore shall lend unto his neighbor a sack full of
corn, and the base of the sack be 4 foot over. And the neighbor afterward
for that one sack, shall pay him 4 sack fulls, every sack being as long as
that was, yet but one foot over in the diameter, he may be thought
peradventure to have repayed that which he borrowed in equal measure, to wit
in height and base. But it shall be indeed far otherwise: For there is a
great difference between the quadrate of the four several diameters, 1. 1.
1. 1. that is 4: and 16, the quadrate of 4, the diameter of that sack by which
it was lent. For Circles are one unto another as the quadrates of their
diameters are one to another, by the 2 e xv. Therefore he paid him but one
fourth part of that which he borrowed of him.

And

16 Cylinders reciprocal in base and height are eequall. 15 p xij.



Both these affections are in common attributed to the equally manifold of
first figures.

And

17. If a Cylinder be cut with a plain surface parallel to his opposite
bases, the segments are, as their axes are 13 p xij.

As here thou see. For the axes are the altitudes or heights. It is likewise a
consectary following upon that general theoreme of first figure, but somewhat
varyed from it. It does answer unto the 10 e 23.

The unequal sections of a sphere we have reserved for this place: Because
they are ^omprehended of a surface both sphearicall and conicall, as is the
sectour. As also of a plain and sphearicall, as is the section: And in both
like as in a Circle, there is but a greater and lesser segment. And the
sectour, as before, is considered in the center.

18. The sectour of a sphere is a segment of a sphere, which without is
comprehended of a sphearicall^ within of a conicall bounded in the center, the
greater of a concave, the lesser of a unequal.

Archimides, makes mention of such kind of Sectours, in his 1 book of the
Sphere. From hence also is the geodesy following drawn. And here also is
there a certain analogy with a circular sectour.

19. A plain made of the diameter, and sixth part of the greater, or lesser
sphearicall, is the greater or lesser sector.

As here of the Diameter 14, and of 73 and 4 (which is the one sixth part of
the greater sphearicall) the plain is 1026 for the solidity of the greater
sectour, so of the same diameter 14, and 29 which is the part of 176, the
lesser sphaericall, the plain is 410 for the solidity of the lesser sectour.

And from hence lastly does arise the solidity of the section, by addition and
subduction.

20. If the greater sectour be increased with the internal cone, the whole
shall be the greater section: If the lesser be diminished by it, the remain
shall be the lesser section.

As here the inner cone measured is 126 4/63. The greater sectour, by the
former was 1026. And 126 -- 126 4/63 do make 1152 46/63.

Again the lesser sectour, by the next precedent, was 410: And here the inner
cone is 126 4/63 And therefore 410 2/^ -- 126 4/63 that is 284 38/63 is the
lesser section.

FINIS.



