Of ghostes and spirits walking by night, and of strange noyses, crackes, and
sundry forewarnynges, which commonly happen before the death of men, great
slaughters, and alterations of kingdoms. One Book, Written by Jews Lauaterus
of Tigurine. And translated into English by R. H.

Printed at London by Henry Benneyman for Richard VVatkyns. 1572.

To the Reader.
Being desirous (gentle Reader) to exercise my self with some translation, at
vacant times, and seeing, that since the Gospel has benne preached, this one
question, touching the appearyng of spirits and souls departed, has not ben
much handled amongst us, and therefore many, otherwise well affected in
religion, utterly ignorant herein, I thought it not amiss to take in hand
some good and learned treatise concerning this matter. VVherin as many have
both learnedly, paynfully, and religiously traueyled: so amongst others, none
in my judgment has more handsomely and eloquently, with more judgment and
better method discoursed the same, then Jews Lauaterus, minister of Tigurine.
Others have handled it in deed well, but yet nihil ad nostrum hunc, being either
to short, or to long, or to dark, or to doubtful, or otherwise so confused,
that they leave the reader more in suspe^ce in the end, then they found him in
the beginning. As for master Lauaterus his discretion herein, I will no
otherwise commend it, then to desire the reader to view, and judge him self.
For thus much at the first sight he shall see: A clear method, with a familier
and easy style, the matter thoroughly handled pro and con, on both sides, so
that nothing seems to be wantyng, nor any thing redoundyng. And if it be true
that Horace says, omne ^ulit punctum, qui miscuit vtile dulci, that is, He
wynneth the price, that joins pleasure with profit: I think this author may
also in this respect be pronounced victor, and adjudged to the best game. For
he so entreats this serious and terrible matter of spitites, that he now and
then insertyng some strange story of Monks, Priests, Friars, and such like
counterfeyts, does both very lively display their falsehood, and also not a
little recreate his reader: and yet in the end he so aptly concludes to the
purpose, that his hystories seem not idle tales, or impertinent vagaries, but
very truethes, naturally falling under the compass of his matter. And how
profitable this his work is, those may best judge, which are most ignorant in
this question, some thinking every small motion and noise to be spirits, and
some so fondely persuaded that there are no spirits, who being better
enfourmed herein by this author, I suppose will confess his work to have done
them some profit: if knowledge be profitable, and ignorance discommodious. And
again, those which being hitherto borne in hand that men's souls return
again on earth, crauyng help of the living, and have spent much of their
substance on idle Monks and Friars, to relieve them, will confess the like.
For when they shall see they have been falsely taught, and that they were not the
souls of men which appeared, but either falsehood of Monks, or illusions of
deuyls, frantic imaginations, or some other frivolous and vain persuasions,
they will think it profitable to have known the truth, as well to avoid error
hereafter, as to save their money from such greedy caterpillars. Some also
which be otherwise well trained up in religion, and yet not knowing what to
think of these matters, will not judge their labor evil employed, nor the
work unprofitable, whereby they may be brought out of doubt, and know
certainly what to believe. There be many also, even now a days, which are
haunted and troubled with spirits, and know not how to use them selves, who
when they shall learn how a Christian man ought to govern him self, being
vexed with evil spirits, will think it a very profitable point of doctrine,
that shall teach them to direct them selves. Profitable therefore it is, and
shall be, no doubt, unto many, and disprofitable unto none, except perchance
unto popish Monks and Priests, who are like hereby to lose a great part of
their gaynes, which sometimes they gathered together in great abundance, by
their deceiptfull doctrine of the appearyng of dead men's souls. But this their
wicked and deuyllishe doctrine, together with all the patches and appendices
thereto belongyng, he so notably teareth and cutteth in pieces, that I am well
assured they shall never be hable to cobble and cloute them up again. And this
does he with such a moderation of brevity and tediousnes, that I may rightly
say: He has said well, and not to much, and written truly, and not to little.

Now as touching my translation, although I have not made him speak with like
grace in English, as he does in Latin: yet have I nor changed his meaning,
nor altered his matter, endeavoring my self rather to make thee understand
what thou read, then to smoothe and pollishe it with fine and picked words,
which I grant others might have done more exquisitely, and perchance I my
self also somewhat better, if I would have made thereof a study and labor, and
not a recreatio^ and exercise. But howsoever I have done herein, verily good
reader, I trust thou wylt take it in good part, which is all that I esteem: if
any man shall mislike thereof, let him amend it. I trust it be sufficient to
testify my good will to do thee good, and to let thee understand the authors
meaning.

Fare well.
An advertisement to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, before thou enter any further, I have thought good to advertise
thee of certain faults escaped in the Printing, which are set forth in
the Page before going, desiring thee to bear with them, and to pardon the
Printer. For thou know: Quandoque bonus dormitat Homerus. Although some of
our Printers be not Homers, neither seen in Greek nor Latin, nor sometime
exactly in English, yet can they nod and take a nap, as well as any Homer.
Howebeit in deed they are herein pardonable, because the Copy was somewhat
obscurely written, as being the first original. Fare well.

Faults escaped in the Print. Note that the first number signifies the Page,
^he second the Line.
Page 2. Lin. 24. for (...) read (...).6.23. for (...) read (...).15.14. for
austerne, austere.32.25. for he said, they said.37.33. for Atirebatens^^,
Atrebatensis.49.6. for bitter, read bittour.60.27. for wandering read
wavering.61.^. for Campana, Campania. eadem.23. for common, read
Roman.67.15. for talk, read task.68.6. for Alexandria, Alexandro. and
mergine Alexander ab Alexandro.70.35. for not that, read, not.84.32. for
^aught by the wall Basil, read, fast by the walls of Basil. eadem. for general
the, read the general.88*23. for Auguries, Angaries* eadem. vlt. for strange
read slaunch.93.8. for companions, companies.95.9. for Tiberius, by Tiberius
99.7. for mortal; read immortal. eadem.29. for horse, read hearse. eadem.33.
for horse, hearse.101.3. for last, read least.102.27. for other in, read
other name in.103.7. for made full, read made not full* 128.30. for certify,
read terrify.130.31. for beat, read chyde.132.1. for ended, read in
deed.136.16. for this is, that is, read that is, this is.143.33. for and
Delphis, read ^i, Delphis.147.24. for was in vain, read was not in
vain.1^2.15. for have lent, read lent.153.7. for late, read later.185*14.
for proverb says, read, proverb says, burnt child dreads fire.

To the right excellent and most wise and virtuous lord John Steigerus Co^sul
of the noble common wealth of Berna, his good lord and patron, Lew^s Lauaterus
of Tigurin wishes health.
MAny and diverse things are resoned upon, both of the learned and unlearned,
as well of other matters, as also of Spirits, which are seen and heard, and
make men afraid in the night season, and in the day time, by sea and by
land, in the fields, woods, and houses: And likewise concerning such
strange things which for the most part happen before the death of certain
men, especially great Princes, and before notable innouations of kingdoms and
empires. Many which never saw or heard any of these things, suppose all that
is reported of them, to be mere trifles and old wives tales: for so much as
simple men, and such as are fearful and superstitions, persuade themselves
they have seen this or that, when in deed the matter is far otherwise.
Again, there are some which as soon as they hear of any thing, especially if
it happen in the night, they by and by think some spirit does walk, and are
maruellously troubled in mind, because they can not discern natural things
from spirits. And some (chiefly those which hunt after gaynes, by the souls
of dead men) affirm that the most part of such things which are hard or
seen, are the souls of dead men, which crave help of them that are living,
to be delivered out of the torments of most cruel pain in Purgatory. Many
not only of the common sort, but also men of excellent knowledge, do
maruayle whether there be any spirits or no, and what manner of things they
are. Yea and some of my familiar friends have many times requested me, to show
them my opinion concerning these matters. Wherefore me seems it shall be
worth my labor, if I declare briefly and plainly out of the word of God, what
we ought to judge concerning these things. For the ministers of Gods Church
can take nothing more profitable in hand, than to instruct the people of God
purely and plainly, in such necessary matters as come in question out of the
word of God, which is a lantern (as the psalmist says) unto our feet, and a
light unto our paths: and to deliver them from all error and superstition,
and bring them out of all wavering and dout. And verily their study and
diligence is to be highly commended, who for these few years ago, have set
forth certain books drawn out of the scriptures written in the Germayne
tongue against sundry errors: and theirs likewise who in these our days by
writing of books do teach, instruct, and confirm the rude and unlearned
people. For amongst many other excellent benefits, which God our heavenly
Father has bestowed upon mankind, this also is a great and most liberal
gift, that in this latter, and as it were old age of the world, he has
brought to light by the art of imprinting, as well many other good authors, as
also the holy scriptures of the ol^e and new testament, written in diverse
languages: whereby he does not only teach us amply and fully what to believe,
and what to do, but also mightyly subuerteth and quite overthrows diverse and
sundry errors, which by little and little have crept into the Church. Truly
all such are very ungrateful toward God, which do not willingly acknowleage
this so notabel a benefit.

As touching this my treatise concerning Spirits, The division or parts of
this book*
and strange wonders, I have divided it into three parts for the more clear
understanding thereof. In the first part I show, that there are visions and
spirits, and that they appear unto men sometimes, and that many and marvelous
things happen besides the ordinary course of nature. In the second I discuss
what manner of things they are, that is, not the souls of dead me^, as some me^
have thought, but either good or evil Angels, or else some secret and hid
operations of God. In the third I declare why God does sometime suffer Spirits
to appear, and diverse forewarnings to happen: and also how men ought to
behave them selves when they happen to meet with such things. In these points
or parts, the chiefest thing whereon men use to reason touching this matter,
are contained. Now I mean to handle this matter, being very obscure and
intricate, with many questions, (I trust) so plainly, and clearly out of the
holy scriptures, whereon we may surely stay our selves, out of the ancient
fathers, allowed historiographers, and other good writers, that those which are
studious and lovers of gods truth, may well understand what may be denied and
thought of those apparitions, and other strange and marvelous matters. And I
also trust yt even our adversaries also, (in case they will lay their
affections aside, but a little while) will say that I have truly alleged all
their arguments, and confuted them without any railing or bitterness. For my
purposed end is according to the doctrine of saint Paul, to edify and not
to destroy.

As touching diuinatio^s, blessings, iugglings, co^iurings, and diverse kinds of
sorcerie, and generally of all other diuelishe practices, certain learned men
of our time have written books, as Gasper Pe^cerus, Ioannes Viera, Ludouicus
Mellichius, and perchance some others also, whose works I have not yet seen.
It is not long ago since Ioannes Riuius, a man learned and eloquent, published
a book in the latin tongue, entreating of spirits and superstition. In the
which book albeit very briefly, yet does he as he is wont in all things, very
finely and eloquently entreat of this matter, and of other foolish
superstitions. And albeit that I do write more largely of this, yet was it not
my mind to gather together all those things which I could have spoken and
alleged touching the same matter: but only such as seem the chiefest and
most especial points, partly because I would not be tedious to the reader, and
partly also least my books should grow unto an over great quantity. I have
great hope that Ioachimus Camerarius, that excellent man, who reads the
ancient writers both greeks and latins, with exquisite judgment, and has
great experience in all things, will shortly write learnedly and at large of
this matter and also of others like unto it. For so much he seems to promise
in his preface to Plutarches book, De defectu oraculorum, and figura, and
cons^crata Delphis (wherein he handles the nature and operations of devils) and
also in other of his writings. I for my part had once written this my treatise
in the vulgar tongue, and now because I trust it shall be also profitable to other
men, I have translated it into latin, adding certain things thereto.

The dedica^^on.
This my book which I have with great labor and study gathered out of many
men's writings I present and offer unto you (most noble consul) according to the
ancient fashion and custom: not for that I suppose you have any need of my
teaching, touching these things which are herein handled. (For I am not
ignorant, under what teachers you have attained unto true learning, and how
you have and do continually read over sundry good authors with perfect
knowledge in many tongs.) But partly that I might purchase credit and
authority unto this my book with those men, unto whom your goodness,
godliness and constancy (whche you have always hitherto evermore showed, and
yet do show, in setting forth true religion, and mainteyning good laws) is
thoroughly known: and partly that I might show my self in some respect
tha^kfull unto you. For your honor has bestowed many benefits on me, whom you
only know by sight, and upon other ministers of ye Church, whereby ye have so
bound me unto you, yt I shall never be able to make any recompense.

Wherefore I most earnestly beseech you, not to refuse this sign and token of
my good will, be it never so simple: but rather to voutchsafe, when ye have
leisure from the labor and toil of the commonwealth, to read over this my
book: for I have good hope it will not seem unpleasant unto you and others
in the reading, as well for the plain order I use therein, as also for the
sundry and manyfold histories in it recited.

Almighty God, who has so blessed you with his heavenly gifts, that for them,
(albeit very young) you have a^pired unto the highest degree in your noble city
and dominion of Berna, voutchesafe to preserve you in health, and increase and
multiply his good gifts in you. My Lords and brethren the ministers of Tigurine
and also your old companion master George Grebelius that excellent man in
lerning, virtue, and nobility, heartily salute your Lordship.

From Tigurine in the month of January the year of Christ's Nativity. 1570.
A TABLE OF the Chapters of the three principal parts, touching Spirits
walking by night.
Of the first part.
COncerning certain words which are often used in this Treatise of Spirits,
and diverse other diuinations of things to come. Chapter. 1. Folio. 1.
Melancholic persons and mad men, imagining things which in very deed are
not. Chapter. 2. Folio. 9. Fearful men, imagine that they see and hear
strange things. Chapter. 3. Fol. 14. Men which are dull of seeing and hearing,
imagine many things which in very deed are not so. Chapter. 4. Fol. 16. Many
are so feared by other men, that they suppose they have heard or seen
Spirits. Chapter. 5. Fol. 21. Priests and Monks feigned themselves to be
Spirits: also how Mundus under this color defiled Paulina, and Tyrannus
abused many noble and honest matrons. Cha. 6. Fo. 23. Timotheus Aelurus
counterfeating himself to be an Angel, obtained a Bishoprike: four Monks of
the order of prechers, made many vayn apparitions at Berna. Cha. 7. Fol. 28. Of
a counterfaite and deceyuing spirit at Orleaunce in France. Chapter. 8. Fol.
37. Of a cert^ine parish priest at Clauenna, which feigned him self to be our
Lady, and of an other that counterfaited himself to be a Soul, as also of a
certain disguised Jesuit Friar. Chapter. 9. Fol* 41. That it is no marvel if
vain sights have been in old time, neither yet that it is to be marvelled at,
if there be any at this day. Chapter. 10. Fol. 45. That many natural things
are taken to be ghostes. Chapter. 11. Fol 49. A proof out of the Gentiles
histories, that ghostes do oftentimes appear. Chapter. 12. Fol. 53. A proof
out of the histories of the ancient Church, and of the writings of holy
Fathers, that there are walking Spirits. Chapter. 13. Fol. 62. That in the
Books, set forth by Monks, are many ridiculous and vain apparitions.
Chapter. 14. Fol. 65 A proof by other sufficient writers, that Spirits do
sometime appear. Chapter. 15. Fol. 68. Daily experience teaches us, that
Spirits do appear to men. Chapter. 16. Fol. 7^. That there happen strange
wonders and prognostications, and that sudden noises and cracks and such
like, are hard before the death of men, before battle, and before some
notable alt^rations and chaunges. Chapter* 17. Fol. 77. It is proved by
testimonies of holy scripture, that Spirits are sometime seen and heard, and
that other strange matters do^ often chance. Chapter. 18. Fol. 85 To whom,
when, where and after what sort, Spirits do appear, and what they do work.
Chapter. 19. Fol. 88.
The Chapters of the second part.
The opinion or belief of the Gentiles, Jews, and Turks, concerning the
estate of souls separated from their bodies. Chapter. 1. Fol. 92. The Papists
doctrine touching the souls of dead men, and the appearing of them. Chapter.
2. Fol. 102. What has followed this doctrine of the Papists, concerning the
appering of men's souls. Chapter. 3. Fol. 110. Testimonies out of the word of
God, that neither the souls of the faithful, nor of infidels, do walk upon
the earth after they are once parted from their bodies. Chapter. 4. Fol. 114.
Testimonies of the ancient Fathers, that dead men's souls parted from their
bodies, do not wander here upon earth. Chapter. 5. 116 A confutation of
those men's arguments or reasons which affirm, that dead men's souls do
appear. And first, that is answered which certain do allege, to wit, that
God is omnipotent, and therefore that he can work contrary to the ordinary
course of nature. Chapter. 6. Fol. 123. That the true Samuel did not appear
to the witch in Endor. Chapter. 7. Fol. 127. A confutation of their arguments,
which would have Samuel himself to appear. Chapter. 8. Fol. 133. Whether the
Devil have power to appear under the shape of a faithful man? Chapter. 9.
Fol. 140. Moses and Elias appeared in the Mount unto Christ our Lord: many
have been raised from the dead both in body and soul, and therefore souls after
they are departed, may return on earth again. Chapter. 10. Fol. 145. Whether
the holy Apostles thought they saw a man's soul, when Christ sodeynlye
appeared unto them after his Resurrection. Chapter. 11. Fol. 148. Concerning
the holy Fathers, Councels, Bishops, and common people, which say that souls
do visibly appear. Cha. 12. Fo. 151. Whether souls do return again out of
Purgatory, and the place which they call Limbus puerorum. Cha. 13. Fol. 155.
What those things are which men see and hear: and first that good angels
(...) sometimes appear. Chap. 14. Fol. 159. That sometimes, yea and for the
most part, evil Angels do^ appear. Chapter. 15. Fol. 163. Of wondrous
monsters, and such like. Chap. 16. Fol. 164. That it is no hard thing for the
devil to appear in diverse shapes, and to bring to pass strange things.
Chap. 17. Fo. 167. Devils do sometimes bid men do those things which are
good, and avoid things that are evil: sometimes they tell truth, and for
what cause. Chap. 18. Fol. 171.
The Chapters of the third part.
God by the appearing of Spirits does exercise the faithful, and punish the
unbelievers. Chap. 1. Fol. 175. What the cause is that in these our days, so
few spirits are seen or heard. Chapter. 2. Fol. 183. Why God does suffer
strange noyses, or extraordinary rumblings to be heard before some notable
alterations or otherwise. Chapter. 3. Fol. 186. After what sort they should
behave themselves, which see good or evil spirits, or meet with other
strange adventures: and first how Jews and Gentiles behaved themselves in
the like cases. Chapter. 4. Fol. 187. How Christian men ought to behave
themselves when they se spirits, and first that they ought to have a good
courage, and to be steadfast in faith. Chap. 5. Fol. 190. It behooves them
which are vexed with spirits, to pray especially, and to give themselves to
fasting, sobriety, watching, and upright and godly living. Chap. 6. Fol. 193.
That spirits which use to appear, ought to be justly suspected: and that we
may not talk with the^, nor enquire any thing of them. Chapter. 7. Fol. 199.
Testimonies out of the holy Scripture, and one example whereby it is proved,
that such kind of apparitions are not to be credited, and that we ought to
be very circumspect in them. Chapter. 8. Fol. 201. After what sort the
faithful in the primative Church, used themselves, when they met with
spirits. Cha. 9. Fol. 204. That sundry kinds of superstition have crepte in,
whereby men have attempted to drive away spirits. Cha. 10. Fol. 206. That
spirits are not to be driven away by cursing and banning. Chapter. 11. Fol.
214. After what sort we ought to behave our selves, when we hear strange
crackes, or when other forewarnings happen. Chapter. 12. Fol. 216.
FINIS.
The first part of this Book, concerning Spirits walking by night.
Wherein is declared, that Spirits and sightes do appear, and that sundry
strange and monstrous things do happen.
CHAP. I. Concerning certain words which are often used in this Treatise
of Spirits, and diverse other diuinations of things to come.
TO the intent, that those men which occupy themselves in reading of this my
Book, and especially in perusing of other ancient writers, may the better
understand every thing, I will at the first entrance briefly expound those
things which shall seem to concern the propriety of words and terms used
in this my treatise of Spirits.

Spectrum amongst the Latins does signify a shape or form of some thing
presenting it self unto our sight. Spectrum.
Scaliger affirms that Spectrum is a thing which offers it self to be
seen, either truly, or by vain imagination. The divines take it to be a
substance without a body, which being heard or seen, makes men afraid.

Visum, signifies an imagination or a certain show, Visum.
which men being in sleep, yea and waking also, seem in their judgment to
behold: as we read of Brutus, who saw his own angel. Cicero in his first
book Acadaem. quest. writes, that Visum, amongst the Grecians is called
(...), a fantasy, or vain imagination.

Visio.
Also the Latins call those things Visiones, which the Grecians name (...).

Terriculamenta, are vayn visions or sightes, which make men afraid.
Terriculamenta.
The Latins also call it Terriculum, because it breeds fear.

Phantasma. Matthew. 24. Mark. 6.
That which S. Math. 24. and Mark. 6. call (...), Erasmus does translate it
Spectrum* but the old interpreter uses the Greek word.

Phasma.
(...) in like manner does signify an else, a sight or vain apparition.
Suidas makes a difference between Phantasma and Phantasia, saying, that
Phantasma is an imagination, an apperance or sight of a thing which is not, as
are those sightes which men in their sleep do think they see: but that
Phantasia, is the seeing of that only which is in very deed.

(...) is taken in Luke. 24. chap. for a spirit or vain imagination. Pneuma.
Luke 24.
Howbeit most commonly some other word is joined unto it, if it be put for an
evil spirit: as (...). The Gentiles (as S. Augustine and other fathers do
testify) supposed that the souls of men became Daemones, that is, good or
evil angels: which if they had done well, then were they called Lares, that is
private gods: but if they have done evil, then were they named Lemures, or
Laru^, bugs and Elues. But if it were douted whether they had lived well or
ill, then were they called Manes. Apuleius and other old writers affirm, that
Genij and Lares were all one.

Lares.
It was supposed (as Festus witnesses) that Lares, were the souls of men, or
else in^ernal gods. Lares were called Praestites, Praestites.
because they made all things safe with their eyes: that is, they saved and
preserved all things.

And authors affirm, they were called Hostilij, Hostilij.
for that they were supposed to drive away enemies. Neither were they thought
to bear rule only in private houses, and in cross meeting ways, but also to
defend Cities. They were likewise worshipped privately in houses, and openly in
the high ways. As touching those that were called Lar^s you may read more in
Anthonius Constantius, of Fauentia his commentaries, and in Ovid. lib. 5.
Fastorum.

Genius (say the Grammarians) is the natural god of every place, of every
thing, Genius.
or of every man when we are borne, as it is written, we have two Geni^, whereof
the one encourages us to do well, the other ^o do evil. Genius (says
Censorinus) is a god in whose governance every man does live, so soon as he is
borne: either because he takes care for our begetting, or that he is inge^dred
with us, or else that he takes charge and defense of us when we are begotten.
Sure it is, he is called Genius, a gignendo, that is, of begetting.

Penates likewise are domestical gods. Macrobius affirms, that they are gods
by whom we only breathe, Penates.
by whom we enjoy this body, and by who^ we possess the reason of our minds.
Nonius says, Lemures are spirits walking by night, and terrors rising of
pictures of men and of beasts. Other say, that Lemures are evil and hurtful
shapes which appear in the night, yea and that they be the souls of those that
make men black and blew, called after that name.

Some men call the ghosts of al dead things by the name of Lemures. Thus says
Apuleius, Of those Lemures* Vmbr^^.
he that has care of his posterity, and inhabiteth the house with a
peaceable and quiet kind of rule, was called Lar familiaris, god of the house.
And because amongst the people of old time, as they counted Lares good, so
they supposed Lemures to be naught, therefore to drive them away, they did
sacrifice unto them.

Lemures.
Some other men affirm, that Lemures are souls which tarry about the bodies.
Porphyrius calle^h them the wandering souls of men departed before their time,
as it were Remures, taking their name of Remus, whose soul followed his brother
Romulus: who to the intent he might pacify them, instituted feasts called
Lemuria.

Laruae.
Seruius writes, that Vmbrae were called Laruae: and they called dead men's
souls by the name of Vmbrae. Of Laruae men are called Laruat^ that is to say,
frantike men, and such as are vexed with spirits. Who also (as Nonius
witnesses) are called Ceriti. Ceriti.


Seruius says, that men's souls are called Manes, at such time as
departing from their bodies, Mane^.
they are not yet passed into other bodies. And he judges that they are so
called by the figure (...), (which is when one speaks by contraries) of the
old adjective Manus, that is good, because they were nothing less than good.
For the ancient people supposed, that Manes were infernal gods, and therefore
did they number them amongst their evil gods, and pacified them with sacrifice,
least they should hurt them. Some affirm that Manes are in deed infernal
gods, but yet good: whereof comes Mane, which signifies good, and Dij
Manes, as if you would say, good and prosperous gods, and thereof also is said
Jmmanes, for, not good.

Some other suppose, that souls separated from the bobodies, were called after
this name: Whereby we see the ancient monuments of tumbes have been dedicated
to Dijs Manibu^, to the infernal gods: In the which opinion Apuleius was, as we
said a little before.

There are some that judge Manes, to be the very same, that the old people
called Genij* and that there were two of these Manes assigned unto men's bodies,
even immediately after their begetting, which forsake them not when they are
dead, but continue in the graves after the bodies are consume^. ^or the which
cause, those men who defaced Monumentes, were thought to do wrong unto the
gods called Manes. The soothsayers called as well the celestial as the
infernal gods by the name of Manes, and that because they believed (as Festus
does write) that all things did manare, that is, were derived from them. Other
think they were so called ^ manandopunc; of ^lowing, because the places
between the circle of the Moon and the earth from whence they come, are full
of souls.

Mani^ are deformed creatures, as Festus says: Maniae.
and also ugly shapes, wherewith nursses make children afraid.

(...) is a woman with a face almost of a monstrous fashion: Mormo.
hereof it is taken for a heg: as also (...), does signify a terrible sight, a
spirit, or an elfe. Nicephorus says in his Ecclesiastical history, that a
woman using to walk by night is called by the name of Gilo.

Lamiae were supposed of the aunciente people to be women having eyes to put
out or in at their pleasure, Lamiae.
or rather certain shapes of devils, which taking on them the show of
beautiful women, devoured children and young men, allured unto them with sweet
inticementes.

Philostratus in his book Appollonio, writes a marvelous history or fable
of one Menippus, beloved of an heg. The same author writes, that Lamiae are
called of some men Laruae, spirits walkyng by night: and Lemures, night
spirits of horrible shapes: and of many Empusa, ghosts of variable fashion:
and that nursses so named them to make their children afraid.

Chrysostomus Dion writes, that in the inmost part of Affrike are certain
wild beasts, having the countenance of a woman, which in like manner are
called Lamiae: and he says that they have their pappes and all the rest of
their breast so fair as any paynters wit can devise, which being uncovered,
they disceytfully allure men unto them, and when they have taken them, do
forthwith devour them. Lame^* of Hieremie* chap. 4.


In the fourth chapter of the Lamentations of Hieremie it is said: Lamiae
nudauerun^ mammas suas etc. Apuleius writes, that Lamiae are things that make
Children afraid.

Striges.
Lamiae are also called Striges. Striges (as they say) are unlucky birds,
which suck out the blood of infants lying in their cradles. And hereof some
men will have witches take their name, who also are called Volaticae, as Festus
writes.

The name of Gorgon, was invented to make children afraid: Gorgones.
for they say these Gorgons are ravening spirits, such as men feign Lamiae to
be.

Ephialtae, and Hyphialtae, that is Jncubi and Succubi, (which we call Maares)
are night spirits or rather Devils, Incubi. Succubi.
which leap upon men in their sleep. The physicians do affirm that these are
nothing else but a disease.

Empusa is an apparition of the Devil, or a spirit which shows it self unto
such as are in misery, Empusa*
changing his shape into diverse forms, and for the most part appears at
noone time. Read more hereof in Suidas.

Dicelon, is so called because it is sent to make men afraid: Dicelon.
those kinds of terrors the Grecians call Hecataea, as Apollonius writes,
because Hecate or Proserpina is the cause of them, Hecataea.
who therefore is called (...) that is of terrifying, and that by reason that
terrors by night were thought to be stirred up by her.

Plutarchus writes, that Acco and Alphito, were monstrous women, Acco. Alphito.
by naming of whom, mothers kept their children in awe, and made them fear
to do evil.

Cardanus calls these Devils which keep under the earth, Telchinnes.
and many times kill men as they are undermining, by the name of Telchinnes.
Men using witchecrafte, and such as are possessed with a Spirit, and out of
their wits, are called amongst the Grecians, (...).

Pan. Faunu^.
Of these sort are those monsters, half like men and half like beasts, which
men say are found in woods, and oftentimes have appeered unto men. It is
said, that Panes and Fa^ni, are all one, having their nether parts like unto
Gaotes feet.

And men say, that Satyri, Satyri. Sileni.
are almost like unto men: And those which are of full age are called
Sileni.

Onocentaurus, is a beast of a strange fashion, Onocentaurus.
which is reported to be like a man in the upper part, and downwarde like an
ass.

Onosceli, as it is written in Plutarche, Onosceli.
are Devils having legs like unto asses.

The old people imagined, that Hippocentauri, Hyppocentaurus.
were creatures, who before were like to men, but the hinder parts had the
similitude of horses.

And they do feign, Sphinx.
that Sphinx is Animal (...), a beast of the similitude of a man.

Scilla, and Harpyae, are ravening Dyuels, Scilla. Harpyae.
with faces like unto maidens.

As touching men living in the Sea, Triton. Nereides. Syrenes.
as Tritones, Nereides and Syrenes, who as the ancient people affirmed, had
faces like unto men, Read Gesnerus in Historia Aquatilium, where he
entreats of them. For he proves out of many authoures, that there are
found Monsters in the sea, having shapes and countenaunces somewhat like unto
men.

Some of these monsters which are in deed, be of the kind of Apes, and some
are only fabulous, or false: yet notwithstanding, it may be, that the Dyuell
doothe deceive men under the forms of them.

Thus much concerning terms, which we must use in this our Treatise of
Spirits or Uisions Herevntoo have I adjoined strange happes, and foretokens,
which for the most part chance before great matters. And therefore I
knitte them unto these, because they have great resemblaunce unto them. For
vain imaginations also appear unto our sights: armed men as it were are seen
on earth, or in the air: and other such like shapes, voices, noyses, crackes,
and such like. Portentum.
But as touching the very words, Portentum is that which forsheweth some thing
to come, as when strange bodies appear in the air, or blazing stars, or
thunder in fair weather, or whirlewindes do chance. Festus says, that albeit
Portentum be a natural thing, yet it happens seldom, and does betoken some
thing to come to pass after a certain season.

Ostentum, is some strange thing, which shows some thing to come to effect
speedily. Ostentum.
They give the like examples of them both.

Prodigium, is a thing which albeit it often chance by course of nature,
Prodigium.
yet notwithstanding it does always betoken some evil thing, being called
Prodigium, as it were of porro agendum, to be done afterward.

Monstrum.
Monstrum, is that which happens against nature, as when any thing is brought
forth having members beelonging to an other kind: the which is also called
Promonstrum, as who should say, Porro aliquid monstrans, sieve monens, that is,
showing or warnyng some thing to happen afterward. Notwithstanding these terms
are many times confounded together, and taken in one signification, and that
because they respect one end, that is, to tell before or give warning of
things to come. The vain visions whereon we here entreat, appertain nothing
to natural philosophers, neither yet these things which we have joined with
them. For if a sudden crack, or sound, or groaning, or rumbling, as though the
house would fall, or if any other thing chance which stands by natural
reason, it does not proprely belong unto this matter which we have in hand. But
letting these things pass, we will by Gods help and aid come nearer to the
matter it self*

CHAP. II. Melancholic persons, and mad men, imagine many things which in
very deed are not.
THere have been very many in all ages, Some men deny there are Spirits.
which have utterly denied that there be any spirits or strange sightes. The
Philosophers of Epicurus sect did jest and laugh at al those things which were
reported of them, and counted them as feigned and counterfeat, by the which
only children and fools, and plain simple men were made afraid. When Cassius,
who was an Epicurian, understood by Brutus, that he had seen a certain
vision, he (as Plutarche does testify) endeavored to attribute the matter unto
natural causes. We read in the.23. chap. of the Acts of the Apostles, Acts.
3^.
that the Sadduceys did not believe there should be any Resurrection of the
dead, and that they denied there were any spirits or angels: Yea and at this
day, many good and godly men believe those things to be but tales, which are
talked of ^o and fro concerning those imagined visions: partly because in all
their life, they never saw any such, and partly or rather especially, because
in time past men have bin so often deceived with apparitio^s, visions and false
miracles done by Monks and Priests, that now they take things that are true,
to be as utterly false. What soever the cause is, it may be proved, by
witness o^ many writers, and by daily experience also, that spirits and
strange sightes do sometime appear, and that in very deed many strange
and marvelous things do happen. True it is, that many men do falsely per^uade
themselves that they see or hear ghostes: for that which they imagine they see
or hear, proceeds either of melancholy, madness, weakness of the senses,
fear, or of some other perturbation: or else when they see or hear beasts,
vapors, or some other natural things, then they vaynly suppose, they have
seen sightes I wot not what, as hereafter I will show particularly by many
and notable examples.

There is no doubt, but that almost al those things which the common people
judge to be wonderful sightes, are nothing less than so. But in the mean
season it can not be denied, but that strange sightes, and many other such
like things, are sometimes heard and also seen.

Sundry imaginations of malancholicke persons.
And first it can not be denied, but that some men which either by
dispositions of nature, or for that they have sustained great misery, are
now become heavy and full of melancholy, imagine many times with them selves
being alone, miraculous and strange things. Sometimes they affirm in great
soothe, that they verily hear and see this or that thing, which
notwithstanding neither they nor yet any other man did once see or hear. Which
thing we sometimes see by experience to b^e true in those men, which be
troubled with great headache, or subject to other diseases of the body, or
cannot take rest in the night or are distraughted of their wits. Those which
dwell with such kind of men, when they here them tell such obsurde tales,
such strange things, and such marvelous visions, albeit they pity their
unfortunate estate, yet can they not many times conteyn themselves from
laughing. Aristotle in his book de rebu^ mirandis, writes of a certain man
distraught of his wits, who going into the Theater of Abydos a City of Asia,
Theatru^ a place to behold plays and pa^^imes in.
when no man was therein, and there setting alone, by clapping of his hands,
signified that he liked as well every thing there, as if some commedie or
tragedy had been notably set forth on stage. The very like History has
Horace, in his second book of Epistles of a certain man, who coming into the
Theater at Argos, behaved him self even as the other man did: And when his
Kinsfolk through the help of good Physicians, had restored him to his right
wits again, he was very angry with them, saying, that he never lived more
pleasantly than while he was beside him self. Atheneus lib. 12. writes of one
Tresilaus, whose brains were so distempered, that he verily supposed all the
ships which aryued at Port Piraeus, to be his own: he would number them, he
commanded the Mariners to launch from shore, and when they returned after
their voyage home again, he as much rejoiced as if he had been owner of all
wherewith they were laden. The same man affirmed, that in all the time of his
madness he lived a very pleasant life, until the Physician had cured him
of his disease. I my self have seen a man, Johannes Leonardus Sertorius by
name, whom very honest and grave men, which knew him well, Ioannes. Sertorius.
would testify to be a godly man, which was thoroughly persuaded with him
self, that he could prove our Religion which we now profess, to be true and
catholic, even by a miracle from heaven as sometime Helias did. He desired the
Magistrates of certain Countries to call together their Papists, and
Protestants: for he was ready (he said) to show this miracle, and in case
he did it not openly before them all, he refused not to sustain any kind of
punishment. The like reason is also of other men which are besides them
selves: for they take on them marvelous things, either because they have mused
long time on some matter conceived in their minds, as cunning Artificers often
times do: or because they have been long weried with sickness, or else because
they love extremely. You shall find some that imagine them self as it were
armed with horns of an Ox: other apeere to them selves to be erthen vessels,
and therefore they will shun every thing for fear they be broken. Of such an
one writes Galene, De lo is affectis. lib. 3 ca 6. and also lib* 4 ca. 1*
Other suppose them selves dead, other think them selves great Princes, other
to be learned men, other to be Prophets and Apostles, and therefore they will
foretell things to come. The same he writes of them yt are taken with frenzy
See Ludoui^. Caeliu. li. 17. c^. ^. antiquitat.

Galen de loci^ affectis.

Libro de Simtomatum diff. chap. 3.


and namely, of one Theophilus a Physician, who in other things was wise, and
could dispute well and perfectly know every man: yet notwithstanding, he
thought there were certain Minstrels did haunte that corner of his house where
he used to lie, and that they tuned their pypes, and played on them every day:
And he verily thought, that he saw them, some sittting, and some standing,
and in such sort continually pyping without intermission, that they ceased
at no time, neither in the day, nor in the night. And therefore he never ceased
to cry, and to command his servants to drive them out of his doors. When he
was thoroughly recovered of his sickness, then he told all other things which
every one of them had said or done: and also he called to mind the imaginations
which he conceived of the tediousness of the minstrels.

Paulus Aegineta. Lycanthropia.
Paulus Aegineta writes in his third book and.xv. chap. that those that are
taken with Lycanthropia* (which is a kind of madness) leap out of their
houses in the night, in all things imitating the nature of wolves, and that
until it wax^ day, they keep about the graves of dead men. Moreover, sometimes
the Devil (enemy to mankind) so deceives men, that they seem unto them
selves to be beasts. Augustine upon Genesis.
Whereof Augustine writes In Genesin ad literam lib 7* cap. 11. they which are
bitten with mad Dogs are afraid of water. This disease they call
Hydrophobiam: out of which Aegineta lib. 5. ca. 3 reports, Hydrophobia.
that they which are troubled with this disease, looking on the water, and
being brought unto it, flee from them soon: other utterly refuse all kind of
moisture: and that there are some which bark like Dogs, and bite them that
come unto them. Rufus showing the cause of their fear, says that they
suppose they see in the water the shadow of the Dog which bitte them. Rufus.


Ephialtes, which the Physicians call the Maare, is a disease of the stomach,
Ephialtes the (...).
concerning which read Paulus Aegineta* li. 3. cap. 16. Many which are taken
with this disease* imagine that a man of monstrous stature sits on them,
which with his hands violentlye stops their mouth, that they can by no
means cry out, and they strive with their arms and hands to drive him away,
but al in vain. Some led with vain fantasy, think him who oppres^eth them,
to creep up by little and little on the bed, as it were to deceive them, and
anon to run down again. They seem also to themselves to he^re him. This
disease is called by an other name (...), and (...).

Mad men which have utterly lost the use of reason, or are vexed by Gods
permission, with a Devil, Madmen.
whom the Gospel calls (...), do marvelous things, talk of many visions
and diverse other matters. Their sight deceives them, in somuche as they
mistake one man for an other: which thing we see by experience, in Bedleme
houses where mad and frantike men are kept. We read that Ajax t^ke the matter
so grievously, when Achilles armor was adjudged unto Ulysses that becoming
mad through grief, and drawing out his sword, he set upon herds of swyne,
supposing that he fought with the whole army of the Grecians. Afterward
hanging up two of the greatest of them on posts, with railing words he whipped
them, thincking one of them to be Agamemnon, the other Ulysses, of whom with
the first he was angry as an evil judge, with the other because he was by him
vanquished in judgment. But afterward when he came again to him self, for
very shame he flewe him self. It has many times chanced in battle, that
the soldiers falling into great fury their captaine^ have been forced to take
away their armor, because by rage they took their own fellows for enemies,
and began to set on them violently.

Tertullianus says thus: Tertullian.
Those which are mad see one man in an other, as Orestes saw his mother in
his sister, Ajax beheld Ulysses in an heard of swine, Athamas and Agaue wild
beasts in their own children etc.

CHAP. III. Fearful men, imagine that they see and hear strange things.
THat which we have hitherto spoken concerning melancholicke men, and men out
of their wits, may also be understood of timorous and fearful men. For if
any man be timorous by nature, or subject to fear through great dangers, or
by some other ways, he also imagines strange things which in deed are not
so, especially if he have in him any store of melancholy. Women, which for the
most part are naturally given to fear more than men, ^. P^t. 3.
(for which cause S. Peter in his first epistle speaking of the duty of
married folks, calls them the weaker ve^sell,) do more often suppose they see
or hear this or that thing, than men do. And so do young women, because
commonly they are afraid. If when men sit at the table, mention be made of
Spirits and elues, many times women and children are so afraid that they dare
scarce go out of doors alone, least they should meet with some evil thing:
and if they chance to hear any kind of noise, by and by they think there
are some spirits behind them, such vain persuasions have they. A cowardly
souldior judges his enemies to be more in number than they are: the noise of a
leaf being moved so affrighteth him (which thing God in his law threatens
his people of Israel except they do their duties) that he betaketh him self
to his heels: if he but hear a woodspecke with his ^ill beating on a Tree, he
straight thinks the enemy ready to leap on his shoulders: yea if ^e hear
but a mouse move, by and by his heart is in his Hose. These and such like
things never trouble a stout and coragious Soldier.

And yet some times in the chase, lusty soldiers flying away from their
company, are so troubled in mind, that they think their friends enemies, and
cannot tell in the world where they are, and whether they go: all the which
comes by fear.

Plutarche in his book De sera numinis vindicta, Plutarche.
reports a marvelous and notable history, of one called Bessus: who after
he had murdered his father, hid him self a long season. But on a time as he
went to supper, espying a swalowes nest, with his spear he thrust it down:
and when those which supped together with him, misliked and abhorred his
cruelty (for we like not those men that trouble little birds and other beasts,
because we judge them austerne and cruel) he answered: have they not (says
he) falsely accused me, a great while crying out on me, that I have slain and
murdered my father. Those which were present being stricken with great
admiration, reported these his words to the king, who immediately caused him to
be tormented, and examining the matter diligently, at the last found him
guilty and punished him as a manquiller of his own father. Hereof ye may
gather what fear^ can do: the swalowes could not speak, and yet he persuaded
him self that they vpbrayed him with murdering his father. Even so many
through fear, imagine that they hear and see many things which in deed are
meer^ trifles.

Procopius in the beginning of the wars of Italy declares, that as
Theodoricus sat at meat, Theodoricus imagining that he sees Simmachus.
after he had put to death Boethius and Symmachus his son in law, a fishes
head being brought before him, he saw in it the countenance of Symmachus
looking horribly, which biting the nether lip with lowering eyes seemed to
threaten him, wherewith the King being sore abashed fell into a grievous
sickness, whereof he afterward died. Yea fear if it be unmeasurable makes us
to abhor those things, which otherwise should be comfortable unto us. The
apostles of our lord Jesu Christ may be examples hereof. Matthew. 14.
Who in the night season being in great danger in the Sea, when they saw
Christ walking on the water approaching toward them were maruelously appalled.
For they supposed they saw a Spirit, and cried out for fear. But the Lord
came to deliver them out of that present danger wherein they were. After his
resurrection they were maruellously affrayde, and as S. Luke says, they verily
supposed they saw a Spirit, Luke. 24.
when in deed he appeared unto them in his own body. Therefore the lord
comfort and hartneth them saying: Behold my hands and my feet, for I am eue^
he: handle me and see: for a spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see I have.
They through great joy could not believe it, but marvelled at it. Here thou
see, by fear it came to pass, that the Disciples supposed ye lord him self
to have been a ghost. And therefore no man ought to marvel if we hindered by
fear, mistake one man for an other, and persuade our selves that we have seen
spirits, whereas no such were. They which are of stout and hautie courage,
free from all fear, seldom times see any spirits. It is reported of the
Scythia^s, Stout and curragious men seldom se any Spirit^.
a warlike nation dwelling in mountains (from whom it is thought the Turks
take their original) that they never see any vain sightes of spirits. Authors
write that Lions are not feared with any bugs: for they are full of stomach
and deuoide of fear.

CHAP. IIII. Men which are dull of seeing and hearing imagine many things
which in very deed are not so.
THey which are weak of sight are many times in such sort deceived, that
they behold one man instead of an other. Poare blinded men whom the Greeks
call (...), which can not see any thing, except it be very near their eyes (as
for the most part students are, which night and day turn over their books)
are so much deceived in their sight, that they are many times ashamed to utter
what they have thought they have seen. And it stands by natural reason,
that an ore seems to be broken in the water: and a tower four cornered, a
far off shows to be round. Dronken men see strange things.
Those which drink wine immoderately, in such sort that their eyes begin
to wax dim, and stare out of their heads, like hares which have been carried
hanging on a staff a mile or twain, see things far otherwise than sober men
do. They suppose they see two candles on the table, when there is but one:
desiring to reach the pot, they put their hand amiss. In Euripides tragedy
named Bacchis, Euripides.
Pentheus affirms that he sees two suns and two cities of Thebes: For his
brains were maruellously distempered. It is a common saying, that if wine have
the victory, all things seem to be turned vpside down: trees to walk,
mountains to be moved, and rivers to run against the head. etc. Solomon
exhorts all men from drunkenness, in his proverbs. cap. 23. showing what
discommodities ensue thereof, Proverb. 23.
and amongst other things he says thus: Thy eyes shall see strange (to wit)
visions and marvelous apparitions. For as timorous men imagine miraculous
things, even so do dronken men, who of purpose corrupt and spoil their sight.
And albeit God show many wonders in the air, and in the earth, to the end he
may stir men up from idleness and bring them to true repentance, yet
notwithstanding we must think that dronken men which sit up until midnight do
often say, they have seen this or that vision, they have behold this or that
wonder, when as in deed they are utterly deceived. For in case they had
returned home in due season, and not ouercharged themselves with too much
wine, no such thing had appeared unto them. For in deed their eyesight had not
bin blinded. Does it not often come to pass, that when men are once thoroughly
warmed with wine, they mistake one for another, of whom they thought they were
abused in word or deed, and violentlye fly on them with weapon? The place
before alleged out of Solomon, may also be understood to this purpose: Thy
eyes shall see strange (to wit,) women, to lust after them. For experience
teaches us that men being dronk, assaie to rauishe matrones and maidens, which
being sober they would never once think upon. Wine immoderately taken is the
nurse of rash boldness and filthy lust.

Some see them selves.
Aristotle writes that some men through the feebleness of their sight,
beholding in the air near unto them (as it were in a glass) a certain image
of them selves, suppose they see their own angels or souls: and so as the
Proverb is, they fear their own shadow. Although men in obscure and dark
places can see nothing, yet do they not (I pray you) imagine they see diverse
kinds of shapes and colors. And we many times suppose those things which we
see, to be far otherwise than in deed they are.

It is well known, a man's sight may be so deceived, that he verily thinks
that one deuoureth a sword, spitteth out money, coals, and such like: that
one eats bread, and spitteth forth meal: one drinks wine, which after
runs out of his forehead: that one cutteth of his fellows head, which
afterward he sets on again: and that a cock seems to draw after him a
huge beam of timber. etc. Moreover it may be brought to pass by natural
things, as by perfumes and such like, that a man would swear in earnest,
that all men ^itting at the table with him, have no heds at al, or else that
they are like the heads of asses: and that sometimes a vine spreads it self as
it were over all the house, when in deed it is a mere deceit, or a plain
iuggling cast Of which matter there be books commonly set abroad. Hearing
deceueth.
The like reason is in hearing, and in the other senses. Those men who^e hearing
is somewhat decayed, many times seem in their own imagination, to hear the
noise of boystrous wind, or violent tempeste, the sparkling of fire, the
roaring of waters suddenly increased, singing and sounding of instruments, and
also the iangling of belles, when as in deed these things are not so, but only
chance by default of hearing: for others which are conversant with them,
having the right use of hearing, do not hear any such thing at all. Sometimes
in very deed such things are heard, as the crackling of waynscot walls, and
such like, which are natural signs of some tempeste shortly after ensuing.

There are also certain hollow places, thorough the which the wind
whiszing, gives a pleasant sound, as it were through a pipe, much like unto
singing, so that men wonder very much thereat. We read in writers of
Philosophy, that the very same also chances in banks of rivers, which bend
a little in compass. Hearing is also deceived when we think we hear thunder,
and it is in deed but the rumblyng of some carte. The sens^ of feeling is
deceived.
There be many which think they handle some thing, and yet are deceived: If
men sick of the ague, drink wine of the ^est and sweetest sort, yet they
think it is more bitter than Ga^l: if they eat pottage never so good, yet
they judge it unsavory: which thing comes not of any fault in the Cook,
but of the mouth and stomach which is distempered with sickness. For unto them
which have abundance of choler, all things seem bitter. And even so it
comes to pass, that a man supposes he sees, hears, feels, or is felt
of some spirit, when in deed it is not so, and yet no man can persuade him
the contrary.

If fear and weakness of the syghte and of other sens^s meet together,
Weakness of the sight and fear.
then men fall into strange and marvelous imaginations, beleeuyng things
utterly false, to be very true: Neither will they be brought from their own
opinions by any means or reason.

We read that not only particular and private men, but also whole armies of
soldiers generally have bin so deceived, that they have verilye thought their
enymies hard at their heels, when as no man followed. And hereof have
proceeded many horrible flightes in battle.

Cominaeus, a knight and diligent writer of hystories, in the end of his
first book of the Acts of Jews the.11. King of France, Cominaeus.
writes, that when Charles Duke of Burgundy, with other Princes had removed
their army to Paris, they understood by their espials, that the next day the
king had determined to set on them with all his power of men. Wherefore the
next day Charles sent out certain horsemen to vewe his enemies: who coming
forth, by reason that the elemente was somewhat ^arke, supposed they saw a
huge number of pikes and spears, but when they had passed a little further and
that the air was a little clearer, they understood the same place wherein they
judged the king to be with all his army, to be planted and ouergrowne with
many high thistles, which a far off showed as it had bin long spears. For
the night beguileth men's eyes. And therefore none ought to marvel, if
travelers toward night or at midnight, mistake stones, trees, stubbes, or
such like to be sprites or elues. We read in the last book of the kings the
3. chap. that after the death of king Achab, Kings. 4.
the Moabites revolted from Ioram his son, wherefore he desired Iosaphat to
aid him, and with all his power he determined to make war on the Moabites,
to reduce them to obedience, and subjection. Which thing when the Moabites
heard, they prepared to defend themselves, so many as were able to bear
armoure. But when they had set foreward very early in the morning against
their enemies, supposing in the rising of the sun, the waters which GOD had
miraculously brought out to be read, they said amongst themselves: Surely the
two Kings have encountered together, and each have destroyed other, whereupon
they running on heaps without order, to spoil the Israelites Tents, were by
them vanquished and slain: here you see all the Army mistook water in stead
of blood.

CHAP. V. Many are so feared by other men, that they suppose they have heard or
seen Spirits.
FUrthermore it comes to pass many times that not only pleasant and merry
conceyted men, but also spiteful and malicious men, changing their apparel,
make others extremely afraid. It is a common custom in many places, that at
a certain time of the year, one with a net or visarde on his face makes
Children afraid, to the end that ever after they should labor and be
obedient to their Parents, afterward they tell them that those which they saw,
were Bugs, Witches and Hagges, which thing they verily believe, and are
commonly, miserably afraid. Howbeit, it is not expedient always so to
terrify Children. For sometimes through great fear they fall into dangerous
diseases, and in the night cry out, when they are fast asleep. Solomon pro.
Solomon teaches us to chasten children with the rod, and so to make them
stand in awe: he does not say, we must bear them in hand they shall be
devoured of Bugges, Hags of the night, and such like monsters.

Many times, pleasant and merry young men, disguise themselves like unto
Devils, or else shroud themselves in white sheets to make other men afraid:
with whom if simple men chance to meet, they make no doubt of the matter,
but verily think they have seen spirits, and strange sightes. And yet it is
not always the safest way, so to deceive men with jests and toys, for many
examples might be brought to show how evil some men have sped hereby. It is an
usual and common thing that young men merrily disposed, when they travel by the
way, coming to their Inn at night, tie roapes to the bed side, or to the
couerlet or garments, or else hide them selves under the bed, and so
counterfeating them selves to be Spirits, deceive and mock their fellows It
chanced once at Tigurin^ where we dwell, that certain plesaunt young men
disguising themselves, Daunsing spirits.
daunced about the Churcheyarde, one of them playing on a beer with two
bones, as it were on a dru^me. Which thing when certain men had espied, they
noysed it about the city, how they had seen dead men dance, and that there
was great danger, least there should shortly ensue some plague or pestilence.

Moreover it is well known to all men, that harlots, and whooremongers, have
practiced their wickedness a long season under this cloak and pretense,
persuading their family, that walking Spirits haunt the house, least they
should be taken with the deed doing, and that they might enjoy their desired
love. Many times such bugges have been caught by the magistrates, and put to open
shame. Thieves likewise under this color have many times robbed their
neighbors in the night time, who supposing they heard the noise of walking
Spirits, never went about to drive the thieves away. Touching this point, that
an evil Spirit, by means of natural things which have strange virtues, can
do marvelous things, by deceyuing men's senses, I will at this present speak
nothing.

CHAP. VI. Priests and Monckes fained themselves to be Spirits: also how
Mundus under this color defiled Paulina, and Tyrannus abused many noble and
honest matrones.
TO these things may be added that there have been in all ages certain priests,
which practicing strange devises, and giving themselves to Necromancie, have
bewitched foolish men that highly esteemed them, to the end they might
thereby increase their riches, and follow their lustful pleasures. Touching
which matter, to the end godly disposed men may be the more heedfull, I will
rehearse a few histories.

Josephus a writer of histories, Josephus d^ antiquitatib.
in his 18 book and 4. chap. of Antiquities, remembers a notorious deed
which happened at Rome in the time of Tyberius Cesa^, under the pretense of
sacrificing to the goddess Isis. I will record the history as it is
translated by Galenius a very learned man.

There dwelled at Rome a woman named Paulina, Paulina and Mundus.
no less renoumed for honesty of life, than for the nobility of parentage:
She was also very rich and exceeding beautiful, as one that was now in the
flower of her age, and especially adorned with the great virtue of chastity:
and married she was to one Saturnius, a man worthy of such a wife. It chanced
that Decius Mundus, a famous young knight, became very much enamored with her:
and because she was a woman of greater wealth tha^ that she might be won with
rewards and money, so much the more was this lovers madness inflamed, in so
much that he stuck not to proffer her for one night.200000. groates. The
Atticke groate and the Romain penie are by common valuation all one. ^udeus
accou^teth one of them worth.viij Crusados: so this sum according to his
reckening amounts to.26000. Florens.

And yet not being able by these means to move her constant mind, because he
could not endure the rage of his love, he determined, by abstinence and hunger
to make an end both of life and love together. This determination was not
unknown to I Would, Mundus Fathers bondseruant, a maid cunning in many arts, but
such as were not to be lyked. She maruellously grieved with the young man's
wilfulness in absteining from meat, talking with him, by sweet and flattering
words began to encourage him, assuring him yt she would bring to pass, that he
should at his pleasure embrace Paulina. After that he had gladly condiscended
to her entreatie, she tells him she must needs have fifty thousand groates
to overthrow the Gentlewomans chastity. So putting the young man in good hope,
and receiving as much money as she required, because she well knew Paulina
could not be won with money, she deuiseth a new way to deceive her.
Understanding therefore yt she was maruellously addicted to the worshipping of
Isis, she inuenteth these means: She talks with some of Isis Priests, and
having received sure promise of them to keep all things secret, and (which is
most effectual) having showed their reward, promising presentlye 25000.
groats, and when they had done the deed, other 25000. she opens unto them
the young man's love, beseeching them to help by all means possible, that she
might enjoy the same. They touched at the heart with desire of the money,
gently promised their help. Wherefore the eldest of them speedily goes to
Paulina, and being admitted to her speech, after he had obtained to talk with
her in secret, he declares that he is come unto her being sent by the great
God Anubis (this Anubis having a head like to a Dog, was worshipped together
in one Temple with Isis) who is maruellously in love with her beauty, and does
command her to repair unto him. She joyfully received the message, and
forthwith vaunteth among her familiar acquain^aunce, that the God Anubis has
vouchsaued to love her: And she tells her husband, that she must suppe and
lie with him. Which thing was so much the more easelye granted unto her, for
that her husband had had good experience and knowledge of her chastity.
Whereupon she goes to the temple, and after supper when time of rest drew
near, being shut in by the priest, she meets with Mundus, who had priuilye
hidden himself there, the darkness bringing them together, without any
suspicion. And so all that night she satisfied the young man's desire, supposing
she had done pleasure unto the God. Afterward he departing from her, Paulina
early in the morning, before the priests (who were privy to this deceyt) were
stirring, returned home to her husband, to whom she recounteth her meeting
with Anubis, and also with great words sets out the same amongst her gossips
and friends. They could not believe her, considering the nature of the thing,
and yet could they not choose but marvel, waying the great chastity of the
woman. Three days after the deed done, Mundus meeting by chance with his
beloved, said unto her: O well done Paulina, thou have saved me 200000 groats
wherewith thou might have increased thy riches, and yet notwithstanding thou
have fulfilled my desire, for I way it not that thou have despised Mundus, since
under the title of Anubis* I have enjoyed my disired lust, which words said,
he departed. But the woman then first perceiving this villainy, began to tear
her garments, and opening the whole matter unto her husband, beseeches him
that he suffer not such a notorious mockery to go unpunished. Her husband
then declares the whole matter to the Emperor Tiberius: who after he had
learned all things by diligent examination, trusseth up these iugling priests
on the gallows, together with I Would, the author of all this mischief, by whose
means chiefly the chastity of this noble gentlewoman was defiled: and
overthrowing their temple, he commanded the Image of Isis to be sunk in the
river Tibris. But i^ pleased him to chasten Mundus with banishment, a more
gentle kind of punishment, ascribing his fault to ye weakness of his immoderat
love. By this history it may easily be gathered how Satan in times past be
witcht the Gentiles, and how their priests persuaded them yt their Gods
appearing in visible form spoke this or yt unto them, which notwithstanding
were very false. Under the pretense of worshipping their gods, they gave
themselves to wicked devises. For how often may we well think they committed
abominable mischief (although in deed ye matter it self never came to light.)
If they brought it to pass, y^ Mundus by their means enjoyed his desired love,
surely there is no doubt, but yt they themselves under the color of holiness
defloured other me^^ daughters and wives: for otherwise this devise could
never have bin so ready in mind. This matron would never hau^ bin so well
content, unless y^ very same had bin practiced with other dames before. Neither
yet would her husband have suffered her t^ lodge in the Church al night. What
need was there for ye gods to have beds prepared for the^ in ye Church, when it
was most apara^t they never lodged in the^. Princes also may lern by the
example of Tiberius, although he were a wicked tyrant, how such varlets are to
be restrained. T^ this purpose makes ye history which Ruffinus a priest of
Aquilia reports in Li. 11. ca. 25. of his ecclesiastical history. Ruffinu^.


Tyrannus a wicked priest.
There was a priest in Alexandria in Egypt, vowed to Saturn whose name was
Tyra^nus. This man as it had bin from the mouth of god, used to say unto al
such noble and principal me^, whose ladies he liked and lusted after, that
Saturn had commanded, yt such a ones wife should lie al night in the temple.
Then he which herd ye message, rejoicing much yt the god vouchsafed to call for
his wife, decking her up bravely, and giving her great gifts (forsooth lest she
should be refused because she came empty) sent her forth unto ye temple, where
the woman being shut up in the presence of al men* Tirannus when he had fast
locked the doors, surre^dring the keys departed his ways. Afterward in great
silence passing through privy caves under the ground, he issued forth out
of the open holes into the image of Saturn: which image was made hollow in
the back, and cunningly fastened to the wall. And as the candles burned within
the Church, be spoke sodeinly unto the woman (giving great ^are, and praying
devoutly) through the image made of hollow brass, in such sort that the
unhappy woman, trembled between fear and joy, because she thought her self
worthy of the speech of so great a god. Now after the ^audy god had talked his
pleasure to bring her in great fear, or to provoke her to lust and
wantonness, suddenly all the lights were put out with the spreading abroad of
sheets, by a certain cunning devise. And then desce^ding out of the image he
committed adultery with the woman much abashed and afraid, using most
profane and wicked gloses unto her. When he had thus dealt a long season, almost
with all the wives of these sely gentlemen, it chanced in the end that a
certain chaste ge^tlewoman began to abhor and loath the deed, and marking ye
matter more heedfully, knew it to be Tyrannus voice: and thervpo^ returning
home again declared ye ^lye conueyance of this horrible deed unto her
husband. He being set on fire with rage for the injury done unto his wife, or
rather unto himself, apprehended Tyrannus, and brought him to ye place of
torments, where being convicted he confessed al ye matter, and the^ other
deceits being likewise detected, al shame and dishonor was spread throughout ye
houses of the Paga^s: ye mothers were found adulterers, fathers incestuous
persons, and their children illegittimate and bastards. Which thing so soon as
it was brought to light and noysed abroad, together both Church and image, and
wickedness and all was utterly subverted and destroyed. We read that Numa
Pompilius bare the people of Rome in hand that he had familiar company with
Egeria a Goddess of the waters, to the end he might purchase credit and
authority to his laws.

CHAP. VII. Timotheus Aelurus counterfeating him self to be an Angel,
obtained a bissopricke: four Monks of the order of Preachers, made many vain
apparitions at Berna.
IT might be somewhat borne withal, if these things had only chanced among
the Gentiles, which were without the word of God, if we did not euidentlye see
the like happen often times amongst christians, and in case it were not to be
feared least many such things should happen even at this day also. Lippis and
tonsoribus no^um
For it is well known to all men, that there have bin many magiciens,
sosserers, and coniurers, and those especially Monks and priests, who could
easelye counterfeit visions, and miracles, and familiar talking with souls.

Theodorus.
Theodorus Lector, collectaneorum ex historia ecclesiastica li. 1. writes of
Timotheus Aelurus, that he, before Proterius bishop of Alexandria was put to
death, gaping for the bisshopprike, in the night cladde in black apparel
walked about the celles of the monks, and calling each man by his name, they
answering, said unto them, that he a spirit, one of gods servants came to
warn them, that every one reuolting from Proterius, should join him self
unto Timotheus. And by this craft and deceyte obteyning the bisshopprike, he
made great vproares in the Church of God. Here I cannot refrain my self as
touching this present matter, Four moncks of Berna.
but that I rehearse a famous history, of four monks of the order of
preachers (who were brent at Berna in Heluetia in the year of our Lord 1509.
the last day of May) by what subtilties they deceived a poor simple Friar
who^ they had lately retained into their monastery: concerning which thing,
many books were written at the same time when these things were done, which
are yet extant both in the latin and in the german tongue. There was great
contention between the monks of the order of preachers, and the friars
Minorites, or Franciscans, touching ye co^ceptio^ of the virgin Mary. The
Friars preachers affirmed, that she even as other men also was conceived in
original sin, that the Franciscans denied and stoutly denied. At the last
the matter came to that issue that the preachers determined to auouche and
prove their opinion by false and feigned miracles: taking aduisement in a
certain Synod (which they call a chapter) holde^ at Vimpenium a city of
Germany, where the most convenient and fittest place for this matter might be
found: and at the last they chose out Berna in Heluetia, because the people
there were plain and simple, and given to the wars. Four therefore of the
cheifest in the Abbay of the order of preachers began the pageant at Berna: and
because the Supprier one of the four, was well seen in coniuring, he bound
the Devil to join in council with the^ by what means they might best bring
their purpose to pass. He appearing unto them in the likeness of a Negro or
black Morian, promised them all that he could do, under this condition, that
they should yield and give them selves unto him, which thing they willingly
did, delivering unto him a writing written with their own hand and blood. And
it chanced at the same time very ^itlye, that one John Iezerus, a plain
fellow, a Tayloure by occupation, was chosen into their order, who seemed to
be very fit for their purpose. They tried him by throwing stones into his
chamber in the night time, making a great noise, and faining them selves to be
Spirits. The matter seemed unto them, even from the beginning, that it would
take good success* On a certain day being Friday, the supprior shrouding
himself in a sheet, together with other Spirits, whom he had coniured up for
this purpose, brake into the Friars cel with great force and noise, faining
with many tears, that he desired his aid and help. Now had they privily
conveyed Holy water and the Relics of Saints into his Cell before. The poor
Friar half dead with fear, denied that he could by any means help him,
recommending himself to Christ our savior, and to his holy mother. The Spirit
answered, that it was in his and his brethrens power to deliver him out of
this misery, if he would suffer himself for the space of.viij. days, every day
to be whipped until the blood followed, and moreover, cause.viij. Masses to be
soong for his sake in S. John's chapel, himself while they were soong, lying
in the floor with his arms spread abroad. After he told him that the next
Friday before midnight, he would come again with greater noise, willing him in
any wise not to be afraid, for the Devils could nothing hurt him, because he
was an holy man. The next day this foolish Friar opens all the matter to the
ringleaders of this devise, beseeching the^ to assist him, that the miserable
soul might be delivered. The matter was out of hand rumored about the city.
The Monks preached openly hereof in the pulpit, co^me^ding highly the
holiness of their order, which even hereby might be seen, for that the
spirit craved help of them, and not of the wicked dronken Franciscans* At the
time appointed, the spirit accompanied with other evil spirits, came again
with great noise to the Friars cell, who adiuring and coniuring him,
questioned with him touching certain points. The spirit showed him who he was,
and for what cause he was so miserably vexed: and withal gave great thanks both
unto him and also to his fathers, for being touched with remorse of him,
adding, that in case there were yet.xxx. Masses soong, and ^our Uigiles
observed, and that he would yet once ageyn whip himself until he bled, then he
should be clean delivered out of most cruel torments, which he had
continually endured a hundred and sixty years. He had conference with him
also of other marvelous matters, which we need not here to rehearse.
Afterward the same spirit appeared again unto the Friar, and preferred the
order of preachers before al others, bearing him in hand, that many of them
which had bin adversaries unto this order, suffered most horrible torment in
purgatory, and that the city of Berna should be utterly overthrown, except
they banished the Franciscans, and refused ye yearly stipends which they
received at ye french kings hands. He also talked of sundry things which had
happened to ye Friar (which thing they had learned before of him by means of
auricular confession.) Moreover he heartily thanketh ye Friar for the great
benefit of his deliverance, giving him to understand, yt he was now admitted
into the.vij. degree of Angels, and that he should say Mass there for his
benefactors.

After these things thus done, an other night one coming unto him in the
apparel of a woman, said he was S. Barbara, whom he devoutly served, and
told him that the blessed virgin would shortly appear unto him, and make full
answer unto those questions which one of the Monks had written in a paper for
him. This paper Barbara promised that she her self would deliver unto our Lady,
which they should shortly after find in a hollie place sealed and signed
miraculously. The Friar upon this reuealeth the whole matter unto his fathers,
desiring to be confessed of his sins, whereby he might be found worthy the
apparition or seeing of our Lady. He willed them to search in ye hallowed place
for the scroule, which at the last they found in the Fratry (as they term it)
where they had laid it before. Then they carried it with great reverence unto
the high alter, affirming that it was sealed with christ's blood, and that the
tapers lightened of their own accord. In y^ morning the virgin Mary appeared
unto him again, rehersing many things which her son Jesus commanded her to
tell unto him: to wit, that Pope Julius was that holy man, which should
reconcile the two orders in friendship again, and institute and ordain the
feast of the defiled conception of our Lady, for she would send unto the Pope
a cross marked with four drops of her sons blood, in sign that she was
conceived in original sin: and that they should find an other cross
marked with five drops of blood in their fratrie, which they must convey to
Rome* for the Pope would allow and confirm it with large indulgences and
after return it to Berna again: other things likewise she said, whereof many
things were both reported and written to and fro.

But in witness of the foresaid things, the same Mary drove an iron nail
through the hand of the poor Friar, saying: this wound shall be renewed in the
day wherein my son was crucified, and in the feast of my sons body. After
they took a burning water made by Necromancie, by the which they taking away
his senses, made four other wounds in his body. And after that he came again
unto him self, they bare him in hand that there was a certain holy thing I
wot not what, which appeared about him. And when they saw that many men came
flocking about him to see this new Christ, they taught him (for he was of
rude conditions) how to behave him self. And when they had given him a drink
beree^ing him of his senses, and causing him to some at the mouth, then he
said be striued and wrestled with death, even as Christ did in the mount
Oliuet. After all this, another of them appeared unto him, telling him many
things: but ye Friar knowing him by his voice, began to suspecte and mislike
the whole matter, and with violence thrust him from him. The next night the
Friar himself appeared unto him, saying that he was Mary of whom he had been in
doubt, and to the end he should be out of all suspicion, she had brought him
the host of her sons body (for he brought him an host stiped in poison) to
the end he should no more think he saw an evil spirit: he also affirmed,
that he had brought a vessel of glass full of her sons blood, which he would
give unto him, and to his Monastery. But the Friar, who also had this vision
in suspicion, answered: If (said he) thou be not an evil spirit, rehearse thy
Pater noster and thy Aue Maria with me. The Priour said the Pater noster, and
afterward said in the person of our Lady: Hayled am I Mary full of grace, the
Lord be with me. etc. The Friar knowing the Priors voice, caught a knyfe, and
wounded him therewith, and when he defended himself, the Friar stoutly
resisted, and drove him back. These things thus done, the Supprior being in
good hope to restore all that they had lost, appeared again to the Friar,
saying that he was S. Catherin of Sena, and therewith begun to chide him, for
that he so discurteously had entreated the holy Uirgin: adding moreover, I am
sent (quod he) to show thee, that the wounds which thou have in thy body, are
the very true wounds of Christ, which neither I, nor yet S. Francis has, and
that he enlarged with many words. Yet notwithstanding, the Friar so
entertained him, that he was glad to save himself with running away. Now
because the Friar would no longer be mocked at their hands, they, maruellously
troubled, and almost at their wits end, taking advise among them selves, brake
the matter unto him, and told him, that in very deed they freely confessed
many of those apparitions which he had seen to be feigned, and that for no other
cause, but to the end he should persevere in his profession and Religion,
howbeit the very effect of the matter was most true, and that he ought not to
doubt, but that he bare the wounds of Christ in his body. And for so much as the
matter was now known abroad, they ernestly besought him, that he would not
refuse to go on in the matter, for otherwise their order should incur open
shame, and both he and they fall into present danger, but in case he would
persist in his enterprised purpose, the thing would fall out to his and their
great advantage. And so with fairer words, they persuaded him to make promise
to be ruled by them hereafter.

After long instruction and teaching, they placed him on the altar of our Lady,
kneeling on his knees within a chapel before the image of the holy virgin:
Where one of the Monks standing behind a cloth, spoke thorough a cane reed,
as if it were Christ talking with his mother, in this wise: Mother why do
thou weep? have I not promised thee, yt whatsoever thou willest, shall be done?
Whereto the image made answer. Therefore I weep, because this business finds
no end. Then said the image of Christ: Believe me mother, this matter shall be
made manifest. This done, the Monk privily departing, the chapel doors were
shut. As soon as these things were scattered about the city, by and by there
was a great thronging of people. Amongst whom also came four monks,
dissembling and fayning, that they knew not what was there done, and therefore
they commanded the doors to be opened, and after asked the Friar how and
after what sort he came there. He answered them that he was carried by a
spirit. And moreover ^old them what words the image had spoken, and that he
could by no means move out of that place before that four of the cheifest
Aldermen were come unto him, unto whom he had certain things to be declared:
he also desired to receive the holy sacrament. The Aldermen were forthwith
called, and then the Friar declared unto them, how the Uirgin Mary lamented and
sorrowed, for that the city of Berna should be shortly destroyed, for receiving
yearly pensions of the French king: Also for that they drove not the
Franciscans out of their city, who honored her with the feigned title of
undefiled co^ception. Unto this his talk the Aldermen answered very little. By
and by the other Monks gave him the host infected with poison, which when he
refused to receive, they brought him an other, which he took, then they led
him with great pomp into the quire, (for so they call the uppermost part of
the church. The Friar and the other four Monks were soon after called
before the Aldermen, to testify the truth whether those things were so or not.
But the four fearing exceedingly least he should bewray some thing, because
they knew he suspected them, endeavored by all means to do him some privy
mischief by poison given in his meat, and therefore they gave him the sacrament
dipped in poison, which he presently cast up again by vomit: finally they so
vexed and tormented him by so many ways, that in the end he left the College
and ran away, and opened the whole matter to diverse and sundry men. In the
mean time the Monks dispatched two legates or messangers to Rome, to obtain
a confirmation of these things of the Pope, that hereafter it should be utterly
unlawful for any man to contrary or mislike the same. And when these
messengers were returned, (and as the Proverb is) thought them selves in a
safe haven, the noble Senate had commanded the four Monks to be fast kept
in prison: for they had learned the whole circumstance of the matter before of
the Friar, whom they had committed to ward. And sparing neither labor nor
money, sent also unto Rome, that they might perfectly know, what they should
do in this matter. In ye end both the Friar and the four Monks were all put
to torments, and there confessed all the matter. And when they had bin openly
conuicte of so many guiles, and horrible deeds, by the Popes permission they
were first put from the orders (which they commonly call degradation) and
afterward burned in the f^er.

It was commonly reported, that in case the noble Senate of Berna had not
prosecuted the matter with great constancy, and courage, the Clergy would
have cloaked all the knauerie, and have set the authors at liberty. For
they had great cause to doubt, as it after came to pass, lest they should
leese their credit and authority amongst many of the orders of Monks, and
that these things whereon the Popedom rests, as it were upon pillars, should
now be had in great suspicion with all men. For it is most evident that after
the impiety, deceyt and wickedness of these Monks began to be known abroad,
the opinion of the clergy began to decay, and to be suspected more and more
every day, of good and godly men: when as they said this or that soul required
their help: that tapers lighted of their own accord: that this or that image
spoke, wept, or moved it self from place to place: that this or that Saint
endowed their monastery with precious relics: or that Crosses were
sprinkeled with the blood of Christ: yea and although they had obtained
confirmation of these matters from the Pope, yet notwithstanding many
afterward would in no wise believe it to be so. Likewise they would not be
persuaded, that this holy father falling into a trance, saw any miraculous
things: or that Frauncis and Catherin of Sena, bare the marks of Christ's five
wounds in their body.

Furthermore, not without great cause, men began to doubt of
transubstantiation of bread into the body of Christ, since they had so often
poisoned the sacrament: and also of those things which they chaunted upon with
open mouth, touching pardons, vigilies, orders, purgatory, holly water, and
satisfaction. For that we let pass many things, it is clerer then the day
light, even by this history, that many things have bin beaten into the peoples
heads touching these foresaid matters, which were only devised and invented by
these idle bellies.

CHAP. VIII. Of a counterfaite and deceiving spirit at Orleaunce in France.
ANd that no man think the Friars preachers alone to have bin so bold, and
wicked, and so ready in devising so many monsters, let us harken a while to a
notable history of the Franciscan Friars, reported by Sleidane in the ninth
book of his commentaries, concerning the state of religion and the commonwealth in the time of Charles the fifth.

In the year (says he) of our Lord 1534. the Franciscan Monks played a bloody
and deadly pageant at Orleaunce in France. The Majors wife of the same city,
when she died, commanded in her will, that she should be buried without any
pomp or noise, solemnly used at that time. (So also William Bude, a rare and
singular ornament of France, lying on his death bed at Paris, in the year of
our Lord 1540. in the month of August, left commandment with his friends to
bury him without any great solemnity and pomp.) The woman's husband, who
reverenced the memorial of his wife, did even as she had willed him, and
because she was buried in the Church of the Franciscans, besides her father
and grandfather, gave them in reward only six crowns, whereas they hoped for
a far greater pray. Shortly after it chanced that as he felled certain
wooddes, and sold them, they desired him to give unto them some part of it
freely without money: which he flatly denied. This they took very grievously,
and whereas before they misliked him, they devised this means to be revenged:
forsooth to report that his wife was damned for ever. The chief workmen and
framers of this tragedy were Colimannus, and Stephanus Atrebatensij, both
doctors of divinity, and Colimannus a great co^iurer, having all his
implements in a readiness, which he woonted to use in such business: and thus
they handled the matter. They place over the arche of the church a young nouice:
he about midnight when they came to mumble their prayers (as they were wont to
do) makes a great ru^bling and noise: out of hand the Monks began to conjure
and charm, but he answers nothing, then being required to give a sign
whether he were a dumb Spirit or no, he begins to rumble and stir again:
which thing they took as a certain sign. Having laid this fou^dacion, they
go unto certain citizens, chief men and such as favored them, declaring that a
heavy chance had happened at home, in their monastery* not showing what ye
matter was, but desiring them to come to their mattens at midnight. When those
citizens were come and that prayers were now begun, the counterfeit Spirit
begins to make a marvelous noise in ye top of the church, and being asked
what he meant, and who he was, he gives the^ signs that it is not lawful for
him to speak: Therefore they command him to make answer by tokens and signs,
to certain things they would demand of him. Now was there a hole made in
the vaute, through the which he might hear and understand the voice of the
co^iurer: and then had he in his hand a little boorde which at every question
he struck in such sort as he might easyly ^e heard beneath. First therefore
they ask him whether he were one of them that had bin buried in the same
place, afterward they reckning up many by name which had bin buried there,
at the last also name the majors wife: and there by and by, the Spirit gave
the sign that he was her soul. He was further asked whether he were damned or
no, and if he were, for what deserte or fault? Whether for couetousenesse, or
wanton lust, for pride, or want of charity, or whether it were for heresy,
and for the sect of Luther newly sprung up? Also what he meante by that noise
and stir he kept there? Whether it were to have the body now buried in holy
ground to be dug up again, and to be laid in some other place? To all the
which points, he answered by signs as he was commanded, by the which he
affirmed, or denied any thing, according as he struck the boorde twice or
thrice together. And when he had thus given the^ to understand, that the very
cause of his damnation was Luthers heresy, and that the body must needs be
dug up again, the monks request ye citizens (whose presence they had used)
that they would bear witness of those things which they had seen with their
eyes, and that they would subscribe to such things, as were done a few days
before. The citizens taking good advise on the matter, least they should
offend the mayor, or bring themselves in trouble, refuse so to do: but the
Monks notwithstanding take from thence the sweet bread, which they call ye
host, and body of our Lord, together with all the relics of saints, and carry
the^ to an other place, and there say their Mass. The bishops substitute judge
(whom they call Official) understanding this matter, comes thither
accompanied with certain honest me^, to the intent he might know ye whole
circumstances more exactly, and therefore he commands the^ to make co^iuratio^
in his presence, and also he requires certain to be chosen to go up to ye top
of the vault, and there to see whether any ghost apered or not. That Stephanus
Atrebate^sis stiffly denied, and maruellously persuading the contrary,
affirmed, yt the spirit in no wise ought to be troubled. And albeit ye
Official, urged the^ very much, yt there might be some coniuring of ye spirit,
yet could he nothing prevail. In ye mean while yt these things were a doing,
the mayor, when he had showed ye other justices of ye city, what he would have
the^ do, took his journey to the king, and opened the whole matter unto him. And
because the monks refused judgment upon plea of their own laws and
liberties: the king chosing out certain of the Aldermen of Paris, gives them
absolute and full authority, to make inquiry on the matter. The like does the
chancellor, master Anthonius Pratensis, Cardinal and legate for the Pope,
throughout France. Therefore when they had no exception to allege, they
were conveyed unto Paris and there constreyned to make their answer: but yet
could nothing be wroong out of them by confession. Whereupon they were put a
part into diverse prisons, the Nouice being kept in the house of master
Fumaeus, one of the Aldermen, who being oftentimes examined and earnestly
requested to utter the truth, would notwithstanding confess nothing, because
he feared that the Monks would afterward put him to death, for stayning their
order, and putting it to open shame: but when the judges had made him sure
promise, that he should escape punishment, and that he should never come into
their handling, he ripped up unto them the whole matter, as it was done, and
being brought before his fellows, aduouched the same to their faces. The Monks
albeit they were by these means convicted, and almost taken tardy with the
deed doing, yet did they refuse the Judges, bragging and vaunting them selves
on their priuileages: but al in vain: for sentence passed on them, and they
were condemned: that they being carried back again to Orleaunce, and there
cast in prison, should finally be brought forth to the chief Church of the
city openly, and from thence to the place of execution, where they should make
open confession of their trespasses. But there chanced at the very same time a
greuouse persecution against the Lutherans, which was the cause why that
sentence, (albeit it was too gentle for so great an offense) was never put in
execution. For they feared much, because Luthers name was odious every where,
least if any sharp judgment had passed, they should not so much have
punished the offenders, as shamed their order: and many supposed that
whatsoever had happened unto them, would have bin a pleasant and joyful pageaunt
and spectacle for the Lutherans. Now the order of the Franciscane Friars, has
the opinion of great holiness with the common people: insomuche, that when
they being condemned, were carried to Orleaunce certain fond women moved with
foolish pity, followed them to the very gates of the city, w^ping and
sighing abundantly. When they were come to Orleaunce, and were there cast into
diverse prisons, again they vaunted and bare them selves very brag on their
priuileages, and liberties: and so at the last when they had lien long in
prison, they were in the end delivered without any greater punishment. All the
while they were in prison, they wanted nothing: for there was bestowed upon
them, especially by women, very largely, for to serve for their living, and to
purchase to them help and favor. Except these persecutions and troubles,
which we spoke of before, had hindered the matter, the king (as many reported)
was fully determined, to have overthrown their house, and made it even with ye
ground.

This history also does demonstrate and shew^, that Spirits are not always
heard, when some men affirm^ they are.

CHAP. IX. Of a certain parish Priest at Clauenna, which feigned him self
to be our Lady, and of an other that counterfeited him self to be a soul: as
also of a certain disguised Jesuit Friar.
TO the end we may the better vnderstand^ this matter, I will yet rehearse an
other history of a certain parish priest, which chan^^d a year before the
other I spoke of, which is set forth breefly but yet truly, loa^nes Stumpfius.
by loannes Stumpfius, in the German Chronicles of the Heluetians the 20. book
and 8. chapter, whereof also many notable men at this day bear sufficient
witness. A certain parish priest of Claeuenna, (which is a City near the
Laake or water Larius in the country of Rhetia, being far in love with an
honest and fair maiden, the daughter of a citizen in the same town, oftentimes
followed her, as she went unto her fathers barn: and attempted to have
defloured her, but she ever resisted, and put him back. In the end when he
saw he could not obteyn his purpose, he privily stole out of the church a blew
cloth, beset with sundry stars, and therewith covering himself, save only yt
he left his arms and feet naked, which he also berayed with blood, he hides
himself without the town, and there muffling his face with a thin linen
cloth, meets again with the maid, fayning himself with a cou^terfait voice,
to be the blessed virgin Mary. Then in many words he declares unto her diverse
plages, which were shortly like to fall on the city, for the heresies of
Luther, (for at other times also he had bitterly inueyed against Luther, in
his open Sermons:) he also commanded the maid to show many things unto the
citizens, touching holydays, fastings, general processions. etc. And amongst
other things he added, that there was a certain holy and religious man, which
had heretofore asked a thing at her hands in the very same place, which she
had hitherto denied him, but now it was her pleasure, if he required the same
again, she should in any wise grant it, if she would atteyn everlasting life:
and y^ above al thing, she must concele and keep close this latter point unto
her self. The mayde^ by and by blazed it about all ye city, yt our Lady had
visibly appeared unto her, and foretold her of sundry plages likely to happen
unto ye city. The inhabitants taking good advise on this matter, at the last
for fear of these imminent dangers and plages, gave commandment, that three
days should be kept holy. In the which time the maid, supposing she should do
high service to the uirgin Mary, fulfilleth the lust of that wicked knave. This
treachery and deceyt being shortly after detected by the wonderful providence
of God, the varlet was first beheaded, and afterward brent in fire.

Erasmus Roterodamus writes in his.xxij. book of Epistles, unto a certain
bishop, excusing himself, Erasmus.
touching certain points, which he had moved unto him, to the end he should be
very circumspect: and amongst other things, making mention there of spirits or
wandering souls, he reports this history. There was (says he) a certain
parish priest, who had dwelling with him in his house, a niece of his, a woman
well stored with money: Into whose chamber he would oftentimes privily convey
himself, being disguysed in a sheet like unto a Spirit: And then he cast
forth a doubtful voice, hoping that the woman would either procure a
coniurer, for her help, or else her self make him answer. But she having a
manlike courage, privily requesteth one of her friends to lodge in her chamber
secretly all night. The man being armed with a club in sted of other coniuring
tools, and being well tippled with drink, to avoid fear, hides him self in
the bed. Suddenly comes the spirit roaring very miserably: The coniurer with
his club awaketh, leapeth out of his bed scant sober, and sets upon him.
Then the spirit with his voice and gesture begins to make him afraid. But
the drunken coniurer soon answered him: If (quod he) thou be ye devil I am thy
mother: and therewith catching hold on him, all to be beat him with his club,
and would also have slain him, if he had not changed his voice, and cried, O
spare me for Gods sake, I am no soul, but I am sir John. Which voice when the
woman heard and knew, she leapes out of her bed, and parts the fraye. etc.
The same Erasmus writes in the foresaid ^pistle, that this Priest upon Ester
eve, Spectrum.
put live crabs privily into ye churchyard, having wax candles on light
cleaving to their sides: which when they crauled amongst the graves, seemed to
be such a terrible sight, that no man durst approach near them. Hereof rose a
fearful report, wherewith all men being amazed, the priest declares to ye
people in the pulpit, that they were ye souls of dead men which desired to be
delivered out of their torments by Masses and alms deeds. This deceyte was
espied by these means: that at the last one or two of the crabbes were found
amongst ye rubbish, having the candles done out cleaving on their backs, which
ye priest had not taken up.

Georgius Buchananus.
Georgius Buchananus, prince of all Poets in this ^ur age, reports an
history in his Comedy called Franciscanus, of one Langus a priest, who falsely
affirming that in a field of Scotla^de full of Brimstone there were souls
miserably tormented, which continually cried for help an^ succor, suborned a
country clown whom he would conjure, as if he had bin one of those souls.
Which disceyte of his, y^ husbandma^ afterward discovered when he was dru^k. I
would hear repeat his verses, but that his books are now in every man's
hands. While I was writing these things, it was reported unto me by credible
persons, that in August^, a noble city of Germanye, this present year 1569.
there was a maid and certain other men servants in a great man's family, which
little regarded the sect of the Jesuit Friars: and that one of the said order
made promise to their master, that he would easyly bring the^ to an other
opinion: and so disguising him self like unto a Dyuell was hid in a privy
corner of ye house: unto the which place, one of the maids going, either of
her own accord to fetch^ some thing, or being sent by her master, was by ye
disguised Jesuit made maruellously afraid: which thing she presently
declared unto one of the me^ servants, exhorting him in any wise to take heed
of the place. Who shortly after going to the sam^ place, and laying hold on his
dagger, suddenly stabbed in the counterfeit devil, as he came rushing on him.
This history, is written in dutche verses, and put in print, and now almost in
every man's hands.

CHAP. X. That it is no marvel if vain sightes have been in old time,
neither yet that it is to be marvelled at, if there be any at this day.
MAny other like examples might be brought but these may suffize to prove
evidently, to what point ambition, covetousness, envy, hatrede, stubburn^esse,
idleness and love, do most commonly drive men.

We see by common experience, Ambition.
that proud ambitious men dare adventure any thing. If they may hurt or hinder
other men by accusations, slanders, or any other ways or means, whom they
suppose may prejudice or let their exalting to honor, they stick not at all to
do it. What marvel is it then that Monks and Priests, which desire to be
aloft, endeavor now a days to purchase unto themselves authority by false
miracles, vain apparitions, and such other like trumperie.

All men know what a pernicious thing covetousness is. For they which are not
contented to live with a little, Covetousness*
but will needs be rich, neither care for any man, nor yet spare any man.
Hungry guts seek sundry ways to fill themselves: few willingly endure
hunger. Wherefore it is not to be marvelled at, if amongst Monks and priests
at these our days, who have b^n ever reported to be covetous, there be some
found, which by false apparitions of souls, seek their gains, inuenting holy
pilgrimages, and other baytes to get money For what will not idle and slothful
lubbers attempt to purchase riches? Paul^*
Does not Saint Paul say, that those which will wax rich by idleness, fall
into the snares of the Devil?

Emulation, wilfulness, envy hatred, contention, Envy.
desire to overcome, what they may do, what they may bring to pass, daily
experience teaches us. The preachers of Berna, when they perceived they could
not ouercom their adversaries by any other means, yielded themselves (which is
horrible to be spoken) unto the Devil, making him one of their counsel. And who
can deny but ye priests now adays are also for the most part, stubborn, and
full of contention.

Idleness.
Idleness is the nurse and mother of all mischief: what goodness then may ye
look for of them, which not only exercise the^ selves in no labors prescribed
by God, neither yet apply them selves to good learning, but day and night play
the gluttons? Tell me I pray thee, whether the laboring husbandman, or the idle
man, who always spent his time in inuenting pernitio^s mischieues, first
found out those cruel instruments of war which they call gunnes.

It might be declared in many words what love is able to do. Love.
Now because Monks and priests live idly, abounding in all wantonness, and
yet are restrained from holy marriage, what marvel is it if at this time also
they feign and counterfeite many visions, that they might thereby the eas^er
enjoy their love? And here I will not say it is to be feared, that there are
many amongst them so wicked and villainous, as to exercise and practice magical
arts, and such like, which are utterly forbidden. Who can then marvel
hereafter, if it be said, they counterfaite spirits, affirming they have let
men see this or that soul? For in what men soever these vices be, which we
have rehearsed, surely those dare boldly adventure any thing.

No kind of men are more obnoxious to these kind of things, than those which
lead their life in monasteries, and colleges: and therefore no man ought to
marvel or think it a strange thing, if we say that in times past many false
visions have bin practiced, and may also at this day likewise happen. For the
world, as all men justly complain, waxes worse and worse. Men are now more
impudent more bold, more covetous, and more wicked, than ever they were in
times past.

Moreover the clergy of Rome have in many places this prerogative above
others, that most men (especially such as are led by superstition) make much of
them, worshipping them with great reverence, no man so much as suspecteth them
to apply their minds to evil matters, to subtlety, craft, and disceyte: al
men look for other things at their hands. If therefore they addict them
selves to evil devises, they may easily deceive men, except God miraculously
reuele their wickedness, and bring it to light, as we declared in a few
examples rehearsed before.

And perchance for this cause also priests and Monks could not be so well
blamed, for their so often deceyuing plain meaning folks with craft and
subtlety, in so much as some of their most holy fathers, Popes have feigned
visions*
I mean Popes of Rome have bin very cunning in magical sciences, as their
own historiographers affirm, and by means of those arts, have aspired to
the high top of Popedom* Beno (or rather Bruno, Bruno.
for so I judge his name is) who was also a Cardinal, set forth the life of
Pope Gregory the seventh, in writing, Gregorius. 7.
in the which he shows the said bishop to have bin a proud, arrogante,
malicious and covetous Monk, and that he was thoroughly seen in the black
art of Negromancie. Bartholom^us Platina.
Bartholomeus Platina (who being a sworn servant with the Pope, excusing
their faults as much as he can) writes of Siluester the second, yt he gave
him self to the Devil, and that by his means, his counsel and magical
devises, he atteined ye great office of papacy. Do ye think, yt it is a hard
thing for him that is confederat with the enemy of ma^kinde, to feign spirits and
souls, or to co^iure a Devil, to make me^ believe he were a s^ule, do you
think such men abhor to do such mischief? The Historiographers report that
Bonifacius the 8. deceived his predecessor Celestinus, by a voice sent through
a cane reed, Bonifacius.
as though it had come from Heaven, persuading him to give over his office of
popeship, and to institute therein, one Bonifacius a woorthier man than he,
except he would be thrust out of the kingdom of heaven. The poor simple Pope
obeying this voice, ordained Bonifacius Pope in his stead, in the year of our
Lord.1254. who first brought in the year of Iubile. Of this Boniface, the
common people would say, He came in like a Fox, he reigned like a Wolf, and
died like a Dog. If the very vicar of Christ, who has all knowledge as it
were fast locked in the Coffer of his breast, could be deceived, let no man
marvel any more if simple credulous husbandmen and citezens have been deceived,
and that it has bin said to them: God spoke this: This soul did ask help:
and such like things, which are most false and vain. If this man could
counterfeite the voice of God, could he not also feign the voice of dead men?

Sometimes Lay men beguile the priests.
Before I proceed any further, this is also to be observed, that pleasant
conceited fellows, may often times deceive the priests them selves. For when
the priests did brag, that they could conjure Spirits and deliver men's souls:
it may be that other being wrapped in sheets, having underneath them live coals
in an earthen pot, appeared unto priests, who by and by were persuaded they
saw souls which required their help to be delivered. Erasmus in his
Colloquio or talk which he entitled Exorcismus, ve^ ^pectrum, or a
coniuration or vision, writes how one Polus maruellously deceived a priest
called Faustus. But there is nodoubt but that priests being many times deceived
in jest by the lay men for pastimes sake, have on the other side more often
times beguiled them in earnest.

I have spoken hitherto of men being awake, and now I will add a feaw words of
such as sleep. Men walking by night.
There be many which have such a kind of disease, that they walk in their
sleep: which thing we read to have bin true in one Theon a Stoicke, and in
Pericles servant, who in their sleep, climed up to the top of the house. I
have heard of some which in their sleep have done that which being awake,
they could not do by any means. If a man see such a one walking in the night,
either appareled or naked, and after hear him say he was at ye same time in
his bed, he will straight think, it was his soul that he saw, the like will
he do if he hear such a one at his own house.

CHAP. XI. That many natural things are taken to be ghosts.
THere happen daily many things by the ordinary course of nature, which diverse
me^, especially they that are timorous and fearful, suppose to be visions or
Spirits. As for example, when they hear the crying of rats, cats, weasels,
martins, or any other beast, or when they hear a horse beat his feet on the
plankes in the stable at midnight, by and by they sweat for fear, supposing
some buggs to walk in the dead of the night. Sometimes a bitter, or hearne
(which birds are seldom seen with us in Germany) or some other strange
birds, make a noise in ye air: many fools straight ways dream, they have
heard I wot not what. If a worm which fretteth wood, or that breeds in
trees chance to gnawe a wall of waynescot, or other timber, many will judge
they hear one softly knocking upon an anduill with a sledge: and sometimes
they imagine they hear many hammers at one time. Simple foolish me^ hearing
these things, imagine, I know not how, that there be certain elues or fairies
of the earth, Fayries of the earth.
and tell many strange and marvelous tales of them, which they have heard of
their grandmothers and mothers, how they have appeared unto those of the
house, have done service, have rocked the cradell, and (which is a sign of
good luck) do continually tarry in the house. If such dwarfes or elues have
bin seen at any time, surely they were evil Spirits. For we read that the
Gentiles in time past, had their familiar or household gods, whom they
worshipped with great devotion, because (as they thought) they took care of
their house, and defended their family: and unto these men, evil spirits did
sometimes appear, thereby to confirm them the more in their blind superstition.

Olaus magnus Archbishop of Vpsalia, writes in his history de Gentibus
Septentrionalibus, Olaus magnus
that even at this day also, there are spirits seen in these countries, which
having the shape of men, do me^ service in the night, dressing their horse,
and looking to their cattle. The wind in the night, overthrows some thing,
or shakes a casement or lid of the window: many by and by think they see a
spirit, and can very hardly be brought from y^ vayn opinion.

This thing is also according to nature, that when a man either cries or
speaks in the woods, Echo.
valeys, or other hollow places, Echo will resound the later word or syllable,
so plainly many times, that a man would verily think some living body made him
answer again. Many would be afraid hereof at al times, but especially in the
night season, except he knew very well it were a natural thing.

Cardanus in his book de subtilitate lib. 18* rehearses a marvelous history
of one Comensis, Cardanus.
who very late in the night, coming to a rivers side, not knowing where he
might pass over, called cut aloude for some body to show him the foorde, and
when the Echo made him answer, he supposing it to be a man, asked him if he
might pass over here: to whom the Echo answered again in ye Italia^ tongue,
Here, here. But in ye place was a whirlepoole, and a great roaring of the water:
Therefore ye man douting, asks once or twice again, whether the river might
be past over in the same place: to which ye Echo answered still y^ it might. In
ye end, when he had escaped the passage without danger, he told his friends,
how by the persuasion of the devil, he had almost thrown himself hedlong into
the river, and drowned himself. In the same place, he says, yt the great Hall
at Ticinium in Italy, does render sundry and manyfolde voices, if one speak in
it, and that the voices as it were die and make an end much like a man's voice,
when he lies a dying, in so much that a man can scant be persuaded it is the
noise of Echo.

There are certain things which shine only in the night, as some precious
stones do, Things shining by night.
the eyes of certain beasts, a Gloewoorme, or gloebearde, as also some kind
of rotten wood, wherewith many times children so terrify their playfellowes,
that they imagine with themselves, to see evil spirits, or men al burning with
fire. Hector Boethius writes, Hector Boethius.
yt a certain king of Scots caused some of his men to be disguised in garments
with brighte shyning scales, having in their hands rotten wood instead of
s^aues and so to appear to his nobility and lords in the night, exhorting
them to fight courageously with their enemies, and promising them to obtein
victory. Whereby the noble men supposing they had seen angels, behaved
themselves valiantly, and achieved the victory.

Many times candles and small fires appear in the night, and seem to run up
and down. Burning lights
And as the young men in Heluetia, who with their firebrands which they light,
at the bonfires in Shroftide, sometime gather them selves together, and then
scatter abroad, and again, meeting together, march in a long rank: even so do
those f^ers sometime seem to come together, and by and by to be severed and
run abroad, and at the last to vanish clean away. Sometime these f^ers go alone
in the night season, and put such as see them, as they travel by night, in
great fear. But these things, and many such like have their natural causes:
and yet I will not deny, but that many times Dyuels delude men in this manner.

Natural Philosophers write, Exhalations.
that thick exhalations arise out of the earth, and are kyndled. Mines full
of sulphur and brimstone, if the air enter unto it, as it lies in the holes
and veins of the earth, will kindle on fire, and strive to get out. Sometimes
fire bursteth out of the earth, as high as a tall tree, and is soddenly put out
again. Which thing is to be thought to proceed of fiery matter, seeking a
vent to gushe out at. We read of the mount Aetna in Cicilie, that in times
past it burnte continually, day and night, casting forth flames of fire, fiery
stones and ashes in great abundaunce. The like is read also at Vesunius a hill
in Campaine, about a German mile from Naples: The same hill in ye time of
Titus the Emperor, as S. Hierom reports, cast forth of it so much fire,
that it burnt the country, and cities, and people round about it, and filled
the fields adjoining full of cinders and ashes. These two hills, even in our
days boiling with great heat, have very much indamaged the people
inhabiting thereabout. In Iseland, as Olaus Magnus witnesses are found fires
which break out of the earth. And as whole hills and mountains may burn,
even so may a little fire be kindled in the earth, and yet wander very large.
They which traveling by the way, or by some other means chance to see these
things, and know not the natural causes of them, imagine by reason of fear,
that they have seen men burning like fire, or some other strange thing, which
they have heard other men talk of. And by means of their great fear, often
times they fall into great dangerous diseases.

Glasses.
The art perspectiue does also work this wonderful feate, that diverse and
sundry shapes will appear in glasses made and set together after a certain
artificial sort: some times they will seem to go out of the doors, and
resemble men of our familiar acquayntaunce. Many things in very deed are
natural, although we can not find any natural reason for them.

And yet by the way, they show them selves too foolish, which labor to bring
al things to natural causes. Here I will say nothing of those men, which can
bear plain and rude people in hand, that they, or some other of their
acquaintance, have seen strange things, which they earnestly auouche to be
true, when as in deed there was no such* thing. How often I pray you, do we
hear things affirmed as true, which afterward prove most false: as that one
was carried away body and soul, that an other was put to death, and an infinite
number of such like reports.

CHAP. XII. A proof out of the Gentiles histories, that Spirits and ghosts do
often times appear.
ALbeit many melancholic, mad, fearful, and weak sensed men do oftentimes
imagine many things which in very deed are not, and are likewise deceived,
sometime by men, or by brute beasts: and moreover mistake things which proceed
of natural causes to be bugs and spirits, as I have hitherto declared by many
examples, yet it is most certain and sure, that all those things which appear
unto men are not always natural things nor always vain terrors to affray
men: but that spirits do often appear, and many strange and marvelous things
do sundry times chance. For many such things of this sort are to be red in
diverse grave and ancient historiographers: and many men of no small credit,
have affirmed, that they have seen spirits both in the day and in the night
also. And here I will orderly declare a few histories out of diverse allowed
authors, touching spirits which have appeared and showed them selves.

Suetonius Tranquillus writes, Triton appeared to Julius Caesar.
that when Julius Caesar marching out of France into Italy with his army, and
coming to the river Rubico, which deuideth Italy from the hither France,
staying there a while, and reuoluing with him self how great an enterprise he
had taken in hand, as he was wavering in mind whether he should pass the
water or not, suddenly there appeared a man of excelling stature and shape
sitting hard by, piping on a reed. ( Melancthon in his phisicks calls him
^^iton) unto whom when not only shepherds, but also very many soldiers from
the camp, and amongst them diverse trumpetters had flocked to hear him, he
suddenly snatched a trumpet from one of them, and leaped to the river, and with
a lusty breath blowing up the alarm, went to the farther side. Then said
Caesar: good luck mates, let us go whether the gods warnings lead us, and
whether our enemies iniquity calls us: The dice are thrown. And so he
transported over.

Theseus seen in the battle of Maratho.
Plutarke writes in Theseus life, that many which were in the battle of
Marathonia, against the Medians, did affirm, that they saw the soul of
Theseus armed (who long time before died of a fall) before the vauntgard of the
Grecians, running and setting on the barbarous Medians. For which cause the
Athenia^s afterward were moved to honor him as a demigod.

Pausanias writes in Atticis, That in the field of Maratho. 400. years after
the battle there foughten, there was hard the neying of horses, and the
incountring of soldiers as it were fighting every night: And that they which
of purpose came to hear these things, could hear nothing, but those that by
chance came that way, heard it very sensibly.

The same Plutarke writes in the life of Cimon, that when the citizens of
Cheronesus had by fair words called home their captain Damon, (who before for
diverse murders departed the city) afterward they cruelly sle^ him in a
hotehouse, as he was bathing him self, and from that time forth, there were
many strange sightes seen in the same place, and many times also most grievous
gronings were there heard, in so much that they were ever after constreyned to
stop up the hotehouse doors.

Also in ye life of Dion, he reports, that the said Dion being a stout and a
courageous man without any fear, saw notwithstanding a great and marvelous
horible sight. For when he chanced to sit alone in the entry of his house in
the evening (those are Plutarks own words, as Xiliander interprets them)
musing and discoursing many things with him self, being suddenly moved with a
great noise, he arose and looked back to the other side of the gall^rie, and
there he espied a monstrous great woman, who in apparel and countenance
nothing differing from a Tragical fury, swept the house with a broom. With
the which ^ight being amazed and terribly afraid, he called his friends and
acquaintance unto him, and declaring unto the^ what he had seen, desired the^
to remain with him all that night: for being as it were stricken dead with
fear, he doubted least it would appear unto him again, if he were alone,
which in deed never happened after. But a few days after his son threw him
self hedlong from the top of the house, and died, and he him self being
stabbed through the body, ended his miserable life.

The same author writes in the life of Decius Brutus, how when Brutus was
determined to transporte his army out of Asia into Europe, being in his tent
about midnight, the candle burning dimly, and all the host quiet and silent, as
he was m^^ing and reuoluing with him self, he seemed that he heard one
entering the Tente into him, and looking back unto the door, he saw a
terrible and monstrous shape of a body, which far exceeded the common
stature of men, standing fast by him without any words, wherewith he was sore
afraid: and yet he ventured to ask it this question. What art thou (says
he) either a God, or a man? and why come thou unto me? Whereto the image
answered: I am (quod he) O Brutus, thy evil ghost, at Philippos thou shall
see me. Then says Brutus being nothing amazed: I will see thee. When the sight
was vanished, he called his servants, who told him, that they neither saw any
such thing, neither heard any voice at all. All that night Brutus could not
sleep one wink. In the morning very early he goes unto Cassius and shows
him his strange vision, Cassius who despised all such things (for he was an
Epicure) ascribed the whole matter to natural causes. For his disputation
hereof, is yet extant in Plutarke. Afterward Brutus (being vanguished by
Augustus, and Anthony in the field of Philippi) slew himself because he would
not be delivered into the hands of his enemies.

C. Cassius saw I. Caesar.
Valerius Maximus, in his first book and.vj. chap. writes, that Caius Cassius
saw Julius Caesar in the battle of Philippi, (in a shape of greater majesty,
than any man has) setting spurs to his horse, and running on him with a
terrible threatening countenance: which when Cassius saw, he turned his back
to the enemy, and fled, and shortly after murdered himself.

Dio Cassius Nicaeus in his Roman history from the beginning of his 55. book
writes of Drusus, Drusus saw a woman excelling all mortal creatures in
majesty.
who by spoiling Germany far and near on every side, came even to the river
Albis, where when he could not get over, erecting monuments of victory,
departed back again: For he there saw a woman, exceeding the state of mortal
creatures, which met him, and said unto him: Drusus, which can find n^ end of
the greedy desire, whether go thou? It is not laufull for thee to see al
these things: but rather get thee hence, for the end both of thy life and
worthy deeds is now at hand. When Drusus heard these things, he suddenly
changed his course, and being in his journey, before he came to the river of
Rein, he sickned and dyed. Other like foretokens the same author reports to
have happened before his death, all the which notwithstanding, he nothing
regarded. For two young men appeared on horseback upon the rampires, and the
shryking of women was also heard, with many other such like. etc.

Plinius secundus citizen of Nouocomensis has an Epistle of Spirits
appearings, Plinius secundus writing of spirits.
written unto his friend Sura in the.vij. book of his Epistles, which we have
thought good to set down whole in this place: Leisure (says he) grants me
liberty to learn, and gives thee leave to teach. Therefore I am very
desirous to know whether thou think fantasyes are any thing, and whether they
have any proper figure of their own, and be some kind of divine power, or
else whether they take upon them ^ome vayn and variable shape, according to
the fear which we have of them. That I should so believe, I am especially
moved thereto by that which I hear say happened to Curtius Rufus, who was as
then, companion to the ^^^consyl of Africa* both poor, and also of small
reputation. And as he walked one day in a Gallerie toward the evening, there
meets with him the shape of a woman, more great and beautiful, than any
living creature. Whereat he being amazed, she tells him that she is Africa,
and is come unto him to foretell him of good hap to follow: First that he
should go to Rome, and there take on him the state of great honor, and
afterward, that he should return into the same province with full and high
authority, and there end his days. Which things came all to pass. And
moreover, the same figure (as it is said) met with him again on the shore
side, as he entered out of the (...), and came toward Carthage* to take his
charge and regiment in hand. Afterward falling sick, when no man dispay^ed of
his health, coniecturing things to come by those that had passed, and
comparing adversity with his former prosperity, he utterly cast away all
hope of recovery. Is not this also more terrible, and no less marvelous,
which I will now repeat as I have heard it told?

There was in Athens a goodly and a very large house, but evil reported, The
spirit of Athens.
and counted as an unfortunate and unlucky house. For about mydnight, there
was heard the noise of iron, and if one marked it well, the rattling of chains,
as it were a far off at the first, and so, nearer and nearer: shortly there
appeered an image or shape, as it were an old man, lean and loathsome to
behold, with a long beard and staring hair: on his legs he had fetters, and
in his hands carried chains which he always ra^led together. By means whereof,
th^se that inhabited the house, by reason of their fear, watched many heavy
and pitiful nights: after their watching followed sickness, and soon after, as
fear increased, ensued death. For in the day time also, alb^it the image were
departed, yet the remembrance thereof, was ever present before their eyes: so
that their fear was longer than they had cause to fear. Upon this the house
stood desert and solitary, wholly le^te unto the monster which haunted it:
yet was it proclaimed to be sold, if happily any man which was ignorant of
this great mischief, would either buy it or hire it. Athenodorus chanced to
come to Athens and there reads the writing on the door: And when he had
learned the price, because he suspected the good cheapnesse thereof, enquiryng
further, understood the whole matter, and notwithstanding any thing that he
heard, he hired the house, so much the rather. When it waxed night, he
commands his servants to make his bed in the utter part^ of the house:
he takes his writing tables, his writing wier and a candle, and sends all
his servants into the inner part of the house. He himself settleth his mind,
his eyes and hand to write, least his mind being unoccupied, should imagine it
heard strange figures, and should breed vain fear. In the beginning of the
night, there was silence as is in all other places, but not long after the iron
began to ring, and the chains to move: but yet he would not look up, nor let
cease his writing, but hardened his heart, and stopped his ears. Then the noise
increases and draws near, and seems sometimes to be without the porche,
sometimes within. Then he looks back, and sees and acknowledges the shape
whereof he had heard before: the image stood still and beckned with his finger
as though he had called him, the philosopher on the other side signifies with
his hand, that he should stay a while, and falls again to his writing. The
image shakes his chains over his head, as he sat writing. He looks about
again, and sees him becknyng, as he did before. And so rysyng up without
delay, takes the candle in his hand and follows: the image goes before with
a softely pase, as though he were heavily laden with chains: After he had
turned aside into the court of the house, sodeinly vanishing away, leaves his
walking mate alone. He being forsaken, lays herbs and leaves gathered
together upon the place. The next day he goth to the rulers of the city, and
wills them to command the place to be dug up, which done, they find
boanes wrapped and tied in chains: which the body being p^tri^ied and
consumed with long lying in the earth, had left lying in bonds: those boanes
being gathered together, were buried solemnly: The house, after they were
orderly laid in the ground, was ever after clear of all such ghostes.

In these things I must believe other men's reports, but that which follows, I
can boldly affirm on mine own knowledge.

I have one with me, sometime my bondeseruaunt, but now enfraunchized and set
at liberty, a man not utterly unlearned: with him my younger brother lay
together in one bed. He in his own imagination seemed that he saw a certain
personage sitting upon the bed where he la^e, putting knives unto his head,
and therewith polling off his hears. When it was day light, the ^eare^ were
found on the ground, he being in very deed notted about ye crown^ of his head.
Shortly after the like happened unto him, which made all men believe the first
was true. The boy amongst a great many of his f^llowes chanced to sleep in
the schole, and being in sleep, there came certain in at the windows (as he
said) clothed in white garments, and shore of his hear as he lay, and so
departed again as they came. This polling, and also his hairs scattered
abroad, were found when it was day. No notable matter ensued hereof, except
it were, perchance, that I was not accused of treason, as I should have bin,
if Domitianus, who died about this time, had lived longer. For there was a
libell found in his coffers, given unto him against me, written by master
Carus. By which it may well be coniectured, that in so much as those which are
accused, do use to let their hear grow very long, the cutting of my friends
hear, was a sure sign of escaping the great danger, which then hong over my
head. Wherefore I hartyly require you to strain your learning. The matter is
worthy, wherein ye may use long and deep consideration: and I surely am
unworthy to whom ye should open your knowledge. You may therefore (if it please
you) dispute the matter on both sids, as ye are accustomed, but yet I pray you
handle it more thoroughly on the one side, least ye send me away wandering and
hanging in doubt, whereas the cause of my seeking counsel is to the end I
might be quit out of doubt. Fare ye well.

What answer master Sura, (who as it appears, was well learned) made unto
master Pliny I do not find. But to say the truth, what sound answer could he,
being a Ge^tile make herin? The like history is to be red in ye collections of
John Manlius common places, Manlius.
who (as Philip Melancthon reports) does write, that Theodorus Gaza had a
lordship or manor place in Campana given him by Nicholas Pope of Rome. In the
manor, when by chance, one of his farmers had dug up a coffin with dead
men's bones in it, there suddenly appeared a spirit unto him, commanding him to
bury the coffin again, or else his son should shortly after dye. Which when
the farmer refused to do, shortly after his son was found slain in ye night.
A few days after the Spirit appeared again unto the husbandman, menacing and
threatening him, that in case he did not bury the aforesaid bones, he would
kill his other son also. The man taking warning by his loss, and seeing his
other son fallen sick, goes unto master Theodorus and shows him all the
matter. He understanding it, goes with him to the manor, and there in the
same place where the farmer had before dug up the coffin, casting a new
grave, they bury the coffin with the bones. As soon as th^e bones were laid
in the grave the husbandmans son immediately recovered his health.

Dion writes that the Emperor Traianus was lead out of the house, where he
had taken up his Inn, in the time of an earthquake, into a more safer place.

Julius Capitolinus which sets out a few lives of the common Emperors,
reports, that Pertinax for ye space of three days before he was slain by a
thrust, saw a certain shaddowe in one of his fishepondes, which with a sword
ready drawn threatened to slay him and thereby much disquieted him.

Flauius Vopiscus writes, that whereas Tacitus fathers grave opened it self
the sides thereof falling down of their own accord, and that his mothers soul
appeared both to him and Florianus day and night, as if she had bin living, it
was a most sure and infallible sign, that he should dye shortly after.

Ammianus Marcellinus writing of ye signs or prognosticatio^^ of Constantius
death, says that he was troubled and terrified in the night season with shapes
and figures.

The same author affirms in his 25. book, that a little before Iulianus
died, as he sat writing in the tents following the example of Julius Caesar, he
saw the image of the public Genius, or God of the place (which was wont to
be painted with Amaltheas horn in his hand) departing from him, more deformed
and ill favored, than when it began to mount up to the narrow top of the tent.

Lucan.
Lucanus as well an excellent historiographer, as also a most learned Poet,
reckneth up many forwarnings in his first book of the battle of Pharsalia
which chaunsed before the great conflict between Julius Caesar, and great
Pompeius: and amongst other things, he writes thus.

The trumpets blew, and look even as the battle joined apace*
So did the night with silent shaades increase her darkishe face.
And then the ghosts of Sylla fierce, were plainly s^ene in field,
Thereby declaring evil signs, of blood that should be spilde.
And by the flud of Anien, the husbandmen did spy
Great Marius, out of broken grave his head aduauncing hiye.
CHAP. XIII. A proof out of the histories of the ancient Church, and of the
vvritings of holy Fathers, that there are vvalking Spirits.
IF we read over the Ecclesiastical histories, we shall find many of these
examples. Sozomenus writes in his ecclesiastical history, the sixth book and
28. chapter, of one Apelles a black Smyth by occupation (whose name was at
that time very famous throughout Egip^e, Sozom^nus.
for the gift of working miracles, wherewith he was indewed) who as he was one
night hard at his work, had appering unto him, a vision of a Devil in the
likeness and attire of a very beautiful woman, moving and intising him to ye
vice of lechery. But he suddenly catching ye iron which he wrought on, glowing
hot out of the fire, thrust it in ye Devils face, and scorched his visage,
whereat he fretting and crying out, in all have fled away.

Likewise in his 7. book and 23. chap. writing of the sedition raised at
Antioche for the immoderate exactio^ and tribute which Theodosius laid on ye
city in ye time of wars, whereby the people being offended ouerthrewe the
images of the Emperor and his wife, dragging them in roapes about the city,
and reporting al kind of villainy and dispite against the^: thus he says. But
in the night before, as soon as the rebellion began, immediately at the break
of the day, it is certainly reported there was a strange sight seen, of a
woman having a huge stature and most horrible look, running up and down the
city through the streats al^ft in the air, whisking and ^eating the air
with a whip, rendering a fearful sound. That as men are wont to provoke wild
beasts to anger, which serve for public spectacles: even so it seemed, some
evil angel by the craft of the Devil stirred up that commotion amongst the
people.

Theodorus Lector in his first book of collectanies out of the ecclesiastical
history writes, Theodorus.
that as Gennadius patriarch of Constantinople, came down to the high altar
to make prayers and orizons, there appeared unto him a certain vision or
spirit in a most horrible shape and figure, which so soon as he had sharply
rebuked, straightways he herd a voice crying out aloud, yt so long as he lived
he would give place and cease, but when he was once dead he would surely ransack
and spoil the Church. Which when ye good father heard, he ernestly prayed for
ye preservation of ye Church, and soon after departed this life. There are
many things to be read in Grego^ius Nicephorus* who sets forth
^^clesiasticall matters at lar^^, Nicephorus.
and Abdias in ye lives of ye Apostles, concerning visions, dreams, miracles
of saints, and also appearings of spirits. For wise men judge, they were more
diligent and ready in describing such things, than in other matters, which might
have be^ to greater purpose and much more profitable for the readers to
understand.

He that reads over the Hystories, which in times paste have been written,
(and that especially by Monks) shall meet with an innumerable company of
these sort: Yet by the way I must needs say this, that very many things have
been written by them, which the Readers may justly suspecte, and stand in
great doubt of.

Ludouicus Viues, Beatus Rhenanus, and many other learned men of our time, in
describing other things do find great fault with the Chronicles written by
Monks, for that they were gathered together by unlearned ^^ltes without any
judgment. But let every man esteem of them as he l^st. For albeit there are
diverse things in them very foolish and ridiculous, yet it may be well thought
that many things ^ere so in very deed, as they have committed them to writing.

A man shall meet with many places concerning visions and appearing^ of
Spirits, even in the old father^ also. S. Ambrose in his.90. Sermon writes of
a noble Uirgin named Agnes who was crowned with martirdom for the profession of
christian religion. Ambrose.
And as her parents watched o^e night by her grave, they saw about midnight, a
goodly compani^ of Uirgins clothed in golden vayles, amongst whom also was
their ^aughter, arrayed like unto the rest: who willing the other virgins to
stay a while, turning her self toward her parents, willed them in any case,
not to bewail her as if she were dead, but rather to rejoice with her* for
that she had obtained of god eternal life. Which as soon as she had spoken, she
immediately vanished out of sight.

Augustine.
S. Augustine de^lareth in his book, De cura pro mortuis agenda, that when the
City of Nola was besieged by the Barbaruus, Felix appeared at Nola.
the citizens saw Felix the martyr plainly ^ppearing unto them. Touching S.
Gregory, who in his Dialogues writes many such things, we will in (...)
hereafter when his turn comes. Gregory.


Ye shall read of many such like in the lives of the ancient fathers, which
all are not to be rejected as vain and fabulous, for some part of them were
written by grave and learned men, whereof letting the rest pass for brevity
sake, I will here rehearse one short history.

It is to be seen in the life of Ioannes Chrysostom, that Basiliscus Bishop
of Comane (who suffered as a Martyr with Lucianus the Priest at Antioch,
Basiliscus appeared to Chrysostom.
under Maximianus the Emperor) appeered unto Saint Chrysostom, when he was in
exile, and said unto him: Brother John, be of good comfort, for to morrow we
shall be together. But first he appeered to the Priest of that Church, and
said unto him: prepare a place for our dear brother John, who will shortly
come hither. Which things the event proved afterward to be true.

CHAP. XIIII. That in the Books set forth by Monks, are many ridiculous and
vain apparitions.
WE made mention a little before, of Chronicles written by Monks. Now as
touching their legendes of Saints (as they term their storehouses of
examples, and lives of ancient Fathers, in the which are many apparitions of
Devils and Spyrits,) verily there is no cause at all why we should ascribe
much unto them, for the most part of such stuff as is set forth in them,
have no show nor likelyhoode of truth^: perchance their mind was to bring
men to great fear and Religion by those their counterfeited and imagined
histories. But concerning these, this place now serves not to entreat.

The like may be said, of many supersticious Popish writers, who following
these men's steps, have written many upon other men's credit and reports,
which least any man think I write, being moved with envy or hatred of the
persons, I will show you one only history or fable amongst so many, that you
may thereby have as it were a taste of that which I said even now.

S. Seuerine Bishop of Colein.
Petrus Damanus, who first was a Monk after the order of S. Benedict, and
afterward bishop of Hostia, a man of great estimation among Papists, as well
for the opinion they had of his learning, as for the show of his upright
living, tells a story of a certain Monk of Colein, who on a time passing
over a River on horseback, espied Saint Seuerinus sometime Bishop of Colein on
the river, who not long before was departed this life, and being buried at that
time, was much renoumed for doing sundry miracles. This Bishop catches hold
on the Monks bridle, and would not let him pass any further: wherewith the
Monk was sore afraid, and dilygently enquired of him, why he being so
notable a man, was there withholden in that place. The Bishop then required him
to lend him his hand, that he might understand by feeling how it was with
him, which when he haddoone, and that the Bishop had dipped the Monks hand
down into the water, suddenly in one moment all the flesh of his hand, by reason
of the extreme heat, was scalded off, so that the bones only remained albare.
Unto whom then ye Monk: since (quod he) thou art so famous a man in the Church,
how comes it to pass that thou art so grievously tormented? The Bishop
answered: only said he for this cause, for that I have not said over my
Canonical hours in due time distinctly as I should have done: for I was in
the Emperors Court busied and occupied with matters of his privy Counsel, in
the morning hudling up all my prayers at once, all the rest of the day I was
troubled with other business: and for that cause do I now suffer this punishment
of miserable heat. But let us both together call unto Almighty God, that it
may please him to restore thy hand again, which came presently to pass
as soon as they had thus said. And then spoke he to the Monk saying: Go my
son and desire the brethren of our Church, as also al other of the Clergy
there, to pour out their prayers for me, to give alms to the poor and
needy, and to persevere incessantly in offering up continual sacrifice for me,
for so sone as these things shall be fulfilled* I shall be delivered out of these
my torments, and shall be joyfully translated to the fellowship of those blessed
Citizens of heaven, which do earnestly desire my company. Out of this history
this argument or reason they make: If that good and Godly Bishop, who being
ouercharged with affairs of the Emperor leading to public wealth, could not
dispatche his talk of prayers in due time, and therefore is so miserably vexed
and tormented, what punishment may they look for, which having no necessary
business, say over the Canonical hours very coldely, or else leave them
clean vnsayde, that they may the better follow there own lusts and vain
devises? And heer^ note by the way, they make no mention at all of omytting
those things which God has expressly commanded us. But in case the Popish
Bishops do verily believe this story to be true, let them think with
themselves, how they can be able to excuse themselves before the Judgment
seat of Almighty God, for that they are content to be created Bishops of
those Churches, whereof notwithstanding they have no care nor regard, but
either wholly entangle themselves with worldly matters, or if they do deal in
matters of ye church, their whole study is directed to this end, to stop the
sincere preaching of Gods word, and to tread those underfoot, whose minds are
occupied day and night, to ye aduau^cing and setting forth of gods glory. Of
this stamp and sort are most of those things wherewith the Monks inferced and
stuffed their books.

CHAP. XV. A proof by other sufficient vvriters, that Spirits do sometime
appear.
AS touching other notable writers, they also make mention of spirits which
do often times appear. Alexander Alexandro.
Alexander ab Alexandria, an excellent Lawier, born at Naples in his second
book Gemaliuns ^ierum, and ninth chapter, writes that a certain familiar
friend of his, of good credit, did celebrate the funeral of one of his
acquaintance, and as he returned toward Rome, he entered into an Inn fast by
the way, because it was night, and there laid himself down to rest. As he
lay there alone broad awake, suddenly the Image of his friend lately
deceased, came before him marvelous pale and lean, even as he was when he saw
him last on his death bed, whom when he beheld, being almost besides himself
with fear, he demanded of him who he was? But the ghost making no answer, but
slipping of his clothes laid him down in the same bed, and drew near, as if
he would have embraced him. The other gave him place, and keeping him of from
him, by chance touched his foot, which seemed so extremely cold, as no ice in
the world might be compared unto it. Whereat the other looking very lowringly
upon him, took up his clothes again, and rose out of the bed, and was never
afterward seen. He reports other histories in the same place, which
happened in his time. He lived above four score years ago, or near that time.

B^ptista.
Baptista Fulgosus, Duke of Genua, in his book of worthy sayings and doings of
Emperors, Princes, Dukes. etc. (which he wrote being in exile to avoid
idleness: Touching strange and monstrous things) writes that in the Court
of Mattheus, surnamed the great Shyrife of ye City, in the Evening after sun
set, there was seen a man far exceeding common stature, sitting on a horse
in complete armor: who when he had been there seen of many, by the space of an
hour, in the end vanished away to ye great terror of those that beheld him.
About three days after in like manner, two men on horseback of the same
stature, were seen in the same place, about three hours within night,
fighting together a long season, and in the end vanished away as the other
did before. Not long after, Henry the seventh Emperor, departed this life, to
the utter undoing of all the Shirifes.

Immediately after this History, he puts an other more worthy memory than
the foremost. Lodouicus father to Alodisius, ruler of Immola, not long after he
died, appeared unto a Secretary, whom Ludouicus had sent to Ferraria, as he
was on his journey, ryding on a horse with a Hawk on his fist, as he was wont
when he lived, and willed the secretary (albeit wonderfully afraid) to bid his
Son the next day to repair unto the same place, for he had matter of
great importance to declare unto him. Which when Ludouicus heard, partly
because he could not believe it, partly for that he douted some body lay in
weight for him, he sent an other to answer in his room. With whom the same
soul meeting as it did before, lamented very much that his Son was not come
thither, for if he had so done, he said, he would have opened many other
things unto him. But as then he willed the messanger to tell him, that twenty
two years, one month and one day being passed, he should loose the rule and
government which he now possessed. As soon as the time forshewed by the
ghost was expired, albeit he were very circumspect and careful, yet the same
night, the soldiers of Phillip Duke of Millen, with whom he was in league and
therefore stood in no fear of him) came over the ditches hard frosen with ice
unto the walls, and raising up ladders, took both City and Prince together.

Phillip Malancthon writes in his book de anima, that he himself has seen
some spirits, and that he has known many men of good credit, which have
auoutched not only to have seen ghostes them selves, but also yt they have
talked a great while with them. In his book which he intituleth Examen
Theologicum, he reherseth this history. Malancthona annie.
Which was, that he had an aunt, who as she sat very heavily by the fire, after
her husband was dead, two men came into her house, whereof the one being very
like, said he was her husband deceased, the other being very tall, had the
shape of a Franciscan Friar. This that seemed to be the husband, came near the
chimney saluting his heavy wife, bidding her not to be afraid, for (as he
said) he came to command her certain things: then he bid the long Monk to
go aside a while into the stoue hard by. And there beginning his talk, after
many words, at the last he earnestly beseeches, and most heartily desires
her, to hire a Priest to say Mass for his soul, and so being ready to
depart, he bids her give him her right hand: which thing (she being sore
afraid) abhorring to do, after he had faithfully promised she should have
no harm, she gives her hand, which albeit in deed it had no hurt, yet did
it seem to be so scortched, that ever after it remained black. This being
done he calls forth the Franciscane, and hastily going forth together,
they vanysh away. Ioannes Manlius, in his collectanies of common places,
writes concerning other spirits which he and other men also did see, the first
tome in the chapter De malis spiritibus et ipsorum operibus, and also in the
chapter De satisfactione.

Ludouicus Viues.
Ludouicus Viues, says in his first book De veritate fidei that in the new
world lately found out, there is nothing more common, than, not that only in the
night time but also at noone in the midday, to see spirits apara^tly, in the
cities and fields, which speak, command, forbid, assault men, fear them and
strike the^. The very same do other report which describe those nauigations of
the great Ocean.

Hieronimus Cardanus of Millen, excellently seen in philosophy and physic,
Hieronimus Cardanus.
remembers a great many of these apparitions in his books De subtilitate, et
varietate rerum: which who so lysteth to read, I refer him to his books, for
I am desirous to be brief.

Olaus Magnus Archbishop of Vpsalia in Sueuelande, declares in his history
De Gentibus Septentrionalibus, Olaus.
the 2. book and 3. chap that spirits apeare in Iseland, in ye shape and
likeness of such, as men are acquainted withal: whom the inhabitants take by
the hand in stead of their acquaintance, before they have heard any word of
those their acquaintance death, whose similitude and likeness they take on
the^, neither do they understand that they are deceived before they shrink and
vanish away. These things have I brought together both out of the old and also
new writers, yt it might plainly apeare, that spirits do often times walk and
show themselves unto men.

CHAP. XVI. Daily experience techeth us that spirits do appear to me^.
TO all the premises before handled, this also is to be added, which no man ca^
deny, but ye many honest and credible persons of both kinds, as well men as
women, of whom some ar living, and some already departed, which have and do
affirm, that they have sometimes in the day, and sometimes in the night seen and
hard spirits. Some man walks alone in his house, and behold a spirit apeereth
in his sight, yea and sometimes ye dogs also perceue the^, and fall down at their
masters fete, and will by no means depart fro the^, for they are sore afraid
themselves too. Some man goes to bed, and lays him down to rest, and by and
by there is some thing pinching him, or pulling off the clothes: sometimes it
sits on him, or lies down in the bed with him: and many times it walks
up and down in the Chamber. There have been many times men seen, walking on
foot, or riding on horseback, being of a fiery shape, known unto diverse men,
and such as died not long before. And it has come to pass likewise, that
some either slain in the wars, or otherwise dead naturally, have called unto
their acquaintance being alive, and have been known by their voice.

Many times in the night season, there have been certain spirits heard
softely going, Spirits requiring help.
or spitting, or groaning, who being asked what they were, have made answer
that they were the souls of this or that man, and that they now endure
extreme torments. If by chance any man did ask of them, by what means they
might be delivered out of those tortures, they have answered, that in case a
certain number of Masses were soong for them, or Pilgrimages vowed to some
Saints, or some other such like deeds done for their sake, that then surely
they should be delivered. Afterward appearing in great light and glory,
they have said that they were delivered, and have therefore rendered great
thanks to their good benefactours, and have in like manner promised, that they
will make intercession to God and our Lady for them. And hereby it may be well
proved, that they were not always Priests, or other bold and wicked men,
which have feigned themselves to be souls of men deceased, as I have before
said, in so much that even in those men's chambers when they have been shut,
there have appeared such things, when they have with a candle diligently
searched before, whither any thing have lurked in some corner or no. Many use at
this day to search and sifte, every corner of the house before they go to bed,
yt they may sleep more soundly: and yet nevertheless, they hear some s^rying
out, and making a lamentable noise. etc.

It has many times chanced, that those of the house have verily thought, that
some body has overthrown the pots, platters, tables and trenchers, and
tumbled the^ down the stayres: but after it waxed day, they have found all
things orderly set in their places again.

It is reported, that some spirits have thrown the door of from the hooks,
and have troubled and set all things in the house out of order, never setting
the^ in their due place again, and that they have maruellously disquieted men
with rumbling and making a great noise.

Sometimes there is heard a great noise in Abbeis, and in other solitary
places, as if it were coupers hooping and stopping up wine vessels, or some
other handicraftes men occupied about their labor, when it is most certain,
that all in the house are gone to bed, and have betaken themselves to rest.

When houses are in building, the neighbors many times hear the carpenters,
masons, Builders hear spirits in the night.
and other artificers handling all things in such sort, as if they were busily
laboring in the day time. And this strange wonder is joyfully received as a
sure token of good luck.

There be some which judge it comes to pass naturally, that we suppose we
hear these things in the night, which we heard before in the day time. Which
question I leave to be discussed of better learned than my self.

Pioners or diggers for metal, do affirm, that in many mines, there appear
strange shapes and spirits, Devils are in Mines.
who are apparelled like unto other laborers in the pit. These wander up and
down in caves and underminings, and seem to besturre them selves in all kind
of labor, as to dig after ye vein, to carry together oar, to put it into
baskets, and to turn the winding whele to draw it up, when in very deed they
do nothing less. They very seldom hurt the laborers (as they say) except
they provoke them by laughing and railing at them: for then they threw grauel
stones at them, or hurt them by some other means. These are especially haunting
in pittes, where metal most abounds.

A certain godly and learned man wrote once unto me, of a silver mine at
Dauosium in the Alps, upon the which Peter Buol a noble man, the Schultish of
the same place, (whom they call Landammanus,) had bestowed great cost a few
years before, and had gathered thereby good store of riches. In the same mine
was a spirit or Devil of the mountain, who when the laborers filled the
stuff they had dug into their vessels, he seemed, for the most part, every
Friday, to be very busy, pouring the metals of his own accord out of one
basket into an other. Wherewith the Schultishe was not offended: and when he
would either descend into the pit, or come up again, blessyng him self with
the sign of the Cross, he never received hurt. It chanced on a time that
while the said spirit was too busy intermedlyng himself with every thing,
one of the myners being offended therewith, began to rail at him very
bitterly, and with terrible cursing words, bid him get him thence in the
devils name. But the spirit caught him by the pate, and so writhed his neck
about, that his face stood behind his back, yet notwithstanding he was not
slain, but lived a long time after, well known unto diverse of his familiar
friends, which yet live at this day, howbeit he died within a few years after.

Georgius Agricola, whose learned works which he wrote of mettalles be yet
extant in the end of his book of creatures living under the earth, Agricola.
he makes two kinds of Devils haunting in certain Mines abroad. For he
says, there are some cruel and terrible to behold: which for the most
part, do very much annoy and hurt the laborers digging for metal.

Such a one was he which was called Annebergius, who only with his breath,
destroyed above.xij. laborers at once, in the cave called Corona Rosacea The
wind wherewith he slew them, he let flee out of his mouth: for he appeered
in the similitude and likeness of an horse.

Such an other was Snebergius, who wearyng a black roll about his neck, took
up a labourer aloft from the ground, and set him in the brinke of a certain
exceeding deep place, where had sometime been great store of silver, not
without grievous brusing of his body.

And again he says, there be some very mild and gentle, whom some of the
Germans call Cobali, as the Grecians do, because they be as it were apes and
counterfeiters of men: for they leaping, and skipping for joy do laughe, and
seem as though they did many things, when in very deed they do nothing. And
some other call them Elues, or Dwarfes of the Mountains, thereby notyng their
small stature, wherein they commonly appear. They seem to be hoare, wearyng
apparayle like the metal fyners, that is, in a petycote laced, and an apron
of lether about their loins. These hurt not the laborers, except they misuse
them, but do imitate them in all their doings. And he says, they are not much
unlike unto those whom the Germans call Guteli, because they seem to bear
good affection toward men, for they keep horses, and do other necessary
business. They are also like unto them whom they call Trulli, who taking on
them the feigned shapes of men and women, do serve as it is said, like servants,
both amongst other nations, and specially amongst the Suetians.

Touching these spirits haunting mines of metal, there is somewhat to be read in
Olaus Magnus de Gentibus Septentrionalibus, the 6. book and.x. chapter.

They which sail on the great Ocean sea, Which are people that eat and
devour men.
make report, that in certain places, where the Anthropophagi do inhabit,
are many spirits, which do the people there very much harm.

Here many strange things might be brought concerning visions appearing unto
men in their sleep: and also of them, which being in a trance, have lain a
whole day and more without moving, like unto dead men: and after being
restored to them selves again, have told many miraculous things which they
have seen.

Cicero writes of marvelous things in his book of divination, Cicero.
or soothsaying. And so do many other men also. Augustine himself recites in
many places of his books, Augustine.
that some after they were dead, have warned many their friends of diverse
matters, and have disclosed unto them secret things, which were to come, and
have showed sick folks good remedies for their diseases, and have done many
such like things.

Auenzoar Albumaro, a physician of Arabia, writes, that he received an
excellent medicine for his sore eyes, of a physician lately deceased, appering
unto him in his sleep: as Marsilius F^cinus does testify, Marsilius.
writing of the immortality of the soul. Lib. 16. cap. 5.

Matthew. 1. and 2.
The holy Scriptures also teach us, that God has revealed many things unto men
by dreams. S. Matthew in his first and second Chapter writes, that the angel
of God appeared many times unto Joseph, our Savior Christ's foster father in a
dream, and commanded him to beware of those which lay in wayt to destroy
Christ Jesus.

Acts.
We read in the tenth chapter of the Acts of the apostles, that saint Peter
fell into a trance, saw the heavens open, and saw a vessel, as it were a
great sheet, descend down unto him from heaven, knit together at the four
corners, wherein were all manner of four footed beasts of the earth, and wild
beasts, and creeping things, and fowls of the heaven. And there came a voice
unto him: Rise Peter, kill and eat.

Acts. 16.
And in the.xvj. chapter, as S. Paul was yet in Asia, coming down toward
Troada, this vision appeared unto him: There stood a man of Macedonia and
prayed him, saying: Come into Macedonia and help us. Hereby Paul gathered, it
was the will of God, that he should pass the sea, and should preach the
Gospel in Macedonia.

But I purpose not to write of Spirits and visions appearing unto men in their
sleep, least my Book grow unto an huge volume: but only of those which we
sensibly see when we are awake.

CHAP. XVII. That there happen strange wonders and prognostications, and that
sodeyn noises and cracks and such like, are heard before the death of men,
before battle, and before some notable alterations and chaunges.
IT happens many times, that when men lie sick of some deadly disease, there
is some thing heard going in ye chamber, like as the sick men were wont, when
they were in good health: yea and the sick parties them selves, do many times
hear the same, and by and by guess what will come to pass. Oftentimes a little
before they yield up the ghost, and some time a little after their death, or a
good while after, either their own shapes, or some other shadows of men, are
apparently seen. And diverse times it comes to pass, that when some of our
acquaintance or friends lie a dying, albeit they are many miles off, yet there
are some great stirrings or noises heard. Sometimes we think the house will
fall on our heads, or that some massy and weighty thing falls down
throughout all the house, rendering and making a disordered noise: and shortly
within few months after, we understand that those things happened, the very
same hour that our friends departed in. There be some men, of whose stock
none does dye, but that they observe and mark some signs and tokens going
before: as that they hear the doors and windows open and shut, that some
thing runs up the stairs, or walks up and down the house, or does some
one or other such like thing.

But here I cannot pass this in silence: that there are many superstitious
men, which vainly persuade themselves that this cousin, and this or that friend
of theirs will shortly dye. For in the end, the falling out of the matter it
self shows it was a vain and folishe persuasion, that they understood such
things by any signs.

Cardanus in his book De veri^ate rerum, writes, that there was a certain
noble family at Parma in Jtaly, Cardanus.
out of the which so often as any one died, there was seen an old woman in
the chimney corner. On a certain time she appeared, when a maiden of the same
family lay very sick, and therefore they clean dispayred of her life: but
soon after she recovered again, and in the mean while, an other, which was
the^ in good health, suddenly dyed.

There was a certain parish priest, a very honest and godly man, whom I knew
well, who in the plague time, could tell before hand, when any of his parish
should dye. For in the night time he heard a noise over his bed, like as if one
had thrown down a sack full of corn from his shoulders: which when he
heard, he would say: Now an other bids me farewell. After it was day, he
used to inquire who died that night, or who was taken with the plague, to the
end he might comfort and strengthen them, according to the duty of a good
pastor.

It has bin often observed in Guilde halles where Aldermen sit, that when one
of those Aldermen was at the point of death, there was heard some rattling
about his seat, or some other certain sign of death. The same thing
happens beside pewes and stalles in Churches, or in other places where men
are often conuersaunt or accustomed to exercise their handy labor.

In Abbeys, the Monks servant or any other falling sick, many have heard in
the night, preparation of chests for them, in such sort as the coffinmakers
did afterward prepare in deed.

In some country villages, when one is at deaths door, many times there are
some heard in the Evening, or in the night, digging a grave in the
Churcheyarde, and the same the next day is so found dug, as these me^ did
hear before.

There have bin seen some in the night when the moon shined, going solemnlie
with the corpse, according to the custom of the people, or standing before the
doors, as if some body were to be carried to the Church to burying. Many
suppose, they see their own image, or as they say, their own soul, and of
them diverse are verily persuaded, that except they dye shortly after they have
seen them selves, they shall live a very great time after. But these things
are superstitious. Let every man so prepare him self, as if he should dye to
morrow, left by being too secure, he purchase himself harm.

There happen other strange things also. For when some lie in the prison in
chains, ready to suffer punishment for their offenses, many times in the
night season there is heard a great noise and rumbling, as if some body were
breaking into the gayle to deliver ye prisoners. When me^ come to understand ye
matter, they can neither hear, nor see any body, and the prisoners likewise
say they heard no manner thing.

Some executioners or ha^gmen do report, yt for the most part they know before
hand whether any man shall shortly be delivered into their hands to suffer: for
their swords will move of their own accord. And there are other that say,
they can tell before, after what sort the prisoners shall suffer.

Many wonderful and strange things happen about those which wilfully cast
away themselves. Sometime their corpses must be carried a great way off, before
they being thrust in a sack can be thrown into the sea: and being laid in a
wagon or cart, the horse could scant draw them down the hill, but up the hill
they need not labor at all, for the carte would run very fast of his own
accord.

Some men being slain by thieves, when the thieves come to the dead body, by
and by there gusheth out fresh blood, or else there is declaration by other
tokens, that the thief is there present. Plato writes in the first book of
his laws, that the souls of such as have been slain, do oftentimes cruelly
molest and trouble the souls of those which slew them. For which cause
Marsilius Fiscinus does think it chances, De animorum immortalitate. li. 16.
cap 5.
that the wound of a man being slain, while the carkas lies on the ground,
does send out blood against him, which wounded him, if he stand nere looking
on his wound. Which thing both Lucretius affirms to come to pass, Virgill.
and also Justices have diligently observed. Dido in Vergile thus threatens
Aeneas.

And when the cold of death is come, and body void remayns,
Each where my haunting spirit shall pursue thee to thy payns.
The like place is in Horace and in other Poets. As a thief sits at the
Table, a cup being overthrown, the wine perceth through the whole and
sound wodde of the table, to all men's admiration.

Touching these and other such marvelous things there might be many histories
and testimonies alleged. But whosoever reads this book, may call to their
remembrance, that they have seen these and such like things them selves, or
that they have heard them of their friends and acquaintance and of such as
deserve sufficient credit.

Before the alterations and chaunges of kingdoms and in the time of wars,
seditions, and other dangerous seasons, there most commonly happen very strange
things in ye air, in the earth, and amongst living creatures clean contrary to
the usual course of nature. Which things me^ call, wonders, signs, monsters,
and forewarnings of matters to come. There are seen in the air, swords,
spears, and such like innumerable: there are heard and seen in the air, or
upon the earth whole armies of men encountering together, and when one part is
forced to fly, there is heard horrible cries, and great clattering of armor.
Gunnes, lances and halberdes, with other kinds of weapons and artillery, do
often times move of their own accord as they lie in the armories. When as
soldiers march toward their enemies, and their ensigns will not displaie
abroad but fold about the stander bearers heads: if the soldiers be
therewith amazed, they surely persuade themselves there is some great
slaughter toward. It is said also, that horses will be very sad and heavy,
and will not let their masters sit on their backs, before they go to the
battle wherein they shall have the overthrow: but when they are coragious and
iustilie neighing, it is a sure token of victory. Suetonius writes, that the
company of horses which Julius Caesar let run at liberty, Suetonius.
never to be put to labor again, did weep abundantly when Caesar was slain.

When Miltiades addressed his people against the Persians, there were heard
terrible noises before the battle, and certain spirits were seen, which the
Athenians afterward affirmed to be the shaddow^ of Pan, who cast such a fear
on the Persians, that they turned their backs and fled. Thereof Terrores Panici
took their name, being spoken of sodayn fears unlooked for, and terrors,
such as Lymphatici metus are, which drive men out of their wits being taken
therewith.

Before the Lacedaemonians were overthrown in ye battle at Leuct^^s, the
armor moved, Cicero de diuinatione.
and made a great noise in the temple of Hector. At the same time the doors of
Hercules temple at Thebes being fast shut with bars, opened suddenly of their
own accord: and the weapons and armor which hoong fastened on the wall, were
found lying upon the ground. These things are to be read in Cicero his first
book De diuinatione.

In the second wars of Carthage, the standerd bearer of the first battle of
pykemen, could not remove his ensign out of his place neither yet when many
came to help, they could any thing prevail. These and such other signs of
evil luck, Caius Flaminius the Consul nothing regarded, but soon after his
army was discomfited, and he him self slain. Li^ie.
Concerning which matter, Titus Liuius writes at large. In the beginning of
the wars waged with the people called Marsi, there was heard out of secret
places, certain voices, and noise of harness, which foreshewed the danger
of the wars to come.

Pliny writes in his.2. book and 59. chapter, that in the wars with the
Danes, Pliny.
and many times before, there was heard the clashing of armor, and the sound
of trumpets out of Heaven.

Appianus declares what signs and wonders went before the civil wars at
Rome: Appianus.
what miserable cries of men, clashing of armoure, and running of horses were
heard no man seeing any thing.

Valerius Maximus in his first book and.6. chapter of strange wonders,
Valerius Max. li. 1. cap. 6.
writes how C^^eius Pompeius had warning before, not to fight the field
with Julius Caesar: for as he launced off, at Dirrachium, his soldiers were
taken with a sudden fear: and in the night likewise before the battle,
their hearts and courages suddenly failed them. And after the same author
adds, that which Caesar him self reherseth in his 3. book De bello civilly:
how that the very same day wherein Caesar faught his fortunate battle, the
crying of the army, and the sound of trumpets was herd at Antioche in Syria,
so sensibly, that the whole city ran in armor to defend their walls. The
very same thing he says, happened at Ptolemais, and that at Pergamus in the
most privy and secret parts of the temple where none may enter, save only
priests, which place the Grecians call (...), there were heard the sound of
drums and timbrels.

The historiographers report, that Castor and Pollux have bin often seen in
battles sitting on white horses, Castor and Pollux. Plutarch.
and valia^tly fighting against ye enemies camp. Plutarch writes in
Coriolanus life, that they were seen in the battle against Tarquinius, and
that immediately after, they bare tidings to Rome of ye victory. The self same
writes Titus Liuius also in his 8. book of his first decade. We may read in
the history of the siege of the noble city of Magd^burge in Saxony, that the
enemy which laid siege to the town, so often as the citizens issued out to
skirmish with them, supposed that one upon a white horse came riding before the
citizens battle, when as the citizens them selves saw no such man. Josephus.
Josephus in his books of the wars in Jury, records what strange signs
happened before the destruction of Ie^usalem: which were, that a brazen gate
being fast rampierd with bars, opened in the night time of his own accord.
And that before ye sun set, there were seen chariots in the air, and
armies of men well furnished, enuironing the city round about. And that at
Whitsontide, as ye priests entered the temple to celebrate divine service* they
heard a great noise, and by and by a voice crying Migremus hinc. Let us depart
hence. He reckeneth up ^ther like things, which we need not repeat in this
place. The same night that Leo of Constantinople was slain in ye temple, the
trauelers by sea heard a voice in ye air which said: that Leo had roared out
even to the same place.

Felix Malleolus doctor of both ye laws, master of Sclodor, and canon at
Tiguru^, a man of great reding, Felix Malleolus.
as it may easily apere by his learned writings which are yet exta^t. (For he
lived about y^ time when ye counsel of Basil was hold^) writes in his book de
nobilitate, c. 30. yt it is to be seen in ye history of Rodulphus king of the
Romans, that when the said Rodulphus had vanquished Othotarus, King of
Boemia, continuing on the place all night, where tho battle was fought, about
mydnight, certain spirits or Devils, with horrible noise and tumulte, troubled
and disordered his whole army. And that those were spirits walkyng by night,
it appeared hereby, that they suddenly vanyshed away like smoke.

The same Author writes in his.xxvj. chapter, That in the year of our
Lord.1280. as one of the Pl^bans (as they call them) belonging to the church
of Tigurine prea^hed to the people, the grave stone of the tumbe or sepulcher
of the two martyrs Felix and Regula, patrones of the same place, violently
brake a sunder, no man mouyng or touching it, giving a horrible sound like unto
thunder, so that the people were no less astonished and afraid, than if the
vaute of the Church had fallen down. And he says, that the same year, the
third day of October, the greater part of the city of Tigurum was brent with
fire, and more over, that sedition was moved amongst the Citizens, for
certain Ecclesiastical disciplines, and for the Imperial Banne (as they
term it.) In the year of our Lord.1440. ye twelfth day of December, at the
dedicatio^ of the foresaid church, about midnight, there was the like noise
heard, and immediately after followed civil wars, which the Tigurins held
with uncertain success against the other Heluetians, for the space of seven
years and more.

The same writer in the.33. Chap. has, that at the same time in the year of
our Lord.1444. before that valiant battle, which a few Heluetians fought
against the innumerable company of Jews Dolphine of France, faught by the
wall Basil, in the time of general ye Council, there was heard certain
nyghtes about those places, the alarm of Soldiers, the clattering of
harneys, and the noise of men encountering together. etc.

Here I purposely omit many such like examples, for there are many Books,
both of ancient and also of new writers, touching strange signs and
wonders, wherein these may be read.

CHAP. XVIII. It is proved by testimonies of holy scripture, that spirits are
sometime seen and heard, and that other strange matters do often chance.
YEt perchance it will be objected unto us, that we bring no testimony out
of holy Scripture, touching this matter: especially to prove, that Spirits do
oftentimes appear unto men. I answer, that truth it is, There are few
things hereof in the Scriptures, and yet notwithstanding somewhat is to be
read in them. It is read in Saint Mathewe his fourteenth chapter, of
Christ's Disciples, that when in the night season, by reason of a contrary
wind, they were in great danger of drownyng in the lake of Genazareth, and
that in the dawnyng of the day, the Lord walked on the water, they being
afraid, cried out, supposyng they saw a Spirit. Hereof we gather, Luke. 24.
that they knew well enough, that Spirits appeared unto men upon sea and
land.

Likewise when the Lord being risen from death, appeared unto his disciples,
meaning to assure them of his Resurrection, they thought at the first, that
they saw a Spirit. In the which place, Christ denies not but there are
Spirits and strange sightes, and that they are sometimes seen, but he rather
confirms the same by putting a difference between him self, and spirits or
vain apparitions. But as touching these two testimonies we will speak more in
another place.

^ Samuel.
It is a notable history which we read in the second Book of Samuel
concerning Saul, who, at what time the Philistians warred upon him, and that
he was in very great danger of them, he came to a woman, who was a witch, and
desired her to raise Samuel from death, that he might know his counsel
touching the success of the wars. She raised him up one, whom Saul took
to be Samuel in deed, who also told him what events should come of the
wars. But whether he were a true Samuel or a counterfeit, we will dispute
the matter more at large in his convenient place.

As concerning other marvelous things, there is somewhat to be read in the
Scriptures: In the second of Samuel and the fifth chap. 2. Samuel. 1. Paral.
14.
Also in the first of Paralipomenon and the.xiiij* chap. we read, that the
Philistines went up the second time into Jury, to make wars on David: He
went unto the Lord, and showed him the matter, who commanded him, that he
should embushe himself behind the wood with his army, and when he heard a
rustling or noise in the tops of the trees, he should immediately set upon
them. This sound they say was a strange and supernatural sound.

It is written in the second book of the Kings the.vj. and vij. chapters, 2.
Reg. 6.7.
that God delivered the city of Samari^ from great famine, when it was
fiercely besieged by Benhadad king of the Assyrians* for in the night season
their enemies did hear the noise of chariots, the neyghing of horses, and
shreeching of a huge army, as it were in their own pauillions and tents,
supposing therefore, that the king of Israel had gathered together his footmen
and horssemen, and had now set upon them, they sought to save themselves by
^lyghte, leauyng their victual and other provision behind them in their
tents.

^. Samuel. 7.
In the first of Samuel and the seventh chapter, God caused a wonderful great
noise to sound over the Philistians, and so destroyed them. I mean they were
so affrighted with a kind of strange fear, that it was an easy matter to
vanquishe them.

In the fifthe Chapter of Daniell ye may read, that king Balthazar in his
roisting banquet, Daniel. 5.
espied right against the candle, a hand writing upon the wall what his end
should be.

It is read in the third Chapter of the second of the Machabees, 2. Macha. 3.
that there appeared a horse unto Heliodorus, servant unto Seleucus King of
Asia, as he was about to destroy the temple at Jerusalem: and upon the
horse seemed to sit a terrible man, which made toward him to ouerrunne
him. On each side of him were two young men of excellent beauty, which with
whippes scourged Heliodorus.

The second of the Machabees and tenth chapter, Judas Machabeus encountered
with his enemies, 2. Macha. 10.
and when the battle was hot, there appeared unto the enemy out of heaven
five men sytting on horses, rayned with notable brydles of gold, who led
the Jews host, and two of them defended Machabeus from all his enemies. And
unto Machabeus appeared a horsseman in a shinyng garment, his Armor all of
gold, and shaking his spear. 2. Machab 11.
Whereby it was signified, that he should obtain a notable and famous
victory.2. Macha. 11.

I allege not these examples, for that I adiudge the books of Machabees, of
as good authority as the Canonical Books of the new and old Testament: but
only for that they are joined together with them, and may be read of every one:
and they were always read of the ancient people. For albeeit they never went
about to approve any doctrine by them, yet were they of great authority
amongst them.

CHAP. XIX. To whom, when, where and after what sort, spirits do appear,
and what they do work.
BY all these examples we may plainly perceive, that many strange things are
objected to men's senses, and that sometimes spirits are seen and heard not
only (as some have thought, as Plutarke witnesses in the life of Dion) of
children, women, sick folks, dottards, and otherwise very plain and simple
creatures, but also to me^ of good courage, and such as have bin perfectly in
their wits. Yet it may not be denied but that there appear many more unto
some, that unto other some, as unto travelers, watchemen, hunters, carters,
and mariners, who lead all their life not only in the day time, but also in
night, in iorneying, in the water, woods, hills and valleys. You shall mete with
some one who never saw nor heard any of this gear in all his life time, and
contrariwise there be other some which have seen and heard very man such
things.

So there are some which very seldom chance upon serpents, and again many
there are which oftentimes meets with them in their journey. The common people
say, that those whose natiuities chance upon the Auguries (for so they term
the four seasons of the year) do see more store of Spirits, than those
which are borne at other times, but these are mere trifles. Those which are
steadfast in true faith, see or hear such thiyngs more seldom than
superstitiouse people, as in all other things. He that is superstitiouse,
uses some blessing (as they call it) to heal his horses disease, and it
takes good effect: he inchaunteth a Serpente, and it can not once move out of
the place. He applies a blessyng to strange bleedyng, and it stops
presentely: He takes a hollie rod, or twisted wand incha^ted, and it will move
where a mettle mine is: but he that is of a sound faith and does despise these
things, (for he knows well they are contrary to the word of god, and also to
the Popes decrees) albeit perchance he practice such things, yet
notwithstanding he can bring nothing to pass. And so also it chances that he
sees spirits and vain visions, a great deal more seldom than superstitious
men do, for he knows well what he ought to deem and judge of them. There
are some kind of men, who think it a gay thing, if many such strange
sightes appear unto them.

There were far many more of these kinds of apparitions and miracles seen
amongst us, at such time as we were given unto blindness and superstition,
than since that the Gospel was purely preached amongst us: the cause whereof
I will show heareafter.

And moreover it comes often times to pass, Some men see things which other
men see not.
that some one man does hear or see some thing most plainly, when an other
which stands by him, or walks with him, neither sees, nor hears any such
matter.

We read in the History of Heliseus, that he saw chariottes of fire, and many
horsemen upon the top of the Mountain: and yet his servant saw nothing
until the Prophet prayed unto the Lord, that he would voutsafe for his
confirmation and consolation, to open his eyes, that he might also behold this
notable miracle. So likewise we read in the 9. chapter of the Acts of the
Apostles, that Christ ouerthew Paul before Damascus, Acts. 9.
and that he spoke unto him, and his companions also heard the voice.
Afterward in the 22. chapter, Acts. 22.
Paul himself showing unto the people in the presence of Lycias, in the
Castle at Jerusalem, what had hapened unto them says that they heard not the
voice of him that talked with him: which two places are not repugnant, for the
meaning is, that they heard a voice or sound in deed, but they understood not
what the Lord had said unto him.

Plato writes in his Dialogue called Theages, that Socrates had a familiar
spirit, Socrates familiar.
who was woonte to put him in mind to cease from laboring, when that which
he attempted should have no happy success. This spirit he himself saw not,
and other men heard not. They say that sometimes Children do see certain
things, which other men see not, and by a certain peculiar operation of nature
some men behold yt which others in no wise can perceive.

At what time spirits appear.
As touching the time when spirits appear, we read in hystories that it shall
be after a thousand years which God has appointed, in the which time Saint
John prophesied in the Apocalips, Apocalips.
that Satan should be let loose, that is to say, errors and supersticion,
and al kind of mischief should abound, and many spirits appear every where:
for men gave them more creditte, than the Scriptures. If a spirit apeared, or
was heard to say in case these or those things be decreed, to wit, vowed
Pilgrimage, and erecting Chappelles, and that this shall be an acceptable kind
of worship unto God, the Bishops and paryshe Priests weighed not whither
those things were agreeable to the word of God or no. etc. Spirits appeared in
old time, and do appear still in these days both day and night, but
especially in the night, and before midnighte in our first sleep. Moreover on
the frydayes, saterdayes, and fasting days, to confirm superstition. Neither
may we marvel, that they are heard more in the night, tha^ in the day time. For
he who is the author of these things, is called in the holy Scriptures the
Prince of darkness, and therefore he shunneth the light of Gods word.

In what place spirits are seen.
And albeit these are heard or seen in all places, yet are they most especially
conversant in the fields where battles have been fought, or in places where
slaughters have been made: in places of execution: in woods into the which they
have coniured devils being cast out of men: in Churches, Monasteries, and about
Sepulchers, in the bounds of countries, and buts of lands: in prysons, houses
and towers, and sometime also in the ruins and rubbish of Castles.

God thretneth the Babilonians in the 13. chap. of Esaie, Esaias. 13. Monsters of
the desert. Esaias. 34.
that spirits and Satyrs shall dance where their magnificent houses and
Palaces were, where they were wont to lead their dau^ces. And in his 34. chap.
where he threatens destruction unto al nations and enemies of God, he says: In
ye ruinous and tottering Palaces, Castles, and houses, horrible spirits shall
apeare with terrible cries, and the Satyr shall call unto her mate, yea and the
night hags shall take their rest there. For by the sufferance of God, wicked
Devils work strange things in those places where men have exercised pride and
cruelty.

The manner of apearing of spirits, After what sort spirits appear.
is diverse and manyfold as it apereth by those things which I have aleaged
before. For they show themselves in sundry sort: sometimes in the shape of a
man whom we know, who is yet alive, or lately departed: and otherwhile in the
likeness of one whom we know not.

I heard of a grave and wise man, which was a Magistrate in the Territory of
Tigurie, who affirmed, that as he and his servant went through the pastures, in
the Summer very early, he espied one whom he knew very well, wickedly defiling
himself with a Mare, wherewith being amazed, he returned back again, and
knocked at his house, whom he supposed he had seen, and there understood for a
certentie, yt he went not one foot out of his chamber yt morning. And in case
he had not diligently serched out yt matter, the good and honest man had surely
ben cast in prison, and put on the rack. I rehearse this history for this end,
y^ Judges should be very circu^spect in these cases, for y^ Devil by these
means does oftentimes circumuent ye inoce^t. Chun^gunda wife unto Henry the ^.
Emperor of ye name, was greatly suspected of adultery, and thereuppon many
false rumors scattered, that she was too familiar with a certain young man in
the Court, for the Devil in the likeness of the same young man, was often
times seen come out of the Empress Chamber. But she afterward declared her
innocence by treading upon hot glowing plowshares, (as the custom was then)
without any hurting her feet, as witnesses Albertus Cranzius, in his fourth
book, and first chapter of his Metropolis.

We read that many spirits have appeared unto certain Hermites and Monks in
the shape of a woman, alluring and intising them to filthy lust. They appear
also in the form of brute beasts, sometime fourefooted, as of a Dog, a
Swine, a Horse, a Goat, a Catte, or a Hare: and sometimes of fowls, and
creeping worms, as of a Crow, a night Owl, aschritche Owl, a Snake, or
Dragon, whereof the Gentiles had great plenty in their Temples and houses, and
nourished them, as we may read every where in the Poets. Spirits have
sometimes appeared in a pleasant form, and sometimes in a horrible shape. At
one time some has been seen riding on horseback, or going on foot, or
crawling upon al four. At another time has appeared a man al burning in
fire, or berayde with blood: and some while, his bowels have seemed to traile
out, his belly being as it were rypped up. Sometimes a shadow has only
appeared: sometimes a hand, sometimes an instrument, as a staff, a sword, or
some such like thing which the spirit held in his hand. Sometimes he appeared
in manner of a bundle of hey, burning on fire: another while only a hoarse
kind of voice was heard. Sometimes a spirit has been heard walking in the
inner part of the house, turning the leaves of a book, or telling money, or
playing at dice, or bounsing against the wall. And sometimes there is heard a
terrible noise or clap, as if a peale of Gunnes were discharged hard at hand.
And spirits sometimes, taking a man by the arm or by the hair of the head,
have walked with them.

Olaus Magnus in his third book and eleventh chapter De Gentibus
Septentrionalibus, writes, Olaus.
that even in these our days, in many places in the North parts, there are
certain monsters or spirits, which taking on them some shape or figure, use
(chiefly in the night season) to dance, Daunces of spirits.
after the sound of all manner of instruments of music: whom the
inhabitants call companions, or daunces of Elues, or Fairies. Somewhat also is
to be read touching this matter in Saxo Grammaticus, in his history of
Denmarck. Saxo.
Such like things are those which Pomponius Mela reports in his third book
of the description of Aethiopia, Pomponius Mela.
that in Mauritania beyond the Mount Atlas, many times in the night season
are seen great lights, and that tinkling of Cymbals, and noyses of Pypes are
also heard, and when it is daylight no man appears. Solinus.
Solinus writes in his 38. and 44. chapters that in this same Mountain,
Aegipanes use every where to lead their (...): of whom also Pliny makes
mention in his first book and first chapter. Men hold opinion, that they are
Panes, Faunes, and Satyrs, of whom the old writers have mentioned many things.

S. Hierome writes in the life of Paul the Hermit, Hierome. A Fable ou^ of
Hierome of a Centaure* A Monster having the forepart like a man the hinder like
a horse*
that an Hippocentaure, appeared unto S. Anthony, in the same shape which is
described of the Poets. In a stony valley (says he) he espied a Dwarffe of a
small stature, having a crooked nose, and his foreheade rough with horns: the
hinder part of his body, and his feet like unto a Got. Anthony nothing
amazed with this sight, takes unto him the shield of faith, and the
brestplate of hope, like a good warrior* Notwithstanding the foresaid creature
presented him with Dates, to refresh him in his journey as witnesses of peace
and friendship. Which when Anthonius understood, he stayed, and enquiring of
him what he was, received this answer. I am (quod he) a mortal ^reature, and
one of the inhabitants of this desert, whom the Gentiles, being deceived with
many erroures, does worship, calling us Faunes, Satyrs, and night Mares.

And I am sent as Embassadoure from our company, who earnestly beseech thee,
that thou will pray unto the God of al creatures for us, whom we acknowledge
to be come into the world, to save the same. etc.

Plutarch.
And here we may in no wise ouerpasse in silence, that notable history which
Plutarch in his book De fectu oraculorum, (translated by that learned man
Ad^ianus Turnebus) recites in these words. Touching the death of devils, I
have heard a certain history of one who was neither foolysh, nor accustomed to
lie. For it was Epitherces, my countreyman, a professor of Grammar, father
unto Aemilianus the Rethoritian, of whom some of you also have heard the same:
He told me that when he once took ship, meaning to go into Jtalie, because he
carried with him not only great store of merchandise, but also very many
passengers, in the evening when they were about the Islands Echinadae, the wind
quite ceased, and that the ship dryuing in the Sea, being brought at the last
unto Paxe, many then waking, and many also quaffing after they had s^pped,
suddenly there was heard a voice of one which called Thamus, in such sort that
every man marvelled. This Thamus was a Pilot borne in Aegipt, unknown unto
many which were in the ship. Wherefore being twice called, he held his peace,
and the third time answered: then ye other with a louder voice commanded him,
that when he came unto Palodes, he should tell them that the great God Pan was
departed. When this was heard, every man was amazed with fear, as Epitherces
affirmed unto us: And being in consultation whether they should do as was
commanded or not, Thamus thus judged of the matter: that if the wind did
blow, they must pass by with silence, but if it were calm without wind, he
must utter that which he had heard. When therefore they were come to Palodes,
and no wind stirred, nor wave moved, ^hamus looking out of the stern toward
the land, cried out as he had heard, yt the great god Pan was deceased: He had
skant ended those words, when immediately there followed a great groaning, not
of one man, but of many, being admi^t as it were with great admiration. And
because many were present in the ship, (they said) the same hereof was speedely
spread abroad at Rome, and Thamus sent for Tiberius the Emperor, who gave so
much credit unto the matter, yt he diligently enquired, and asked who that Pan
was. The learned men whom he had in great number about him, supposed that Pan
was he, who was the Son of Mercuri^ and Penelope* etc.

These and such like things, De preparatione Euang. li. 5. chap. 9.
( Eusebius who also recites this history) affirms to have chanced in that
time of Tiberius, in the which Christ being conversant amongst men, expelled al
manner of devils from the society of the^. Other most Godly professors of our
Religion affirm, (as namely Paulus Marsus, in his Annotations upon the first
of Ouids Fasti) that this voice was heard out of Paxe the very same night
ensuing the day wherein our Lord suffered, in the ^9. year of Tiberius,
Paulus Marsus.
which was the same year that Christ was crucif^ed in: by the which voi^e
being uttered in a wilderness of solitary rocks, it was declared that our
Lord and God had suffered for us. For the word Pan in Geeke signifies all and
then the Lord of all the world was Crucified.

He adds moreover that Theodosius does say, that the Archadi^^s do worship
this God, calling him (...), meaning thereby to signify a Lord and Ruler, not
of words, but of al manner of material substances: whose power is such, that
it is able to create the essence and substance of al bodies, whether that they
be heavenly, or earthly. And albeit he refer this unto the Sun, yet if a man
mark diligently, his mysteries have a higher meaning. etc.

Heereunto belongs those things which are reported touching the chasing or
hunting of Devils, and also of the daunces of dead men, Hunting of Devils.
which are of sundry sorts. I have heard of some which have avouched, that
they have seen them.

No man is able to rehearse all the shapes wherein spirits have appeared, for
the Devil, who for the most part is the worker of these things, can (as the
Poets feign of Proteus) change himself into all shapes and fashions.

These walking spirits sometimes stop the way before men as they travel, and
lead them out of their way, and put them in such great fear, that sometimes
they become grayheaded in one night. I remember I have heard the like history
of my old friend John VVilling, a godly and learned man, of one in the
County of Hann^w, who not many years ago, meeting with a walking spirit in
the night season, was so much altered, that at his returning home, his own
Daughters knew him not.

Spirits oftentimes awake men out of their sleep, and cause many to forsake
their own houses, so that they can not hire them out to any other. Sometimes
they overthrow somewhat, or strike men, or cast stones at them, and hurt them
either in their bodies or in their goods: yea and sometime God does suffer
them to bereave men of their lives. It often chances that those men's faces
and heads do swell, which have seen or heard spirits, or have been blasted
with them: and some are taken mad, as we see by experience. I remember well it
has happened, that some supposing they have seen armed men, who were ready to
take them, have therefore assayed to slay themselves: which thing may be by
craft of the Devil. Spirits do also trouble cattle in the night time, in the
pastures.

Thus much concerning the first part of this work, wherein (I trust) I have
proved, and made it evident, that albeit there be many which vainly persuade
themselves they have seen wandering spirits, or have beheld one in steed of an
other: yet notwithstanding yt there are walking spirits, and that other strange
things do sometime happen.

I have also showed unto whom they appear especially, and where, when, after
what sort, or in what fourmes they show themselves, and what things they work
and bring to pass.

Whosoever dare flatly deny these manyfolde and agreeable testimonies of the
old and new writers, he seems unworthy in my judgment, of any credit,
whatsoever he say. For as it is a great token of lightness, if one by and by
believe every man which says, he has seen spirits: so on the other side it
is great impudency, if a man rashely and impud^ntely contemn all things which
are aduouched, of so many, and so credible Historiographers, and aunciente
fathers, and other grave men of great authority.

The second part of this Book does show, that those Spirits and other strange
sights, be not the Souls of Men, but be either good or evil Angels, or else
some secret and hyd operations.
CHAP. I. The opinion or belief of the Gentiles, Jews, and Turks,
concerning the estate of Souls separated from their bodies.
IN the second part of this book we have to consider, what those things be
which (as we have before showed) are both heard and seen, in the daytime and
in the night, whether they be the souls of dead men or no: also what the old
Writers have judged of them, and what the Holy Scriptures, do teach us herein.

Platos opinion.
Plato does think, that Heroical and excellent souls, as being of the pure
sort, do mount aloft: but that other base and viler souls, that are defiled
with the pleasures and lusts of the body, do wander below on the ground, and
the same he deemeth to be those spirits which are eftsoon seen.

Also other heathen and profane writers say, they are hereby moved to think
that the souls of men do live after death, for that it is most clear and
evident, that many spirits wander and raunge hither and thither, and are often
times heard and seen, and found to talk with men: for they suppose that most
of these are men's souls. Tertullian.
Tertullian a very au^^ient writer, in his book De anima, says, that the wise
Heathens, which did define the soul to be mortal, (for some of them, as
namely the Epicures, thought that the souls dyed with their bodies) thought
that the souls of the wise, if they departed from their bodies, had their
abiding on high: but the rest were thrown down into Hell.

Furthermore, the Heathen thought the Souls should stray continually abroad
before they found rest, unless the bodies from which they were severed, were
rightly buried in the earth. Wherefore (as we may read in Poets) it was a
grievous crime to cast forth any body unburied. Home^.
Hector in Homere besoughte Achilles that he would not cast forth his carcass
to be devoured of Dogs and birds, but that he would deliver the same to be
enterred by old Priamus his father, and Hecuba his mother. Patroclus appeared
in a vision by night after his death unto Achilles, and requested him to
bestow upon him all funeral solemnities. For otherwise he said the souls of
those that were buried, would thrust him back, that he should not be able once
to enter in at Hell gates. Which example Tertullian aledgeth, and therwithal
confuteth this vain opinion of the heathen. Palinurus in Virgill, besought
Aeneas, that he would cast earth on him, Virgill.
when he was dead, and erect unto him an horse, for so did they call those
Monuments of the dead, in which albeit no man was laid, yet were they used
in the honor of the deceassed. Vergill writes, that Deiphobus his Ghost
wandered abroad, unto the which Aeneas erected an Horse. For the Gentiles were
of such opinion in those days, that they thought an empty and counterfeyted
burial profited very much. Moreover the heathen were persuaded that the souls
which dyed before their natural time (especially of those which perished by
violent death, whom they call (...) as by hanging, drowning or beheading.
etc.) did strap abroad so long time as they should have lived, if they had not
ben slain by violent death. Which opinion Tertullian also confuteth. Plato in
his 9. book De legibus, Plato.
writes, that the souls of those which are slain, do pursue their murderers
so far, that they do hurt them: the which except it be understood by way of a
Metaphor, is likewise to be rejected.

The Catholic faith amongst the Jews was, that the souls of the dead did not
return into this earth, The Jews opinion.
but either were at rest, which was when they dyed in the faith of the
promised Messiah, or were condemned if they departed hence in their sins
without repentance. For Job in his 7. chapter says: Even as the cloud
vanishes and fades away, Job. 7.
so he that goes down to the grave shall come up no more, nor return into
his house. etc.

But if thou will say that Job was an Ethnic, it may be alleged of David,
that when he was in very great danger, and death even present before his
eyes, he prayed in the 31. Psalm. Psalm 31.
Into thy hands O Lord I commend my spirit. The Preacher also in his 12.
chapter says: The spirit shall return to God that gives it. Eccle. 12.
In the book of Wisdom (which of old writers is attributed to Philo Iudeus)
the third chapter thereof, Wisedo. 3.
it is written: the souls of the righteous are in the hand of God, and no
torment shall touch them. And on the other side, the souls of ye wicked go
down into hell. ^sal. 49.
In the 49. Psalm it is written of those welthy worldlings, which for lucres
sake, depart from God and his commandments: They are laid as sheep in Hell,
death shall consume them, and Hell is their habitation. etc.

If the Jews had believed, that the souls after this life were tormented in
Purgatory, no doubt amongst so many diverse kinds of sacrifices, which they
offered for the sins of the living, they would at last have some one kind
of sacrifice whereby to redeem souls, or in some part to assuage and mitigate
their pains. And that souls do return after death, do offer themselves to
be seen and beheld of men, and require aid of them, we find no where in the
old Testament, but rather the contrary. In the 2. of Samuel 12. 2. Samu. 12.
David speaks this of his young child that he begat by Bersaba, that he could
not bring him into life again, that he would go to him, and the child should
never return unto him again. And Jesus the son of Syrach in his.38. chapter
says: Eccle 38.
there is no returning from death. Of the vision which was showed to Samuel,
we will straightway speak in his proper place.

And that in latter ages, long after Christ came in flesh, there were some
amongst the Jews, who thought that the souls separated from their bodies,
did straye and raunge a broad: it may hereby be gathered, for that certain of
the Rabbines write, that the soul of Naboth (which was slain, because he
would not sell his Uyneyarde to Achab) was that Spirit that promised his
help to seduce Achab, being as it were one that coueted his death.

The Turks also believe that the soul is immortal, The Tukes opinion.
and that as soon as they are loosed from the body, they come either into a
place of rest, or of torment. But whether that they did think, that souls
returned again into the earth, and roue there too and fro, I could find no
plain mention thereof in their Alcaron.

CHAP. II. The Papists doctrine touching the souls of dead men, and the
appearing of them.
Papists.
THe Papists in former times have publicly both taught and written, that those
spirits which men sometime see and hear, be either good or bad angels, or else
the souls of those which either live in everlasting bliss, or in Purgatory,
or in the place of damned persons. And that diverse of the^ are those souls
that crave aid and deliverance of men. But that this doctrine of theirs, and
the whole state thereof may be the more evidently perceived, we will more largely
repete the same out of their own books. Iacobus de Cusa.
Iacobus de Cusa, a Carthusian Friar, and Doctor of divinity, wrote a book of
the Apparition of souls, after they were separated fro the bodies: which work
of his, has in it many supersticious toys, and was Printed in a town
belonging to the dominion of Berna, named Burgdro^e in the year of our Lord.
1475.

Popish writers commenting on the 4. book of the Master of Sentences, 4.
places for Souls. Heaven. Hell. Limbus puerorum which is a place where the
Papists imagine the souls of young children to be, which departed without
Baptism. Purgatory*
do appoint four places to receive souls, after they are departed from the
bodies. Three of the which places they say are perpetual, and one which
lasts but for a time already lymitted.

The first place or receptacle is Caelum Empireum, the fiery heaven, so termed
of his passing great brightness and glory, which they say is the seat
ordained for the blyssed sort: this place by an other in Scripture is called
Paradise. The second place is Hell under the earth, being the Mansion of Devils
and Infidels, departing hence in deadely sin, without repentance. The third
place they term Limbus puerorum, which is provided as well for the Children
of the faithful as of the unfaithful: who (they say) shall continually abide
there without any sense of pain, being only deprived from the fruition of Gods
presence. And therefore they say, that after their death, they ought not to be
buried in holy burial. The fourth place is Purgatory, which is prepared for
them that depart hence without deadly sin, or if they committed any such
sins, did some penance for them, but yet made full satisfaction for the^ or
else went hence only stained with venial sin.

Of this place, to wit, Purgatory, Popish writers teach marvelous things.
Some of them say, that Purgatory is also under the earth as Hell is. Some say
that Hell and Purgatory are both one place, albeit the pains be diverse
according to the deserts of souls. Furthermore they say, that under the earth
there are more places of punishment in which the souls of the dead may be
purged. For they say, that this or that soul has been seen in this or that
mountain, flood, or valley, where it has committed the offense: and that
these are particular Purgatories, assigned unto them for some special cause,
before the day of Judgment, after which time all manner of Purgatories, as well
general as particular shall cease. Some of them say, that the pain of
Purgatory is al one with the punishment of hell, and that they differ only in
this, that the on has an end, the other no end: and that it is far more easy
to endure all the pains of this world, which al men since Adams time have
sustained, even unto the day of the last Judgment, than to bear one days
space the least of those two punishments.

Further they hold that our fire, if it be compared with the fire of
Purgatory, does resemble only a painted fire. Seek their Doctors in this
point, on the fourth book of Sentences, the ^0. distinction.

This question also they move, By whom Souls are tormented in purgatory.
by whom the Souls in Purgatory are tormented. Wherefore their opinion are
very diverse, and disagreeable among themselves.

Richardus de Media villa a Franciscan friar, writes upon the Master of
Sentences, and says, he verily believes that souls are carried by good
Angels, into the places of torment, but yet that they themselves do not torment
them, because they shall become at length fellow citizens with them. Neither
yet are they punished by Devils (who after this life do no longer tempte men)
but only by the mere justice of God. And yet (says he) it may so come to
pass, that the Devils be present at the doing thereof, and rejoice at their
tortures. I thought good to repeat these things of Purgatory somewhat at
large, the rather for that the reader might see, that their Doctors do
disagree in a matter of great weight, by which they have both robbed men of
their wealth, and plunged them into very great myserie.

Hereunto they add, that the spirits, as well of the good, as the ill, Papists
feign that souls re^o earth again
do come and are sent unto men living, from hell. And that by the common law of
justice, all men at the day of Judgment shall come to their trial from hell:
and that none before that time can come from thence. Farther they teach, that
by Gods license and dispensation, certain, yea before the day of Judgment,
are permitted to come out of hell, and that not for ever, but only for a
season, for the instructing and terrifying of the living. Heervppon they recite
diverse kind of visions, that certain Clerks, and Lay persons being damned,
both men and women, have appeared to their ghostly fathers, and others, and
have opened unto them the causes of their damnation: all which to rehearse
here were lost labor. And that the souls which be in everlasting joy, or
in Purgatory, do often appear, it may be seen in Gregory's Homelies and
Gregory's Dialogues, who writes that Peter and Paul, and other Saints, did
not only appear unto holy men, but did also conducte their Souls unto
Celestial joy. Moreover that God does licenc^ souls to return from those
two places, partly for the comfort and warning of the living, and partly to
pray aid of them. And yet that those souls do not here represent themselves
to be seen of men, when, and how often soever they list themselves. No doubt
these men show them selves to have a sharp wit and profounde knowledge.

These doctors moreover move this question, whether we may request without
offense, Whether we may wish to see spirits.
that the souls of such as are departed may show themselves to be beheld
and seen of the living.

To ryue asunder this crabbed knotte, they bring this wedge: that if this
request proceed of some good intent, without the spot of lightness and
vanity, that a man might understand the state of some friend, neighbor,
benefactour, or of his parents, or some other, thereby to help and relieve them
speedily of their torments, it is no offense at all: because dead men's souls
do of their own accord show themselves unto the living, to receive help of
them, and therefore nothing can let us to ask this thing at gods hand. Of this
opinion is Thomas of Aquine.

But as concerning the time and place, when and where Spirits do proffer them
selves to be seen, they say, no certain rule can be given: for this
stands wholly in Gods pleasure, who if he list to deliver any, suffers him
to make his appearaunce forthwith even in such places as he may be well heard
in. And that spirits do not always appear under a visible shape, but
sometimes inuisibly, in so much that sometime nothing else is heard of them but
sneesing, spitting, syghing, and clapping of hands etc. Of which point I have
noted somewhat before when I spoke generally of ghosts, because they appear in
sundry sorts. And whersoeuer these spirits be, they say, that they endure
punishment. Besides that souls do not appear, nor answer unto every man's
interrogatories, but that of a great number they scantly appear unto one. And
therefore they teach. How a man ought to use him self when spirits appear
according to the Papists. Daniel. 10.11.
Whenever such visions of spirits are showed, men should use fasting and
prayer or ever they demand any question of them: which (say they) in the x.
and xj. chapters of Daniell, is read to have been done by Daniell him self.
Besides this, shrift, and massing should be used ere we question with them:
farther, that we should not give credit as soon as we hear but one sign, but
wait to hear the same thrice repeated, which in the first book of Samuel
and 3. chapter is read to have bin done by Samuel being yet a child: 1.
Samuel. 3.
for otherwise the Devil may delude and deceive us, as he does very often. And
so soon as these things are dispatched and performed, that four or five
devout priests are to be sent for, which should come to the place where the
spirit was wont to show him self, and that they should use certain
ceremonies, as to take a candle that has bin hallowed on Candlemasse day, and
light it: also holy water, the sign of the cross, a censor in their hand,
and when they light their candle, should pray over it (as I remember) the seven
penitential psalms, or read the gospel of S. John. And when they come to the
place, they should sprinkle it with holy water, and p^rfume it with
Frankincense, casting about their necks a holy stoale, and then that one of
them kneelyng on his knees, should rehearse this prayer following.

O Lord Jesus Christ, the sercher of al secrets, which art always wont to
reveal healthful and profitable things unto thy faithful people and little
ones, which haste permitted some certain spirit to show himself in this
place: we humbly beseech thee of thy great mercy, by thy death and passion,
and by the sheding of thy most precious blood for our sins, that thou will
vouchesafe to give in charge to this spirit, that he may declare and open what
he is, without any fraying or hurting of us, or of any other creature besides:
showing unto us thy servant, or to other sinners as we be, who he is, why he
is come, and what he desires, so that hereby thou may be honored, he
comforted, and thy faithful people also helped and succored. In the name of
the father, the son, and the holy ghost. Amen.

Yet do they teach, that a man may choose to use this or some other form of
prayer, and ceremonies: because that without these, spirits have often
appeared, and showed what they required. This done, we should (as they teach)
fall to questioning with them, and say: Thou spirit, we beseech thee by Christ
Jesus, tell us what thou art, and if there be any amongst us, to whom thou
would gladly make answer, name him, or by some sign declare so much. After
this, the question is to be moved, each man there present being recited
whether he would answer unto this or that man. And if at the name of any, he
speak, or make a noise, al other demands remaining, should be made unto him:
As these and such like: What man's soul he is? for what cause he is come, and
what he does desire? Whether he require any aid by prayers and suffrages?
Whether by Massing, or alms giving he may be released? Farther by how many
Masses yt may be compassed, by, iij.vj.x.xx.xxx. etc. Furthermore, what manner
of priests should say Mass for him, Monks, or secular Priests. Then if he ask
for any Fasting, by what persons, how long, and in what sort he would have
it done: If he require alms deeds, what alms deeds they should be, how
many, and on what persons bestowed, whether on him that lacks harbor, or
that is diseased of the leprosy, or on some other sort of people.

Furthermore, by what sign it may be perfectly known yt he is released, and
for what cause he was first shut up in Purgatory. And yet they hold, yt no
curious, unprofitable, or superstitious questions should be demanded of ye
spirit except he would of his own accord reuele and open them. And yt it were
best, yt sober persons should thus question with him, on some holyday before diner,
or in ye night seson, as is commonly accustomed. And if the spirit will show
no sign at that time, the matter should be deferred unto some other season,
until the spirit would show himself again: and yet that the cross and
holy water should be left there, for that by the secret judgment of God, it
was ordained, that they should appear at certain hours, and to certain
persons, and not unto all men. And farther they say that we need not to fear,
that the spirit would do any bodily hurt unto that person, unto whom it does
appear. For if such a spirit would hurt any, he might justly be suspected
that he were no good spirit.

Moreover popish writers teach us to discern good spirits from evil by
four means. By what tokens good spirits may be discerned from evil. Luke. 1.
First they say that if he be a good spirit, he will at the beginning, somewhat
terrify men, but again soon revive and comfort them. So Gabriel with
comfortable words did lift up the blessed virgin which before was sore
troubled by this salutation. They also allege other examples. Their second
note is to discry them by their outward and visible shape. For if they appear
under the form of a Lion, bear, dog, tode, serpent, catte, or black ghost,
it may easly be gathered that it is an evil spirit. And that on the other side
good spirits do appear under the shape of a dove, a man, a lamb, or in the
brightness, and clear light of the sun.

We must also consider whether the voice which we hear be sweet, lowly,
sober, sorrowful, or otherwise terrible and full of reproach, for so they term
it.

Thirdly we must note, whether the spirit teach ought that does vary from the
doctrine of the apostles, and other doctoures approved by the Churches censure:
or whether he utter any thing that does dissent from the faith, good manners,
and ceremonies of the church, according to the canonical rites or decrees of
councels, and against the laws of the holy Church of Rome.

Fourthly we must take diligent heed whether in his words, deeds, and
gestures, he do show forth any humility acknowledging or confessing of his
sins and punishments, or whether we hear of him any groaning, weeping,
complaint, boasting, threatening, slander or blasphemy. For as the beggar does
rehearse his own misery, so likewise do good spirits that desire any help or
deliverance. Other signs also they have to try the good angels from the bad:
but these are the chief.

Now touching the suffrages or ways of succor, How we may help and succoure
souls.
whereby souls are dispatched out of Purgatory, Popish doctors appoint four
means: That is, the healthful offering of the sacrifice in the sacrament of
the altar, almose giving, prayer, fasting. And under these members, they
comprise al other, as vowed pilgrimages, visiting of churches, helping of the
poor, and the furthering of Gods worship and glory. etc. But above all, they
extol their mass, as a thing of greatest force to redeem souls out of
misery: of whose wonderful effect, and of the rest even now recited by us,
they allege many strange examples.

Of these things they move many questions, the which who so lust to see, let
him search their books which have bin written and published of this matter.

Neither only in their writings, but in open pulpit also they have taught, how
excellent and noble an act it is, A notable deed to releue souls.
for men touched with compassion, with these foresaid works to rid the soul
that appears unto them and craves their help, out of the payns of
purgatory: or if they cannot so do, yet to ease and assuage their torture. For
say they, the souls after their deliverance, cease not in most earnest manner
to pray for their benefactors, and helpers. On the other side, they teach that
it is an horrible and heinous offense, if a man give no succoure to such as
seek it at his hands, especially if it be the soul of his parents, brethren
and sisters. For except by them they might conveniently be released of so
manyfolde miseries, they would not so earnestly crave their help. Wherefore
say they, no man should be so void of natural affection, so cruel and
outrageous, that he should at any time deny to bestow some small wealth, to
benefit those, by whom he has before by diverse and sundry ways ben
pleasured.

If they were not the souls of the dead which crave help and succor, but
diuelishe spirits, they would not will them to pray, fast, or give alms for
their sakes: for that the devils do hate those, as also al other good works.

CHAP. III. What has follovved this doctrine of the Papists, concerning the
appearing of men's souls.
BY these means it came to pass, that the common sort were of opinion, that
those spirits which were seen and heard, were the souls of the dead, and
that whatsoever they did say, was without gaynsaying to be believed. And so
the true, simple, and sincere doctrine of the calling upon God in the name of
Christ Jesus only: of the confidence in Christ's merits, and redemption from
sin and damnation: of the true deeds of christian charity, was daily more
and more impugned and oppressed. So that when men by little and little,
forsook holy Scripture, and cast it aside, men's traditions and precepts began
straight way to be had in great price and estimation, yea, they were more
regarded tha^ gods own word. A great offense was it taken to be, if any would
presume once to break men's traditions. On those apparitions of spirits, as on
a sure foundation their Purgatory is chiefly builded. For by talk had with
them, Popish writers taught that men atteined unto salvation, by their own,
and by other men's merits: which opinion so blinded them, that they became
retchlesse, secure, and sluggishe. For if any did so persuade him self, that
he could hyre one for money, which could work one feate or other to deliver
the dead from torments, then would he either delay the amendment of his life,
or utterly neglect it. Wherefore unto such fellows, that happened, which
chanced unto the five foolish virgins, of whom mention is made in the.^5. of
Matthew. By these apparitions of spirits, masses, images, satisfaction
pilgrimages for religion sake, relikes of saints, monastical vows, holidaies,
auricular confession, and other kinds of worshippings and rites, and to be
short, al things which have no ground in holy scripture, by little and
little grew into authority and estimation. So that the matter came at the
last to that extremity and excess, that many devout, and simple souls,
pinched and nipped their own bellies, that they might ye better have by these
means, wherwithall to find and maintain idle monks and priests, and to offer
unto images. They founded chapels, alters, monasteries, perpetual lights,
anniuersaries, frieries, and such like, to release their friends out of the
torments of Purgatory. And this did the walking spirits will the^ to do. And
sometime also by their council, men's last wills and testaments were altered.
Monks by their doctil^^ of spirits have heaped infinite riches.
Hereby priests and monks increased daily, their parishes, colleges and
monasteries with yearly revenues, and got into their hands ye best farms,
vineyards, lands, meadows, pondes, parkes, bond me^, jurisdictions, great
lordships, and the authority of the sword. For after yt this opinion once took
firm root in men's hearts, ye men's souls did walk after their death, and
appear on ye earth, ye greatest part did whatsoever they commanded the^. And
yt it may more plainly be perceived how much me^ esteemed those visio^s and such
like pelf, and how in memorial of the^ they devised and framed to themselves
new kinds of worshippings, I will recite unto you one or two histories.

Martinus Polonus Archbishop of Consentine, and the Popes Penite^tiarie
writes in his Chronicles, Martinus Polonus.
tha Pope Clement the fourth did canonize for a saint at Viterbe, one Eduergia,
duchess of Polonia, a widow of great holiness, who (among many notable
things that are written of her) when her canonization had bin many years
delayed, at length appeared her self in a vision to her Proctour in the court
of Rome, being heavy and pensive about this matter, and certified him, both of
the spedy dispatching of this business, and also of the day wherein it should
be dispatched. Canonization amongst the Ethniks, from whence it took his
original, is named (...), that is, deification, or making of a God.

Ioannes Tri^enhemius Abbot of Spanheim, a man of great authority, All souls
day whens it took original.
in his book of Chronicles teaches, that the memory of all faithful souls,
termed All souls day, had his original observation by this means: that when
a certain Monk returned from Jerusalem, and lodged in a certain Hermits
house in Sicill, about the mount Aetna, which flasheth forth fire, he learned
of the said Hermit, that many souls of the dead were tormented there by fire,
out of which again through ye prayers of the faithful, they were released, as
it was taught him by ye testimony even of the spirits themselves. Hereof also
writes Polydor^ Virgill in his vj. book, Polidor^.
and ix. chapter, De inuentione rerum that the feast of All hallowes had the
very same original, which they shall find in Petrus de natalibus his tenth
book, and first chapter. Whereby thou may gather that Feasts were first
ordained by the tales of spirits appearing unto men. The like fable is found
in Damascene, who writes of Macharius thus: When according to his manner he
prayed for the dead, and was desirous to understand whether his prayers did
profit them ought, and whether they received any comfort thereby, God willing
to reveal so much to his servant, inspired a dry scull with the word of
truth, so that the dead scull brake forth into these words: When thou prayest
for the dead, we receive comfort by thy prayers.

Of the like root sproong the order of the Carthusian Monks, The beginning of
the order of Carthusians.
which of the common sort is judged to be the most holiest and streightest
order: of the which the Monks them selves of this brood, have put forth a
book. For as Polydore Virgil records, they began upon this occasion in the
university of Paris in the year of our Lord.1080. Polidor^.
A certain doctoure which for his learning and integrity of life was very
famous, chanced to dye, when he should have bin buried in a certain Church,
he cried out with an horrible voice: I am by the just judgment of God accused.
Whervppon they left the coffin in the Church by the space of three days,
during which time the people flocked together out of sundry places, to behold
this strange sight. The second day he cried again: By the just judgment of
God I am judged. The third day likewise he cried: I am by the just judgment
of god condemned. And as Vincentius Bellonacensis says, some add hereunto, yt
he rose up thrice upon the beer, which perchance they feign of their own
heads. Now because no man suspected that so notable and famous a man was
utterly condemned for ever, every man was sore astonished thereat.

Wherefore Bruno, a doctor of divinity borne in Coleine, forthwith forsook
all that he had, and taking to him six other godly companions, gat him into a
desert called Carthusia in the diocese of Gratianopolis: where he erected the
first monastery of that order, which drawing his name of the place, was called
the Carthusian order. For this cause also, or for the like, many other
monasteries at the first beginning, were both founded and endowed with great
liuelyhode.

CHAP. IIII. Testimonies out of the word of God, that neither the souls of
the faithful, nor of infidels, do walk upon the earth after they are once
par^ed from their bodies.
NOw yt the souls neither of ye faithful nor of infidels do wa^der any longer
on ye earth, Souls go either to hell or to heaven.
when they be once severed from the bodies, I will make it plain and evident
unto you by these reasons following. First certain it is, yt such as depart
hence, either die in faith, or in unbelief. Touching those yt go hence in a
right belief, their souls ar by and by in possession of life everlasting, and
they yt depart in unbelief, do straight way beco^ partakers of eternal
damnation. The souls do not vanish away and die with the body, as ye Epicures
opinion is, neither yet be in every place, as some do imagine: touching this
matter I will allege pithie and manifold testimonies out of the holy scripture,
out of which alone this question may and ought to be tried and discussed. Our
savior Christ Jesus which could well judge of these mysteries, in the.3. of
John says: So God loved the world, John. 3.
yt he would give his only begotten son, yt who so believes on him, should not
perish, but have life everlasting. For god sent not his son into ye world to
co^demn ye world: but yt ye world by him might be saved. He yt believes in him
is not condemned, and he yt believes not is condemned already, because he
believed not in ye name of ye only begotten son of god. And in ye.5. of John he
says: Uerily verily I say unto you: he yt hears my word, and believes on him
yt sent me, has everlasting life, John. 5.
and shall not come into judgment or condemnation, but has passed already from
death to life: he does not say yt his sins should first be purged in purgatory.
And in ye.6. cha. he says: John 6.
This is ye will of him yt sent me, that every one yt sees the son, and
believes on him, should have life everlasting. and I will raise him up at the
last day again: verily I say unto you, he that believes on me has life
everlasting. In ye.14. of John also our Lord and savior Christ Jesus says,
John. 14.
yt he will take us up to himself, yt where he is, there should we be also. etc.
When Christ sent forth his disciples to publish his gospel in ye.x. of Math.
he said unto the^: Go ye into ye whole world, and preach the gospel to every
creature: Matthew. 1^
he yt believes and is baptized, shall be saved, and he yt believes not shall be
condemned, and in ye 5. chapter of ye 2. to ye Corin. ye apostle S. Paul says: ^.
Cor. 5.
we know yt if the earthly house of this tabernacle be destroyed, we have a
building of god, yt is, a house not made with hands, but eternal in ye heavens.
etc. By these places it may be evidently gathered, yt the souls of ye
faithful are taken up into eternal joy: and the souls of ye unfaithful
as soon as they are departed from their bodies are condemned to perpetual
torment. And yt this is done streightway after death, may be perceived by ye
words yt Christ spoke to the thief on the cross, when he hoong on his right
hand: This day shall thou be with me in paradise. Luke. ^^. Apo. 14.
And in the 14 chap. of ye apocalips it is written, and I hard a voice yt said
unto me write blessed are ye dead yt dye in ye lord (...).i. amodo, as ye old
tra^slatio^ redeth, yt is by and by, out of hand without delay. Steue^ in ye
very point when he looked to be stoned, cried, lord Jesus receive my spirit. He
douted nothing, but was assuredly persuaded yt his soul should straightway be
translated to eternal joy. Paul in ye.j. chap. of his epist. to ye Philip.
says: I desire to be losed, or I covet to depart hence, and to be with Christ.
Here is no me^tio^ at al made of purgatory, in which ye souls should be first
purged. If thou will here object yt the persons before aleged were saints and
martirs, we say farther ye Paradyse was opened also to the thief, as soon as he
became repentant. And that the souls both of the faithful and unfaithful,
which presently after their death are translated to heaven or hell, do not
return thence into the earth before the day of the last judgment, may well be
perceived by ye parable of the rich man clothed in purple, and Lazarus, as we
read in the.xvj. of Luke For when the rich man prayed Abraham that he would
send Lazarus unto him, to coo^e his tongue, Abraham gave him this answer:
Betwixt thee and us, there is a great gulf set, so that they which would go
hence (from Abraham's bosom) to you (in Hell) can not: neither can they come
from thence to us. And when he be sought him, that he would send Lazarus to
his fathers house to admonish his five brethren, least they also should come
into that place of torment: he said unto him: They have Moses and the Prophets,
let them hear them. And again: If they hear not Moses and the Prophets,
neither will they believe though one rose again from the dead.

CHAP. V. Testimonies of the ancient fathers, that dead men's souls parted
from their bodies, do not wander here upon earth.
THis matter was also thus understood by the holy and ancient Fathers. August.
For Augustine in his.xviij. Sermon De verbis Apostoli, has, that there be
two mansions, the one in everlasting fire, the other in the everlasting
kingdom.

Idem.
And in his.xxviij. chapter of his first book, De peccatorum meri^is and
remissione contra Pelagianos, in the seventh tome of his works, he says:
Neither can any man have any middle or mean place, so that he may be any
other where than with the devil, Idem*
who is not with Christ.

And in his notable work de ciuitate Dei, the.xiij. book and.viij. chapter he
says: The souls of the godly so soon as they be severed from their bodies be
in rest, and the souls of the wicked in torment, until the bodies of the one
be raised unto life, and the other unto everlasting death, which in scripture
is called the second death.

Iustine.
Iustine also an ancient father, writes in Responsione ad Orthodoxos quest.
75. that the difference of the just and unjust, does appear even as soon as
the soul is departed from the body. For they are carried by the angels into
such places as are fit for them: that is, the souls of the just are brought
unto Paradyse, where they have the fruition of the sight and presence of
Angels, and Archangels: and moreover the ^ight of our savior Christ, as it is
contained in that saying, whiles we are strangers from the body, we are at
home with God. And the souls of the unrighteous on the other side, are carried
to Hell, as it is said of Nabuchodonosor the king of Babylon: Hell is troubled
under thee, being ready to meet thee. etc. And so till the day of resurrection
and reward, are ethy reserved in such places as are meetest for them.

Saint Hillarie in the end of his exposition of the second Psalm writes:
Hillarie.
that men's souls are straight way after death, made partakers of rewards or
punishments.

And touching the souls of the old Patriarks, that dyed before the nativity
of Christ, Austin, Hierom, Nazianzen, Dormitantij.
and other holy Fathers teach, that God in certain places by him chosen out
for that purpose, has preserved the souls of all those that are departed from
this life in the true faith of the Messiah to come, in such sort that they
feel no grief, but yet are deprived of the sight of God. This place they call
Abraham's bosom, and hell (for Hell does not always betoken a place of tormente,
but also generally the state that souls are in after this life.) And that our
lord Jesus Christ did visit and release them, and when he ascended, carried
them with himself into heaven. Albeit certain of the fathers, as Ireneus,
Tertullian, Hilarie, and others, think that they shall at the last day ascend to
heaven. Some also there be of our time which maintain this fond opinion, that
the souls sleep, until ye day of the last judgment, in which they shall be
again coupled with their bodies: but this assertion has no ground in holy
scripture, of the which point diverse have entreated. Calvin.
But especially John Calvin that worthy servant of God in a proper treatise
that he wrote of the same matter, in which he does learnedly confute their
reasons that maintein the contrary opinion.

Wherefore since holy scriptures, as the Fathers understand and interpret them,
teach that the souls of men, as soon as they depart from the bodies, do
ascend up into heaven if they were godly, descend into hell if they were
wicked and faithless, and that there is no third place in which souls should
be delivered, as it were out of prison, and that souls ca^ neither ^e
reclaimed out of heaven or hell. Hereby it is made evident, that they cannot
wander on the earth, and desire aid of me^. For first the souls of the
blyssed need no aid or help y^ men ca^ give them: and on the other side, the
damned sort can no way be releued: the which S. Ciprian the martyr in his
oration against Demetria^, Ciprian mar.
does plainly witness in these words: when we be once departed out of this
world, there is afterward no place left for repe^ta^ce, no way to make
satisfaction: here life is either won or lost, and so forth. Albeit ye
testimonies already alleged on this point of doctrine, may well suffice those that
love the truth, and are desirous to come to the knowledge thereof: yet to
increase the number, I will recite other testimonies also out of ye fathers,
Souls do not walk.
to prove manifestly, yt the souls departed, do not again return, and wander
on the earth, so that all they which have not yet stopped their cares that the
truth might not pierce and enter into them, may evidently perceive, that those
ancient times taught a far better doctrine of those spirits and ghosts, than
other later times under poperi^ have commended and allowed. Tertullian a very
ancient writer, in the end of his book De anima, Tertullian.
says, the souls do not any longer abide on the earth, after they be once
loosed from their bodies: and that neither by their own accord, nor other men's
commandment, they do wa^der at all after they have descended into hell, but he
says, that evil spirits do use this kind of deceyt, to feign themselves to be
the souls of such as are deceassed. And that Hell is not open to any soul,
that it should afterward at any time depart thence, Christ our Lord in the
parable of the poor man that was in rest, and the rich glutton that was in
torment, does plainly ratify under the person of Abraham, that there can be
no man sent back to show or tell ought of the state of hell. And albeit the
fathers have noted certain errors and scapes in Tertullian, yet there was never
any that reproved him for this opinion. Athanasius.
Athanasius in his book of questions the.xiij. question, does give a reason
wherefore God will not suffer y^ any soul decessed, should return unto us, and
declare what the state of things is in hell, and what great misery is there:
hereby (says he) many errors would easily spring up among us: for many devils
might so take on them the shape of men, and be tra^sformed into the likeness
of the dead, and say, that they arose from the dead, and so publish many lying
tales, and false opinions of things there don, thereby to seduce and hurt us.
Weigh these words of Athanasius I pray thee.

Saint Chrysostom in his nyneteenth Homily on the eight chapter of saint
Mathews Gospel, Chrysostom.
has in manner the same words, for he moves this question: Why such as
were possessed with Spirits, lived in graves? Therefore (says he) they abode
there, to put this false opinion in men's heads, that those persons souls
which by violent death departed, were turned into Dyuels, and so did service
unto witches and soothsayers. The which opinion the devil first brought in,
thereby to diminishe the Martyrs praise and glory, that so the Sorcerers
might ^lea those persons, whose wicked travel and help they used, and those
matters says he, ar far from truth. For he proves by the Scripture, that the
spirits of the godly are not under the power of the Devils, nor yet do stray
abroad after death: then that they would return unto their own bodies, if
they might wander whether they lusted. And further if they did any service
too their Murderers, by that means they should at their hands receive a
reward for an ill deed and displeasure. By natural reason also it can not come
to pass, that a ma^s body should be turned into an other body, and therefore
also the spirit of a man can not be changed into a devil.

But among other things which proprely belong to our purpose, he says: If we
hear a noise that says, I am such a soul, we must thus think, that this
talk proceeds of some slight and subtlety of the devil, and that it is not
the soul of the dead body that speaks these things, but the Devil that
deuiseth them to deceive the hearers. And by and by he says, that these are
to be counted old wives words, or rather doting fools toys to mock children
withal. For the soul when it is parted from the body cannot walk any longer
in these parties. For the souls of the just are in the hands of God. And on
the other side, the souls of the wicked after their departure hence, are
straightway lead aside and withdrawn from us, which may evidently be seen by
Lazarus and the rich man. And in another place also the Lord says: This day
will they take thy soul from thee, wherefore the soul cannot here wander when
it is departed from the body.

A little afterward he adds, that it may be proved out of many places of
scripture, that the souls of the just do not here wander after death. For
Steven said, Lord receive my Spirit, and Paul desired to be loosed and to
depart hence, and to be with Christ.

Also the scripture, as touching the patriarks death, uses this phrase, he is
laid unto his fathers, grown up unto a good old age. And that the souls of
sinners and wicked men cannot after their departure here abide any longer, we
may learn by the rich man's words, if we will wey and consider with our selves
what he demanded and could not obtain. For if after death men's souls might
any longer have their conversation here on earth, no doubt the rich man him
self would have returned as his desire was, and certified his friends of
hell torments. Out of which place of scripture it is most clear, that souls
immediately upon their departure from their body, are carried unto a certain
place, whence they cannot of themselves return, but needs must wait there for
that terrible day of judgment.

Also in his second homily of Lazarus, among other things he says, It is most
plain not only by that we have before rehearsed, but also by this parable,
that souls parted from the body, have their abiding here no longer, but are
forthwith lead away. For it came to pass (says he) that he died, and was
carried away by the Angels. And not only the souls of the just, but of the
unjust and wicked are hence lead away, and carried to their proper places, which
does evidently appear, by another rich man, of which mention is made in the
12. of Luke, to whom the Lord said: Thou fool this night will they take thy
soul from thee.

And in his fourth homily of Lazarus he plainly teaches that we should give
more credit to holy Scripture, than to one that came from the dead, or an
Angel from Heaven. Herewithall he also shows that the dead do not only make
no apperance unto men living, but yeldeth reasons wherefore they do not return
hither, in these words. If god had known that the dead being raised might have
profited the living, he would never have let pass so great a benefit, who
otherwise does give and provide us all things profitable.

Furthermore he adds, that if it were requisite still to raise up dead men,
to make relation unto us of such things as there are done, this no doubt in
continuance of time would have bin neglected: and so the Devil very easily
would have broched and brought in damnable opinions into the world. For he
might often have made counterfeit sights or suborne such as should feign their
selves to be dead and buried and by and by to present themselves before men, as
if they had bin in deed raised from death, and by such manner of persons
might so have bewitched simple souls, that they would believe whatsoever he
would have. For if now when there is in deed no such thing, the vayn dreams
as it were of men decessed, that have bin showed to me^ in sleep, have
deceived, perverted and destroyed many: surely much sooner would the same have
fallen out, if it had bin a thing truly done, and this opinion had prevailed in
men's heads. For if many dead persons had returned back again into this life,
the wicked spirit the devil would easily have devised many sleights and wiles,
and brought in much deceit into ye life of man. And therefore god has clean
shut up this door of deceit, and not permitted any dead man to return hither
and show what things be done in ye other life, least ye devil might gredely
catch this occasion to plant his fraudule^t policies. For when ye prophets
were, he raised up false prophets: when the Apostles were, he stirred up false
Apostles: and when Christ appeared in flesh, he sent hither false Christ's or
Antechrists: And when sincere and sound doctrine was taught, he brought into ye
world corrupt and damnable opinions, sowing tares whersoeuer he came. And
therefore although it had come to pass, that dead me^ should return again, yet
would he have counterfeited ye same also by his instruments, by some fained
raising of the dead through the blinding and bewitching of men's eyes: or
otherwise by suborning of some which should feine themselves to be dead (as I
said before) he would have turned al things topsituruie and utterly have
confounded them. But god who knows all things, has stopped his way, that he
should not thus deceive us, and of his great mercy toward us, has not
permitted that at any time any should return from thence and tell unto me^
living, such things as there are done, heerby to instruct us that we should be
of this opinion and judgment, yt the scriptures ought to be believed before
other things whatsoever, because that God in them has most clearly taught us
the doctrine of the last resurrection. Further, by them he has converted the
whole world, banished error, brought in truth, and compassed al these things by
vile and base fishers, and finally in them has given us every where plentiful
arguments of his divine providence. etc.

S. Cyril in his.xi. book and.36. chap. upon S. John's gospel says: We ought
to believe, Cyrillu^*
yt when the souls of holy men are gone away from the bodies, they are
commended unto the goodness of God, as into the hands of a most dear father,
and yt they do not abide in the earth, as some of the heathens believed, until
such time as they abhorred their graves: neither that they are carried as the
souls of wicked men, unto a place of exceeding torment, which is hell, Christ
having first prepared this journey for us, but that they rather mount up aloft
into their heavenly fathers hands. etc.

And in the Popes canon law, causa. 13. quaest. 2. Fatendu^, we read, The
Gloss of the canon law. Deuteronomy. 18.
that many do believe that some come from ye dead to the living: even as on the
other side holy Scripture does witness that Paul was caught up from the
living into paradise. Upon these words the gloss says that some do in deed
so believe, but falsely, since they be but fancies and vain imaginations, as it
is in causa. 26. quaestione. 5. Episcopi.

What farther may be said to those men that know these things, and
nevertheless do believe that souls stray in ye earth, I know not: and yet
that I may lay out al things plainly, I will here confute their chiefest
arguments.

CHAP. VI. A confutation of those men's arguments or reasons, which
affirm, that dead men's souls do appear: And first that is answered
which certain do allege, to vvitte, that God is omnipotent, and therefore
that he can work contrary to the ordinary course of nature.
FIrst our adversaries do lay against us, yt by the usual and common course of
things, the souls of the godly abide in heaven, and the souls of the wicked in
hell, until ye last day, and do not walk at all: but yet yt god may dispense with
them to appear here sometimes, thereby to instruct and admonish us: And then
Samuel did appear after his death unto king Saul: and Moses also which
forsook this life many years before: Likewise Elias, who was taken up into
heaven in a fyrie charet, appeared unto Christ our savior and his iij.
disciples, who^ he took with him at his transfiguratio^ in ye mount. Lazarus also
of Bethanie, returned from death into ye earth, and many other also were raised
from death by Christ, his apostles, and prophets.

Farther they allege this, yt Christ's apostles believed, yt the spirit or soul
either of Christ, (as some of the fathers understand it) or of some other
person did appear unto the^. Besides to prove this matter, they allege places
out of ye fathers, decrees of councels, and the common report yt has been
bruted of those yt returned from the dead. To al these resons by Gods
assistance, we will briefly and orderly answer.

The souls do return to instruct men contrary to the common course of nature,
by the omnipotent power of God.
As touching y^ first objection, yt al things are possible unto God, we deny it
not. We grant then that God can bring souls out of heaven or hell, and use
their travail and service to instruct, comfort, admonish and rebuke men. But
for yt no text or example is found in holy scripture, that ever any souls came
from ye dead, which did so scoole and warn men: or yt the faithful learned or
sought to understand any thing of the souls deceassed, we cannot allow ye
sequel of their reason. We may not of gods almighty power infer co^clusions
to our pleasure. For this is a principle holde^ in schools, yt the reason does
not truly follow, yt is set from the power of doing, to the dead done. For God
does nothing against himself, or his word written, to warrant their reason: they
should first have proved, that it was gods will, y^ souls should return into the
earth: for so do holy fathers entreat of gods almighty power.

Tertullia^ against Praxias says: How we ought to reason of the omnip^tent
power of God.
Truly I never thought that any thing was hard to be done of God, we may feign
of God what we list, as if he had done the same, because he is able to do
it. But we must not believe that God has therefore done all things, because
he is able to do them. But first we ought to make inquiry whether he has
done them.

S. Ambrose in his sixte book of epistles and 37. epistle writes unto
Cromatius in this wise: Ambrose.
Therefore what is there impossible unto him? Not that thing which is hard to
his power, but that which is contrary to his nature. It is impossible for him
to lie, and this impossibilite in him proceeds not of infirmity, but of
virtue and majesty. For truth receives no lie, neither does the virtue of God
enterteine the vanity of error. Read farther that which follows in the
same place.

Hierom writing to Eustochia of the preserving of her virginity, says: I will
boldly avouch this one thing, Hierom.
that though God can do all things, yet can he not restore a virgin after her
fall.

Augustine in the tenth chapter of his fifth book De ciuitate dei has:
Augustine.
That God is said to be omnipotent in doing that he will, and not in doing
that he will not. Again he adds: Gods power is not herby any whit
diminished, when we say, that god cannot die or be deceived. And immediately,
therefore he cannot do some things because he is omnipotent etc.

Thodoret also teaches us, Theodoret.
that it may not absolutely without exception be pronounced, that all things
are possible unto God. For who so does precisely affirm this, does in effect
say this much, that all things both good and bad are possible unto God etc.
Wherefore feeble is that objection of theirs: God can send souls unto men to
teach and admonish them: therefore these spirits that pray aid be souls
that come out of Heaven or Hell. In the mean time we do not deny the power of
God, as some do maliciously report of us: but we would not have the same made a
den or covert of errors.

We must lea^ne nothing of the dead. Deuteronomy. 18
Hear what the Lord our God in the.18. of Deuteronomie speaks: When thou
shalt come into the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, do not thou
learn to do after their abominable rites, and vsages of those nations. Let
none be found among you, that makes his son or his daughter to pass
through the fire: nor a diuiner that does forshew things to come, nor a
Sorcerer, nor a witch, nor a charmer, nor one that consulteth with spirits,
nor an inchanter, nor a Magitian, nor one that raises up the dead. For the
Lord does abhor all that do such things: and because of these
abominations the Lord thy God has cast them out before thee. Be thou
therefore sound and perfect before the Lord thy God: and by and by he
promises to send them that great Prophet whom they should hear.

In the.viij. of Esaias, it is written: If they say unto you, inquire of them
which have a spirit of divination, Esaias. 8.
which whisper and murmr softely in your ears to deceive you. Should not
every people or nation enquire at their God? what shall they go from the living
to the dead? Let them go unto the laws testimony, such as have no light,
should they not speak according to this word, which who so should contemn
shall be hardened and hunger. etc. Hereby we do understand, that under a great
penalty God has precisely forbidden, that we should learn and search out
any thing of the dead. He alone would be taken for our sufficient
schoolmaster. In the Gospel we read: Luke. 2^.
They have Moses and the Prophets, let them hear them. Unto these may be added
testimonies out of the Apostles writings, that God does not send us souls
hither to inform us. The common and ordinary way whereby it pleases God to
deal with us, is his word. Therwithal should we content our selves, and not
wait for new revelations, or receive any thing that does not in all points
agree therewith. But as touching this matter, we will speak more in his proper
place.

CHAP. VII. That the true Samuel did not appear to the vvytche in Endor.
Now touching the examples by them commonly alleged, which do think that
the souls of the dead do return again unto the living upon the earth: I will
first entreat of Samuels apparition, of which matter now adays there is great
contention and reasoning. And (as I trust) I shall prove by strong arguments,
that very Samuel himself did not appear in soul and body, neither that his
body was raised up by the sorcerers, which perchance then was rotten and
consumed unto dust in the earth, neither yt his soul was called up, but rather
some devilish spirit. First the author of the two books of Samuel says,
that Saul did ask counsel of the Lord, and that he would not answer him,
neither by visions, nor by Urim, nor by his Prophets. Wherefore if God disdayned
by his Prophets yet living, and other ordinary ways to give answer unto him,
whom he had already rejected, we may easily conjecture, that he would much less
have raised a dead prophet to make him answer. And the rather, for that as we
have a little before said, the law of God has severely by a great
threatening, forbidden to learn ought of the dead, and would not have us to
search for the truth of them, nor that any manne should use dyuination by
spyrites, and such other diuelyshe Arts. Secondly, if very Samuel in deed
appeared, that must of necessity have come to pass, either by the will of
God, or by the work of art Magike. But Gods will was not that Samuel should
return. For he has condemned Necromancie, and would not have us to ask
counsel at the dead: and that the spirit of God did that which was contrary
hereunto, or did permit the saints to do it, or was present with them that
did ought contrary thereto, it may not be granted. And that those things were
done by the force and operation of Art Magike, we can not affirm. For the
wicked spirit has no rule or power over the souls of the faithful to bring
them out of their places when he lust, since they be in the hand of God, and the
bosom of Abraham, nay (which is less) he has no power over filthy and
unclean swine, for he was driven (as we read in the viij. chapter of Matthew)
to beg leave, Matthew. 8.
before he could enter into the heard of swine: and how the^ should he have any
power over the soul of man? yet can it not be denied, that God sometimes for
certain causes does give the Devil and his servants, Magitians and
Necromancers, power to do many things, as to hurt and lame man and beast, and
to work other strange things. But that God does give the Devil leave to
raise dead bodies, or to call, bring forth, or drive away souls especially out
of Heaven, it has no ground at all in Scripture, neither can there be any
reasonable cause alleged, wherefore God would or should give the Devil
license to do these things contrary to the usual and common order, yea and
against his own express commandment. For vain and childishe is the cause
hereof that is given of some men, that Samuel should appear to certify and
astonishe Saul: as if God could not have feared him by other ways and
means. Was he not before utterly abashed and dismayed? Thirdly, if Samuel were
brought back, the same was done either by his will and consent, or without the
same, but that he did freely and of his own accord obey the sorcerers, no man
I think is so blind to imagine. For that were utterly repugnaunt to the Law
of God, that he should confirm Witchcraft and Sorcerie by his example. If the
Witch had called for Samuel, whilst he lived, doutles he would not have
approached unto her. And how then can we believe that he came to her after his
death? We may not so say, that the Witch compelled him to resort to her against
his will: for the Devil has no power over the Souls of the godly, and Magike
of it self is of no force. Heathnish superstition no doubt it is, Words of
themselves have no force.
that words uttered by Magitians, after their peculiar manner, or figures
drawn, should have such a secret and hidden operation. For the Hethens
believed that they could with a certain set style and number of words, bring and
draw down Jupiter out of Heaven. Wherefore they termed him Jupiter Elycius.
There are also certain superstitious persons in these our days, Jupiter Elicius
which go about to cure diseases by certain rites of blessings, and by
coniurings. Some hang about their necks certain scrolles of Paper, in which
there are written diverse strange words, but whether words of themselves have
any force at al, Pliny.
read Pliny in his 28. book, and 2. chapter, and Caelius Rhodiginus in his
16. book and 16. chapter of Antiquities.

Fourthely, if very Samuel himself had appeared, he would not have been
worshipped of Saul. Apoc. 19.22.
For we read in the 19. and 22. chapter of the Revelation, that John would
have worshipped the Angel, which had opened unto him great mysteries, but the
Angel of God forbad him so to do. Some here answer, that Saul meant not to
give unto the Prophet, the honor that was due unto God, but only a certain
outward and civil worship, such as we are wont to yield unto honest men, and
such as have well deserved of the Church and common weal. For they say, that
the Hebrew word Schachah there used, does signify to bend the knee, and to
fall down at a man's feet: which kind of worship we read, that Abigael and
Nathan the the Prophet gave unto King David. And Paul also in the 12. chapter
of his Epistle to the Romans teaches, Rom 1^.
that we should honor one another. Thomas of Aquine entreating of those two
places that I even now recited out of the Revelation, says, that John meant
not to worship the Angel, with the worship properly called Latria, but with an
other kind of worship termed Dulia, that is to say, that John's will was not to
withdraw from God, the honor due unto him, but to worship the Angel that was
sent from God, only with a civil and outward homage: and yet the Angel would
not so far condescend unto him. In the new Testament the 10. chap of the Acts
of the Apostles, Acts. 10.
we read that Cornelius met with Peter, fell down at his feet and worshipped
him, yet, so as he had been an Ambassador from God and not God himself, and
yet Peter lifted him up and said, arise for I my self am a man also. He said
not to Cornelius thou do well herein: nor as his worthy Uicare (with a
mischief) is wont to do, proffered his foot unto him to kiss. We may read
also that Elias disciples worshipped Elizeus that succeeded into his office, in
which place the word to bow the knee, or fall down, is used. But whether the
Prophet did accept and allow this kind of reverence or no, there is no
express mention. Breefly, it is not lykely that the Prophet would have
suffered the King to fall down at his feet.

Fifthly, if he had been the true Samuel, he would no dout have exhorted Saul to
repentance, and willed him to wayt for aid from God, to put his whole
confidence in him, or at least way, to have given him some comfort, or
counseled him to fight against his enemies with more courage. For though the
Prophets do often beat and threaten men, yet do they again revive and solace
them. Now because this Samuel does beat no other thing into his head, but
that God was displeased with him, Testimonies out of the Fathers touching
and had already forsaken him, we may not believe that he was the true, but a
mere counterfeit Samuel. Sixthly, the ancient Fathers write, Samuels appearing.
Turtullian.
that the true Samuel was not seen.

Tertullian in his book De anima says, that the Devil did there represent
Samuels soul, God forbid (says he) that we should believe that the devil can
draw the soul of any Saint, much less a Prophet, out of his proper place,
sith we are taught that Satan does transfourme himself into an Angel of
light, and much sooner into a man of light: who also will avouch himself to be
God, and do notable signs and wonders to seduce, if it were possible, the very
elect. S. Augustine is not always of one judgment touching this apparition:
in his second book to Simplician Bishop of Millane, and the third question
thereof, Augustine.
he grants that by the dispensation of Gods will, it might so come to pass,
that the spirit of some holy Prophet, should consent to present it self in
the sight of the King, to come out of his own place, and to speak with him,
but not to do this by constrainte, or by the virtue of Art Magike, which might
have any power over it: but thereby to show it self obedient to the secret
dispensation of God: and yet he does not dissemble* that a better answer may
be given, to wit, that the spirit of Samuel was not truly, and in deed raised
up from his rest, but rather some vain vision and counterfeit illusion, that
should be brought to pass by the devils practice, which the Scripture
therefore does term by the name of Samuel, because the same is wont to call
the Images and similitudes of things, by the names of the things themselves.
For who is he (says Augustine) that will be afraid to call a man painted, a man,
considering that without staggering, we are acustomed to give each thing his
proper name, as soon as we behold the picture of the same: as when we take the
view of a painted table, or wall, we say straight way, this is Tullie, this
is Salust, he Achilles, that other Hector, this is the floude called Symois,
that place termed Rome, whereof these things be ended no other than painted
Images, of those things whose names they bear. Since this is so, he says, it
is not to be marvelled that Scripture says Samuel was seen, when perchance
Samuels Image seemed to appear, through the crafty policy of him, that
transformed himself into an Angel of light, and fashioneth his Ministers like
unto the Ministers of righteousness.

In his book De octo Dulcitij questionibu^, the 6. question thereof, he
utters all this in as many words, and in his book De cura pro mortuis
gerenda, he writes that some are sent, from the dead to the living: as on the
other side, Paul was rapt up from the living unto Paradise: he adds there the
example of Samuel being dead, which did foreshewe to Saul, things, that
afterward should come to pass. He says further, that this place may
otherwise be understood, and that certain faithful men have been of this
Judgment, that it was not Samuel, but that some spirit fit for such wicked
practices, had taken upon him his shape and similitude. And in other places, as
we will show hereafter, he affirms that there is a figure contained in those
words, because the name of the thing is given unto the Image that does but
represent the same: and that it was not Samuel that appeared, but some deuilysh
spirit.

Other Fathers of the Church have written nothing particularly of this story,
so far as I know, but in certain places of their works, they teach generally
that good spirits are not pulled back into the earth by Magical Art. Of
Iustine and Gregory I will speak anon. In the very Papal decrees 26.
question 5. chapter Nec mirum, The Popes decrees.
it is written that it was not Samuel, but rather some wicked spirit that
appeared to Saul: And that it were a great offense that a man should believe
the plain words of the story without some farther meaning, for how says he
could it come to pass, that a man from his birth holy and just in
conversation of life, should by Art Magic be pulled out of his place? And if
he were not so drawn against his will, then he must needs agree thereto:
both which are alike absurd, to be imagined of a just man. This is the
Devils legerd^mayne, to make show, as though he had power over good men,
thereby the rather to deceive many. He there farther adds, that the
Hystoriographers do set forth both Saules mind, and Samuels state, and also
those things which were said and seen, omytting this, whether they were true
or false. And other words follow, which who so list to see more of that
matter, may there read.

But here Nicolas Lyras judgment (which in his commentaries on the books of
the Kings, Lyra.
mainteineth the contrary opinion) should be little weighed and regarded of
us. Where he notes, that the place by us even now alleged, is not written
according to the censure of the Church though it be found in the Popes law,
for otherwise says he, they which ensued in latter times, would not have
written contrary to the same, for many of those things concerning which men
have written otherwise in latter times, were nevertheless set forth to the
world, to be believed, as the very express and sound judgment of the whole
Christian Church, because they were put in the Popes book of Decretals.

CHAP. VIII. A Confutation of their arguments, which would have Samuel
himself to appear.
WE will now come to the Confutation of their Arguments, which maintain, that
very Samuel himself appeared to the Sorcersse, for he that rightly
overthrows his adversaries arguments, is supposed by the same means to
confirm his own cause. The cheifest arguments which our adversaries use, is
taken out of the 46. chapter of Ecclesiasticus, Eccle. 46.
where these words are found. Samuel before his death made protestation before
God, and before his anointed, that he took from no man his substance, no not
so much as the value of a shoe, and no man could then reprove him. And after
his death he Prophesied and told the King of his end. From the earth he lift
up his voice, and showed that the wickedness of the people should perish.

This place somewhat troubled S. Augustine, and other Godly Fathers. For if the
Devil only appeared, and not Samuel, how is it there said that he slept,
that is, dyed, for the Devil neither sleeps nor dies. Hereunto I may
shape this answer, that this book is not to be numbered among the Canonical
books of the old Testament, and that Doctrine in controversies, cannot be
proved by the authority thereof, the which Saint Augustine, also confesses
in his book De cura pro mortuis agenda.

But howesoeuer that be credited as true or false, I answer them plainly, that
Jesus the Son of Syraches intent was, to allege the Story literally, as
the words lie, and not by reason to debate the matter, whether Samuel truly
appeared or no. He speaks there according too the opynion of Saul and the
Witch, which thought that Samuel himself was raised. Further they say, that
he which appeared unto Saul, is sometimes expressly and in plain words
called Samuel. And an unseemly matter it were, making much for the reproach
of so great a Prophet, if his name had been applied unto the Devil. If
say they, it had not been Samuel, but some wicked Spirit, the Scripture
would in some one word, or other have noted the same.

To this Argument first I answer, that even in our common speech, it is an
usual phrase by the figure Metonymia, to term the Image by the name of the
thing, that it presents. So we term the Arms and Ensign of a Noble man,
by the name of that Lord himself, that gives those Arms. We say, this is
Julius Caesar, Nero, Saint Peter, Saint Paul, or here thou may see the
Cities of Tigurine, and Argentorat, also the Duke of Saringe, whereas in deed
they are only their Counterfeicts, or Arms, and Signs of Honor.

In a Commedie or Tragedy, we call this manne Saul, that Samuel, an other
David, whereas they do but betoken and represent their Personages. So says
Vergill, in his first book of Aeneidos: They wonder at Aeneas gifts, and have
Julius in admiration. And yet was it not Julius or Ascanius, but Cupide feining
himself to be Julius, whereby he might the eas^yer pearce the heart of the
ignorant Queen, with his Darte of Love.

Saint Augustine in his second book and nynth chap. De mirab^libus
Scripturae, says, that holy Scripture does sometimes apply the very names
of things to the Images and similitudes of the same. He alleges there this
example, that the foul spirit is called Samuel because he did falsely bear
Saul in hand, that he was Samuel: which fraud of the Devil, could no
ways turn too Samuels reproach. For who would say, that it should be a
reproach for an honest manne, if some knave would term himself by his name,
as if he were he himself.

The false Prophets said, they were true Prophets, and Gods Servants, yea
(which is more) they fained themselves too be the very Messiah, the Son of
God. And that Scripture does not so much as in one word make mention, that
this was very Samuel in deed, but rather some spirit, we must think that it
so came to pass, for this cause, that all men by the Law of God might
understand, that Magike and inquiry of things at the dead, did much displease
God. Saul himself before by the counsel and motion of Samuel, slew all the
Magitians that he could any where find. And God is not accustomed in this wise
to interpret Figurative speeches: for many of them are soon descried by such
as give diligent heed to them. A vain and superfluous speech it were, if a man
would say this is Peter, this is, that is the Image of Peter, which by a
figure, is called by the name of Peter.

Furthermore, holy Scripture does use to speak of things, rather according
to the opinion and judgment of men, than according to the substance and true
being which they have in deed. So Jesus is called the Son of Joseph, and
Iosephe named his father, whereas notwithstanding, our Savior Christ Jesus,
was borne of a chaste and unspotted Uirgin, without any help of man. And yet
nevertheless many of the Jews, imagined, that he was the Son of Joseph. In
the 1. Cor. 1. the Gospel it self is named foolishness, 1. Cor. 1.
because that men did account the great wisdom of God but as mere
foolishness. So in the first epistle to the Corinthians.x. chap. the Scripture
terms them gods, 1. Cor. 10.
which be nothing less tha^ so in deed. And that for this cause only, for
that the Heathen took them for Gods, Iere. 10. Psalm. 96.
and so did worship them. Even so the Scripture does term the Devil Samuel,
because Saul thought him to ^e Samuel in very deed.

An other reason they use, that Samuel forshewed unto (...) such things as
afterward should come to pass: as that the Philistians should in ba^tayle
overthrow his (...), Whether the devil for know of things to come.
and he and his sons together be slain. And all these things com^ to pass
according to his Prophecy. And say they the Devil knows not, neither can he
foretell of things to come, since it is only in Gods power so to do: But as
Christ in the eight of John says, he is a liar, John. 8.
and the father of lies. Here unto a man may easily answer: The Devil knew
how things stood with the Jews, and the Philistines, he understood even the
very secret consultations, privy practices, and warlike preparation on both
sides. He saw that the Israelits were slenderly addressed unto battle, and
utterly daunted of courage. Besides this, Samuel had a little before thretned
Saul with gods heavy wrath and vengeance, and that David should be advanced
to the kingly throne whereby he might easily gather what would ensue, and that
Saul must needs give place to David. And if the event had bin otherwise, yet
he knew that Saul with this prophecy would be quite dismayde, and driven to
despair: which thing must needs well content and please Satan, who lays
his baits day and night to intrappe men.

The Devil does not presently understand things to come, Which being
doubtfully spoken may be understood either of subuerting other kingdoms or
losing his own
and therefore he gives doubtful aunswers to such as seek oracles of him: As
when he said, Croesus perdet Halin transgres^us plurima regna.

That is, Cresus passing over the river Halis shall ouerturne many kingdoms.
And yet oftentimes he gathers one thing no otherwise than by an other. Hereof
writes Augustine in the 26.27. and 28. chapters of his book De Anima. The
Devil is one which has bin long beaten in experience, the which thing in all
affairs and matters is of very great force. For old and practiced soldiers
(...) by and by foresee to what issue things will come, but young men, and such
as want experience do not forthwith espy out the event of each enterprise.
Moreover, the Devils are very active, and can soon dispatch their matters. The
mariners know when winds and storms will arise. Husbandmen also are not
destitute of their prognostications. The skilful astronomer can many years
before exactly foretell when there will happen an Eclipse of the Sun and
Moon. The Physician by the critical days, pulse, and urine, can lightly judge
whether his patient shall live or no: builders see before hand when an house will
fall, and a practiced souldioure can straight ways judge who shall win the
victory. And what marvel then may it be, if the Devil an old trained
soldier, can sometimes foreshew some certain thing? Shall we be of this
mind, that so many years experience has brought them no knowledge at all?
Otherwhiles he tells things which be true in deed, and yet to no other end,
but that he may thereby purchase a certain credit unto his lying, to seduce
the ignorant.

For even that counterfeit Samuel, made wise, as if he had taken it in very
ill part, that Saul did so molest and disquiet him, and that he should be
forced to talk with him: he uses farther the words as it were of Samuel him
self. And hereof it comes, that many gather, he was the true Samuel in
deed. But what does not Satan devise to deceive men, and to force them unto
desperacion? Here I could allege examples of such as have bin persuaded, that
they saw and heard this and that man, and moreover knew them perfectly by
their speech: whereas they have afterward had evident intelligence, that they
were at that time many miles distaunt from them. So crafty is the Devil, and
knows how to work these and many other feats.

There are farther, diverse places alleged out of the ancient fathers that
seem too make for them, which affirm that true Samuel appeared unto Saul.
But these places we have before for the most part aunsweared. For albeit
Augustine in some places move a doubt, whether it were the true Samuel or no,
yet in certain other places he lyketh and best allows their opinion, who
deny Samuel to have appeared at all, taking rather that kind of speech, for
tropicall and figurative.

Iustine the Martyr, who is one of the most aunciente fathers, reasoning
against Trypho a Jew, Justinius.
writes in his colloquio, that the couetouse sorceresse at Saules
commandment raised up Samuels soul. And no man should marvel hereat, since
that the self same author does by and by add, that he is of this judgment,
that all the souls of Prophets and just men are subject unto such power
as a man may in very deed believe, to have bin on this greedy and subtle
Witch. But this none of the fathers will grant him. Other Greek writers
also, which in their tender years applied their minds to Philosophy, and
not to the study of holy Scriptures, and afterward were converted to
Christianity, do set forth in their writings certain opinions which are
not agreeable to the word of God. Wherefore it need not seem a strange thing
to any manne, that Iustine the Martire in some points had his erroures.

The same author in Responsionibus ad Orthodoxos, quest. 52. mainteineth the
contrary assertion. For, says he, what soever things were done by that hungry
witch, were in deed the works of the Devil, who did so dasell the eyes of
such as beheld him, that it seemed unto them, they saw Samuel him self,
when in very deed he was not there. But the truth of his words proceeded from
God, who gave the Devil power to appear unto the sorceresse, and to declare
unto her, that which should afterward come to pass. etc.

If any manne object that this work is not ryghtly ascribed unto Iustine,
(for so much as he does make mention of Origin, and Ireneus the Martire,
whereas notwithstanding he him self was martired before them: And further,
speaks of the Manichees, who were in their ruff long after this time.
Hereunto we answer, that if this book were not written by Iustine* yet (as
may appear) some other learned clerk wrote that work, whose authority
might carry away as great credit as Iustines, ^ith that the same does fully
agree with holy Scripture. Furthermore we may set against Iustine, other holy
fathers, as Tertullian and Chrysostom, of whom we have before spoken, who have
by holy scripture instructed us, that it was not Samuel in deed which appeared
unto Saul. We will hereafter say somewhat of Gregory, Gregorius.
who no doubt was a learned and godly father, but yet too simple and light of
belief.

And the fathers themselves deny, that a man should subscribe unto their
opinion in ought that they do mayntaine and aduouche without the warrant of
Gods word. The Popes out of Augustine have written in their Decrees, Quest. 9.
ca Noli, that a man should credit none of the fathers except he proved his
saying out of holy scriptures. But in these days many cull nothing out of their
books but erroures, and whatsoever they maynteyn by good testimony of the
holy scriptures, that they reiecte and disanull: in which point they do fitly
resemble those children, who only in things wicked and evil, imitate their
good parents: for good men also have their faults.

CHAP. IX. Whether the Devil have power to appear under the shape of a
faithful man?
BUt thou do demand whether the Devil can represente the likeness of some
faithful man deceased? Hereof we need not doubt at all. For in the second
Corin. 11. Saint Paul witnesses, 2. Corin. 11.
that Satan transformeth him self into the shape and fashion of an Angel of
light. Satan by nature is a spirit, and is therefore termed an Angel, because
God uses to send him to bring that thing to pass which he thinks best. So
in the second of kings.22. chapter an evil Angel was sent forth to Ahabs
destruction to be a lying spirit in the monthe of 400. false prophets. 1. Reg.
22.
This was an Angel of error and darkness: who yet in outward show could
resemble a good Angel, that he might so guide the council of Baals
worshippers, who no doubt vaunted the^ selves, as if they had bin gathered
together by Gods holy spirit. If Satan be then so skillful, can he not
counterfaite and feign him self to be some holy man, by resembling his words,
voice, gesture, and such other things?

Amongst the Gentiles he has done miraculous Acts, persuading them to think,
that souls by art Magike were called up, and compelled to give answer of
secret and hidden things that were to come. And therefore not only in public,
but also private affairs, if they seemed to be any thing hard unto them, they
consulted with Magitians and sorcerers, and had moreover recourse sometimes unto
oracles.

Tertullian in his book De Anima mentions, Tertullian.
that there were some even in his days, which professed they could raise up
and reclaim souls from the hellishe habitation. And he calls art Magike,
the second Idolatry, in the which the Devils do as well feign them selves to
be dead men, as they do in the other to be Gods. So do these subtle spirits
lurk, and do many strange things under the pretense of dead men. He adds
that Magike is thought to convey souls out of Hell which lie there in rest,
and to represent them unto our sight, by reason that it shows a vain
vision, and counterfeiteth the shape of a body. Neither is it a hard matter
for him to bleare and beguyle the outward eyes, who can easily darken and
dazell the inward sight of the mind. The serpents that were brought forth by
the inchaunters rods, seemed to the Egiptians to be bodies, but the truth of
Moses devoured up the Magitians lie. Simon also and Elimas the Magitians did
many signs and wonders against the Apostles etc. He adds, that even in his
time those heretics named properly Symonistes of Simon the Magitian, the first
author of that sect, did with such great presumption advance their art,
that they professed they could raise from the dead, even the souls of the
Prophets. etc.

Lactantius in the.2. book and.17. chapt. De origin erroris, writes,
Lactantius
that evil angels lurking under the names of the dead, did wound and hurt the
living, that is, they took unto themselves the names of Jupiter and Juno,
whom the heathe^s took to be gods, or as we now say, they took unto them the
names of S. Sebastian, Barbara, and others.

In the.7. book and.13. chap. he says, that the Magitians with certain
inchauntmentes did call souls out of hell. Idem.
But this may not so be understood, that Lactantius was of this judgment, that
they by their wicked arts did bring the souls back again into their dead
bodies: but that they did so vaunt and boast that they had raised up this and
that soul. He also confuteth the opinion of the Ethnikes, proving by the
testimony of the very Magitians, whom they highly reverenced, yt the soul was
immortal. These men affirmed and taught, that they did call up souls from the
dead, the which point even those of the Gentiles believed, who notwithstanding
thought, that the soul did streightway die with the body.

Iustine the Martyr in the second Apology which he wrote in the defense of
Christians, has these words: I will (says he) say the truth: In times past
wicked angels through vayn visions deceived women, and children, and with
strange and monstrous sightes made men afraid, by which means they often
wroong that out of foolish and rude persons, which by reason they could
never get of them. And therefore not knowing that these were the Devils engines
and policies tendyng to delude them, they by one consent termed the workers of
these slye conueyances, by the name of Gods, assignyng to each of them their
propre names, as best pleased themselves. etc.

Afterward in the same Apology he exhorts the heathens, that they would
not deny men's souls after this life to be endued with sense, but at the least
way, would give credit to their own Necromancers, who teach that they call
up men's souls. Also let them believe those yt affirm they have been vexed with
spirits of dead men, which persons the common people term furious and frantike
bodies. In Augustine de ciuitate dei, many such things be contained.

Now what dreadful, strange, and marvelous ceremonies they used when they
went about by their Magical arts to call up the souls of the dead, a man
may see in the first book of Lucan the Poet: where he sets forth how
Erictho, a famous Wytche in Thessalye, revived and restored a souldioure to
life again, who was lately slain before. Which act he did at the request
of Sextus Pompeius, that so he might by him learn what would be the issue of
the battle fought at Pharsalia.

This kind of Magike they proprely term Necromancie or Psycomancie, which is
wrought by raising up the spirits and souls of the dead. Of which there were
diverse sorts. For sometime appeared unto men the whole bodies of the dead,
but at an other time only ghostes and spirits: and often nothing was heard,
saving only a certain obscure voice.

Plutarche in the life of Cimon, (as he is translated by Ioachimus Camerarius
in the Preface on Plutarches books, De oraculis quae defecerint, and de
conseruata figura, and Delphis) writes, that Pausanias, when he had taken the
City of Bizance, sent for Cleonice, a maiden of noble parentage, to have
unhonest company with her. Whom her parents partly by necessity, and
partly for fear, sent unto him. But after that the Uirgin had once obtained
so much of his wayghters in his privy chamber, that they should at her first
entrance, put out the lyghtes, sh^e in the dark going softly toward
Pausanias bed, by the way stumbled on the candlestick, and overthrew it
against her will, as he lay asleep in his bed, who being troubled with
the sudden noise, drew a swoorde that lay by him, and therewith slew the
virgin, as she had bin his enemy, which went privily to set upon him. But
she being thus slain with that deadly stroke, would never after suffer
Pausanias to take his quiet rest, but in a vision appearing unto him in the
night season, denounced sentence of hatred against this noble captayn, in
these words. (...). which is,

Answer to the law, for wrong is an evil thing unto all men. This heinous
deed of Pausanias was very grievously taken of all his companions, who
therefore under the conduction of captain Cymo* set on him, and chased him
out of Thracia. And thus having lost the city of Biz^nce, when (as it is
reported) the sight continued in troubling him, he fled unto Necyomantium,
at Heraclea, where the soul of Cleonices being called up, he by entreaty
pacified her displeasure. She did there both present her self unto his
sight, and also told him, it should shortly come to pass, that ye evil toward
him should cease, as soon as he came to Sparta. Hereby privily intimating his
death. etc. This Pausanias did at the first soberly and discreatly demean him
self, Ephori amongst the Lacedaemonians w^r magistrates* who in certain cases
were above Kings, unto whom appeals were made from Kings: even as amongst
the Romans, they appealed from the Consuls to the Tribunes.
but afterward being puffed up with such victories as he had obtained, he
ruled and reigned like a very Tyrant. Wherefore when the Magistrates called
Ephori, would have committed him to prison, he took Sanctuary in a Temple,
where he was shut up until he famished through hunger.

I might here heap together many such like Hystories, to prove evidently what
this Samuel was. In other matters also, if God license him, the Devil is not
destitute of power, and how crafty and ready he is for all assayes,
experience does well declare.

Furthermore grant that, wherein the pith and strength of the question does
consist (which can never be proved by Scripture) that God did permit Samuel to
return and to Prophecy of things to come after his death, yet will it not
thereof follow, that such visions should now be showed also, or that those
things should be out of hand credited and done which they command.

God in times past, did often in visible shape send his Angels unto men, but
now we hear not that many are sent unto men, neither in deed is the same
necessary. When the Apostles lived here, many notable miracles were done,
but now for certain good causes, they cease and fall away, for whatsoever is
necessary for our Salvation, is expressly contained in the word of God. These
notes touching Samuels appearing, may suffice.

CHAP. X. Moses and Elias appeared in the Mount unto Christ our Lord: many
have been raised from the dead both in body and soul, and therefore Souls
after they are departed, may return on earth again.
IN like manner they obiecte unto us, Math. 17 Moses and Elias appeared.
out of the 17. of Matthew, that Moses and Helias were seen in the Mount,
(which is called by the old Writers Tabor,) with our Lord Jesus, by the
Apostles whom he had chosen for the same purpose, and that they did speak with
him. Luke tells of what matters they co^muned with him, to wit of his death,
yt is ye death of ye cross Thereupon they gather, that the souls of dead men
may come again into the earth and appear unto men: we have granted before ye
God is able to send souls again into the earth, but that it is his will so to
do, or that it is necessary especially at these days, is not yet proved. Moses
and Helias apered not to all the Apostles but only to three, neither did they
speak to those three, they brought no new Doctrine, they commanded them not
to build Churches in their honor, or to do any such like thing, whether that
their souls came alone, or their bodies: also sure it is, they were not sent
to the Apostles, but to Christ only.

It was very necessary, yt they which should be Christ's witnesses, should very
well understand, that both ye Law and the Prophets, do bear record unto our
Savior Christ, yt he should die for the world, and come again in the latter
day, to raise up the dead bodies, to glorify them, and to carry the^ with
him, into eternal bliss. And for this cause, God would have these two excellent
Prophets seen of the Apostles.

Lazarus soul did not only appear, but he came again both in body and
soul, Lazarus came again on earth. John. ^1.
as John witnesses in his 11. chap. he is as it were a sure token, of our true
resurrection, which shall be in the last day, as also others, which our Savior
Christ, ye Apostles, and in ancient time, the Prophets have raised from the
dead. You shall never read that either Lazarus, or any other have told where they
were while they were dead, or what kind of being there is in the other world,
for these things are not to be learned and known of the dead, but out of the
word of God.

Matthew. 27. At the resurection of Christ many roase again.
The like may be said to that which is in the 27. chap. of S. Matthew, that when
Christ suffered on the Cross, the graves were opened, and afterward on the day
of his resurrection, many dead bodies did arise, and appeared to many at
Jerusalem. The souls of the dead did not only appear, neither did they warn
the living, or command them to do this or that for ye deads sake, to wit,
either to pray for the^, or to go on pilgrimage to saints etc. But ye dead with
their souls and bodies together, came into the earth: for heerby god would
show, that he by his death has ouercom and destroyed death to the faithful,
and that at the last day their souls and bodies shall be knit together, and
live with God for ever. Now what th^se holy men were that rose again, and
whether they remained any time in this present life, or died again, or went
with Christ into heaven, look ye judgment of S. Augustine in his.99. Epist. to
Euodius, Augustine.
and his 3. book De mirabilibus scrip. ca. 13.

To these we may ioyn that which Ruffinus writes in his ecclesiastical
history.1. book 5. chap. and which Socrates repeteth in his first book and 12.
chap. touching Spiridion bishop of Cyprus. He had a daughter called Irene,
Spiridion raised his daughter. Ruffinus.
with who^ a certain friend of hirs left gorgeous apparel, she being more wary
than needed, hyd it in the ground, and within a while died. Not long after
comes this man yt owed ye apparel, and hearing say ye maide^ was dead, goes
to her father whom sometimes he accuses, and sometimes entreats. The old
father supposing this ma^s loss to be his own calamity, comes to his
daughters grave, and there calls upon god, beseching him yt he would show him
before the time, ye resurrection which is promised. And his hope was in vain,
for ye virgin being revived, apeared to her father, and showed the place where
she had hid the aparel, and so departed again.

I will not deny this thing to be true. For ye like history has Augustine in
his 137. epist. A certain young man which had an evil name accused Boniface,
Augustines priest, yt he enticed him to filthiness. Now when ye matter could
neither be proved, nor disproued by sufficient resons: both of them were bid to
go to ye grave of one Felix a Martyr, that by a miracle the truth might be
known. They had not bin sent, unless before this time also some secret
matters had bin known by this means: it may be well answered, that they were
good, or rather evil Angels which did appear.

CHAP. XI. Whether the holy Apostles thought they savve a man's Soul, when
Christ suddenly appeared unto them after his Resurrection.
WE read in the 24. Chapter of S. Lukes Gospel, Luke. 24.
that two Disciples which returned from Emaus to Jerusalem, told the
Apostles, that they had seen Christ alive again, and whiles they yet spoke,
the Lord stood in the myddest of them, and said unto them, peace be unto you:
but they being amassed and afraid, thought they saw a spirit. etc.

Out of this some go about to prove, that the Apostles believed that spirits or
souls did walk and appear unto men, Christ's Disciples supposed they saw a
ghost.
and that they themselves did think they saw the spirit of Christ (as
certain of the old Writers do expound it) or else some other man's spirit.

This Argument may be answered two ways. First if they thought they saw a
Soul, they thought a mysse. But they were no less deceived with the common
sort now, than when they thought Christ would raise up an outward and
earthly kingdom, in which they should be chief. Secondly, it may be, that
they supposed they saw an evil or good Angel, Many kind of spirits.
for there are more kinds of spirits than one. There is a spirit that created
al things, to wit, God the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Again there
be spirits that be created, as good and evil Angels, as also the souls of
men, which either are in the body, or by death severed from the body, and abide
either in everlasting life, or in eternal damnation. As touching the state of
Souls in Purgatory, where they are prepared to the Heavenly journey, and of
Limbus puerorum, there is nothing extant in holy Scripture.

It is manifest in scripture that God appeared unto the holy patriarchs, to
the prophets, to kings and others, in diverse visions and forms, and that he
showed him self unto them and spoke with them. Jacob saw a ladder reach from
the earth up to Heaven, and God leaning on it. Isaias saw the Lord sitting
upon an high throne. Daniell saw an old man, sitting and his son coming
unto him and receiving all power of him.

Tertullia^ and other holy fathers do teach, that ye son of God, which at
the appointed time should take upon him human flesh, did appear unto
the Patriarchs in an angelical shape.

When John Baptist did baptize our savior in Jordan, the Holy ghost was seen
in the shape of a dove. The holy scriptures in many places do testify, that
good Angels have oftentimes appeared to Gods ministers.

That evil spirits are often seen, and that at this day they show themselves
in diverse forms, to inchaunters and coniurers, and to other men also, as well
godly as wicked, both histories and daily experience does witness.

Truly we read not, that souls have appeared on this fashion. By these we may
easly gather, that the Apostles, when they thought they saw a spirit, did not
believe they saw a soul. Could they not think I pray you, they saw an evil
spirit? Or rather that they saw a good spirit, or a good angel? For it may be
showed by many examples, that even the faithful have bin troubled, and feared
at the appearing of good Angels.

In the eight and tenth chapter of Daniel, Daniel. 8.10.
we read that the Prophet fell into a sickness at the sight of Angels. The
virgin Mary hirselfe was afraid when she saw the Angel Gabriel. So was
Zachary the priest, and many others.

In the 12. of ye Acts, we read, that Herod killed James the Apostle with the
sword, Acts. 12.
and when he saw that it pleased the Jews, he caught Peter also, and when he
had put him in prison, he delivered him to.16. Souldioures to be kept,
entending after the feast of Passover to kill him. But the Angel of the Lord
led S. Peter out of the prison by night through the Soldiers watch, and set
him in the right way to the house of Mary, the mother of John, whose surname
was Mark (where many were gathered together and prayed.) And when he had
knocked at ye entry door, a maid came forth to harken, named Rhode. But when
she knew Peter's voice, she opened not the entry door for gladness, but ran
in and told how Peter stood before the entry, but they said unto her thou
art mad: yet she affirmed constantly that it was so. Then said they it is his
Angel, but Peter continued knocking, and when they had opened and saw him, they
were astonished. In like manner, now also when the Apostles saw Christ,
peradventure they thought they saw a good Angel. For there are Angels given of
God unto men to keep them. Of this matter there is somewhat red in the.18. of S.
Matthew, and in the 19. Psalm. and we will note somewhat more of it hereafter.
Matthew. 18. Psalm. 19.


The Gentiles also believed (as may be gathered by their writings) that every
man had a good and an evil Angel, and that the good Angel did stir men up to
virtue, and defend them, but that the evil Angel did hurt men wheresoever he
could, and did provoke them to wickedness.

If our Elders, when they have seen or heard any thing of one that has been
traueling or dead, did say it is his spirit, it may be, they meant not his
soul, but his Angel: for if when as spirits were seen now in this place, and
by and by in an other place, they did think them to be souls (as in these
latter times all men have believed:) in this they were deceived, as they have been in many other things also, for souls are by and by received, either into
everlasting joy, or into eternal damnation.

If the Preachers and Teachers had done their duties, and had in this and other
points of Christian Doctrine, rightly instructed the people committed to their
charge, or at the least, if they had not forbidden them to read the holy
Scriptures, they would have thought a right both of this, and other things
which at this day are in controversy.

CHAP XII. Concerning the holy Fathers, Councels, Bishops and common people,
which say that souls do visibly appear.
THe authority of the holy fathers is objected against us, The holy fathers
say that souls appear. Ambrose. Augustine.
as that which S. Ambrose writes of S. Agnes, and S. Augustine of S. Felix, of
which we have spoken before. And that which Abdias has in the life of the
Apostles, that Thomas appeared after his death and preched. S. Gregory in his
Dialogues, Gregory.
does write diverse and wondrous things, among others he rehearses many
examples of the beade which appeared, and desired help of certain Saints,
yea and of the Apostles themselves, which have visited some upon their death
beds, a little before they departed, and many other such like matters, which
they that list may read themselves. It is said that Hierome appeared to S.
Augustine.

I will not in this place accuse the holy Fathers of vanity, yet this we must
note, they say not they have believed that they which appeared, were the
souls of dead men, but they spoke after the common manner. As touching S.
Gregory's Dialogues, I can not hyde, Many things fabulous in Gregory's dialoges.
this (which many have noted before me (that many things are contained in them
that are nothing true, but altogether like old wives tales. Not because ye holy
father has written these things of malice, but for that he being too too
credulous, has put many things into his books, rather upon other men's report,
than that he himself knew them certainly to be true.

At this day also there are many honest and godly men which have this fault,
that they are too quick of belief, and altogether ruled by others. They judge
other men by themselves, they would be ashamed to report any thing that were
false, and think such men in like manner to be affectioned, which do abuse
their simplicity and goodness. Often times these men, through their too much
lightness of belief, fall into great dangers.

Moreover, in that age wherein Gregory lived, men began to attribute much to
those apparances and visions. And at that time the true and sincere Doctrine
began greatly to decay. Truly the time in which a man happens to live, is much
to be regarded: he himself confessed that his time was the latter times.
Therefore the Scriptures should have been more diligently have lent unto,
neither should any thing have been retained that was not agreeable unto them.
Some going about to excuse him, for that he has stuffed his Dialogues full of
miracles and wonders, say he did it to mollify by those examples, the perverse
and hard hearts of the Longobardes, to the end they might embrace the true
Religion, which they had so grievously persecuted. But that it is in no wise
profitable to make known the true faith, by these helps, which are nothing
else but vain tales, even Viues himself, in his first book De tradendis
disciplinis does acknowledge.

Some urge us with the authority of counsels, which have allowed certain
apparances of souls, Counsels approve the appearing of Souls.
and have suffered some books, which are extant of such apparitions, to be
read for the edifying of the simple, and some again together with their
visions, they have clean rejected.

It is reported that the Counsel of Constance, has allowed this vision:

A certain Deane when he had given over his Deanrie, went into the Wilderness
to do penance: after his death he appeared to his Bishop, and told him that
the same hour in which he departed this life, there dyed thirty thousand men,
among whom only his soul and S. Bernarde were made partakers of eternal
salvation, and three went into purgatory, and all the rest into endless
damnation. etc. Counsels may err. Matthew. 24.
They say that Councels and the church cannot err, because they are guided by
the holy Ghost. Also in the 24. of Matthew, the Lord does say in the late
days there shall be signs and wonders that the very elect if it were possible
might be seduced, therefore they conclude those things which councels do say of
such apparitions, are to be believed. Christ's words are not so to be understood
that the chosen can never be brought into errors (for the contrary may be
showed by many examples) but that they do not abide in error, albeit some do
very hardly get out of the same again. Tell me, I pray you, who they were that
came together in ancient Councels? were they not holy fathers? It is manifest
that in many points they were at variaunce among themselves, and that they have
showed by their contrary writings: yea and many times they are contrary to
themselves, and therefore they have not always thought aright. Sometime they
send us to the word of God, as to the most certain rule and leauell of faith.
There are examples ynow, by which it may be showed, that the old Councelles
have erred in some of their determinations. The Council of Ariminum has
allowed the Arrians doctrine. The second Ephesin council did subscribe to
Eutiches. The Council holden at Car^hage, which Cipria^ gathered, pronounced
flatly against the scriptures etc. What shall we say was done in later times?
It is well enough known by histories who has resisted Councels, and ruled
them, and what has been chiefly handled in them for certain hundred years:
And what for the most part has by and by followed after them, even cruel
wars and bloody slaughters. If now those ancient Councels could err, who
will maruayle that they which have assembled since have erred? But as touching
the apparitions, that I may (all other things omitted) talk only of them, tell
me I pray you who should certify the Councles, whether this or that vision
were true or false? Certainly no Councels can bring to pass, that the lies
which have bin scatred abroad, shall now begin to be true tales, although
they of the Council have said they are true.

Popes have approved the appearing of souls.
It is even as foolish to say, the Pope (who will be counted above all Councels)
has confirmed this or that miracle to be true, which they say was wrought in
some one monastery or other. How can the bishop of Rome being so far off, know
any thing better than they which dwell in the same places? If the bishop having
no other assurance than out of their words or writings, which perhaps go about
to erecte new pilgrimages, and new devises to get money, confirm once that
this or that soul was seen, it must straight way without any gaynsaying be
believed. But if any other men who have with diligence sought out the truth of
the matter, do testify the contrary: all that they say must not be regarded.
Consider (I beseech you) of this matter. Before, all have doubted whether the
thing were so or no, but as soon as the Pope does give his verdicte, or some
Church man do in his dream see it to be so, it is a heynouse matter afterward
to doubt of it. O time! O manners!

As touching other common and lay men as they term them, Many affirm they
have seen souls.
which say they have seen one after his death, and have heard and known him,
and have spoken with him: I easyly grant they have seen and heard some thing,
and have thought verily they were souls, and that they did speak with them.
But it follows not therefore, that they were souls indeed, much less that
any dead man has appeared in body and soul unto them. For at Domes day only the
souls shall return to their bodies again. Souls are spirits, but spirits
are invisible, wherefore they cannot so be seen, unless they take some
outward shape upon them. But it can never be proved by the testimony of holy
scripture, that as good and evil Angels, so souls take some shapes upon them.
Besides this, it is most true that oftentimes ye shapes and forms of them
whose souls are not yet sundred from their bodies by death (as when one lies
upon his death bed) are no less seen than theirs which are already dead.
Therefore it is not necessary that we believe ye ghosts which are seen, to be
souls. By these things you understand what is to be thought of the tale of
Platina, Nauclerus, and others, which write yt a certain Bishop saw Pope
Benedict the eight (lately dead) in a solitary place sitting upon a black
horse, and being demanded why he was so carried about with the black horse, he
warned the bishop that he should distribute the money which was given to ye use
of the pore (but now wickedly kept to other purposes) unto those pore folks to
whom of right it belo^ged. Other tales of like stamp are ryfe every where.

CHAP. XIII. Whether souls do return again out of Purgatory and the place
which they call Limbus puerorum.
THat souls, which are gone either to Heaven or to Hell, return not thence,
nor appear again before the latter day, perchance some men would easily
grant: but they imagine there is a third place, which is Purgatory) out of
the which souls do return upon earth. For as yet the last sentence has
not passed on them, and therefore as yet they may be helped, and therefore
also they do crave help, and show themselves unto men. But we have proved
before at large, both out of the scriptures, and also out of the writings of
the ancient fathers, that the souls of the faithful are saved, and that the
souls of the unbelievers are damned immediately without delay, and therefore
there is no Purgatory. Against this, they allege sundry arguments amongst
the which this, albeit it be very common, yet is it the cheifest, when they
say, that no man is saved except he be purged from all his sins, and that
sin cleaves unto us even unto the grave. If we say that purity and
cleanness consists not in our works, or in the pains which we endure, but
that God through faith in his son Jesus Christ (who is our only redemption,
justification, satisfaction, and raunsom for our sins) does justify us: they
straight aunsweare, that our faith is imperfect, and that the most godly men
complain when they depart hence, of the weakness of their faith. And
therefore that God does not take up such kind of men straightwayes into
heaven, nor yet because they are not utterly void of faith, thrust them
presently down into hell. And therefore, that there is a middle place between
both, which is called Purgatory, in which the souls are purified from the
imperfection which remained in them at the time of their death, and out of the
which they are delivered by the merits of the living, and by large pardons. Is
not this as much as to attribute that unto our own pains and to external
fire, which ought only to be ascribed unto the death of Christ? Does not
Christ teach us yt if at any time we feel any weakness of faith, we should
cry out with the Apostles: Lord increase our faith? Does God disdain to
hear the prayers of his faithful people in the extremity of death? Christ
says, he that is washed has no need save to wash his feet, but he is
clean every whitte: He will save us, not for the worthiness of our faith,
but by his mere grace only. He does bestow these things amongst us, as if
some rich man did freely give meat and drink unto others, whereof some of
them receives it in wooden, some in earthen, and some in silver or golden
vessels: or as if a Prince did distribute unto every one a piece of gold, and
some receive it with a feeble hand, and some with a strong and lusty hand.
He that has the weak hand receives money as well as he that has the strong
hand. Saint Paul exhorts the Thessalonians in his first Epistle and
fourth Chapter, 1. Thessa. 4.
that they mourn not for the dead as the Gentiles do. If there had been a
fire of Purgatory, as they have falsely imagined, he could not have been
angry with them, although they had taken their friends departure somewhat
impaciently. etc. Other arguments which are brought for the confirmation of
Purgatory, are of late so confuted by many godly and learned men, that it is
marvel our adversaries will so often repete them.

But before I leave this matter, I will here insert this history following. A
certain Germain being accused by the Inquisitours of heresy (as they term
it) that amongst his companions he denied Purgatory, contrary to the common
consent of the Catholic Church, made his answer thus: If our parish Priest
(quod he) whom I credit very much, preach unto us true doctrine in the
Pulpet, either there is no Purgatory at all, or else it is clean empty. For
he oftentimes says, that Turks, Jews, heretics, and wicked men go not
into Purgatory, but straight into Hell fire, from whence they shall never be
delivered: Then that by Pardons which are every where sold for money, many
souls are restored to their first perfection: And moreover, that the Mass is
of such force, that there is not one soong in all the world by which one soul
at the least is not delivered out of the flames of Purgatory. If these things
(quod he) be true, (for I will not go about to refell that which master Parson
has said) I will stand in this my opinion. For you do all complain, that
the number of the Catholykes is very small, the greater part of men being
divided into sundry se^tes, and the multitude of Epicures daily increasing.
Then are all men's pursses many times drawn dry by pardoners, which for
money sell their indulgences, that by them the souls of men may be delivered
out of the torments of purgatory. Furthermore, there is no village but there
are a great many Masses soong in it, before any one husbandeman dies. What
follows then, but that there is either no Purgatory, or one utterly void
and empty? When the Inquisitours (who knew very well that their men commonly
taught such doctrine) herd these things, they were amazed, and taking advise
together, they all berated him for occupying his head about questions nothing
appertaining unto him, which they commanded him to leave unto divines, and to
follow his own business.

There was in our country an honest and sober man, who before the light of the
Gospel began to appear, used this dilemma: Dilemma, is a kind of argument or
reasoning, which every way conuinceth him unto whom it is spoken.
The bishop of Rome either has authority to bring souls out of the pains of
Purgatory, or else he has no authority: If he have that power, and will not
use it, except he receive money, he can not escape the fault of cruelty
and couetousenesse: But if he have no such authority, surely it is great
villainy to rob so many widows and fatherless children, and so arrogantly
to boast himself of authority which he has not. And if there be no
Purgatory (as by the holy Scriptures it is plainly gathered there is not)
surely then men's souls can neither return from thence, nor offer themselves
to be seen of men.

Now as touching the fourth place, namely Limbus puerorum, Limbus puerorum.
(in the which innocent children, as they call them, are said to be) Papists
themselves scante dare affirm, that they return again and appear unto men,
and crave their help: for they teach, that if they depart without baptism,
they shall never enjoy the sight of God, and for that cause they may not be
buried in the same churchyard with other christians. Merciful God! how many
godly matrones has this false devise miserably vexed? I call it a false
devise, for that they bring nothing out of the holy Scriptures whereby to prove
this point of doctrine. The Scriptures do not attribute so much unto external
baptism, which is by water. Was the condition of infants better in the old
testament than in the new? You do not read that the old fathers, supposed
that infantes which dyed before the eight day, and therefore were not
circumcised, should be separated from the sight of God for ever. David the king
and prophet said he should follow his son, whom God had called out of this
life before he was circumcised. But it was not David's meaning that he should go
into a place where he should be deprived of the sight of God for ever. But it
appertains not much unto our purpose to dispute any further hereof. Thus have
I now answered the cheifest arguments of our adversaries, whereby they would
prove the souls of good and evil men, to offer them selves to be seen
sometimes of them that live, after their departure by death from their bodies.

CHAP. XIIII. What those things are which men see and hear: and first that
good Angels do sometimes appear.
BUt thou will say, I do not yet clearly and plainly understand what manner
of things those are, (whereof (as it is said before) Historiographers, holy
fathers, and others make mention: as that holy Apostles, bishopps, martires,
confessors, virgins, and many other which died long ago, appeared unto certain
men lying at the point of death, gave them warning, aunsweared unto certain
questions, commanded them to do this or that thing: and that some thing is
seen and heard at certain times, which not only affirms it self to be
this or that soul, but also shows how it may be succored, and afterward
retourning again, gives great thanks unto them of whom it has received such
a benefit: that the husband being dead, came in the night unto his wife now
a widdowe, and that seldom times any notable thing has happened, which was
not foreshewed unto some man by certain signs and tokens. You will say, I
hear and understand very well that these things are not men's souls, which
continually remain in their appointed places, I pray you then what are they?
To conclude in few words: If it be not a vain persuasion proceeding through
weakness of the senses through fear, or some such like cause, or if it be
not deceyte of men, or some natural thing, whereof we have spoken much in the
first part, it is either a good or evil Angel, or some other forewarning
sent by God, concerning the which we will speak more orderly and fully
hereafter. Our savior witnesses in the gospel, Angels appear. Matthew. 18.
that children have their good angels: and we read in the 18. of Matthew,
that the Lord said: Take heed ye contemn not one of these little ones: for I
say unto you, that their Angels in Heaven do always behold the face of my
father which is in Heaven. Which words are not so to be taken, as though they
were never sent down into the earth, but the Lord here speaks after the
manner of men. For as servant stand before their masters to fulfill their
commandment, even so are the Angels pressed and ready to serve God. Esaias the
63. Esaias. 63.
The Angel of his face, that is, which stands ready in his sight, preserved
them. And further they which often stand in presence of their lord, are
acceptable unto them and privy to their secrets. Out of this place of Math.
Saint Herome in his Commentaries, and other fathers do conclude, that God
does assign unto every soul as soon as he creates him his peculiar Angel,
which takes care of him. But whether that every one of the elect have his
proper Angel, or many Angels be appointed unto him, it is not expressly set
forth, yet this is most sure and certain, that God has given his Angels in
charge to have regard and care over us. Daniel witnesses in his tenth chapter,
that Angels have also charge of Kingdoms, Daniel. 10.
by whom God keeps and protecteth them, and hinders the wicked counsels of
the devil. It may be proved by many places of the Scripture, that all
Christian men have not only one Angel, but also many, whom God imployeth to
their service. In the.34. Psalm it is said, the Angel of the Lord pitcheth
his tents round about them which fear the Lord, and helps them: Psalm. 34.
which ought not to be doubted but that it is also at this day, albeit we see
them not. We read that they appearing in sundry shapes, have admonished
men, have comforted them, defended them, delivered them from danger, and
also punished the wicked. Touching this matter, there are plentiful examples,
which are not needful to be repeated in this place. Sometimes they have
either appeared in sleep, or in manner of visions, and sometimes they have
performed their office, by some internal operations: as when a man's mind
foresheweth him, that a thing shall so happen, and after it happens so in
d^ede, which thing I suppose is done by God, through the ministry of Angels.
Angels for the most part take upon them the shapes of men, wherein they
appear. And so it may be, that saint Felix, and Saint Agnes, and other which
have appeared unto honest and godly men, were the Angels of God. Angels have
appeared not only one at a time, Whole armies of Angels. Constantinople
preserved by the appearing of angels.
but also whole Armies and Hosts, of them, as unto Jacob the Patriarch, and
Heliseus the Prophet. It is read in the Ecclesiastical history written by
Socrates and Sozomenus, that Archadius the Emperor received Gaina, with all his
Army of Soldiers into the City of Constantinople, to defend it, but this
traitor went about to get the rule of the City into his own hands, and
therefore he sent a band of men to fire the Emperors Palace, which suddenly
espied a great Host of Angels, of large stature, armed like unto Soldiers,
whereupon they gave over their enterprise offiering. Then sent he others who
reported the very same: At the last he went himself, and saw it to be so, and
so left his purpose: and thus God by a miraculous means, preserved the City
and Church of Constantinople from the crafty suttletie of the tyrant.

Whereas Saint Augustine in his book De cura pro mortuis agenda, Augustine
Chapter.10. writes, that dead men, have appeared unto the living in dreams,
or any other means whatsoever, showing them where their bodies lay unburied,
and requiring them to bury them. There he supposes, that these are the
works of Angels by the dispensation of Gods providence, using unto good
purpose, both good and evil Angels, according to the unsearchable depthe of
his judgments. He says not that souls appear in sleep, but the
similitude of souls. He adds further, if the souls of the dead had any
thing to do with matters of the living, and that we might talk with them as
often as we list in our sleep, his mother no night would leave him, who to
live with him followed him both by Sea and by land, such love bare she toward
her Son.

CHAP. XV. That sometimes, yea and for the most part, evil Angels do appear.
Contrariwise evil Angels are hurtful and enemies unto men, they follow them
every where, to the end they may withdraw them from true worshipping of God,
and from faith in his only Son Jesus Christ, unto sundry other things.
These appear in diverse shapes: for if the Devil (as Paul does witness)
transfourmeth himself into an Angel of light, Paul.
no less may he take the shape of a Prophet, an Apostle, Euangeliste,
Bishop, and Martyr, and appear in their likeness: or so bewitche us, that
we verily suppose we hear or see them in very deed. He takes on him to
tell of things to come, whether he hit them right or wrong. He affirms
that he is this or that soul, that he may be delivered by this or that
means, that by these means he may purchase credit and authority, unto those
things which have no ground of Scripture.

By means of false miracles, he decrees new Hollydayes, Pilgrimages,
Chapels, and Aulters: by coniurations, blessings, and enchauntmentes, he
attempteth to cure the Sick, to make his doings have authority.

You shall read marvelous strange things in Arnobius, Lactantius, and other
holy Fathers, who wrote against the Gentiles and their supersticion, after
what sort Devils have deluded the miserable Gentiles, and have entrapped them
in many errors. He joined and hid himself in their Idols, he spoke thorough
them from one place to an other, he made them to move, and did such strange
miracles, that very lame men leaving their stilts whereon they leaned in the
Temples of their Idols, returned home to their houses, without any help or
stay of them, but especially in the Temple of Aesculapius (who was counted the
Patron of Physic) many of these kind of miracles are reported to have
happened. Wherefore there is no cause, why the Papists at this day, should so
insolently glory of the like miracles, by the which they go about to prove
their intercession of Saints, and such like trumperie.

CHAP. XVI. Of vvondrous Monsters, and such like.
NOw as concerning other strange things, we must hereafter search what
nature they are of: as when one dies that there is somewhat seen, or some
great noise is suddenly heard, but especially ye many signs and wonders happen
before the death of great Princes. It is well known by histories, what signs
went before the death of Julius Caesar, amongst the which, a great noise
was heard in the night time, in very many places far and near.

As concerning other Emperors, and Kings, and other great men's deaths, we
read that some certain forewarnings were heard or seen, we must also
consider what those strange things are, which for the most part happen before
the innouations of kingdoms, before battles, seditions, and subuersions of
Cities.

I say flatly, even as I said before concerning spirits: if they be not vain
persuasions, or natural things, then are they forewarnings of God, which are
sent, either by good Angels, or by some other means unknown unto us, that we
might understand that all these things happen not by adventure, without the
will and pleasure of God, but that life and death, peace and war, the
alteration of Religion, the exchange of Empires, and of other things, are in
his power, that we might thereby learn to fear him, and to call upon his
name. In the mean season Satan also fayneth and works many things to
terryfie men, and to plant superstition in their hearts. But that all things
are not done by Satan, hereby we may understand: It chances that one is
thrust through and slain by one with whom he never was at variance, but has
ever used him as his friend, some man is drowned, or falls down from some
high place, or otherwise is miserably slain, an evil spirit can have no
foreknowledge hereof (for there are no natural signs, or conjectures going
before them, as there are in diseases) yet notwithstanding, some signs and
rare casualties fall out before. Hereof do I gather, that these things are
wrought by God, who only knows that they shall come to pass, and they are
not only admonishmentes unto them, whom they especially concern, but also
unto them which hear them, and are present at the doing of them.

There was a certain Magistrate within the liberties of Tigurine, not long
before I wrote this, whom certain of his friends tarried for to break their
fast with him before he took his journey, and thus waighting, they supposed
they heard a knyfe falling from the upper part, or floor of the stewe,
wherein they were, yet saw they nothing, and suddenly as they co^muned together
of this strange wonder, they thought they heard it again. In the mean while
comes the Magistrate, unto whom they declare what had happened, and as they
had skant ended their talk, the knyfe fell again the third time, in the
hearing of the Magistrate, who before doubted very much of the matter. And
therefore taking occasion hereby, he began to exhort them, that whereas
within few days after a great marriage should be kept in the same place,
they should all endeavor to maintain peace, and observe sobriety, least
perchance through quarelling and murder, it should be a bloody marriage. After
he taking his journey and within a day or twain dispatching his business, as
he was returning toward his Castle, (his horse falling into a river, which
was suddenly increased with rain) after he had long striued with the water, at
the last died myserably.

And that the Devil does delude men with strange happes, hereof I gather,
that if any be taken with grievous sickness, so that not only the Physician,
but also the sick themselves despair of their own health, in the night
tym^ there is heard a noise as if one were making a coffin or chest to lay one
in, or were burying a dead body: that suppose I to be an illusion of the Devil,
for he thinks verily the diseased will die, whom God by means of godly and
earnest prayers, does restore again to his former health.

Where as Pliny writes that ravens are of such sharp senses, Pliny.
that they will fly three or four days before, unto the place where carryon
will afterward be, it is altogyther vain and fabulous. If this were granted,
it were no obsurditie to say, that ye devil has a knowledge of things to come,
yea even where there are no natural causes. etc. Moreover he may by Gods
permission, if wars and mutinies be toward, stir the instruments of
war, and al other kind of munition as it lies in the Armorie, he can make a
noise and rear a clamor and cry, as it were of a great Army in the air,
and play as it were on a Drum, and do other such things, which al
Hystoriographers affirm with one voice, have oftentimes chanced.

CHAP. XVII. That it is no hard thing for the Devil to appear in diverse
shapes, and to bring to pass strange things.
BUt it is no difficult matter for the devil to appear in diverse shapes, not
only of those which are alive, but also of dead m^nne, (whereof I spoke also
before, when I entreated of Samuels appearing) yea, and (which is a less
matter) in the form of beasts and birds. etc. as to appear in the
likeness of a black Dog, a horse, an Owl, and also to bring incredible
things to pass, it is a thing most manifest: for he may through long and great
experience, understand the effects and force of natural things, as of
herbs, stones. etc. and by means hereof work marvelous matters. And then
he is a subtle and quick spirit, which can redyly take things in hand, which
in each thing is of no small weight. By his quickness, and by his knowledge
in natural things, he may easily deceive the eye sight, and other senses of
man, and hide those things which are before our face, and convey other things
into their places. Whereof the holy Scriptures, and histories, and continual
experience bears record. How did the wicked spirit handle Job? what did he
not bring to pass in short space? What strange works of an evil spirit did
Bileam bring to pass? did he not purchase a famous name by his Magical arts?
what wonderful great miracles did Pharaos Sorcerers? Did not Simon Magus so be
witch the Samaritanes with his unlawful Arts, that he would say he was the
great virtue of God? Touching this coniurer, the old Fathers write many
things, as Iereneus in his first book and tenth chapter. Eusebius in his second
book and thirteenth chapter. Egesipppus writes in his third book and second
chapter of the destruction of Jerusalem, that this Simon came to Rome, and
there set himself against Peter, boasting that he could fly up into Heaven,
and that he came at the day appointed unto the Mount Capitoline, where
leaping from the rock, he flew a good while not without the great admiration of
the people, who now began to credit his words, but suddenly he fell down and
brake his leg, and after being carried unto Aritia, there died.

Johannes Tritenhemius Abbot of Spanheimium, writes in his Cronicles
concerning the Monastery of Hirsgraue of the order of S. Bennet, in the year
of our Lord.970. that Peter and Baianus, the two Sons of one Simon a Monk,
ruled over the Bulgarians, whereof the one namely Baianus was thoroughly seen in
the Art of Necromancie, and thereby wrought many miracles. He changed
himself into a Wolf so often as he list, or into the likeness of an other
beast, or in such sort as he could not be discerned of any man, and many other
strange things he could do, and did, whereby he brought men into great
admiration.

And after in the year.876. he writes, that there was a certain Jew named
Sedechias, sometimes philosopher and physician unto Jews the Emperor, who
being very cunning in sorcerie, did strange miracles and wonderful sleyghts
before the Princes, and before all other men. For he brought it to pass by his
cunning, that he seemed to devour an armed man with his horse, and all his
harness, and also a carte laden with hay, together with the horse and
carter. He cut off men's heads, their hands and feet, which he set in a basyn
before all the lookers on to behold, with the blood running about the basen:
which by and by he would put again upon the places whence they seemed to have been cut off, without any hurt to the parties. He was seen and heard of all
men to exercise huntyng and running, and such like things in the air and
clouds, as men are accustomed to exercise upon the earth. He practiced so many
and diverse deceytes, that all men marvelled and were astonished out of measure.

In the year of our Lord.1323. when Frederike Duke of Austrich who was chosen
Emperor against Jews, as the same author witnesses, was vanquished in a great
battle between Ottinga and Mo^nd^rfus, and delivered into the hands of
Jews, who sent him away into a strong castle to be safely kept: It chanced
shortly after, that a coniurer going unto his brother Lupoldus in Austriche,
promised, that by the help of a spirit, he would within the compass of an
hour, deliver Frederike safe and sound out of captivity, if he would promise
him and give him a worthy reward for his pains. The Duke aunsweared him: if
thou will (quoth he) do as thou make promise, I will worthily reward thee. So
ye Magitian with the Duke entering his circle of coniuration in an hour most
convenient, calls the Spirit which was accustomed to obey his commandment.
Whom, when he appeared in the likeness of a man, he commanded by the virtue
of his coniurations, that he should spedyly bring unto him into Austriche Duke
Frederike delivered safely out of prison. Unto whom the spirit aunswearing,
said, If the captive Duke will come with me, I will willingly obey thy
commandment. This said, the spirit flies away into Bauarie, and taking
upon him the form of a Pilgrim, he enters into the prison where the Duke
was kept prisoner: whom as soon as he saw, the Spirit which was sent as
messanger unto him, said: If thou will be delivered out of captivity, mount
thee up upon this horse, and I will bring thee safe and sound without any
hu^te into Austriche unto Duke Lupoldus thy brother. Unto whom the Duke said:
Who art thou? The Spirit answered: Ask not who I am, because it appertains
nothing to the purpose, but get thee up on the horse which I offer thee, and I
will bring thee safe and sound, and freely delivered into Austrich. Which when
the Duke heard, he was taken with a certain horror, and fear, being otherwise
a hardy knight: and when he had blessed him self with the sign of the holy
cross, the Spirit suddenly vanished away with the black horse, which he had
proffered him, and returned empty again unto him that sent him: of whom
being rebuked because he had not brought the prisoner, he declared al ye
matter unto him in order. Duke Frederick at the last being delivered out of
prison, confessed that it had so happened unto him in his captivity the very
same day they named. This history is also to be seen in the Chronicles of the
Heluetians.

There are also coniurers found even at this day, who brag of themselves
that they can so by inchauntments saddle an horse, that in a few hours they
will dispatch a very long journey. God at the last will chasten these men with
deserved punishment. What strange things are reported of one Faustus a German,
which he did in these our days by inchauntments?

I will speak nothing at this time, of those old sorcerers, Apollonius and
others, of whom the histories report strange and incredible things. Hagges,
witches and inchaunters are said to hurt men and cattle, if they do but
touch them or stroke the^, they do horrible things whereof there are whole
books extant. Iugglers and tumblers, by nimblenesse do many things, they will
bid one eat meat^, which when they spit out again, they cast forth ordure and
such like. Magitians, iugglers, inchanters, and Necromanciers, are no other
than servants of the Devil: do you not think their master reserueth some
cunning unto him self?

Howbeit this is not to be dissembled, yt the Devil does glory of many things
which in deed he cannot perform: as that he says, that he raises ye dead
out of their graves. etc. He may in very deed by Gods sufferaunce, show the
shapes of them unto men, but he has no such power over the dead bodies.

CHAP. XVIII. Devils do sometimes bid men do those things which are good,
and avoid things that are evil: sometimes they tell truth, and for what
cause.
IF those spirits which seek help at men's hands be not souls, but Devils,
many will say, why then do they persuade men unto good things, exhort them
unto virtue, and call them from vice. For they say, Judge vprightely, take
heed of theft and extortion, restore goods unjustly gotten unto their
owners, beware of perjury, surfets, and drunkenness, envy and hatred, lying
and deceit, pray earnestly, come to Church often etc.

The Dyuell is not pleased when we do good, and avoid evil: nothing would
grieve him more, than that we should live according to the prescripte word of
God. Therefore they are not Devils which bid us do good, and eschew evil.

Moreover, those Spirits speak truth, but the Dyuell is a liar, and is
called by Christ, the father of lies. Therefore we may not say that they are
diuellishe Spirits.

Unto this argument I answer thus: he does this for his own advantage. If
he should show him self so, as he is by nature, he should little proffite.
That which he does, he does it to this end, that he may purchase credit
unto his words, and that he might the better thrust other things upon men, and
bring and drive them into sundry erroures, whereby they forsaking the word of
God might give ear unto Spirits. Did not the servant of unclean ^pirits, I
mean false Prophets, come in times past under sheep skins, and feigned
themselves ^o tender the peoples commodity, whereas in very deed in the mean
space they sought after another thing, that is, that when they had obtained
great authority, they might pill and poule other men, and fill their own bags
with gold and silver? Do not all heretics yet at this day say, they are sent
from God, and that we must eschew wickedness, and seek after virtue. Did
thou never hear y^ thieves traveling by the way with those on whose company
they light, have talked of living honestly, and of the punishment of wicked
men, and the reward of good men, to the end that after they might take the
advantage of the^ unawares? Whereas the Devil has feigned him self to be
otherwise than he is, it has brought forth innumerable errors, superstitions,
and false worshippings in the Church of God. For Bishops in process of time
neglected the word of God, they would accept the Devil and receive him as an
Angel of light, when he came not in a black and horrible, but a plesaunt and
acceptable form. He speaks some good things, that he may intermedle evil
things therewith, he speaks truth, that he may scatter abroad lies, and root
them in men's hearts. So Sinon in Vergill mingled falsehode with truth, that he
might the better entrap the Trojans.

Satan does imitate crafty gamsters, who suffer a plain and simple young man
to win a while of them, that afterward being greedy to play, they may lurche
him of all his gold and silver. He follows them which once or twice justly
repay unto their creditoures such money as they have borrowed, keeping their
promise duly, that afterward they may obtain a great sum of them, and then
deceive them.

The devil sometimes utters ye truth, that his words may have the more
credit, and that he may the more easily beguile them. He that would utter
evil wares, does not only set them forth in words, but does also so trim
and deck them, that they seem excellent good, whereby they are the more
salable: this art also the devil knows, for he painteth out his stuff that
he may obt^^de it unto other men in the stead of good ware. Ambrose.
S. Ambrose writes in his Commentaries upon the first epistle to the
Thessalonians, and fifth chap. expounding these words: Qu^n^he not the Spirit.
Despise not prophesying. Examine all things, and keep that which is good. Evil
spirits are wont to speak good things craftily, as it were by imitation, and
amongst those they privily insinuate wicked things, that by means of those
things which are good, evil things may be admitted, and because they are
supposed the words of one spirit, they may not be discerned a sunder, but by
that which is lawful, an unlawful thing may be commended by authority of the
name, and not by reason of virtue etc.

Hereunto apperteine those words which we read in S. Chrisostomes second
sermon De Lazara. Why the devil does sometimes tell truth
There he shows that many simple men have bin in this error, that they have
thought the souls of those which were slain by some violent death did become
Devils. He says further that the Devil has persuaded many witches, and such
as serve him being in this error, that they should kill the tender bodies of
many young men, hoping they should become Devils, and do them service. And by and
by he adds: But these things are not true, no, I say, they are not. What is
it then that Devils say? I am the soul of such a Monk? Uerely I believe it
not, even for this, that Devils do aduoutche it: for they deceive their
auditors. Wherefore Paul also commands them to silence albeit they speak
truth, lest taking occasion by truth, they mingle lies therewith, and so
purchase them selves credit. For when they had said: These men are the
servants of the most high God, showing unto you the way of salvation: Acts. 16.
The Apostle not content herewith, commanded the prophesying spirit unto
silence, and to come forth of the maid. And yet what harm speak they? These
men are the servants of the most high God. But because the most part of
simple men have not understanding always to judge of those things which are
uttered by Devils, he at once excludes them from all credit. Ma^ke. 1. Luke.
4.
Thou art (says he) of the number of infamous spirits, it belongs not to
thee to speak freely, hold thy peace, keep silence, it is not thy office to
preach. This is the authority of the Apostles: why take thou upon thee
that which appertains not unto thee, hold thy peace, be thou infamous. So
also did Christ sharply rebuke the devils saying unto him: we know thee who
thou art, therein prescribing unto us a law, that we should in no wise trust
the devil, albeit he tell the truth.

Since we know these things, let us in no wise believe the devil, nay rather if
he say any thing that is truth, let us fl^e from him and shun him. For it is
not lawful exactly to learn sound and wholesome doctrine of devils, but out of
the holy Scriptures.

That you may therefore know that it can in no wise be, that a soul once
departed out of the body can come under the tyranny of the devil, hear what
saint Paul says: For he that is dead is justified from sin, that is, he
sins no more. For if the devil can do no hurt unto the soul while it is in
the body, it is euidente, he can not hurt it when it is departed out of the
body. etc. By all these things it is plain, what manner of things those are
which are heard and seen.

The third part of this Book, in which is showed why, or to what end God
suffers Spirits to appear, and other strange things to happen: as also how
men ought to behave them selves when they meet with any such things.
CHAP. 1. God by the appearing of Spirits does exercise the faithful, and
punish the unbelievers.
IT follows now hereafter to be entreated of, why God suffers spirits,
ghostes, and horrible sightes to appear. etc. and also why he does permit
other strange and miraculous things to happen: And furthermore how men
ought to behave them selves when they see any such things.

GOD does suffer Spirits to appear unto his elect unto a good end, but unto
the reprobate they appear as a punishemente. Causes why God suffers spirits
to apere.
And as all other things turn to the best unto the Faythefull, even so do
these also: for if they be good Spirits, which appear unto men, warnyng,
and defendyng them, thereby do they gather the care, providence, and Fatherly
affection of GOD toward them. But in case they be evil Spyrites, (as for
the most part they are) the faithful are moved by occasion of them unto true
repentance. They look diligently unto themselves so long as they live, least
the enemy of mankind, who is ready at all assayes, and lies always in
weight, should bring them into mischief, and take further vauntage to vex and
hurt them. God also by these means does exercise and try their faith and
patience, to the end they continue in his word, and receive nothing contrary
to ye same, have it never so fair a show, nor do any manner of thing against
his word, although those spirits do not streightwayes cease to vex them.
God does also suffer them to be exercised with haunting of spirits, for this
cause, that they should be the more humble and lowely. For in the second Epistle
to the Corinth. and.xij. chap. Paul says: And least I should be exalted out of
measure, through the excellency of reuelatio^s, there was given unto me
unquietness through the flesh, even the messanger of Satan to buffet me,
because I should not be exalted out of measure. For this thing besought I ye
Lord thrice, that it might depart from me. And he said unto me: My grace is
sufficient for thee, for my strength is made perfect through weakness. Except
God did shut up the way before us with certain stops and ^ets, we should not
know our selves, we should not understand whereof we stand in need, we should
not so earnestly pray unto God, to deliver us from evil, to strengthen our
faith, and to give us patience, and other necessary things. Neither should we
be touched with compassion of other men's misery which are vexed with
spirits: but we would rather say, that they can not tell what they speak, and
that they imagine many vain fears. Moreover, if other understand that godly
men are for their exercise vexed by spirits, they become more pacient when
soever they are sick, or otherwise troubled, acknowledging their own harms
to be but small in comparison of other men's. For nothing is more greuouse, than
when a man is tormented by the Devil.

Now as touching infidells, they are constrained, Seeing of spirits to the
wicked is a punishment.
will they or nill they, to confess, that there are devils, for there are many
which would never be persuaded, there are good or evil Angels or spirits,
except sometimes they had experience thereof in deed. God suffers these things
to chasten them. For so much as they will give no place unto truth, but are
wilfully deceived, it is good reason they be taught by diuelishe illusions what
they must do, or leave undone, and that they be illuded by evil spirits, after
some other means.

Thus we read in the.13. chapter of Deuteronomie: Deuteronomy. 13.
if there arise among you a prophet or a dreamer of dreams, and give thee a
sign and wonder, and that sign or wonder that he has said come to pass,
and then say, let us go after strange Gods, which thou have not known, and
let us serve them: hearke^ not thou unto the words of that prophet or dreamer
of dreams. For the Lord thy God proves you, to wit whether ye love the Lord
your God with all your soul. Ye shall walk after the Lord your God and fear
him, keep his commandments, and hearken unto his voice, serve him and cleave
unto him. And he adds further, that the same Prophet or dreamer shall dye
the death.

By these words we do not only see that God does suffer such leude fellows to
work marvelous things, but also to what end and purpose he permits it,
that is, to try his faithful, how constant they be, and how faithfully they
would believe in him, if at any time spirits do come and foretell things to
happen hereafter. Our savior Christ says in the third chapter of Saint
John: John. 3.
This is the condemnation, that light is come into the world, and men loved
darkness more than light, because their deeds were evil: for every one that
does evil, hates the light, neither comes he to the light, least his deeds
should be reproved. etc. By the which words our Savior shows the cause
why the world is condemned, which is, because they receive not the light of
the word of God, or Christ himself, who is the light of the world, set
forth unto us in his word: but rather shut their eyes against the clear
light, preferring darkness, that is, errors, superstition, and wickedness,
before the word of God. If God then condemn and reiecte the unthankful
world, John. 5.
what marvel is it, if he vex them with spirits and vain apparitions?
Christ says in the fyfth of John, I come in my Fathers name, and you receive
me not: if an other come in his own name, you receive him. Christ labored
for their health and salvation: this they would not acknowledge, but refused
him: therefore was it the just judgment of God, that they should receive others,
that hunted after their own commodity and profit: such as were Theudas,
Judas of Galilee, and many other false doctors, and seditious seducers.
Wherefore if any refuse to give ear to Christ and his ministers, it is by the
just judgment of God, that they hearken unto Spirits, and such like things.
Saint Paul in the second to the Thessalonians and second chapter writes
of Antichrist, 2. Thessa. 2.
that he should exercise great tyranny in the Church of God, and shows
against whom, and for what cause God will suffer him so to do, saying: Among
them that perish: because they recyued not the love of the truth that they
might be saved. And therefore God shall send them strong delusions, that they
should believe lies, that all they might be damned, which believe not the
truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness. And in the fourth chapter of his
second Epistle to Timothe, 2. Timoth. 4.
he earnestly beseeches his scholar to be diligent in preaching daily. He
gives this reason: for the time will come, when they shall not suffer wholesome
doctrine: but after their own lusts shall they (whose ears itche,) get them
an heap of teachers, and shall withdraw their ears from the truth, and shall be
turned unto fables. Now we see the cause why god does suffer seducers, false
teachers, and wicked spirits, to deceive men in the place of true doctors:
which is for that either they utterly despise his word or little esteem it,
and can not abide godly and constant preachers.

Touching which matter, Examples of the wicked punished by delusio^s of spirits
Pharao. Exodus. Samuel.
we will allege a few examples. Pharao contemned God and his servants,
Moses and Aaron, wherefore God blinded his eyes, that he gave himself to be
ruled by his Magi or wise men, and at the last perished miserably in the red
Sea.

Saul would not give ear unto Samuel, who bare a right heart and good
affection toward his king: he loved him not (as by reason he should have
done) but ha^ed him, and all other that loved him right well, for he contemned
the word of God. Wherefore it came to pass, that being in extreme danger, he
sought help of a witch to rear Samuel from the dead, yt he might now use his
advise, who^ he despised being alive, and disdayned to hear him. This woman
reareth one, who is no otherwise called Samuel, than when false gods are called
gods, when in very deed they are not gods, but wood and stones, or rather (as
Paul says).1. Corin. 10. very devils. 1. Cor. 10.
This counterfeit Samuel gives him neither comfort nor counsel, but drives
him to utter desperation. The same happened unto Saul which chances unto those
stubborn children, which despise their parents, contemn their counsel, and
would gladly wish their death, and at the last grow unto y^ point, that they
would willingly take in hand a great journey on condition it might be granted
them to hear them give their last counsel.

An other example hereof. Achab king of Israel, Achab.
and Iezabel his wife had many godly prophets, amongst who^ Elias was a man
endued with the gif^e of showing and working miracles. But they did not only
conte^ne those prophets, but also cruelly murdered so many of them as they
could catch. Yet amongst the rest, they especially labored to entrap Elias,
who was exceading zelouse. The Baalamites were in great favor with the king:
but especially with the Queen, as her chief dearlings. And when the time
approached, that Achab should suffer due and worthy punishment for his
Idolatry and wickedness, wherein he had long time lived, ^. Reg. 22.
he entered council with his kinsman Iosaphat, that they joining their powers
together might recover again the city of Ramoth Gilead, which the Assirians
had taken from him. Iosaphat allowed well this devise, notwythstanding he
would in any wise ask counsel herein of GOD. Achab therefore gathers
together a council of.400. priests of Baall, who all with one voice, exhorted
him to go on with his enterprise, assuring him of most certain victory. One
of them named Sedechias, was so vainly bold, that putting horns of iron on his
head, he said: with these horns shall thou pushe the Assirians. But Iosaphat
suspecting the matter, asked if there were any one Prophet of God to be found,
of whom they might seek council. Achab answered: There is (quoth he) yet a
certain man by whom we might enquire of the Lord, but I hate him, for he does
not prophecy good unto me, but evil, his name is Micheas. Iosaphat thought
good in any wise to hear him. Wherefore the king presently sent for him by one
of his chamberlaines. And thus the messanger spoke unto him. All the Prophets
with one voice, prophecy good luck unto the king, I pray thee therefore, that
thou speak nothing to the contrary. When he was now brought before the two
kings sitting in their thrones, clad with sumptuous apparel, and before the
other Prophets, which stood in their presence, king Achab asked him, whether
they should make wars against Ramoth Gilead, or no? Unto whom he scoffingly
answered: go (says he) thou shall have prosperous success. The king who by
the manner of his utterance, understood he spoke not in earnest, instantly
required him to tell him the truth. Whervppon he said: that he had seen all
Israel dispersed in the mountains, as sheep without a shepherd, and that the
Lord had said: These men have no Lord, let every one return home to his own
house in safety. Then said Achab, did I not tell thee, that this fellow does
prophecy me no good? The Prophet went on, saying: hear the word of God: I
saw the Lord sitting in his seat of majesty, and all the host of Heaven
stand about him on his right hand, and on his left hand. And the Lord
said, who shall entice Achab that he may go and fall at Ramoth Gilead. And one
said on this manner, and an other said on that manner. Then there came forth
a spirit, and stood before the Lord and said, I will entice him. And the
Lord said unto him, wherewith? And he said, I will go out and be a false
Spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets. Then he said, thou shall entise him,
and shall also prevail: go forth and do so. Now therefore behold, the Lord
has put a lying Spirit in the mouth of all these thy Prophets, and the Lord
has appointed evil against thee. Then Sedechias came nere and smote Micheas
on the cheek, and said: when went the spirit of the Lord from me, to speak
unto thee? And Micheas prophesied what should happen also unto him. So the king
commanded him to be cast into prison, and to be fed with bread and water until
he returned from ye wars. Then said Micheas, if thou return in peace, the
Lord has not spoken by me: and therewith he willed all the people to hearken
what he spoke. Notwithstanding the kings went forewarde with their enterprise,
and prepared themselves, and led forth their arms against their enemies.
Achab was slain in the battle: Iosaphat because he joined him self with the
wicked was in very great danger etc.

I have handled this history somewhat at large, that we might understand, how
God by his just judgment sends spirits unto those which despise his word,
whereby they may be beguiled and deceived.

The very same happened unto the Christians after the Apostles time. For when
the word of God began to be less esteemed than it should have bin, and men
preferred their own affections before the hearing thereof: and when as they
would incur no manner of danger, for the defense of their faith, and of the
truth, but accounted of all religions alike, God so punished them that now
they began to give ear unto false teachers, which framed them selves unto
their vein affections, they learned of images, whom they called lay men's
books, they kissed these men's boanes, and shrined them in gold (if happily
they were their boanes) whose doctrine before they disdained to receive: they
gave credit unto false apparitions and diuelishe visions: and so suffered they
worthy punishment for their great ingratitude. Even as young men, which will
not be ruled by their masters, are after compelled to obey other men with
great shame: so also happened it unto those men: for they fell daily more and
more from the word of God, in so much that when they had once lost the truth,
some ran one way, and some an other to find a means for the remission of
their sins: and one man believed this spirit, an other that, which no man can
deny.

The like chanced unto the Gentiles in times past, as it appears by the first
chap. to the Romans, and also by their own writings. Roma. 1.
They worshipped many gods, many miracles were showed amongst them: they had
many visio^s of gods, and many oracles: which when ye Apostles began to preach,
Athanasius.
al cessed. S. Athanasius in his book De humanitate verbi. Fol. 55. and 64.
writes, that in ancient time there were oracles at Delphos in Beeotta, Lycia,
and other places which he names: but now since Christ is preached every
where unto all men, this madness has ceased etc. In the like manner writes
Lactantius and others. But in these our days, since we have refused men's
traditions and willingly embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, all appearings
of Souls and Spirits have quite vanished away.

Who (I pray you) hears now of any soul or Spirit, which does wander, and as
they call it, crave men's devotions? Those rumblings of Spirits in the night are
now much more seldom heard than they have bin in times past.

CHAP. II. What the cause is that in these our days so fevve spirits are seen
or heard.
THe clear light of Gods word drives away al such spirits, which use to work
their feats in the dark. The clear light approaching, the shaddowe and
darkness vanishes. The prince of darkness shunneth light, and has nothing to
do where men worship God the father, only through Jesus Christ, believing only on
him, and committing them selves wholly unto his protection. If men esteem the
word of God, and have it in price, he will in no wise suffer them to be so
ouerseene and deceived, as they are which do all things without the warrant of
his word.

Here I cannot ouerpasse with silence a certain merry jest: when once there
chanced to be talk in a certain place of visions and Spirits, a certain
professor of the Gospel said unto a Papist in this manner: You ought (quoth he)
even by this to gather, that our religion is true and youres false, for that
since the Gospel was preached unto us, very few spirits have been seen of any
man. To whom the other made answer by way of reasoning called violentum:
Nay (says he) hereby ye may gather, that your religion is naught, and ours
good: for the devil assaulteth those, whom he fears will shortly reuolte
from him.

A story of S. Benedict, seeing many devils in a monastery and few in the
market.
It is not much unlike which Aeneas Siluius (who was afterward made Pope,
called Pius. 2.) recites in his History of the Council of Basil, out of the
life of holy Benedict, father of the Monks called after his name. He
sometimes visityng a certain Monastery of holy men, espied an infinite route
of devils, who as it were fighting with the holy fathers, labored to disturb
the good works which they went about. And he forthwith going to a fair full
of merchandise and buying and selling, saw there but one devil, and he also
idle and sad, sitting upon a watchtoure, whereat saint Benedict maruelling,
that he saw the place which was holy and dedicate to prayer, full of dyuels,
and that he found the profane place which was occupied with perjury and
other offenses, guarded but with one Devil: he coniures the same Devil to
declare and show unto him the true cause thereof: who straight answered him,
that it was needful the holy place should be assaulted by many devils, but
those which sinned of their voluntary accord, had no need to be deceived
by the Devil.

But I ask thee this question O thou Papist, might not the Gentiles in ancient
time have objected the same to the Christians, when they demanded of them why
their Oracles ceased? and why there were so few Uisions? If those Spirits or
bugges be Devils, why do you then say and believe that they are the souls of
dead men, which desire help of you? I will show you the very true cause
why those visyons are now so seldom times seen: forsoothe because the Dyuell
perceyueth, that we understand his subtleties and craft, therefore he
hunteth after other men, and seeks to deceive them. As for example, when thou will cramp some man by the toes in the night time (as sometimes pleasant
fellows use to do, to recreate themselves when they travel) and so draw him
out of his bed, if thou perceive he be acquainted with thy sleyght, by and by
thou leauest him, and go unto an other which is fast asleep, and cannot
perceive the deceyt.

There be other causes also why these things happen now more seldom. If any
man deceive thee once, twice, or thrice, afterward thou openest thy eyes, and
espiest what he does and what he goes about: so when we have been often
beguiled with false apparations, we will not easily be persuaded, if any man
tell us that a soul, or spirit has appeared (as the proverb says.) Moreover
whereas now adays few stand in fear of spirits, A burnt child dreads fire.
many might be easily found, who would seek them, feel them, yea and also
handle them. This is well known, and therefore no man will gladly put on a
visour, or otherwise counterfeit himself to be a ghost. A man may soon
persuade a child that there is is a black man, a tall woman, which will put
children that cry in their budget. etc. but after they are come to maturitie
of years, they will no more be feared with visours and such like persuasions:
they will laugh at thy folly, if afterward thou go about to make them so
afraid. Even so when we were children in the Scriptures, that is, when we
understood them not, we might be easily seduced to believe many things: But
now that we read them in all manner of tongs, and do daily profit in them, we
do not suffer our selves to be so mocked, neither do we believe every vain
apparition. How many sightes of spirits did the knauerie of the Monks of
Berna drive away, after it was once detected? Things are set up in the fields
to fear away the birds, which at the last also they perceive to be but
trifles, and are not driven away any longer with such toys. What marvel is it
then, if after so great a shipwreck of godliness and truth, men albeit they
are simple, do at the last open their eyes.

CHAP. III. Why God does suffer strange noyses, or extraordinary rumblings
to be heard before some notable alterations or otherwise.
IN that there happens certain strange things before the death of men, and
also before notable alterations, and destructions of countries, as marvelous
crackes, and terrible roaring, surely it turns to good unto the just, and to
further damnation to the wicked. For by these means God shows that nothing
comes to pass by chance, or by adventure, but that the life and death, the
prosperous or unfortunate estate of al men, is in the power and hand of God. It
is nothing so as the Epicures affirm, that God has no regard whether any man
live, or be borne, or do well or evil, or otherwise, or whether common welthes
do flourish, or be made wast. Christ himself techeth us, that not so much as a
sparrow falls unto the ground without the will of God. Solomon and Daniel say,
that the hearts of kings are in Gods hands, and that he appoynteth or deposes
kings at his pleasure. Wherefore if we happily do hear any noises or such like,
they ought rather to put us in good comfort, than to make us afraid. And
again, God hereby admonishes us, that we be not idle and secure, for he has
in all ages stirred up his servants not only with words, but also with rare and
strange apparitions. The very Gentiles accounted these myraculous things, as
the admonitions and warnings of their gods, as it may be seen every where, in
there histories. And albeit it be very likely, that most of these things happen
by the devils procureme^t, yet nevertheless, we heerin perceive Almighty God
his fatherly care, love, and preservation of us against ye devises of the
devil. For albeit ye devil take no rest, but is always in redynesse to destroy
us, yet can he not hurt us, so long as God keeps watch and defends us. The
wicked who despise the preaching of Gods word, are sore terrified with these
things, in so much that they not knowing whether to turn themselves, are
constrained to confess, that god does govern al men's actions, and that there
are good and evil spirits. Otherwise they could in no case be repressed, but
that they would do greater mischief unto the faithful, except God by these
means did cast fear upon them, and as it were with a snaffle or bridle, did
hale and draw them back.

CHAP. IIII. After what sort they should behave themselves, which se good or
evil spirits, or mete with other strange adventures: and first how Jews
and Gentiles behaved themselves in the like cases.
THat we may rightly understand how we ought to behave our selves, if any thing
either good or evil, appear unto us, we will first declare how the gentiles
and Jews used themselves in like cases. Amongst the Gentiles, What the
Gentiles did when they savve spirit.
not only those wandering spirits bear men in hand yt they were men's souls,
but also showed what were good and expedient for them to do for their sake, to
wit, that they should do sacrifices for their souls, observe their obsequies,
bury their bodies, erect Temples, make holidays, and such like stuff.
Suetonius writes, that the Emperor Caligule his body was privily conveyed into
the gardens called Lamiam, Suetonius.
and there with a hasty fire being but half consumed, was cast into a pit,
and covered with a little earth. But afterward, when his sisters returned from
exile, it was taken up, and thoroughly burnt, and afterward solemnly buried. But
before they had so done, the garden keepers were very much troubled with
appearing of spirits. And moreover, no man could pass any night in the same
house where he was slain, without some great fear until such time as the
house was utterly destroyed with fire.

We read also in other writers, that the ghostes of them which were not orderly
buried, or whose accustomed rites and ceremonies in the time of wars were
omitted, did appear either to their friends or unto others, complaining and
entreating that their funerals, and all other ceremonies might be observed for
their sake: whereof came the hearses, Septimae Tricessimae Anniuersaria.
weekemyndes, monthmindes, and anniuersaries, whereof we read many things in
the Ethnike writers, and many things are recyted out of the old Poets, and in
Lilius Giraldus, Lilius Giraldus.
in his book De sepultura, and also in Polid. Virgilius de Inuentione rerum.
lib. 6 cap. 10. We have showed before in the second part and first Chapter,
that some have desired others, that they might be buried after that they were
dead. Cicero.
Cicero writes in his 1. book De legibus, that Romulus the first founder of
Rome, walking after his death not far from Atticus house, appeared unto
Julius Proculus, and told him that he was now a god, and that his name was
Quirinus, and therewith commanded that there should be a Temple erected and
dedicated unto him in the same place.

Ovid.
Ouide writes lib. 4. Fastorum, that Remus apeared in the night time unto
Faustulus, and to his wife Accia Laurentia, sometime his Nurse, complaining unto
them of his miserable death, and desiring them to make labor that the same
day wherein he was slain, might be accounted amongst their holidays. The
people of Rome (as Ouide witnesses lib. 2. Fastorum) kept a feast in the
month of February called Feralia, in the which they did sacrifice unto the
infernal Gods, and those whose duties it was to celebrate the funerals of
their Auncesters, carried dishes of meat to their sepulchers. Whereof Festus and
Varro called the same feast by the name of Feralia. Feralia.
These dishes of meat were set upon a stone, at the time of these sacrifices:
for the which cause, as Seruius says, they were called Silicernium, by the
which word some will have a certain feast signified, which is bestowed upon
old men. Donatus says, that Silicernium is a supper, which is made to the
infernal Gods, because Eam silentes cernant, that is, the dead souls do
receive it, or because those that do serve it, do only cernere, see it, and
not taste thereof. etc. There were also certain holy feasts called
Par^ntalia, in the which meat was carried to the Sepulchers, Parentalia*
for the souls of Parents and Ancestors before deceased And albeit they
suppose, that souls were pleased with small gifts, as of milk, wine, and
such like, whereof mention is made in Ovid, yet notwithstanding they also
killed sacrifices, whereof some suppose that Feralia took their name a feriendis
pecudibus, of killing sheep. Unto their sacrifices they also added prayers,
and kindled lights. When in times past the Romans being troubled with wars,
had let pass the feast of Parentalia, they therefore supposed (that the
infernal Gods being for the same cause angry) there arose storms and
pestilence, and that souls rising out of their graves, did wander with
pitiful complaints about the graves, and by the highway sides, and in the
fields. This feast endured by the space of fifteen days, in the which
married women lay not with their husbands, neither those which were
mariageable did marry, and the Images of their Gods were covered. The souls
of them that were dead, when they came too the meat, they wandered about the
graves, and were fed (as they thought) with the banquet.

In the Month of May, there was holden a feast in the night time, which at the
beginning they called Remuria, and afterward Lemuria. Lemuria.
This did not differ much from the feast called Feralia, which was instituted
to pacify souls. Touching the original of them, and the rytes belonging
thereto, look Ovid in his lib. 5. fastorum. Ovid.
One who took on him to pacify the souls arose in the night very late, he
went barefooted, and washed himself over with fresh springing water, and then
taking beans which he had rolled in his mouth, he threw them behind his
back, and said, that with them he did redeem himself, and after beating on
a piece of brass, he prayed the souls to depart from thence: which thing if
they had done nine times, they thought they had ended their holy service.
These were celebrated by the space of three days. The sacrifices which are
done for the infernal Gods are called Jnferiae.

We read in Lucan of the souls of Sylla and Marius, which were purged by
sacrifice. We showed before how Athanagoras commanded the bones which were
dug up in the entry of his house at Athens, to be orderly buried again.
etc.

Touching the Jews behavior.
The ancient Jews had an express commandment of God, not to be any thing
moved with the miracles of false Prophets, and God in plain words forbad
them, not to seek counsel of dead bodies. Saul in the beginning of his
reign, while he yet gave himself unto godliness, utterly destroyed all
coniurers and witches. I do not remember that I have ever heard or read, how
the Jews behaved themselves when any spirits appeared unto the^: yet I doubt
not but that they are supersticious as well in these things, as in all others.

CHAP. V. How Christian men ought to behave themselves when they see
spirits, and first that they ought to have a good courage, and to be steadfast
in faith.
How Christian men ought to behave themselves in this behalf, it is fully
and amply declared in the holy Scriptures, in like manner as all other things
are, which appertain unto our salvation. To wit, that first we ought to be of
good courage without fear, being assured and constante in true faith.

For if they be good Angels which show themselves unto us, then are they sent
unto us from God, to a good end and purpose. But if they be wicked and evil,
they can do us no harm be they never so desirous, except God give them leave
thereto. If it be nothing but a vain imagination that we have, or an idle
sight objected unto our eyes, surely it is great folly to be any thing afraid.
In deed it is natural unto us, to be amazed with fear when we see such
things: for very godly men, as we read both in the old and new Testament,
were stricken with exceeding fear when they saw good Angels, but yet a man
must pull up his heart again. When Christ's Disciples saw their Master
walking upon the water, and approaching near the ship, they thought they saw
a spirit, and they were astonished, and cried out through fear. But the Lord
said unto them, be of good comfort, it is I, be not afraid.

The like is read in the four and twenty Chapter of Saint Luke, Luke. 24.
when he appeared unto them after his resurrection, and saw that they were
maruellously afraid. Matthew the 10. Fear not says Christ, Matthew. 10.
those which slay the body, but cannot kill the soul, but rather stand in
awe of him, who can cast both body and soul into hell fire. The Devil would
like it well, if we would always stand in fear of him.

Be not dismayde, although thou hear some spirit stir and make a noise, for in
case he rumble only to make thee afraid, care not for him, but let him
rumble so long as he will, for if he see thee without fear, he will soon
depart from thee. And if thou think good, thou may boldly say unto him, get
thee hencewith a myschiefe thou wicked Devil, thou have nothing to do with me,
who have set my only belief in Christ Jesus my Savior. I am owner of this
house, and not thou, unto whom there is an other place appointed. etc. If he
perceive yt there is no fear or dread of him, and that his bustling is not
esteemed, he will not continue long time. I will make this matter manifest with
a similitude, which is well known. There be certain men, which if they think
other men stand in fear of them, they make wise to draw their sword, and
sometimes too they draw it, and strike the stones therewith, chafing and
swearing lustily: But if they know their adversaries have a good courage, and
that (if need require) they will fight it out stoutly, they will quickly put
up their sword into their skabberde. In like manner, if the Devil see thou
art of a good stomach, and well armed with Gods word, he will soon seek after
others whom he may mock with fear.

But if it please God to exercise thee by the Devil for a certain time, as
he did sometime Job, thou must patiently suffer all things which he lays
upon thee, and that willingly for Gods commandment sake. And know thou
well, that he cannot thus much hurt, neither thy goods, nor body, nor soul
without the permission and sufferaunce of Almighty God: if God give him leave
to plague thy body, think with thy self how so ever it be done, that God
has so done for thy profitte and commodity, who also sends grievous
sicknesses upon other men, by other means and instruments, or else does
exercise them with other kinds of calamities. Be therefore strong and constant
in faith, yet let every one beware of boldness, temeritie, and headdie
rashness.

Christ has conquered the Devil. Luke. 11. John. 12*16.
Let it comfort thee that thou know Christ has conquered the Devil, as he
himself teaches in the eleventh chapter of Luke, by the example of a strong
man at arms. In the 12. and.16. of John he says: the Prince of this world
shall be cast out of the doors, that is to say, out of the hearts of them which
cleave to the word of God, and are not in love with the world, whereof he is
prince and ruler. For he has power over such, which do greedily love the
world.

In the first of John the third chapter, it is said: The son of man
appeared, that is, came into the world for that cause, that he might destroy
the works of the devil. 1. John. 3.
There are many miracles in the gospel which show that Christ cast out devils.
Albeit God for a time do suffer the devil in many things, yet has he appointed
him his bounds, which he may not pass. And he does not suffer the faithful
to be tempted any more of him than they are able to endure. He gives his grace
plentuously unto them, upon whom he lays great afflictions.

We ought not to marvel if spirits somtymes be seen or heard. For as saint
Peter says: The devil is conversant among men.
Satan raungeth every where, in houses, fields, water and fire: and yet he is
not always espied of men, neither can he so be, except God give him leave to
show himself. In that that we do always see him (for he being of an
invisible nature, takes on him diverse shapes) or hear him, we have to thank
the goodness of almighty God: for otherwise we should not be in rest one
moment of time. But if sometime wicked spirits meet with us in a visible
form by the will of god, or do otherwise trouble and disquiet our houses, we
must not think therefore yt they were never in our house before.

CHAP. VI. It behooves them which are vexed with spirits, to pray especially,
and to give themselves to fasting, sobriety, watching, and upright and godly
living.
NOw because good angels appear unto us more seldom in this our time (for
there is a very great difference of men living under the new testament from
them that live under the old, unto whom God many and oftentimes sent his
angels) and that evil Angels very often appear, we ought the rather to
commit our selves more diligently to the tuition of almighty God, both when
we go to bed, and also when we arise again.

Our savior amongst all other things taught us to pray to this purpose:
Deliver us from evil. And moreover he says in the.17. chapter of Matthew,
that some kind of devils are not driven away by any other kind of means than
fasting and praying. As touching those which suppose that devils ought to be
cast out with coniurations, and execrable curssings, I will entreat in the end
of this my book. Watch and pray, least ye fall into temptation Matthew.26. And
in the 22. of Luke, Christ says unto Peter, Satan has desired to sifte you
even as corn, but I have prayed that thy faith fail not. And eue^ at this
present also he makes intercession for us sitting at the right hand of his
heavenly father.

The ancient fathers in old time, called upon God in all their dangers and
troubles, whereof it were a needelesse matter to aduouche many examples. It is
also very profitable and good to crave the Prayers of the whole congregation,
when soever we are vexed with evil spirits and vain fantasies. For we know
right well that the prayers of the Church have bin very proffitable and
effectual unto others, and that the godly in their distresses have evermore
desired them.

It is Gods pleasure, that the faithful should succoure one an other with
their good prayers. Howbeit that the Saints after their departure from hence,
should pray for us, or that we should in any wise desire their prayers,
surely there is no commandment of God, or any example thereof in the holy
scriptures.

Moreover, the Apostles teach us to withstand the craft and subtlety of the
Devil by this means. Saint Paul to the Ephesians the 6. chapter, and Peter
in his first Epistle and fifthe chapter says: Ephe. 6. 1. Pet. 5.
Be ye sober and watch, for your adversary the Devil, as a roaring Lion
walks about, seeking whom he may devour: whom resist steadfast in faith etc.

When men are secure and negligente, We must figh^ against the devil with good
life.
wholly given unto pleasures, and as it were drowned in drunkenness in
surfettyng, covetousness, adultery, and such other wickedness, then has
the Devil place to show him self. Wherefore we ought to give our selves to
watching, praying, fasting, and godly living: we must hear the word of God
often and gladly, we must desire too read and talk of him contynually, that
we may thereby put from us those diuelishe illusions and sightes.

If thou have any public office or charge, do it faithfully: restore thy
goods evil gotten, either unto their true owners, or else employ them to some
good and godly end. If men care neither for God, nor his word, it is no
marvel if vain sightes appear unto them. For God suffers such things to
happen unto them, to humble them and to make them know themselves.

It is an horrible thing, yt there are some which give over themselves to the
devil, because he should not torment them: they ought rather to weigh with them
selves, that if they so do, they shall be perpetually tormented of evil
spirits, except they truly repent and turn again unto God.

CHAP. VII. That spirits which use to appear, ought to be justly suspected:
and that we may not talk with them, nor enquire any thing of them.
WE ought not without great cause to suspecte all Spirits, and other
apparitions. For albeit God does use the help and service of good Angels, for
the preservation of his elect, yet notwithstanding in these our days they
appear unto us very seldom. For things are now far otherwise since
Christ's coming into the world, than they were before in ancient time.
Although perchance thou think thou haste seen a good angel, yet do not
easily and unadvisedly give him credit. If the event of the matter declare
afterward, that it was a good angel, which gave thee notable warning of
some matter, or delivered thee out of some great dangers: give God thanks
that he has delte so fatherly and mercyfully with thee, and has such care
over thee, and endeavor to frame thy self to his good will and pleasure. But
if thou see an angel which flattereth and speaks thee fair, such a one as
th^se are which crave thy help, (as thou have heard before) in no wise
credit their words. Men which blaunche and flatter with us, are always
suspicious, why then should not such spirits be suspected? Enter into no
communication with such spirits, neither ask them what thou must give, or
what thou must do, or what shall happen hereafter. Ask them not who they are,
or why they have presented them selves to be seen or heard. For if they be
good, they will like it well, that thou will hear nothing but the word of
God: but if they be wicked, they will endeavor to deceive thee with lying. When
the Angel in the first chapter of Matthew instructed Joseph in a dream, he by
and by alleged testimony out of the Prophet. If it be so, that we must not
believe an angel coming from Heaven, who can justly blame us, Matthew 1.
if we give no credit to spirits and suspicious dreams? Although Christ
and his Apostles had the full power to show miracles, yet did they establishe
and confirm their doctrine by the holy Scriptures.

When Almighty God himself had enquired of Adam in Paradyse, touching the
breaking of his commandment, and that he had laid the fault upon his wife
Eua, and she had put it over to the Serpente, which caused her to eat of the
forbidden fruit, God would not demand of the Serpente, that is, of the
Dyuell, (which had used him as instrument) why he had so done, for he knew
right well that he was a liar. Except Eve had talked with the Serpent, she had
never transgressed Gods commandment.

If Spirits of their own accord would gladly tell us many things: yet we
must not give ear unto them, much less ought we to conjure them to tell us
the truth. God commanded in his law, (as we have oftentimes said before)
that no man should enquire any thing of the dead.

God himself sent his faithful servants, the Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists,
God has always given us teachers.
and especially his only begotten son Christ Jesus our Lord and savior into
the world, by whom he truly and plentifully taught his faithful servants
what they ought to believe, to do, to leave undone, and what kind of worshipping
did best please him, with many other such things. By them he informed us
concerning great and weighty affairs, which should happen in his Church,
and in kingdoms, even unto that blessed day wherein Christ shall judge the
world, and shall call together his general council, and shall pronounce
final sentence upon them who have done well or ill, and wherein he shall make
a division and separation between the good and evil.

Christ himself after his Resurrection did not immediately ascend into
heaven, but aboade a why^e in earth, appearyng unto his Disciples and others,
least we should at any time say: Who ever came again to tell us what estate is
to be looked for in the other world?

Moreover, God has preserved the scriptures.
God among such great and long persecutions, wherein many profitable books
have perished, has miraculously preserved the holy Scriptures for our
profit, even unto this day, and hereafter will preserve them in despite of all
impious and wicked men.

God has instituted the holy ministry.
He has also ordained the ministry of the word, that unto the end of the
world, there should be some men, which both by lively voice, and also by
their writings, should interpret his word, and enfourme others of his will
and pleasure. His word is a shining lantern, which shines in this dark
world, which is full of errors, Psalm. 119. John. 8.
as we read Psalm. 119. And our savior says in the eight chapter of saint
John, that he is the light of the world, whom if any man follow, he walks
not in darkness.

This stands as a sure ground: wherefore no other revelations are to be
looked for, neither by miracles from heaven, nor by wandering spirits or
souls, as the common people mysterme them. But let us imagine, that they are
the wandering spirits of dead bodies, then is it necessary, that they be the
souls, either of faithful men, or of infidels. If they be the souls of the
faithful, they will say with God the father concerning his son Christ Jesus,
Hear him. But if they be the souls of Infidels and of wicked men, who I pray
you, will vouchsafe to hear them, or believe any thing they say? Mor^ouer
those things which these counterfayte souls do speak, either agree with the
holy Scriptures, or else are contrary unto them. If they are agreeable, then
are they to be received, not because spirits speak them, but because they are
comprysed in the word of God. But in case they are repugnant to the word of
God, they ought in no wise to be received, albeit an angel from heaven utter
them. Thou will not believe a man of thy familiar acquaintance, otherwise
worthy of credit, who sound of body and soul, now lives together with
thee, if he affirm any thing which thou know to be contrary to the holy
Scriptures: why then would thou believe a spirit which thou do not know?
In civil causes the evidence or witness of dead men is rejected, why then in
causes of religion should we give ear to the testimony of runagate and
wandering spirits.

It is no hard or difficulte matter for the Lord our God to send his angels
unto us, whom otherwise he uses for our profit, and by them to instruct
us in the Faith: but it has pleased him to appoynte the matter otherwise.

We read in the tenth chapter of the Acts, that by an angel he commanded
Cornelius to send for Peter, Acts. 10.
that he might instruct him in the faith. He might have commanded the Angel
to teach Cornelius, but he followed an orderly means. It shall be best for us
therefore to stand to the holy Scriptures simply, and that all appearing of
spirits, as also all dreams and revelations be tried by the holy scriptures,
as upon a touchstone, and so to admit nothing but that which is set forth in
the holy Scriptures: for except we go thus warely to work, there is great
danger least we be deceived. If the aunciente Fathers had so done, they had
not estrayed so far from the Apostles simplicity.

S. Augustine in his third book and.6. chapter, writing against the letters
of Petilianus says thus: S. Augustin^^ coun^ell.
If concerning Christ, or any other thing, which appertains to faith and
everlasting life, (I will not say, we: Scripture to be only believed.
for comparyng with him that said: Albeeit that we) but simply, where as he
going on, said: If an Angel from Heaven shall teach you any thing besides
that which you have received in Scriptures containing the law and the Gospel,
be he accursed.

S. Chrysostom upon the Epistle to the Galathians the first chapter:
Chrisostomes advise.
Abraham (says he) when he was desired to send Lazarus, said: They have
Moses and the prophets, if they will not hear them, they will not give ear
unto them which rise from the dead. And when he brings in Christ uttering
these words, he shows how he would have the holy scriptures more worthy of
credit than any raised from the dead. S. Paul (when I name Paul, I name
likewise Christ, for he stirred up his mind) prefers the Scriptures before
Angels descending from Heaven, and that for very just cause. For albeit Angels
are great, yet are they servants and ministers. For all holy scriptures were
not commanded to be written and sent unto us by servants, but by almighty God
ye lord of all things. Thus write these two holy fathers.

All things necessary to salvation are contained in the scriptures.
What things soever are necessary for us to know are contained in ye holy
scriptures: those things which are not expressed in them, we must not
curiously enquire of, as things profitable for our salvation. Who will therefore
say against the commandment of God, that these things are to be sought and
learned of dead men, and by diuelishe visions? These things which are secret
and hidden, we shall thoroughly see when we come to eternal life. May not god, if
we be not content with his holy word, say that unto us, which sometimes he
spoke by the mouth of Helias unto the messangers of king Ochosias. Is there no
god in Israel, that you now go to Accaron to ask council of Belsabub? Yea
Thomas Aquinas denies that devils are to be heard, which deceive simple men,
feyning them selves to be the Souls of dead men: and by that color
especially terrify men, which some times also happened unto the Gentiles.

If it were certain and sure that the Devil could not appear and deceive
men, and also show great and strange miracles, then perchance some men
would think that we should give ear unto such Spirits: but now we see the
contrary happen. An evil spirit cloaketh his erroures under the color of
divine service, and under the pretense of religion, he endeuoreth to overthrow
religion. For as S. Hierom says, Hierom.
the Devil shows not himself with all his deceites, that he may be known what
he is. And therefore it behooves us to be very circumspect and wary.

Moreover, Miracles are seals of the word.
miracles are only testimonies and seals of the word, neither may any thing
be approved by them, which is repugnant to the word of God. All miracles
which lead us away from our creator unto creatures, and do attribute that unto
our works which is only due unto the merits of Christ: and to be short, all
those which induce us any ways into error, are to be eschued. If we must
needs believe these appearing souls, no man could be assured of his estate:
for new things should be continually devised, as we see plainly it happened
in the old time. Therefore we must let pass all manner of spirits, and
embrace true religion, and therein constantly abide.

CHAP. VIII. Testimonies out of holy Scripture, and one example whereby it is
proved, that such kind of apparitions are not to be credited, and that we
ought to be very circumspect in them.
THat we ought not by and by to believe all things which we hear, not only
experience and many common Proverbs, but also the holy Scriptures teach us,
especially in cases concerning our salvation, touching the which thing we will
allege only a few places and examples.

When Christ first sent abroad his Disciples to preach the Gospel, he said
unto them. Matthew.10. Mat. 10.
Be ye wise as serpents, and simple as Doves, beware of men: how much more
than ought we to take heed of devils? Christ prophecieth in the 24. of
Matthew, Matthew. ^4.
that many false techers shall come in the latter days, and shall show
strange miracles to confirm their erroures, and therefore he commands the
faithful, to be heedefull and circumspect, and not without cause he adds:
Behold I have told you before. Saint Paul to the Galathians the first
Chapter, says in great eanest unto them, that if an Angel come from Heaven,
and preach unto them any other Gospel, he should be accursed. Even so, if
at this time spirits appear, and do utter any thing repugnant to the
Doctrine of the Apostles and Prophets, they are to be rejected. The Apostle in
his first Epistle and fourth Chapter to Timothy, does prophecy of false
teachers which should come, 1. Timo. 4.
and says, the spirit speaks evidently, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, and shall give heed unto spirits of error and
doctrines of Devils, which speak lies through hypocrisy, and have their
consciences burned with an hot iron, forbydding to marry, and commanding to
absteyne from meats which God has created to be received with gyuing thanks
of them which believe, and know the truth. etc. By the word (spirit) are
understood false teachers, which vaunt themselves of the spirit of God: But
what cause is there, why it may not be understood of such wandering spirits,
which have induced men to take in hand many things? In the second Epistle to
the Thessalonians, and the second Chapter, when certain affirmed the latter
day to be present at hand, 2. These. 2.
Paul foretells them, that there shall be a defection, and that Antichrist
shall first come, saying: Now we beseech you brethren by the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ, by our assembling unto him, that ye be not suddenly moved
from your intent, nor troubled, neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter
as it were from us, as though the day of Christ were at hand. Let no man
deceive you by any means. etc. Which words truly in my judgment may also be
very aptly understood of those wandering spirits. Saint John says in his
first Epistle and fourth chapter: 1. John. 4.
Dearly beeloued, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they
are of God: for many false Prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby shall
ye know the spirit of God. Every spirit that confesses yt Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh, is of God, and every spirit which confesses not, that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is not of God. etc. Here he speaks not of
spirits which falsely affirm themselves to be men's souls, but of those
teachers which boaste of themselves that they have the spirit of God. But in
case we must not believe them being alive, much less ought we to credit them
when they are dead. And albeit that neither Christ nor his Apostles, had so
diligently given us warning, not to suffer our selves to be seduced with
miracles, and with the talk of spirits, yet notwithstanding, daily experience
teaches us to be circumspect and wary in these cases. For as soon as false
teachers see that they have no testimony of Scripture to defend themselves
withal, by and by they turn themselves to spirits and visions, whereby they
may confirm their Doctrine, which thing has opened a large window to many
erroures. To what inconvenience Ambition, couetounesse, and envy has brought
many of ye clergy, it is both well known by many examples, and it has also
as it were by the way been before declared. Have not the orders of Monks
striued amongst themselves for the pre-eminence? have not they invented new
miracles, have they not counterfeited Gods, Pilgrimages, Saints and spirits?
The holy Virgin did not by and by believe the appearing of the Angel.
The holy Uirgin is a famous and notable example that we should not rashly
believe every spirit. For at what time ye Angel Gabriel apeared unto her in a
visible shape, and saluted her, showing her before of the Incarnation of the
Son of God, she thought with her self, what manner of salutation yt should be,
how this thing could come to pass, seeing she had known no man. Then at the
last being enfourmed of the means by the Angel, she said: Behold ye handmayde
of the Lord, be it unto me according to thy word. Why then should we believe
every spirit, especially those which teach things quite contrary to the word
of God.

CHAP. IX. After what sort the faithful in the primitive Church, used
themselves when they met with spirits.
I Have declared out of the word of God, how good and godly men ought to behave
themselves, when soever any spirits appear unto the^. And truly ye ancient
Christians behaved themselves after this sort. For they were courageous and
without fear, they gave themselves to godliness, and all good works, they
diligently avoided all things which were displeasing unto God: and they were
also very circumspect, not to attribute too much unto spirits and visions.

The sign of the Cross. Tertullian.
It was a common custom amongst the^, to bless themselves with the sign of
the Cross, when they met with these things, which many also use at this day.
Tertullian writes in his book De corona militis, that the ancient Christians
did many times mark their foreheades with the sign of the Cross. S. Hierom
exhorts Demetriades, that he often cross his foreheade, Hierom.
least that the destroyer of Egypt find any place therein. Origin also,
Epiphanius, Chrysostom, Origin. etc. Athanasius.
and Augustine, write many things of the virtue of the holy Cross. S.
Athanasius writes in his book de Humanitate verbi, eiusque corporali aduentu
fol. 67. In times past (says he) the devils by vain shows, and mockery,
ensnared men, abiding sometimes in wels, sometime in ryuers, in stones, and
woods, and so by crafty deceytes, brought unwise men into sottishness. But
now since Gods word has appeared unto us, such sightes and vain fantasies
have surceased. Fol. 56. and.72. and in other places also he handles the same
matter.

Lanctantius writes of the same in his fourth book Diuinarum Institutionum 26.
chapter, and also thorowout the 27. Chapter. He says that the devil can have
no access unto those, nor any ways hurt them, which sign their foreheades
with the cross. He adds moreover, that the Christians used this ceremony in
old time, in casting out devils and healing diseases

Not for that they ascribed such efficacy and force to the external sign of
the cross, Whether the bare sign of the Cross have any force
(for that were supersticious) but unto the cross, that is, to the merytes of
Christ, whose worthiness and excellency they called withal to their
remembrance. Touching the holy Apostles, or Apostolic Churches, we read not,
that they ever used the sign of the cross, in expelling devils, in curing
diseases, or in any other thing. God spared the Jews in Egypt, which marked
the door posts with the blood of the Lamb: not that Lambs blood is able
to deliver men from death, but it was a figure of the blood and passion of
Christ Jesus. And the Jews sprinkled not blood of their own good devotion, as
they term it, but by the commandment of God. The holy fathers by the
ceremony that they signed themselves with the cross, mente to testify their
confidence in the cross, that is, in the death of Christ Jesus, which
abandoneth all evil and mischief. The devil never a whit fears the cross,
wherewith we sign our selves, nor yet those pieces and fragmentes of Christ's
cross, which are showed for relics, but he trembles at the power and force
of Christ's death, by the which he was conquered and overthrown. If any man
attribute too much unto ceremonies, he cannot be excused from supersticion,
which worthily deserves blame:

We read more in the ancient writers, that they used exorcismes, Coniurations
against devils.
or coniurations in the primatiu^ Church against Devils.

You may read in Tertullian in his book De anima, that unclean spirits have
often times deceived men, Tertullian*
have taken on them the persons of others, and have feigned themselves to be
the souls of dead men, that men should not believe that all souls descended
into Hell (what is to be understood by the word Hell, I have showed before)
and so to bring the belief of the latter Judgment of the resurrection of the
dead, into doubt and question.

Moreover, we read that the old Fathers have cast Devils out of men, and
out of such places wherein by their rumbling, they have put many in horrible
fear. Such an history of S. John is in Abdias Babylonius, for the holy
Apostles, and many godly men after them, were endued with this grace from
God, that they could cast out unclean spirits: which gift continued a long
season in the Church, to the great profit of the faithful, but afterward it
ceased as other miracles did also. It makes unto this purpose, that Tertullian
writes his Apologetico fol. 858. and 159.

Thus we have sufficiently seen after what sort the holy fathers and ancient
christians behaved themselves when any spirits appeared unto them.

CHAP. X. That sundry kinds of superstition have crept in, where by men have
attempted to drive away spirits.
IN process of time, Supersticions increased more and more. Paul complayneth,
that in his time Antechrist began to practice his mystery of iniquity, 2.
These. 2.
and that many opinions and sects began to spring up. Saint John writes that
in his time, 1. John. 4.
there were many Antechristes. What marvel is it then, if afterward, yea and
that very quickly diverse errors croape into the Church, and multiplied
exceedingly?

Saint Augustine in his 22. book De ciuitate Dei, Augustine.
and eyghte Chapter, after that he had recited certain miracles, which were
therefore showed that men might believe in Christ, he se^teth forth this
history. Hesperius a man of good worship and calling amongst us, has a
piece of land in the territory of Fussalum called Cubedi, in the which
perceiving by the languishing of his cattle and servants, that his house was
infected with the force and rage of evil spirits, he desired our fellow
Priests, (I being then absent,) that some one of them would take the pains to
go thither, that the spirit by his good prayers might give place: one of them
went thither, and there offered the sacrifice of the body of Christ, praying
very earnestly, that the same disquieting of spirits might cease, and by and
by God had compassion, and it ceased. He had given him of a friend of his,
some part of holy land brought from Jerusalem, where Christ being buried,
rose again the third day: that earth he hung up in his chamber, least any
evil might happen unto him. But when his house was delivered from that trouble,
he devised with himself what he might do with the said earth, which for
reverence sake, he would not keep any longer in his chamber. etc. Hereby it
is manifest, that superstition began immediately, and (as it happens always)
grew bigger with great increase, as if one should roll forth snow clodded
together, or as when huge lumpes of snow begin to fall down from the Alps* al
things on every side are filled with snow. Shortly after men began to pray,
and offer sacrifice for dead men's souls, yea and that with a good intention,
as it may evidently appear in many of the ancient fathers.

Afterward when Bishops and parish Priests, did not only not correct old
supersticions, but also upon a good meaning increase the^, at the last they
grew to an infinite number. For when spirits appeared, men called not upon God
through Christ only, but also upon Saints, forgetting that which Saint Paul
says to the Romans the tenth. (For I will let pass at this time all other
arguments,) how shall they call upon him in whom they have not believed? The
Papists themselves cannot deny, but that we must believe only in God, and
therefore he only is to be worshipped through his Son.

The Aue Marie i^ no prayer
Some write that it is a sovereign remedy to drive away devils, if we pray
Aue Maria. Where by the way it is to be noted, that the same salutation of the
Angel is no prayer, but only a greeting, and hystoricall narration, to wit,
how the Archangell Gabriell told the Uirgin Marie before of the Incarnation
of Christ. But I pray thee weigh the sense of the words, and whether thou will
or no, thou must needs say that these words contain in them neither asking,
nor thanksgiving, which are the parts of prayer. When the Angel came unto
her, he saluted her saying, (...). i. salve, that is, God speed, or rejoice
(for as Festus says, the Greek and the Latin word have one signification.)
Then he adds further, full of grace, which is to be understood passiuely, as
they term it in the schools) for because God bestowed his grace upon her: for
so the Angel himself expounds it, when he says afterward, that she had
found grace, that is, that God is merciful and loving toward her. Those
words may not be so understood, as if she were the fountain of grace (as some
have expounded it) and that she has grace of her self, and bestows it upon
such as call upon her, or speak unto her with the salutation of the Angel.
For neither the Greek word, nor any other places of the Scriptures admit this
sense. The Apostle says to the Ephesians the first chapter, that God has
made us his faithful servants dear by his grace through his beloved, Epes. 1.
that is, through Jesus Christ. In the which saying, the same word is put,
which the Angel used in saluting the holy virgin. It is written in the
first chapter of saint John's Gospel in plain words, that John Baptiste
bare witness of Christ with a loud voice, and said, John. ^.
that we all have received of his fullness, grace for grace. For the law was
given by Moses, but grace and truth sprang up by Christ. Many other such
places I omit for breuities sake. The virgin Mary her self says, the Lord
has done marvelous things unto me. She sets forth the grace of God, given
unto her from God, without any of her deserts. For he never bestowed greater
grace on any woman. And there is a very great difference between him that
co^ferreth grace, and them which receive or obtain grace. Grace is only to be
sought at his hands, who gives grace, and not of them which them selves
receive grace. A few years past, all men besought the virgin for help,
hoping for more grace and succor of her than of Christ him self. The Angel
adds further: Blessed art thou amongst women, that is, God has conferred
more grace unto thee, than unto any other woman. The words which are joined
hereunto, Blessed is the fruit of thy womb, are not the words of the Angel,
but of her cousin Elizabeth, who also saluted her. Unto these words some
religious men added, Jesus Christ amen. Therefore the Angel uttered not all
those words of the Aue Marie (as it may manifestly be gathered out of the very
text of Saint Luke chapter.1.) not because we deny these words to be good and
holy, for the text says of Elizabeth, that she was full of the holy ghost: but
that which the Angel spoke not, is not to be attributed unto her. You shall
not find in any allowed authors that in the time of the apostles and many
days after, this greeting was accounted as a prayer, or that any godly men did
salute, and call upon the holy virgin. Which thing I write not, because I would
bereue the holy Uirgin of her honor, but least that against her will, we give
her that honor which is only due to God the Father, and to his son Jesus
Christ. For he is our only mediator and redeemer. 1. Timoth. 2. 1. Timo. 2.
Otherwise the Aue Marie, and other such places of holy Scripture full of
consolation and comfort, touching the humanity of Christ, his punishment,
death, and merits are to be often read, and diligentely considered: neither
are the Scriptures to be pulled out of the hands of the lay people, in which
they may see all these things with their own eyes. In deed I deny not but
Spirits have many times vanished away upon the saying of Aue Marie, but it was
so done, that men might thereby be confirmed in their superstition.

But these men proceeding further, did conjure or consecrate water with certain
peculiar ceremonies, Holy water.
and kept it in vessels in their churches, houses, and elsewhere: amongst many
other virtues, ascribing this force unto it, that it chaseth away spirits and
vain sights. They also consecrated salt, and taught, that whether soever it
were cast, it drove away spirits, and all deceytes of the devil, yea and the
devil himself also. Moreover, they coniured with certain ceremonies and words,
candles, palm, herbs, and other creatures, to drive away fantasies (as they
term them.) They laid these and such like things, as also the relikes of
Saints, in those places whereas Spirits had been seen or heard. They also bear
men in hand, that great belles and sancebelles by their noise frayed spirits
out of the air. All these things are found more at large in the Papists
books which are written of the consecration of such things, and are
publicly extant. If belles be roong on S. John's day, or S. Agathes day, they
say it is a most excellent remedy against spirits. Some used to burn a bu^dell
of consecrated herbs, that with the smoke thereof they might thase away
devils. Many have their peculiar and strange blessings against spirits. There
have been also many holy rites instituted by the commandment of wandering
souls, as Masses for the dead, vigils, prayers, and twelve months minds: as
though the souls of godly men, being delivered from all trouble, were not
immediately translated into eternal rest. And it is also plain by reding the
Poets and Historiographers, that the Gentiles had their sacrifices for the
dead, as their rites called Nouendialia, which were observed the ninth day, and
their yearly feasts. etc. Howbeit those counterfeit ghostes craved nothing so
earnestly, as that many Masses might be song for their sakes, for they bare men
in hand, that those had great and marvelous force to redeem them out of
Purgatory.

John Tritenhemius writes in his Chronicles of the Monastery of Hirsgauium,
about the year of our Lord 1098. Henricus the fourth then being Emperor,
that at such time as the order of the Cistertians first began, The order of
Cistertians.
there appeared many days and nights, not far from the city of Worms, great
troops of horsemen and footmen, as if they were now going forth to battle,
running now here and now there in troops, and that about.ix. of the clock at
night they returned again to the hill nere at hand, out of ye which they used
to come forth. At last a certain monk of the abbey of Limpurge which stood not
far from ye hill whence they issued associating certain other unto him, came on
a certain night to ye place of the hill, and blissing himself with the sign of the
holy cross, adjured them in ye name of the holy and inseperable Trinity, as
they came out of the hill, to declare unto him who they were: unto whom one of
the company made answer: we are (quod he) no vain things, neither yet living
soldiers, but ye souls of earthly me^, serving in this world under our
prince, who not long since was slain in this place. The armor, furniture, and
horses which were unto us instruments of sin while we lived, are even now
after our death, certain signs and tokens of torments. Whatsoever ye see
about us, is all fiery unto us, although you nothing discern our fire. When
the Monks enquired whether they might be helped by men, the spirit answered:
we may (says he) be helped by fasting and prayers: but chiefly by the oblation
of the body and blood of Christ, which thing we beseech you to do for us. As
soon as he had so said, all the whole route of spirits cried three times with
one voice: pray for us, pray for us, pray for us. And suddenly withal, they
seemed to be all resolved into fire, yea and the hill it self, as if it had
bin on fire ^ast forth as it were a great crashing and rushing of trees. They
had in Churches a peculiar order of them whom they called Exorcistes, or
coniurers, whose duty was to conjure and drive away Devils, Exorcists.
but they were not so endued with that gift, as the ancient Christians were,
and therefore they did but vaunt and boast of themselves.

Afterward certain Monks and priests well seen in Magical sciences (for
they were never without such trim men) took upon them to conjure and drive away
evil spirits out of houses into wods and desert places. They wroght
maruellouse and strange things, and they said that a spirit in the name of
saints, and by the virtue of their coniuring and charecters, was constrained
to give place whether he would or not. In deed the Devil gives place, but he
does it as enemies do, which by flying choose a more fit place to fight in, or
more apt to embushe them selves. That which Satan does, he does it willingly
and of his own accord, that he might withdraw men from trusting in God only,
and drive them hedlong into Idolatry. Christ and his disciples cast out
Devils, but they were loath and unwilling to depart. Moreover they used to hang
saint John's Gospel about their necks, and carried about with them hallowed
wax enclosed in a purse, which they call an Agnus Dei. There are certain
books abroad, especially one written by Iacobus de Clusa a Carthusian,
concerning the appearing of souls separated from their bodies, wherein amongst
other things we read, after what sort men should prepare them selves, when
any Spirits appear, how they shall behave them selves in coming to them, in
departing from them, in the place where they appear, and what questions are to
be proposed unto the^: touching which things I spoke before, in the second
part of this book and second chapter, where if you list you may find them.

I have heard men which have confessed themselves to have bin so superstitious,
that when the priest lifted up the host (as they call it) in saying mass, they
would presently wipe their face with their hands, because they were persuaded,
that it was good to stop all spirits from meeting with them in a visible form.

But tell me I pray thee who soever thou art which do so, by what places of
scripture can thou confirm those ceremonies? Where does Christ and his
disciples teach us to expel the Devil (which is a Spirit, and therefore
without any body) by bodyly things? show but one example, that they have cast
forth the Devil by this way or means. If you bring out of the books of
Tobie, that the heart and liver of the fish being laid on the coals, drove
away the Devil with the smell, we say that the same book is not accounted
amongst the canonical scriptures: and moreover that the same Devil was rather
vanquished by the prayers of Tobias and his wife, than by any fumigation. Did
Christ ordain the holy Supper to this end, that thereby Devils should be
cast out? Albeit that an evil Spirit do feign to give place, because of
these things, yet he brings to pass in the mean season, that Superstition
is more deeply rooted in the hearts of men.

CHAP. XI. That spirits are not to be driven away by cursing and banning.
HEre I cannot ouerpasse, that certain do vainly persuade them selves, that
Spirits may easily be driven away with cursing and banning, for that (as they
say) Spirits approach near unto such as pray, and do more egerly disturb and
vex them. Our Lord Jesus Christ who can best tell how we should fight against
the craft and subtlety of the Devil, teaches us in many places to pray
continually, he bids us to pray in the Lords prayer, that we may be
delivered from evil, calling Satan by the figure (...): Evil it self,
because he excels therein. Nothing can be more acceptable and pleasing to
the Devil, than when any man uses cursing and banning. He feyneth that he is
hereby driven away, but in ye mean season he crepeth inuisibly into their
bosoms. If you list ye may drive away the Devil, in saying that he has no
place with you, but his place is in Hell, and that he has nothing to do with
those which put their only trust and confidence in Christ Jesus. For in the
eight chapter to the Romans in the beginning, Roma. 8.
it is said: Now there is no condemna^ion unto them, that are grafted in
Christ Jesus, who walk not according to the flesh, but according to the
spirit. A man may command the devil to depart from him without any cursing or
banning. And that is also to be blamed that certain wicked and rash men talk
very beastly, and filthily with spirits, if they appear at any time unto them.

Some others, when spirits appear unto them, will by and by set on the^, and
drive them away with naked swords: and sometimes throw them out of the
windows, not considering with themselves, that spirits are nothing hurt with
weapons. In the Grecian histories we read, that a certain Lacedemonian
passing by a sepulcher in the night season, when a spirit seemed to appear
unto him, ran toward it thinking to run it through with his spear: saying:
whether flyest thou O thou soul which shall twice dye? Surely it is praise
worthy when a man me^ing with a spirit is not afraid, but yet boldness and
rashness can not be commended. If thy enemy, albeit he be very weak be not to
be despised, much less ought an enemy so mighty and so crafty, to be
neglected. There have bin some who when they would have stricken a Spirit with
their sword, have thought they have stricken the fetherbed, the Devil so mocked
them. Others supposing they had thrown a spirit out of the window, by and by
thought they heard shingles falling and rattling amongst the trees.

It is reported that there have bin some, who supposing with their weapons to
hurt spirits, have wounded them selves, for their arms and other members of
their body have never served the^ after. We must not use a material sword
against spirits and vain shows (for it profyteth nothing) but we must use the
sword of the Spirit. They which will strike spirits and ghosts with a sword, in
deed (...), that is, fight with their own shadow. In the book of Job the
devil is signified by Leuiathan, which cares not for ye spear, for he
apeareth in diverse shapes, and ca^ not be put to flight with pikes. The devil
is a spirit, he has not boanes and flesh, but he only takes on him a shape
for a time. But in case spirits which have bodies do wa^der (yt is, co^iurers,
priests, whores and whoremo^gers, which feign the^ selves to be spirits*) there
ca^ be no better co^iuratio^ inverted tha^ to bang the^ well with a cudgel. For
thou shall not so much prevail with this kind of devils with words as with
stripes.

Hitherto I have showed how they ought to behave themselves which meet with
spirits. As touching them which never heard or saw any thing (for there be
many which never chanced on such things) let them be thankful unto God for so
great a benefit, let them not be rash and bold, nor desirous to see such
things, but rather let them pray unto God for them which are vexed with such
euyls. Let them not do, as they many times use which were never greatly
sick: for they feel not other men's griefs, and therefore they think they are
little sick, or that they counterfaite their sickness, until such time as
they them selves fall into some great and dangerous disease: even so God can
cause them to see spirits, which never saw any before, that afterward they
may be the more touched with other men's greefs, and diligently pray for them.

CHAP. XII. After what sort we ought to behave our selves, when we hear
strange crackes, or when other forevvarnings happen.
BUt now as concerning other matters, as in case any strange crackes and
noyses be heard, or any rare and marvelous things happen before the alteration
of kingdoms (which we spoke of before) what shall we then do? Surely we
must not attribute too much unto such things, for they sometimes yea and most
commonly chance by the disceyte of the devil, who has a great pleasure to
have men muse night and day on such matters, and to imagine before their
eyes and minds many horrible things, that thereby they may fall into some
grievous sickness, and never be at rest. When such things happen in deed,
they ought to put us in mind, that we casting from us al these things which
displease God, should wholly consecrate our selves unto God, and so frame our
selves, that at what hour soever he come, and please to call us out of this
life, we should be ready for him even as he himself teaches us, and also
endure patiently all unfortunate chances, how many soever happen unto us,
knowing that they come not by chance, but by the providence of God.

Plutarch, albeit he be an Heathen writer, is of a sound judgment (as me
seems) concerning Monsters and wonders. For writing of Alexander the great,
Plutarches Christian opinion.
in his book De vitis he says, that there happened certain prognostications
before his death, which sometimes Alexander ^ared not for, but contemned them,
and contrariwise sometimes he took small and tryfling things, as signs of evil
luck.

He adds further how dangerous a thing it is, to despise tokens and signs
sent from God unto men, and on the other side, how pernicious and hurtful it
is to be afraid of every trifle, for as in all other things, so is there a
measure to be observed herein. The same opinion is he of, touching other
wonders and miracles. For ye may read in the life of Camillus, that when he
being Captain, had taken and destroyed the Veians, he made a solemn vow, to
translate the Image of Juno unto Rome. And therefore he commanded certain
men to take up the Image: he offered sacrifice unto the Goddess, and besought
her that she would voutsafe to follow him, and to be favorable unto the
Romans, as other Gods were which now dwelt at Rome. The Image made him
answer that she would go with him. He also writes that those men which noted
and recorded these things, report other such strange matters, as that Images
did sweat, that they gave great groans, that they turned away their faces, or
hanged down their heads: he says, that men which lived before his time,
gathered many such examples together, and that he himself has heard many
marvelous things of men living in his time, which were not by and by to be
neglected and contemned: and yet man's infirmity is such, that it cannot
attribute either too much or to little, unto those things without great
danger, for men observe no mesure, but are either too supersticious and
attribute over much to such matters, or else do utterly reject and contemn
them. And therefore the safest way is, to be advised and to keep a mean in
such affairs. Valerius Maximus.
Valerius Maximus confesses in his first book, that the very Gentiles
themselves had many miracles and wonders happening among them in great
suspicion, and that not without just cause. True wonders ought to stir us up
from sleep. A courageous horse goes well inoughe of his own accord, and
yet if you do but make sign unto him with a wande, or put spur unto him,
he will be more redyer and quicker. Even so must we go in the way that leads
unto Heaven so long as we live, but in case we see any foretokens, or some
great alteration s^eme to hang over us, we ought to be the more stirred up,
to give our selves to prayer, and to exercise godliness. The Gentiles if at
any time such forewarnings were showed unto them from Heaven, did institute
certain solemn prayers and processions to pacify their Gods: how much
rather ought all Christian Princes and Magistrates, Doctoures and Preachers of
our time, to bend themselves wholly herein, when so ever plagues hang over our
heads, that all men generally and particularly show forth true repentance?

The conclusion.
Hitherto (I trust) we have sufficiently showed what we may think, concerning
visions and appearing of spirits, and other strange things which have great
affinity and likeness unto them. And that in times past, Doctors wrote and
taught far otherwise concerning them than the very truth it self was, we
have also showed the causes thereof. It might be also declared in many words,
that the like has happened in other points of Christian doctrine, yea and
many excellent learned and godly men, have at large opened the same in their
books which are now extant concerning such matters.

And that I may conclude this my book, I shall beseech all those, for the
glory of God, that shall happen to read it, that in case they think I have
strayed from the rule of the word of God, they would freely and friendly
admonish me thereof, but if they know it be agreeable to the word of God (as
I trust it is) that then they suffer not themselves to be ruled and mocked of
iugling Monks and Priests, but rather give God thanks for that great and
unspeakable benefit, whereby he does daily deliver them out of great errors
and fears, and does continually more and more bring his truth to light: le^
them not so lose the reigns to their affections, that they reject the truth
which they have once acknowledged.

The Senate and people of Rome as stories witness, granted liberty to the
people of Cappadocia, when the stock and issue of their Kings was utterly
extincte, to be free, and Lords of themselves for ever after. But the
Nobility consulting on the matter, refusing liberty which they could in no
wise digest, desired to have a King. The Romans wondering heereat, gave them
leave to choose whom they would to be their King. Let not us be such fools,
but rather let us embrace the liberty of our souls, which God does daily
offer unto us by his word.

Many Noble nations fighting courageously, have put themselves in present
danger of life, to obtain and keep this sweet external liberty. How
much more ought we Christians to fight against the suttletie and deceyt of the
Devil, least the liberty of our souls, which is much more precious than
the other, should be oppressed by diverse errors and supersticions.

Men setting in darkness, desire the light very earnestly. Let not us
therefore cast away light freely offered unto us by God in his Scriptures. We
have nothing here in earth more dear unto us, than the liberty of our souls
and consciences. Let us not then (as Paul says,) with hol^^ truth in
unrighteousness, let every man of what age soever he be, weigh with himself
how frail and brittle this life is which God has given unto us, and that we
must depart from hence, sooner then we think for, and render an account to
the just Judge, of our faith, w^rdes, and deeds.

Glory and praise be unto Almighty God for ever and ever, and I beseech him
to voutsafe to stretche forth his hand, to deliver all such as are still
entangled in superstition and errors, and to grant those whom he has
delivered his Heavenly grace, that they be always thankful for so great a
benefit, least they be wrapped again in the same mischief.

FINIS.
Jmprinted at London, by Richard Watkins. Anno. 1572.


