The Pleasant History of Lazarillo de Tormes a Spaniarde, wherein is
contained his marvelous deeds and life.

With the strange adventures happened to him in the service of Iunarie Masters.

Drawn out of Spanish by David Rouland of Angles^y.

Accuerdo, Oluid.

Imprinted at London by Abell Ieffes, dwelling in the fore street without
Crepell gate nete Groube street at the sign of the Bell. 1586.



To the right worshipful Sir Thomas Gressam Knight.
WHEN I had read over this little treatise (right worshinful,) finding it for
the number of strange and merry reports, very recreatiue and pleasant. I thought
it no labor evil bestowed, to occupy my self in the translation thereof. And
being moved thereto the rather, perceiving that in France many delighted
therein, being turned into their tongue, I fully determined to bring my former
pretense to end: Considering that besides much mirth, here is also a true
description of the nature and disposition of sundry Spaniards. So that by
reading hereof, such as have not travailed Spain, may as well discern much of
the manners and custonis of that country, as those that have there long time
continued. And being now finished, I was so bold as to dedicate the fruit of
my simple labor unto your worship, who both for travail, dally conference
with diverse nations, and knowledge in all foreign matters is known to be such a
one, as is well able to judge, whether these reports of little Lazaro be true or
not. Wherefore I most humbly beseech your worship favorably to accept this poor
present, (as offered of one) who wishes unto you and yours, all health,
wealth, long life, with increase of al veruse and worship: Trusting that after
your weight and important affairs, to case your tedious exercises, you
will recreate your self with reading of some pleasant part hereof.

Your worships most humbly to commanae, David Rowland.

The Prologue of Lazaro de Tormes, unto a Gentleman of Spain, which was
desirous to understand the discourse of his life.
I Am of opinion, that things so worthy of memory, peradventure never heard of
before, ne seen, ought by all reason to come abroad to the sight of many, and
not be buried in the endless pit of obliuio^, there perpetually to be
forgotten: for it is possible that those, which shall read this treatise of my
life, may find some plea sure therein. Wherefore true it is ye Pliny
records, there is no book so evil, but has some goodness in it contained
(considering all men taste not a like,) that which one man will not eat,
another longs sore for: we see many despise things which other do greatly
esteine: Therefore nothing ought to be broken a cast away, unless it were
detestable, but that first diverse men should see the same, and especially being
not hurtful, but rather able, in fleade o^ damage, to yield profit and
vtdi^ie. If the world verre otherwise, very few would take pen in hand to
pleasure one man only, seeing that they can not bring their works to end
without great travel: And when they have ended their labor, they rightfully
desire to be recompensed, and not with money, but only that all men with
courteous m^de will trad and allow their works, (yea and if there be cause why)
give them praise. For to this end Tullie says, Honor does maintain art of
cunning. Do you think that the soldier that first mou^teth on the wall with
his ladder, is weary of his li^e? No surely, the desire of honor encourages
him, so to venture into such danger. So likewise in Art and learning, we use
to say, master Doctor has preached well, he is a man that seeks ye health of
souls: but I pray you dema^d of him whether he will be offended, that one shall
say, O how divinely you have preached master Doctor. The like happens in me^
of arms, as men commonly report, O how such a knight iustled noughtly, and
notwithstanding he has given his coat armor to a Iester which commended him
for running well, what would he have given, if he had said the truth?
Wherefore now that all things pass after such a sort, I confessing my self
to be no holier than my neighbors, am content that such as find any taste in
this my gross Style and novelty, may pleasure and delight themselves
therewith: and they may perceius how a man lives, after so many fortunes,
dangers, and adversities.

Therefore now I beseech your worship, receive with willing heart this poor
token of my true affection, which should have been much richer if power and
ability had been equal with desire. And seeing that you have commanded me to
write the matter at length, I have thought good not to begin the midst of my
life, but first to tell you of my birth, that al me^ may have full knowledge of
my person, that those which possess great rents and revenues, may understand
what small praise is due unto the^, seeing that Fortune has deall parcially
with the^: and how much comme^dation they deserve, which in despite of cruel
fortune, with force and industry, by rowing out of tempesinous seas, have
arrived to fortunate and happy ha^^tis.

Lazaro declares his life, and whose son he was.
YOur worship shall understand before all things, that my name is Lazaro de
Tormes, son of Thome Gonsales and Antona Petes native of Tessiares, a village
near Salamanka: I was borne within the river called Tormes, whereof I took my
surname, as hereafter you shall hear; my father whom God pardon, had the
charge of a Mill stauding upon that River wherein he supplied the room of a
Milner about rv years. It fortuned on a night my mother bring great with
child, was there brought to bed, and then was I borne: therefore now I may
truly report the River it self to be the place of my nativity: and after the
time I came to the age of eight years, there was layds to my Fathers charge
that he had shamefully cut the seames of men's sacks that came thither to grind,
wherefore he was taken and imprisoned, and being tormented he confessed the
whole matter, denying nothing wherefore he was persecuted. I trust in God that
he is now in paradise, seeing that the Gospel does say, that blessed are such
as confess their faults. About ye same time an army was made against the
Turks, and my father being then banished for the mishap aforesaid, chanced to
be one supplying the room of a Mulitor, under a knight which went thither, in
whose service like a true and a faithful man, he ended his life. My mother
being then a comfortless widow, after the loss of her dear husband,
determined to inhabit among such as were virtuous and honest, to be of that
number, and therefore came immediately to this noble City, where after that
she had hired a little house, she kept an ordinary table for diverse
Students, and washed shyrts for a rompany of horsekepers, belonging to the
Commander of Magdalona, by means whereof she had accusation to make often
resort unto the stables, where in continuance of time, a black Morrien, one of
master Commanders men, became to be famiarly acquainted with her* So that for
his part he would oftentimes arrive at midnight to our house, and return
again betimes in ye morning, other whiles at noonetide, dema^ding at the door,
whether my mother had eggs to sell, and so come in pretely without suspection:
At the beginning I was right sorry to see him make repare thither, being afraid
to behold his black uncomely visage: but after that I once perceived how only by
his resort our fare was so well amended, I could by no means find in my heart
to hate him, but rather bear him good will, rejoicing to see him: for he
always brought us home with him good round can^^^s of bread, and pieces of
broken meat, and in the Winter time wood to warm us withal. To be short, by
his continual repair thither, matters went so forward, that my mother found
good time to bring forth a yo^g morren, whom I daily playde withal, and
sometimes helped to warm. And I remember very well, that on a time as my
Stepfather played merrily with his young son, the little child perceiving that
my mother and I ware white, and his father black as yeat, he ran away for
fear to my mother, and stretching forth his finger, cried Mamma ye hug:
Whereat my black stepfather would laugh, and say, a whoreson, art thou afrayce
of thy father? Although I was then but young, I right well marked the child's
words, and said to my self, there are many such in the world, which do abhor and
flee from others because they cannot see what shape they have themselves.
Within a while after, it pleased fortune that the daily conversation of Aid
(for so was my fathers name) came to the cares of him that was Steward to
master Commander, who made suthstreight inquiry, that he was aduertise^ how
the black moren did use to steal half the prouander that was allowed ye
horses, yea, horsecouerings, shetes and curry combs, other whiles wood, and
bran: which things in ^eede he always said were lost, All was fish that came
to the net.
and when nothing could be gotten to serve his turn, he would never slicke to
vnshoe the horses, to get some gain, presenting daily all such gifts to my
mother, as a help to bring up my little black brother. Let us never therefore
marvel more at those which steal from the poor, nor yet at them which convey
from the houses they serve, to present therewith whom they love, in hope to
attain thereby their desired pleasure, seeing that love was able to encourage
this poor bondsman or slave to do thus much as I have said, or rather more,
which by evident trial was afterward proved true: for I being examined of the
deed, after much thretning was constrained as a child, for fear, There is an
order in that country when any Moredoth commirte any hemous effe^ce to strip
himnaked and being bound with his hands and his knees together, to bast him
with hot drops of burning Larde.
so discover the whole matter, confessing how I had sold certain
horseshoowes to a smith at my mothers commandment: wherefore my miserable
stepfather was by judgment of the law, as the order is there, whipped and
Larded, and to my mother express commandment was given upon the usual pain
of a hundredth stripes, no more to enter into the house of the above named
Commander, nor yet entertain into hirs the unfortunate Zaide. My sorrowefull
mother fearing to throw the helue after the hatchet, determined by all means
to keep their commandment, wherefore she entered into service with those
which at that time dwelte at the ordinaric Inn called Solona, so to escape
danger and to avoid the dangerous reports of evil tongues, where she
suffered much sorrow, and there brought up my black brother, until he was
able to run abroad, and that I being a good stripling, There is no pro^sion
there in Innes: for the guestes must send abroad into the town for all such
yittell as they need.
could go up and down the town to provide the guestes of wine, and candels,
and other things necessary. In this mean time, there happeued a blind man to
come thither to lodge, who thinking me to be a fit man to lead him, desired my
mother that I might serve him, wherewith she being right well content, most
earnestly prayed him to be good master unto me, because I was an honest man's
s^nne, who in maintaining the faith of Jesus Christ against Lurkes, died in the
battle of Gelues, and how that she trusted in almighty God I would prove as
honest a man as he: therefore in any wise that he would be careful over me,
being a fatherless child. Let me alone then (answered he) I will not use him
as a servant, but as a son. Then in happy time I began to serve my old
and new master: And after we had remained certain days at Salamanka, my
blind master perceiving his gain there to he but small, determined to depart
thence: and a little before our departure, I went to see my mother: when I came
where she was, we shed both most bitter tears, and she gave me her* blessing,
saying, now my dear son I shall see thee no more, therefore be a good child,
I pray God be thy help, I do thank the Lord I have brought thee up well
hitherto, and I have now put thee to a good master, from henceforth provide
for thy self, seeing that I have done my part. I took my leave and returned
in haste to my master, which tarried for me ready to take his voyage. So we
departed out of Salamanka, and came on our way as ^rre as the bridge, at the
entrance wher^^ stands a beast of Stone, fashioned much like a bull: as soon as we came nere it, ye blindma^ willed me to approach, saying Lazaro, put thine
ear to this Bull, and thou shall hear a terrible noise within it: as soon as
he had said ^ words, I was ready like a fool to bow down my head, to be as he
had comanded, thinking that his words had been most true: but the traitorous
blind man suspecting how near it my head was, thrusts forth his arm upon a
sod^^ne, with such force, that my fore head took such a blow against the
devilish Buil, that for the space of three days my head feste the pains of
his horns, wherefore he was right glad and said: Consider now what thou art
thou foolish call, thou must understand, that the blind man's boy ought to
know one trick more than the dinel himself. It seemed then immediately that I
awaked out of simplicity, wherein I had of long time slept (like a child,) and
I saw to my self, my blind master has good reason, it is full time for me to
open mine eyes, yea and to provide and seek mine own advantage co^ssdering ye
I a^^^alone with out any help. We continued on our ^^^ney, and within few
days I came to good knowledge, so he perceiving what a ready tongue I had, was
right glad, and said, neither gold nor silver can I give thee, howbeit, I do
mean to teach thee ye way to live, and so certainly he did: for next after God
he made me a man, and although he was blind, it was he that gave me light and
that taught me how to know the world^. I rejoice to declare unto your
worship these Childish toys, that you may see how comme^dable it is for a man
of low estate to be brought to authority and exalted, and contrariwyse what a
shame it is, a man for dignity and estimation to be pulled down to wretched
misery, But to return to my blind master, and to show his nature, I assure
you that since the beginning of the world God never made man more deceitful
and crafty: for in his art and trade of living he far passed all other: he
could recite by heart a hundred long prayers and more, yea, and the life of all
the holy saints: at his devotion time he used such a loud tunable voy^^ that
it might be heard thoroughout the Church where he prayed, and besides all
that, he could counferset a good devout countenance in praying, without any
strange gesture, either with mouth or eye, as other blind are accustomed to
use. I am not abl^ to recite a thousand other manner of ways which he had to
get money: he would make many believe that he had prayers fo Biuers good
purpo^es, as for to make women bring forth children, yea, and to make men to
love their wives, although they had hated the^ before never so much. He would
prognosticate to women that were with child, whether they should bring forth
a Son or a daughter: in matters of Physic, he would affirm that Galen
never knew half so much as he: also for any grief, the tooth ach, or any
other disease, there was never one complained, but that immediately he would
say, do this, do that, sees such an herb, take such a root: So that by this
his continual p^actise, he had daily great resort made unto him, (especially
of women) which did faithfully believe all that ever he said: by them he had
great gain, for he wan more in a month, ^^en twenty of his occupation did in
a whole year. Yet for all his daily gains, you must understand that there was
never man so wretched a inggarde. For he caused me not only to die for
hunger, but also to want what so ever I nee^^d. And therefore to confess the
troth, if I had not found out means to help my self, I had been buried long
sithence. Wherefore oftentimes I would so prevent him of all his craft, that my
portion should prove as good as his: and to bring my matter so to pass, I
used wonderful deceits (whereof I will recite unto you some) although sometimes
my practicing of them did cost me bitter pains. This bl^nd man carried always
his bread and his vittell in a little bag of cloth, which was shut at the
mouth with an Iron buckle, under a miserable lock and keye: at the time of
putting his meat in, and taking it out, he would keep such straight account,
that all the world was not able to deceive him of one crun me, and therefore
there was no help, but that I must needs be content with that small
allowance that he gave me, which ^^wares I was sure to dispatch at two
morsels: and as soon as ever he had shut his little lock, he would think then
that all were sure, imagining that I had other matters in hand: then would I
boldly unrip and sow up again the side of his covetous sack, using daily to
lance one of the sides, there to take out not only bread at mine own
pleasure, but also sitces of flesh, and sweet ca^banades: So that by such
means I found convenient time to ease the raging hunger which he was cause of.
Morcouer all the maney that ruer I could convey and steal from him, I changed
always into half blanks and when any man demanded any prayer, he had always
of ordinary a blanke given him for his hire, and because he could not see, it
should be delivered me: but he could never so soon put forth his hand to
receive it, but I was as ready to throw it into my mouth, and by quick
erchaunge to give him the just value of half of it, whercat he would much
murmr, knowing by the only feeling of it what it was, and would say: How in
the devils name cha^^eth it that sithence thy coming to me, I receive but
half blankes, and before I had always a whole blanke and sometimes two? I
think surely that thy unluckiness be cause thereof. From that time forwards
her thought good to shorten his prayers, cutting them off in the midst:
wherefore he commanded me, that as soon as the alms giver had turned his
back. I should pluck him by the cloak. Blind men stand there in Church
porche^ryady to be hired for money to recite any prayer
Then straight ways changing tune, he would begin to cry with loud voice (as
blindmen use to do) who will hear such a devout prayer, or else the life of
some holy Saint? At dinner or supper time, he had always before him a
little potfull of wine, which oftentimes I would lay hand on, and after two
or three kisses send it him secretly home again: But that happy time
continued but a while, for I was wont to leave so little behind me, that he
might soon epsy the fault, as in deeds immedially he did mistrust the whole
matter, wherefore he began a new order, not to leave his wine any more at
randon, but to avoid danger, had always his little pot fast by the ear, so
to be sure of his drink. Yet notwithstanding for all this, the Adamant stone
had never such virtue to draw Iron to it, as I had to suck up his wine with a
long reed which I had prepared for the purpose: for at soon as the end of my
reed had been once in, I might well defire hun to fill the pot again. Yet at
the last the crafty blind man chanced to feel me, and being angry,
determined to take an other way, to place his pot betw^ne his legs, covering
it still with his hand, so to auoy call former dangers: when he had so done,
I being accustomed to drink wine, did long to taste of it, and perceiving that
my reed could then no more prevail at all, I devised an other kind of
fetch, how to make a hole in the bottom of his wine po^, and to stop the
same with a little s^fte ware, so that at dynner time making a show as I were
ready to dye for cold, I would creep between the blind man's legs, to
warm my self at his small fire, by the heat whereof, the wax being little in
quantity, would so melte away, that the wine would issue down into my meuth
freshely and trime. I being sure to gape upward so just that one drop should
n^uer fall beside. So that when my blind mast^r would taste of his wine, he
should never find drop to oue^ch his thurst, whereat he would much marvel,
cu^sing and swering all manner of oaths, yea wishing the pot and all that was
within it at the druell, musing still how his wine should be so consumed away.
Then st^^ightwayes to excuse my self. I would say, I trust you will not
mistrust m^e gentle vucle, seeing that the pot came never out of your own
hands. Whereupon then to be well reformed of the truth, he began to feel and
to gro^e the pot over so often, that at last he found the spring, and at that
time dissembled quietly the matter, as if he had perceived nothing. The next
day I began again to prepare my self after my accustomed sort to take my
pleasure of his wine, being ignorant of the evil that should ensue, thinking
that my master would never have mistrusted me about such a matter, wherefore I
was merry and careless. But my cruel master, perceiving after what strange
sort I received those sweet drops of wine, which came forth as a quick
spring at his pot bottom, my face bent toward heaven, my eyes in manner
closed, so to receius with more delight and better taste, that pleasant licour
which I thought did preserve my life, the malicious blind man having time of
rouengement at his will, Inted up the sweet and sour pot, (as I may say,)
and with all his force clapped it so rudely upon my face, that I thought varily
heaven abeue, and all therein, had fallen upon me. The cruel blow was such
that it took away my senses, it troubled sore my brains, and my face was all
cut with pieces of the broken pot, yea, and some of my teeth were then
broken, which as yet is seen, wherefore I never loved him after, howbeit be
cherished me daily: yet for all the false love and fridship which he showed, I
perceived right well how glad he was that he had so punished me. To make me
amends, he washed with wine the wou^des which the unhappy pot had made, and
after much l^ughing, said, what say thou to this my boy, the wy^^ that has
done the hu^t shall now heal thee again, and such other merry iestes, which I
utterly mis^^ked. As soon as I began to recover, an^ that my face was in
manner heal^d, and considered with my self, how that with few more such
blows, the blinte m^n might quickly vring me to my grave: And therefore
determined to shorten his days if I could, which thing I went not about
immediately, but tarried a due time for mine own safetis and advantage. And
whereas afterward I went about to sorget mine anger, and to forgive him the
blow, the cuill usage and entertainment which he daily showed me, would in
no wise consent thereto. For still he tormented me with sore blows without
any offense or fault at all. And when any man demanded why he handled me so
cruelly, straight ways he would up and declare the ^iscourse of his pot,
saying, do you not think that this child is some innocent, and always at the
end of his tale these would be his words: who unless it were the devil him
self could have found out such rare prankes? The people would much marvel at
my muention, and blessing themselves, would say unto my master: Punish him,
Punish him, God will reward you therefore: which thing he did continually,
and would have done without their bidding: wherefore I daily led him through ye
worst ways I could find possibly all for very spite, minding if I could to
do him harm: where I might cipye stones or mire, I would even through the
thickest: and although I could never escape dry foot, I was glad with losing
one of mine own eyes, to put out both his that never had any. ^e was borne
^^inde.
At such times of his sorrows to be revenged, he would take hold with his
nails on the hinder part of my head, where with his often pulling, he had
lefie very fews hairs behind: it would never prevail me then to say, that I
could find no better way, nor yet to swear how I did not lead him that
naughty way maliciously for he was so subtle that to my words he would give
small credit. But now because your worship shall understand how far his
craft did extend. I will declare one chance amongst many, which happened in
the time I served him where in he seems to give full understanding of his
subtlety: When we departed out of Salamanka, his intent was to come to the
City of Toledo, knowing that the people were richer there than in other
places, although not so charitable, yet for all that, leaning to his old
proverb: More gives the niggarde than the naked, we took our voyage through
the best villages we could find, where we found great gain and profit,
continuing after such sort a certain time: and where as we liked not our
entertainment, the third day we would be sure to take our leave and to end
our year. It fortuned at the last, that we arrined to a town which is called
Almorx, at such time as they gathered their grapes, where one of ye viniar^ gave
my master a whole bunche, which by reason of the late time, were more than
ripe, so that some were ready to fall from the ^unch: wherefore he could by no
means carry it in his bag, by reason it was so moist. Therefore he
determined to make a sumptuous banquet with it, partly because he had no
means to carry it with him, and partly because he thought therewith to please
me, which had received that day many cruel blows. As soon as we found a
valley fit for the purpose, we satte us down, and my master said, Lazaro my
boy, I will now use a great liberality toward thee, it is my pleasure that
both of us shall eat friendly together this bunch of grapes, whereof thy part
shall be as much as mine, we will part it after this sort, thou shall take one
grape and I an other, promising me faithfully that thou will not take above one
at a time, and I will do the like to thee, and so we will quietly end our
bunche, without any fraud or guile on ^ither part. Upon that condition we
agreed and began our bancket: but my master belike forgetting his pr^mise, did
soon change purpose, for immediately he began to pick the grapes by two and
two, thinking peradventure that I would do the like, as he might well think.
In deed I was not far behind him, for as soon as I perteiued that he had
broken the law, I was not content to go by two and two as he did, but went
before him, taking up by two and thr^^ together, and sometime more as I was
best able. When the bunch was ended, he took the stalk in his hand, and
wagging his head said, Lazaro thou have deceived me, by God thou have eaten by
three and three: I utterly denied it, and said, in deed uncle it is not
true: why should you think so? Then he like a crafty blindman answered, I did
perceive straight ways h^we the matter went, for when I began to take up by
two and two, thou never did find faultebut did keep silence. I then
laughed to my self, although I was but young, I cons^dered well his discrete
consideration. Now ^ir to avoid long talk, I will leave apart many matters as
well pleasant as worthy to be noted, which have fortuned to me with this my
first master. I will only tell what happened a little before I departed: we came
to Scalona, a town of the Dukes, and when we were at our lodging, Here they
use few gridiros but all spits, and do roast ouerth wart the coals. A mareuedi,
is the sixth part of an English penny.
he gave me a piece of a sausedge to roast, the which being almost enough, and
the fat dropped and pressed out upon thin flices of bread, as the fashion is,
and those being ^aten, he drew his purse, and boldly drew out a Mareuedi,
willing me to fetch the value thereof in wine. The devil (who as they say) is
the occasion that men become thieues, was ready at hand to prepare opportuni,
tie to deceive him. It fortuned that near the fire there lay a little root,
somewhat long and evil favored, such a one as belike, was not leru ^able for
the pot, and therefore was left there as abiecte: and as at that time there
was no more but he and I alone, I felt my self pinched with a lickorous
appetite, my teeth being s^t on edge with the sweet sauoure of his roasted
sausege, the which was the only witness that I should be the eater thereof)
I not regarding what the seque^e might be, seauing aside all manner of fear,
for to fulfill my rash desire, in the mean while that the blind man was
drawing his pursse, I whipps off quickly the sausedge from the spitte, and
thereon broached the foresaid worm eaten root, which my master most
willingly took and began to turn, thinking to roste that which for the
goodness, was not worthy t^ be boiled.

So I went for wine, and by the way I made a fair end of my sausedge, and as
soon as I came in again, I found my master wringing between two slices of
bread, yt naughty root, not knowing what it was: for with his fingers he had
not as yet touched it. Immediately after he began to eat, taking a large bit of
his bread, meaning to have tasted a little of his sausedge, but his teeth
entered into the root, where he found a cold morsel: whereat he being sore
abashed, showed it to me, and said, Lazaro what means this? I then answered:
Now Jesus what is this? Alas wretch that I am, do you mean to blame me, you
know well that I came but now from the tavern with wine, surely some
naughty man has been here, that has done this in despite or mockage. No no,
then said he, that cannot be possible, for I never let the spitte go sithence
out of mine own hands. Then to clear my self, I began to swear all other,
that I was innocent of that vile excha^ge: but al was in vain, for from the
subtlety of that ungracious blind man, nothing could be kept hid. He rose
up and took fast hold on my head, to smell whether he could feel the
sauoure of his sausedge: and as soon as ever he felt occasion to suspecte
that I had eaten it, he was as gl^d^e as a good blood hound^, that had his
chase in the wind: Wherefore to be better enfourmed of the truth, being sore
endued with anger, he rashely opened my mouth with the strength of his hands,
so that perforce I was fayns to gape even to the vttermoste: and then he
thrusts in all haste, into my mouth, his wormeaten nose, which was both long
and sharp, yea, which at that time by reason of great anger, was lengthned a
long handful, so that the pike thereof did ga^ my throat. Wherefore, partly
by reason of the fear that I was in, and partly because the sa^sedge in such
short time was not settled in my stomach, but most of all, by reason of the
great trouble which his monstrous nose put me too, wherewith I was in a
manner choked, I was forced to discover my gluttonte, so that the sausedge of
necessity returned to his old master again: for my poor stomach was so
much altered, that before the blind man had drawn out his hoggish nose, I was
even ready to render up the theft. For look as soon as ever he had pulled
out his snoute, the evil eaten sausedge came gushing cut after, in honest
company. O mighty God how ha^ been then buried, might well have looked for
my company, for and was altogether dead: his rage was (...) so great, that if
men had not come in, I think certainly he would have taken away my life.
With much a do I got me out of his hands, leaving him with his claws full
of that small quantity of hear which I had left, (all which torment he most
justly deserved seeing that through his naughtiness I suffered such
persecution.) The ungodly blind man, would then declare to as many as came
in, my unfortunate disgraces, rehe^^sing often over, as well the tale of his
^otte, and of the bunch of gr^pes, as also this last trick of his sausedge.
The laugh^^^ that men made was so great, that a^ such as were in the streate
came in to see the feast, where he recited with such (...) all my
misaduentures, that me thought verily, I did them great wrong in not laughing
for company. When all this was past, there came to my mind a certain faint
and a stouthfull cowa^ which I had committed, in not leaving him nosselesse,
seeing that I had time fit for the purpose: yea and that I had gone half the
way to do it. For if I had but closed my teeth together, his nose had nener
gone more abroad: and truly I believe because it was the nose of that naughty
man it would have better agreed with my stomach, than the sausedge did, for
had it once been invisible, I might well have denied it him again. Now I
would to God my teeth had done their part, for it had been better so then
otherwise. The hostise, and other that were there, made us friends, and with
the wine which I had brought for his supper, they washed my face, and my
throat, which his nails had altorne. Whereat he made much grudging, saying,
certainly this boy does consume me more wine in a year, with washing his
wounds, than I do drink in two. Without doubt Lazaro, thou art more bound
to wine, than to thy father, for he only begot thee once, and it has saved
thy life a thousand times, and so declared how many times he had wounded me
and healed me again with wine, and then said again: I promise thee truly
Lazaro if any man in the world shall have happy chance with wine, it is thou.
Which words caused those that were there, to laughe heartily, I being still
in most sorrowful despair. But look what the blind man prognosticated then,
it was not all in vain, for his sayings at ye time proved afterward most
true: wherefore I have oftentimes sithence called to mind his words, whereby
it appeared that he had a great gift in prophesying, and therefore it has
often repented me of my cruel dealing toward him, although his deserts were
evil, seeing that his words of Prophecy proved so true, as hereafter your
worship shall plainly understand. To conclude, his evil nature and my usage
considered, I determined to forsake him for ever, and as I imagined daily
thereuppon, desirous ^o depart, this his last deed persuaded (...) fully
thereunto, and the matter chanced to fall out thus: Within two days after,
we went through the City to demand men's charities, where it had rained
much the might before, and because like wise it rayn^^ s^re tha^ ^ay, my master
went praying under certain portals ye are th^^^, where it wa^^^^^. When (...)
the rain (...) he (...), Lazaro, (...) is Without (...), for the more that
nigh^^ (...), the more earnest (...) let us draw ^^^^war^ to our lodging. But
as it chanced, we had vetweene us and home, a great wide gutier which the
(...) had (...) I (...) uncle, ^hi^ gut^er is very bro^de and svnste, so that
w^e shall have much a do to pass, notwithstanding. I have new espied one
(...) were we may well seape over (...) thought vertly then, that I had (...)
him good (...) (...) and therefore said, my good boy, now I (...) art wise, I
must (...) thee lead (...) to (...) place, where I may ^^st escape a for now
in winter it is not (...) to take water, especially to go wetshood. O how ^lad
I was then to see the (...) I had wished for, therefore without delay, I
brought him (...) vnder^^ath the portal^, and lead him right against a great
(...) stoode^^, (...) uncle (...) place of all the (...).

The (...) of the (...) and also (...), for (...) himself (...) his
understanding to (...) time of (...) to my (...) and said (...) canste (...)
take my ^ump (...) leap (...) Gods (...) for (...) him (...) I could and too^^
(...) post, as one that (...) ^^ncounter of a Bull, and the^ If (...) uncle
leap boldly as far as you can possibly, for else you may chance wet your
self. I had not (...) said the word, but that inc^ntinently the poor blind
man was ready to take his race, returning a pace or two back^ (...) the
standing (...) and so with great (...) took his leap, throwing forwar^ (...)
that at the ^ast his head took such a monstrous blow against the cruel stony
pill^^, that his head sounde^ withal as it had been a ^^ther bottell,
whereupon he sell back with his cloven pate, hal^e dead: then gave I (...)
leap and said; how now (...), ^ould you smell the sau^^dge so well, (...)
not the pillar I p^ay you? (...) a little what you can do. So I le^te him
there between the hands of (...) that came in all have to help him, and
took (...) ready way straight toward the ^owne gate, with (...) flow pace,
and then ^rotte^ so (...) forward, that before night I arrived to Tortois. After
that ti^^ I never (...) ^ought to know what God (...) with him.

(*)

How Lazaro placed him self, with a Priest, and what thing happened to him in
his service.
THE next day after doubting of mine own safety there. I departed thence and
went to a village which is called Mekeda, where I met for my sins, with a
priest, who as soon as he espied how that I demanded alms, did enquire
whether I could help to mass: I answered, saying, yes sir, that I can, as
truth it was: for although the blindman had used me scarce well, he taught me
to do a thousand feats, whereof this was one. The Priest received me for his
own: so I escaped then front the thunder and came into the tempest, yea and
God knows, how from evil, to ten times worse, for the blind man was in
comparison of this master, a great Alexander. Howbeit, he was so covetous a
nigarde, as heretofore I have rehearsed. All the misery in the world, was
enclosed within this wret^^ed priest, for he had always a great old coffer,
wherein he continually locked with a keye whith did hang at the point of his
reate, all the bread that came from the Church at offeringes, forgetting at
no (...) to (...) the same vnlorked, being (...) and buttrie. For (...) all
the house a man might discern (...) that could be eaten; neither (...) in
the chimney, nor Cheeses (...) upon sheltice, nor ye! and broken (...) corner
as common^y in other (...) which things so (...) seen and not tasted, (...) me
much: (...), was a rope of (...), in a (...) and under (...) was (...) four
days. And when I show and come for the ^^ye to talk my due, if (...) were am
stranger (...) he would (...) his hand in a his (...), and with (...), would
say, (...) immediately de^iue, (...) me again, their (...) nothing but
crainuie up meat. So that he that had heard him, would have judged there had
been under the costodie of that key, all the confectures of Valentia. But for
any thing that was there, beside the rope of Onion ye hong on a natle, the
devil him self might have had part, and of them he kept such straight
accounte, A blanke the xii. part of an English pen^e. The custom is there upon
Saturday to eat the heads, the fecte and bowels of all beasts with his
license.
that if I had taken at any time more then my ordinary, I should dearly
have bought it. After that I had continued a while with him. I was ready ^ury
hour to fall down dead for hunger. His use was, to dine and sup with as much
flesh as mounted to the value offlue blankes, whereof I was sure never to taste*
unless it were of the broth, which sometimes he would friendly part between
us, and so for bread, I would to god I might have ha^ half as much as was
sufficient. Upon Saterdayes, as the custom was in that city, he would send
me for a sheep head that should cost three Mareuedies, Two blankes a Mareuedi.
whereof when it was sod, he would eat both the eyes, the tongue, and the
brain yea, and all the flesh on both the cheek bones: Then reaching me the
platter, with a few naked bones, would say, take down this to thee, and
rejoice, seeing that thou have the world at will, I am sure the Pope him self
has now no better life than thou have: the^ would I answer him, with low
voice. God send thee always the like. I had not dwelte with him three weeks,
but I was so lean yt my legs were scarce able to bear me: the hunger was so
great which I sustained, that I never thought to escape death, unless that
Gods help and mine own industry would find some remedy to save my life. And
for to use my accustomed subt^^tie, there was not wherewithal, seeing that
there was nothing there to give assault unto: yea although there had been, I
might never have been able to deceive him, as I had done the poor blind man,
upon whom I pray God take mercy if he be dead with his last blow. For
(...) beit he was crafty, yet wanting his precious sight, I was sure be could
never see what I hourly did. But there was never man that had quicker
eyesight than this Prlest: For at offering time, the silver was not so soon
fallen into the basen, but that straight he had it registered, having always
one eye to my hand, and an other to ye people: and his eyes would so roll in
his head, as if they had been of quickesiluer. As soon as offering was done he
would take the basen out of my hands, and lay it upon the altar, so that I was
never able to deceive him of one blanks. And whiles I continued with him, (or
to say better,) whiles that I consumed my self in this miserable service, he
never sent me to the tavern, for as much as the value of a blanke in wine, but
that small quantity which he had offered on the Sunday, he kept always in
his coffer so sparingly, that it would last him all the week over. And for to
hide his covetousness, he would sometimes say unto me, my boy, all Priests
ought to be sober in eating and drinking and therefore I dare not break order as
many other do, Now you sha^ see how ye miser lied falsely therein, A Saluter is
a kind of drunke^ prophets in Spain which take upon the^ the healing of mad
dogs,
for at burials and dirges, where he had meat at other men's charges, he would
eat like a wolf, more tha^ four me^, and drink as it were a Saluter: and
because his office was always to say dirge, at such times (god forgive me) was
always an enemy to h^^ane nature, and only, because that then we should
fare well, and have meat at liberty, I wished and prayed God that he would
every day call up one to heaven. When we went to minister the sacrament to
such as were sick, my master would desire those that were (...), to pray for
the sick man, Lazaro had not eared though the king had died, so that he might
have had meare to stay his hu^ge^.
surely I was never one of the last that (...) vnstring God with all my heart,
not that he would do to the patient according is his will, (as other prayed)
but that he would dispatch him out of the world: and when any of them escaped
death, I was ready (God (...) me) to wish him at the devil, and who so ever
(...) sure to have of me many blessings, and prayers for his (...) I dwelt with
this master about sir months, and in that (...) died only vnpersons, which I
certainly slew to at (...) least, the earnest request of my pray (...) was
cause of their death: for God the father perceiving the raging hunger which I
continually sustained, reioysed (as I think) to stay them, to (...) my life
thereby, considering that otherwise my disease could not be reme^^^ (...) I
was never acease, but when we had^^ burials: The day that there was (...), my
teeth should have no work my (...) would faint, because that I had been used
sometimes to have my bet^^ filled. At such times I sounds case in nothing but
in death, which then I wished, as well for my self, as I had done before for
the sick men. I determined oftentimes to depart from that miserable master,
yet fearing so to do, for two (...), because I durst not trust^ my legs, which
by hunger were brought to great weakness, secondly, considering with my
self, saying, I have had two masters, with the first I died for hunger, whom
when I had forsaken I cha^^ed upon this other, which with the very same disease
has almost brought me to my grave: therefore I made account that if I should
forsake the second and meet with a third that were worse then these two, then
there were no remedy but plain death. Wherefore I never durst depart from
him, being assured to find all estates worse and worse, knowing that to
descend an other degree, Lazaro should be soon forgotten, being once rid out of
this world. Lazaro was a good Christian believing that all goodness came from
God.
And being in such affliction (God of his grace deliver every faithful
Christian from the like) not knowing how to counsel my self, my misery daily
increasing, upon a day, when by chance my wretched master had gone abroad,
there arrived by chance to ye door a tinker, which I believe was an Angel
disguised, sent from God, who demanded for work: I answered softly, thou
haste enough to amend in me, and I beleene more than thou can do. But as it
was no time then to delay the matter, (by divine inspiration) I said unto him,
uncle, I have lost the key of this coffer, I fear yt my master will beat
me, for gods sake look amongst your keys if there be any that will open it,
I will consider your pains: the heavenly tinker began to assay, now one key,
now another, of this great bunch, and I helped him with my prayers, so that
immediately before I was aware, he opened it: whereof I was so glad, that me
thought I did see in figure, (as they say) the face of God, when I beheld the
bread within it: and when he had done all, I said unto him, I have no money,
but take this for thy payment, so he took one of the fairest loves, and after
he had delivered me the key, he departed right well pleased, and I as well
content as he. At that time I touched nothing, partly because I perceived my
self to be the Lord of such treasure, that by reason of that keye hunger
durst never again approach me. Incontinently after, who comes in, but my
unhappy master, and as God would, he never took heed of the loaf, which the
heavenly tinker had borrowed. The next day after, as soon as he went abroad,
I began to open my paradise of bread, and what between my hands and my teeth,
with the twinkling of an eye I made a loaf invisible, forgetting in no wise to
lock the chest again: the^ I began cheerfully to sweep the house, judging ye
by such remedy I might ease my sorrowful life. So I passed that day and the
next, with much mirth. But my contrary Fortune went about to hinder me to
enjoy such pleasure long, for the third days just, a tercian ague came upon
me, in perceiving him that had slain me with hunger, at an undue hour, over
the chest, tuching and tossing, accounting and reckoning his bread. I
dissembled the matter, as I had not perceived him, and in my secret prayer and
devotion, I prayed: saint John to blind him. And after that he had been a good
while casting his acc^umpte upon his fingers, he said unto me, if it were not
that this coffer is so sure, I would say that some of my bread has been taken
away, but from henceforth I will keep good accounte of it, there is now left
nine loves besides a broken piece: then said I with low voice, nine evils God
send unto thee, It seemed unto me with that which he had said, my heart to be
pierced through with an arrowe, and my stomach began to riue for hunger,
perceiving how I was put to my former diet. He then departed out, and I opened
the said coffer to comfort my self a little, and beholding the bread, which
I dursts not touch, but worshipping it, I beheld and counted it over, to see
if the wretch had ouerreckoned him self: but I found his account more just,
that I would have wished it by the one half: the most that I could do, was
to give it a thousand kisses, and to cut a little delicately of that place
where it was cut before: and with that I passed over that day, yet not so me
rily as I did the other. But now because two or three days before I had bread
at will, the appetite in my stomach did increase in such sort, that I was
almost dead for hunger: wherefore being alone, I did nothing but open and locks
again the coffer, beholding always that bread as a God. And God himself which
succoureth those that are afflicted, seeing me in such necessity, brought a
little remedy unto my memory, which was, that I remembered with my self this
coffer to be old and broken in many places, and although the holes were
little, yet might it be thought that Mice had entered therein to damage the
bread. And to take out a whole loaf, the wretch would sone epsy the fault yet
this may be better born withal: so the^ I b^^a^ to claw the bread with my
nails, upon a simple napkin that was there, taking one loaf and leaving
another, so that of every third or fourth, I would be sure to take some
cru^mes, and even as if they were confects I did swalow the same, to comfort
my stomach. When he should come to dinner, opening his cheste, and espying
incontinently the hurt, he did judge that rats had done that spoil, for I had
so counterfeited their gnawing, that any man would have thought the same:
wherefore he sought all corners of the chest, and at the last he espied
certain holes where he suspected they had entered: whereupon he called me in
all haste, saying, Lazaro, see here what persecution has been done this night
upon our bread. I began to marvel, demanding what it should be? what should
it be said he but rats, which leave nothing wholed we went then to dinner, and
as God would I had vetter allowance then I was wont, for with his knife he pared
away all that which he thought the mice had touched, saying, take eat this my
boy, Mice are clean. I chanced ye day to fare better, for he augme^ted my
allowa^ce with ye which I had made, by the travel of my hands, or to say
truth, of my nails. We ended our dinner for all that, somewhat to sone, yet
there came another plunge upon me, perceiving how the Priest was earnest in
pulling nails out of the wall, and seeking little bourdes to slop the holes
again: wherefore I said to my self (Lord God) unto how many perils and
calamity of Fortune are human creatures subject? how short a time do the
pleasures of our troublesome life last? lo where I am now, which trusted by
this my poor remedy, to ease my misery, being in best hope of good
adventure, my evil luck would not consent, but opened the sight of my
covetous masters understanding, causing him to have more subtle wit than he
had given him by nature, although such wretches are commonly subtle enough.
When he had dummed up the holes, I thought his chest should be shut to my
comfort, and opened to my pain, and therefore I never left lamenting, until
that the curious Carpenter with his company of bourds had ended his work of
nayling, and when he had done, said: now ye traitorly Mice you must change
purpose, for there is no more profit for you in this house. As soon as ever
he went abroad, I went to view his work, and I perceived that he had not left
in his old cheste one hole unstopped, not so much as a place for a fly to get
in: notwithstanding without hope of gain I opened the chest with my
unprofitable key, and there visited two loaves begone, which he had thought
the Mice has carved, and from them once again I scraped a little quantity,
touching the^ lightly like a nimble master of defense, for necessity at that
time my mistress, caused me days and night to imagine how I might live and
seek remedy for my sore, whereunto hunger taught me the way, which commonly
makes men have ready wits. I began then to study about my affairs,
seeking means to draw some commodity out of the said covetous coffer:
perceiving one night that my master slept soundly (or at least made me
believe so) by his snorting and blowing, I rose on my feet, and as I had taken
order with my self the day before what should be done that night, I had
left an old knife which was cast about the house, in a place where it might
be found at need, and went to that happy coffer: and where it seemed to have
least defense, I gave the assault with my rustie knife, which served my turn
well for a wimble: but the chest by reason of good years, being weak, without
strength, very soft and tender, did straight ways render and consent that I
should make for my commodity a good hole in the side of it, and that done,
opening the wounded chest, and knowing every loaf severally by the touch, I
did as I had done before, and by that means being somewhat comforted, having
locked the chest again. I returned to my pallet, whereupon I slept little (and
as I think) mine evil supper was cause of that, for otherwise, at that time
of the night the king of France his cares could never break me of my sleep.
On the morning the Priest my master perceiving the hurt which was done as well
to the bread as to the coffer, began to curse the Mice, saying, what means
this? there was never Mouse wont to go here before now-and certainly his words
were true, for if any house in the whole kingdom might be priuileged from Mice
it might be his, for Mice are never wont to dwell where no parings of meat do
fall. But now he began again to seek nails about the ways, and little
bourds, to make defense against the traitorous Mice: but as soon as night came
that he went to his rest. I rose up with my tools, and looked what he stopped
in the day time, I broke up again in the night: finally, the one and the other
of us took such pain, that this proverb was fulfild, when one door is shut
the other opens: at ye last, we seemed to have Penelopes wcb in hand, what
so ever he wrought in the day, I undid again in the night, in so much ye we
brought the poor coffer to such estate, ye who so ever would properly talk of
it, might compare it to an old boat or briga^tin, for that number of old
nails that was driven into each side of it, when he saw his remedy prevailed
not he said, this coffer is so old and so weak, that it is no longer able to
defend our vittalles from vermin, it is now at that point yt if I meddle
any more with it, them ore it will decay, and so at length be able to do us no
service at all, and peradventure evil fortune will cause me spend two or
three shillinges to buy an other: the best remedy that I can find, seeing this
does not prevail, is to set up a trappe within it, to take these cruel rats:
whereupon he went in mediatly and borrowed one of his neighbors, which he had
continually bent within the coffer, with a bait of cheese paring, which was
laid only for my comfort and ease, for although I could well have eaten my
bread alone, without ye help of any thing else, to cause my appetite, yet the
cheese paring which I would pull out of the trappe, gave me trim taste with
my mouse eaten bread. But when he should perceive the bread so spoiled with
ra^t^s, and the cheese eaten, and the rat that did the deed not taken, then
would he wish the trap at the devil, demanding of his neighbors what it
might be, that the cheese should be eaten, and the Rat not taken, yea and the
trap fallen? the neighbors would answer that it was no rat that did that
harm, ^akes are ^ot there to ^ort much in (...) h^u^^ for food.
for at one time or other she had been taken. And amongst the rest one said,
I do remember that a snake was wont to haunts your house, and by all reason
it is she that has done the deed, for she being long, might easily eat
the cheese, and although the trap did fall, yet because her body entered not in
all, she might well and easily get out and escape. This neighbors saying did
satisfy the whole com^anie, and especially my master, which from that time
forward never slept one night s^undely, for when he had heard the least noise
amongst the wood, he would think that it were the S^^ke gnawing the coffer,
wherefore he would straight be up with a cudgel, which fithence he entr^d into
such suspectio^, was always ready at his beds head, where with he would beat
the poor coffer so hard^, to fear the snake, that he waken all the neghbours
with the noise. And as for me, I never sl^pt, for often times in the night he
would turn me and my pallet over and over, thinking that the snake had gotten
thit^er into my bed or into my apparel, for he was informed, that those
beasts oftentimes seking heat, have come into childrens Cradles, and b^tten
them to death. I would always make as though I slept: then he would in the
morning say unto me O Lazaro, have thou heard no noise this night. I did
pursue the Snak, and I was ^afraid (...) had gotten into thy bed, for they are
cold, and therefore seek heat. Then answered I, I pray God she has not
bitten me. I fear Snakes as the ^euil. He continued in such fearful famaste,
that he never slepte, so that and bering the Snake, du^st never approach the
coffer, but only in the day time, whiles he was at Church, or abroad in
(...) town, then would I make my assault: whereof when he had knowledge,
perceiving that he was not able to find any further remedy, would every night
(^s I have told you) be raging mad. All that I feared then was, that he with
his diligence w^ulde meet with my privy key which I had hid under the
bedstrawe: But for more surety, at night tim^ I would a waves keep it in my
mouth, for when that I dwelt with the blind man, I had brought my mouth to such
use by conueying money into it, that it served me often for a purpose. I can
well remember, when sometimes I have had in it.xiitj. or xv. deniers, and not
hindered my eating, otherwise I had never beens master of denier, but that the
curssed blind man would have found it out, not leaving one seame or wrinckle
of my coat unsought. Therefore as I tell you, I did every night put the keye
in my mouth for a safegarde, and by that means I slepte soundly, not fearing
that he should find it. Notwithstanding, when that the evil hour could not
be escaped, my diligence was all but vain: it pleased my fatal destenie (or
to say truth) my sins, that upon a night when I was asleep, the keye
happened so to turn in my mouth, being wide open, in such sort, that my
breath coming forth through the hole of the keye, which was hollow, made
such loud whistling (as evil fortune would) that my careful master heard
it, who thought certainly that it had been the hissing of the Snake, (as
surely it might be like) he rose up very softly holding his cudgel fast, and
by the noise of the hissing came by little and little straight to me, without
making any noise, to the intent the Snake should not hear him. When he was
neers me, he thought certainly that the Snake was there in the straw,
wherefore he lifted up his cudgel to kill her, and with all his strength he
discharged upon my head such a cruel blow, that he wounded me to death.
Whereupon, he knowing that he had stricken me, belike by the groaning that I
made after the receipt of the blow, suspecting what had happened, cried out to
awake me, but as soon as he touched me with his hands, he felt abundance of
blood issue out of my head: wherefore considering what hurt he had done me,
he went in haste for a candle, and retourning with it in his hand, found me
groaning and gasping with my keye in my mouth, which I never let go, being
half out, even as it was when it made such hissing, whereat the killer of
Snakes marvelled, especially when he beheld the keye, which he took out of
my mouth, and vewing it, he perceived what it was, for in workmanship it
differs nothing from his. But for more surety he went streighte to prove
it, and so then espied the whole disceit. God knows then how he bragged,
that he had taken the Rat and the Snake that had made him such war, and that
so destroyed his bread: what happened the three days following, I am not able
to tell, for I was as it were in a whales belly (but only this that I have
told you: which I had heard my master report, after that I was returned to my
self, for he declared the whole matter to as many as came in and out. The
third day after, I began to recover, maruelling much, when I perceived my self
being in my straw, my head full of plasters, oils, and ointments, and being
thereat amazed, I said what meneth this? The priest then answered, the meaning
of this is, that I had chased away the Ratte and the Snake that have done me
such hurt: then calling to mind my affairs, I susspected my hurt, and the
cause thereof: then came there in an old woman, with certain of the
neighbors, to undo the cloutes about my head, and to dress my wounds, and
being glad to see me recovered, said, there is no danger, now in him, seeing
that he has his senses, they began then to recite my afflictions, they
laughing and I weeping. After all this, they gave me meat, I being almost dead
for hunger. Much a do they had to recover me, but by little and little I wared
strong, and at.xv. days end, I rose up and was out of danger, yet not
without hunger, howebeit half healed. The next day after that I rose, my
master took me by ye hand, and brought me out at the door, and leaving me in
the streate, said unto me: Lazaro, from this day forth, thou shall be at
thine own liberty, and not under my subjection, the Lord be with thee: go
seek thee a master, I have no need of such a diligent sernaunt, it is not
possible, but that thou have been servant to some blind man. And therewith
blessing him self from me, as though I had been possessed with some evil
spirit, he ge^teth him in and locketh fast his door.

How Lazaro places him self to serve a Squire, and what happened to him in
his service.
BY this means I was forced to help my self being weak, and shortly after,
I came by help of good people, to this noble city of Toledo, where (I thank
God) my wound closed up. As long as I was sick, every man gave me his
charity, but after that I was once whole, every man would say, thou vacabond
and leiterer, why do thou not seek a master? Then I murmuring with my self,
would say, and where the devil shall I find him, unless God, as he made the
world, make me one. But now Idemanding alms from door to door for Gods sake, I
found little remedy, for charity had then ascended up to heaven. At the last
God caused me to meet with a squire which walked through the streate, in very
sumptuous apparel, and cleanly, his pace in going well measured after good
order. He beheld me and I him, and he said unto me: boy, do thou want a
matter? I answered, I would feign have a good master sir. Then follow me
said he: God has sent thee good fortune to meet with me, thou have prayed
well this day, I thank God, for that which I had heard him say, and for that
he seemed by his behavior and countenances to be even he, that I had so much
longed for. I met with this third master betime in the morning, and he led
me after him thorough the most part of the city: we passed through the
market place, where there was sold bread, and other provision: Gentlemen use to
buy their meat in the market them selves.
I looked when he would have lode^ me there with meat, for it was then, that
every man provided and bought things necessary for their dinner. But with
comely and large pace he went by, and left that place behind him: then I said
to my self, There is not such provision of meat in Spain as there is in
England.
peradventure hes does not see here that which does content him, he will
buy in an other place: we walked so long that the clock strok eleven, then
went he to the chief Church, and I after him, where I saw him most devoutly
hear service, when all was ended, and the people departed, he came ou^ of the
Church and marched loysurely do^^ne a streate: He went so let to the Church to
came that his dinner might be made ready.
and as for me, I went joyfully, the best content in the world, perceiving
how that we did not stay to seek our dinner, imagining that this my new
master had been some great personage, and that he had his house pr^uided
before hand, that we should find dinner ready, yea such as I desired, and as
I had need of. At that tune the clock stroke one after noone, when we
arrived at a house before the which my master had stayed I with him, then he
throwing his cloak over his leaf^e shoulder very ciuilly, drew out a key out
of his sleue to open his door, we then entered in, the entrance whereof was so
dark and unhandsome, that it might fear any man living to enter in, how be
it, there was within it a pretty little count and reasonable chambers: and when
we were within, he puts off his cloak, demanding me whether my hands
were clean, we shook it, and then doubled it handsomely, and after he had
blown cleanly the dust away from an old benche that was there, he laid it
up: that being done, he sat him down, demanding of me at large what country
man I was, and how I came to the city: I gave him a larger account than I was
willing: for I thought it a more convenient time to command me to lay the
cloth, and to take out pottage, than to make such inquiraunce: yet for all
that, bringing forth the best lies I could frame for my self, I made him
account what I was, reckening all the goodness that was in my personage,
leaving apart all that which I thought was not to be rehearsed in that place:
when I had declared all he stayed a while, and by that time I did see an evil
slgne: for it was almost two a clock, and yet he was no readier to dine tha^
he that had been dead. I marvelled moreover, when I perceived that he had
locked his door with his key, and that I could not hear any living creature
stur, neither above, nor beneath: all that ever I did see was the naked walls,
As the Priest had.
not so much, as a chair or ^^oole, nor a table, nor yet a coffer, as the
other man had: finally you would have said, it had been a house, not
inhabited. A while after he demanded me whether I had dyned, I answered
saying, no sir, for it was not eight a clock when I met with your mastership
this morning, (then said he) as early as it was, I had broken my fast, and
whenever I break my fast in the morning, I never eat again until it be
night, therefore pass thou over the time as well as thou can, and we will
make amends at supper: your worship may well think that when I heard these
words I was ready to fall down dead, not so much for hunger, as for plainly
perceiving, that then fortune was altogether mine ennemie. Then began my
sorrows to appear unto me again, and I to lament my misfortune: then came
there to my mind, the consideration that I made when I was about to depart
from the Priest, Poor Lazero did bear his masters dinner and his own in his
boson e for fear of leesing it.
weyghing with my self, that although he was most wretched and miserable, yet
peradventure I might meet with a worsse: finally, I lamented and wept my
troublesome life that was paste, and my death that did approach: and yet for all
this I dissembled the matter as well as I could, and said unto him, sir I
thank God, I am a boy that does not greatly care for eating and drinking, for
I may well compare with any of my age for sobernes and measure in eating, and
so have I been always esteemed of as many masters as I have served: be then
answered saying, it is a virtue to live soberly, therefore I commend thee
much: Pogs fill them selves, and wyso men eat discreetely what is only
sufficient for them. I now understand you well sir, said I to my self,
evil luck light upon such virtue and goodness as these my masters do
find in hunger: immediately after all this, I conveyed my self behind the
door, where I drew certain pieces of bread out of my bosom, which were left
of that I had received for Gods sake two days before. But he perceiving
me, said, come hither boy, what do thou eat? I came unto him, and did
show thr bread, whereof he took a piece, which of two or three was the
best and the biggest, saying, by my soul me thinks this bread is good and
sauarouse: yea mary sy^, at this time especially, said: I. Is so in deed said
he, but where had thou it, was it molded with clean hands? that I know not
said I, howbeit I find it good. I pray God it be clean, said the poor
Gentleman: and with that putting his hand to his mouth, devoured quickly all
that I had given him: and somewhat before we had ended, he said, by God this
bread has a good taste, how sauerous it is. And as for me then, I perceived
upon which foot he halted, I made have to eat, perceiving him to be so
disposed, that if he had made an end before me, I thought he would gently have
offered to help me: therefore we ended both at one time in good order. He
began then with his hand to brushe away a few crummes, which had feign upon
his breast, In Spain many, drink nothing but water, and some that may have
wine; but this square drank it for want of better.
and after that entered into a chamber that was there, and thence brought
forth an old pot broken mouthed, and drank well, and then he offered me the
pot. But I to seem sober and modest, said sir I drink no wine: it is water,
said he, thou may well drink of it: then I took the pot, but I drank not
much, for it was not thrust, but hunger that troubled me. We passed the time so
until that it was night, reasoning of sundry matters which he demanded of
me, whercunto I answered as well as I could. Then we entered into the chamber
from whence he had brought forth his drinking pot, he saying: boy, go to
the other side, and mark how we make this bed, that thou may know how to
make it from henceforth. I went to the one side and he to the other, and made
the poor bed, which was an easy matter to do, for it was thus as I will tell
you: A sheep hurdell laid ouerhwarte two trefles, a silly rotten hard
matresse, and upon that his bed clothes, which by reason of seldom washing
could not be discerned in color from the matresse, the which had not half so
much wool as need required: we turned it to make it soft, but that was
impossible to do, for ver^e hard it is for a man to make a hard thing soft,
and the devil a thing was within the cruel mattresse at all, for when it was
spread upon the hurdle of big^^ sticks, every stick appeared through, en^ as
like as could be, to the ribs of a carian this time especially, said: I. Is so
in deed said he, but where had thou it, was it molded with clean hands?
that I know not said I, howbeit I find it good. I pray God it be clean, said
the poor Gentleman: and with that putting his hand to his mouth, devoured
quickly all that I had given him: and somewhat before we had ended, he said, by
God this bread has a good taste, how sauerous it is. And as for me then, I
perceived upon which foot he halted, I made have to eat, perceiving him to be
so disposed, that if he had made an end before me, I thought he would gently
have offered to help me: therefore we ended both at one time in good order.
He began then with his hand to brushe away a few crummes, which had feign upon
his breast, In Spain many, drink nothing but water, and some that may have
wine; but this squ^e drankest for want of better.
and after that entered into a chamber that was there, and thence brought
forth an old pot broken mouthed, and drank well, and then be offered me the
pot. But I to seem sober and modest, said sir I drink no wine: it is water,
said he, thou may well drink of it: then I took the port, but I drank not
much, for it was not thrust, but hunger that troubled me. We passed the time so
until that it was night, reasoning of sundry matters which he demanded of
me, whercunto I answered as well as I could. Then we entered into the chamber
from whence he had brought forth his drinking pot, he saying: boy, go to
the other side, and mark how we make this bed, that thou may know how to
make it from henceforth. I went to the one side and he to the other, and made
the poor bed, which was an easy matter to do, for it was thus as I will tell
you: A sheep hurdell laid ouerhwarte two tresles, a silly rotten hard
matresse, and upon that his bed clothes, which by reason of seldom washing
could not be discerned in color from the matresse, the which had not half so
much wool as need required: we turned it to make it soft, but that was
impossible to do, for verse hard it is for a man to make a hard thing soft,
and the devil a thing was within the cruel mattresse at all, for when it was
spread upon the hurdle of biggs sticks, every stick appeared through, en^ as
like as could be, to the ribs of a carian lean Hog, we spread upon the
hungry miserable matris, a couerlet suitable to the rest of the stuff, what
stuff it was off. I can not well devise: before that we had made the beds
it was night, and he said: Lazaro, it is now late, and from hence to the
market place where provision of meat is sold, it is a long way, The streets
are natrowe and dark few lanternes are ho^g out.
and besides that ruffians and thieves do meet men every night to spoil them
of their cloakes and caps in the dark, therefore let us pass over this night
as well as we may, to morrow God will provide better for us. I am not provided
of meat because I have been hitherto alone with out a servant, and I have
always taken my meals in the City, but from henceforth we will keep a
new order: sir said I, take no care for me, I can pass over one night, and
more if need be without meat, and that will be cause that thou shall live
longer said he, for as wise men affirm, there is nothing that can make a
mancliue longer than to eat a little. If that be true said I to my self. I
shall neu^r di^^for I have always been constrained to keep that rule, and I
think I am fortuned to observe it as long as I live. After all this he went
to bed, making his hose and his dubled his bolster, and causing me to lie at
his feet, where I never slept wink, for the hard hurdle never left galling
my naked bones, which by hunger and sorrow together, had not lest on them nor
yet on all my body besides, and ounce of flesh: Hunger is always an enemy to
sleep.
and as I chanced to eat nothing that day, my brain was so light, that I
could never take rest. Wherefore (God forgive me) I cursed my self and my
fortune a thousand times, and that which was worse than all this, I never durst
change sides for fear of waking him: wherefore I desired death. The next
morning when he rose, he began to shake and to make clean his hose, his
dublet, and his cloak, I was his brushe, so he araide himself at leisure: I
gave him then water for his hands, and when he had occupied his comb, he
takes his sword and kisseth the pommel, and as he was putting it to his
girdle, said unto me: My boy, if thou knew what a blade this is, ye
would marvel, there is no gold that can buy it of me, for of as many as
Antonio made, he could never give such temper to any as he gave this: then
drawing it out of the scabbarde he tasted ye edge with his fingers, saying,
scest thou it? I dare undertake to cut asunder with it a whole fleece of wool:
I answered him softely to my self, saying, and I with my teeth though they be
not of such hard metal a loaf of bread weighing iiu. pound. Then up went
the sword again, hanging it at his girdle. and after all this he marched out
into the streate, with a leasurely well measured pace, holding his body
straight, making therewith and with his head a very good countenance, casting
the end of his cloak sometimes upon his shoulder, and otherwhyles under his
arm, with his right hand always on his side, and as he was going forth said,
Lazaro, look well about the house, while I do go and hear service, make the
bed, and then fetch some water here at the river beneath, look thedoore
least any body rob us, and lay the keye underneath ye threshold, that I may
come in: he went up the streate with such comely gesture and countenance, that
he that had not known him, would have judged him to have been nere kinsman
unto the high Constable of Spain. or at the least his chief Chamberlein. I
remained then alone, saying to my self, blessed art thou O God which sendest
the sickness and give the remedy, who would think that should meet my Lord
and master, with such gesture and cou^tena^ce, but that he had supped well
yesternight, yea and that he had slept in a good bed? and although it be now
early, who would think but that he had broken his fast well? Great are thy
secret doings O lord, and all people are ignorant of them: might not his good
disposition, his reasonable cloak and coat deceive any man? who would
distruste that such a noble Gentleman had eaten nothing all yesterday, but one
piece of bread which his servant Lazaro had kept in the chest of his bosom a
day and a night, so that it could not be (to say ye truth) very clean? who
would suspect that he had dried this morning his face and his hands upon the
skirts of his coat for want of a towell? I am certain no man would judge it in
him, O Lord how many are there in the world, that are in such bravery as
this my master is in, which do suffer more for a little vain glories sake,
than they would do for the love of thee. I stood in the door so long
remembering all those things, that my master passed through a long and narrow
street, then I went in, and within a minute of an hour, I visited the whole
house above and beneat, without staying, or finding whereat to stay. When I had
made the unlucky b^dde, I took my pot and went streighte to the River, and
being ready to take up my water, I might perceive my master in a Garden over
the water, in great talk with two comely women, which by their countenance
seemed to be some of them, whereof in Toledo a number are rifely found: and many
of them take an use of going abroad early in the morning in Summer time, to
take the air in those Gardens, and to break their fast without provision of
their own under trees and shadows, nere that pleasant River, trusting to
find out some that would beflowe charges upon them, especially such as they
had accustomed thereto, such lusty young soldiers of the city as delighted
in such pastime. He was (as I mean to tell you) between these women devising
and counterfaiting all kind of bravery, reciting more pleasant and sweet
words than ever Ouide wrote: but when they perceived ye their beauty had
vanquished him clean, and that he was left without shame, they demanded of
him their breakefast, and he therefore to have the accustomed payment. Whereupon
he bing as cold in the purrse as he was hot in stomach, fell in such a
trance, that he lost all the color in his face: his tongue not able to talk,
was feign to allege vain excuses. But they which in their science were well
instructed, when they perceived his infirmity, they gave him over for such a
one as he was indeed. All this while I was breaking my fast with stalks of
colworts, and when I had done, like a diligent servant, not seen of my
master, returned home, meaning to sweep some part of the house that had
most need: but I could not find wherewithal to do the deed. Wherefore not
knowing what to do, I began in the world, that are in such bravery as this my
master is in, which do suffer more for a little vain glories sake, than they
would do for the love of thee. I stood in the door so long remembering all
those things, that my master passed through a long and narrow street, then I
went in, and within a minute of an hour, I visited the whole house above and
beneat, without staying, or finding whereat to stay. When I had made the unlucky
b^dde, I took my pot and went streighte to the River, and being ready to take
up my water, I might perceive my master in a Garden over the water, in great
talk with two comely women, which by their countenance seemed to be some of
them, whereof in Toledo a number are rifely found: and many of them take an use
of going abroad carly in the morning in Summer time, to take the air in those
Gardens, and to break their fast without provision of their own under trees
and shadows, nere that pleasant River, trusting to find out some that would
beflowe charges upon them, especially such as they had accustomed thereto,
such lusty young soldiers of the city as delighted in such pastime. He was
(as I mean to tell you) between these women devising and counterfaiting all
kind of bravery, reciting more pleasant and sweet words than ever Ouide
wrote: but when they perceived ye their beauty had vanquished him clean, and
that he was left without shame, they demanded of him their breakefast, and he
therefore to have the accustomed payment. Whereupon he bing as cold in the
purrse as he was hot in stomach, fell in such a trance, that he lost all
the color in his face: his tongue not able to talk, was feign to allege vain
excuses. But they which in their science were well instructed, when they
perceived his infirmity, they gave him over for such a one as he was
indeed. All this while I was breaking my fast with stalks of colworts, and
when I had done, like a diligent servant, not seen of my master, returned
home, meaning to sweep some part of the house that had most need: but I
could not find wherewithal to do the deed. Wherefore not knowing what to do,
I began to muse wherein I should occupy my self, master study, I determined to
tarry until noone, that my master came, for peradventure he would bring
somethings with him for us to eat: wherefore I tarried his coming, yet all for
nothing, for it was now two a cloc6ke, and be not yet come: but because
hunger oppressed me sore, I came out and locked the door, laying the key where
he had commanded, with a low and a sorrowful voice, my hands thrust into my
bosom, I began to return to my former practice, in so much, that having GOD
before mine eyes, and my tongue, in his name, I fell to beg bread from door to
door, and from house to house, where I thought best to speed, having learned
this trade in my sucking years, I mean with the blind master, I became
such a scholar, that although in that City there was small charity, nor the
peace was not abundant, yet notwithstanding I had put my affairs in such
good order, that before the clock stroke four, I had laid a pound of bread
in my belly, and twice as much in my hoseme and sleeves. I returned then
homewarde, and in my way wents through the streets where they sold tripes,
where I demanded a woman ye was there her charity, she gave me a piece of a
neats foot, and a few sodden tripes.

When I came home, my curteouse master was within, having folded his cloak and
laid it up* walking up and down the court: and as soon as he did see me, he
came toward me, wherefore I feared he would have beaten me, because I had
laried so long, but it was not Gods will. The first thing he demanded me,
was, where I had been? I answered, sir I was here until it was two a clock, and
when I perceived that your maistership came not, I went forth into the city,
to recommende my self to good people, which have given me thus much for gods
sake, and so showed him the tripes which I kept in the skirt of my coat,
whereat he made no angry countenance, but fayde, I have ^^^ried for thee to
dinner, and because I could not see thee come, I dined alone, as for thee, thou
have done like an honest boy, for it is better to beg than to steal, as God
help me I am of that opinion, one thing only I will desire thee to do, that
thou will not let them know that thou do dwell with me, nor that I am thy
master: For that touched mine honor, and I do not doubt but that will be kept
secret for very few do know me in this city, I would to God I had never come
to it. Of that matter sir take you no care, said I, for no man will ask me
that question, I need not therefore make such account to any of them. But why
do thou not fall now to thy vittels poor foul, if it be Gods will we
shall soon be out of this misery: thou shall understand, that sithence I
came in hither, I had never good hour, this house is surely built in an
unhappy place, and certainly some houses are so unlucky, that look
whosoever does dwell within them, he shall be sure to have evil fortune.
But I promise thee, that as soon as the month is ended, I will not dwell
here, (no though they would give it me rent free.) I fall down then, and
because he should not think me a covetous glutton, I drew out my vittels,
and there began to suppe honestly, biting my tripes with my bread handsomely,
beholding dissemblingly my miserable master, which had his cye always upon
my skirte, being at that time my only platter. God take such compassion on
me, as I did then upon him, for I had oftentimes endured, yea and daily felt
that sorrow, which I knew tormented him: wherefore I imagined with my self,
how I might well inuire him: but because he told me that he had dyned, I was
afraid least he would refuse the bankst. Finally, I wished that the poor man
would have eased his pain, by help of mine, and that he would have eaten with
me for company, as he had done the day before, especially, because ye then I
had better vittels, and more store, and moreover that then my hunger was less:
it pleased God to accomplish my desire and his together, for when as I had
begone my meat, as he walked he came near to me, saying, Lazaro I promise
thee thou have the best grace in eating that ever I did see any man have, for
there is no man that sees thee eat, but by seeing thee feed, shall have
appetite, I did pity him, rather then hate him, for oftentimes with carrying
him home wherewith to pass the day, I felt griefs my self. One morning, the
poor gentleman rose up in his shirt, and went up to the top of the house, to
ease hun self, and in the mean season to he out of the suspicion that I was
in, I unfolded his dublet and his hose, which were his boulster, and there
founte a little purse of velvet, which had a hundredth wrinkels in it, but the
devil a penny, nor yet any^ stgne that there had been any there long time
before. Then did I say to my self, this man is poor, no man can give that
which he has not: but my covetous blind man, and my wretched priest, unto
whom God has given so much goods, ye one got with smoth hand, the other gained
with his loose tongue, and yet they famished me continually: there was good
reason why I should hate such people, so is the cause, why this man's case
should be lamented. God knows that when I met with any of his estate, being
of like gravity, pace, and countenance, how I pitied them, thinking that they
did endure that which I did see him daily suffer, whom I hadd rather ser^^ for
all his poverty, than any of the other for the causes above named. I did like
him well, but only ye me thought he was to presumptuous, where I often wished
that seeing he so plainly perceived his own poverty, he would something
have hid his fa^tastical pride. But as I think, it is a ro^mon usual rule
amongst such as he, which though they have not a cross in the world, nor a
Denier, the cappe must needs stand in his old place: but if GOD of his
mercy do not order the matter, all such are like to dye of that vile
disease. As I continued in such estate, sustaining the life that I have told
you, my evil fortune which never ceased to pursue me, would not yet suffer
me to continue in that troublesome and shameful kind of life. For the matter
happened thus: the Lords of the counsel made proclamation with sound of
trumpet, because that that year there was searcitie of corn, all poor people
being strangers, should forsake the City, upon pain that he which from
thencefoorthe should be taken, should be punished with s^^pes: and so exeruting
the law, within th^^ days after the pr^^ amatio^, I saw a whole procession of
poor folk whipped theough the four principal streets, which sight did so
fear me, that never after I durst venture to beg. The^ might you have seen a
strange diet we kep^ at home, and the great silence that was there so that we
were constrained to fast two or three days together, without eating any
morsel, or speaking a word: and as for me, the best shifte I made, was
amongst ^ertaine poor worden, which were spinners and cap knitters, (...) my
life, by reason of the aquaintance I had with them, being our (...) neighbors:
For of that meat they had I should have a little, wherewith I did not so lament
mine own case, as I did my poor masters, which in eighto days did not ca^e
one morsel, at the least, we were so long at home without meat, but in deed
I know not whether he went, nor what he did eat abr^^^^, yet notwithstanding,
for all this, you should see him come some times up the street, with a body
as large as any grehounds of good race: and for to maintain his poor honor,
he was wont to take a straw in his hand, whereof also there was want in our
house, Small need to pick his teeth for any meat he had e^ten.
and standing without the door, would therewith pick those which had little
need of picking, for any thing that had stuck in them with eating. Lamenting
still the vuluckinesse of that house, he would say, it greueth me, to see how
all our sorrow comes of this house, thou see how vnconfortable and dark
it is, and as long as we dwell here, we are like to be thus tormented,
therefore I would to God the month were ended, that we might depart out of
it. And as we continued in this afflicted and famishing persecution, one day a
rial entered into the power of my master, Six pence English.
I know not by what good luck and adventure, wherewith he came home so
blowing, Belike some g^^^^ers had ^^uen it him and it was full time.
as if he had brought with him the whole treasure of Venice, and so with a merry
and lively countenance he gives it to me, saying, take here Iazaro, now God
begins to open his hand, and to smile upon us, go quickly to the market
place, and buy bread, wine and flesh, that we may break the devils envious
eye: and furthermore, because thou shall have good cause to rejoice, thou shall
understand, that I have hired an other house, therefore, the month once ended,
we will no longer abide in this miserable unlucky house, cursed be it, and he
that laid the first tile on it, for in evil time did I come in. By our lord
all the time that I have been here, I never drank drop of wine, nor a morsel
of flesh entered into my belly, nor yet have I had any rest in it, such is the
sorrow and misery that belongs to it, go thy ways and make speed, and
let us dine this day like Earls. Then I took my riall and my pot, and with
all haste, I began to go up the street, toward the market place, with joy
and mirth. But what profits all this, now that I am borne under such a
planet that I can never enjoy any pleasure long, without hyndraunce, (it
appears so now) for as I went on my way, making my accounte how I should
bestow my money upon that which should be most profitable and best, giving
infinite thanks to God (that he had given my master that money) upon a sudden
I might see right before me a dead coarse come down the street, accompanied
with many priests and other people: I leaned to the wall to give them place,
and the coarse went by, I might see a woman which belike was the dead man's
wife, following the beer, all in mourning weed, accompanied with other women,
and she weeping and lamenting, said: O my husband and my lord, alas, whether
do they ^arie you? to the vnconfortable and sad house, to the dark and
sorrowful house, to the house where they never eat nor drink? When I had
heard her speak these words, me thought heaven and earth had met, and I
said, O unfortunate wretch that I am; they carry this dead coarse to our house:
wherefore I forsook my way, and brake in between the people, and running
down the street as fast as ever I could, I got into the house, and when I had
entered therein, I locked the door with all haste, calling out to my master
for stranger long before, by reasou that he had so little acquaintance with
those of the City. Finally, my wish was accomplished, and I understood that
which I coueted to know: for upon a day, after that he had dyned reasonably
well, he being at that time indifferently well sati^^^ed, declared unto me
his affairs, in so much that he certified me, that he was borne in Castilia
the old, and how that he had forsaken his country for nothing in the world,
but because he would not abase him self so much as put off his cappe to a
Genleman his neighbor: and having heard all his discourse, I said unto him,
sir if he were such a one as you say, and besides that, if he were richer than
you, it had been but your duty to put off your cappe first to him, for I
believe he would have done the like to you: in deed he is a gentleman, and
richer than I, and he would always put off his cap to the uttermost, when I did
put off mine, but seeing that oftentimes mine was first off, reason would have
required, that his should once have bin first, and so have won of me by quick
hand, the courtesse. As for me said I. I would never have had regard to that.
Thou art a child said he, and therefore thou know not what does belong to
honor, which at this day is the only refuge of such as be honest:
therefore thou shall understand, that I am as thou see a poor esqire, and I
make a vow to God, that if I should meet in ye midst of the street an Earl,
that would not put his cap altogether off, as well as I do mine, the next time I
see him come, I will enter into some house, as if I had some business there,
or else cross over into an other street, if there be any between me and
him, so that I shall not need to put of my cappe to him, for a Gentleman is
bound to none but to God and the Prince, and therefore it is reason that an
honest man shall be curious to esteem his own person. I do remember that
upon a day, I dishonored, and had almost beaten a crafts man where I was
borne, because that when so ever he met me, he would say Mantenga deos a vim,
which is to say, Sir, God maintain your worship: I took him once with the
deed, and said, will streght bid you fare well, and most commonly, their
wages is paid with long terms, sometime your meat and drink only for your
painful service. And when they mean to reform their conscience, and to
consider the servant pain, there shall be delivered out of the wardrobe,
some cut dublet, or some thread bare cloak, or coat: but when a man serves a
Noble man of the Order, he shall better pass over his misery: but
peradne^ture there is not in me ability to serve and to content such men. By
God if I had met with one of them, I think certainly, I should quickly have
been chiese of his counsel, for I would have done him a thousad kind of
services. I could have disembled as well as any other, yea and pleased him a
thousa^efolde, that it would have been marvelous, I would have smiled merrily at
his doings, although they had not been the best in the world, I would never
have recited that which should have displeased him, no although it had been
much for his profit, most diligent about his person in word and dorde, never
vering my self about the well doing of thing (...) that should never come to
his sight, but sometimes have chid such as served, where he might hear me,
that I might se^me to be careful, about that which touched him and whenever
he should happen to fall out with any of his men, then would I put forth two or
three smooth words to set him forward, which should seem to be in the favor of
the offender, affirming always that which I thought he liked of: and on the
contrary side, a malicious mocker of the ignorant and rude sort: furthermore,
I would always demand and procure, how to know the lives of strangers, to
account them unto him, with other suchtricks of like quality which at this day
are used in great palaces and courts, and which please the chief dwellers
herein, which can not abide to see in their houses virtuous men, but do abhor,
and esteem them as naught, despising and calling them fools, and ignorant in
the traffic of weight is affairs so that the Lord ta^ not safely trust to
their simple doings in weighty matters: therefore now a days, those that are
subtle and crafty, get into favor, and use such means as cheth unto me,
and taking fast hold on the collar of my coat, said: thou art prisoner,
unless thou tell where thy master his goods are become: but as never no man
had taken hold on me in that place before saving only my blind master, who
never laid han^e on me so rudely, but ge^tly, that I might lead him that
could not see, I was afraid, and crying mercy, I promised to tell all that they
demanded. Go to the^, say they, say on gods name what thou know and be not
afraid: the Scriuener sits down in haste, to write the Inventory,
dema^ding what goods he had. I then began to declare what I knew, saying, sir,
the goods that he has, or at least that which he told me he had, was a
piece of ground, where foundation of houses is laid, and moreover a Dove
house, which is feign, Well said (say they) my boy, though that be little worth,
it is sufficient to pay us, In what place of the City stands it, (say they)
I answered, mary it stands a good way hence in his own country. The matter
is then in a fair case (say they) but where is his country: he told me that he
was borne in Castilia the old: the Sergeant, and the Scriuener, laughing apace,
said, this confession is sufficient for you to recover the debte (though it
were greater) the neighbors that were there present, said, this child is an
innocent, and he has not dwelt long with the Squire, therefore he knows no
more of him than you do, he has oftentimes come to us, and we have given him
such meat as we had, for Gods sake, and at nights gone in to lie with his
master: when they perceived my innoce^cie, they did set me at liberty. The
Sergeant and the Scriuener did demand of the man and the woman their fee,
whereupon there rose great contention, and they alleged that they were not
bound to pay, seeing that there was no execution made, esperially, seeing there
was not wherewithal: the officers alleged, for that coming thither, they had
left undone matters of much greater importance: finally, after many angry
words, a poor carier was laden with the old matteris, which was the woman's,
scante half a ^dade to the bearer: then went they all flue out together
chyding, what became of them after. I know not, I believe the poor mattris
paid for all. And thus as I tell you, I lost my third inaster when as I fully
perceived evil fortune wrought altogether against me, in so much that my
affairs went so back ward, that where as master ear wont to be forsaken of
their servants, it was not so with me, but my master was feign to forsake me,
yea and run away in have.

How Lazaro places him self to dwell with a Friar of the Abbey of Grace.
I Was then constrained to seek the fourth master, which was a Friar of the
Abbey of Grace, unto whom the poor women which I have to^de you off,
preferred me. They called him cousin. This man was an enemy to the Quire, not
liking well of his meals in the covent, a man lost for going abroad, ^estr^us
to see worldly affairs and visitations, wherefore I think that he alone did
tear more shoes than all the rest of his brethren: it was he that gave me the
first shoes that ever I wore in all my life, which lasted me but eighte days,
for he never left trotting abroad: wherefore for this, and for other small
matters, which at this time I will not speak of, I was feign to forsake him.

How Lazaro places him self with a Pardoner, and What things happened to him
in his service.
I Met by evil chance with the fifth master, which was an vtterer of Pardons,
the disceitfullest merchant and the most sham^lesse, that ever I did see, or
any man else: for to dispatch away his pardons, he had fine means and
traficke, and daily imagined therefore most subtle inventions. As soon as he
arriu^d to such towns, were he should utter his pardons, he w^ld first present
some gift of small value or substance to the Priests and Curates of that
place: sometimes a Cabadge lettis, a couple of Lemuio^s or Oranges: otherwhiles
an apricocke, or else a couple of Meaches, or at the least, to every one a
fair Pear: and by that means he went about to make them his friends, that they
might favor his affairs, and cause their parishioners to receive the
pardons: yea, and that they should thank him, he would always be informed
bfore he came, which were learned, and which not. When he came to those which
he understood were learned, he would be sure never to speak word of latin,
for fear of stumbling: but used in snche places, a gentle kind of Cast^lian
Spanish, his rong always at liberty: and contrariwise, whenever he was
informed of the reverend Domines (I mean such as are made priests, more for
money than for learning and good behavior) to hear him speak amongs such
men, you would say it were S. Thomas: for he would then, two hours together
talk latin, at lest which seemed to be, though it was not. When that they
received not his pardons friendly, he sought means to make them to take them
perforce: so that oftentimes, he herefore molested the paris^^oners,
otherwhiles causing them to receive them by subtle inventions. And now,
seeing that it were too long to accounte all such parts as I did see him use.
I will recite one, whereby he she wed right well how sufficient he was. He had
preached two or three days, in a village, within the diocese of the
Archbishop of Toledo, without omitting any part of his accustomed diligence,
and the people had not taken one pardon, nor no man (as far as I could
perceive) was minded to receive any: wherefore he was in great rage. And as he
imagined what he had best to do, Pardoners have always with them a sergeant
to taky up gages in such houses as refuse to pay for their pardon at the time
appointed.
determined to inuit and bid all the people to come thither the next day, so
to dispatche his pardons, and that ^^ght after supper, he and his Sergeant
went to play for their breakefast, and as they played, they fell at such
debate, that ye one gave evil words to the other: In so much, that at the
last he said to his Sergeant, that he was a thief, and the Sergeant answered,
saying that he was a falsifier, wherefore the commissarie my master laid
hand upon a short pike that stood behind the door where they played, and
the sergeant on ye other side, put hand to his sword which hong by his side,
so that with the great noise ye we made, our host and our neighbors came in,
and went between them: then they being sore angry, sought all means to come
together, that the one might kill the other: but the house was so full of
people, that they could by no means come nee to one another, wherefore they
never left, giving one another injurious words, in so much that the Sergeant
said to my master, that he was a fasifi^r, and that the Pardons which he
preached of daily, were most false. To be brief, when the people perceived
that they could by no means pacif^e them, they determined to carry the
Sergeant away to an other lodging, and my master remained still there in great
rage. Whereupon our host, with his neighbors desired him heartily that he
would forget his anger, and go to bed; and so then we w^t all to sleep. As
soon as day appeared in the morning, my master went to the Church and caused
them there to ring to Mass, and to Sermon, that he might dispatch his Pardons,
then the people assembled together, murmuring amongst them selves at the
Pardone, saying that they were false and nothing worth, seeing that the
Sergeant himself had affirmed the same: So that before ye time, they having
small mind to receive any, they then utterly abhorred them. Master co^missarie
mounte^h up into the pulpit, and begins his sermon, encouraging the people
not to forsake such great goodness and indulgence, as the holy pardon
contained: and being in the midst of his sermon, the serg^ant comes in at the
Church door, and when that he had ended his prayers, he rose up suddenly,
and with a loud voice discretely said, ye honest and godly people, give ears
that I may tell you a word or two, and then hear whom ye will. I am come
hither in the company of this crow keeper which now preaches, who has
deceived me, promising, that if I would help him in his affairs, I should
have hal^ the gains. But now perceiving the damage that my conscience ^hold
receive, and besides that, the loss of your goods, I do earnestly repent that
which I have done, All Sergeants in Spain do bear a white, ^od (...) their
^^ndes, higher than themselves by half a foot as big^as a ma^s finger.
and I will tell you plainly, that the pardons which he has brought, are false:
therefore ye ought not to believe him, nor yet take any one of them. As for
me, I will neither be partaker with him, one way or other, therefore from
this time foreward, I do forsake the rod of them, which I now cast to the
ground: for if hereafter he be punished for his falshoode, you may be
witness with me that I am no doer with him herein, nor yet help him, but do
rather bewray unto you his craft and falsehood: and when he had said all,
certain men of honor which were there, would needs have cast him out of the
Church, They were no ^^^rds, enerv (...) is of ho^^or there.
to avoid sla^der: but my master did forbid them so to do, commanding them
all upon pain of excommunication, to suffer him to say all that ever he
could, and he him self kept Silence whiles that the Sergeants declared all that which I have rehearsed: and as soon as he held his ^ounge, my master
demanding hun whether he would say any more: ye sergeant answered, there may be
much more said of thee, and of thy falshoode, but at this time this is
sufficient. Then my master commissarie falling down upon his knees in the
pulpit, holding up his hands, his eyes l^oking up to heaven said these words:
O Lord God, from whom nothing is hid, unto whom all things are manifest, and
unto whom nothing is impossible, who ca^ do all things, thou know the
truth, and how unjustly I am accused and slandered: as for me (O lord) I
forgive him, that thou may forgive me. Have no regard to hun that knows
not what he does nor says: notwithstanding, O Lord, I do beseech thee: and
through justice I demand of thee, that thou will not dissemble this injury
which is done unto thee, peradventure, some that are here present, were minded
to take th^s divine pardon, which now will not, giving place and credit to the
wicked man's words: and because this matter is so hu^tfull to Christian
neighbors, I beseech thee once again good Lord, that thou will not dissemble
it, but immediately, that it may pl^ase thee to show here a miracle, and that
it may be thus: If it be true that this man says, that is, that the Pardons
which I have here are false, that this pulpit may then sink with me, as
far as the depth of s^uen men under the ground, that neither it nor I may
never be seen again. And on the other side, if that be true which I say,
that he being persuaded by the devil, has said these words falsely and
untruly, only to deprive the people of such goodness, that then it may also
please thee to punish him, that his malicious peruersitie may be known to all
men. My de^out master had scant ended his prayers, but that the poor Sergeant
fell in a trance, giving him self such a blow against the ground, that all
the Church sounded of it, stretching out his body with great absidance of foam
at his mouth, making strange visages, and striking the ground both with hand
and foot, tumbling up and down from one side to an other: In so much that
the noise which ye people made, was so great, that one could not hear another.
Some were amazed and sore afraid, saying God be his help, and other said, he
has that which he has deserved, seeing that he durst affirm such falshod.
Finally some of those that were there, which to my judgment were not without
great fear, came near to hold fast his hands, wherewith he stroke all such
as came near him. Others held him falste by the feet, for there was never
false moyle in the world that ever kicked so fast: and so they held him a good
while. There were above xv. men upon him, and he gave them all their hands full:
so that if they had forgotten their business, he would have given some of
them ouerwhart the teeth. All this while my master was in the pulpit upon his
knees, holding his hands together still, his eyes bent toward heane^,
transported into such divine essence, ye all the noise and rumor which was in
the Church, was not sufficient to bring him out of his divine contemelation.
Certain honest men that were there, came unto him, and a waked him by force of
crying, God (seeing that he desires not the death of a sinner, but rather that
he shall repent and live) to pardon, forgive and restore to life, that poor
sinner which was led by the devil, overcome with death and sin, that he
might repent and confess his sinn^^: when he had so done, he sent for one of
the pardons, and laid it upon his head, whereupon immediately the poor Sergeant
began to amend and by little and little to return to him self. And as soon
as he had recovered his senses, he knele^h dow^^ at master commissaries feet,
and there demanded pardon, confessing how that he had said and done all those
things, by the mouth and instruction of the devil, as well to give him grief,
and to be revenged of him, as also d^^^^^^se the devil was sorry to see the
goodness which people received by taking the holy pardons. My master did then
forgive him, and friendship was made between them. Then was there such
great haste to take the pardons, that almost no creature living in that
town, but took one, the hus^ande, and the wi^e, sounes and daughters, menns
servants and maid servants, there was none but would have one. This news was
spread abroad through all the towns there about, so that we then ar^ued thither
it was not needful to preach, nor yet to go to the Church to dispatche the
Pardons: for the people came so fafte to our lodging for them, as if they had
been pears that had been given them for nothing: in so much that my master
dispatched and uttered away ten or twelve thousand pardons in ten or twelve
little villages thereabouts, without preaching one sermon. And as for my part,
I will confess my ignorance, for when this their invention was tried, I was
in a great marvel to see such a strange case, and I thought the matter had bin
so in deed, as many other did: yet notwithstanding, when I perceived once the
Jesting and scoffing that my master and the Sergeent would make at the matter
by the way, I understood plainly, that all that counterfaite show was
invented by my masters subtle industrious art. And although I was of tender
years, yet I took great pleasure to consider their doings, and would say to my
self: How many are there such as these that deceive the simple people. To
conclude, I continued with this fifte master near ^oure months, during
which time I suffered much sorrow.

How Lazaro dwells with a Chaplain, and what happened to him in his service.
AFterward I entered into the service of a painter of Orummes, unto whom I
tempered colors, with whom I suffered a thousand evils, and as I was the^ of
good bigness, entering one day into the great Church, one of the Chaplains
received me for his own, and gave me in government an Ass, with four great
tankerdes, and a whippe, to sell water up and down the City, and this was the
first staire I climbed up, to come to attain unto good life: They do ea^ water
up and down the c^tle to sell vp^ Asses, with four and some times six ran^
kards: for the have no wat^ but from the river.
for my mouth had then the measure. I delivered up daily to my master in game
thirty Mareuedis, and on every Saturday I labored for my self, and all the
week also whatsoever I could earne over thirty Mareuedis a day, was mine
own. This office was so good, that at four years end I had spared with my
wages and my gains, so much as bought me apparel honestly, with old stuff,
whereof I bought an (...) black fustian dublet, and a coat thread bare with
gathered steeues and whole before, and a cloak that had been of selzado, and a
sword of the old making one of ye first of Cuellar. And perceiuin, my self
then in apparel like an hones man, I desired my master to take his Ass
again, and that I would no more follow that office. (*)

The Spaniardes life. How Lazaro dwells with a Sergeant, and what happened
to (...) his service.
AFter that I had taken my leave of ye chaplain I did place my self we a
sergeant, to be a meber of justice: but I dwelled few days we him, for in
short time I perciued that it was a dangerous office, A man may scap in Spain
the hands of the officers of Instice if they (...) flee into some church so
(...) not their (...) of religion.
especially when ye certain transgressors, which retired into a Church,
chased my master and me maruellously with stones and staves: and at that
present time my master (whom I tarried for) was evil handled but they could
never overtake me: yet for all that I did forswear the office. And as I
imagined what kind of life I had best lead, ye I might provide some thing
against mine old age. God by his grace lightened my mind to find out the
profitable way: So that through the favor which I had of my friends and
masters, all the forrowes, which before that time I had sustained, were
recompensed with an office royal, which I obtained: the which I pretended,
because ye at this day there is no account but of them that have wherewithal.
So that at this present, I live in mine office, and exercise it to Gods service
and yours. Sir, it is so that I have the charge to cry the wines that are sold
in this citic, and to make inquiraunce, The Cryers in Spain do fell at kind
of stufte and when ^^y is whip. through the cry goes before him declaring
with loud voice what he has done.
with open cry, for things that hour been lost, and when any suffer
perserution by justice, I do accompany them, declaring with loud voice their
offense. I am (in plain language) a common crier. Sir matters have so well gone
forewarde with me, and I have used my self so well, that in manner all things
belonging to the office, pass through my hands. In so much, that look
whosoever within this citte does broch wine, or sell any things, and ye
Lazarillo de Tormes be not present, they make accounte never to get game. In
this mean time, master Archdeacon of saint Saluador your friend and servant
at commandment, having knowledge of my person and ability, especially since
I had cried his wine, went about to marry me with his maid. And after that I
had considered, that with having to do with such a man as master Archdeco^
was, I cold not receive but honesty and goodness, I determined to do it, so
that I took her to wife, whereof hitherto I do not repent: for besides that
she is honest, and a diligent wench, I find great favor and help at master
Archdec^ns hand, for every year from one tune to an other, he gives her as
good as a load of wheat, and against Christmas or Easter, some good morsel of
flesh, a couple or two of loaves, and such old hose as he leaves: and he
caused us to hier a little house near his dwelling: on every sunday and holy
day we dined (most commonly) in his own house. But evil tongues which never
cease, would not suffer us to live in peace, they would say this and that, and
that they did see my wife go and make his bed, and dress his meat. But God
help them better than they say truth. Forbesides that she is a woman that
deeth not delighte in such game, master Archdeacon has promised me that
which I trust he will fulfill. For upon a time in her presence, he said at
large unto me, Lazaro de Tormes, he that will have regard to cuill tongues,
shall never get profit. I say thus much unto thee, I can never marvel,
though some men murmr to see thy wife come in an out of my house, which
doing, I promise thee, shall not otherwise redcund but to thy great honesty
and hers. Therefore let people have their words, have thou only regard to
that which shall be for thy profit. I answered him, saying, Sir, I have
determined to join my self with those that are good, but truth it is, that
certain of my friends have warned me of this, yea and moreover they have
twice or thrice certified me wtih other, that before she was married to me
she had two or three children, be it spoken under your maistershippes
correction, seeing that she is present. My wife began then to give such oaths,
that I thought the house would have suncke with us all, and then began to
weep, cursing the time that ever she married me, in so much that I wished my
self dead when that I let escape that word out of my mouth. But I on the one
side, and my master on another, said so much, that she left weeping: and I
did swear unto her, that as long as I lived I would never again use the like
talk: and how that I rejoiced and was well content, that the should come in
and out both day and night, seeing that her honesty and faithfulness was so
well known. So the^ we remained al three with one accord until this day, and
never no man heard us sithence reason of that matter. And from that time
forward, whenever I could happen to hear any man talk of this, I would
straight break off his matter, and say unto him, look if thou be my friend,
speak nothing that shall grieve me, for I do not take him for my friend that
caused me to sorrow, especially that goes about to sow discord between me
and my wife, which I love better than any thing in this world, considering how
that by her means, God has done more for me, than I have deserved, and I
dare swear by the holy sacrament, that she is as honest a woman as any that
dwells within the four gates of Toledo: and he that says the contrary. I
will bestow my life upon him. So from thence foreward, they nener durst meue
any such matter unto me, and I had peace always in my house. This was the same
year that our victorious Emperor entered into this noble city of Toledo, where
his court was kept with great feasts and triumphs, as your mastership has
heard: finally, it was then that I was in my prosperity, and in my chiefest
time of good adventure.

The Spaniardes life. Laziro declares the frie^dship that certain high Duchmen
showed him, and what happened between them.
BEing now in the top of my prosperity, having fortune my friend, I never
went without a bottle of the best wine in the city, of the very same I
carried about me (beings common crier) to give a taste to as many as were
willing to buy: by virtue of which wine I purchased so many gentlemen my
friends, as well inhabitaunts there as strangers, that where so ever I came,
the door should straight be opened for me. And I was in favored every
where, that if I had chanced to have slain a man, or to commit some heinous
offense, all the world would streightwayes have been on my side, being
assured that those gentlemen being the kings guard would sufficiently both
succor and help me. Therefore when so ever we met, I never suffered them to
depart drimouthed away, but did carry the^ with me to the best wine I had
broched in the city, where oftentimes we went in upon our own feet, and came
out either without any, or at the least with strange feet.

And that which I liked best of all, was that all the time I kept them company,
the devil a blanke Lazaro de forms did pay, nor that they would consent he
should pay: for whenever I did put my hand to my purse (for manners sake
only) they would take it in evil part, and beholding me angerly, would say,
Nitte Nitte, Asticot lanz, and so reprehenting me, would allege, that where
they were in company no man should pay a blanke: wherefore I was greatly in
love with these people: and it was not only that served our turn, but as often
as we met we should have also slices of baco^, pieces of legs of mutton sod
in that pleasant wine, with all manner of fine spice, and therewith they would
fill both my bosom and skirts, enough for my wife and me a whole week. The
world being then so plentiful I would call to remembrance the hungry fits I
had sustained in times past, praising the Lord, and giving him thanks that the
world now at the length was so well changed. But as the proverb says: He that
will do good to thee, will either go his way, or die. And so it happened to me,
the court removing as it is wont to do, and my friends following it, at their
departing I was defired by them that I would bear them company, promising to
show me much friendship and favor. But remembering the old proverb: Better
is the evil knowns, than the good which is yet to know, thanking them for
their good will, and desiring their favor, after many sighs and sorrowful
embracings, I took my leave, and they departed. And truly had I been unmarried,
I would never have so forsaken their company, for indeed they were people,
much of my nature and disposition. And it was a gracious, and not a
fantastical nor a presumptuous life they did lead. A man should never see
the^ scrupulous nor nice to enter into a tavern, but would go in boldly (yea
with cappe in hand) if the wine for goodness desc^^rd so much. They ware
plain men, full of at honesty and gentle courtesy, and se well provided at all
tunes, that I would to God when I am athuest, I might always meet with such
men. Notwithstanding the love which I bare to my we and to my country (which
new I take for mine own natrue, because m^n to commonly say, whence art thou
honest man) caused me to stay at home. So I continued ever since in this city,
leading a solitary life for the loss of my friends and courtle life although
that I was well known of all the citizens. Afterward I lived very well at
mine own ease, with increase of joy and kindred, for the birth of a trim little
daughter, which within a little while after my wife brought forth. Whereat I
having some evil suspision, she did swear al oaths, that I was the father, and
that she was mine. I continued in this estate, until that fortune thought
that she had now given me too much-ease, and that she thought it reason for
her to turn back and show me again her severe and cruel visage, to temper
those few years which I passed at ease, with as much more travel and deadly
sorrow, which now I should endure. (O great God) who is able to write so
unfortunate and miserable a case, but must let the Inkhorne rest and put the
pen to his eyes?

To the Reader.
THough truth do purchase hate,
and glosing bear the bell:
Yet is the man to be belikte
that truest tale does tell,
Without respect of place,
of country, or of kind:
For so the law of writing does
each honest writer bind:
Then Lazaro deserves
no blame, but praise to gain,
That plainly pens the Spaniards prank
and how they live in Spain.
He settes them out to show
for all the world to see,
That Spain when all is done, is Spain
and what those gallants be.
The writer meant but well,
and he that took the pain,
To turn it to our mother tongue,
the readers thanks would gain
For all his former toil,
in penning of the book,
The suite is small, allow him that,
that hapst hereon to look.
Though small the volume be,
the value may be great:
Wherefore to yield him thy good will
let this my muse entreat:
Let Roulande have reward
for this his taken pain:
And so thou (reader) may perhaps
the like hereafter gain.
G. Turbeuile Gent.

Imprinted at London by Abell Ieffes. 1586.


