A GOLDEN TRVMPET, TO ROWSE UP A Drowsy MAGISTRATE: OR, A PATTERN FOR A
GOVERNORS Practice, drawn from CHRIST'S coming to, beholding of, and weeping
over Jerusalem.

As it was sounded at Paul's Cross the 11. of April, 1624.

By JOHN LAWRENCE Preacher of the Word of God in the City of LONDON.

ESA. 53.1. ROMANS 10.16. Lord, who has believed our report?

ESA. 58.1. Cry aloud, spare not: lift up thy voice like a Trumpet, and show my
people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their sins.

Either read all or leave all,
Let not the Epistles be past over,
Left idle Readers you discover.
LONDON, Printed by JOHN HAVILAND, 1624.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE SIR MARTIN LVMLEY, Knight, Lord Mayor of the
Honorable City of London, and to the Right Worshipful (his Brethren) the
Aldermen and Sheriffs of the same.
AS ALSO TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Knights, Sr ALLEN APSLEY, his MAJESTY'S
Lieutenant of the Tower, Sr RICHARD MORISON, Lieutenant of his MAJESTY'S
Ordnance, and Sr BENJAMIN RIDDIARD one of his Majesty's Officers in the Court
of Wards, JOHN LAWRENCE wishes increase of Grace in this life, and Eternal
happiness in the life to come.
Right Honorable, Right Worshipful:
SIthence one profession of Religion toward God, and Execution of Justice
toward man has combined you together; let me not sever you in this my
Dedication: for my desire is to manifest my dutiful respect of you all;
therefore I crave your favorable construction and acceptance of this my bold
enterprise. Your Honor and Worships (by the providence of our good God) are
the General Captains and Lieutenants of this (...) City, and chief Castle
of this Renowned Kingdom, under whose government we the Inhabitants of the
same enjoy great peace and tranquillity; God might govern the whole Universe
(if it pleased him) immediately by himself, but out of his heavenly wisdom
(for causes best known to himself) has committed the guiding thereof to
Magistrates and Rulers, whom with an high style he has honored, calling them
Gods, Psalm. 82.6. Psalm. 47.9.
and the Shields of the earth to defend from wrongful evils the children of
men; approve your selves therefore, according to your titles and places. Let
the sound of this Trumpet enter not only into the ears, but also into the
heart, that you may the more be encouraged to draw out the sword of Justice,
and with boldness to ransacke the irrilegious corners of this City. Follow
the counsel of Cambyses, which he gave to all Citizens that desire the safety
of their City; namely to be most vigilant when the eyes most require rest,
that the hurtful people may fear, as well in darkness as light, night as day.

The Commonwealth is compared to a Musical Instrument, the strings whereof
are the people, and you are the Musitioners; therefore as the Musician cannot
abide the strings to iar, nor his Instrument to be out of tune, no more should
you suffer the people to be without manners, nor the Commonwealth without
order. Show your selves careful in this one thing, that the world may see, the
longer the tree grows, the better: Offer unto the Lord Primitias cordis, and
oris tui, the first fruits of your heart and mouth upon this Altar. Doubtless,
it will be an acceptable Sacrifice unto him, more pleasing then a Bullock that
has horns and hoofes. I fear I detain your Lordship and Worships too long:
therefore I conclude, desiring Almighty God so to bless your government in
this City, that sin may be punished, wickedness banished, the naked
clothed, the hungry refreshed, the feeble cherished, Gods word maintained, his
Ministers rewarded, and all the enemies of the truth suppressed; which God of
his mercy give you hearts to perform for his Son Christ Jesus his sake. AMEN.

Your Honors and Worships to command to the furthermost of his power, I. L.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND TRVLY Religious Knight, Sir ROBERT CARR, Gentleman
of his Highness Bedchamber, and Keeper of the Princes privy Purse: JOHN
LAVVRENCE wishes all health and happiness.
WOrthy Sir, when I call to mind the great favors which you showed to my
father in his life time, I cannot but reprehend my self of ingratitude, in not
performing that duty, whereunto (for his sake) I am so far obliged: but
studying how I might best testify my grateful affection, have here presumed
to present you with the first fruits of my poor studies. I could find no
better flowers than those that spring from faithful love, bound with the bond
of duty, to make my labors gracious in your thoughts: If I presume too far,
pardon me, for this my love is sprung from the root of your bountiful
kindness toward my father, which if ever I forget, I will not say with David,
Let my right hand forget her cunning, Psalm. 137.5.
(for that is nothing) but let God himself forget to prevent me with any
grace, or to follow me with any blessing: Accept therefore (most worthy Sir)
these mites, grains, drops, tears, cries, as it was by me sounded forth in
place of public meeting; I must confess it has lost what it then had, for a
dead letter cannot be so patheticall as a living voice; neither can the pen so
set it forth in writing, as the tongue in speaking. Papias who was a companion
of Policarpus, Eusch. Eccles. Hist. lib. 3. cap. 39.
thought that he did not so much profit by the writings and books of the
Apostles followers, as by the authority of the persons, and the lively voice
of the speakers: Whereupon Aeschines, when he had read the Oration which
Demosthenes had made against him, and withal perceived how the people wondered
at the force and excellency of it, answered them thus: Hier. Ibid.
What would you have thought, if you had heard him pronounce it with his own
mouth: q.d. If you are thus ravished with hearing it read, how would you have
been ravished if you had heard him speak and pronounce it? Howsoever, I hope
you will look more upon my mind and honest purpose, then upon the worthiness
of the work: I durst not presume to shroud these unpolished sprigs under so
virtuous a patronage, if I did not hope, that as David loved Mephibosheth for
his good father Ionathans sake; so you this lame work of mine. I humbly
entreat you therefore, that as Ulysses was defended under the shield of Ajax;
so these my unworthy lines may by your favor, be patronized from the envy of
malicious detractors. Our tribe owes much to you, both for loving and
rewarding their labors, for which cause I know many join with me, to wish
your whole man, soul and body, true perfect joy in this life, and full
accomplishment of glory in the next, for the which I do and ever will pray,

Whilst I remain JOHN LAVVRENCE.

TO ALL MY LOVING Friends and well-willers, both in and without the Liberties
of this City of LONDON, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
CHristian friends, some known, all desired in the Lord; I cannot more fitly
salute you, then in the phrase of that divine Apostle: 2 Ep. Ioh. 3. v.
Grace be with you, mercy and peace from God the Father, and from the Lord
Jesus Christ. Beloved, I wish above all things that your souls may prosper as
your bodies do, for I have no greater joy then to hear that my children walk
in the truth: as I have labored to do you good, 3 Ep. Ioh. 4. v.
do not you requite me with evil; censure me not too rashly for this my
forwardness to the Press, nor for my slender judgment in prosecution of my
matter. I must confess, that in regard of the small number of my years, I may
justly incur the censure of presumption, in that I should be so forward;
first to preach in such an honorable Assembly, next to send my labors to the
worlds view; had I not to the former been enjoined by authority, and to the
latter pressed by importunity, the place of birth had been the place of
burial, and the memories of many the graves where I would have left it, but
being so earnestly pressed thereunto, with the persuading how much good might
come thereby, not only to the City in general, but to every man's house and
family in particular; at last condescended, not for affection or ostentation,
but for the glory of my God, and the good of Church and City: It was plain in
preaching, but more plain in printing, to the end it might not be obscure to
any: if any thing be amiss, as sure it cannot be perfect, let me request you
to mend the fault with a good conceit, and to cure my failing with my good
meaning; remember it is an easier thing to pluck down a house then to build
one: If my style be too homely, then think wise men desire rather a careful
then an eloquent Physician; if we might not make books, wherefore were
letters first invented? shall the Epicure be tolerated to write dishonest
things, and shall not a Minister much more good and needful things? O yes:
accept therefore of this small mite, which at this time I have cast into Gods
Treasury. Scorn not to read it because I am young, for the least star has
his light and influence, and there may be some use of Goats-haire to the
finishing of the Tabernacle: I have many friends to remember in this my
journey, but if I call at every man's door, I shall be lated, therefore I crave
leave to pass by most, not for want of any affection (for I love you all in
Jesus Christ) but that in due time I may arrive at my hoped haven, entering my
lodging at a lawful hour.

The first friend which dwells in the way I travel, is the Minories which in
times past used me very kindly, for she entertained me when I was destitute of
outward comfort, affording both me and mine meat, drink, and lodging, almost
two years together, and still would, had not the principal corn been
blasted with the Easterly wind of vain reports, and the mil-dew of evil
imaginations; yet for the kindness once received, I cannot forget them, for
having loved them, I cannot choose but still love them: Can the mother forget
that Child which endangered her life most? if she could, yet cannot I forget
you, I speak it not for any vain glory, but the more to stir me up to
return praise to him to whom all praise belongs, that gave me such an heart
to seek the good of your souls: my God (and you, if you will but speak the
truth) can testify with me, how that I thought not my life dear for your
sakes. This is my comfort, so long as I was with you, I omitted no time,
wherein I might do good to your souls, but in season, out of season, morning,
evening, public, private, in Gods house, in my house, or in your houses, was I
never backward to afford you the milk of the word, if I were desired
thereunto: when you were asleep, I was awake; when you were a bed, I was at
study; when you little thought of me, many times was I praying for you, that
the Lord would make my Ministry the savor of life unto life, and not the
savor of death unto death to any one of you. But alas, my pains were not
noted, but my failings strictly observed, and pried into, nay blazed abroad to
the wounding of my soul. It was not you, but Satan, who sought to sow tares
where God sowed wheat, and the Lord brought this thing to pass for my greater
humiliation, yea I know it shall work for my good if the fault be not in my
self: but I cease, desiring you to esteem of me as I of you, my hoped, loving
and faithful friends, saluting the worshipful Master Mulis, Master Tice,
Master Vphill, Master Hauercampe, with their wives and families, and all the
rest of that parish, wishing health and happiness to attend you in this life,
and eternal glory to be conferd upon you in the life to come, Amen.

Before I had quite taken leave of the Minories (for I was prevented of that
intended courtesy) through the mercy of the Lord my God, I met with another
harbor, namely Saint Margarets Fish-street, where I was lovingly received,
kindly entertained and friendly welcomed, but a ruff Sea of a raging
discontented mind soon wrought my departure from my faithful friends, for
such is the nature of envy, that both eyes shall be ventured to extinguish one
of the parties not beloved, and Viper-like will not stick to tear the belly
where once it was cherished, but I remember my promise was utterly to forget,
and absolutely to forgive in my farewell: since my continuance was so short, my
discourse cannot be long, therefore I kindly take my leave of all my loving
friends there remaining, ever resting your poor Orator at the throne of grace
for your joy in this life, and everlasting happiness in the life to come.

At this time I was like the distressed traveler, remaining in the wild
fields, in the midst of a tempestuous storm, far from company, destitute of
money, beaten with rain, terrified with thunder, stiff with cold, yet not
brought to despair for all these miseries, but still trusted in God who was
able to help me. Neither was I deceived in whom I relied, for he that is
called faithful, showed himself most merciful, turning his countenance angry
to his wonted clemency, giving me entrance after seven days absence, into his
Sanctuary at Saint Margaret Pattens, alias Rood-Church, where receiving a most
free Election, I comfortably spent my labors almost two years, reaping the
profit of my studies with much joy; I hope the conversion of many souls unto
God: but Satan that subtle enemy of mankind, who ever sought my subversion
and overthrow, would not suffer my foot long to rest in any place, but by his
malicious mind I was soon dispossessed of my harbor, where had I not found
one faithful friend, Saint Butolphs.
my habitation had been like David's in the Wilderness; far be it from me I
should lay any thing to the charge of Gods chosen, my sins deserved my
punishments had they been greater, and I pray with Saint Augustine, Hic ure,
hic seca, vt in aeternum parcas Domine, id est, Here burn me, here slay me,
to spare me hereafter, q.d. Lord do what thou will with my body, so that thou will but save my soul. Nay further, I pray with Saint Jerome, Vtinam ob Domini
mei nomen, atque iustitiam, cuncta gentilium turba me persequatur and tribulet:
vtinam in opprobrium meum, stolidus hic mundus exurgat, tantum vt ego mercedem
Jesus consequar; id est, I would to God that the whole nation of the Gentiles,
Pagans, and Infidels, would for the name of my God, and for the glory of his
Gospel, persecute me and trouble me: I would to God this mad and foolish world
would rise up against me for the profession of Gods blessed truth, only that I
may obtain Christ Jesus for my reward. For the love I found generally amongst
you all, I have nothing wherewith to requite it, therefore I only praise my
God, and heartily thank you, amongst which Lovers I cannot choose but
particularize some of the best, for where most kindness has been received,
most thankfulness should be returned; and though I am not able worthily or
sufficiently to return thanks unto you, yet I hope you will accept of what I
am able, receiving these few lines as a testimony of further service.

First therefore, I salute the worshipful Mistress Moore, with whom though my
acquaintance be but small, yet for the good I have both heard and seen, cannot
choose but mention as one of my friends, if my judgment fail not: they are to
be counted the best friends that provoke a man to clean closest to God. Genesis
45.5.
Joseph's brethren out of envy sold him to be a bond-slaue, but God that sits
above turned the wheel so about, that envy brought glory; debasement,
advancement; for this the Lord suffered them to do for his and their
preservation. Mistake me not, I do not tax you with any injury, but thank you
for your courtesy, for this be far from me to grieve any of the Saints, of
which I am persuaded you are one, for the world has crowned you for religion,
piety and bounty, for wisdom, honesty and ciuility, for kindness, courtesy
and modesty, and which is most of all, for a tender conscience, ready to
relieve the poor members of Christ Jesus, affording succor to his Ministers,
which are destitute of outward comfort. Helen Queen of Adiabene, when she
left her own Country and came to dwell at Jerusalem, she filled the bellies
of the poor with the Corns of Egypt, Eus. lib. 2. cap. 12. Joseph. antiquet.
lib. 20. cap. 2.
and the Fruits of Cyprus, sparing for no cost to do good to the Saints that
were at Jerusalem, by which your self has gotten a very famous report, and I
hope the Lord will still make you a beneficial instrument, both to Church and
Commonwealth. The rarer this virtue is, the more I reverence it, commending
you and your household to God, Act. 20.32.
and to the word of his grace, which is able to build further, and to give you
an inheritance among all them which are sanctified.

Master Freeman, you I must not forget, unless I forget my self, and though I
should forget my self, yet can I not choose but remember you, the affection of
your heart I have found by the act of your hand, and your willingness to do
me good has been seen by your forwardness to speak and write in my
behalf, upon any occasion that has been offered unto you; a requital I
cannot make, unless it please you to accept of my heartiest prayers, which I
cease not to pour out at the throne of grace for you, your wife and family,
and for my unknown friend, who desiring them, has not forgotten me.

Master Goodwin, my love is great to your soul, though my familiarity be small
with your bodily presence and neighbourly association. I wish (if it might not
be offensive) to live to requite some part of your courtesies, for beyond my
desert I have found you forward to subscribe to any good motion for my good,
for which I shall ever rest at your command for any service.

Mistress Glouer, much wrong I should do you, if I neglect to number you
amongst my friends, you were the tree that yielded me the first fruit in this
City; though it was but small, yet it was comfortable, by reason of my
necessity, since you have watered my studies with your beneficence, that even
my barrenness has (through your drops) yielded some fruit, I trust to the
comfort of many, your love to Gods Saints and zeal to the Word does crown
you; for as women delight not only to see fair Jewels, and curious
needle-workes, but to take them out and we are them, so I dare boldly say, that
your care is not only to know, but to express and wear the good things you
know in your conversation. I beseech God to increase his fatherly blessings
upon you, and upon your son, Master Richard Glouer, and upon all the rest of
your children and family, to his own glory and your endless comforts.

Master Alkin, you are the favor of my heart, and the Father of my being in
some kind, if ever I was obliged to any, in a double and treble manner to you.
Your care both for me and over me, has been more fatherlike then friendlike,
and not only to me, but to many more of my Brethren, which if pride do not
too much puff up their minds, cannot choose but acknowledge: forwith Lot in
Sodom, you have received the Angels and Messengers of God; Genesis 19.2, 3.
with Rebecca, you have courteously entertained the servants of Abraham; with
believing Rahab, received the Spies; nay, Genesis 24.25. Josh. 2.1.
with Publius in the I Will of Malta, you have received Paul; and with Martha and
Marie you have received, if not Christ himself, yet Christ in his members:
nay, with Lydia, Act. 28.7. Luke 10.38.
you have constrained the Apostles to stay in your house; and with Tabitha you
are full of good works and alms deeds, Act. 16.15.
according to your ability. This I know, therefore cannot choose but speak,
not to the end you should be puffed up with vain glory, but to encourage you
in this godly course, that at the latter end of your days, you may with
comfort say: I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, 2 Timothy 4.7,
8.
I have kept the faith, from henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord, etc. I seal up my love with my heartiest
prayers; for you, your Wife, and all the rest of your Family, ever resting your
true friend.

Time calls away, the evening requires haste, I dare not call to any more
friends, lest darkness overtake me, and prevent me of my hoped haven:
Generally therefore, I salute Mr. Camden, Mr. Parker, Mr. Whitbread, Mr.
Milsop, Mr. Smith, with the rest of my friends in Rood Parish; wishing all
happiness to attend you in this life, and eternal glory to be conferred upon
you in the life to come.

To Master Gifford, and all his loving Parishioners now dwelling in Saint
Buttolphs Billingsgate, John Lawrence wishes health and happiness.

Loving friends, yet not more loving then beloved, though you are the last in
this action, yet not the least in my affection: If I owe a thankful
acknowledgment to any, much more to you; for above many you have comforted my
bowels both in word and deed. In health you were joyful to receive me, in
sickness you often came to visit me: my rising was your desire, my falling you
did not require. This, and more then this I have found, which enforces my pen
(because my tongue cannot) to set forth the thankfulness of my heart to you
for it. I was your Preacher two years together, during which time I traveled
in pain, that Christ Jesus might be formed in you. All my desire was your
good, not your goods: your salvation was the end of my study, and by
submitting to the word, though meanly delivered by me, you did much encourage
my holy intended labors. My desire was still to have been amongst you, but
sithence it might not, my prayer was, and still is, that the Lord would give
you a Pastor according to his own heart, Iere. 3.14.
whereby you may be fed with knowledge and understanding. And further, I pray
that every good Minister may find as much comfort from his people as I have
found by you. I know you take no pleasure to have your goodness published,
because you account virtues fairest Theater to be a good conscience, yet it
becomes an ingenious mind to profess by whom he proficeth. I would that every
Parish in London understood your godly disposition and Christian carriage, both
in public and private, that they might be provoked by your virtuous example. I
will not dull your ears with too large a discourse: therefore to conclude. I
commend this Treatise to your diligent reading, and not only to yours, but to
all theirs that love the truth, and my self to your Christian prayers, and all
of us to the good grace of God. Thus craving your pardon, and the continuance
of your favor to him who acknowledges himself

Bound unto you in all duty, JOHN LAVVRENCE.

Page 88. line 16. for like time, read life time.



A GOLDEN TRVMPET, TO ROWSE UP A Drowsy MAGISTRATE.
TEXT, LVKE 19.41. (...).

Et vt appropinquauit, visa vrbe, fleuit super ea.

And as he drew near, he beheld the City, and wept over it.


RIght Honorable, Right Worshipful, and well-beloved friends, I am here
presented by the hand of the Lord upon this eminent place, or place of
eminency; in person to your eyes, in voice to your ears, in matter to your
judgments, in nothing to your censures, but in all to your benefit; yet not
for any worthiness in me, being Minimus Apostolorum, but for the sakes of you
that love his truth, for whose sakes he continues the preaching of his truth,
with all those blessings that attend thereupon. Though I cannot so truly
complain with Moses, that I am slow of speech, yet I may fitly complain with
Esaias, that I am a man of polluted lips; yea, confess with Jeremy, That I am
but a child, not only in years, but also in understanding. For my tongue is
not fluent, my style is not refined, my phrase is not eloquent, my matter is
but roughly cast, or cast roughly over, receiving his form in a course mould,
therefore wants that gloss or decency that perhaps curious brains, or deep
diuing judgments could set upon it, and all because I want the vigilance of
Gregory, the heavenly gifts of Theodosius, the divine spirit of Ambrose, the
golden mouth of Chrysostom, the sweet vein of Lactantius, and the shining
style of Fulgentius: yea what not? For I have nothing of my self, my
sufficiency is of God: Eccle. 11.6.
therefore that God that bids me sow my seed, and in the evening, not to suffer
my hand to rest; the same God (I trust) will make my words profitable, though
not pleasurable, able to refresh, though not sufficient to fill; for though my
cookerie cannot provide Quails and Manna, Angels food; yet my industry shall
set before you sufficient to keep hunger from the door, though the coursest of
the wheat.

These words (Right Honorable) which are read this day in your ears, is part
of the relation of Christ's progress to Jerusalem, or as I may truly term
it, a mild, meek, gentle, loving, and merciful visitation, which he came to
hold in Jerusalem, the (...) of the Jews: for Christ being a Priest for ever,
after the order of Melchisedecke, had an Episcopal dignity conferred upon him
by God the Father, so that (not without desert) he became the great Bishop of
our souls from the beginning, and the primate Metropolitan of all the world;
therefore his labors did not only consist in preaching, (which is the duty
of every one that bears the title of Presbyter) but also in executing all
other things that only remain to a Bishop, and ought not to be performed by
any, but by such as have an Episcopal dignity conferred upon them, of which
this is one, viz. Once or twice a year to hold a Visitation within the limited
Diocese, whereby the abuses in the Ministry might be reformed, Church orders
better observed and performed. This was the intent of Christ by his Visitation,
as may be gathered from the words following; and should be the intent of every
Bishop by their Visitation to the end of the world.

Of these words I will not stick to say, as Jacob sometimes did of his
pretended Venison; The Lord has brought it to my hand, sit up therefore and
eat, that thy soul may bless me. Even so, this Text the Lord has brought
unto me, Sit up therefore and seed, that at the conclusion, your souls may
bless me.

This root sends forth three branches, The text branched into three parts,
compared to Peter's three Tabernacles.
or this fountain three streams: The first, Christ's appropinquation; (...),
and as he drew near: The second, his deep contemplation, (...), he beheld the
City: The third, his great compassion, (...), and he wept over it.

THese three may fitly be compared to Peter's three Tabernacles, which he would
have built at the Transfiguration of Christ, and each is full of comfort, yea,
fuller of comfort, than Peter's Tabernacles would or could have been; for
though Peter's Tabernacles should have had glorified substances in them all, yet
Christ but in one, whereas the Tabernacles of my Text have not glory, but
Christ in them all. In the first, he draws near to Jerusalem: in the
second, he viewes and beholds Jerusalem; in the third, he laments for
Jerusalem.

Or to a 1. Chariot.
The first is made in the form of a Chariot, wherein we have Christ riding to
Jerusalem: (...), as he drew near.

2. Watchtower.
The second is made in the form of a Watchtower, wherein we have Christ
viewing Jerusalem: (...), he beheld the City.

3. Solitary Closet.
The third is made in the form of a Solitary closet, hung round with mourning;
wherein we have Christ lamenting for Jerusalem: (...), and he wept over it.

Or to Natures twins.
Further, they may be compared to Natures twins: Twins being borne
together; Natures twins, because they produce each other; his weeping is
produced by his beholding; his beholding is produced by his coming. For had he
not drawn near, he neither could have beheld nor wept as man, but drawing
near, he does both: For his coming begets a beholding, and his beholding
their miserable fashion inforceth abundant tears of compassion, to distill
from his heavenly eyes: therefore as Pilate said in another case, John 19.5.
Ecce homo, behold the man, so I in this place use the same words, Ecce homo,
behold the man. A man, nay more then a man; For, for an Object at this time,
behold the true, natural, dear, and eternal Son of God, Jesus Christ
himself in the nature of man; and behold him in his threefold Tabernacle.
First, behold him in his Appropinquation: Secondly, behold him in his deep
Contemplation: Thirdly, behold him in his great Compassion: which three may
enforce attention with your ears, Meditation in your hearts. It has been an
ancient saying, or the saying of the Ancients, that there are three things
which will move attention, to wit, the Author, if he be famous; the matter, if
it be of consequence; the manner, if it be compendious; all which three do
meet and concur in this my Text. For the first, the Author of these words is
more famous than all men, being as he is indeed, the very Son of God:
secondly, for the matter, it is of great, yea, exceeding great consequence; for
it sets out to us the fervent love the Lord bears to miserable men: thirdly,
for the manner, it is very compendious, for in ten words the fountain of Mercy
is described in mourning for the loss of preservation, and the gulf of misery
is unfolded by way of Implication. Therefore as Jesus said to the Jews
concerning John, Math. 11.7.
What went ye out into the wilderness to see? A reed shaken with the wind? As
if he had said, Surely you would never have taken such pains, or adventured
your selves into such a desert, but in hope to have seen some strange sight,
great wonder, or rare matter: So I say to you, What came you hither to see? or
rather to hear? why have you left your own houses, to present your selves in
this public place of meeting, but only in hope to hear some rare thing, new
matter, or strange news? Then lend me your attention: if any thing be worthy
your hearing, then this is; for here you have Christ Jesus, the Son of God,
making his last journey to Jerusalem his first progress, and his first
progress his last Visitation: not substituting others, but performing it
himself, whilst he was able in his own person: and the entrance into this
his Visitation, is with great sorrow; For when he drew near, he beheld the
City and wept.

Now let us proceed, according as our Text is branched out unto us in our
division, and in the handling thereof, let me entreat you not to run before
me in your quick conceits, nor to wrong your selves in your earnest
expectations; for if you look for strange things from these words, or
contentable matter from this Text, you may be deceived as Jacob was, who
whilst he dreamt of beautiful Rachel, Gal. 1.10.
found nothing but a bleare eied Leah. If I study to please man, I am not the
servant of Christ. Censure me not for what I say; yet if you do, I weigh it
not: for as I desire not to be applauded by men, I less deem to be judged of
men: yet to purge the mind from secret censures, and the heart from
misconceiuing thoughts, let me request you to go fair and easily along with
me, till we arrive at our hoped haven; I mean the end of our discourse at this
time: then if any thing be so happy as to fill the soul with comfort, ascribe
the honor to God who has enabled me. If any thing be so unhappy, as to
distaste the spiritual, pardon me, and think my time of preparation but
small, to provide my self fitting with such short warning, for so judicious an
Auditory. Thus then as God shall assist me, time and strength permit me, and
your Christian patience suffer me, I do begin: and first of his
Appropinquation.

(...), And as he drew near: In the first part or Tabernacle Christ's
Appropinquation, where 1. Absentia. 2. Praesentia. 3. Diligentia.
This first Tabernacle has three rooms, or the first body that proceeds from
our root, has three branches; Absentia, Praesentia, and Diligentia. Absence is
implied, presence is desired, diligence described. First, his Appropinquation
implies his absence; for how can it be said, he drew near the City, unless
he were first absent from the City? but he was (at this time) absent from the
City; therefore it is said, he drew near unto the City: from which
implication we note, That the greatest, gloriousest, 1. Doctrine.
and famousest place in the world, may be destitute of the presence of Christ.
All this was Jerusalem, yet Christ is absent from it: First, it was great, in
regard of the largeness of the situation and popularitie of people: secondly,
it was glorious, in regard of the sumptuous buildings and great riches:
thirdly, it was famous, in regard of the ancient monuments, and many victories
which the Lord blessed them withal above any other Nation; yet was not Christ
present with them. I need not instance for example ancient Rome, beautiful
Paris, famous Constantinople, with the residue of the great Cities in the
world, because I will judge of none, yet this I am sure of, how that the
greatest places may be destitute of Christ's presence, for the presence of
Christ is not tied to any place for the greatness of it, but for the goodness
of it; he cannot partake with Iniquity, neither shall the evil doer enjoy his
presence. For as light and darkness, life and death, fire and water, cannot
agree together, no more can the presence of Christ with a wicked generation.

omni-present in all places, at all times, with all persons, therefore no place
nor person can be destitute of the presence of Christ.

Resp.
It is true, the Lord fills heaven and earth, and the Prophetical David does
acknowledge as much, Ier. 1.23, 24. Psalm. 139.7.
how that a man can fly into no place where the Lord is not present: But for
the clearing of the point, we must distinguish. The presence of the Lord is
twofold, either Corporal or Spiritual: The Lords presence corporal or
spiritual.
his Corporal presence, is his being with any people in his humane Nature; but
of this presence, both we and all other people are destitute: his humane Nature
only remains in heaven, Sitting at the right hand of God in the glory of the
Father, and there shall sit till his second coming in the Clouds to judgment.

His presence Spiritual is either general or special. Praesentia. 1.
Absoluta. 2. Specialis and Approbationis. Act. 17.28. Genesis 4. Mat. 28. 1 Samuel
16.14. Dan. 5.
Secondly, his spiritual presence is twofold, general and more special: his
general presence is as the Schoolmen call it, his absolute presence, which
is his essential being in any place, and so he is present with all the world,
as well with the Reprobates as the godly, the unreasonable creatures as the
reasonable: by this presence we all live, move, and have our being: By this
presence, he is with Cain to affright him, with Judas to confound him, with
Saul to vex him, with Balshazer to amaze him, with all the wicked to terrify
and overthrow them for ever.

The second spiritual presence is special presence, Special spiritual
presence what.
called in Scripture, the love of God, or the favor of God, and thus he is
present with his Elect and none else. When Abraham made a request for Ismael,
it was only that the Lord would suffer him to live in his presence, that is,
in his favor and love, Genesis 17.18.
but this presence, none that are wicked can attain unto. As for that presence
which Jerusalem wanted was his corporal presence, and if I mistake not, his
spiritual also; for these Jews did reject him, both in his own person, and
in the person of his Prophets, continually refusing those which were sent unto
them for their own good, Mat. 23.37.
therefore it was just with God to leave them destitute of his special
presence, as soon after woefully came to pass.

Wheresoever the Ordinance of God is, Ob.
there is also his special presence: but these Jews had the ordinances of
God, therefore his special presence.

Answ. The ordinances of God do not tie Christ always to be present: Resp.
Then should his special presence remain amongst many Reprobates, Gods
ordinances may be where he is not present in a special manner.
for those which have not the fear of God before their eyes, can many times
get his ordinances, and that into their houses, yea into their hands, yet never
a whit the nearer is the special presence of Christ, because they want them in
their souls. It is not Michahs getting a Prophet into his house, Judge. 17.13.
can enforce the Lord ever a whit the more to be present, for the Arc may be
in the midst of Isreal's army, 1 Samuel 4.10, 11.
yet they put to flight by their enemies, because their sins had banished the
special presence of the Lord from their souls. But let this be granted,
though it never can be proved, yet was the special presence of Christ now
fled or flying from these Jews, and all by reason they wanted his ordinances:
It is true, they were offered, but rejected; for if Christ walk but toward
the Gadarens, this salutation shall meet him as a hedge to prevent him, Mat. 8.
v. vlt.
I pray thee depart out of our Coasts: thus they made the presence of Christ a
burden to their souls; and 11.30.
his yoke (though light) too heavy for them to bear, and never could have
inward peace, till they banished his presence from their Country: I cannot
deny, but that they had the Law, and the Sacraments of the law, yet not the
special presence of Christ in them, for these things were now abolished, new
things substituted and set up in their room: Needs therefore must the shadow
give place when the substance approaches. If it have turned us over to a
better Tutor, it self has no more to do with us, being only but a
Schoolmasters, to send us to Christ, Luke 19.42.
but as for that Law which Christ brought, the Jews wanted, for it was hid
from their eyes, therefore they needs must be destitute of the special
presence of Christ.

If Jerusalem that famous City which God lou^d above all the Cities in the
world; If that place, I say, was or could be destitute of the special presence
of Christ, then let not Rome boast too much of her holiness and outward
flourishing estate, let her never say, Ap. 18.7.8.
I am a Queen and shall see no mourning, for since the blood of all the
Prophets are only found in her, her fall shall come suddenly: But what have we
to do with Rome? and concerning her Religion, God grant we never may. Let us
therefore turn unto our selves, looking more near home, for here we shall
find employments sufficient amongst our selves: 1 Pet. 4.17.
If judgment begin at the house of God, where shall the wicked and ungodly
appear? if God deal thus with a green tree, L^k. 23.31.
what shall become of the dry? If the Jews so smart, Gods eldest sons, what
shall the Gentiles look for, his youngest servants? Surely, sin cannot go
long unpunished, for Saint Augustine in his Book of 50. Homilies, Aug. lib.
50. Hom. Hom. 21.
Homily 21. says that Iustitia est, vt puniat peccatum, It is a part of Gods
Justice to punish sin, yea, No greater punishment to a City, than to be
destitute of Christ's special presence.
a part of his active justice. But how he will punish it in us we do not know,
worse he cannot punish it in any nation, than to deprive the sinner of his
special presence, and that first because his presence is a Cities protection:
For if the Lord keep not the City, the watchman wake^h but in vain; 1. It is
a Cities protection. Psalm. 127.1^ 1 Samuel 17.4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Samuel 2.18. 2 Samuel
14.25. 2 Samuel 17. Judge. 16.3. 1 King. 3.12.
It is not Goliahs greatness, nor Azas swiftness, nor Absolons beauty, nor
Achitophels policy, Sampsons strength, Salomons wisdom, Croesus purse, nor any
thing under the Sun, that can be the safety of a City, but only the presence
of the Lord.

Secondly, his presence is a Cities direction: For as the wise men were led
from the East to Bethelem by a Star; 2. Direct. Mat. 2.9.
so are those people where Christ remains, led from nature to grace, from
sin to sincerity, from bad to good, from good to better; for Christ is that
bright morning star, Apoc. 22.16.
who will not suffer any to lodge long in sin, if they direct but their course
to that haven whereunto Christ will guide them.

3. Instruct.
Thirdly, his presence is a Cities Instruction: For as the Sun discouers all
dark places, so will Christ who is that Sun of righteousness, Man. 4.1.
or righteous sun, by his presence, unmask the face, take off the veil, and
chase away the foggy mists of sin and superstition from the heart, Psalm.
19.7. and Psalm. 119. Prou. 1.4.
filling the ignorant with knowledge, the simple with understanding, and all
with grace.

4. Consol.
Fourthly, his presence is a Cities comfort and consolation, and that because he
is all things beneficial, and the end of our hopes; he is a Sword, Water,
Milk, Wine, a Treasure, a Salve, a Garment, a Shepherd, a Bridegroom, a
Crown, a Pearl, a King, and a Key: See what benefit these or any of these is
to a Nation, a Family, or a private person, the same benefit is Christ, where
his special presence remains, for he is a Sword to defend us, Water to wash
us, Milk to nourish us, Wine to rejoice us, a Treasure to enrich us, a Salve
to heal us, a Physician to cure us, a Garment to cloth us, a Shepherd to
feed us, a Bridegroom to marry us, a Crown to honor us, a Pearl to deck
us, a King to govern us, and a Key to open and unlock Heaven gates unto us.
What shall I say? but only as a man ravished, cry from the bottom of my
soul, O happy and blessed be the people that have the Lord for their God; they
shall be fed as a Flock, fostered as a Family, dressed as a Vineyard, decked
as a Spouse, and crowned as a Queen. Contrariwise, where Christ's presence is
departed, to that people I may say, O miserable and unhappy men and women, good
had it been for you you had never been borne, but as the untimely fruit of
the womb had perished and been no more; for better no man, than a man without
Christ, and no City, than a City destitute of his presence. When Lot forsook
Sodom, it was soon consumed; and if Christ's presence forsake our land, it
will soon be destroyed; for that place which is destitute of the presence of
Christ, may complain as sometimes Martha did to our Savior, Joh. 11.21.
Lord if thou had been here, our brother LaZarus had not been dead: So if
thy presence had still remained with us, our Kingdom had not been wasted,
Magistrates not corrupted, Laws not violated, Lawyers not bribed, Faith and
Virtue not banished, Ministers mouths not stopped, but all goodness cherished,
and all men amended. To conclude, I leave this branch with a word of
exhortation, beseeching you so to entertain Christ though not in himself (for
that is impossible, seeing his body only remains in Heaven) yet in his
members, that he never may find any just cause of departing from us. I dare
boldly say, and that with a rejoicing heart, that England yet enioyes the
special presence of the Lord, to the great comfort of those that seek his
face, but how long we shall enjoy the same, the wisdom of Solomon is not able
to declare: could we keep from sin, we should ever enjoy a Savior, but if
sin be harbored in the soul, and rule in the life and conversation, it will
prove as a mist or a dark cloud, to obscure the special presence of Christ
from our Kingdom: I fear, nay know, that offense is given, and am not much
unsure that offense is taken, for iniquity grows so fast, that it has covered
the whole Land, yet who does seek to cut it down? neither is there but few
(if any) that stands in the gap to entreat the Lord for us; what shall I say,
Am I a Prophet? Amos 7.14.
No, nor the Son of a Prophet, yet this I dare boldly say, Luc. 13.
Unless we suddenly repent, we perish; either we must forsake our sins, or
else the presence of Christ will forsake our souls. I wonder we have not lost
him before this day: had it not been more of his goodness than of our
kindness, London had long since been left as Sodom, and raked up in Ashes
like to Gomorra: For how is his Name blasphemed, his Sabbaths profaned, his
Word contemned, his Sacraments neglected, his Ministers despised, his Children
derided, his holy Spirit grieved by many sins, which I will not say are
publicly maintained, but am sure they are openly practiced, which draws
tears afresh from the eyes of the Son of God, and makes him for want of a
Jerusalem to weep over London, as though it would prove a second Jerusalem, to
crucify his body again: but the Lord in mercy amend it, and give you hearts
that bears the sword of Justice to reform it, that Christ may not wilfully be
banished, but kindly received, friendly welcomed, lovingly entertained to us
and our posterity to the end of the world.

The second room of the first Tabernacle is Praesentia.
The second room in our Tabernacle or Branch, proceeding from our trees first
body or bole, is Praesentia; yet not so much in person as in affection; not by
the people required, but by Christ desired: he longed to be present with them,
Christ draws near either
therefore drew near unto them. Christ may be said to draw near a people,
either Corporally or Spiritually; Corporally. 1. in himself. 2. in his members.
Corporally in himself, or in his members. In himself, when he rides or goes
to any place in his humane body and soul, and thus he drew near at this time
to Jerusalem: for his body was carried on the back of a silly Ass, which he
sent his Disciples to borrow at the hand of a certain Farmer. Luke 19.35.
And upon this Ass he did take his progress toward Jerusalem, now drawing
near to the City: but thus he never shall draw near to any place again, his
body remaining only glorified in heaven.

Secondly, he draws near Spiritually, and that in love or affection. Or
spiritually in love and affection.
Thus also he may be said to draw near to Jerusalem; for this journey was not
only pedibus, sed affectibus, not by the motion of the feet, but of the
affections; or as Lira in locum has it, Lira in locum.
Non solum corporis gressu, sed etiam compassionis affectu: He came not only
with the feet of his body, but also with the affection of his compassion. When
he begins to work by his holy Spirit, Faith, Repentance, and Sanctification in
the hearts of a Nation, he may be said to draw near that people: For says
Christ, John 15.22.
if I had come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin, but now they have
no cloak for their sin: that is; if I had not come, they never would have
known themselves to be sinners, whereas by my coming they now perceive it:
so that we conclude, if any Nation be brought to a true sight and sense of
sin, it is by Christ his drawing near: but in that he here is said to draw
near Jerusalem, we note,

That the Lord will not absent himself for ever, 2. Doctr.
but at last will draw near to the people of his pasture: He is a God which
cannot always be chiding, neither will he forsake his Inheritance for ever.
Psalm. 30.5. and 103.9.
His wrath endures but a moment, but in his favor is everlasting life:
Heaviness may endure for a night, but joy comes in the morning. The Clouds
of our sins shall not always shadow the love of our Savior, but as the
Sun, at length shall break forth to our endless comfort. These Jews,
though they were stubborn and rebellious, hardening their hearts, increasing
their hatred against Christ, yet will he not quite leave and forsake them, but
once more resolves to draw near unto them: and herein has he expressed his
wonderful love, by which he would feign overcome our ingratitude, in that he
refuses not to draw near to miserable sinners. Men willingly draw not near
for good to 1. Strangers, 2. Poor and miserable, 3. Professed enemies.
There be three sorts of men in the world, which we would be loath to draw
near unto for good: the first, are strangers; the second, are poor and
miserable; the third, are professed enemies: As for strangers, we would not
come near unto them; for poor and miserable, we scorn to come near unto
them; for professed enemies, Jews, all these, notwithstanding Christ draws
near to them.
we dare not come near unto them. All these were the Jews to Jesus, yet he
draws near unto them. First, they were strangers, and that in Grace and
Goodness, yet Christ will come unto them: Secondly, they were poor and
miserable, and that in regard of their sins, yet Christ could not be kept
from them: Thirdly, they were professed, nay protested enemies, for surely in
their hearts they had vowed to kill him, else would they not have spread so
many nets to take him: yet he strives to save them in drawing near unto them.

Has he dealt thus alone with them, To the Gentiles, to us and our Land,
though like in condition to the Jews, though for a while he hid his face.
utterly refusing all other people? or was his affection so set upon the Jews,
that the Gentiles could not taste the sweetness of his love? Oh no! For as he
dealt with them, so likewise with us and our land. I must confess, how once
he hid his face from us, showing himself so stern and wrathful, as though
he never would be entreated by us. For in Queen Mary's days, the bloody
banner of persecution was displaied, and the fearful drum of terrible
threatening (Fire and Faggot) was struck up, the shrill Trumpet of mournful
lamentation was heard in every corner, Rachel weeping for her children, Matthew.
2.18.
and would not be comforted. The pale grim Sergeant Death, was met in every
street, who neither spared nor pitied young nor old, man nor woman, rich nor
poor, infant nor suckling, but arrested all that would be godly; yet soon had
that night an end, and the loving countenance of the Lord our God, like unto
the morning Sun, did most comfortably arise upon our land, in the beginning
of Queen Elizabeth's reign, of famous memory, and ever since he has drawn
nearer and nearer unto this present day. In so much as I may truly say, and I
hope say nothing but the truth, that he is now approached so near in the
Chariot of his love and mercy, as he never was nearer to any Nation from the
beginning to this day. For he is now arrived at the palace of our souls, he is
already come to the gates of our affections, Revel. 3.20.
and now stands knocking at the door of our hearts with the hammer of his
sacred word: and so Lord Jesus continue still, till thou have got a full
possession of our bodies and souls.

The several ways that God draws near a Nation, are many: for he comes not
to his people always after one sort, though still to one end: he is like a
skillful Musician, that sings new songs with diversity of Moddes and variety
of Notes, God draws ^ee^ a Nation by 1. His Word and Sacraments.
yet all to one end; namely, for the good of his own people.

The first way that he draws near to any Nation, is most commonly by his Word
and Sacraments: for he is that Son of man which walks in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks: Reu. 1.13.
Ap. 22.16. and Ap. 1.16.
that is, in the midst of his seven Churches; He is that bright morning star,
that holds the seven stars in his right hand, who although they shine, yet
receive they their light from him; his Word is himself, and he is his Word,
therefore where his Word is truly preached, his Sacraments constantly
administered, both carefully received, and conscionably practiced, there is
Christ present.

2. For his mercies.
Secondly, he draws near in bestowing great mercies, as when he gives us
gracious Princes, zealous Magistrates, painful Ministers, religious people,
and a flourishing commonwealth, al which we have had and do enjoy, the Lord
continue the^ for ever amongst us.

3. By afflictions
Thirdly, he draws near when he sends afflictions either inward or outward,
upon body or mind, for affliction is the rod which he ever holds in his hand,
to correct his children withal, needs therefore must he come very near when
he lays this rod upon the bodies of his people.

4. By deliverances.
Fourthly, he draws near when he delivers from any imminent danger, as when he
saues us from fire, water, sword, wild beasts, or strong enemies; thus he drew
near the three children, Dan. 3.17.
when he saved them from the fire; Exodus 14. vlt.
the Israelites when he saved them from the water; Daniel when he kept him from
the lions; David when he hid him from Saul; Esaias 43.1, 2, 5.
and this the Lord confesses by the mouth of his holy Prophet, saying, When
thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, and through the floods that
they do not ouerflow thee; when thou walk through the very fire thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee. From whence we plainly
see that the Lord draws near his Church, when he delivers them from great
dangers.

Fifthly, the Lord draws near by signs and tokens, either in the air, or in
the earth, or in the water; 5. By extraordinary signs in the elements and
creatures. Mark. 13.29. 6 By the motions of his Spirit.
For when ye see these things come to pass (says Christ) then know that the
son of man is at hand.

Sixthly, the Lord draws near by the motions of his holy Spirit, as when he
inflames a land, city, family, or private person, with godly desires, with
heavenly Meditations, with comforts and consolations in their souls. If the
iron rise of it self, we may be sure the Lodestone is not far off: so if our
minds (which are more heavier than lead) be elevated and lifted up toward
heaven, our hearts which by nature delights in nothing but evil, do now
begin to thirst after godliness, we may be sure Christ is not far from us.

Seventhly and lastly, 7. By death.
the Lord draws near unto us by death, and thus he draws near unto all, as
well wicked as godly, unreasonable as reasonable, creatures senseless, as
sensible: For what creature moving or growing upon the earth shall not taste of
death, for the holy Apostle says, It is appointed unto all men once to die,
Heb. 9 27.
and after that comes the judgment.

As he to us we ought to draw near to him. Genesis 3.8. I^^a. 1.3, 5.
We must not with Adam run to hide our selves in the bushes, nor with Jonas
fly to Tarsish, covering our selves in the keele of a ship from the presence
of the Lord, nor with Peter desiring him to depart from us, Luke 5.8.
because we are sinful men; nor with the Gergesites, desire him to part out
of our Coasts, Mat. 8. vlt.
when we spy him drawing near; Mat. 9.20.
but with that woman which had the bloody issue, strive to come so near him as
that we touch, not only his garment, but flesh and spirit also, if it be
possible. Luke 19.
Yea, with Zacheus, let us press so near, as that we may behold his whole
person with our own eyes; for if he draw near to us in mercy, we much more
ought to draw near to him because of misery, Heb. 4.16.
and with speed run to the Throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find
grace, not so much with the feet of our bodies as of our souls; Generally by
the affections of our souls which we may do in what estate soever we are in.
for we may run a pace to Christ, even as we sit in our houses, feed at our
tables, or lie in our beds; the feeblest cripple may make as good speed as the
swiftest foot man: for if the heart be not wounded by sin, and the feet of
the soul foundred by infidelity, we shall soon draw near: therefore let us
put but agility into the soul, then passage will soon be made for our
approaching into the presence of the Lord.

Specially by 1. Prayer.
The ways that a Christian may draw near to God are many: as first, when we
fly to him by earnest and hearty prayer, for true prayer is the wings of the
soul, by which we mount aloft into the presence of the Lord, soaring toward
the Heavens, where the souls conversation remains. Phil. 3.20.
True prayer brings us so near Christ, as that it admits us conference face to
face, Genesis 32.29.
nay it makes us wrestle with the Lord, and Jacob like, to depart with a
blessing: wherefore let us embrace that exhortation of S. Aug. Ascendat oration
vt descendat gratia: August.
Let our prayers ascend unto him, that his graces may descend down upon us.

Secondly, we draw near unto God, 2. By frequenting his Word.
when we often frequent his holy word; for he is in his word, and his word in
him, his word and he is both one; as by prayer we draw near to speak to him,
so in frequenting his word we draw near by harkning what he says to us; for
by his word he confers with our souls, as it were face to face (only setting
the brightness of his glory aside, which no mortal eye has or can endure to
behold) publishing and divulging to the sons of men, what he would have done
and left undone in this world: Therefore Qui habet aure, Apoc. 2.
audiat quid spiritus dicat Ecclesijs; Whosoever has an ear to hear, let him
hear what the spirit says unto the churches.

Thirdly, 3. By partaking his Sacraments
we draw near unto God by often receiving his Sacraments, for when we partake
of those heavenly mysteries, we either lodge in his arms or lean on his
bosom. The Sacrament of Baptism does lodge us in his arms, for he took the
children into his arms, he laid his hands upon them and blessed them; the
Sacrament of his last supper does lay us in his bosom, so that near must they
needs come that receive both these worthily.

Fourthly, we draw near unto Christ, 4 By taking up his cross.
in taking up his Cross, for when we take up his Cross with patience we
follow him, and if we follow him without fainting, we soon shall draw near
unto him, he that takes not up the Cross, can never come to Christ; well he
may follow him, but it will be with Peter, Mat. 26.58.
a far off, for which he was rebuked; but he that takes up the Cross and
follows Christ, shall with that worthy Cyrenian, at last attain Golgotha as
soon as Christ, and Heaven with Christ, therefore he that draws near unto
Christ this way, must not with Demas forsake Christ for a little affliction,
but must be like unto Paul, Gal. 6.14.
who was crucified to the world, and the world to him.

5. By outward profession.
Fifthly, we draw near unto Christ by an outward profession, which many
hypocrites does the like; therefore the Lord complains by the Prophet Esaias,
Esaias 29.13. Mat. 15.8.
saying, These people draw near unto me with their lips, but their hearts are
far from me.

6. By conversion.
Sixthly and lastly, we draw near unto Christ by our conversion, for the work
of regeneration brings us into the house of Christ, makes us one of his Family,
Esaias 43.1. Mat. 12. vlt. John 15.14. John 21.5. Romans 6.8, 22. Cant. 5.1.
his Brethren, his Sisters, his Mothers, his Friends, his Kinsfolk, his
Children, his Servants; nay, what not? For this makes us bone of his bone,
flesh of his flesh, yea his Spouse, we wholly his, he wholly ours for
evermore, and this conversion consists of two parts, Mortification and
Vivification. First, Mortification, Romans 8.13.
for he that mortifies not the deeds of the flesh by the spirit, can never
draw near unto Christ. Secondly, Vivification, for he that begins not to
lead a holy life as well as to forsake a wicked life, shall never attain to
the favor of Christ. Thus briefly you see how Christ may be said to draw near
unto us, we near unto him.

Secondly, if Christ draw near unto us, it is our Provide for his
entertainment.
he may not find bare walls; I mean a barren heart. The Proverb is, bare
walls drives away a good huswife, and a barren heart void of grace and
goodness, banishes a loving Savior. A man cannot offer a Prince a greater
injury then to seem to rejoice at his drawing near, yet to afford him no
entertainment at his arrival: and we cannot offer this Prince greater
indignity then to show our selves joyful at his appropinquation, but to have
nothing for his welcome: this is all one to cry with the Jews, Mat. 21.9.
Hosanna in the highest, blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord:
yet with the same Jews soon after, strain our notes to another tune, (...),
Mat. 27.42. and Mat. 27.25.
If thou be the Son of God come down from the Cross, save thy self and
others; or crucify him, crucify him, his blood be upon us and our children.
When Christ came to Marthaes house, there he did feast, Luke 10.38. Luke 7.36.
and now he comes to us, shall we make him fast? then soon shall we starve our
Savior from our souls. Publicans and sinners could, and did make provision
for his entertainment, shall we be worse then they? O no, far be that from
us, that Christ should find such courtesies from his enemies, and no welcome
amongst his professed friends; therefore since Christ draws near to us, Genesis
18.6.
let us with courteous Abraham run into our Tents, I mean into our hearts,
with the feet of zeal and love, and there make provision fitting for his
entertainment, which if he like, we never shall have cause to repent of our
cost, for liberally will the Lord reward all those to whom he comes. Peter's
wives mother did but once receive him, Mat. 8.15.
and he cured her of her Fever. Luk 19.9.
Zacheus did but once entertain him, and salvation was bestowed upon him. The
Bridegroom of Galile did but once inuit him, Ioh. 2.9.
and he turned Water into Wine. Abraham did but receive the Angels into his
house, Genesis 18.10.
and had a son bestowed upon him. Genesis 19.
Lot did the like, and was preserved from Sodoms destruction. Obed-edom did but
receive the Arc into his house, 2 Samuel 6.12.
and the Lord blessed him and all his house. Josh. 2.15. and 6.22.
Rahab received but the spies, and she was preserved in the downfall of
Jericho; if such benefit be reaped by entertaining the shadow; what do you
think you shall have for receiving the substance? As Isaac therefore kissed
Jacob, Genesis 27.27.
saying, The savor of my son is as the the savor of a field which the Lord
has blessed. So let us kiss our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ with the kisses
of zeal and humility, and being refreshed with the sweet smell of his
righteousness in himself, and his love toward us; let us bless Christ, and
say, the smell of our Savior is as the smell of a field which the Lord has
blessed. For surely I may say, to the comfort of those that find it; Oh happy
and blessed people, that has

Christ's drawing near, a preservative against despair and fear in Christ's
absence or afflictions. Esaias 54.8. Psalm. 30.5.
Thirdly, this is a preservative against despair: For why should any soul
fear when Christ absents himself, since it is but for a time? A little while
(says the Lord) in mine anger have I hid my face from thee, but with an
everlasting love have I had compassion upon thee: Heaviness may endure for a
night, but joy comes in the morning; though he be slow, yet he is sure,
therefore wait his leisure; for he that shall come will come, and will not
tarry: But how? Tibi si credis, contra te si non credis; If incredulous,
against thee; but if believing, for thee: What can be said less, yet what
can thou wish for more? If Christ does come, he respects not his pain; if
he come unto thee, he regards not his profit, for all his desire is only to
save thy soul. Upon the Cross he thirsted, but Domine quid sit is? Lord, what
do thou thirst for? John 19.28.
not so much for drink, as for man's salvation, and now comes to effect, what
before he thirsted for. I cannot deny, but that sometimes the Lord will make a
man believe how that he will never draw near in mercy to his soul: but being
once gone, will be ever gone, especially from thee, because thou art a great
Sinner; therefore, it may be thou shall be tempted and induced to make away thy
self, either by hanging or drowning, or stabbing, or poisoning, or casting thy
self down from some high place, by which thou may shorten thy days, and
become a murderer unto thy own body. But take heed thou yield not, for these
are only the delusions of thy enemy, who longs for thy downfall, and would
rejoice at thy ruin, neither sit thou alone that art in such a conflict, for
these things are exceeding common amongst Gods people. The Prophets, Apostles,
yea, and the best of his Saints have endured such things long before thee. What
a case was Job in, when he cursed the days of his birth? Job 3.1.
What a case was David in, when he seemed to fear utter perdition? therefore
prayed, Psalm. 51.11.
Cast me not away from thy presence, and take not thy holy Spirit from me:
What a case was Jeremy in, when he cursed and fretted, Iere. 20.14.
wishing he had never been, or that he had been slain after his first
entrance into the world? What a case was Elias in when he cried; 1 King. 19.4.
Math. 26.75.
It is enough Lord, take away my soul? What a case was Peter in when he went
from Christ and wept bitterly, to come again to Christ? What a case was Paul
in, when he cried out, Romans 7.14.
Oh wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? the
good I would do, I do not; the evil I would not do, that I do. Nay, what a
case was our Savior Jesus Christ himself in, when he prayed and wept, Matthew.
26.39.
wept and prayed: Oh Father, if it be possible let this cup pass from me; and
being in an agony, Luke 22.44.
he prayed more earnestly, that he sweat water and blood, and upon the Cross
cried that woeful and lamentable cry; My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? Was it thus with these servants of God, nay with the Son of God himself?
Then fear not thou, for as the Sun at last breaks out from under the
Clouds, so shall the presence of the Lord to thy poor soul: Fear not
therefore, though he absent himself a while, he will soon come again. The
experience of his mercies past, should encourage and strengthen thee for the
time to come; remember how he has cherished and kept thee in his bosom, when
thou were in danger; yea, how he has snatched thee out of the claws of
Satan, and set thee up upon a rock of stone. Remember how when thou wast not,
he made thee; when thou wast lost, he redeemed thee; when thou wentest astray,
he reclaimed thee; when thou wast naked, he clothed thee; when thou wast
hungry, he fed thee; when thou wast ignorant, he instructed thee; and ever
since thy birth, he has waited for thee. Furthermore, consider how be has
nourished and maintained thee, admitting thee by Baptism into the fellowship
of his Saints, and has sealed his affection unto thee, by the Sacrament of his
body and blood: O remember, how in great griefs he has stood by thee! when
the pit was open, it did not swallow thee; when Satan roared, he could not
touch thee; when men have threatened, they could not wrong thee in all thy
lawful actions; the Lord has blessed thee, can such a God who has done all
this for thee, now leave and forsake thee? Oh no! It is impossible, for he
will not absent himself for ever, neither will he utterly forsake the people
of his own pasture. Let this comfort therefore even melt thee with kindness
toward thy God, and cause thee to say with David, Psalm. 116.12.
What shall I render unto the Lord for all his benefits toward me, I will take
the Cup of salvation, and call upon the name of the Lord; yea, I will love thee
dearly, O Lord my strength, I will honor thee, embrace thee, kiss thee,
rejoice in thee, and deuote my self wholly unto thee; because thou have
favored my soul in her greatest extremity, and rejoiced my heart in her
greatest heaviness. August. in 17. Sermon. 8. Tom. 10.
Saint Augustine says, that a mighty man will not lose that which he has
bought for his money, and will Christ lose that which he has bought with his
blood? Surely no: therefore when thou find a want of Gods presence, either
in the whole or in part, which before thou have felt, be not too much dismayed,
for he can as soon forsake himself as thy soul; and though he did forsake
thee, he will not leave thee: comfort thy self therefore with these words.
This matter were worthy of a longer speech, but time inforceth me to make an
end: wherefore I beseech the God of all consolation, to make this point as
profitable, as it is comfortable.

The 3. room in the first Tabernacle, is Christ d^ligence of labor.
The third room in this Tabernacle or Branch, proceeding from his
Appropinquation, is Diligentia; or as more properly we may term it (labor.)
For a journey cannot be taken in hand without great diligence and labor, and
that because it procures a continual motion of the body, which constant motion
will at length breed weariness in all the parts of man. And surely thus it was
with our Savior, for as man he was subject to all those passions belonging to
man, Heb. 2.17. and 4.15.
being like us in all things, sin only excepted, yet he continues his
journey, drawing near to Jerusalem, as one regarding no pain, fearing no
labor, respecting no profit; so that his Appropinquation might comfort his
inheritance. From whence we see,

3. Doct. No labor hinders Christ's love.
That no labor could hinder Christ's love, no pains withdraw his patience,
but still he is patient in waiting, and loving in coming to these rebellious
people. Nothing commends patience more, then with painfulnesse to show
kindness; nor nothing sets forth love more, then to overcome ingratitude with
labor: both which do magnify themselves in our Savior. His pains does show
his patience, his labor sets forth his love, in that he drew near unto the
City. Many will love so long, as love requires no labor, and all will be
patient whilst they feel no pain: but let labor and pain, pain and
labor, once seize upon the body of the most, yea, of the best, soon then
shall you see love extinguished, patience banished. The Jews can love Jesus,
so long as he will cure their diseases, feed heir bodies, and restore their
Kingdom: but when he preaches against the Scribes and Pharisees, calling them
Hypocrites, and the Generation of Vipers, Matthew. 23. Luke 19.45.
whipping the buyers and sellers out of the Temple: declaring how that his
Kingdom was not of this world, then farewell love and patience both; For love
is turned into loathing, patience into raging; in stead of God save thee, now,
The Devil take thee; in stead of Hail Master, hang Master is set up; for
Crucify him, Matthew. 27.
crucify him, is their evening and morning song: nothing would content them
but his death, when once they felt the smart. But with our Savior it is not
so: for though his coming was laborious, and his labor painful to all the
parts of his body, yet be vouchsafes to draw near this sinful City. By
which he shows, how far his love exceeds man's, and how great his patience
is beyond ours: Our love may sparkle very high, and our patience may drink up
many years, but the highest sparkle of our love, could it mount as high as the
love of Jonathan to David, 2 Samuel 1.26.
whose Love surpassed the love of women, yet could it not reach the middle
region of Christ's love; and were our patience like Jobs, Iam. 5.11.
able to feed upon all afflictions, and to drink up years of life, yet not
comparable with the patience of Christ. For look how high the heaven is above
the earth, gold beyond dross, man beyond beast, nay God himself the Creator,
beyond miserable man the creature; so far is the love and patience of Christ
beyond ours. Amor vincit omnia, is an old phrase, love overcomes all things:
but were it as old as man, and man as aged as the world, yet true in none but
only in Christ. Christ's love exceeding large.
The love of man may overcome many things, as nakedness, famine, sword, water,
fire, stones, and many other perils; yet not all things, for hell, death,
damnation, and the burning wrath of God was something; yea, and such a thing,
that all the love of all the men in all the world, was never able to overcome
one for another, therefore non omnia, sed multa, not all things, but many
things; but the love of our Savior ouercomes non multa, sed omnia, not many
things, but all things: for hell, death, damnation, and the burning wrath of
God, was by our Savior overcome and satisfied, not for him self, but for us,
and by the loss of his life; John 15.13.
therefore greater love then this could no man show, then to lay down his life
for his friends.

1 Use. Think no pains too great to come to Christ.
If our Savior take such pains, as by labor to weary his body in coming to
us; we then are to think no labor or pains too much in coming to him: one
kindness requires another, yet not so much for our Saviors profit as for our
benefit. His laboring to come to us, is for our good, not for his own: our
laboring to come to him, is to profit our selves, not him; therefore we ought
to be more willing to undergo any pains to attain his presence, then he our
persons: But alas, I mourn to see, and seeing mourn, the backward age wherein
we live; Christ may take pains an hundred times to come to us, before we once
to come to him. For who will go from East to West; from North to South, to
come to him, as he does to come to us? If it were to go to profit or pleasure
never so far, we could be well contented to undergo all the labor and
pains such a journey casts upon the body: But to come to Christ, who is the
pleasure and profit of our souls? we hardly will go a mile; a mile did I say,
nay hardly out of our doors, nay scarce will take the pains to rise off our
beds to draw nigh Christ. For we are like the Church in the Canticles, who have
put off our coats, Cant. 5.3.
and cannot put them on, washed our feet, and will not defile them again:
though they are more defiled in keeping from him, then they would be in coming
to him. But be it they were defiled after our labor or journey, he that washed
Peter's feet, would not stick to wash thine: For what he was to him, he is to
us, John 13.9.
and to all those that draw near unto him; yet how long may his house stand
naked, his word unfrequented, and his table unfurnished, before we will take
the pains to draw near any of them, especially with sincerity and
uprightness? neither can we of our selves, so backward and auerse are we by
nature to all goodness. Christ tells us, saying; John 6.44.
No man can come unto me, unless the Father which has sent me draw him: yet
we must do our endeavor, and express the desire of our hearts, to come to
him. For, Qui creauit te sine te, non saluabit sine te, August. tract. 15. de
verbis Apost.
says Saint Augustine; He that made thee without thy self, will not save
thee without thy self; therefore arraigne thy self by this Indictment at the
bar of Gods Grace, make an humble confession of thy own backwardness to any
goodness, craving mercy at the hands of him that is rich in mercy, and
evermore forwarder to give, Matt. 7.7.
then we to ask; to open, then we to knock; to be found, then we to seek,
praying with his only beloved Spouse; Lord draw me, Cant. 1.3.
and we will run after thee. And thus much shall suffice for furnishing the
first Tabernacle of our Text.

The second Tabernacle like a Watchtower, has also three rooms, or this bole
three branches.
Our second Tabernacle, as you heard in our division, seems to be made in the
form of a Watchtower, wherein we have Christ viewing Jerusalem, (...), he
beheld the City. This body or bole like unto the former, sends forth three
branches: or this Tabernacle has three rooms.

1. Contemplation, He beheld as
The first is the Contemplation it self, (...), he beheld.

The second is the Object, (...), a City.

The third more particularly what City, (...), the City.

Of these in order; and first of his Contemplation, he beheld: but how? either
with the eyes of his body, or the eyes of his mind; either with the eye
natural, or with the eye spiritual; either as God, or else as Man, or as both
God and Man, and so I rather think. 1. Man.
First, he beheld as man with the eyes of his body, or bodily eyes; the
beauty, the glory, and the magnificence of this City. He looked at this time
upon her Bulwarks, her Towers, her strong walls and fortifications: He saw her
curious buildings, rich pauings, ancient monuments, spacious streets; he
beheld the great concourse of people flocking from all parts in all corners of
this City. Not any sexes, years or degrees, were hid from him as man: he
beheld the old sitting, the young playing, the maids dancing, the Merchants
trafficking, the greedy scraping, the profane spending, the prodigal wasting;
yea, what not? For surely, what might be seen with the eye of man, was not
unseen by the eye of our Savior as man.

But if we consider him in the second place, how he beheld it as God: we then
shall find, 2. As God.
he saw much more then man was able to discern. For as God, he beheld their
wickedness, hardness of heart, contempt of him and his graces; yea, he saw,
or rather foresaw from this his watchtower, how there he should suffer shame,
ignominy, and reproach; yea, how he should shed his precious blood amongst
them, yet they never a whit the better for it: the future temptations, ruins,
and desolations, both of Church and people, head and tail, branch and rush,
were not obscured from his eyes, for he foresaw all, therefore foretold all,
Matthew. 24.2.
How that a stone should not be left upon a stone vncast down; yet as he
foresaw it as God, bewailed and lamented it as man.

But some perhaps may say, Eust. in his Exposition upon the tenth book of
Arist. Ethiks.
that a deep Contemplation is part of our felicity, to which I do assent and
agree in some sense: for I am not ignorant how that Eustratius affirms, that
Contemplation is a chief perfection of our felicity, because it does separate
a man from the domestical and civil cares, making him fly from all company
and society of friends: others take it to be a pleasure of the mind, which I
rather assent unto, therefore in Greek it is called (...), because we are
sweetly affected with the presence of some good thing agreeing with our nature:
But I stand not here to dispute with Schoolmen and Philosophers, because this
Contemplation of Christ affords us no such fruit. For it is neither the
perfection of his felicity, nor any pleasure of his mind to behold such
misery, which now was an object to his eyes; for had it been so, doubtless
it neither would, nor could have wrung tears from his bright glistering eyes
as it did.

But in this his Contemplation he offers us a breast of Consolation, from
whence we may suck no small comfort for our instruction: for if he contemplate
our miseries, how gracious does he intend to be to our souls? Never did the
beams of his glistering eyes reflect upon any object, but either it did good,
or showed his desire so to do, might he be but accepted. Though these wicked
Jews had rejected him many a time, both in himself, and those which were sent
unto him; yet he vouchsafes to view them once again, so unwilling he was to
leave them: even Lover like, who is loath to take any denial, if tongue, eyes,
hands, works, or tears, could draw their affections. O happy! nay thrice
happy, had it been for Jerusalem, had they made but a right use of our
Saviors beholding them; then would his eyes like a salve have cured their
sores, for as the Sun drives away the mist from off the earth, so would his
eyes the foggy mists of sin and superstition from their heart, or as the fire
does purge the gold from dross, so would these heavenly looks their souls
from errors. Act. 5.15.
Peter's shadow cured the diseased as he passed by: and would not the substance
of Christ's eyes (to whom Peter's whole body was but a shadow) much more have
cured their souls? Surely yes; no sooner did he look upon Matthew, Matthew. 9.9.
but raised him from the table of Custom. He did but glance his eye upon
Zaccheus, Luke 19.6.
and it brought him down hastily, causing him to receive Christ joyfully. John
7.48, 49.
In telling Nathaniel how he saw him under the Fig tree, made him confess he
was the Son of God: In but once looking back upon Peter, Luke 22.60, 61.
he was driven hastily from sin, to weep bitterly for sin. Many more
examples might be produced, but this is sufficient: for certainly the eyes of
Christ were full of virtue, Sunne-like, able to have thawed the greatest frost
of sin in the soul; the fire consumes the fuel, the heat does melt the
wax, the Sun does thaw the ice, yet the eyes of Christ does neither consume
their sin, melt their hearts, nor thaw their frozen souls. The Lodestone by
her attractiue virtue draws up the solid Iron; so would those eyes of Christ
these peoples affection, had not their hearts been more obdurat then Iron.
They cease to be Iron (yet are they no Gold) but now are converted into the
nature of an Adamant. When I call to mind, how pitifully, how mournefully,
how sorrowfully, how carefully, and how lamentably he looked upon this place
and people; it is like David's stone, wounding not only my head, but my heart;
yea, it is like Longinus spear, ready to pierce my soul with sorrow and
grief. Never did the father so tenderly behold his child, nor the mother so
compassionatly look upon the tender infant in her arms, as our Savior Christ
did at this time upon Jerusalem. For such was his affection toward this
Nation, that his contemplating their miserable fashion, wrung forth abundant
tears of compassion from his heavenly eyes. But no more of this, lest grief
and sorrow should hinder our passage to the second branch.

The second room of the second Tabernacle, is the object, City.
The second room in this Tabernacle or Branch of this body or bole, is Christ's
Object, which in our Text is called (...), a City, a fair object by name, but
foul by nature; for though it was a City, yet a most sinful City, as
remained under the heavens, neither are we so to understand our Text, as that
he beheld nothing but the City. For doubtless, the Suburbs, out-parts and
skirts thereof were seen by him, as well as the City; nay, the villages and
private houses near adjoining to Jerusalem, were not hid from his all-seeing
eyes. If we consider him as God, then he sees all things: for the Prophetical
David does thus acknowledge, saying; Thou know my down sitting, Psalm.
139.2, 3. and 4 v.
and mine vprising: thou understand my thoughts a far off; thou compassest
my path, and art acquainted with all my ways; there is not a word in my
tongue, but lo, O Lord, thou know it altogether. Sibylla in her Oracles,
could thus say, Sibyl. Or.
(...), The Almighty and invisible God, he only sees all things; yea,
(...), God has an all-seeing eye. Also the Mystical and Enigmaticall letter,
whereby the Egyptians would have God to be understood, was an eye: and the
reason is rendered by Hieroglyph^lil. 33.
P^erius, because (says he) the great God of heaven is mundi oculus, the eye
of the world. Saint Augustine is of the same opinion, who says; That God is
totus oculus, wholly an eye: and his reason is, quia omnia videt, because he
sees all things, yet more especially at this time Jerusalem, for he beheld
the City: thereby noting to us, that he was more desirous to view the City,
then the Country, and ever more forward to pry into these places, then any
other besides. When he had a controversy with Sodom, he did not so narrowly
view Zoar, or search the little Villages near adjoining, as he did those four
great Cities; therefore said, Genesis 18.21.
Because the cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is great, I will go down and see
whether they have done altogether according to the cry that is come unto me.
Whether they, not leaving out the skirts, nor any parts of the plain, but they
more especially. Also, in the days of Iona, Iona. 1.2. and 3.2.
Gods eye was more fixed on Niniue, then upon any part of the Country besides,
that he might view and behold that place (being great and populous) more
circumspectly then any other: from whose example, you that are Magistrates of
this Honorable City are to learn,

That though your eyes be fixed upon many objects, Doctr. The eye especially to
be fixed upon Cities.
yet more especially, you are to set them upon the City: The City (I say) is
to be your principal object, and that for many reasons: I will only mention
four.

First, in Cities there is most good to be done, 1. In Cities most good may be
done.
because there is most people; it is best angling where there is most Fish;
best gathering, where there is most fruit; the greatest garrison, requires the
vigilantest Captains; the greatest City, the watchfulest Magistrates; where
there is most treasure, there is most watching and warding; and where there is
most people, there should be the most beholding.

2 Cities the head of lands.
Secondly, Cities are the head of Lands, and all other places are but as members
to them. Now nature as well as Physic teaches this, that if the head be
polluted, the body cannot be sound; if the head be ill, all the members fare
the worse; and whatsoever the head affects, the body does not hate; therefore,
he that desires a sound and healthy body, must look well to his head, that
cold pierce it not, blows wound it not, wine disturb it not, heats perish it
not, diseases wrong it not, and cares trouble it not. So you that desire a good
Commonwealth, look well to the City, that Vice infect it not, Sectaries
trouble it not, Atheism drown it not, Schism rent i^ not, Popery powder it
not, nor Traitors betray it not. I say again, look well to the City, for as
the Dragon with her tail drew the third part of the stars from heaven, A^.
12.4.
and cast them upon the earth; so will a City the third part (if not more) of
a Commonwealth, to delight in what she loves. I say again, look well to the
City; for as the poisoning of the Fountain is the spoil of all the streams,
so the wickedness of the City is the bane of a whole Kingdom. If the mother
be well tutored, the daughters will suck their instruction from her breasts.
Win the Lady or Princess, and her handmaids will soon be brought to
obedience: Look well to the City, that she remain sound in religion, then
the Country will soon be brought to any goodness.

Thirdly, Cities are full of windings, turnings, 3. Cities full of secret
sins.
and secret corners, in which filth and corruption may lie so long festring,
till it has bred a contagious Leprosy, that like to the Gangren, will
endanger the spreading over the whole body; therefore Cities ought most
narrowly to be looked unto. Achans theft may lie in one corner, I^sh 7. 2 King
9 22. D^n 5. 2. Sam. 15.
Iesabels whoredom may keep in another corner; Belshazers drunkenness may
lodge in another corner; Absolons conspiracies may keep in another corner.
These, with a thousand more wickednesses, like so many dunghils, may be
harbored within, and about the walls of this City, yet you ignorant of all,
unless you search more narrowly then we fear you do concerning all.

Fouthly, Cities are in greatest dangers, 4. Cities are in greatest danger.
for as the Fowler aims at the head when he intends to kill the Bird: so our
Adversaries aim at our Cities, when they intend to conquer our Countries, and
that either by secret powdering, or cloaked flattering, intending never more
mischief, then when they pretend most friendship. Awake therefore O you
Magistrates, and wipe your eyes O you Ministers of the Lord, that you may
behold clearly the wonderful deformity and abuse of our City. Isreal's
second King, and first best King, hid not his eyes from the violence and strife
in the City, Psalm. 55.9.
but confessed to the Lord, how he saw it all wheresoever it was committed, and
will you mask your faces that you may see none? Prou. 20.8.
Solomon tells us, that a wise King sits upon the Throne, and chaseth every
one that is evil; yea, even with his eyes. Job, who was a Magistrate, and a
great Ruler in the Country where he lived, was so vigilant in his place, that
the disordered young men durst not endure his sight, but hid themselves from
his presence: Job. 29.8.
for he brake the iaw of the unrighteous, (of what state or degree soever) and
plucked the prey out of his teeth: Job. 29.17.
As for vagabonds and vilde persons, they were compelled to fly into the
Wilderness, and into dark and desolate places, they were chased forth from
among men, they shouted at them, Prou. 30.3.5.6.
as at a Thief, therefore they dwelt in clifts of rivers, in holes of the
earth, and in rocks. You, my Lord, and the rest of the Governors of of this
honorable and famous City, give me leave to tell you one thing, and that the
truth. I know you have heard it, and am fully persuaded you know it, yet I
cannot choose but once more divulge it; namely, how that the safety and
prosperity both of Church and Commonwealth, next under our good God, and our
gracious King James, whose famous memory shall live when he is dead, lies in
your careful vigilance. For as grass cannot grow where feet often pass, so
sin dares not flow where your eyes often glance: Commonly called the Batt.
But as the Night-bird flies without fear, when once the Sun declineth our
Horizon; so iniquity will domineere in our City, if your eyes cease to look
abroad. When Sampson was asleep he was betrayed; and if you slumber long, our
Cities will be wasted. Holofernes in taking his rest when he should not,
smarted, both he and his Army, when they would not; therefore take heed you
give not your eyes to much sleep, nor your eie-lids to much slumber. When you
should be about the work of the Lord, I mean, hewing down those trees of
sins with the sword of Justice; that it may be said of you, as the Lord once
said of the Church of Ephesus, Ap. 2.2.
I know how thou can not bear with them which are evil: But if you do
contrarily, neglecting the place wherein the Lord has set you, it will not
only be your own blot, the poison of your family, the bane of your
posterity; but also the utter disgrace, ruin, and overthrow of our whole Land.

As I remember you command lights to be hung forth in dark nights, that the
feet of Passengers may be kept from stumbling, and strangers to be guided in
the way: shall I say you do well in so doing? yes, and very well, else should
I wrong your care. But I could wish, that the same Lanthornes might be lights
to guide your feet into the secret corners of our City more oftener then they
do: I need not then show you what there you should find. For I am persuaded,
you would say with the Queen of Sheba; The one half of what I now see, 1
King. 10.7.
was never told me by the Ministers of the Lord. For it is impossible that our
tongues should unfold so fully the enormities of this great City, as your eyes
may discern them: If I should ask you that question, which once the Lord did
ask our daily Watchman, Custos quid de nocte? Watchman, Esaias 21.11.
what see thou by night? So my Lord, what see you in London by night? it may
be nothing: why so? because you are then at rest, when you should be at the
greatest labor. Do you not see Adulterers and Adulteresses together? Do you
not see how they strive to make one another drunk, that they may cheat and
cousen them of their patrimony? Do you not see reuelling, dancing, and
banqueting till midnight? Do you not see carding, dicing, drinking, and
swearing all night? Do you not see how the Iesabellicall dames bake painting
on their faces in the night, that they may allure men unto vanity in the day
with their deceivable beauty? Do you not see Mass Priests as ordinary in the
streets as Ministers? Do you not see the Thief stealing, the Murderer
stabbing, Couzners cheating, the Prodigal wasting, the profane spending, and
conspiracy following their business very closely? What shall I say? me
thinks, if your eyes were not too much blinded, you might see those every
night in their cups and iollitie, which scarce the Sun sees in a month
together, nor they the inside of a Church or good book in a twelue-moneth
together. The Devil sees all this, and laughes at it; if you see it not to
amend it, God one day will see to punish it, both in you and them: In you, for
winking at it; in them, for committing of it. But what avails it me to
speak of these things? this Pulpit has sounded with these exclamations many
times in your ears; but I fear all in vain, because I see so little
reformation. You are lulled so fast asleep in the cradle of security, that it
is almost as easy for us to raise Lazarus from the grave, who has been dead
four days, as to open your eyes to behold the sins of this City, with a
purpose to punish them: me thinks you have eyes, Why do you not use them in
the work of the Lord? God and Nature has made them round like a ball, thereby
intimating, that you should look every way; not only before you, but also of
each side, and lest any thing should be amiss behind, Nature has given your
neck motion, so that the head may turn to fix the eye upon any object, as
well behind as before. Also, the eye stands not out, but in the head; for it
does not appear so far forth, as the nose or lips of a man: but it is placed
in a deep hole, as water in a Fountain, and also has a lid to cover it, and
a brow to shelter it: thereby noting to us, that the eye must be preserved and
not blinded with gifts, or sinister respects. Veiles which hinder the eyes of
Governors, from beholding a Cities enormities.
I am not ignorant of the veiles or couerings that may hinder your eyes from
beholding the enormities of this City: I will not tax you with any, only I
will show you them, that when you see them, you may examine your selves
concerning them.

The first is Ignorance (which is the ground of all Errors, and not the mother
of Devotion, 1. Veil, is ignorance of the Cities vices.
as the adversary teaches) yet not of God, nor of his truth. For that you
cannot, nay I dare boldly say, be not ignorant of. Your knowledge is great,
yea wonderful great in this respect, far exceeding all other Nations, the
Lord make it as good as great. But the ignorance I speak of, is of the vices
and sins of this City; for surely if you knew them, your eyes could not be
restrained from beholding them, that your hearts might the more be encouraged
to punish them. Yet why do I say you are ignorant of these things? Me thinks
it is impossible: you are not Strangers in Israel, but borne and bred where
these things have lodged. Were you therefore as deaf as an adder, your ears
could not choose but tingle long ago with these reports; if they have not now,
God grant they may, and not only now, but every day till a reformation be made.

2. Veil, stupiditie.
The second veil or covering is stupiditie or blockishnesse, which is engendered
most commonly by gluttony and drunkenness: for when a man is ouer-charged with
Gods good Creatures, they do so stupifie his nature, and dull his spirits for
the time, that he is not fit for any action, either in his public or private
calling; When the belly is full the bones would be at rest, is the ancient
Proverb; therefore so receive the creatures of God, that by them you may the
more cheerfully perform that work, and execute that place whereunto the Lord
has called you. When the Israelites were full, they forgot that God that made
them. When Belshazer was ouer-charged with Wine, his Kingdom might have run at
random: And when the Glutton was crammed with delicates, Lazarus was forgotten;
most true therefore is this saying, That the body being ouer-charged, is not
fit for any employment: for the creatures of God being received immoderatly, so
stupifie and dull the whole Man, that it makes him forget both God and
goodness, himself and others, life and death, heaven and hell, and all things
else that is needful for a Christian to ponder. But why do I rest here, since
venture non habit aures, the belly has no ears; and what is spoken unto it, is
no more then stones cast against the wind, or men fighting with the air. Pass
we therefore from this second veil, and come we to the third.

The third veil or covering, 3. Veil, is delights.
is wallowing in delights and pleasures; as hawking, hunting, dicing, carding,
bowling, shooting, drinking, sporting, with the like: not that I condemn the
lawful use of lawful things, but the abuse of them, as in using them at
unlawful times and seasons, and unlawfully. It was well said by a good Divine,
that we must play no longer then we can pray. Can we pray an hour? then in
lawful exercises we may sport an hour; but if a minute we cannot pray, we
have no liberty to spend a day, nor the least part of a day in any exercise
whatsoever. Genesis 34.1.2.
When Dina went from praying to playing, she lost her virginity. When David
took liberty to sport with his neighbors Wife, he brought Gods judgments
upon his Kingdom. When Sampson lay bathing himself upon the lap of his
delights, 2 Samuel 11.4. and 12.10. Judge. 16.20. Judith 12. and 13 Chap.
he was betrayed into the hands of the Philistims: and when Holofernes was
ravished with conceit of pleasure he should enjoy with Judith, lost his head by
the hand of Judith. For never was there any that wallowed long in delights, but
smarted soundly in the end. It is so thick a veil, that no misery or
mischief can be discerned (though never so near) through it. Dina saw not
Sechem, David discerned not the sword, Sampson dreamed not of the Philistines,
nor Holofernes perceived not the intent of Judith: he that eats Honey, thinks
not of the sting, because the sweetness delights his palate: and he that
wallowes in delights and pleasures, thinks omnia been, all is well, because he
enioyes his hearts desire: but as he that loiters when he should not, shall
smart when he would not: so that Magistrate that beholds no iniquity for
delights and pleasure, shall one day feel much misery, and that beyond measure
inexpressible by the tongue of man.

4. Veil, is fear ^r cowardlinesse.
The fourth veil or cover of the eye, is fear and timorousness, which we
commonly call base cowardlinesse, when you would behold to punish, but dare
not, because they are rich men, or great persons; therefore if you should pry
into their faults, they perhaps would sit upon your skirts when you would
receive kindness of them. This veil is just like the plastering of
hypocrisy, or a strong man with a cowards heart, whose voice is ever, One good
turn deserves another, or like the Thief, Say nothing of me, and I will say
nothing of thee; or like the greedy Cormorant, whose only aim is for his own
gain, saying; I am contented to pass by your offense, and to wink at this
your fault, only do me such a courtesy when you go unto the Court. But know
all you that harbor such intents within your breasts, that if you see and
fear to strike, God will not fear to see you smitten, with all those plagues,
woes and curses, threatened in his holy Word. What though they be your friends?
it is a happy loss to lose the friendship of man, to win the favor of God.
What though they may do you a kindness? God must do you a greater, or good
it had been you had never been borne. What though they may stand you in stead
in time of extremity? God must stand you in more when the world forsakes you,
or else woe be to your souls in death and judgment. What though they be
great, and threaten to remember you? God is far greater, and will not forget
you, when the memorial of them is rooted out of the earth; therefore pluck up
your courage, draw out your sword, cut down iniquity, wheresoever,
whenever, or in whomsoever you find it. Stand not like that Abomination of
desolation, mentioned by Daniel, Dan. 9.27. Math. 24.15.
neither pass by the enormities of this City, with those sugared words of
Elie, This ought not to be so my sons, this ought not to be so: but march
fiercely like Iehu: threaten terribly with David, 1 Samuel 25.22.
God do so, and more then so to the enemies of David, if ought of Nabals house
be left until the morning. Speak sternely with Joseph, Genesis 42.15.
By the life of Pharaoh you shall not go hence, unless your younger brother
come. So, take an holy oath, promise betwixt God and your souls, that
wickedness shall not go unpunished, unless it speedily be amended: set
always before your eyes this common, yet ancient verse: A Prince can have no
better part
Then Foxes wit, and Lions heart.


The fifth veil or covering to the eye, is rashness, 5. Veil, is rashness.
which is seen when you punish by striking and giving sentence before you
hear the defendant. The Proverb is, One cause is good till the other be
heard; therefore as God has given you two ears, you must hear both sides; I
mean, as well the defendant as the plaintiff, the witness, as the Jury. He
that takes up Iron, but afterward finds Gold, flings by the worse and takes
up the better. Even so, though you find one cause good, but the other better,
cleave to the best; yet give sentence upon none, till their case be more
clearer: for Judgment rashly pronounced, many times causes the innocent to
be punished, the offender cleared; if you therefore break forth suddenly into
any such passion, oh speedily recall that wicked affection, and suffer it not
to rest within your breast.

6. Veil, is Idleness, and casting the charge upon other.
The sixth and last veil or covering of the eye, is Idleness, which we commonly
call sloth and laziness. Many Magistrates it may be, would willingly reform
the abuses of the City, but are loath to take the pains: for thus many a
drowsy Magistrate confers with himself; To walk abroad in the night will
break my sleep, disturb my rest, endanger my body; going about the City
will weary my limbs, trouble my brains, and move my patience in beholding the
wickedness of the people: therefore, that my body may have his ease and rest,
I am willing to suffer the people to walk in their own ways during my time:
A year is not ever, for soon will that time be accomplished, and as for the
people, they cannot grow much worse in so short a time; therefore he that
comes after shall take the pains for me. And thus through sloth, we post our
labor off from day to day, casting the burden upon other men's backs: so that
ease and rest may be had, let the City flow with iniquity, till it sink
with Abiram, and burn with Sodom. Others there are, who think their places
fully discharged, in authorizing any servant to see a reformation. But I tell
you nay: for their labor cannot discharge your duty, nor other men's pains
your place. Know you not that servants are idle, and as feign would have ease
and rest as you; but suppose they be not, yet soon eye blasted, for a vision
of Angels will make them play bo-peepe; see, and not see; hear, and not hear.
Matthew. 26.
Will not Judas sell his Master for profit, much more your Honors for gain?
Will not Gehesi take a bribe behind his Masters back, yet shamelesly say; 2
King. 5.
Thy servant has been no where? Trust not therefore too much to their pains,
but to your own; for that which is done by your own labor, is ever best, and
will afford your souls in trouble the greatest rest. Thus briefly you see the
veiles that may hinder from beholding the enormities of this City: search
therefore your selves, whether these, or any of these be as a covering to your
eyes, which if you find, cast them away suddenly, not only from the face, but
from the heart. For if you solace your selves in these things, then sin will
be the sickness of our City, and your portion after this life everlasting
misery.

The third room in this Tabernacle or Branch of this body, The third room of
the second Tabernacle.

The City Jerusalem the Cesterne into which God powered his blessings, yet not
answerable to his mercies.


does lively paint out to us what City it was our Savior thus beheld. The
Text says, it was (...) the City. Should I therefore pass by this particle
(the) I should suffer Jerusalem to lose her honor, though now her honor and
happiness be laid in the dust: For that City which is Christ's Object at this
time, was Jerusalem, a City once that shined as the stars in heaven, a
City that ouer-awed all the Cities in the world, and was the rod of Gods anger
to smite the Nations withal. It was that City which God had chosen above all
the Cities in the earth to dwell in. It was that City where the Throne of
David stood: Psalm. 132.13, 14
It was that City where Gods worship was put, for there was the Temple, the
Altars, the Sacrifices, the Priests, the Arc of the Covenant, the Sanctum
Sanctorum: yea, what not, for all things that appertained to the worship and
service of God, was only found in her, and none else. It was that City that
was called holy, counted glorious by all them that lived when she was in her
glory, those that then saw her could not choose but acknowledge as much, if ever
they numbered her Towers, considered her walls, and marked her bulwarks. Should
I make report at large of it, you would hardly believe me: but I am sure, when
the Kings of the earth were gathered together and saw it, Psalm. 48.4, 5.
they marvelled, were astonished, and suddenly driven back. Besides all this,
it was a City of the greatest Antiquity one of them in all the world: at
first, it was called Salem, Genesis 14.18.
where Melchisedeck King thereof brought forth Bread and Wine to refresh
Abraham and his Servants, after he returned from the slaughter of his enemies.
Afterward it was possessed by the Iebusites, Judge. 19.10.
and by them named Iebus. Now Peter Martyr from both these names, Iebus and
Salem, supposes that by the change of a few letters, Peter Mar. in Com. upon
the 2 Samuel 5.6.
Jerusalem received her name. But whither do I run, I come not to preach
names, but doctrines to you; therefore in that it is said, he beheld the City,
namely Jerusalem, above all the Cities in the world, this collection does
arise.

That where much is bestowed, much is expected, Doctr. Where much bestowed,
much expected.
the Lord had bestowed much upon this City, and now does expect much from this
City, therefore it is said, he beheld (the) City.

This they could not be ignorant of, for the Prophet Esaias told them (many
hundred years before this day) in a parable, that after the Lord had dug
his vineyard, hedged it round about, and built a Wine Press therein, he came
to look for Grapes, Esaias 5.2.
that is, for fruit, and that not for a handful or two, but so much as would
answer his pains and cost, not of any fruit, but true fruit; Verse. 5.
for there was wild Grapes good store, yet they could not content the Lord,
nor withold him from destroying this his vineyard. In the Book of the
Canticles, the Lord is said to go down into the garden of Nuts, Cant. 6.11.
to see the fruits of the Valley, and to see whether the Vine flourished, and
the Pomegranats budded. For most certain it is, that where the Lord has
bestowed many blessings, he expects much fruit and benefit. This Christ also
told these Jews in many parables, which are to be seen to this day, and
shall be in his Church to the end of the world: As first in the parable of a
certain householder which planted a vineyard, Mat. 21.33, 34.
and built all things necessary thereunto, then let it out to husbandmen, and
went (himself) into a far Country: but when the time of fruit drew near, he
sent his servants to the husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits of it.
Secondly, by the parable of the talents, Matthew. 25.14, 15, 16, etc.
for from him that had five talents, the owner expected ten; from him that had
two, four; and from him that had one, two; but from all some, according to the
measure they had received; and if any failed, as one did, he was sure to be
punished most severely for it. Luke 13.6.
Thirdly, by the parable of the Fig Tree, which was planted by a certain man,
who afterward came and sought for fruit, and that not any fruit, but doubtless
such fruit, as for quality and quantity might be answerable to the labor and
cost that he had bestowed upon it. And no marvel, for nature teaches this; to
expect much where they bestow much. The Usurer looks for ten from the hundred,
and a hundred from the thousand, if not more; not alike from both; but where is
the greatest sum, there he expects the greatest use. The Merchant looks for
gain from ventring a little, but for more if he venture much. The Husbandman
plowes and sowes his ground, afterward expects a fruitful harvest. The
Gardener dungs and prunes his trees, that thereby they may be the fruitfuller,
and with plenty requite his pains. In a word, every one in their several
labors, looks that their cost and pains should bring forth profit, and that
answerable; for little, something; for much, plenty; but for all benefit. This
the Lord speaks by the mouth of his holy Apostle, 1. Cor. 9.7.
saying; Who planteth a Vineyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof? Or who
feeds a flock, and eats not of the milk of the flock? This he propounds
as a question to the Corinths by the mouth of his Apostle: Who does these and
these things, spending their money, time, and strength of body, but in hope to
reap profit, and to taste of the sweetness of their labor? (q.d.) Show me
but an example of one man that is so void of judgment, and destitute of
understanding, that can be contented to travel and take pains; wearying his
body, spending his time, wasting his substance, yet to look for no gain in
the end, then will I be willing to depart with the loss: but if you cannot
show me one man so ignorant or foolish, think then it is no cruelty in me, to
expect not only my own, but my own with advantage. Matthew. 25.27.
The earth was not created for it self, nor any other unreasonable creature
for his own use, but all for the good and benefit of man; the Sun to light
him, the Clouds to distill her dew upon him, the Fire to warm him, the Water
to wash him; the Fish of the Sea, the Fowls of the Air, and the Beasts of the
field to nourish and refresh him, and all other creatures to be serviceable
unto him. And was he created for no use, but like the Hog to devour all the
Maste, and never to look to the tree from whence it came? Surely no; for as
all things was created for the use and service of man, so man was created for
the use and service of God: not to live as we list, like masterlesse curres
that have no owner, but to use our talent to our masters profit, and to spend
our time and strength to honor and glorify our God: Neither is it the end of
our creation alone, but also of our election. For ye have not chosen me, says
Christ, Ioh. 15.16.
but I have chosen you, and ordained you, that you should go and bring forth
fruit, and that your fruit should remain: for every branch in me that bears
not fruit, Verse. 2.
he takes away. Neither is it the end of our creation and election alone, but
also of Gods glory: for our light must so shine before men, that they may see
our good works, and glorify our Father which is in heaven. This then serves in
the first place as a rod, to scourge two sorts of men and women withal: first,
those that receive much and return nothing: secondly, those that receive much,
but returning nothing worthy of what they have received. First, we have a world
of people that receive Gods blessings, both temporal and spiritual, yet
return nothing at all; and they are either such as know not God, or such as
know God, but forget both him and his gifts. First, they are such as know not
God, and they are all those that ascribe whatsoever they do enjoy to sat and
fortune: For many a man, if he be preserved from thieves in his journey, and
brought safe to his habitation again; or if he be restored from a dangerous
sickness to his former health, presently ascribes it unto destiny, concluding
with himself thus: It was my fortune to escape at this time from the hands of
Robbers, or from my cruel sickness which brought me wonderful low; for had
it not been my fortune, it had been impossible to have escaped those dangers
that I was in; or by good fortune, such a man died and left me all his goods,
or I got so much by such a venture beyond Seas. Thus we return all to fate and
fortune, but nothing to the Lord, who has bestowed all, and looks for all:
and the reason is, because we know him not, or at the leastwise know him not to
be such a God as is the giver of all things; Psalm. 14.1.
for the fool has said in his heart there is no God. Secondly, they are such
as forget God, and in forgetting him, forget that ever they received any thing
from him, therefore cannot return any thing unto him. If a man have a friend
which bestows a great gift, he is thankful so long as he remembers both gift
and giver; but if he forget either, it is impossible he should return any
thing worthy of what he has received. Judas had great favor showed him, when
the Lord passed by many, and chose him to be an Apostle; but this he soon
forgot, which made him turn Traitor to his Lord. So these men, though they
cannot but acknowledge God the Creator and Giver of all at sometimes, yet soon
do they forget it again, which makes them so to abuse what God has bestowed
in mercy upon them. Many a man has received wealth, and a large estate of
earthly things, but has forgotten how he received it of the Lord; and that
moves him many times to spend so prodigally, to feed so gluttonously, to drink
so unsatiably, to go so proudly, and to live so wantonly: whereas if he
remembered both the Giver and the gift, how he enioyes nothing but what be has
received from the Lord, it would enforce him to return the fruit of humility
and thankfulness unto him that has been so gracious unto him: Others have
received honors, favors, and great authority in this world; but it has so
puffed them up, with disdain, ambition, and such aspiring thoughts, that they
soon forget what they have received, which makes them to pervert authority to
injustice, and to sell equity and all conscience for Gold, as ordinarily as
cattle are sold in Smith-field for gain. Others have received gifts and
talents of great knowledge and deep learning, by which they are able to diue
into the custom and practice of all ages past, and to do good service in
Church and Commonwealth: but many in forgetting the Giver of that gift, do
either hide this talent in a Napkin, and do no good, living as drones and
unprofitable members amongst us, like fruitless trees, who neither will do
good themselves, nor suffer others that would during their life; or else they
do much hurt with their learning and knowledge, in opposing the truth,
goodness, and good men, defending corruptions, maintaining erroneous opinions,
making bridges to all Popery and profaneness, or else they draw away others
to wickedness by making filthy Poems, and such like. Thus while we know not
God, or knowing him, soon forget both him and his gifts, it makes us we
cannot return any thing to him who has given all things, unless it be with
the barren ground, thorns and thistles, or with the wicked Jews, nothing but
stones to cast both at him and his Prophets for all his mercies.

Secondly, those are to be reproved, that return, but nothing answerable to
what they have received, and they be either such as make show without
substance, or such as have substance but of no continuance. First, there are
many that like the fruitless Fig Tree, are full of leaves, that is, glorious
in outward profession, full of good words, but void of good actions: and these
are those that speak fair with their mouths, but dissemble in their hearts;
that have Jacobs voice, but Esaus hands; glister like gold, but being once
tried at the touchstone, are found nothing but Copper; they bear the title of
hypocrites, having Belials heart, though the Saints countenance; glorious to
the eye, like the Apples of Sodom, but crush't in the hand, fall to ashes;
painted Sepulchers, but full of rottenness and dead men's bones. O these are
worse then those that return nothing, and greater shall their condemnation be
at last. Secondly, there is another sort which return substance, but of no
continuance, like the Summers fruit, no sooner ripe but rotten; or like Aarons
rod, Numb. 17.8.
will bud, blossom, bear fruit; and more then it, wither, and all in one day.
These we commonly call Apostataes, because they fall from the grace which they
have received; and like Julian, turn their backs upon heaven, blaspheming him,
whom once they prayed unto; one while with the Jews, Mar. 11.9.
Hosanna in the highest, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord;
soon after strain their voice to another tune, Matt. 27.25.
Crucify him, crucify him, his blood be upon us and our children.

Secondly, this serves for exhortation, lamentation, and consolation: First,
for exhortation, to spur us forward to all good actions and holy duties; not to
be backward in returning, according to what we have received; for if we have
much, God looks for much; if little, for little; if nothing, for nothing: He
requires not what he has not given, neither will he reap where he has not
sown: He expects not that from the Beggar, which he does from the King; nor
that from the Handmaid, which he does from the Mistress; but from every man,
woman and child, according to what he has bestowed upon them. Does any man
look for Grapes of Thorns, Matthew. 7.16.
or Figs of Thistles? Surely no, neither did ever any reap Wheat where he
sowed Barley: I mean, one grain in sowing cannot be converted to another in
reaping; for every Grain bears his own body, 1 Cor. 15.38.
and yields fruit according to his own kind. So every Christian must be
fruitful, according to that measure which they have received of the Lord. Has
he given thee wisdom, and that above others? O labor then, to be more wise in
thy sayings, and discreet in thy doings then others: Has he given thee riches
and wealth, so that thou in means do far exceed thy neighbors? Then look
thou be more forward in hospitality and liberality then thy neighbors. Has
he given thee strength and courage exceeding many that dwell near thee? then
thou must be more forward to stand for the Gospel, and to defend thy King and
Country then the weaker. Art thou a Child or a Servant? and has God given
thee a religious father and mother, or a religious master and mistress? O then
strive thou to outstrip many that want those helps which thou enioyest. Let
not those that have profane Parents and wicked Governors, be more forwarder in
religion, more fuller of knowledge, more zealous for the Lord of Hosts, then
thou that do enjoy the means and helps to spur thee forward. For shame,
let grace and goodness in thy breast above theirs appear; suffer not those
that have no means, to come to heaven before thou that have all means, lest
the Saints and Angels shout at thee at thy arrival. If a footman and a
horseman should travel to a Town together, the footman with bolts upon his
legs, the horseman free from any: were it not ashame the footman should
attain his iournies end before the other? Surely yes: and well might all men
imagine, that he either has rid far out of his way, or else spent his time
very idly, that having such helps and means to hasten him, yet should be far
behind him that has no means, but rather pull-backs and hindrances to have
kept him from his iournies end: even so it is a shame, nay, a far greater
shame for thee, that have godly Parents and Governors, to suffer those to
outstrip thee in the way to heaven, that have wicked Parents and Tutors. For
they will not only cease to spur them forward to hear the Word, read
Sermons, receive Sacraments, and the like, (which thy parents does daily and
hourly animate thee unto,) but also what in them lies, will keep, hinder,
and draw them from hearing the Word, conferring with Saints, reading, praying,
receiving, and all other good and holy exercises: therefore as God has blessed
thee in this kind above others, so labor to exceed others, that at the last
day the Lord may find a plentiful harvest in thy soul. Has the Lord given
thee a faithful Minister, that is careful in watching, diligent in feeding,
painful in teaching and instructing thy soul in the ways of godliness? Does
he break the bread of life early and late, preach in season and out of
season, pray for thy good when thou art fast asleep, and little thinks of any
good to thy own self? Then see thou be found holy in life and conversation,
gracious in all thy words and deeds, heauenly-minded in every place, full of
divine knowledge and godliness. For if thou (that have so much good teaching)
have not Faith for thy shield, the Word for thy sword, righteousness for thy
breast plate, Truth for thy girdle, the Gospel for thy shoes, Salvation for
thy helmet, and Christ for thy Savior; but still like the Papists remainest
ignorant, then greater shall be thy damnation; for to whom much is given, much
shall be required. In a word, look whatsoever it is, that the Lord has
blessed thee with all above other men, see thou be found more fruitful then
other men; Matthew. 26.24.
else as Jesus said of Judas, It had been good for that man he had never been
borne. So may I say to thee, it had been good for thy soul thou had never
been made partaker, or once tasted those things, which thou in abundance have
enjoyed; for those that have received much at the hands of God, must not be
like unprofitable ground, receiving much seed, but restoring no profit; much
dunging, yet far from fructifying; lest to our souls terror and amazement, we
hear that fearful sentence; Take the unprofitable servant, Matthew. 25.30.
bind him hand and foot, and cast him into utter darkness, where shall be
weeping and gnashing of teeth for evermore.

Secondly, this serves for lamentation; for if God require much where he has
bestowed much: who can refrain from tears, to see our land in general, and
almost every man in particular, so fruitless and barren in goodness,
notwithstanding all we have received from the Lord? Has not God planted us his
Vineyard as on a fruitful hill? Es. 5.1.
has he not hedged us in on every side with the shield of his protection? has
he not gathered out the stones of Popery amongst us, and planted us in this
fertile soil, as his choicest plants, seasoning our souls with his holy
doctrine and heavenly Sacraments; watring us with the dew of his holy Spirit,
and has built a Tower of excellent discipline amongst us? Has he not lightened
our darkness, heated our coldness, revived our drooping souls, rejoiced our
trembling hearts, and freed our languishing Spirits from sorrow? Has he not
opened his house, provided his meat, Prou. 9.5.
mingled his wine, spread his table, sent forth his servants in a plentiful
manner, to call and inuit all those that be weary and heavy laden, Matthew.
11.28.
and those that be a thirst, to come to the waters of comfort, Esa. 55.1.
to buy and drink without money, or moneys worth? What shall I say? Has he
dealt thus with any Nation? O no; neither have the heathen knowledge of his
Laws. So gracious and bountiful, and bountifully gracious, has he been to
us (and that not for three years, as to the Fig Tree; Luke 13.7.
but threescore, with many years advantage) that he may say, and say truly to
us, What more could I have done for you my people, then what I have not done?
yet (for the general) we are as backward and auerse to all goodness, as
though we never had received any kindness; as far from godliness in our lives
and conuersations, as though God had never been preached amongst us. He
requires nothing for all his mercies but thankfulness, and that is the return
he demands for all his blessings: but we are worse then the ten Lepers, for one
of them returned with praises in his mouth, Luke 17.17.
and thanksgiving in his heart, for the mercy he had received of the Lord. But
let the Lord bestow never so many blessings upon us, scarce one of an hundred
will bestow thanks unto him for it. It is a commendation that is given of the
Dog, that he is Fidelissimus Domino, and gratissimus, most faithful and
grateful to his master that maintains him; for by night he will watch, ward,
and diligently keep his Masters house, and by day he will attend upon his
Master abroad; fight for him, and die for him too if need require. 2 King 5.15.
Naaman the Syrian, when he was cured, would have given the Prophet a reward,
but we will not give the Lord so much as thanks for all the favors he has
bestowed upon us: Gods mercies by us are now forgotten, as though they had
never been. For who remembers the miraculous overthrow of that invincible
Navy, in the year eighty eight? Who remembers the peaceable government of
Queen Elizabeth, (whose famous memory shall live for ever?) Who remembers the
peaceable entrance of his Majesty into this Kingdom, when we had cause to
fear the days many hoped for? Who remembers the fifth of November, wherein we
had the greatest deliverance that ever any Nation had, from that damned,
deuillish, and hellish plot of Powder treason, invented by the Devils eldest
son the Pope and his followers? Who remembers our freedom from the plague,
which wasted thousands, and ten thousands in our streets? Who remembers these I
say, with thousands more of Gods mercies? Surely, surely, very few or none: and
no marvel though those mercies that are past be forgotten, when mercies
present are not remembered. We forget how the Lord has dealt more favorably
with us, then many; yea, then with all Nations round about us. Psalm. 144.14.
We see no carrying into captivity, no complaining in our streets: Our men
are not killed, our Nobles are not wounded, our Women are not ravished, our
Virgins are not defloured, our Infants are not tossed, our goods are not
wasted, nor our Land nor Cities are ruinated. We hear not the noise of the
Gunshot, the clattering of Armor, the slashing of Swords, the groans of the
wounded, nor that vnmercilesse proclamation, Kill, kill, and spare none, rip up
the Women, imbowell the aged, and dash the Infants upon the stones. This, nor
none of these do we hear, which our poor brethren have felt a long time;
yet we forget all. We have forgotten how he has kept us from diseases,
restored us from sickness, and watches over us all the day long. We have
forgotten how he feeds us, carries us in his arms, saves us from danger,
refreshes us with sleep, draws the Curtain of his love about us, watching
our houses from fire, from robbers, and from ruin; nay more, have we not
forgotten that wonderful redemption, wrought by the blood of Jesus Christ,
when we were utterly lost? What shall I say? Sure we have forgotten all, that
makes us so fruitless as we are; for could we remember these things, and
prize them according to their worth, our tongues could not be kept from
praising the Lord, nor our hearts be kept from rejoicing in God our Savior. O
ungrateful England, and little deserving London, that have fed so long upon
all kind of Gods mercies, yet no fruitfuller in goodness to your God! It
makes my heart to bleed within my breast, to see thy rebellious and wicked
practices, in swearing, lying, dancing, singing, carding, dicing, drinking,
drabbing, as though thou did intend to crucify the Son of God again. Is
this the entertainment thou do intend to afford Christ? Will thou requite
his love with such churlish actions? Shall this be all the fruit thou will
afford to requite his pains? Then shall thou soon make him pluck up his
hedge, that is, take away his favor, and lay thee open as a prey for all thy
enemies to feed upon thee; for to whom much is given, much is required.

Thirdly, this serves for comfort and consolation to all those that find
themselves fruitful, though it be but in a little measure: for he that has
enabled thee to bring forth any, will (in his good time) so strengthen thee,
that thou shall bring forth more, holding fruitful to the end: For they that
are planted in the Courts of the Lord, Psalm. 92.13, 14.
shall bring forth much fruit in their old age: then shall all things prosper
thou take in hand; Deuteronomy. 28.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
for blessed shall thou be in the City, blessed in the field, blessed shall be
the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy ground, and the fruit of thy
cattle, the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep: Blessed shall
be thy basket and thy store, blessed shall thou be when thou come in,
blessed shall thou be when thou go out; and blessed from this time forth
for evermore. Thus much shall suffice for the furnishing of our second
Tabernacle.

Now we come to the last body or boule springing from this root, or the third
Tabernacle in our Text, which you heard in our division, The third Tabernacle,
like a solitary Closet, has three rooms or things remarkable.
was made in the form of a solitary Closset, hung round with mourning, wherein
we have our Savior Christ lamenting (...), and he wept over it: it diuides it
self according to the two former parts into three rooms or branches.

The first is the compassion it self: fleuit, wept.

The second is the person so passionate, Christ wept.

The third is the cause of his weeping, which as it may be gathered from the
words following, is twofold.

Tum propter mala culpae, the evil of sin committed by them.

Tum propter mala poenae, the evil of punishment which must be inflicted upon
them.

Begin we first with the compassion it self (wept.) Here is nothing but
lacrimae and suspiria, tears, sighs, The 1. room of the third Tabernacle is
Compassion, he wept.
sobs, and great sorrows, deplorations, lamentations, yet all fit meditations
for our souls at this time: for the life of our Savior Christ was no other
then the passage of Jonathan and his Armor-bearer, 1 Samuel 14.4.
sharp rocks on the one side, sharp rocks on the other, with a very
dangerous and infractious passage, flintie stones under him, briers and thorns
on each side of him, mountains, crags, and promontaries over him: Sic petitur
coelum: so heaven must be caught or never, or else lost for ever. He wept, and
in his weeping shed tears, which are the outward expression of sorrow and
grief: A man may cover sorrow a long time by secret sobs and inward groans,
but when tears break from the eyes, as water from the fountain, it plainly
demonstrateth to the view of all beholders, the wonderful grief conceived in
the weepers breast: for as fire smothering, will at last break into a flame,
so will a grieved and an oppressed soul into tears, as here our Savior. But
what tears were these our Savior shed? Divines do make tears to be of
diverse sorts, but I will only follow Goran, as liking his distinction of
tears best: for he in his Commentaries on the Psalms, makes mention of three
sorts of tears. Lacrimae contritionis.

Lacrimae compassionis.

Lacrimae deuotionis.

Gor. super Psalm. in Psalm. 137.


First, the tears of Contrition; secondly, the tears of Compassion; thirdly,
the tears of Devotion: The contrite tears, or tears of contrition, is either
for sin committed, or good duties omitted; but our Savior neither committed
evil, nor omitted good, therefore could not shed the tears of contrition. As
for the tears of devotion, or devout tears, they are powered forth in holy and
religious exercises; as praying, hearing, receiving, conferring, or meditating,
or because we are debarred from so doing. But these were not the tears which
our Savior powered forth at this time: I cannot deny but that at sometimes he
shed the tears of devotion, for his prayer was heard which he sent up to his
Father, with strong cries and tears, Heb. 5.7.
as the Apostle affirms, yet at this time there were no such tears: then as
for the tears of compassion, they are either for the miseries of others, as
those tears which the Daughters of Jerusalem shed when Christ went to be
crucified, Luke 23.28.
or else for the wickedness of others: as those tears which Lot shed for
Sodom, Psalm. 119.
and David for his enemies: such were the tears of Christ, which here he shed
for Jerusalem.

The second branch of this body or boule, The second thing in the third
Tabernacle, is the person weeping, Christ.
or room in this Tabernacle, is the person weeping, which by our Text is found
to be Christ; and that may make these tears of Christians the more to be
lamented, of all the more to be admired. Who does not stand amazed when he
considers these tears, for they are not the tears of man, but of the Son of
God: the more worthy the person is that weepeth, the more astonishment it
strikes into the beholder. If a mortal King should shed tears, would it not
cause wonder; yea, amazement, trembling, and fear, because we should imagine
that their tears do proceed either from some great anger, or some great
danger: much more may these tears astonish us, because they proceed not from
the eyes of an earthly King, but from him that is Rex coelorum and terrae, the
King of heaven and earth, even Jesus Christ the eternal Son of God. The holy
Prophet David, when he did but consider how the Sea opened for Isreal's
safety, was so amazed, that out of the astonishment of his soul he cries
out, saying; What ailed thee, O Sea, that thou fleddest, Psalm. 114.5.
thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? How much more may we out of the
amazement of our souls cry (now we see not only the Sea to open, but the
blessed Son of God distilling abundant of tears from his fair eyes upon his
tender cheeks:) What aileth thee, O thou Jesus, that thou so weepest? Thou
blessed Savior of mankind, that tears runs so fast from thy unspotted eyes?
Do thou so weep for those that laugh at thee? yea, do thou shed tears
for those that neither will, nor can weep for themselves? Are our sins so
piercing to thy soul so pleasant to us? does our wickedness wring groans,
sighs, sobs, and brinish tears from thy fair eyes; nay, blood from thy most
tender heart, and cannot we shed one tear for our selves? Then hard is our
hearts, and miserable our case.

Oh my dear Brethren and loving Countrymen, know this one thing; how that it
was not another wept for him; that he could not endure, (O Daughters of
Jerusalem, Luke 23.28.
weep not for me, but for your selves) but he for others, though he never
deserved to shed one tear, yet cease not to power forth rivers of tears for
this hard-hearted Nation. For my Text tells me, that He wept, not an Angel, a
Saint, or a Sinner, but He; yea, even He; He that was all one with the father;
Heb. 2.6. and 10. Genesis 3.15. Luke 1.35. Matthew. 2.3. Matthew. 2.13. Matthew. 4.1.
He that was full of glory and might, He that was promised to our first Parents
in Paradise; He that was conceived by the holy Ghost, and borne of the Virgin
Marie; He that at his birth troubled Herod and all Jerusalem; He that was
exiled into Egypt, and there obscurely kept in the Cottage of a poor
foster-father; He that was transported and tempted by Satan; He that was
derided of his kindred, and blasphemously traduced of the Jews; He that by
the words of his mouth stilled the raging of the Sea, Matthew. 8.26. and Psalm.
65.7.
the ruffling of the winds, and the madness of his people; He that caused the
Fish to bring him money from the bottom of the Sea; Matthew. 17.27. Matthew. 14.19.
He that fed five thousands with five loaves and two small fishes; John 9.1.
He that made the Blind to see, the deaf to hear, the lame to go; Mark
7.34. Matthew. 11.5. John 11.44. Matthew. 8.29. Matthew. 3.17. Matthew. 17.5. John
12.28, 29.
He that cleansed the Lepers, cured the diseased, and raised the dead from the
grave; He that made the Devils to cry, What have we to do with thee, Jesus
thou Son of David? Art thou come to torment us before the time? He that
received this testimony three times from God the Father: This is my beloved
Son, in whom only I am well pleased; He that did all things well, and never
any evil, neither to God nor man. It is He that wept in this my Text, and none
but he: He, even Jesus Christ, the Savior and Redeemer of the world, the
Parragon and Prince of Prophets, the true Messiah, the Fathers joy, the Angels
bliss, heavens beauty, the glory of Israel, the light of the Gentiles, Luke
2.32.
the worlds Savior prefigured in the Law, foretold by the Prophets, and
exhibited in the Gospel. It was He that wept: from whence we might draw many
conclusions, I will but point at them at this time; yet promising to all those
that affects goodness to enlarge them according to their worthiness, if
strength of body permit hereafter.

First, in that he wept it shows us, Christ wept, therefore 1. Man. Heb. 2.17.
and 4.15.
how He was true man, consisting of soul and body, as all other men do, yet
not sinful man: for he was like to us in all things, sin only excepted,
neither are we so to take our Savior, as no more but man: for though he were
man, yet he was more then man, having the divine Nature, hypostatically united
to the humane; so that he rested not God alone, nor man alone, but God-man,
and Man-God; perfect God, begotten of his Father; perfect Man, borne of his
Mother. 2. Great his affection toward man.


Secondly, in that he wept, he shows us how that great is his affection
toward mankind: the affection of a Father to his child, or of a Mother to
the fruit of her own womb, is nothing in respect of the Lords affection
toward Man: for had he not affected us, he would never have died for us, but
he did not only weep, but die for our sins, therefore needs must we
conclude, his affection was great unto our souls.

3. Christ not delighted in the destruction of his enemies.
Thirdly, in that he wept, it shows us how that he was no whit delighted in the
destruction of his enemies. Though man rejoice at their enemies ruins, either
in body, goods, or name, making that day (though a day of fasting) a day of
feasting, when tidings is brought of the subversion, ruin, and desolation, of
those whom they affect not; yet it is not so with our Savior, for he
foreseeing their desolation, wrung from his eyes abundant tears of compassion.

4. Greatly delighted in the conversion of man.
Fourthly, in that he wept, it shows us, That he is greatly delighted in the
conversion of others, that weeps so bitterly at the subversion of others; for
he is the loving Father that ever is ready to receive his prodigal children,
at what time soever they do repent them of their sins from the bottom of
their hearts, and that not with grudging, Ezekiel. 18.17.
but with delight; for so greatly is he rejoiced when we forsake our sins, as
that he counts nothing too dear for our souls. If we be naked, he brings a
robe to cover us; if we be hungry, Luke 15.12, 23.
he kills the fat Calfe to feed us; and if not married to the flesh, world,
nor devil, he brings a Ring to wed us; for if he mourn for man when man was
dead and lost, how greatly will he rejoice at man when man is living found.

Fifthly, in that he wept, and that when the people cut down the branches of
the trees, 5 Worldly pomp would be mixed with tears.
spreading their garments in the way, every one crying with a joyful
acclamation, Hosanna in the highest, blessed is he that comes in the name of
the Lord, We learn that which Ludolphus does observe, Ludolphus de imitat.
vitae Christi. par. 2. cap. 28.
That worldly pomp and applause should be mixed with tears: For though it
were never so great, it cannot always free from sorrow, especially if we
belong unto God. I know the wicked will and can shift off their sorrow, with
the Vial, Harp, Lute, or singing to the tune of the Organs. Pompillius writes
Epistles to Tullie, Pompillius to Tully. Antimachus.
thinking to rid away his sorrow by reading. Antimachus makes verses, thinking
to rid away his sorrows by riming. Archilochus calls for Wine, thinking to to
rid away his sorrow by drinking. A^chisochus. 1 Samuel 16.22, 23
Saul calls for Music, thinking to rid away his sorrow by playing. Some call
for cards and dice, thinking to rid away their sorrow by gaming; but alas, all
in vain: for neither the world nor any thing in the world, can free us always
from sorrow, especially if we belong to the Lord, for Quid ad nos consolatio
mundi, Martia Epise.
What do the pleasures of the world belong to us: for the world is but spuma,
fumus, somnium, a froth, a smoke, a dream: a froth, because it puffs up; a
smoke, because it makes blind; a dream, because it vanishes away. Yea, as
a good Divine says, it is Vices Nurse, Natures stepmother, Virtues murderer,
Thefts refuge, Woredomes pander, Sodomes fruit, Crocodils tears, a Sirens
song; yea, as Philo calls it (...), a bitter sweet; pleasure is a spur,
riches a thorn, honor a blast, life a flower, glory a feather, beauty a
fancy, joy a frenzy, and all things in the world but like the Book in the
Revelation, Ap. 10.9.
sweet in the mouth, bitter in the belly; or like the reeds in Egypt, which
does not only break in pieces when it is leaned on; but in breaking, flies
in splinters, 2 King. 18.21.
to the piercing of the hands of him that trusted to it; or like a draught of
cold water, drunk up by him that is heated with the violence of a burning
Fever, which allaieth the heat, during the continuance of drinking; but
scarcely is the Cup gone from his mouth, before he feels an increase of his
boiling drought; or like money taken up from the chest of the Usurer, which
will stop a gap for the present, but afterward make the wound the deeper.

6. Cities are chiefly to be lamented.
Sixthly and lastly, in that He wept, and over Jerusalem, the (...) of the
Jews, the same City that he drew near unto, and even now beheld, We learn,
That Cities ought chiefly to be lamented: These things we might handle at
large, but lest your patience should be urged, my weak body too much strained,
and all our memories over charged, I cease the prosecution till some other
occasion: in the mean while I refer these heads to your godly meditations;
and for a conclusion, will only speak a word or two of the cause of these
tears, Causes of Christ weeping over Jerusalem.
which is twofold. First, Propter mala culpae, the evil of sin committed by
them. Secondly, Propter mala poenae, the evil of punishment that was to be
inflicted upon them.

1. Cause was propter mala culpae, their sins.
First, Propter mala culpae, the evil of sin committed by them: This was the
greatest cause that produces our Saviors tears; Roy. Post.
for non ruinam lapidum, sed hominum vanitatem, says Royard in his Postils: He
wept not so much for the ruin of the City, as the vanity of the people. Never
did the nails so wound him, nor the spears so gore him, as their sins did
pierce him. Never was the gall so bitter to his taste, nor the thorns so
pricking to his touch, as their sins was offensive to his soul: Never was
their fists so smarting to his cheeks, nor their spittle so loathsome to his
face, as their sins were hateful to his heart: Never was their flouts so
hurtful to his name, nor the Cross so tormenting to his narure, as their
sins were burdensome to his body and soul: for so heavy a weight was their
sins to him, that it did not only make him pray once, Matthew. 26.44. Luke
22.44.
twice, and thrice, nor to sweat, and that in a cold winters night, water and
blood, nor to complain, I thirst, but to cry, John 19.
and that with such a lamentable cry, as made both heaven and earth to stand
amazed, the Sun to hide his face, as not daring to behold the Son of God in
such a case as he was in, when he cried, Eli Eli lamasabachthani, My God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me. Blame not therefore our Savior to weep, since
sin is so tormenting to his soul. Of old the Lord complains by the mouth
of his holy Prophet; Amos 2.13.
That he was pressed under their sins as a Cart is pressed with sheaues,
which Saint Hierom thus glosseth, As a Cart laden with hay or stubble, makes a
noise, sounds out, and howleth, so I howl and cry under your sins, says
the Lord; even shriking as sometimes a cart does: and no marvel, for their
sins were not few, but many; yea, more then can be numbered by any
Arithmetician, and greater then can be measured by any Geometrician. (...).
1.4. (...). 1.5. and Ier. 5.7. Ie^. 17.21. Ier. 6.14. Ier. 5.3. Jer. 6.13. Amos
6.6. Esaias 3.16, etc. Ier. 9 5. Ez^k. 6.9. and 16. Esa. 5. Iere. 17.25.
I will not now stand to tell you of their Idolatry, not of their swearing and
forswearing, nor of their profaning the Lords Saboath, nor of their false
teachers, nor of their contempt of Gods word, nor of their Covetousness, nor
of their sloth and drunkenness, nor of their pride, nor of their deceit, nor
of their whoredom, nor of their unthankfulness, nor of their waxing worse and
worse, with many more. All which I will not spend time about, because I know you
have heard them, and hope by frequent reading the Bible you know them, but
needs it must be granted, that since their sins did so abound, it was the
cause that our Saviors tears did much more abound.

Our sins as well a^ Hierusalems, draw tears from Christ's eyes.
And was it their sins alone, that wrung these tears from our blessed
Saviors eyes; alas no, sweet Jesus, thou know it was ours as well as
theirs: for all thy labors, thy troubles, thy miseries, thy griefs, thy
sweatings, thy bleedings, and thy torments, which in the days of thy flesh,
from the first hour of thy Nativity, to the last moment of thy sufferings
upon the Cross, was for our sins, and for our sakes: our sins, I say, was
the cause of all. Esaias confessed it, Es. 53.4, 5.
saying; He has borne our griefs, and carried our sorrows; he was wounded
for our transgression; he was bruized for our iniquities: the chastisement of
our peace was upon him and with his stripes we are healed. If there be ever an
unbelieving Jew amongst us, that should demand this unseasonable question: Why
does our Savior weep for my sins? He has his answer from these short
Arguments following.

First, because it grieves the Father, offends his Majesty, vexes his holy
Spirit of grace: Christ weeps for sins, because 1. they grieve God and his
blessed Spirit. 2. Procure punishment. Romans 6.23.
Christ being one that loves the Father, cannot choose but weep at that which
grieves and offends the Father.

Secondly, because it procures punishment from the Father, either temporal or
eternal; for the reward of sin is death; Death in this life, and without a
great repentance, eternal death in the life to come.

Thirdly, because it separates grace from the soul, 3. Separate grace and God
from man. Esaias 59.2.
and the soul from grace, and God from the whole man, for it is a high brazen
wall, hindering our prayers from ascending to God, his graces from descending to
us.

Fourthly, because it rejoices the Devil, 4. Rejoice Satan.
who is Christ's greatest enemy, for sin is meat and drink to Satan. When any
dances after his pipe, he is as greatly rejoiced, as a man that has taken many
spoils: if all this then be true, as the Lord he knows it is too true,
needs must it make Jesus to weep, if either he respect God or love man.

If this then be so, it may teach us in the first place to take heed of sin.
O delight not in it, 1. Delight not in sin.
since it is an offense both to God and godly men: therefore detest it, and
fly from it as from the Devil, who is the Author of it; it is a fire and will
burn thee; water, and will drown thee; a nettle, and will sting thee; a
sword, and will wound thee; poison, and will kill thee; and a Serpent, which
will devour thee; kill it, or else it will kill thee; be a stranger to it, it
will be a stranger to thee; harbor it not to gain the world, to grieve Christ:
but beat out the brains of these Babilonish children; Sin to be nipped in
the bud. Iud 7.1. and 8.30 and 9.5. 2. King. 11.1. 2. Par. 22.10.
for if they die thou may live, but if they live thou shall die. As the
reign of Abimelech was the slaughter of Gedeons Sons; and the reign of
Athaliah was the overthrow of the Kings seed: so the reign of our sins will
be our destruction. Let us therefore beat them down betimes before they grow
too headstrong, like an unruly Mastiue Dog tearing out their masters throat;
the Israelites at first spared the Canaanites, afterward when they would have
destroyed them they could not; but they became pricks in their eyes, Numb.
^3.55. Iud. 2.3.
and goads in their sides: Even so will it be with our sins, for if at first
we spare them, in the end they will be irresistable. Oh that we could once
live to say of our sins, as Christ said of the Temple, Matthew. 24.2.
One stone shall not be left upon another vncast down: so one sin shall not
be left upon another vncast out of the heart. Then would they soon die in our
lives and conuersations, but so long as we harbor them in the hidden man, so
long will our lives be corrupted, and our conuersations detested: let us
therefore bury our sins that they never be remembered; kill our sins, that
their power against us, never be lamented; cast out our sins as dung out of
the City, that they never be respected: for as carrion causes worms,
stinkes, and feeds Fowls; so our sins causes woes, and sorrows, and
feeds the Devil. Dan. 4.24, 27.
O therefore break off your sins by repentance, break off your iniquity by
returning to the Lord your God. Nothing can stench Christ's tears, unless we
stop our sins; nothing can dry his cheeks, unless we wash our hearts; The
best actions, if sin be not stopped, dry not Christ's cheeks.
nothing can clear his eyes, unless we purge our souls; our singing
Psalms, hearing Sermons, receiving Sacraments, reading Homilies, feeding the
hungry, clothing the naked, visiting the sick, building hospitals, repairing
Churches, catechizing families, nor all the glistring profession in the world
can stop Christ's tears, unless we make conscience of sinning. We must not be
of Abraham's heart and Belials life, we may not bear the soul of David, and
the shows of Pharisees: Good King Iosaphat in aduenturing to go like Ahab, 1
King. 22.32.
had like to have been slain for Ahab; so all those are in danger of
destruction, that make a show outwardly, but like Sodoms Apples are corrupted
inwardly; for if those be in danger which are upright in heart, and fail in
act, how much more are they in danger that glister like Gold, but being touched,
are found Copper? I pray God our sins have not wrung more tears from the
eyes of our Savior then ever the Jews sins did; I fear they have, Romans 6.1.
because I see the more his grace abounds, the more our sins abound; by how
much the more merciful God has been to us, the more miscreants have we been
toward him. In agro Narniensi siceitate lutum fieri (ex Plinio) imbre pulurem.
That abundance of grace should produce abundance of iniquity is Christ's
greater grief.
Tully reports amongst all his wonders in Nature, that in one Country drought
causes dirt, and rain stirs up dust. Whether this be so or no, I stand not
hear to prove; but this I know, that the abundance of Gods graces has brought
forth nothing, but abundance of sins: Iniquity was never so rife, as since
frequent preaching of the Gospel; yet the fault is not in the world, but in
the Devil and our corrupt nature: God may call a Convocation of heaven and
earth together against us, as sometimes he did against his own people the
Jews, Esaias 1.2.
saying; Hearken, heavens, give ear O earth, I have nourished and brought up
children, but they have rebelled against me: Had they been my enemies that had
done me this dishonor, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.
I could have borne it; or had they been my servants, or the sons of Hagar
that had magnified themselves against me, I could have endured it, but it was
Children, yea, even my Children, Children of my own education and bringing up;
those that were nurtured and instructed in my own family, and that by my own
hand; it was they that rebelled against me; therefore hearken O heavens, and
give ear O earth. Nay the Lord may take up his own complaint against this
City, which you lately had sounded in your ears by a thundering Trumpet of the
Lord: I mean Master Wood in his sermon at the Spittle on Wednesday in Easter
week last, 1624. Hosea. 4.2.
There is no truth, nor mercy, nor knowledge of God in the Land: For by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break out,
and blood touches blood. Are these things so, and do they cause no tears? O
yes! and shall bring judgment too, if they be not amended. Our sweet Saviors
patience shows his desire of our amendment, if tongue or tears can procure
it; besides, so great is his desire of our repentance, that he uses a very
patheticall persuasion to induce us thereunto by the tongue of his blessed
Spirit, recorded by Solomon in the Book of the Canticles, Cant. 6.13.
saying; Return, return, O Shulamite, return, return: but alas, we cannot
return of our selves: being by nature dead and lumpish; Man like a Coachwheele
moves not to any grace if not drawn. Iere. 31.18.
even like to a Coachwheele, able to run no further then we be drawn;
therefore let us reply with the holy Prophet Jeremy, Turn us, O Lord, and we
shall be turned; convert us, and we shall be converted indeed. Yea, let us pray
with Saint Augustine, Domine da quod iubes, August.
and iube quod vis, id est, Lord give us ability to return unto thee, and
then command us to return, or enable us to do what thou command, then
command what thou will.

Secondly, if Christ weep for our sins, Seeing Christ weeps for ours, we
should weep for our own.
we are taught to weep for our own. We must not be like stocks and stones
that have no sense nor feeling of our own misery; neither must we be like
men dead, since we make a show of life: for if Christ weep for us, we have
much more cause to weep for our selves. It may be the worldling thinks he
need not weep, because Christ wept not for himself, but for us: For says the
careless Carnalist, If his blood be sufficient for my soul without mine, why
not his tears for my sins without mine? Thus to a desolute liver, the tears
of Christ are like Mercuries still-pipe, Mercuries still-pipe.
which played Argus his hundred eyes asleep at once. But let me tell thee, O
thou traitor to thy own soul, though Christ's blood be sufficient without
thine, yet not his tears without thine. For when he shed his blood, it was to
redeem thee from sin, but when he sheds his tears, Our sins cost Christ
both tears and blood, therefore we must at least shed tears for them.
it is in seeing thee run so fast to sin; therefore as it cost him both
blood and tears to come to thee, so it must cost thee at the least many a
shower of tears before thou can come to him. He sailed through the Sea of
blood to save thy soul; thou must sail through the Sea of tears to win his
favor. If thou refuse to lanch forth into the Sea of Contrition in this world,
thou shall be drowned in the Ocean of perdition in the world to come; therefore
to purge thy heart, to free thy soul, to win Christ's favor, be not backward
to weep, but power forth tears with David, Psalm. 6. Ion. 3.6. Genesis 17. Esaias
38.14. Job 3.24. 1 Samuel 1. Io^l. 2.13. Matthew. 26.75. Luke 7.38. Act. 2.37. and
16 30.
apparel thy self in sackcloth with Niniuy, humble thy self to the ground
with Abraham, mourn like a Dove with Ezechia, rore out thy grief with Job,
power forth thy soul with Hanna, rent thy heart with the penitent, lament thy
sins with Peter, let sorrow be thy feast with Mary, and cry out with the
Jews and Iaylor, Men and brethren, what shall we do to be saved? It may be
thou thinks thou do sorrow, but delude not thy soul; for every groan, and
sigh, and crying, Lord have mercy upon me, is no true sorrow: but grant it be,
yet where are the tears? Christ did not sigh, Christ did not stay in sighing,
groaning, praying, but also shed both tears and blood.
groan, and pray for thee, then resting himself contented as if he had done
sufficient, but as a man never satisfied in affection, was not contented till
he had shed tears from his eyes; nay, blood from his heart for the sins of
thy body and soul: therefore if thou thus truly sorrow, Tears, griefs chief
testimony.
show me thy tears, for tears are griefs chief testimonies, the sorrow of
the mind will soon bewray it self by the countenance of the man: Seneca.
Neither pleasure nor profit, nor any thing in the world should hinder tears.
if thou can not weep, then thou have most reason to weep, for there is no
greater cause of sorrow ministered, then where tears are abolished. Does the
worlds pleasure or profit stop or hinder thee from penitential tears? Then
call to mind Solomon and Christ. Eccle. 1.2.
Solomon who enjoyed many things, yet said of all things in this world, Vanitas
vanitatum, and omnia vanitas, Vanity of vanity, and all is but vanity. Christ
who enjoyed no thing of this worlds good, yet said; Matthew. 16.26.
What shall it profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his own soul. Let
not therefore the world, nor any thing in the world withdraw thee from weeping
for sin, but rather lament the more: for the more thou weepest here, the more
thou shall rejoice hereafter. Peter when he came to Christ, leapt into a Sea of
waters; but when he went from Christ, leapt into a Sea of tears: our sins
deserve as much; for a whole ocean of tears, will hardly rince our souls.
David, though a man after Gods own heart, yet complains that he was like a
Pelican in the wilderness, whose nature is ever to have tears trickling
down her bill. For tears were his meat day and night, Psalm. 6.6.
yea, he washed his bed, and watered his couch; nay, made it to swim with the
tears of his complaint Josiah though he were a powerful Prince over a great
people, yet his heart melted like wax, and his eyes weept bitterly, 2 King.
22.19.
when he heard the words of the Law. Look upon Job, that was the Mirror of
patience, yet upon the dunghill he sits weeping night and day, crying out most
pittiously: My sighings come before I eat, Ioh 3.24.
and my rorings are powered out like water. Look upon holy Jeremy, you shall
find his eyes casting forth rivers of tears. Lam. 3.48.
Look upon Iona, Iona. 2.2.
you shall find him weeping at the bottom of the sea, and in the belly of
hell. Look upon Mary Magdalen, you shall find her weeping, Luke 7.38.
and that in such excessive manner, that she is able with tears to bathe the
feet of Christ. In a word, view but any one of the Children of God, and tell me
whether you find them backward in weeping for sin, None come to heaven with
dry eyes, at least not having a sorrow for not weeping. Reu. 21.4.
yea or no? Can we find none that ever came to heaven with dry eyes, and shall
we think to come to heaven with a merry countenance? Surely no; for Christ is
said in the Revelation, to wipe away all tears from his childrens eyes. But
how can he wipe them away from those that never either did, or sorrowed that
they could not shed any? Awake therefore, O thou sinner, weep and howl for
the sins thou have committed against God, against man, and against thine own
souls conscience, lest judgment overtake thee, and there be none to help
thee; Psalm. 50.22.
but away thou must to the grave, before thou have repented.

Once there was a certain King that never was seen to laugh or smile; In all
places, amongst all persons, at all times, he was very pensive and sad. His
Queen being much grieved thereat, came to his Brother, requesting him to ask
of the King, what was the cause of his continual sadness. No sooner had this
Noble man fulfilled this Princess desire; but the King his Brother replied, I
will tell thee next day; so he departed for that time. When the King perceived
he was gone, he went presently and caused a great deep pit to be made,
commanding his servants to fill it half full with firie-coles; having so done,
he causes an old rotten board to be laid upon it, and over the board to hang
a two-edged sword by a small thread, with the point downwards, and close by
the pit to set a table full of all manner of dainty meats and delicious wines.
This being thus done, he commanded his Brother to be placed upon that rotten
board, and four men to stand round about him with drawn swords; one before,
another behind, a third on his left hand, a fourth on his right; also, he sent
for Drums, Trumpets, and all other kind of Music, which his Country
afforded, to play, sing, and dance before his Brother. Then the King called
unto him, saying, Rejoice and be merry, O my Brother, eat, drink, and laugh,
for here is pleasant being: but he replied and said; O my Lord and King, how
can I be merry, since I am in such danger on every side; looking under me, I
see coals of fire, and if I stir, this rotten board will break, then shall I
fall into the pit and be consumed to ashes. In looking up, I see a sword right
over me, which if it be but touched, falls down and slaies me: In looking on
either hand, behind and before me, I see men stand with naked swords to take
away my life. Since therefore I am in the midst of so many dangers, how can I
eat drink, or be merry? for these same sights do turn my joy into sorrow,
and my laughing into lamenting. Then the King said, Look how it is now with
thee, so it is always with me: for if I look above me, I see the great and
dreadful Judge, to whom I must give an account of all my thoughts, words and
deeds, good or evil. If I look under me, I see the endless torments of hell,
wherein I shall be cast if I die in my sins. If I look behind me, I see all
the sins that ever I have committed, and the time which unprofitably I have
spent. If I look before me, I see my death every day approaching nearer and
nearer unto my body. If I look on my right hand, I see my conscience accusing
me of all that I have done, and left undone in this world. And if I look on my
left hand, I see the creatures crying vengeance against me, because they
groaned under my iniquities. Romans 8 21.
Now therefore wonder not, hence-forward, why I cannot rejoice, but still
mourn and weep. O that all men could thus consider their estate, then should
they find small cause to rejoice at the world, or any thing in the world, but
imploiment for Argus his eyes, yet all little enough to weep and shed tears
for the miserable estate wherein we stand by sin: for these things are
hidden from the worlds eye; they account their estate to be happy, blessing
themselves in the abundance of their riches, and because they are not afflicted
like unto other men, Psalm. 7.5.
they think of no better heaven then that which they enjoy upon earth. For the
Prince of this world has so blinded their minds, that they cannot discern
what is good for their souls.

Many times I mourn, as one who cannot otherwise choose, to see the folly of
this world, and what excuses the sons of men will make to free their eyes
from weeping, and that not only of the profaner sort, but also of such as make
great show of Religion, in so much that now a days true penitential tears is
as rare to find or see, (as the Proverb is) a black Swan. Every true tear
in this age wherein we live, is a pearl in price, and a few of them is worth
a Kings ransom. But where shall we find them? In the Court? Alas no; there is
pride and vanity, Tears for sin in this age, scarce any where to be seen in
any estate generally. Hosea. 4.2. Not in the City, Inns of Court.
and hardly any room for true penitential tears. Are they in the City? No;
for there is swearing, lying, stealing, whoring, and breaking out, till blood
touch blood; therefore there is hardly any room for these true tears. Are
they in the Innes of Court or Westminster Hall? Alas no; unless it be the
poor Clients tears, who weeps more for the loss of his money amongst
Lawyers, then for his soul by sin: for there is delaying of Judgment,
demurring of Causes, and selling of Justice, but no place for true tears. Are
they in the Country? Surely no; Country.
for there is nothing but laboring day by day, week by week, and year by
year, for the maintenance of the body, but never once dreaming of the good of
the soul. Are they among the Gentry? No neither; Gentry.
unless true tears consist in hawking, hunting, gaming, or seasting, which if
they do, God shall have enough of that: but alas, these cannot wash the soul
from sin, or free the conscience of his burden, but rather bespot their soul
more with sin, heaping fuel to the fire for their greater torments. Where
then shall I find true tears? Surely amongst the Clergy; for they be the
Priests of the Lord, Clergy.
and ever should be offering sacrifices, not only of prayers, but also of
tears, and that both for their own sins, and the sins of the people; but
with grief I speak it, that few, if any, is there to be found; for they are
grown so fat, that they can neither weep for themselves, nor speak to
instruct the people. What shall I now do? Or whither shall I travel, to find
one cloth bedued with true tears? For since I find them not in the Court, nor
in the City, nor in Westminster Hall, nor in the Country, nor in the Gentry,
nor in the Clergy, (I mean the generality of all these) whither will you
then send me to find this rare fountain? I will command my Muses once more to
go abroad, to see if they can find this cleansing river of Jordan, or bring
me any tidings of the true Fullers earth: But whither? I have searched all
places, one only excepted, therefore if they remain not there, I boldly dare
say, they have no being in this land: and that place is Babylon, Only among
the afflicted.
where the captiuated Israelites remain, I mean, the afflicted, oppressed,
and grieved servants of the Lord; whether it be in Court, or City, Westminster
Hall, or Country, Gentry or Clergy, or any place else; there, and only there
is this precious water to be found, and not elsewhere: for these people weep
sore in the night when they should take their rest, Lam. 1.2.
and their tears cease not trickling down their cheeks, till the Lord
return with comfort to their souls. Psalm. 137.1.
These weep at the remembrance of Sion, and are wasted with sorrow, when they
call to mind the dew of Hermon distilling upon the Watchtower of the Lord;
therefore you that desire to drink of these tears, resort with speed to these
people, lest the Lord do free them from the Egypt of this world, before we
have learned to lament our sins.

Excuse for not weeping.
Some there are that could find in their hearts to weep, yet dare not, and
only for fear of hurting the eye: But alas; this bucket will draw no water,
nor this excuse free the sinner from sorrow. Christ had more walls to stop his
passage to us, and shall such a slender hedge keep us from drawing near to
him by repentance? Be it granted, that the tears hurt the eye; yet who will
not hurt one member for the good of all, rather then to cherish that and
endanger the whole body? If thy ere offend thee, Matthew. 5.29, 30
Christ's counsel is, to pluck it out, for better it is to enter into heaven
with one member lost, then into hell fire with all: Be it therefore that it
hurt the eye, Houle and lament.
yet if it hurt the eye natural, it cures the eye spiritual, heals the
soul finally, and pleases God perpetually. Tears, The effects and nature of
tears comparatively.
as one Divine says, are hot and moist; hot, to warm the cold conscience;
moist, to mollify the hard heart. They are salt and wet; salt, to season the
soul; wet, to cleanse the conscience. They are bitter and sweet; bitter, to
waine us from the world, as Wormwood the Infant from the dug; sweet, to season
all our sorrows, and to turn them into joys. In a word, they are a sword,
and a salve; a sword, to cut the soul from sin; a salve, to cure and heal
the soul again: Fear not therefore to shed tears since they are of such
quality; for if the world were truly persuaded of the benefit true tears do
bring, they would not be hindered from weeping. Royard observes six properties
of true tears.

First, they do Purgare, purge the soul: Plainly they are six. Roy. in Pest.
for as rain distilling from the clouds clarifies the air; so the tears of
the penitent purifies the heart; it makes the tongue to pray, the tongue makes
the heart to relent, the heart makes the man to repent, and repentance can
never be begun, continued, and ended, without many tears, which cannot cease
till the heart be purged. I remember a certain King had an Oxe-stall, which
had not been emptied of many years, at last was grown so soul, that it was
thought men could hardly make it clean in a life time: The King perceiving
that, presently considered, that if he could bring the River which ran hard by
his house to run through it, that then it would quickly be cleansed. No sooner
was this thus conceived in his mind, but he presently put it in practice, and
at last with much labor and cost, brought the river to run through the
oxe-stall with a very swift current, which river in three days cleansed that
house, and carried all that filth away, which otherwise could hardly ever have
been cleansed: even so that heart of ours, which would ask a like time to
cleanse, by hearing, reading, praying, and receiving, will in a short time be
purged, if tears be but joined with these: for true tears run with such a
forceable current, that they will suffer no putrefaction to rest long in the
heart vncarried away; as Peter, David, Marie Magdalen, with many more, can
witness.

Secondly, they do illuminare, open the eyes; for true penitential tears are
as a sovereign salve, making the stiff lid pliable, and will eat out the web
that hinders the sight of Mercy: for Mercy is obscured where the eye is veiled,
and the eye is veiled where sin reigns: but as the rain pouring from the
Clouds, clarifies the air, and alaies the dust, by which a man may see far,
both forward and upwards; even so true tears alaies the dust of sin, and
that mist of despair inabling a man to see far into Gods wonderful mercies
promised in Christ to his soul.

Thirdly, they do Corroborare, strengthen the man: for these tears do enable
a Christian to encounter with Satan, and to wrestle with Christ; nay, to
conquer Satan, and to overcome Christ. First, they do conquer Satan: witness
our Savior; who by strong cries and tears, received strength from God his
Father, to vanquish Satan, Death and Hell; for he triumphed over them all upon
the Chariot of his Cross. Secondly, they overcome Christ: witness Jacob; who
by weeping and praying had power over the Angel, Hos. 12.4. and 14.6.
for as the dew of the Lord makes Israel to grow as the Lilly, and to fasten
his roots as the trees of Lebanon: so will true tears make a man strong in the
Lord.

Fourthly, they do Laetificare, rejoice the soul, and that both by making it
fruitful and acceptable to the Lord. First, by making it fruitful; for as the
water which falls from heaven, nourishes the earth, comfort the dry ground,
making it able to send forth fruit which rejoices the heart of the sower; even
so, true tears causes the heart to send forth much good, which will rejoice
the man in the Winter of adversity and temptation. Secondly, it makes a man
acceptable in the sight of the Lord: witness Mary's tears, which preferred
her to Christ before all Marthaes dainties could her self: besides, they bring
a blessing, and a joyful harvest; a blessing, Matthew. 5.4. Psalm. 126.5.
For blessed are those that weep, they shall be comforted; a joyful harvest,
For they that sow in tears, shall reap in joy.

Fifthly, they do Eleuare, up, for as Noah's Ark, the more the water increased,
the more it was elevated: even so, the more that tears abound, the more is the
heart raised, and the affection set upon God.

Sixthly and lastly, they do Impetrare quicquid vult, obtain whatsoever good
a man would at the hands of God: witness Hezekia, upon whose tears the Lord
delays not to send unto him the Prophet Esaias to remove his fear, Esaias 38.5.
Psalm. 116.7, 8.
and assure him of his desired wishes. And David in danger of death and in
doubt of falling, coming to the Lord with tears in his eyes, was freed from
the one, and stood upright upon the other; so that his soul returned to that
rest for which it longed.

Doctr. Christ weeping for our sins, not his own, we should weep for others
sins.
Thirdly, if Christ weep for our sins, we are taught to weep one for
another. It is a duty of love that Christians owe, to weep one for another:
If they were to love none but themselves, then were they to shed tears for
none but themselves. But we are commanded to love our neighbors as our selves,
therefore must weep for other as for our selves. It has been the practice of
Gods Church from the beginning, and ought not to be left in the declining age.
The ancient custom of the Jews (which still they do retain) was to rent
their clothes at any blasphemy spoken by others. Jeremy when he saw the
wickedness of his people, was vexed, Ier. 8.21. and 9.1.
therefore wished, O that my head were a Well of water, and my eyes a fountain
of tears, that I might weep night and day for the slain of the Daughter of
my people. 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
This did Lot for Sodom, and David was no whit behind any, when his eyes
powered out rivers of tears, Psalm. 119. 130.
because men would not keep the law of his God: Shall such affection be found
in Gods ancient people, and we to savor never a whit thereof? If our friends
depart from us, or die with us, we can weep and mourn as fast as any; but if
we see a neighbor or a brother wedded to wickedness, and sunk almost past
recovery into sin, we never mourn, nor show any dislike, but salve it up
with humanum est: Others sins not to be salued, but sorrowed for.
so that for a young man to sin, is but a trick of youth; for an old man,
but an infirmity of age; and in none at any time as it should be lamented.
Children are suffered to be wanton, because their years are tender; youth is
permitted to be licentious, because their age is lusty; rich men are moved
with vanity, because it is their portion; poor men are customed with folly,
because they live in want; old men are drowned in superstition, because they
are near their graves; women are wanton, because they be beautiful, and all
are sinful, yet by few or none lamented: nay, are they not rejoiced at, Sins
now move not mourning, but mirch or mockings, especially the failings of Gods
children.
and in these times made the principal cause to move laughter? for if any man
fall dangerously into sin, especially the child of God, either by
infirmity, blindness, or being overtaken on a sudden by Satan, the world then
flings away jeering, as having caught what of long time they watched for: then
with a joyful countenance they vaunt abroad, the whole, nay, more then the
whole fall or sailing of this poor child of God, divulging to as many as they
see, or at leastwise know, the time, the place, and the manner of that sin
which was committed by such a person: 1 Samuel 17.52.
for as the Israelites rejoiced at the fall of Goliath, so does the world at the
failings of the Saints of God. Cato.
Cato, that grave Senator of Rome, was never seen to laugh but once, and that
was, when he espied out of his window an Ass eating of Thistles; wondering why
that beast should take pleasure in pricks, that should have been spurs to
have made him to take pains: So we when we see our brethren eating up sins
like bread, and drinking up iniquity like water, Job. 15.16.
rather laugh with Democritus at their folly, then with Heraclitus lament their
faults. I tell you brethren, there is no greater sign of a reprobate, then to
laugh at sin and Sinners: for he that can make wickedness his chiefest
pastime, and the faults of others his greatest joy, is just like to Satan our
greatest enemy, Satan's greatest solace is to see men sinning.
who rejoices at nothing more then when men commit sin. Therefore when thou
see sin in any, be it in thy wife, children, friends, servants, or enemies,
take heed thou rejoice not at it, but weep and mourn for it: present not
Omnia been, all is well: For any man being fallen into sin, Our hearts should
smite us when we see another sin. Pia est illa trislitia alienis vit^js
ingemiscere, non adhaerere: Contristari, non implicari: dolor contrahi, non
attrahi. August. Ber. homil. de resurrectione Dom.
is in a very miserable case till he return unto the Lord by true repentance;
wherefore let thy heart smite thee when thou see thy brother sleeping in the
bed of sin. For, This is a godly sorrow to pity men's sins, and not to be
polluted by them; to sorrow for them, and not sink into them, to be drawn
away in dolor, and not drawn away with delight. Saint Bernard makes mention
in one of his Homilies, of an old man, who when he saw any man sin, wept and
lamented for him; being asked why he so grieved for others, answered: Hodie
ille, cras ego; he fell to day, I may fall to morrow. If we could but remember
this, it would rather draw blood from the heart then joy, when we see a man
fallen into sin; therefore when thou see a murdering Caine, a theeuish
Achan, Genesis 4. Ios. 7. 2 King. 5. 2 Samuel 13. 1 Samuel 25. Numb. 16. Genesis 19. 2 Samuel 15. 1 King. 12.28. Exodus 9. 1 King. 21. Esaias 37. 2 Samuel 6. Luke 15. 2 Samuel
17. Acts 12. Luke 16. Luke 22.48. Matthew. 23.25. Luke 7.37.
a lying Gehezie, an incestuous Amnon, a churlish Nabal; a resisting Cora, a
filthy Sodomite, a murmuring Israelite, a rebellious Absalom, an idolatrous
Jeroboam, and an oppressing Pharao: a painted Iesabel, a blaspheming
Sennacherib, a railing Rabsachath, a scoffing Michal, a spending Prodigal, a
cursing Shemei, a proud Herod, a gluttonous Dives, a traitorous Judas, an
hypocritical Pharisie, a wanton Mary Magdalen, an tyrannical Nero, a bloody
Bonner, and an Apostate Julian, or any other sinner whatsoever, Oh weep and
lament for them, knowing not how soon God may withdraw his grace from thee,
and suffer thee to fall as foul as any of them into the like sins! I
conclude this point with that place of Ezechiel, where the Lord commands a
mark to be set upon the foreheads of all those that mourn and cry for all the
abominations done in the midst of Jerusalem for their preservation: Ezekiel. 9.4,
5.
But to take notice of all those which did not only laugh at sin, but would
not lament for sin for their destruction: O therefore let us with our loving
Savior, sorrow and grieve for our sinful brethren, using all means to turn
them from their wicked course of life; embracing the man, but hating his
manners, rebuking him sharply for his great offense; Prou. 27.5.
for an open rebuke is better then a secret love: then it may be, thou shall
pull his soul from Satan, which if thou can but so do, thou may sit
down with joyful Jacob when he heard of Joseph's life; Genesis 45.25.
I have enough, my son is living.

2. Cause of Christ's tears, was Propter mala poenae, the punishment to which
they were subject.
Our last point is the second cause of Christ's tears, which is Propter mala
poenae, the evil of punishment that was to be inflicted upon them; for as God
he saw, nay rather foresaw from the Watchtower of this Mount, the future
temptations and utter desolations both of Church and people, Cities and
Citizens, which whilst he beheld as God, he lamented as Man. Should I enter
into their punishments, I should diue into an Ocean without bottom, and lose
my self in a wilderness of discourse: therefore I refuse to tell you how the
sword destroyed twenty thousand in one day, Josephus.
and how the Edomites let in by Iehochanan, slew eight thousand and five
hundred of the wealthiest Citizens in one night. I will not relate how the
pestilence went through stitch, destroying more then an hundred thousand during
the siege, neither will I stand to show you how the famine spared none, but made
the Nobles to eat the leather of their Coaches as they rid, Ladies to scrape in
dunghils for their food, Lament. 2.20. Iere. 31.15.
and many women to eat the fruit of their own womb, and children which were
but a span long: as for Rats, Mice, Frogs, Snailes, and such like, they were
no ordinary food in Jerusalem at this time, for vengeance did so stir her
within and without, that there was nothing but weeping, howling, and great
lamentation. Not only Rachel weeping for her children, Matthew. 2.
but the children weeping for their parents, servants for their Masters, and
the poor for their maintainers. If a man at this time had been in Jerusalem,
his heart could not but have melted, to have seen the deaths of some, the
cryings of others, and the miseries of all. For if he look of one hand, he
might see men and women half dead, and half living, bathing themselves in one
another wounds, crying out for some relenting hearted man to kill them
outright, and to rid them out of their lingering tormenting pain. If he look
on the other-side, he should see the sons, daughters, and servants of the
Elders thus slain, crying up and down the City like mad men, with their eyes
and hands extended toward heaven, saying, Justice Lord, Justice Lord, Justice
upon the unjust depriuers of our friends and maintainers. If he look before
him, he should see the gray hairs of the ancient lying upon the pauements of
the City, as if they had bin strewed with rushes. If he looked behind him,
there he should see virgins lamenting the untimely death of their Lovers: which
way soever he had looked at this time in Hierusalems misery, famine, death, and
destruction, must needs be his object. But I cease to prosecute it largely,
because it would be too tedious both to me that speak, and to you that hear;
neither will I tell you of the ancient buildings, glorious Temples, and stately
Palaces of David, Solomon's, and the rest of the ancient Kings of Israel, how
they were all destroyed, and pulled down to the ground, not having a stone
left upon a stone, according as our Savior foretold them; inso much as now we
may say of Jerusalem, as one spoke of Priams Town; Iam seges est, vbi Troia
fuit; Now is that a Corne-field, which was c^rst called Troy; so now is that a
barren ground, and a mount of stones, which was erst called beautiful
Jerusalem. All this, with a thousand times more our Savior foresaw, which
whilst he beheld it as God, Magistrates about to punish should contemplate the
malefactors case, and temper mercy with Justice. Grego.
lamented it as man. To draw toward an end, though there be no end in the
matter it self, and to temper my speech according to the time: The residue
belongs to all Magistrates and Judges, but more especially to you that are
Magistrates and Judges of, and in this honorable City of London. Omnis
Christi actio est nostra instructio, says Gregory, id est, Every action of
Christ is our instruction; if all ours, then this more particularly yours;
namely, to temper Mercy and Justice together, that is, If at any time in
Justice you are compelled to punish a malefactor, yet in the midst of Justice,
let Clemency shine forth; be not unlike our compassionate Savior, who powers
forth tears when he pronounces Judgment: for if this be wanting, all your
Justice will be converted into tyranny; a man's estate, name, or life, is not to
be played or iested withal, Noli me tangere: for these three, or at the least
two of them can never be restored again.

Sulpitius.
Memorable is that fact of Sulpitius, an ancient Roman, who never passed the
sentence of judgment to execution upon any man, but his tears were seen to
trickle from his eyes, as if water had been powered on his face. Bias.
And Bias that was a Judge of Greece, never gave sentence of death upon any,
but he wept for them. Theodosius.
Theodosius the Emperor was ever so merciful, that he always gave one days
liberty to the enemy for meditation, before he would use any violence. Also I
have read of a certain Captain, who when he besieged any City, the first day
would display a white Ensign in token of Mercy; By no means to insult over or
deride the guilty in sentencing or punishing.
the next day a black Banner, in token of judgment; the third day red
colors, in token of blood, fire and sword, without any Mercy; they therefore
are monsters in Nature, which will show no mercy to their Brethren, but in
superstition, malice, or vainglory, wrong those whom they ought to judge with
equity. There ought to be a sympathy, and a fellow-feeling in men's minds,
especially in a Ruler great compassion, wishing from the bottom of their
hearts there were no such cause of punishment so to be suffered: for a
Magistrate ought not to be like the proud Pharisees, and insolent Priests, who
when they had taken our Savior, delighted not in any thing so much, as in
mocking, spitting, buffeting, Matthew. 27.
railing, reuiling, scourging, scorning, crowning him with thorns, and
crucifying him between two Thieves. They were not content to take his life,
and to shed his blood, but loaded his body with most shameful calumniations;
nay, when they had him where they would have him, namely upon the Cross, then
did they rejoice and shout out of measure, nodding their heads, shaking their
hands, Matthew. 27.
and cried with their voice; If thou be the Son of God, come down from the
Cross, and we will believe thee: he saved others, but himself he cannot save.
Neither would I have you like to Volesus, who was a Proconsull of Asia, living
under the Emperor Augustus: for he is recorded for a very famous Tyrant,
because that when he had beheaded three hundred in one day, with a proud and
lofty countenance he walked amongst the dead carkases, as if he had done some
great exploit, and at last cried out, O rem regiam, id est, Oh an act fit for a
King! But surely we may answer him thus: O rem Diabolicam, O an act fit for a
Devil! For this doing beseems not a King or Magistrate, they should rather
with Christ here, grieve that any should grow to that extremity, as to deserve
such judgment. Courtesy should be the Crown of a King, Compassion the
handle, Justice the edge, Anger the back, and Mercy the point of a Magistrates
sword; therefore you that are Magistrates, call to the Lord early and late,
morning and evening, that he may drop down kindness and mercy into your
hearts, that discourteous and churlish actions may always be far from your
hands: For it is not in our time as it was in the days of Jeremy, Iere. 48.10.
that cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood: but blessed is he
that spares, and blessed is he that saves: For those whom you judge, are they
not your Brethren? Yea, and that from the very womb; Mal. 2.10.
(...), having one Father, which is the Lord in heaven; and one Mother, which
is the Church on earth: A Magistrate in doing justice may be guilty of
injustice, and subject to Gods judgment, failing in the end and manner. 2
King. 9.25, 26. Hos. 1.4.
therefore when you pronounce judgment upon any, look it be done with an
upright heart, and to the glory of God: otherwise whilst you give sentence
against man, the Lord gives sentence against you. Iehu King of Israel executed
the judgments of the Lord upon the house of Ahab, according to all the word of
the Lord: yet himself is threatened to be punished because he did it with a
cruel and bloody affection. The work was good, but his heart was evil: the
deed done was righteous, but the manner of doing it was corrupt, for he
respected not the glory of God, but his own revenge, which made the Lord to
visit him and his house, and all Israel for it. See therefore not only what
you do, but also to what end and purpose you do it. Be not unlike the Lord
your God, who is (...), the Father of mercies: 2 Cor. 1.3.
But when you judge, let clemency shine forth, knowing that one day you shall
be judged your selves; and what measure you give unto others, shall be
rendered at the last by the Lord unto you again.

It is time to gather up all my broken fragments into one basket, and to wind
up all my ends upon one clue, therefore let my last conclusion be your
exhortation; Hierusalems destruction our instruction, and a fearful Felix
quem faciunt, to all those that fear not judgments threatened: as God has
made you Magistrates, so execute your places, and show your selves worthy of
your calling: Let Jesus Christ be still a pattern for your practice, that as
he was careful to come to view, to weep, so do you; let not your pains be
burdensome to your bodies, wicked objects pleasing to your minds, nor true
tears offensive to your cheeks: It was not so with our Savior, I hope it
will not be so with you.

I remember a certain Roman General, after the besieging such a Town, was
demanded by one of his friends of his proceedings, who answered; Veni, vidi,
vici: I came, I saw, I conquered, But if you demand what success Christ had
against Jerusalem, he may thus answer, Veni, vidi, fleui; I came, I beheld, I
wept, not overcame; for his tears was not able to break into the stony hearts
of those wicked Jews; if not theirs, let it be ours, and teach you to do the
like; Magistrates where they cannot draw by compulsion, should win by
compassion: howsoever be strong, vigilant, and look near home.
namely, where you cannot draw by compulsion, win by compassion; you are the
arms of our City, therefore ought to be strong; you are the pillars of a
Commonwealth, therefore must have a good foundation; you are our Watchmen,
therefore ought not to be drowsy; you are our Keepers, look therefore you be
not found gadders too far from home, when we have most need of your helps.
When Moses was in the Mountain, Exodus 32.19.
Israel played the wanton: and if you be not careful, our City will be
extreme sinful; it is so already, yet it will be worse if you be not wary; for
we have so many back-windowes, and obscure corners, that unless you search
narrowly, you will never find out those Cages of unclean birds that harbor
within them: but I leave the labor to you, the blessing to God.

London in many things to be praised.
Many things (Right Honorable) we may commend you for, as building of Hospitals,
repairing of Churches, maintaining of Schools, rewarding of learning, feeding
the hungry, clothing the naked, providing for widows, caring for Orphans,
guarding your City: Romans 1.8.
but above all, for your faith which is spoken of thorowout the whole world;
yet as the Lord said to the Church of Thyatira, so may I say to you, Ap. 2.20.
Nevertheless, I have a few things against you, which are these: Why do you
suffer pride to iet up and down by your faces, and to live in your houses
without correction? Why do you suffer the Tauerns and Alehouses (which for
multitude is the shame of our City, and for order the baine of our City) to
be more frequented then the Church, many times room being to be had in the
one, none in the other, and that upon the Lords day? Why do you suffer Stews
and Brothell-houses to live at your elbowes; nay, under your noses, as though
you had afforded them a toleration? This made Diogenes to laugh, when he saw
how the great thieves hung up the lesser.
Why do you suffer little thieves to go to the gallows, and great thieves to
escape without any punishment (I mean those that rob and steal by false
wares, false weights, false measures, and false tongues?) I will not mention
what else I publicly spoke (and that not without a credible Author, though
then I named him not) because the adversary shall have nothing by me to detect
your unspotted Charity withal, because you might be ignorant of it: but I
hope the sound of this Trumpet has so rowsed you from the bed of rest, that
that little which is amiss, shall soon be reformed without any more
threatenings from the Lord. If you do not, God will not long see our want, and
this wickedness unpunished: for though he came in mildness here to
Jerusalem, he shall come in terror hereafter to us, and pay us what we have
deserved. I cannot persuade my self that Sodom lies in ashes for greater
offenses, then have been found in us within these few days. For I have seen
drunkenness, drunk till it thirsted, and gluttony vomit till it hungered
again; I have seen Gods word contemned; his Saboaths profaned, his Sacraments
neglected, his Ministers abused, his children most shamefully derided. What
shall I say, if I should reckon up all the wickedness that I have seen in
this short time of my life, it would ask a large time to name them, and drink
up a great volume to unfold them; therefore I will say no more but only this:
beseeching you, that as God has placed you above others, so to look to
others, have a care of their souls that are committed to your government as to
your own. Go forth into the high way with those servants of the King, Matthew.
22.10.
walk the streets, ransacke the irreligious and idle corners of this City;
Luke 14.23.
Compel them to come to the house of the Lord for fear, which will not come
for love, that their rooms which now are empty may be filled: If you refuse
this, you refuse to wage war with sin, and to waken your Brother out of his
wicked sleep: and if you refuse to wage war with sin, you deny the colors
of Christ your Captain, and reject the Ensigns of God your Emperor. If
therefore you will have God to bless you, Christ to save you, and the holy
Trinity to defend you, keep your oath with your Sovereign, be faithful to
your Captain, and fight against sin that you may win many souls to Christ.
If sleep would kill your friend, would you suffer him still to slumber and not
awake him? What care and respect Governors should have over and toward those
who are committed to their charge, in the Testimony of the Heathens. Xenophon
in Cyro.
Surely no; why then do you suffer your Brethren and Sisters to sleep in
sin, and to snore and snort in the bed of wickedness, and never once awake
them with a lash of Justice? The old Heathens to note unto us the great care
that Magistrates should have of the people over whom they were placed,
entitled them Fathers of the people, because they must esteem and imagine
(...) to be (...) to be (...) to be (...), and (...) to be (...); his Country
to be his house, his Citizens his fellows, his friends, his children, and his
children his soul. Hom. Illiad. 10.
Homer calls Agamemnon to his great praise (...), the Shepherd of the people;
because his sleep was seldom or never (...), sweet, pleasant, or quiet.
Plutarchus.
Such was Epaminondas, of whom it is reported, that when others feasted and
slept, he did fast, watch, use sobriety, view the Tents, and walk the walls;
also the ancient Persian Kings, when they should take their rest, had a
Chamberlain who usually came unto them, saying; (...), id est, Arise, arise, O
King, and look about thy business. Had the heathens this care over their
charge and people who knew not Christ, and will not you that know Christ and
his will, have much more care? then shall these people rise up in judgment
against you: Awake, awake, therefore you Magistrates, I say awake, both early
and late, and walk about the streets of this City, that you may find the
Crimson colored sins without any varnish: then thrust them out of the gates,
and bring Christ into the City, who has stood this threescore and almost ten
years, waiting for an entrance, for fear left he depart, and you never more
enjoy his presence: God has given you both gifts and places not for your
selves alone, but also, (...), for the common good of Church and City, Town
and Country, which if you carefully and truly perform, aiming more at the
glory of God, then your own praise; the peoples good, then your own ease:
the^ will the Country be less miserable, the city less a lover of pleasure,
2 Timothy 3.4.
and both more lovers of God; the Country more plentiful, the City more
beautiful, the Country flowing with goodness, the City ouerflowing with
happiness. In a word, the Country shall flourish and rejoice, the City with a
loud sounding voice shall send forth your praise to the uttermost parts of the
earth; yea, it shall be a crown to your heads, a recompense to our labors, a
sweet smelling sacrifice unto the Lord, the joy of Angels, the triumph of
Saints, a blessing to the City, a saving of souls, and an everlasting
happiness to your posterity; nay, more then all this, if you thus do, it
will so please our Savior, as that it will stop his tears, rejoice his heart,
confound his foes, win his favor, unfold his mercy, unlock his kingdom, that
our souls may have free passage to enter; first into grace in this life, and
hereafter into glory in the life to come: Where God the Father shall take you
by the right hand, and lead you to the fountains of water, washing all your
garments white in the blood of the Lamb; Christ Jesus shall embrace you in the
arms of his mercy, crown you with crowns of glory: at whose Coronation all
the Angels in heaven shall applaud your praise, and God himself shall say Amen
to your felicities.

Laus Deo.

