THE THIRD VOLVME OF THE FRENCH ACADEMIE: Containing a notable description of
the whole world, and of all the principal parts and contents thereof:

As namely, of Angels both good and evil: of the Celestial spheres, their
order and number: of the fixed stars and planets; their light, motion, and
influence:

Of the four elements, and all things in them, or of them consisting: and
first of fiery, airie, and watrie meteors or impressions of comets, thunders,
lightnings, raines, snow, hail, rainebowes, winds, dewes, frosts,
earthquakes, etc. engendered above, in, and under the middle or cloudie region
of the air.

And likewise of fowls, fishes, beasts, serpents, trees with their fruits and
gum; shrubs, herbs, spices, drugs, minerals, precious stones, and other
particulars most worthy of all men to be known and considered.

Written in French by that famous and learned Gentleman Peter de la Primaudaye
Esquier, Lord of the same place, and of Barree: and Englished by R. Dolman.

LONDINI, Jmpensis Geor. Bishop. 1601.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful Sir WILLIAM MOVNSON Knight.
YOur emploiments (Right Worshipful) in sundry her Majesty's foreign services
both by sea and land, and also (for your farther experience, and satisfaction)
in diverse other noble enterprises, being accompanied with a sharp and
judicious observation of things memorable, and the perusing of many excellent
and rare writers; must of necessity have made you not only expert in matters
of war and estate, but also most singularly well read in God his great book
of nature, I mean the admirable frame of this Universe, or whole world. Wherein
the infinite varieties and sorts of creatures, like so many visible words, do
proclaim and publish unto man the eternity, infinity, omnipotency, wisdom,
justice, bounty, and other essential attributes of his dread and sovereign
creator.

Wherefore I do here present unto your Worcester. the discourse ensuing, not as a
teacher to instruct you in things unknown, but as a faithful remembrancer to
recall matters to your mind, which are there already both by speculation and
experience most soundly imprinted.

It may please you then to accept of this mine homely translation, not so much
for mine own sake, who am able to deserve less then nothing; as for the
Authors worthiness, being a Gentleman (as appears out of this, and other parts
his learned ACADEMIE) most rarely qualified: and likewise for the excellency
of this present work of his, both in regard of the method, the matter, and the
scope. For the method is most exact, and agreeable to rules of art, proceeding
from generalles to particulars, and from the whole to the parts. The matter or
subject is most noble: so that if (according to Aristotle) all arts and
sciences do receive their perfection from the dignity of the object; then
certes of all others (Theology excepted) this science is the most excellent,
having so spacious, so beautiful, and so fruitful a field to manure, as the
whole world and all things therein contained. Neither is the scope any whit
less charitable and christian, tending partly to the information of men's
understandings, and the reformation of their errors; but most especially aiming
at the glory of the creator, unto whom only is due all submission and honor.
Finally considering the authors manner of handling this discourse, and the
variety of choise-writers both ancient and of our times, which he alleges
for confirmation of sundry truths, and for other purposes, purging by the fire
of his exquisite judgment the dross of their opinions from the pure metal,
and in all places adorning their gold and silver with the most orient and
inualuable pearls of holy scripture; I deemed it in all respects most worthy
to shroude it self under your Worcester. patronage. London this 28. of March. 1601.

Your Worcester. most ready to be disposed of, RICHARD DOLMAN.

To the Reader.
MOunt on this worlds maiestike theater;
Survey the spheres and euer-burning lamps;
Pierce through the air, fire, earth and water;
Admire Jehouahs hosts and royal camps
Ranged in batallions and seemly troops,
At sight whereof the proudest Atheist droupes.
Surmount the spheres, and view those ghostly wights
Jnhabiting a world supercelestiall:
Then stoop, and trembling, see those ghastly sprights
Plunged aie in deepest fiery gulfes infernal:
And frighted thence, look all the world arou^d,
What other natures-wonders may be found.
R. D.

Sonnet.
CE que Dieu fit, et fait d'admirable en son monde,
Ce qu'on en peut auoir de plaisirs et de biens,
Et d'enseignemens beaux, diuins, et terriens,
BARREE icy l'instruit par celeste faconde.
Mais quel saint trucheman, o Nimphe-Angloise blonde:
T'apprent ces hauts discourse, qui rauissent les tiens?
C'est mon gentil DOLMAN, ieune laurier des miens:
Le qui de des neuf seurs, qui en langues abonde.
O toy heureuse donc d'auoir ce traducteur!
Comme ta soeur Francoise heureuse est de l' Autheur.
Mais plus heureuse encor quand par estudes saints
Des grands oeuures de Dieu en ce liver depeintes,
Si bien cognoistres Dieu, qu'au mieux d'ame et de coeur,
En crainte, amor, et foy, le seruires sans feintes.
IN attens le temps, PIERRE CASTLE.

The special and principal matters handled in this third Tome of the French
Academie, as it is divided into several days works, and distinguished by
Chapters.
The first days work.
Page 1 OF the Creation of Heaven and Earth, Chap. 1 Page 7 Of time, which
took beginning with the world, Chapter 2 Page 12 Of the insufficiency or
nullitie of reasons, framed concerning the nature of the world against the
creation thereof, chap. 3 Page 15 Of the reasons taken from motion, and the
moving intelligences against the creation of the world, and of the
insufficiency of them, chapter 4 Page 20 Of many other devises which they
invent, who pretend to overthrow the doctrine of the creation of the world,
performed by the creator thereof, chap. 5 Page 24 Concerning those causes which
have made the Philosophers to err from the knowledge of truth, and of their
ignorance concerning God and his works, chap. 6 Page 29 Of the authority of
such witnesses, as make the creation and newnes of the world undoubted, chap. 7
Page 34 Of the reasons making for the creation and newnes of the world, chapter
8
The second days work.
Page 39 COncerning the errors of those Philosophers, which say that God does
his outward work of necessity, chap. 9 Page 45 Of the reasons, which conclude
that God proceeded of frank and free deliberation to the work of the world,
chap. 10 Page 49 Of one only principal and first cause of the Universe. chap.
11 Page 54 Of the space of the six days mentioned in the history of the
creation of the world, chap. 12 Page 59 Of the mysteries hidden under the
number of six in the creation of the Universe: and of the seventh day of rest,
chap. 13 Page 64 Of the divisions of the universal world, chap. 14 Page 68 Of
the Angelical and intellectual world, chap. 15 Page 74 Of devils and evil
spirits, chap. 16
The third days work.
Page 80 OF the celestial or sphericall world, chap. 17 Page 86 Of the form
and figure of heaven, and of the motion thereof, as well general as
particular, chap. 18 Page 91 Of the circles ingenerall, and particularly of the
Equinoctial and Zodiake, and of their signs, chap. 19 Page 95 Of the two
great circles named Colures, and of the four less circles and parallels, and
of the five Zones of the world and immooueable circles chap. 20 Page 101 Of the
hower-circles, and what is done by them in sunne-dials: and of the circles
which divide the 12. houses of heaven, chap. 21 Page 106 Of the ascensions and
descensions of the stars and of the signs, and other arkes of the Zodiake, and
of the oriental and occidentall latitude of the sun, or degrees of the
zodiac, chap. 22 Page 109 Of the natural and artificial days, and of the
nights, of their diversity and cause, chap. 23 Page 112 Of equal and
unequal, temporal and artificial hours: of the heights of the sun above
the Horizon, and of his right and reuerse shadows, chap. 24
The fourth days work.
Page 117 OF the substance and nature of heaven, and of the celestial bodies:
and of their continuance and change, cha. 25 Page 121 Of motions ingenerall, of
their first cause, and of their union in all nature, chap. 26 Page 125 Of the
life, reason, and understanding of the celestial bodies: and of the excellent,
political and military order which is amongst them, chap. 27 Page 130 Of the
influence and effects of the planets and stars in things here below either to
good or evil, chap. 28 Page 135 Of the truth which is found in
prognostications of Astrologers: and how the stars are appointed by God for
signs, and that from their influences no evil proceeds, chap. 29 Page 140
Of the planet Saturn, and how it is not evil, nor any other star. chap. 30
Page 144 Of the planets ingenerall, and how they work in man, not in
constraining, but disposing, chap. 31 Page 148 Of the true Astronomy which the
heavens do teach us, and especially the sun in his admirable effects, chap.
32
The fifth days work.
Page 152 OF the rising and setting of the sun: and of the providence of God
which shines in the commodities of day and night, chap. 33 Page 157 Of the
second course and motion of the sun and moon, for the distinction of years,
months, and seasons: and of the providence of God in these things, chap. 34
Page 161 Of the image of God, and of his light which is proposed unto us in the
sun, with the felicity of man's life, in changing of light and darkness,
chap. 35 Page 166 Of the eclipses of the sun and moon; and of the image
which we have therein of the constancy which is in God, and of the
inconstancy of men, and of humane things, chap. 36 Page 171 Of the beginning
of natural and corruptible things, chap. 37 Page 176 Of the elements, and of
things to be considered in them, in that they are distinguished by the number
of four, chap. 38 Page 180 Of the opinion of those, who admit but three
elements, not acknowledging the elementarie fire, chap. 39 Page 185 Of the
perfect compositions which are in the nature of all things, by which the four
elements may be considered, chap 40
The sixth days work.
Page 189 OF the agreement betwixt the elements and planets, chapter 41 Page
195 Of the fire, and of the air, and of the things engendered in them: and of
their motions, and of the winds, cha. 42 Page 199 Of thunder, and lightning,
chap. 43 Page 203 Of the true Meteors of Christians: and of the supernatural
causes of thunder and lightning, chap. 44 Page 208 Of snowes, mists, frosts,
frosts, ice and hail, chap. 45 Page 212 Of comets. chap. 46 Page 216 Of
clouds and vapors, chap. 47 Page 221 Of the waters sustained and hanged in
the air, and of the rainebow, chap. 48
The seventh days work.
Page 226 OF dewes and rain, chap. 49 Page 230 Of the fertility caused by
dewes and rain, and of the providence of God therein, chap. 50 Page 234 Of the
winds, and of their kinds and names: and of the testimonies which we have in
them of the power and majesty of God, chapter 51 Page 239 Of the fowls of the
air, and namely of the Manucodiata, of the Eagle, of the Phoenix, and of other
wild foul, chap. 52 Page 243 Of singing birds, and chiefly of the
Nightingale, and of sundry others, and of their wit and industry, chap. 53
Page 247 Of the Estridge, of the Peacocke, of the Cock, and of other fowls,
chap. 54 Page 251 Of the earth, and of the situation, immobilitie, figure, and
quality thereof, chap. 55 Page 255 Of earthquakes, chap. 56
The eight days work.
Page 261 OF the sea, and of the waters, and of the division and distribution
of them throughout the earth, chap. 57 Page 265 Of the flowing and ebbing of
the sea; and of the power that the moon has over it, and over all other
inferior bodies, chap. 58 Page 269 Of salt, fresh, and warm waters; and of
other diversities in them, chapter 59 Page 274 Of the commodities which men
reap of the waters by Navigations, and of the directions which seamen do
receive from heaven, and from the stars upon the sea, chap. 60 Page 278 Of
the division of lands and countries amongst men by the waters: and of the
limits which are appointed them for the bounds of their habitation, chap. 61
Page 283 Of the commodities which are incident to men, and to all creatures, by
the course of the waters thorough the earth, chap. 62 Page 287 Of diverse kinds
of fishes; namely of the whale, of the dolphin, of the sea-calfe, and others,
chap. 63 Page 291 Of the image that we have of the state of this world, and of
men in the sea, and in the fishes thereof, chap. 64
The ninth days work.
Page 295 OF fruits, and of the fertility of the earth, and the causes
thereof: and of herbs, trees and plants, chap. 65 Page 299 Of the virtue that
herbs and other fruits of the earth have in physic and in food: and of the
true use of them. chap. 66 Page 304 Of the diversity of plants, and of their
difference and natural growth; and of their parts, and of the most excellent
amongst them, chapter 67 Page 308 Of trees, and especially of the pine, the
fir tree, the cypress tree, and the cedar, chap. 68 Page 313 Of trees bearing
cinnamom, cassia, franckincense, mirrh, and cloves, chap. 69 Page 318 Of trees,
and plants that bear nutmegs, ginger, and pepper, chapter 70 Page 321 Of the
date-tree, of the Baratha or tree of India, of the Gehuph, and of brasill,
chap. 71 Page 326 Of the citron-tree, limon-tree, orange-tree, oliue-tree, and
pomegranate-tree, chap. 72
The tenth days work.
Page 331 OF mallows, wilde-mallowes, purple-violets, betonie, ceterach, and
Saint Iohns-wort, chap. 73 Page 336 Of celandine, cammocke, wormwood, hyssop,
sage and mints, chapter 74 Page 340 Of thyme, sauorie, marierom, rue, parsley,
and fennel, chap. 75 Page 344 Of rosemarie, camomill, the lilly, baulme, of
grass or dogs-tooth, and of pimpernell, chap. 76 Page 348 Of nightshade,
alkakeng, pellitorie of the wall, fumitorie, angelica, and of maidens-haire,
chap. 77 Page 352 Of rheubarb, licorice, aloes, seen, saffron and centurie,
chap. 78 Page 357 Of wheat, rye, barley and oats; and of rice and millet,
chap. 79 Page 361 Of the vine, of grapes, of wine, and of Aqua-vitae, chap. 80
The eleventh days work.
Page 366 OF terrestrial beasts, and especially of serpents; namely of the
aspis or adder, and of the viper, chap. 81 Page 370 Of Bees, and of their honey
and wax; and of silke-wormes, cha. 82 Page 373 Of the dog, and of the horse,
chap. 83 Page 378 Of the elephant and of the camel, and of the rhinoceros,
chap. 84 Page 382 Of the lion, of the tygre, and of the panther, chap. 85 Page
386 Of the woolfe, of the bear, and of the ape, chap. 86 Page 390 Of the heart,
of the wild bore, and of the unicorn, chap 87 Page 394 Of the ciuet and
muskat, of the castoreum, and of the ottar, cha. 88 Page 397 Of the right use
of venomous creatures and wild beasts; and of the justice and bounty of God
which shines in them, chap. 89 Page 401 Of the nourishment of many creatures,
by that which is poison to others, and of the natural amity and enimitie
which is between them, chapter 90 Page 404 Of the profit which redoundeth to
men by beasts, and chiefly by tame and private beasts; and of the wondrous
providence of God which shines in them, chap. 91 Page 407 Of the blessing and
providence of God in the multiplication and conservation of those beasts that
are most profitable for men, and with which they are most served, chap 92
The twelfth days work.
Page 411 OF metals, and chiefly of gold, chap. 93 Page 415 Of silver, amber,
iron, lead, brass and copper, chapter 94 Page 418 Of precious stones, and
namely of the diamond, chap. 95 Page 422 Of the emeraud, of the carbuncle or
rubie, of the saphir, of the Iacinth, and of the amethyst, chap. 96 Page 425 Of
the Chrysolite, of the Topaze, of the opall, of the turkesse, and of the agath,
chap. 97 Page 428 Of pearl, coral, and crystal, chap. 98 Page 432 Of the
instructions that men may take in that gold and silver are hidden under ground,
and of the use and abuse of them, and of precious stones, chap. 99 Page 436 Of
the doctrine and profit that every one must, and may receive of the whole
work of God in heaven and in earth, thereby to acknowledge and glorify him,
chap. 100
Par la priere Dieu m'ayde.
THE FORESPEECH OF the Academicke speakers in the discourses following. Of
Heaven and Earth.
ASER, felicity. AMANA, truth. ARAM, highness. ACHITOB, brother of goodness.
ASER. IT is time (companions) that we quit our selves of the promise, which
we made one to another in the entrance of our discourses concerning man, to
recreate our minds sometimes (if God thereto gave grace) in the fair and
spacious fields of the Or whole world.
Universe, by a diligent search and attentive consideration of all nature: to
the end thereby the better to acknowledge the sovereign author thereof, and
to induce us the more to honor him, who is the foundation, whereupon we began
at first to build, and still desire to raise up our Academie. For seeing the
knowledge of God, tending to his service, is the principal outte of our being
and of all our actions: and that his infinite essence cannot make it self to
be comprehended woorthily, and according to his greatness by the feeblenes of
man's understanding: it behooves us carefully to meditate upon his works, for
so much as in them the great Architect of the world has imprinted certain
marks of his glory, sufficient to give us so much knowledge of his high
Majesty, and of that wherein he requires us to honor him; as our condition
can bear, and according as is altogether necessary for the health and repose
of our souls. Now we consider of the work of God principally in two things
(yea, and to them we may easily refer all the discourse concerning this
matter:) to wit, in the creation conducting, and government of his creatures;
and in the mystery of Redemption, which it has pleased him to vouchsafe on
mankind. As then in the process of our Academie, where we have amply
entreated of the little world, which is Man, we have begun to instruct our
selves concerning the chiefest of his works: so now I desire that we may
prosecute this goodly matter of the creation and being of the great world; if
you (companions) will answer me with the same affection: And if we may obtain
so much favor of our God, that being well instructed in his school of
wisdom, and guided by his holy spirit, we may dare to speak (and what may we
not dare in seeking his glory) of the incomprehensible secret of his work for
the health of man; we will assay to accomplish our work, and rest our selves
on this point.


AMANA. For as much as the world is a shadow of the brightness of God, and like
a great book of Nature and natural Theology; and that all creatures
contained in the Universe, are like so many preachers and general witnesses of
the glory of the creator, as all the learned teach: we must diligently settle
our understanding to the contemplation of this shadow of the divine brightness,
and our eyes to the reading of this book of Nature; and our ears to hear
these natural preachers, which teach us to acknowledge God and his providence
above all things else, to the end to glorify him as his bounty does bind us.
We know also the great reasons which inuit us to this natural search of all
things, and namely the impiety of our age, as we have declared in the
forespeech of the second Tome of our works, showing that the world is of it
self sufficient to vanquish all Atheism, there being nothing in the Universe
either so great or small, but from step to step does direct man to
acknowledgment of a divinity. Which will appear more manifest unto us, if we
entreat of the so great variety of creatures. Boldly then (companions) let us
prosecute our purpose. If the enterprise be difficult, and too high for us to
attain to the sum thereof, yet to approach to things excellent, is always
very laudable.


ARAM. Many blame discourses which are made, of heaven, for that they be feeble
and very slender being compared to the beauty, and importance of the thing it
self. And indeed I must confess, that all that can be spoken of the world
accords therewith as it is in it self no more then the portraiture of the
Roman common wealth upon the shield of Aeneas, could meetly represent the
greatness and majesty of the acts and power of this Empire. But howsoever it
be, we have in the doctrine of the spheres most excellent principles and
grounds, which prepare men to the knowledge of nature, and the author thereof;
yea which advance them (if they can apply this study to his proper end) in
the understanding of the secrets, wisdom, and providence of God, so far as the
mind of man can pierce thereinto. Let us then (companions) direct our sight
straight toward the place, which we must apprehend, to be blessed; to wit,
toward heaven, and let us especially regard God in his works, as the only
limit whereto we shall and must once attain.


ACHITOB. The orderly motions of the heavens, the goodly workmanship of so
many starry pauilions disposed one above the other, without any inter-annoia^ce
in their course; the accord, agreement, power, virtue and beauty of the
elements; the situation, stabilitie, and largenes of the earth in midst of the
waters, which continually threaten it, and yet drown it not; and so many
diverse natures, and creatures, which are, which live, which have sense and
understanding, in this whole great Universe, and serve each one in his place:
all these things (I say) are like so many interpreters, to teach us God, as
their only efficient cause, and to manifest him unto us in them and by them,
as their final cause. Therefore pursuing our first intent sufficiently
declared in the beginning of our Academick discourse, and according to the
process of the talk by us observed in our description of the natural history
of the Microcosme (or little world:) let us here make (companions) as it were
another history of the Macrocosme (or great world) first entreating of the
creation of the world: then of the division of the same, afterward of the
orders of the spheres; of their substance, natures, and motions, of the
influences and effects of their planets; consequently of the elements; and
lastly of every essence and creature therein contained; not by a particular
description of their kinds, which would amount to a work almost infinite, but
only of the principal of each sort, and so much as we shall hold sufficient
to induce every one of us, and of those which will deigne to hear us, to
consider, and highly to praise the wisdom of the father and moderator of all
these things, in the creation, conduction, governance, and end of them: and by
the union of their parts, with the whole, and among themselves, we have enough
to refer the event of our purpose to their beginning and principal scope,
which is, to know God and his providence, to the end to glorify him. Declare
then unto us (ASER) that which you have learned of the creation of heaven and
earth.


THE FIRST DAYS WORK, OF THE THIRD TOME OF THE FRENCH Academie. Of Heaven and
Earth.
Of the creation of Heaven and Earth. Chapter 1.
ASER. IF all men guided by reason (as Plato very well said) have a custom to
invoke on God in the beginning of their work, In Tim.
whether it be great, or little; how much more convenient is it, that desiring
to dispute of the Universe (if we retain any judgment at all) we should call
God to our aid? It is very difficult to speak as is requisite of the
celestial bodies, and of so many diverse motions as they have, and yet not one
hinder another: but it is a much more high and intricate matter to find out
the workman, and father of all this great world. And when we shall have found
him, it is altogether impossible vulgarly to express the cause, and reason of
his works. For though (as it is) the glory and infinite wisdom of God
shines in this admirable construction of heaven and earth: yet our capacity
is too too small, to comprise so great and profound effects, so much it wants
that the tongue may be able to make a full and entire declaration thereof: And
we cannot hold disputation, or argument upon that, which does not offer it
self unto our sense, and proper reason, as is the creation of the world. For
therein have we that wonderful Architect (whom Hermes called the great and
infinite sphere intellectual, whose center is all that, which is, throughout
the world, created) who performing his work, and giving motion to all the
celestial bodies, does himself continue stable. Now that which moving, is not
it self moved, surpasses al discourses and speculations humane and
philosophical, and appertains to a divine knowledge, the which we ought to
impetrate through prayers by revelation of the holy Spirit, even in such sort
as all things natural are invented, and comprehended by reason and
demonstration, and all moral are obtained by art and use.

Prayer to God.
Then of the sovereign, and true God, with his eternal Word, and holy Spirit,
which three are one essence, one God in Trinity of persons, Exodus 3.
whose name is (I will be, that I will be) or (I am that I am) Almighty,
Eternal, Creator and governor of every soul and body, in contemplation of
whom consists the only good, the true felicity, and blessedness of man, whom
he himself has created to attain thereunto, a living creature, reasonable by
the gift of understanding, and free will: Who being just, permits not his
creature made according to his own image, to remain unpunished, having
sinned; and being merciful, has not left him without grace; who has given
both to the good and evil an essence, with the stones; a life vegetative and
full of seed with the plants; a life sensual with the beasts, and a life
intellectual with the Angels; from whom proceeds all governance, all
goodlines, and all order; by whom all that is natural, even from the highest
of heaven, to the center of the earth, does subsist; of whom are the seeds of
forms, the forms of seeds, the mouings of seeds, and of forms: who (being
good) has not left regardlesse not only the sphericall and elementarie world;
or else the Angels and man, but even the entrails of the most small, and
contemptible amongst creatures, neither the lightest feather of the birds, nor
the least flower of the herb, nor leaf of the tree; engrauing in each of all
these things (the works of his omnipotency) certain signs of his glory,
and majesty, by the covenant and accord of every of their parts, and as it
were by I wot not what manner of peace: Of him (I say) father, and moderator of
all that which is, which lives, which has sense, and understands, let us
request (Companions) that with the light of his wisdom he will illuminate our
understandings, and by his holy spirit direct and govern our words, meetely to
discourse of according as man's power is able, the works of his al-mighty hand
in heaven, and in earth, according as our intent is.

The beginning of every thing whatsoever, is of such weight and importance,
that on the knowledge of the same depends all the science thereof: for it is
impossible that a man can be skillful in any thing, if he be ignorant in the
principles, and first causes of the subject which he desires to know:
contrariwise having well known them, the understanding of the effects which
thereupon ensue, of the virtues and qualities which thereby redound, of the
actions which thereof proceed, of the degrees which therein are established, of
the bounds and limits whereto these first causes tend to obtain their
perfection, declares it self, as of it own accord, without great difficulty
and much pain. This was the cause why many sages in old time despising the
care of temporal affairs, addicted themselves altogether to search out the
cause of all nature: so that the most excellent of them would boldly discourse
of the original and making of the world. But the saying of Plato remaining
ever true, that it is as hard to find out the maker, and father of this All,
as to speak properly of him being found out: it so falls out, that the most
part of them, who have entreated of so lofty a matter, have erred, straying by
diverse by-waies; yea even all those whom the Son of Justice, has not fully
illuminated with his supreme brightness. Thereupon it proceeded that the
philosophers have been divided into diverse and contrary opinions, about this
question (whether the world has been from everlasting, or whether it has
been of late, whether of necessity, or else by the free will, and motion of
God.) Aristotle with all the troop of those, Diverse opinions of the
Philosophers in th^^ argument of the being of the world.
who believe nothing but that which they can invent and comprise by natural
reasons and syllogismes taken from sensible things, which guide them to a
certain demonstration, not being able thereby to understand, how, and
wherefore heaven and earth have been created, affirm that they were never
made, but that they have been from eternity. But Plato followed of a great
number of the most cleere-sighted wisemen, has confessed the generation of the
world which he teaches to be ordered, and disposed by complete and perfect
numbers: under the veil of which, and the obscure notes of hidden sense, it
seems that he would hide the close mysteries of the creation of the universe
to those which were not yet instructed in such secrets, which only may be
comprehended by a pure and celestial cogitation divinely infused. For let us
know that there is no certainty at all of this doctrine, except for those to
whom the mind, by a special and supernatural grace is sharp, being fashioned
and formed by meditation of the immutable substance of God himself, and by a
secret operation of the holy Ghost, to believe that it is the Eternal who by
his word has made all nature. For so the Sovereign Creator talks with man,
and establishes a certain testimony of his truth in the heart of him, when
he has made him proper and meet to hear him, with the best and most excellent
part of his understanding, in regard whereof he is said to be made according to
his own image.

But although these things may be known, being nor far remote from our
interior, How the creation of the world may be believed.
or exterior senses, yea so that they may be called present, and whereof no
doubt is to be made, especially being supported by authority of good
witnesses; yet those things which surpass the ordinary puissance of the
mind, because by our own judgment we cannot credit them, must be considered,
and believed, according to that covenant of verities, which they announce unto
us, who have known the^, by our understanding peaceful, and duly purged: so
that we may add faith to such holy personages, as God has made capable of his
light, and which instruct us not in the things which they have imagined, but in
such as they have heard and received from divine oracles. It is then of their
authority, that he must make a buckler, whosoever will meetly debate of God,
and of his works, and of his providence in the governance of them. And when
the wings of Nature fail us in so lofty a contemplation, we must take to us
those of divine grace; and when the natural light fades and is ready to die,
to require an infused and supernatural illumination. The world is greatest of
all things visible, and God of all things invisible. That the world is, we
perceive; but that God is, we believe. Now that he has made the world, we can
better believe of no body then of God himself. But where have we heard that?
In his word, whereto we must give credit concerning those things whereof it is
expedient that we should not be ignorant, and which we of our selves are not
able to understand. Now he has spoken first by his prophets, then by himself
in the person of our Redeemer, and lastly by the Apostles and disciples. We
hear him speaking aloude, where Moses the father of divines, Genes. 1.
and master of Philosophers says (In the beginning God created the heaven, and
the earth.) The prophet was not there present, but the wisdom of God, by
which al things were made, and which by an incomprehensible virtue conueieth it
self into holy minds, and does direct them, and declare all his works, without
any noise at all, by his spirit; which can do all, beholds all, encourages
all, and passes through all purified spirits of understanding, and abides in
his elect. And the blessed Angels, who always behold the face of their father,
speak to them also, and announce the secrets of the eternal Majesty, to all
them (I say) in such sort as it pleases the Omnipotent to make them worthy.
One of these was Moses, who teaches us that God almighty made this great
Universe. A witness so excellent and worthy, that by him we must believe in
God, whom we perceive, as it were through the same wisdom and spirit, which
revealed unto him the creation of the world: who prophesied almost two thousand
years before of the high-mysteries of Christian faith: confirming also his
whole doctrine, by miracles, prodigies, oracles, and prophecies, wherewith all
his writings abound. And therefore having confidence in his testimony, we call
God, Creator of all things, thereby inferring, that he is author, principal,
and first cause of all essences, which cause by manner of speech ought to be
full of all things, if this Maxim of the Peripatetickes be true. (That none
can give away of that which he has not.) And therefore the Poet the honor of
our age very learnedly says. Ere time, form, substance, place, to be
themselves attained, Du Bartas in the 1. of his weeks.

All God in all things was, and God in all remained.
For there is nothing produced by nature, or formed by art, but first it has
abiding in that which performs it. So every creature is engendered by virtue
of that seed, wherein it was at first, by power, included: so each work
lives in the mind of the workman before he puts it in practice. So had the
world perfect being, in the thought of God before it was builded, and the very
Idea thereof was contained in it, by which this great architect, when it
pleased him, performed his outward work: as saint Augustine very learnedly
discourses in a long treatise upon this text of Scripture (All things were
made by the word, John 1.
and in it was life, etc.) And thereby we learn, that God almighty, the unit
from which all number proceeds, and whereto all multitude refers it self,
did increase himself in himself, before he communicated his unity with
creatures, engendring one eternity, and by an alone unique action never
disturbed, his lineage full of understanding, the very image of the father, his
word, the perfect pattern of the world, and his love and power the holy
Ghost, which allieth the understanding with the thought, three persons in one
essence and substance. Afterward this Godhead, though in it self it was
sovereign good, not having need of any strange thing, yet would he according
to his own bounty in him consisting, produce the outward work of the world,
whereinto spreading himself, by a kind of process of well ordered degrees,
and disposing through admirable workmanship the harmonicall forms of the
heavens: the angels and men by him created to be made partakers of felicity,
contemplating these maruailes, were ravished and carried away with meditation
of spiritual things, and by the beauty of his works, and ornament of his
creatures have learned to acknowledge the father of this Universe. Who moreover,
performed not so great a work in such manner as mortal men accustom to
labor, who cannot do any business themselves, if they have not stuff and
tools fit for it, nay and then cannot do it according to their desire. But God
created all of nothing, without help, without counsel, That God made all of
nothing.
by himself, by his word, by the power of his holy spirit, in such time and
manner as he has pleased; of his own frank and free will. Therefore it is
written (He spoke, and it was done, Psalm. 33. Psalm. 135. Ierem. 31.
he commanded and the world was created.) Also (The Lord has done whatsoever
he pleased in heaven, and in earth, and in all the depths.) And again (Oh
eternal Lord, behold, thou have made heaven, and earth by thy great power, and
by thy stretched out arm: nothing is impossible to thee.) Briefly holy
writings are filled with texts to this purpose, which give us certain
testimony, that the works of God are not subject to any other cause, then to
his only omnipotent will, and that thereby, the word being spoken, those
things which were not, have been created, as well the substance, as the
fashion of them: and also the word Creation does properly import so much,
according to the style of holie-writ. Behold then summarily that which we
learn of the original of the world; we will consequently consider, as near
as may be, of this notable and excellent doctrine, and of certain arguments
which some use to the contrary. Wherefore AMANA, if you think good, you shall
frame the subject of your discourse, upon the time, wherein this Universe began
to be builded.


Of Time, which took beginning with the World. Chapter 2.
AMANA. THe matter which we entreat of, Hierom. in prolog Gal^^ Au^ust (...)
upon Genes^^
has always been accounted of the Sages, to be of such depth, and
profunditie, that it was ordered amongst the ancient Hebrews, that any, who
had not attained to ripe age, and good years, might not meddle with the
creation. Of this prohibition does S. Hierome make mention. And therefore Saint
Augustine upon Genesis, searching out the deep secrets hidden under the veil
of simple words therein contained, speaks to the Reader in this manner.
[Comprehend this if thou can; if not not, leave it to them, which are more
learned. But make profit of the Scripture, which abandoneth not thy weakness,
but, like a mother steppeth foot by foot an easy pace with thee. For it
speaks in such sort, that in height it scorneth the proud, in depth it
astonisheth those which are attentive to it. It feeds the great with truth,
and nourishes the small ones with mild and familiar discourse.] And in truth
in each part of Moses writings, the treasures of all Philosophy are by him
discovered, like as if they were closely hidden in some field, chiefly in this
place which we have intended to entreat of touching the creation. For of
deliberate purpose he argues in Philosophy of the original of all things, of
God, of the degree, number, and order of the parts of this great world. We
nevertheless having confidence in this saying of the Psalmist, Psalm. 119.
That the word of God does illuminate and give understanding to the simple, and
that it serves for a light to our paths, we may be bold to touch so lofty a
point.

But before we proceed to consider of the precious treasures, and learned
doctrine wherewith the sacred sayings of the prophet touching the creation are
replenished: it will be good that we discourse a little of the principal
arguments, whereupon many, better Philosophers then good Christians, have
objected against this doctrine of framing of the world. And I will willingly
begin with this old question of the Epicure, Why God made the world in the time
that Moses declares.
which the atheists of our time have renewed, to wit: Why in the time that
Moses records, it pleased the eternal God to create heaven and earth, which
he had not made before? If they, which say thus, would thereby infer, that
the world has been eternal without any beginning, and for that cause it
seems to them that God made it not, they are too far wide of the truth, and
sick of the mortal disease of impiety. For besides the manifold tellings,
and prophetical testimonies, which make the creation of heaven and earth
vndoubtable: even the world it self, by his motion, and well ordered changing,
and the gorgeous show of all things visible therein contained, not speaking one
word, do after a sort cry out, that it was made, and that it could be no
otherwise formed, then by God, who is ineffablie, and inuisibly glorious. For
it is not to be supposed, that a thing of most exquisite order and reason,
should have bin made by chance; and that a deed most sovereign, could have any
other father then sovereign; nor so goodly a work any other architect then
one essentially, goodly. And therefore all the schools of those Philosophers,
which have had any whit of divine sense, affirm with one consent, that there
is nothing which more proves that God has made the world, and that it is
governed by his care and providence, then the only beholding of the whole
world, and consideration of the beauty and order thereof. But see here what
imagination not grounded on sense puts into the mouths of many. What did
God (say they) before he created the world? why staide he till then? or why
staide he not a little longer? In these and such like doubts they inwrap
themselves; making no difference between the condition of God, and our own;
between his eternal essence, and that of those things, which have once had a
beginning. But with a discreet, and pleasant answer Saint Augustine resolves
those, which demand what God did before the fabrication of the world. He was
busy (says he) cutting down wood in the forest, to burn the rash and
curious, who remember not what they themselves did yesterday, and yet dare
inquire what God has done of eternity. But that I may speak to the most
subtle, let the best learned among them tell me, what they intend by this
word (before) whereof they inquire? Time began with the world.
If they mean the passing away oftime, they deceive themselves, because time
took beginning with the world. And if by the word they imagine something
concerning eternity, they abuse themselves also, for therein is neither
before, nor after. For eternity is an entire being at once altogether, without
any proceeding. Whereby it is evident that their question is nothing. Time
therefore cannot accord with eternity, nor be eternal, seeing eternal has
no process. It is therefore a foolish question, why before time was, God
created not the temporal world, as if there had been some succeeding seasons,
before any succession did consist: for one cannot with any reason imagine any
time before the stablishing of the universe. Yet Aristotle, whom the atheists
will rather believe then the word of truth, proves no other thing, when he
enforces himself to declare the eternity of the world, then that time was
never without the world, nor the world without time, which the Sages say, march
in equal pace with the place. Wherefore as there is nothing beside place,
appertaining to place; so there is nothing beside time, belonging to time. And
for those which ask why the creator made not his world later: I again request
them that setting apart the work of the universe, they would assign me their
before, and after, and then I will render them a reason why God created not the
world sooner, or later: It is most certain that they shall be constrained to
confess, that before the order and intercourse of the Spheres, there was never
any before or after, which are the conditions of time. And therefore their rash
demand deserves no other answer, except we recount unto them the pleasant
saying of Democritus, which is not unfit for our purpose in this place (No man
regards that which is before his feet, and yet we see many sound the secrets
of heaven, and curiously seek after the mysteries of God.) Of those which take
from the world the beginning of time.
There are others also who disputing more subtly of these matters, agree
very well that the world was made, but they will not allow that it had a
beginning of time, but of his own creation, so that it has always had a
being in some sort, which they cannot understand. Those found their opinion
upon this pretext to defend that God should not do any action new, or of
chance, for fear least men should believe, that that came suddenly into his
mind, which before he had not determined, to make the world, and that he, who
is immutable in all things, should create it, through a new-sprong thought. Now
as they make doubt, concerning the time, which they would not have begun with
the universe: let me ask them also, why the world was set in that place where
it rests, rather then any other where? For if they suppose infinite spaces of
time, before the generation of the universe, in which it seems not that God
could rest from work: they may as well believe many spaces of place out of the
world: wherein if any could affirm that the Omnipotent has not been idle,
they should be forced to dream with the Epicure of innumerable worlds. But if
they answer me that the thoughts of men are vain, by which they suppose of
infinite places, since there is no place out of the world: I may tell the^ also,
that they are ill-grounded in the consideration of time, since there was never
any before the world. And therefore as it is no consequence, that God framed
the universe, rather by adventure, then by divine reason; not in any other
place, but in that wherein it is; though man's capacity cannot comprise the
same divine reason, by which, it was so made: So is it no consequence, that we
should deny that it happened to God by chance, or by a new imagination, when
he created the world, rather in one certain time, then before, seeing that the
times precedent how long-soeuer we may imagine them, should be equally past
away, comparing them with eternity, by an infinite space at once: and there
should be no difference why an ancient time should be preferred, before a
latter. Wherefore we must all believe, that the world was made with the time,
and that time took beginning with the world, Of the will of God in the work
of the Creation.
and that notwithstanding, in making it, God changed not his eternal
counsel, nor his immutable will: but according to his inscrutable providence
and bounty innate, he would, when he pleased, compose the large frame of the
universe, full of his image. And here the definition which Aristotle makes of
Time, serves to our purpose, to wit, that it is the measure of motion. For if
immutable eternity is easily discerned from Time, who perceives not, that
time had never been, if some creature had not been made, who might change
the created species by moving? For that which gives time his course, is the
changing of things, when they give place one to another, and one succeed
another, because they cannot consist all at once together. Let us conclude
(therefore) seeing that the holy and most true writings express (that: In the
beginning God created heaven and earth) we may assure our selves there was
nothing before then, and that doubtless the world was not made in time but
with it. For that which is done in time, is done both before, and after some
time: after (I say) that which is past, and before that which is to come. Now
before the world, there was no creature, by the chaungeable motion of which,
time might have proceeding. Wherefore the world and time have the same
beginning, by the will of almighty God, and according as is declared unto us
in his word: against which, there is no other reason of Sophists, which can
conclude any reasonable appearance, as you ARAM may amply declare, in the
process of our discourse.


Of the nullitie of reasons, framed concerning the nature of the world, against
the creation thereof. Chap. 3.
ARAM. THis sentence of Simonides, the ancient poet, is well worthy to be
celebrated by the mouth of every Christian man, (God alone has the glory, to
be supernatural.) For what other cause can we invent of his works, but his
only free will? But what rashness renders man so audacious, as to enquire the
cause of Gods will, seeing it is, The will of God is cause of all things.
and by good right must be the cause of all things, which subsist? For if it
had had any cause, then must that cause have preceded, and the will of God
attended thereupon, which were unlawful to be imagined. Wherefore when it is
asked, why did God so? we must answer; because it was his will. If proceeding
farther, any enquire, why it was his will? they demand after a thing greater,
and higher then the will of God, which cannot be found. Yet nevertheless have
we sufficient in his word wherewith to satisfy our minds, in meditation of
his secrets with all reverence. For they, which have declared them unto us,
penetrating into most hidden mysteries, by the light of the holy spirit, have
sufficiently revealed them unto us, with most splendant cleerenesse. But the
way of truth is shut up to the wise of the world, and cannot be attained but by
the directions of it self. So that (which is greatly to be deplored) it often
comes to pass, which this Iambicke relates, (That the understanding of
things given by God, in long tract of time, is confounded by men's opinions,
retaining very little divinity, and truth, by reason that it agrees not with
those things, which fall within the compass of our sense.) The philosophers
therefore, attributing too much faith to themselves, have blinded themselves
through their vain discourses, and have become guides to the blind: so that
falling into the ditch, they have drawn many after them, by false arguments,
and apparent reasons, whereof our subject shall here be to insert the most
principal.

They then, who esteem that nothing is stable, or can be stable, in such sort
reasoning, and arguing by sensible things, prove it by the same demonstration
that Aristotle has delivered, Of the demonstration of Aristotle.
yea and as he has observed in his whole discourse, and natural progression
(considering that all his consequences proceed from certain maxims, which he
supposed to be perfect true) and amongst the most powerful inventions, by
which they pretend to overthrow the creation, and framing of the world, these
Peripatericall reasons of the nature of the world are produced. First, they
behold the heavens altogether differing from contrariety: Reasons of
philosophers against the creation of the world.
whereupon they conclude, that it is not corruptible, and by consequence not
made. They find moreover, that those things which have a beginning, do get
unto themselves a new place: now heaven not being able to get it self a new
place, they conclude that it could not be created at any time. They consider
also that all things which are moved, pass into a new place, or are moved
round about some thing, which remains firm (as all the spheres are about
their center) to the end that all disorder might be brought to some
uniformity. Likewise they suppose every new thing to be reduced into the old:
so that all generation and corruption is made according to the old substance,
and all motion is governed by the firm and stable earth, or the immovable
center, by which principles they could not perceive how the newnes of the
world could any way come to pass. And forasmuch as the generation of one thing
is the corruption of another, and that nothing which should be corrupted might
precede the world, thereupon they ground that it is eternal without a
beginning. Proceeding farther, they suppose that every thing which is
produced, had a fore-being in the matter thereof. Therefore (they hold) that of
necessity the matter must be eternal. But the most principal and
substantial argument, which they bring, and most generally received, is, That
of nothing, nothing is created; whereupon they conclude, that the world could
not be made, because nothing did proceed it.

Now we may easily answer these reasons, and try whether they conclude, Three
sorts of works, and three kinds of workers.
or not: but first let us suppose (as it is most certain) that there be three
sorts of works, and three kinds of workers. For there is the Artificer, who
presupposes the nature, to wit, the stuff, fashion, and all the compound.
There is the natural agent, which requires beforehand; the effect of God, to
wit, the subject, or the matter. And there is God the sovereign worker, who
has no need of any other thing, because he is perfect, retaining in himself
all manner of virtue. Which three kinds of workers do fitly accord by a
certain analogy and proportion, but do much differ in comparison one with
the other: and at the bounds and limits of the one worker, cannot be concluded
the power of the other. For it were an error to proceed from art to nature, as
if one should say: The art does first require the compound, the Goldsmith
gold, the Founder metal, the Carpenter wood, and the Mason stones and cement:
therefore the natural agent does also require the compound. Answer to the
arguments of philosophers.
And likewise the philosophers deceive themselves, when they imagine that the
sovereign Creator has need of a subject, or matter to work on, as is
requisite for the natural agent. Also they abuse themselves to teach, that
forasmuch as herein there passes a certain proportion from one contrary to
another, it therefore follows, that God and nature do proceed by one and
the selfsame way. But where (I pray) have they learned to invent such
conclusions, when themselves teach, that art is distinguished from nature, and
that natural things appertain to one kind of doctrine, and the eternal, and
free-from-motion belong to another? For the artificer gives the artificial
form, and requires the natural; and the natural agent fashioneth the
substantial, and requires the material, which is the work of the
sovereign. But if God should require any thing beforehand to work with, he
should also require a former God which must have produced it, and by that
reason there should be I wot not what former thing before the first. What are
then these shows of arguments? They conclude and accord badly, when because of
the passion of a new place, which demands that which is newly performed,
they would thereby exclude the world from generation, because it gets not a
place. But what absurdity shall they find it, if granting them that it has
obtained a place; I say it is the same wherein at this present it remains?
For it subsisteth about the center, or above that of the earth, or of the whole
universe, or of the sphere intellectual, whose center (as Hermes says) is all
that which is every where created. In that which they farther infer, that
every new thing must be reduced to an old, we grant it them. But that old, is
the divine cogitation, wherein all things are contained, before they be
displaied in their proper forms: which, being created by it self, it alone
does govern and preserve them afterward. What they moreover adioine, that
all natural transmutation is made of one matter transposed into another, we
consent to them. But this is not requisite in the primitive production, free
from all laws of nature, whereto by right the prince thereof is not obliged.
And we agree also that every thing, which is produced, must first be included
in some other power, before it be effected: but we say that natural things
remained first in the matter; and the world and diversity of substances, were
comprised in the Ideas, or exemplaries resident everlastingly in God. And so
do the Platonists maintain, who mounting much higher then the Peripateticks,
agree with that which Saint John says. John 1.
That all things were made by the word, and that in it was life: which brought
forth all things, and that in it the world before was by power comprised.
Wherefore these be no dreams (as Aristotle calls them) but the Ideas of
Plato: but those are sighted like the bat, who see not the things most manifest
in nature, thereby to acknowledge the author of nature. And to the end that we
loosen the strongest knot of their arguments, to wit, Nullitie of the argument,
Nothing of nothing can be made.
That of nothing nothing is created: I would desire them to expound me their
sentence, because it is doubtful, and ambiguous: for if the sense be thus,
that of nothing, by art, or nature nothing is made, because they require the
matter whereupon to work: we willingly accord. But what is this to purpose
concerning the supreme and almighty architect, whom nature does follow after,
as far as art does nature, as all philosophers confess: For according as
the natural agent, bounded and subject to motion, time, and succession, is
less and more disable in essence; so is it less in performance then he, who
is free, and at liberty from all laws of nature. But if they mean, that of
nothing (to wit) after it has no being, nothing is created; then have they
left it to this present to discuss, and to all posterity for ever. Wherefore
we have a spacious field, to deny them that which is neither proved, nor
evident in it self. If they infer, that this nothing rejects all manner of
causes: then we consent to them in this point. But in the creation, or
generation of the world, we presuppose (as truth requires) a working, and
sovereign cause, who in the infinite virtue of it self, contains the
matter, subject and fashion, to bestow the means, the disposing qualities, and
all that, which is requisite to reduce, and bring to perfection any business.
Behold then, how all these arguments conclude nothing against the doctrine of
the worlds creation, no more these other reasons derived from the motions, and
their bounds, which the Peripateticks do farther induce against the same, as
pursuing this matter (ACHITOB) we may hear of you.


Of the Reasons taken from motion, and the moving Intelligences, against the
Genesis of the world, and of the nullitie of them. Chapter 4.
ACHITOB. THE Peripateticks, whereof now adays many may be found, perseuering
in their natural speculations, Nullitie of the argument of material
generations in respect of the divine piece of work.
and considering that motion consists in that which is moved, or engendered,
or else in the subject of transmutation, and because no substance did precede
the primitive production of the world, thereupon they conclude, that it was
never created. But it is no marvel if they be greatly abused, seeing they
would never swerve from their sense, and sensible things: whereof no pure and
sincere truth can be gathered, because that by them, or by the reasons on them
founded, we cannot attain to the knowledge of divine mysteries, which are
intellectual, far remote from any substance, moving, succession, or other
sensiblenes. And therefore they much deceive themselves, when they, in such
sort, argue of these gross, and material generations, comparing them with the
divine master piece of work, which surpasses all means of nature. They
maintain that all direct (or forward) motion cannot be perpetual, because it
requires infinite space which nature is not able to endure: but circular
motion, because it passes nothing infinite, may be perpetual. Now in eternal
things, the consequence is good from the power to the being. One may then (say
they) thereby assure himself of the eternity of the world. But see a goodly
reason to presuppose that to be perpetual and infinite, which they pretend to
prove. Auerrois proceeds farther, and says, that it is impossible for the
world to have had any other disposition, then such as at this present it has,
and that being exempt from all contrariety, it follows, that in no wise it
is corruptible, and therefore was not engendered. But who revealed unto him that
which he supposes of the state of the world? With what measure pretends he
to meat out the puissance of the sovereign workman? Other vain arguments of
Philosophers.
By what authority dares he limite out the power of the infinite, so, that he
may not destroy, and build up at his good pleasure? I say then that the
passing away of heaven has another kind of bound and limit, then the earth,
and the very rest it self, whereto (as with one mind all Philosophers teach)
all motion does tend. All motion tends to a rest.
But forasmuch as motion begets time, and time it self is the measure of
motion, thereby it comes, that forging their arguments upon one part of time,
they miss and fail in reason, when they dispute thus: If the world was not
before it took beginning, seeing this (before) is an appendix of time; then it
follows that time should precede motion, which is his cause, and progenitor.
Again they say [In every instant and moment assigned, is the beginning of time
to come, and the end of time past: then time has been before this first
instant, and consequently motion, and the world.] But the cause of these errors
proceeds from the misunderstanding of words, when they would bar that this
word (before) should signify any thing else then some part of time. For as
well in the divine as profane writings of all authors, who can speak fitly
and properly, we may find that this particle (before) signifies more then a
part of time, for sometimes it denotes the extreme: as is said in the
Proverbs, Prou. 8.
[The Lord has possessed me in the beginning of his way before he created any
thing, I have had principality from everlasting, Eccles. 24.12.
and before the earth.] And in Ecclesiasticus, [He created me from the
beginning, and before the world.] Ovid himself in his Metamorphosis uses this
manner of speech, [Before the sea, the earth, and heaven which covers all
things,] though that being of a fine, and subtle spirit, he was not ignorant,
that time slideth away by reason of the turning of heaven. Moreover this word
(Ante) signifies amongst the Latins, the highest degree, whereof is derived
(Antistes) he which is principal, and chief among others. Since therefore this
particle (before) has diverse significations, why will our Peripateticks
restrain it to denote any other thing, but only a portion of time. Would they
not grant me this, that by a certain order the matter was before the form,
and yet preceded it not in time? So is it that God was before the world, by a
certain order of eternity. What they farther infer [That the instant is the
end of time past, and the beginning of time to come: Of the point as instant.
] We answer them, that as the point is to things continued, so is the instant
to things succeeding. Now the point is sometime the extreme of one part of a
line, and the beginning of another part: and sometimes also it is the beginning
of the whole line, and not the end of any part precedent. So the instant and
moment wherein the world had being, was the beginning of the time to ensue, and
not the end of any past. They add another argument against this doctrine,
[That (say they) which passes on has something both before, and after it] But
I Will proceed farther, and grant them more, to wit, that all that which passes
on returns to the same point, from whence it began to pass. For the water
returns to the sea from whence it had an original. The body returns to
the earth from whence it was borrowed. The soul, Al things return to God.
and other intellectual things created of God (I except that which the
Scripture teaches us of the reprobate) return to himself, of whom they were
engendered. And all essences produced from the divine thought, make a full
circle beginning in God, and finishing in God himself. So must time return
into the same eternity, whereout it proceeded, and which shall remain (this
same ceasing) in such sort as it consisted before it. And therefore we answer
those who demand how the creator could precede the fabrication of the world,
that he proceeded it by an eternal enduring. Wherefore they conclude just
nothing against the Creation of that which then was, and is after the
generation of things. Others which reason upon the point, which we have
delivered concerning the opinion of Auerrois, that the world is not
corruptible, and therefore not engendered, argue thus. [That which is dissolved
into another thing, is divided: but considering that beside the world, there is
nothing, into which it can be dissolved, it must therefore endure
everlastingly.] To which we may answer them, How the world is dissolved.
that the world is dissolved according to his parts, to the end that it may
remain in a better estate. But now we dispute not of the dissolution, but
only of the original thereof. And it may seem nothing contrary to Christian
religion, that the work of God may always have a being: but far otherwise
then as we see it, and which shall be then, when we, most blessed, shall
inhabit the new heavens and new earth, in life everlasting. And herein do we
concur with sundry great Philosophers, who esteem, that it is ill done to
suppose, that those things which immediately proceed from the blessed God, can
perish. And therefore we affirm that the soul is immortal, because it was
produced, and inspired by God: and that the body it self shall obtain
eternity, when afterward in the resurrection it shall be reuested with the
nature of the soul: which subject we have amply discoursed upon in the second
part of our Academie. But it is ill-concluded, to take away all beginning from
things, by reason of the perpetual enduring of the same. The opinion of
diverse, is that the celestial spirits moo^e the spheres
For (as we have declared) it were to argue by natural generations, of the
divine masterpeece of work, which surpasses all sensible consideration. And
since we are in this talk of the enduring of the world, we may further note,
that those, who have thereupon imagined to take away the original thereof,
have taught, that the spirits moving the spheres, should obtain felicity in
the eternal recourse of the heavens: which point Aristotle enforces himself
to demonstrate, in his most lofty part of Philosophy, where repeating diverse
considerations more lofty then in any other place, he sharply contendeth for
this eternity of the world. And John Lescot seems to grant him more then he
requires, when he says, that the spirits are blessed, not only moving the
spheres, but for so much as by such revolution, serving God, they communicate
perfection to things here beneath. To which, agrees that which Plotin,
entreating of heaven, and of the soul of the world, says, [It is an absurd
thing, and discordant, to suppose that that soul, which did for a time
contain the heaven, should not always do the same, as if by violence it had
contained it.] And thereupon he concludes that the world should endure for
ever, because the principal part of the soul thereof, cannot be dissolved,
nor the nature thereof empaire. Aristotle also amongst his other considerations
inserteth this, [That the prince of this worldly palace being eternal, not
receiving any vicissitude, or changing, it is most likely that his palace
should also be eternal: and that his ministers, or celestial spirits, being
altogether addicted to perpetual motion, should never take rest.] But that we
may untie this knot, we will say, that it is an error of comparison, to argue
of that which has his beginning immediately from God, in respect of the
creator, and of that, which is here below, in regard of things above, and of
the immediate end of every thing in comparison of his last end. For the
immediate end of unreasonable creatures, is to live, Of the sundry ends of all
things
and feed themselves; but their final end is to serve man's use: which
according to the mind of sundry wisemen, is the end of all things here
below. And the immediate end of man is to govern his house, and family, or
the commonwealth; to contemplate, traffic, and such like businesses: but his
latest end is to attain to God, or to felicity, be it, as one would say
through a Stoicall virtue, or by a Peripateticke contemplation, or by
Academicke purifying, or (which is most certain true) through faith, and grace
according as our religion does import. And also we affirm that the immediate
end of the spirits separated from God, and of the corruptible matter, is to
govern the heavens, and men, and such other things, as have been committed to
their charge. But their last end is their only contemplation of that first
essence, from which they derive their felicity (as Aristotle himself
testifies in his Ethickes.) Suppose then that they cease to move, and from
their immediate end, yet shall they never cease to be blessed: no more then man
shall be less happy, when he shall cease to govern the commonwealth, or to
perform his other temporal businesses. And certainly it is marvelous that
any can think, that the Angels, and celestial spirits should obtain their
happiness, by moving the heavens continually about, seeing that all moouings
(as the Philosophers teach) do tend to a resting. But none can say that the
spirits shall not cease, because they still labor; but when they have
accomplished, and performed their work, and delivered such favor to
terrestrial things, as they were charged with. And for the soul, whereof
Plotin makes mention, one may likewise affirm that it shall not cease to give
life to the Universe, when it shall cease to move. For (as we have already
heard) we maintain not the annihilating of the elements, of the world, or the
parts thereof; but rather the resting after the motion: in such sort as all
nature must be, in the end, after sundry reuolutions reduced to the rest of
the Sabbath, unknown to many learned men. Let all those then, who trouble
themselves without mean, or measure to search out the end of the worldly
frame, or contend about the original thereof, here fix their foot, least
running without ceasing in their fantasies after this perpetual moving, they
never rest, and least by no light, they can behold their repose, being always
troubled with a continual course. Now then ASER, I leave to you to prosecute
the confutation of diverse other arguments, upon this matter of the Creation.


Machinations.
Of many other devises, which they invent, who pretend to overthrow the doctrine
of the Creation of the world, performed by the Creator thereof. Chapter 5.
ASER. BEsides that, which we have hitherto heard, concerning the reasons, and
arguments, whereupon many depend, who deny that the world had a beginning, I
find that such are willingly induced to think, Reasons against the doctrine
of the creation of the world.
that by reason of this new creation, or generation of the Universe, there might
seem to arise some new devise in the Creator, because of the newnes of the
work, and by consequence an alteration of his mind or will: which cannot
happen to the most perfect, and immutable, neither within himself (for nothing
can move it self) nor outwardly without himself (for then that should
consist and increase which was without him by the empairing and wearing away of
the most infinite) These are the terms, which Aristotle, Auerrois, Moses of
Egypt, and their disciples use, alleging many other considerations, which
Cicero in the person of the Epicure, enueighing against Plato, in his fluent
and eloquent speech has collected in the discourse of an oration. Cic. 1. of
the nature of the Gods.
[With what eyes (says he) could your Plato behold the art, and composition
of so great a work, by the which he says the world was builded, and composed
by God? What inventions of buildings? What iron works? what lifting leauers?
what engines? what ministers had he in so great a business? How is it that the
air, fire, earth, and water could obey to the worke-master? whence issued the
five forms, whereof all the rest are formed, falling out fitly to compose the
soul, and produce the sense?] And a little after he proceeds [I would feign
ask these fellows, why upon a sudden these builders of the world started up,
who had been a sleep by the space of innumerable ages? For though there was
then no world, yet were there certain ages, although they were not such as are
made of a number of days, and nights, by course of years (for I confess that
those could not come to pass without the turning of the world: but there was
of infinite time a kind of eternity, which no term, nor circuit of time did
measure. Nevertheless none can divine of what space it has been, because it
falls not into humane sense, that there could be any time then, when time was
not. Then in such an unlimited space, why should the providence be idle? why
should he fly labor? and what cause was there, why God like the Sheriff of a
city, should desire to adorn the world with signs, and lights? If it were to
them that God might the better dwell at his ease, he had then an infinite time
before dwelt in darkness, as if in an hole, or by-corner. But if we think
that he has thus beautified heaven, and earth, because he delighted in the
diversity thereof; what may this pleasure of God be, whereof he was so long
time before deprived? May it be for love toward man, as you might infer,
that God made all these things? But has this love been for wisemen, or for
fools? if for the wise, then to small purpose (God wot) has this so exceeding
great compiling of things been made. If for the foolish, first there was no
occasion why God should seek to deserve any thing of the evil; then what
has he gotten when every one being a flat fool is most miserable, in that
he is not wise? For what can we name that is worse then folly?] hitherto
Cicero. Alcinois speaking like him does farther add: That since there is
nothing beside the world which may do it violence, it can suffer neither
malady, nor consumption, nor any dissolution at all. Forasmuch then as it must
perpetually endure, it follows also that it has been without beginning.
Auicen according with him, says [He which negotiateth by the power of another,
may instantly produce that, which before he could not: for he must attend the
pleasure of such as work with him: but the first that works by his proper
power, needs not attend, but work continually.] Behold then, how the servants
of the world contend for the dignity of their prince, endeavoring to make him
eternal, as if volu^tarily subiecting themselves to a continual revolution,
they would defeat themselves for ever attaining to any rest, wherein
consists true felicity. But we must fight for the sovereign Creator, which
is our peace, and true Sabbath: defending like good and valiant warriors his
eternal rest, whereto all revolution of the world does refer it self; and
presently it will appear (he himself aiding us) how weak those engines are
which our adversaries have planted against his work, and against the wall of
truth.

Answer to the arguments of the Philosophers.
First we will consent to Aristotle, and to the defenders of his doctrine, that
there came to God, by the framing of the universe, a new imagination; but full
of reason, and without any alteration in his nature, or will, and moreover the
same new-minde was properly real, and all one with his eternal will, toward
the generation of the world, to performance whereof, he also proceeded
according to his good pleasure. But I wonder at so many instances, as they
intend to found upon this new-thought, seeing we behold, how assidually many
new things are produced, whereof returns a new-thought either toward God
framing, or governing, or at least (as they say) so, as may be toward their
wished and desired end. I demand then why should the new-thought of creating
the world, make more against the majesty of God, and not the invention of the
new parts thereof, every moment arising? Algazel Sarasyn holds it not unmeet,
that the most perfect agent, having all conditions thereto co^cording, deferred
nevertheless to produce his work in effect, so long as he pleased, and that
then he performed it, without any motion in him of novelty. And there is no
Philosopher which proves the contrary, by any demonstration, concerning this
newness, which they presuppose in God, but do full oftentimes contradict
themselves. And so it is that Aristotle in his book of the world, after having
in the beginning declared God, Prince, Governor, and Creator of this Universe,
does afterward deny it, proceeding by reasons derived from sense. For thereby
he endeavors, to demonstrate the eternity of the world, and amongst other
arguments he uses this same. [It is most certain, that the agent either of
deliberate purpose, or by nature, if he be good, puts the good in practice,
as much as in him possibly lies, if there be nothing to hinder him.]
Certainly we confess that the good is naturally addicted to community. But we
hold that although the agent, by his labor, and industry, endeavors with
all his power to get the good, and obtain it, yet nevertheless in the
distribution thereof, he bestows it in such manner and sort, as he pleases.
Why should we not then affirm, that the supreme Creator, through his immutable
and omnipotent will, having from everlasting the good for his object, to the
end to put it in practice, does according to his good pleasure proceed to the
performance thereof? But if any passing farther, will argue, that the good does
naturally become common: heereto, mounting much higher then Philosophy does
require, we answer; That for ever God, who is the sovereign good, does
increase himself in his son, and spirit coeternall, by which son, and
through which holy spirit, one sole essence, and substance, he produced of
eternity, and continually the exemplaries, and Ideas of all things, by an
eternal measure always present, being the work and possession altogether. We
tell thee then, O Epicure, that God remained not in sloth, and idleness before
the Creation of the world, John 1.
he that by the testimony of Jesus Christ, does always work, whereof none
knows but the Creator, save only the son, and he to whom the son shall
have revealed him. And he which is most blessed in himself slept not, O
Cicero, no more then having no need of any thing beside himself, he framed
not this worldly tabernacle for his own use, with so great beautifulnes; but
rather for man: not foolish, or wicked; but just, and wise, or at least,
Proverb. 8.
that in this terrestrial habitation he might learn wisdom, and goodness, to
be made at length a worthy citizen of the celestial palace. This is the
delight, and pleasure which his sapience received in the compass of the earth,
and in the sons of men (as the wiseman says.) But neither Aristotle, nor
Auerrois, nor Cicero, nor the Epicures, and Atheists of our time, have attained
to such supreme Philosophy, as to understand this language of the holy Ghost.
Excellent well did that thrice worthy Mercury, the prince, and most ancient
of all Philosophers, acknowledge, as the whole work of his Pymander does
testify, and himself also when he says, that God, whom some call Nature,
mixing himself with man, performed a wonder, surpassing the reason of all
wonder: wherein beholding his own image, he smiled upon him through great
love, and gratifying him as his own son, gave him all his works to serve
him: to the end to reduce to himself all things by him, with whom he was
mixed, but himself before any thing else, because that being purified, and
acknowledging his divine race, he might be made most worthy of God. The
eternal omnipotent then had no need of tools to frame the world with: he,
I say, that by his only commandment performs all things. Neither had he
need of help to produce forms, who is himself the Architype, and giver of
all forms, and replenished with all fecunditie. Neither is it a strange thing,
that the elements should obey him, which by his word only have been settled
in their places. Neither dwelt he in an hole, or a corner, nor in darkness, whom
heaven, and earth cannot contain nor comprehend, and who is all light; but
within the ample temple of this imme^se, and intellectual sphere, whose ce^ter
is all that which every where subsisteth. There he inhabiteth those everlasting
ages, which no thought, except himself, can comprise. It is no marvel
therefore, if human reason be so often deceived in the search of that which
is enclosed in the closets and cabinets of the sovereign worke-master, and
revealed but to very few. And for the saying of Alcinois, that there is
nothing beside the world, whereinto the world can be dissolved: I answer him,
that we teach not that it must be consumed, and brought to nothing, though it
has had a beginning of enduring. But say it is so: God shall have no need of
any thing, for this business, no more then he had need of a subject, to make
and compose his work of: by reason that his creation, or dissolution is free,
and delivered from the laws of natural generation, and corruption, as we have
heretofore already declared. Neither had he need of help, O Auicen, who
through his proper power, and according to his own good pleasure, performs
of his own liberality all things, not by nature, and necessity, as those
imagine, to whom the eternal power of God, and his love, for which he created
the world, are hidden, as in the process of our discourse, we may more amply
declare. But first let us hear of AMANA, concerning those things, which have
caused the Philosophers to err from the truth.


Concerning those causes which have made the Philophers to err from the
knowledge of truth, and of their ignorance concerning God, and his works.
Chapter 6.
AMANA. WE may by our precedent discourse easily understand what be the
strongest engines, which the Philosophers have planted (but in vain) against
the walls of supernall verity, in this point concerning the creation, and we
need not think it strange that they be deceived; for it is a doctrine, not
usurped by humane arrogancy, but infused into the hearts of the small ones and
humble, through illumination by the holy spirit, which mocketh such as think
themselves wise, and scorn all others; leaving them in the darkness of their
blinded presumption: as contrariwise the same spirit directs, and conducteth
those, whom he replenisheth with his own virtue, to contemplate in most clear
brightness the excellent mysteries of God, and nature. But to the end that we
may partly proceed to the discovery of their ignorance, who do arrogantly
assume unto themselves the name of wisdom, abusing even to this day many
unskillful in the knowledge of piety, by their grave and ornate writings,
being in show and appearance like somewhat that sauoreth, as it were solid and
entire, true and profitable: though being profoundly examined, one may find
therein all clean contrary, and a marvelous repugnancie not only generally
between them all, but even in the particular writings of each of them. I would
willingly ask to be resolved of them in this point, how is it that they know
the most blessed God (for now I speak to such as are not very far off from
religion, and godliness; for as for Atheists, and such as believe not God, we
will deal with them apart in the sequel of our discourse) I doubt not but
they will answer me, that they have knowledge of God, by the motions, and
other sensible things, which lead them by the hand to all such things as may be
known by us. For these be their common sayings. [All our knowledge proceeds
of sense. And the experience of true discoursing is, That by means of sensible
things one cannot attain to the knowledge of God.
that it agree with that which is perceived by sense: that being best known,
which best agrees with sense.] But I would entreat them to tell me if sensible
things have an agreement of one and the self same name, or of a name common to
many, with the sovereign God: It is most certain that they are not of one
signification, or name (to the end that we may follow their own institutions,
by which they teach that God, and things created, do not agree in a self same
proportion of substance, or essence.) And if one nominate all kinds, he shall
name them (says Aristotle) by many sundry names. But if God and his works,
are diverse in reason; then is it no marvel if the Philosophers proceeding by
things here below deceive themselves in the knowledge of God. For how can they
imagine of his high Majesty by the motions, and these things sensible, seeing
the Eternal is altogether exempt from sense and motion? Does not Aristotle
affirm, and after him Auerrois the Arabian, that God is altogether different
from the manner of creatures? That he is the first moouer, not being moved? Is
it not to deprive themselves of the true knowledge of God by sensible things,
when they separate him from the manner of creatures? Let us not think it
strange then, if those, who admit nothing, but that which they can invent and
comprise by natural reasons and syllogismes derived from sensible things,
enforce themselves to take from the Omnipotent many things, which are to them
hidden, and unknown, being only received by an holy intellect, and by a pure
and celestial thought divinely infused: as are these verities following. [That
God has created the world: That of a free, and liberal will, he framed, and
ordained it, when and according as it pleased him: That it belongs to man,
the masterpiece of work of his power, to consider what this great God
produced according to Nature, and what according to his bounty innate: How he
dealt in his works; briefly all the secrets of so wondrous a workman.] But to
return to our purpose, I wonder how these Philosophers will on one side
distinguish God altogether from the creatures, and on another side will measure
his al-mightines and power by that which they consider of things here below. I
would entreat them to hear (and yet they have no occasion herein to do it,
for they know it well enough already, I speak therefore to their scholars)
that which Saint Dennis first instructed in their doctrine, Dennis in his
Hierarchy.
and afterward lightened with the beams of the holy Ghost, has said of the
Eternal. God (says he) is every thing in excellency. For every good thing
which we behold in these domestical things, we must dedicate and appropriate
the same to GOD in the most excellent sort, that we can. For every thing
which appears fair in the work, should flourish much fairer in the worker.
And that which is in it self worthy of the simplest, The good, in a better
is ever most excellent.
and meanest commendation, is in him found to be the best, and most excellent
of all, for good in a better is ever most good. Good is wisdom in a citizen,
better in a President, and most good in a king. Good is fortitude in a
soldier, better in a captain, but most good in a prince. The like is to be
thought concerning clemency, liberality, and other virtues, and ornaments.
Since then fecunditie, puissance, vigor, piety, beauty, magnificence, and such
other properties do shine in things here below; much more must they in the
divine thought shoot out their beams in sovereign brightness. For in the
creatures all these virtues, like borrowed colors, do point out the soul of
the world: but in the celestial prince, they flame out in rays of his infinite
essence, which unites al things, being appropriated and dedicated unto it. See
then how we must speak, and believe concerning the Sovereign, and how to
measure his works by his omnipotency, and power. But forasmuch as the
Philosophers do confess that God is the first, and best of all things; and
all other things are under him, and subject to him; and that they praise, and
commend in them, fertility, liberality, generation, and such other virtues,
and faculties; which from time to time do here make manifest their effects:
wherefore should they not acknowledge them in the Sovereign good God, who
says in Esaias, [If I give fruitfulnes to others, shall I be barren?] They may
tell me that they separate from God; not only all that which feels his own
imperfection, but all that also, which wants of perfection: and thereof it
arises that they take from him all fertility, concerning things that are
without him, least any new thing, or alteration might be attributed to the
everlasting, and immutable: and likewise the liberty of contingence, least as
if imperfect, Al things enforce themselves to represent the image of God.
he might seem to negotiate under hope of reward: and yet they deny him not
the liberty, by which he works as is convenient for him. Certainly these be
subtle, and sharp allegations, and yet of small force. For let me ask them,
if all schools teach not, that the things of this world enforce themselves to
their power, to represent the image of God? The Platonists in every discourse,
do acknowledge it as well as the Theologians. Yea the Peripatetickes
themselves agree in this point, as their master teaches in the second treatise
of the soul, in such words. [It is the most natural deed of all living
things, so far forth as they be perfect, not impotent, to make another thing
like to it self: as the beast a beast, the plant a plant, because they
participate of the divine, and eternal essence, so much as they can. For all
essences desire it, and all things which follow their course according to
nature, work for the love of it: but they cannot imitate it continually and
with perpetual proportion, because no corruptible thing attayneth to be one
and the same in number.] These be very obscure sayings, but yet by them we
may learn that all creatures tend according to their faculty, to agree with
the semblance of God; and by how much more each member of this worldly body is
more perfect, by so much more does it enforce it self; as if in emulation, to
imitate the creator of it. It is true that Auerrois does interpret this text of
Aristotle, concerning heaven. But how should the heaven be this Eternal, whom
all things should enforce themselves to follow, considering that it of it self
is eternal, in favor of whom, the elements, heaven it self, and every
creature does work? Does not the doctrine of Aristotle resound in each point,
that God is the end of all things, in desire of whom they are moved as to the
thing loved and desired? But leaving this Arabian Auerrois, who studieth in all
his works to deface, and mar many other sentences of his master, that he may
defend that which he imagines; let us conclude, that according as the
Philosophers confess, the elements in their being, the plants in their life,
and fruitfulnes, the living creatures in a better life, and in their condition
such as it is, imitate in emulation the divine power and perfection; and that
man endued with the singular gift of liberty, and free will does in the same
imitate God, and bears in a better estate and condition, then any other
thing, his image, and semblance: By such considerations (say I) is also proved
the freedom and liberty of God, always tending to good, according to his
good pleasure, because he contains within himself that which he conferreth
upon others. And briefly to answer all their reasons heretofore alleged, let
us hold, that that Sovereign perfection, which is in God, wants not in the
lowest degree, nor for the cause thereof, nor yet that his simple unity is
distributed into a multitude, because that in it self, by infinite power, it
contains all things. Neither does the intellectual soul degenerate,
although (as they teach) it exercises the power to feel, Proper faculties to
be considered in God.
to strengthen, to cause increasing, and to move according to his estate. For
(that we may mount to higher considerations) God perceives with such his
senses, as the holy Scriptures attribute unto him: He moves all other things,
himself remaining stable; he gives them strength, and feeds them with the
food of his wisdom. But he performs all these things by a means, by a
perfection and power, which is unknown to humane spirits, except they be
illustrated with his light. And there is in him a fertility without travel,
which is the fountain of all other things, through which he produces always
within himself, but outwardly he does it at the pleasure of his will. Which
because it is the rule of contingence, it is not possible, nor fit for us to
search out the cause of the first beginning. For when we are thereto arrived,
Aristotle himself does charge to stay: for God has no need of any precedent
disposition, nor of help; neither did fear resistance, nor was hindered by
space, he, who in commanding created all things. But the causes of things here
below, the instruments and subject framed by his word, require a precedent
disposition, have need of an application, attain succession of time, and seek
such helps, as are requisite for such a one, as negotiateth by power limited.
And therefore (as we have already said) when they deduce their reasons from
these conditional and natural workers, to him, which is free, and delivered
from all these things, they fall into diverse errors. But if by the works,
which they contemplate in this Universe, they do enforce themselves to attain
to the knowledge of the Sovereign Architect, then let them attribute unto him
all these things after a convenient and perfect manner: separating from him all
that denotes feeblenes, and impotencie in the worker. And then they shall see
that the supreme things of the Architype, accord by a sweet and melodious
consonancie to those which are more base and mean; all which are comprised in
the creator, as in a model and pattern, and contemplated by us here below, as
in a shadow or trace. But this shadow, and much more the trace, does want much
of him, whom they represent. And yet by them, as by a token, or privy note, we
attain to some obscure knowledge of the creator: although his works do agree
with him neither in different proportion or signification, nor yet in all and
through all in the same reason, but only by a certain resemblance they
represent unto us the perfect fashion of supernall things, by their most gross
and base nature every one in their degree. But this is sufficient concerning
this subject: now speak we of the authority of such witnesses, as make the
creation of the world vndoubtable, which we refer to you ARAM to declare unto
us.


Of the authority of such witnesses, as make the creation and newnes of the
world undoubted. Chapter 7.
ARAN. AS we have seen, how weak and feeble, the arguments of Philosophers,
against the creation and newness of the world are: so is it expedient also,
that being ready for the combat, we march in battle against them, armed with
true and strong reasons: and under the authority of very good, and approved
witnesses, to the end to make undoubted to all, Many witnesses of the worlds
creation.
that, which we have already declared concerning the creation of the Universe.
And first we will recite those, who being worthy of credit, have taught it
us. We have already seen how that the opinion of Plato (concerning this
generation of the world) accords with the doctrine of Moses. Mercurius
Trismegistus in his Pimandre delivers in few words the same sacred mysteries,
rendering the composition of this Universe, and of the governors thereof, and of
all things created, to be vndoubtable. And by the baser elements he aduertiseth
us of the pure workmanship of nature, united nevertheless with the thought of
the Creator. Which elements he affirms to be for this purpose, established by
the will of God only, and yet in far worse condition, then before they were
in the worker. Empedocles of Agrigentum, and Heraclitus of Ephesus affirm not
once, but oftentimes the world to be engendered, and corruptible. Democritus
teaches, that it has had beginning, that it one day must perish, and never
again be renewed. Hesiod and Orpheus the Poets sing that it has been created.
Thales one of the seven Sages affirms, Hieraclus.
that this round frame is the work of God. Pythagoras and Hieraclus his
expounder, confess God creator, and father of all things. To which accord
Auicen Arabian, Algazel Sarrasin, Philo no less excellent in doctrine, then in
Greek eloquence, and Alcinois the Platonist, who says, (It is necessary for
the universal world to be the perfectly-beautious work of God.) And many such
other authors the most commended for learning, whom it would be too long and
tedious to rehearse, affirm the same. But leaving the testimonies of
strangers, let us come to such as have received from divine oracles, A certain
approbation of the doctrine of Moses.
by supernatural illumination, that which they have taught unto us. We have
heard that which Moses teaches us concerning the generation of the world, now
let us consider how his doctrine, or rather the doctrine of the holy Ghost
speaking by the mouth of so excellent a prophet, is confirmed unto us by
miracles, prodigies, oracles, and prophecies: and lastly by the consent of
every part of his writings; as also by the grave authority of those who in
their interpretations of them do confirm and approve them. Of miracles.
Exodus 4.7.8.9.10. etc.
Concerning his miracles they are all most manifest to such as have read his
books. The rod is turned into a serpent, and again returned into the former
shape: It deuoureth the magicians rods, showing that the sorceries of unclean
spirits, and all their puissance and force is consumed by the power of God,
which wrought and dealt in Aaron and in Moses. He brings forth infinite
little beasts and of sundry sorts, which prick both man and beast: he draws
water out of the stone, gives quails from heaven, brings thunder, a cloud
by day, and a pillar of fire by night, and also the dark night, and does all
this by the word of the living Lord, who one while terrifieth, and another
while comfort his people. He sends slaughter among the Egyptians, sudden
loss and ruin to the wicked, fire among the proud, and leprosy to her that
murmured; and preserves for a long time a great number from sickness, and their
garments from waxing old, and wearing. Moreover he feeds them with heavenly
food, and gives them victory over all their enemies. Such things and many
such like things does the sovereign architect of this Universe perform by his
prophet, to the end to approve his doctrine, and to teach us his truth
thereby. To this end also by the word of Moses he appeaseth monsters, Prodigies.
causes the thunder to cease, heals such as were empoisoned: to the end that
so much the more through such prodigies, his law, the wisdom of life and
doctrine, by which he instructed his people, might be celebrated. And
concerning Oracles, Oracles.
they have not been delivered unto us from a Delphicke Apollo, from a Jupiter,
from a Pallas, or any fained sapience, or else from some newfound godhead; but
they bin given us from the mouth of the living Lord, whose voice the
innumerable multitudes of Israel did sometimes hear. But if some (as there
are many amongst us) will not believe Moses alone, relating all these things,
nor his people which have written of them as he himself did, yet let them at
least give credit to the many grave and sage Authors, who affirm them for a
very truth: Author which consume Mose^ writings.
as to Berosus the Chaldee, to Manethon the Egyptian, Hierome the Phenician,
king Darius, Mendesian Ptolomy, Menander of Ephesus, Nicolas Damascenus, Abiden
the Historiographer, Estieus, Theodore, Chorilus and Ezekiel the Poets,
Demetrius the Historian, Hecate of Abdera the Philosopher, and above forty
other learned, recorded for testimony by Josephus, Aristobulus, Prophecy
Tertullian and Eusebius, who all agree in recitation of the foresaid
woonders. Let us proceed and come to the prophecies. Of them Ptolomy in his
book of Fruits says, (Those only who are inspired by God, prophecy of
particular things.) If then Moses in his doctrine, and all the other prophets
which have followed him, have prophesied of so many particular actions to the
king of Egypt, to the Tribes, to many princes and kings, as well concerning
themselves, as also concerning their cities, and people, who will doubt that
they have been instructed by the spirit of God? Who can accuse them of
falsehood? who will make doubt of their doctrine? If one read the text of Moses,
all points therein are so replenished with prophecies, and future events, that
there is nothing left out there concerning that which belongs to the
mysteries of divine and philosophical matters, nor of the Messiah then to
come, nor yet of all whatsoever should afterward come to pass; as is evident
to those who have the eyes of their minds illuminated, and who understand the
books of the law, to see clean through a great many vailes, under which (as
was most meet) the prophet did hide so many profound mysteries. What man then
of sound judgment that making small or no account of such and so great
sacraments, will rather then to believe in them, have recourse to the monuments
of certain Philosophers, not approved by so many witnesses, and whose
writings savor no whit of divine matters? We may very well receive their
instructions so far as they differ not from the doctrine of holy writ: but we
must altogether reject that which relying upon their own authority, or their
own invention supported by their reasons, and indeed not in many places ought
worth, (which) they induce besides that which is contained in the writings of
Moses and the Prophets. For if we will show reverence to authors, What authors
are worthy of belief.
to which I pray you, should we show more, either to Aristotle, Auerrois,
Epicures, and such like, who only do shine with a small light of human
doctrine, or else to Moses, to the Prophets, to Solomon the wisest of all his
time, to the Evangelists, and to the Apostles, every of which in sapience, in
wisdom, in manners, in prophecies, in oracles, and in all kind of holiness do
shine, and flame like burning torches? Who affirm in an unused style that
which they speak concerning divine things, proouing them with peril of their
lives, and confirming them by prodigies: and speaking of things natural,
human, and base, above all common capacity of men, and penetrating into most
deep secrets by illumination of the holy spirit, do with most bright cleerenes
manifest them to all those which have eyes to see, and ears to hear. And
therefore Eusebius has excellently written to this purpose, Eusebius in his
ecclesiastical history.
speaking thus, (You shall find out the errors of the Ethnic Philosophers,
not by me, but by the contradiction, and meruellous repugnancie among
themselves: and when I compare them among themselves, or with other common men,
certainly I cannot deny but they have been worthy personages; but when I
confer them with the Philosophers and Theologians of the Hebrews, and
compare their doctrine, with the doctrine of those, frivolous and vain do all
their inventions seem to me.) Moreover, know we not that by the one all
things have been delivered humanely, and by the others divinely? And that
those who would taste of the first draughts of wisdom, have been
constrained to learn of the Hebrews? And therefore Porphirius in his book of
Abstinence, adorneth with sundry praises the religious, or prophets among that
people, calling them Philosophers, and assigning them the chiefest degree above
all other Prophets and Magi, who have made profession of holiness. And Orpheus
in his book which he has written of the holy word, after he chased away all
contemners of the divine ordinances and mysteries, confesses that he learned
out of the tables of Moses, that which he song of God, known only but to his
Prophet. But above all the foresaid testimonies, Consent of the doctrine of
Jesus Christ with that of Moses.
worthy to be believed, to them (that which surpasses all admiration) the
doctrine of the celestial and divine messenger Jesus Christ, the true Messiah,
anointed with divine graces, above any other prophet, does accord. Who
allowing and approouing the doctrine of Moses, opens and reuealeth many
secrets, which he received of God his father, and announceth the perfection of
true religion: wherewith his apostles have so filled the whole world, that
even to this day, all the wise men in every part of the world do embrace and
reverence so excellent doctrine, as that, wherein shines so much divinity and
celestial brightness, that without comparison it surpasses all humane
doctrine. Let us receive it then, even all of us that desire wisdom, because
that never any more excellent did ever yet appear to mortal men, neither
shall ever appear hereafter. And let us not make a stay in that that
Socrates knows some thing, or that Anaxagoras sees the light in darkness, or
that Democritus draws virtue out of pits, or that Empedocles enlarges the
path of his spirit, or that Archesilas, and Carneades attain to some new
kind of knowledge, or that Aristotle proves that which flies from sense.
But let us give full faith to the authority of so many irreprochable
witnesses, who make the generation of the world vndoubtable to us, and let us
proceed to the reasons which further confirm it unto us, and which, ACHITOB,
we desire to hear of you.


Of the reasons making for the Creation and newnes of the world. Chapter 8.
ACHITOB. AMongst those other arguments, which we have heard some Philosophers,
object against the creation of the world, one has bin the disconueniencie of
the newnes thereof with eternal God, not being able to perceive how and which
way it might come to pass: for by reason of the consideration of such a like
question, to wit [which of the egg, or of the bird was first engendered;
seeing that the egg without the bird, nor the bird without the egg could not
subsist:] they have imagined that this world was eternal, and that the
beginning of every thing engendered, was the end likewise thereof, through a
perpetual course, and proceeding. But let me ask these doctors, Reasons for
the newnes of the world.
whence comes this newnes which we behold every day in all things of this
world? For there is nothing which suffers not vicissitude, and changing.
Auerrois says, that this proceeds from new reuolutions, which
notwithstanding are ancient by an everlasting succession: and that there is
the stay where the oldnes, and newnes is conserved. For which cause also some
have affirmed, that heaven is some part new, some part old. But for as much as
these Philosophers do teach, that reuolutions are made by those disposing
spirits, which are called the servants of the creator, or of the first moouer,
does it not thereupon follow, that there is no stay in the heavens, but that
they move anew to accomplish that which the first moouer does propose in a
certain time to be performed, and who remaining stable does give motion to all
the rest? Wherefore we may say that the beginning of newnes cannot be from
heaven, nor through the spirits, but by the first moouer, who at his good
pleasure commands, and all things are made, and afterward renewed by a secret
order within himself not constrained by any necessity. For so it is that God
proceeds to his work, and so prosecuteth it, without being otherwise bound
to base things: which Aristotle himself accords to, when he declares that
he is blessed, without any good that is strange, or not of himself. And
farther I would willingly know with what kind of measure they would meat out
the Universe, who bear such favor to the eternity of the world? If by time
(it be measured) then is not eternal, for those reasons which we have
delivered heretofore in the discourse concerning the time of the Creation. If
by eternity (it self) then let them remember that that is a possession
altogether separated from time, and from motion, as has been to us
sufficiently declared. How then can this world be eternal which is equal in
age to Time, and altogether subject to Motion? That the world cannot be
eternal.
But if any one yet would hold that it is eternal, let him tell me, whether it
endures by the self same eternity which is in the blessed God, or by some
other? If it be by another sort of eternity, then should there be diverse
eternities of governors, and of kinds, which should savor of the nature of
the infinite: and also many infinitenesses should be contained in this world
which is so small. If they will say, that the world subsisteth of the same
eternity by which God is; certainly such are not worthy of any answer, but
rather to be mocked at, who think the spheres, and their mouers to be measured
with God: for eternal enduring differs not from God. But that which is
changeable according to Nature, and operation cannot be measured with the same
compass, as he who is altogether unchangeable. They will tell me that the
eternity of the world differs from that of the first agent; because the one
being altogether divine is a possession at once altogether, and the other is
successiue. But I answer them that if it be successiue, it has certain
portions; now such portions cannot be infinite, and therefore such eternity
has a beginning, and successiue ending. Now if it be limited and bounded with
these terms, how can it be that it may agree with the eternal, who is not
closed, or limited by any ending? Besides, by what reason may this be called
eternal, to which always something is added by a continual succession? For
one can add nothing to the infinite, neither does it increase at all. And
therefore I ask them again that if their eternity subsisteth, what do become
of the new reuolutions? Shall we say they are conjoined with the former, or
else that they begin a new infiniteness? If they grant the first, then will
they be more in number then infinite. Auerrois says, that this is no more
disagreeable to successions, then to numbers, that infinite tens be infinitely
repeated, which amount to so much as innumerable hundreths, without making any
more increase in one part then in another. But good God who can hear these
things with a quiet ear? By an impossible supposition which he deuiseth in
numbers, and which never comes to pass, he would resolve the inconveniences
which depend upon infinite reuolutions, which he says did precede al eternity.
And for the other point, to think that the new reuolutions should begin a new
infinitenes, we have already answered that, saying, that many infinitenesses
cannot be imagined in this world. But here leaving the successions and numbers,
I would farther request these defe^ders of the eternity of this round frame to
tell me, whether the moving spirits know the reuolutions, or not? If they
know them not, certainly men do them much injury to think, that they are
ignorant in their motions, which many Astronomers know. If they know them all
(being) infinite, how is it that by a finite understanding, which is in all
creatures, they may comprehend things (that are) infinite? Reason taken from
generation.
Again, since that generation is bounded and limited by the vndiuidable, and
the last generation of any creature whatsoever by the last creature, what
generation shall we say to be limited to the first? If they say there is no
former, how is it then that there can be a latter? I wonder also at those
ancient Sages of the world, and the modern likewise which follow them, when
they declare all things to be moved, and ordained in God as in the last
wished, and desired end; and yet doubt to confess that he is the ordainer,
considering also that they call him the first moouer. But if he has ordained
all things, Another of the moderation and government of things.
it follows likewise that he must know them. For concerning that which some
infer, that God has only disposed the uppermost and highest things, and
that the second causes engender the lowest: I demand of them, how it is that
those here below are correspondent to those which are most high, considering
there are diverse ordainers? Does not Aristotle say, [That there is but one
only prince, for fear least things should be euilly disposed and governed?]
Again, if all things depend of a desired and finishing cause, so that in
favor thereof they become great: how is it that they have a being of
themselves, seeing they seek to be perfect in another? Why have those any need
of a preserver: which have no need of a creator? Indeed the son is preserved
without the father, but without him he is not engendered. For what occasion then
do these philosophers give a keeper to the members of the Universe, and do take
clean away from it any parents? What lies do they bring unto us that accuse
others to be sellers of lies? For in one place they misconster and deny that,
which in another place the truth constrains them to confess. Auerrois in
many places of his writings, How the Philosophers contrary themselves.
denies that God created the world; and yet, interpreting the treatise of
heaven, he calls him Creator. So likewise Aristotle proceeding by sensible
things mocketh at Plato, that at every word confesses the world to be created:
and in the book which he entituleth Of the World, he avouches God to be
Creator of the Universe. And in his Metaphysics he teaches that he is Prince
of the world. And how is it that the Prince is entered into an house which he
neither has builded, nor obtained by right of inheritance, nor bought with any
sum of money? This is as he affirms that the supreme thought understands
not the particular matters, for fear least he should ouer-labour, or else
wear himself. And yet in the treatise of good, and bad fortune, he often
repeateth, that he has excellent good fortune that is guided by God. But how
does he guide and direct that which he understands not? And how does he
render condign recompense, and reward for things well or ill done (as it is
said in the same Treatise) if he does not consider and examine the works of
every one? Again we read in the Meteors, that God has placed the pure fire
under the globe of the Moon: and yet how has he disposed and ordained that,
which he neither made, nor has knowledge of? Surely it would be a tedious
matter to bring out all the contrarieties and repugnances of the writings of
Philosophers, which do plainly confound themselves. But out of much I have
selected this little, to the end that those who boast rather of the name of
Peripateticks, or Auerroists, then of good Theologians, and Christians, may
behold, that all their teachings are not solid, nor firm. Let us insert among
our reasons, which confound their doctrine, the judgment of Saint Augustine,
of Macrobius, and of many other learned men, who hold that the eternity of the
world cannot subsist, and have place with so small memory of things done, as
we have in our histories, as well holy as profane, neither yet with the
invention of arts and many other things celebrated by Eusebius, Pamphilus,
Clemens Alexandrinus, Berosus the Chaldee, Aristotle, Auerrois, Theophrastus,
Epigenes, Critodemus, Philostophanes Egesius, Archimachus, Damasthenes, Aulus
Gellius, and a great number of others of diverse languages, and most plentifully
by Pliny in his book of the natural history, where he confesses to have
collected part of his writings out of the said authors; The eternity of the
world cannot agree with histories and invention of things.
with whom also, in that which they testify of the invention of things, the
holy letters are of great authority, in that they do agree with them herein in
many points. For although there be some difference concerning the names of
those which have invented them, as the forenamed authors do not always agree
among themselves; yet the invention found in time, is wholly confirmed by the
same reason, and all that which disagreeth, is come either by reason of the
languages, not being alike, or because that Historiographers, cheefely the
Greeks, have attributed that to their nation, which properly appertained not
to them. Now if the world had been from the beginning, yea even before the
beginning, as many would have it: why then in the successiue course of
innumerable ages, was not that policy and kind of living invented, which we
use at this present? Why not the use of letters, by which only, memory is
made eternal? Why not the experience of many things? For none of all this is
found to be, but within and since five thousand five hundred years, so long as
the Scripture teaches us that the world has been created, being from the
creation thereof to the nativity of Jesus Christ (according to the common
computation) three thousand nine hundred sixty seven years; what did the
inhabitants of the world before this time so brief and short being compared
with eternity, and to which the histories do refer the inuentors and use of
all things? Lived men then without policy, and without laws? without bread,
without wine, without tillage of the earth? were they without the exercise of
merchandise, without the study of good letters, of discipline, of warfare, of
navigations, of building, of weauing, of sowing, of dressing wool: all which
things have their invention famous but within a few years, and in diverse
seasons? wherewith lived they before? where dwelt they? how were they clothed?
what did they being altogether ignorant of arts? Certainly it is mere
mockery, that those who teach that the world is eternal, do themselves
assign the inuentors of laws, of arts, and of men's living, considering that
both the one and the other could not consist both at one instant. Behold
(companions) that which seemed good to me to note concerning the reasons making
for the creation, the history whereof will put us altogether out of doubt in
that which touches the principal arguments of the Philosophers against it, if
we do amply entreat of their errors, when they maintain that God works
of necessity, and not of free and frank will, which will serve us to morrow
for a subject to begin the days discourse.


The end of the first days work.
THE SECOND DAYS WORK.
Concerning the errors of these Philosophers, which say that God does his
outward work of necessity. Chapter 9.
ASER. I Think (companions) we were yesterday sufficiently entangled in the
discourse of the creation of the world, about that which concerns the doubt,
that remains in many. But ere we do farther enter into the cabinets of God
and nature, it would not be unfruitful if we yet have an other pull with the
Philosophers about this question [Whether of necessity, or of free choice, and
frank will God was provoked to work?] For they supposed that the condition of
necessity was fitter and more convenient then was the matter of contingence,
and therefore they appropriate it to God. Wherein they think verily to want no
reasons for their purpose, and that these make specially for them [That God
works by his proper substance, If the work of God be of necessity, or
voluntary.
and not by any borrowed virtue: That the effects of the world, are of
necessity, because they seem in no wise to proceed of a contingent cause; that
by the same reason is to be considered the inuariable, and necessary order of
things, to the end that the universe be not confounded or troubled] Moreover
the Philosophers supposed that it was a very unfit thing, for the divine
understanding to work of necessity, and the divine will to work freely,
considering that it is no less perfect then the divine thought. Now though
that we (concerning these considerations) night take out of the quiver of
reasonable discourse arrows enough against these Sages of the world, yet for
that this point does particularly touch the divinity, it may suffice to say
with Plato, that one cannot pick out so great a mystery by reasons, but seek
to learn the same by oracles. For it is sufficient to know that the great
lawgiuer records that [God spoke, Genes. 1. Psalm. 33.
and it was done] and that with him agrees the kingly prophet, saying, [he
commanded, and it was established] to conclude, that all the scriptures teach
us the same doctrine.

But here let us declare, that that which seems thus to disturb the
Philosophers, is nothing at all: For they presuppose a necessary disposition
to be more perfect then the contingent cause: which they have left to prove,
to those that should come afterward. Now I beseech you, do we not more esteem
a Prince, who directs every thing according to his own good pleasure, then
if urged by nature, or any other provocation constrayning him, he should set
his hand to any business? Who will blame liberty, which (as the Proverb says)
is hardly bought for gold? That, I say, which they themselves think to have
been granted man for a most singular good? What perfection, what praise
should be attributed to most lofty thoughts, if they were ever forced to
perform that which is good? Liberty profitable for all things.
What dignity might appertain to a great king, if he did all things
necessity constrayning him, and nothing of a generous heart? And seeing by
common consent, we acknowledge God to be the Prince of the world, what glory
and honor should be given him for his government, for his wisdom, for his
justice, for his clemency, if of necessity, and constraint he were drawn on
to maintain that, which is in his tuition? What grace, what service, and
adoration should we owe him? Why is it entered into nature, to sacrifice, as
Aristotle says? Why are we obliged (as Auerrois himself teaches) to magnify
God the creator in prayers and sacrifices? If God does all things of
necessity, what profits all this? For what cause is it convenient for us to
pray, Prayers are fit for men.
if God be not appeased by prayer? To what end has all mankind in every
age, in all places, of every nation been addicted to adore a divinity? Surely
we may thereof gather that prayers are fit for men; and that it is naturally
grafted in our minds that God is moved by them. So many reasons then may well
conclude, that the author of Nature does never negotiate of necessity. And for
that that he works by a proper substance, that is not of eternity, except in
the spiritual work, from himself, whereof we have spoken in the 5. of our
discourse. But for the outward work he proceeded thereto, according to his
own will, when it pleased him; not constrained by any causes (for he is the
only and principal cause of all things) nor for hope to get any good (for
that he of himself is blessed, not having need of any other good. God is not
subject to any order of nature.
) Furthermore also, the necessary effects conclude not any necessity in the
prince, or in the first cause, considering that the second causes, which Plato
and the other Sages call his servants, do work by his commandment in
determined order; so that the necessity that therein is, depends upon his
commandment, or upon the order, from which he absolueth them according to his
own good pleasure. Dan. 3.
And thereof came it that the fire burned not the children in the Chaldean
furnace: that the sun stayed his course by the space of a day at Iosuahs
commandment: that it went back ten lines or ten hours, Ios. 10. 2. Kings. 20.
in the time of Ezechias: That it was eclipsed at full moon, during the
passion of Jesus Christ. The Peripatetickes, Atheists, and Epicures will laugh
at this, and will say scoffingly: which of the Philosophers recounteth these
things? These sellers of lies, which teach the laws, are mad (says
Auerrois.) But herein since question is made concerning divine mysteries, what
have we to do with such contemners of all piety? The sentence wherein we
make stay, has been celebrated by those which could judge. And men do rather
believe one that affirms, then a thousand that deny: for negation concludes
nothing. And why should we care then though they deny altogether in words
that, which many witnesses, yea and most wise, do assure to have proved in
effect? The holy letters testify it, whereto we rather give credit, then to
Aristotle, and all his scholars. And amongst a thousand most famous
Philosophers and Christian Martyrs, which consent to this doctrine of truth,
Areopagus of the Athenians.
is Saint Denis Areopagita, so called of the Areopagus or street of Mars,
which was a court and assembly among the Athenians, first of nine persons
elected by the chief Magistrates, and afterward increased to the number of
fifty of the most principal, as well for learning, holiness of life, and
wisdom, as also for riches, to the end that poverty might not induce them
to corruption (as Androtion in the second, and Philocorus in the third book of
the Athenian affairs do write.) This man then writing to Polycarpus,
reprehendeth Apollophanes the Sophister in these very words, because he would
not admit of the eclipse of the sun which came to pass at the death of the
Messiah [I know not with what spirit thou were led to divine, Of the eclipse of
the sun at the death of Jesus Christ.
O Apollophanes, when, with me, conte^plating the eclipse, which was against
the order of nature, at the time that Christ suffered, turning thy self
toward me, thou said (noble Denis, these are the changes, which come to
pass sometime in divine things:) If thou can; convince this of untruth. For I
was present with thee in consideration of so great a prodigy: with thee I
beheld it, judged of it, and thought it worthy of perpetual admiration.] But
if any will not yet believe this most entire philosopher, let him harken to
that which the astronomers say. Esculus very skillful, and learned in this
science, taught by astronomicall numbers, that the sun went under The ^amme.
Aries, and the moon under The balance.
Libra, when the sun failed at full moon, and at that time the Jews
according to their custom celebrated the feast of passover. Moreover Phlegron
one most excellent in reckoning the Olympiads, in his thirteenth book
testifies, that in the fourth year of the two hundred and second Olympiad
there was an eclipse of the Sun, much greater then all those that had ever
before happened; at which time was the passion of Jesus Christ. Recalling of the
sun in Ezechias days.
And for the going back of the sun in Ezechias reign, as also that which we
read of the deluge of waters, with many other miracles contained in holy writ,
the ancient memorials of the Persians, and Chaldeans do make notable mention
thereof. And thence comes it that the Persian priests do celebrate the
memory of the triple Mithras, that is of the sun (as Denis and Strabo
witness) which at the foresaid time appeared to perform a triple course, or to
stay three times, from his accustomed progress into the west, retyring again
into the east by a new kind of return for ten hours, and then returning
again into the west. I leave, for this point, the other witnesses
Philosophers, Gentiles, Chaldees, Egyptians, Phenicians, Greeks, the Sibilles,
and many Historians brought for proof of the supernatural effects of
omnipotent God, by Josephus, Aristobulus, Tertullian, and Eusebius, whereof
each by their writings may sufficiently instruct. And if authority do ought
avail in disputation, let then the deposition of so many Sages prevail in
this point, in a matter that Aristotle and his fautors deny in words only.
Most prudently certain does Auicen think that motion is neither necessary,
nor violent, but in a mean betwixt both, in such sort, that it ever rests at
the pleasure of the Prince. And therefore it must be granted that the second
causes are so alligated to the first cause, that they do nothing but as the
other commands them. And yet it so governs those things which it has
created and ordained, that it permits them to perform their ordinary
proper motions. Now because that it seldom happens to the contrary, and that
the order of their first institution perseuereth in many things, and that most
commonly: therefore did Aristotle judge that it was natural, and necessary.
For as he says in his treatise of natural hearing, [That is natural which
comes to many, and oftentimes:] And so could he make no farther search by
sensible things. But the operations of God, By the necessity of effects one
must not conclude the necessity of the cause.
and the alliance of things here below, with the first cause may not be
searched out by discourse of reasons, but must rather, as we have declared, be
learnt of oracles. Thus is convinced of nullitie, the progress which is
deduced from necessity, appearing in the effects, to the necessity of the
cause: because that necessity of the effects depends upon the order
established by the first cause. And the effects also are not needful because
they are all particular: for the work of nature is not bounded by the
universal All, but by each particular which the Peripateticks themselves do
rather nominate contingence, then necessary. But because the most subtle
Philosophers do yet debate, that they be eternal, and that most needful is
the coherence of the subject, with the worker; in which the proper essential,
or the quidditie, (as they term it) is named of the subject: we may render
them an other reason for this pretended necessity: to wit, the correspondence
of things with the exemplaries or eternal Ideas, celebrated by Plato, and
defended by many sage and great personages, God has produced all things by
himself.
as has already been showen. For this cannot consist, considering that the
universal is a simple essence, which produces nothing by the second causes,
nor by the spirits, nor by nature, but only by himself: and also the first
cause of all things created, before ever any soul, or any heaven, or any other
particular thing, whatsoever was produced. To return therefore, from whence we
strayed, the effect ensues the ordinance, and immutable order of the supreme
cause, if by the same it be not otherwise instituted. And whereas the
Philosophers add farther, that the will of God has equal perfection with the
thought, which operateth of necessity: we confess that it takes place, but
it is in regard of the work within himself, whereby he enge^dreth eternally,
the perfect image of himself, his word, the absolute Idea, and true pattern
of all things. But we say, that he displayeth according to his good pleasure
the outward effects, that from everlasting the divine thought has described in
the word. Surely I wonder at the Sages of the world, who acknowledge that God
is most simple, and of himself most perfect, all other strange thing set
apart, and yet presently (as if they had forgot their doctrine) think that God
has a needful bond with things here below, as if he could not subsist
without them, nor yet be blessed. And how is he most simple, if he has a
necessary bond with other things? How is he prince of all things, if he be
obliged to the service of the most basest? What dignity, or what condition
has he of a sovereign governor? Briefly to conclude this matter, let us take
away all necessity from the Lord in regard of this round frame: and let us not
doubt that the order of this Universe shall decay, or be destroyed; if it be so,
that the creator does dispose, and vary it at his good pleasure: for he does
know how ever to direct in order, that which he has once made, and ordained.
For none need to fear the spoil of the work, when the work-master sets hand
thereto, by whose handling it is rather made perfect, then any whit marred. But
yet before, we take any other subject, we must first hear of AMANA, the
reasons which declare that God proceeded of free will to his work.


Of the reasons which conclude, that God proceeded of free and frank
deliberation to the work of the world. Chap. 10.
AMANA. ALthough that by our precedent discourse we may easily judge, such (as
maintain that God of eternity did by necessity his outward work) worthy
rather to be despised then refuted, being against the doctrine of divine
oracles: yet we will run over a few points, by which they themselves shall be
pearsed with their own darts. I would therefore first, desire them to tell me
from whence come the monsters in nature? They may say, that this proceeds
either by defect, or super-abundance of matter: or else because that the
qualities answer not in due proportion; or through corruption of the
containing part, and such other considerations, which are subdivided by
physicians into their species. But let me ask them, if that the natural
causes work necessarily, why do they not perform every thing duly, seeing
nature (as they say) wants nothing in necessary things? How then do
natural causes work of necessity, when they fail? They may answer, that I
would thereupon conclude, that they work by contingence, which if I said,
what might follow thereon? But to leave all superfluous debate, let them
remember, that it is an old sentence used in schools, that a thing is said to
be necessary in two sorts: the one absolutely necessary; and the other
conditionally necessary. Wherefore we attribute the first to God alone; A
thing is said to be necessary two ways.
and the other to his creatures: so as we call them necessary according to the
order appointed by the supreme creator. Which if the Philosophers deny, we
will urge them with the work it self of these causes. For it is certain,
that if they be faulty, and produce monsters, it comes to pass, because
that order which is delivered them by nature (as they say) or rather of the
sovereign creator (as truth is) does fail them. Now if they fail of the
order, it then follows, that it was not simply necessary for them, but given
by the first cause, through virtue whereof, the rest subordained under it do
work: from which if the first withdraw it self, they do not only fail, but
become nothing at all. And if they may seem to perform any thing of
necessity; this comes unto them by reason of the law, which has been given
them by the Prince of Nature: who giving laws to others, is no whit for that
thereto himself obliged. They may reply, that if our doctrine might stand,
there should be no certainty of science, considering that it should consist of
things, which otherwise might be: whereto Aristotle does make denial. But we
answer, that if he intends that those things which are known should be
necessary according to the order of the universe: the like may ensue in those
things, which may happen contrary to the order, according to the disposition
of the eternal will. Now if they find too great difficulty herein for their
capacity, what need we care? Let themselves (if they think good) unloose
the knot. For fire may well be without burning, Dan. 3. The effect may be
separated from the cause.
as indeed it has been, as we have heard in the former speech. And likewise
every effect may be separated from the cause, which has produced it; yet
nevertheless the bond remaining, by a certain correspondencie, between the
worker and the subject (that we may use school terms.) But proceeding
farther, I would feign learn of these Peripatetickes, whence it is, that
things have a necessary covenant. They will say that it is by nature, as they
prove by experience. What truly nature is.
But what is this their nature? Nothing truly, but the author of the Universe,
which is the true spirit not erring, seeing that (as they teach) the work of
nature, is the work of the intelligence not erring, and by the ordinance
whereof, all things have a due course. For there is nothing but serves this
supreme worker. [ He stretches out (says the prophet) the heavens like a
curtain. Psalm. 104.
He looks on the earth, and it trembles, he touches the mountains, and
they smoke.] But these naturalists may say (what have we to do with prophets,
seeing we hold that none can have perfect knowledge, but in those things, which
are proved by demonstration? And from whence fetches demonstration his
original? Is it not from those principles, whose terms being known, we
accord to them, or prove them by experience? Now if we believe demonstrations,
by principles, and experiences, it then follows that there be some things
more certain then demonstrations. Oh execrable vice grown old amongst our
people, that having had this happiness to be enrolled in the number of
Christians, ^anitie of the ^emonstrations ^f Philosophers.
yet receive nothing for truth, and certainty, if it be not proved by such
demonstrations as Aristotle has declared, and wherewith (for all that) he is
but little aided in his discourse concerning nature. For herein he proceeds
always by those maxims that he takes to be confessed: so that the
demonstration whereto his disciples give belief, is nothing else but a
consequence drawn from the place of authority, or from the foundations by him
supposed. Wherefore let us rather believe the holy scripture, which instructs
us, that many things, and especially divine, are known through the beams of
supernatural illumination, and by the covenant of the holy word with our
understanding touched by the truth. Let Epicures and Atheists then maintain
how they list from Aristotle, That to know, What it is to know.
is to understand by demonstration. For us it is sufficient to hold our
instructions from the prophets taught by the divine oracle: who by miracles,
and prodigies, and great sacraments, approve (as we have already heard) that
which they teach. And if we say that knowledge is an understanding by any
thing, we may take our selves to be wise in believing the doctrine of the holy
Ghost, not any whit accounting of the Peripateticks, who have only kindled the
light of their contemplation by the moving forms of the universe, and have not
been able, with a pure cogitation, to contemplate him, who possesses the
highest degree of dignity amongst all essences, as their sovereign prince,
and governor: having in the rest, rather given an artificial finenesse, and
base manner of proceeding, then any science. And this is that which privily
their Master confesses, when he entreats of the last Analyticks, or
Resolutions, saying, that Science is of demonstration, and demonstration of the
quiddities, as he names it, and by the proper differences of things to us
unknown. For thereupon it follows, that the principles of demonstration are
unknown, and that from them one may bring, no whit, or very little
demonstration. But resuming our principal point of the free, That the work of
the Universe is freely and willingly.
and frank will of God in his work, begun in time, we will argue more lively
thus. [Seeing that the parts of this universe, are so disposed, that without
any contrariety, or contradiction, they might have been otherwise ordered, it
follows, that they are contingent, and not ordained of necessity, but of
free will.] Auerrois says: [We confess not, that the parts of the world
could be altered, because the world is an animal.] But I answer, in what place
of Aristotle learnt he this manner of disputing? He will that his authority
should be for a principle of demonstration. Moreover from whence draws he the
consequence? Let him tell me, if the world be an animal, whether is it
sensible, or insensible? If it be void of sense, then is it no animal. If it be
sensitive: does it see then? does it hear, does it smell, does it taste, does
it eat? Whether the world be an animal.
But say we confess the world to be an animal (as it seems that Plato, and
many other Sages would affirm) surely it is no animal, contained under the
kind of animals. For all things in this frame are divided by all philosophers
into a former division, before you come to the animal. But let us confess that
it may be called an animal by some kind of answerablenes and likeness:
Wherefore then could not the disposition of the parts thereof be otherwise
ordained? Why should it be disagreeable for man, to have only one eye in his
forehead, as it is reported of some? Why could it not be made, to the other
creatures, the upper iaw moving, and the undermost firm, as the crocodile
alone has? Why have not sundry beasts two knees, like the camel? Surely
these, and such like things have been so disposed by the sovereign creator,
that without any contradiction, or contrariety, might have been otherwise
ordained, if we presuppose not the condition of the nature specified, such as
the creator himself, has according to his will prefixed. But let us farther
proceed concerning the animal the world. Of the course and straight passage
of the Ocean.
By what necessity has the sea bin in such sort disposed, that the ocean
should pass through the narrow straights of Abyla and Calpe (high mountains,
which antiquity called Hercules-pillers?) What need is there that from thence
it should spread it self in length and breadth? That then it should stretch it
self into the Tuscan, or Tirrhene sea? afterward gathering it self into the
Adriaticke gulf, then enlarging it self into the Siriacke sea, so running
about by the Egean (which for the beauteous number of isles therein contained,
is named the Archi-pelagus, or princess of seas) and from thence shrinking
between most narrow passages the Helespont is made? And again the Propontick
where it dilateth it self, and where again it is straightened, is called the
Thracian Bosphorus? Then this Ocean being once again widened, there is made
the sea Euxine, that is to say the host, since the manners of the barbarous
nations have been polished, and made civil, for it was first called Axenes,
that is the inhumane host, because of the cruel, and fierce nature of the
dwellers thereabout: And again mixing it self with the lake of Meotis, it is
named the Cimmerian Bosphorus? What need is there also why Nilus passing by
the Ethiopians, and Arabians into Egypt: and Tanais passing through the one and
other Scythia, Of Nilus and Tanais.
and running almost into the midst of the lake of Meotis, should distinguish
and separate the three parts of the world? And by what other needful
ordinance is one part of the earth laid low in valleys, another stretched out
into plains: this part raised up in billocks, that lifted up in lofty
mountains; and that the floods and euer-running fountains and streams do
flow in their seasons? Of what necessity also are some beasts of the earth
fruitful, others barren? these dry, and those moist? Might not we easily
(without any contrariety or repugnancie) imagine all the circuit of the earth
to be plain, soft, and bearing fruit? And if God can perform that which we
cannot think, as all the Sages who have believed in him do affirm, why can
he not do that which we may imagine? Which if he can easily perform, these
things then are not of necessity, no otherwise then of eternity, disposed in
such sort as we see them, but according, and how, and when it has pleased the
sovereign creator of them. Now enough is said of these things: we must
farther proceed in the consideration of Gods works, wherein will greatly aid
us, the understanding of one only principal and prime cause of the universe;
that we may afterward comprehend the marvelous effects thereof. And herein
(ARAM) let be the subject of thy discourse.


Of one only principal, and first cause of the Universe. Chapter 11.
ARAM. THose, who have bin commonly called the Sages of the world, have so much
differed in their doctrine, even in the search which they have made of nature,
following the course of their speculations, that amongst them who have bin
nourished in one family, and learned under one master, there are great
contrarieties, either in doctrine, in manners, in religion, or in the end to
which all these things tend. Which is chiefly happened unto them, by having
settled the building of the world upon badde and discordant foundations, affying
in their own powers, and inventions too feeble for so weighty a charge, as by
rehearsing some points of their principles, we may easily understand. Diverse
opinions of Philosophers touching the beginning of the world.
Thales Milesius supposed, that the water was the beginning of all things:
because all the members of every living creature, seemed to be nourished by
water, which as it is placed in the middle of the world, so does the watrie
humor abide in the center of the bodies of animals, from whence it ministers
nourishment to all the rest of the members. But his auditor Anaximander was of
advise, that I wot not what infinitenes, called the boundless matter, was the
principal subject, and first of essences, and because that by nature such
matter has neither form nor quantity, he thought that this was the
substance of perpetual generation: in such sort that infinite worlds were
already past, and hereafter infinitely to arise. Anaximenes his disciple
attributed the causes of all things to the infinite air. And his hearers
Anaxagoras and Diogenes, disagreeing together, one of them would persuade that
the infinite matter wouen with diverse parcels of all sorts and kinds, according
to the condition thereof, had been beginning to it self: And the other, that
the air endued also with divine reason, was the matter of things. Leucippus,
Democritus and Diodorus affirm, that before all things, there were certain
Atomoes, or little indiuidable bodies, some smooth, others sharp, some round,
others partly made of angles, partly turned and pointed, and some crooked, to
be perceived by reason only, solid, without any vacuitie, not engendered,
immortal, eternal, incorruptible, which move them in an infinitenes, and
through an infinitenes that is emptines, which bodies are in number infinite
with these two qualities, form and greatness; and that by a chance of
adventure, without constraint of any nature, heaven and earth of them were
composed. Hipparchus Metapontine, and Heraclitus the Ephesian said, that fire
was the vnick beginning, because it is the subtle maintainer and sustainer of
all bodies, and whereof at first, the heavens were made. And because it is a
brightness that moves all things by his light, they teach, that in abasing it
self it was mixed with all things, in such sort, that all things were thereof
engendered by the means of discord and love. Empedocles for fear of failing,
said, that all the four elements had been the only beginning: but that the
earth was the matter and first subject of all, containing the forms and
figures of things; which neither the water, air, nor fire could do. The
Poets, following his opinion, attributed the original of things to etherian
Jupiter, terrene Pluto, aerian Juno, and to Mestis the beginning of the water,
who (they said) nourished with her tears the rivers of the earth. Pythagoras
mounting higher, then many deem, esteemed that numbers, and their subject
(that is, the measures and apt proportions, called harmonies and consonancies)
were the original of things; not those numbers, which merchants use, but the
formal and natural, the knowledge of which lies only hidden in such, as have
learned Philosophy and Theology by numbers. Almeon follows Pythagoras,
saying that the unity was the effectiue beginning, but the two, or binarie, not
finite, was the subject, and material beginning of all multitude. Epicurus in
his Philosophy pursuing the steps of Democritus, teaches the beginnings of
things to be corporal, solid, not created, perceived by understanding only,
eternal, that could not be corrupted, nor destroyed, nor changed in any sort.
To which prime causes, beside the form and greatness which his master assigned
them, he also attributes weight. Socrates and Plato set three principals, God,
the matter, and the Idea. Aristotle affirmed for the first, Entelechie, or the
kind, the matter, and privation; although he had otherwhere taught the
equivocations, as is privation, not to be numbered among the principles. Zenon
appoints for the first, God, and the matter; so that he is the active, and it
the passive, and the four elements means between. But on this point we may
note, that amongst all those, which have taught that the matter was the
principal subject, we have one alone, who tells us, whether it has been
created by the blessed God, or whether this nature pliable, and deprived of all
beawty together with God has made the world: or else if, void of all fashion,
it has been coeternall wife and companion of Demogorgon, father of the Gods
(as Poets feign) or if like a Pallas, it has been borne of Jupiters brain.
Certainly our mind can find no repose, when we find a nature deprived of all
power and all form, without the maker and creator thereof. Now who, or what he
has been, we have none of these Philosophers, that can relate unto us. Very
well see we that they agree very ill together, in the doctrine of the
principles and foundations of the world; which doubtless happened unto them,
because they did straie very far off from the unity, master of all verity,
in whom they should all have met, and yet every one went a several way,
following the inventions of their natural speculations, temerariously
presuming by their own proper powers to manifest that, which God would rather
have kept close, and hidden; to wit, the nature of celestial things. And
thence comes it that their teachings founded on the confused multitude, were
dissolved and vanished, after (I say) that they were so severed from the
unity, which gives to all essences the power to be, and harmoniously to
accord.

How all those that have had the true knowledge of God do agree in the doctrine
of one only original of the universe.
But they, who confess one God creator of all things, and acknowledge him for
the true source and fountain, from which all the waters of eternal sapience
do flow, all united in profession of piety, religion and doctrine, Hebrews,
Chaldees, Greeks and Latins, do all together give praise to this God alone,
father of the universe, planting the foundations of this mundaine habitation
with an harmonious concord. For Moses, Job, David, Solomon, Esaias, and all the
other prophets, Evangelists, Apostles and disciples of Jesus Christ, and all
those whom he has made worthy to entreat of divine mysteries: all with one
voice do teach us, one only and prime cause of all forms, and that alone, to
be the maker of the matter; and moderatresse of all nature. To which doctrine
agree all the ancient, and modern doctors of the Christian church, having the
rule of holy letters so fixed and bounded, that they do not cross themselves
in any point, because they have settled the foundations of all things in the
only and true author of all wisdom. And upon the same principles innumerable
persons of great erudition, and laudable life, diversely dispersed into contrary
climates, according to the course of times and different languages, have
enterprised diverse works of a divine consonancie, and all to one end, to cause
acknowledgement of God, creator of heaven and earth. Which could in no wise
have been done, if all these excellent men had not been illuminated with one
selfsame divine understanding (as the Platonists call it) or with one
selfsame holy spirit (as our doctors teach) which makes all such as dwell
in the house of God to be of one mind, and indueth all of them with one heart,
and one soul, and therefore also all the ancient Prophets, and blessed
ambassadors of Jesus Christ, being replenished with this spirit, despising the
vain babble of Philosophers schools and all contentious disputations, have
proposed their teachings, with such and so great constancy, though they had to
deal with princes, and people learned and unlearned, that they have confirmed
them for truth, by sanctity and splendour of life, and by many miracles, yea
with their own blood. And our doctors (imitating this doctrine) lightened and
illustrated with the same spirit, have acknowledged God the only, and very
beginning of all things, the free Creator and supreme fountain from whom all
verity, and virtue flows. Amongst which doctors, four Greeks and four
Latins shall sing in the little quire of God like the bases, and fundaments of
our Theology, according with the four disciples of our Lord, who delivered
the Evangelical elements in Canticles sweetly distinguished, and yet in
agreeable consonancie. Of the most celebrated doctors of the church Greeks and
Latins.
For Saint Hierome and Saint Chrysostom shall unloose the knottie heads of the
holy letters: the one and the other Gregory, to wit the Roman and
Nazianzene, shall pursue the divine sense, closed and covered under the bark
of the letter. Damascenus, with Saint Ambrose shall remain in the grave
sentences, and allegorical sense. And Saint Augustine with Basil shall mount
up in the anagogicall song, to resound the supreme accents of the celestial
harmony. And for the other celebrated persons, who preceded these men till the
time of Saint Hierome, he in the book of excellent men numbreth an hundredth
thirty seven, who were known by their writings. To whom Gennade minister of
Marseilles, adds ninety and one, who have been followed of many others till
the time of Peter the Lombard: who emulating Damascene in reducing and
distinguishing into four volumes the Theological doctrine, has given fair
matter for posterity to dispute upon. And since then have increased so many
others of diverse professions, nations, and languages consenting with an
admirable concord in confession of one father, author and principle (without
any means) of this Universe, that this point leaves no doubt, but constrains
every one to acknowledge that all of them have been illuminated, and taught
by the sovereign doctor and supreme brightness, from which all truth and light
does issue. For likewise he alone the eternal God contains the source of
verity unable to be emptied, out of which it behooves us to exhaust so many
and often times, as we pretend to give true instructions, and agreeable to the
mysteries of his omnipotency; because there is no knowledge of the separated
substances, of the secrets of nature, and of God the author thereof, which has
not been divinely revealed. For divine things are not touched with our hands:
and the worldly fly from our senses every moment. From whence it comes, that
that which Philosophers call wisdom and certain science, whether concerning
celestial, or natural things, is nothing else but error, or at least, a thick
obscurity. But we know so much, as the pure, bright and clear understanding,
placed in the point of man's soul, does behold, by means of supernatural
light in the mirror of eternity, wherein we contemplate God, the father, and
creator of this Universe. And when the Philosophers shall confess him such, as
nature teaches, religion persuades, and reason proves him, then may they
concur with the truth, in that which they declare of the elements of the
world, fire, air, water, and earth, and of the nature of things, as hereafter
we must discourse. But first we will begin to enter into some consideration of
the precious treasures and learned instructions, wherewith the sacred words of
Moses (by us heretofore heard) concerning the creation are fruitfully
replenished, and namely in the space of the six days, which he describes for
perfection of this great human building: as I refer to you (ACHITOB) to
give us to understand.


Of the space of the six days mentioned in the history of the creation of
the world. Chap. 12.
ACHITOB. IF we hold for certain and undoubted, the fabrication of the
universe, as we have in all our precedent discourse sufficiently proved: then
must we confess that it is new and made in time, according as holy writ
teaches us, and all Mathematicians confirm, when by the Genesis of the world
they prognosticate the events that should succeed. We have already made
mention of the time, since which, we hold the creation thereof: now must we
consider the space of days which are mentioned by Moses in recitation of this
Masterpiece of work of the Almighty, wherein the prophet has concealed a
mystery of high, and difficult understanding. For as Saint Augustine says,
Lib. 2. de cluit. Dei. cap. 6.
The six days wherein God performed his works, and the seventh wherein he
ceased; in what sort and manner they are, is very difficult, or rather
impossible for us to think, much more to express. For the days which we have
now, have their evening and morning, the setting and rising of the sun: and
the three first days whereof Moses speaks, passed without the sun, which
was created the fourth day. Hereof therefore grow profound and deep
questions, and principally this, [Whether all things have been created
together, or in the space of diverse days? In the same book chap. 9.
] It seems that Saint Augustine made no doubt that all was not created in a
moment: seeing he says (speaking of the creation of the Angels, made the first
day) that the second day, nor the third, nor all the rest, were any other then
the first day: but that the same one was repeated, to make up the number of six
or seven, for the works of God, and his repose. In the same book chap. 31.
In another place he speaks thus, [In the seventh day, that is, the same day
repeated seven times.] There have been also diverse ancient doctors that have
taught the like, satisfying themselves with this text of the Wiseman, saying,
[He that lives for ever, Eccles. 18. Whether all things were created together,
or in diverse da^es.
made all things together.] They also showed these reasons, [All power finite
and limited has need of time to work in, but not the infinite, as that of
the sovereign creator: and forasmuch, as by an intelligible and eternal word
(which Saint Basil interprets, the moment of the will of God) all things had
their beginning; there is no reason, why there should be any delay for the
creation of the light after the darkness, which was upon the deep (as the
prophet declares) and whereof the evening and morning of the first day were
made: or else of the heaven till the second day: Genes. 1.
the budding forth of the earth, till the third: the production of the sun,
moon, and stars, till the fourth: the gathering together of the waters, till
the fifth: and to the sixth the forming of man.] For these reasons (I say) many
great personages would conclude that heaven and earth, and all things therein
contained, were created at one instant, charging those which thought otherwise,
to do great wrong to the Almighty and sovereign creator (to whom all things
are of eternity presented) to suppose that he should operate by tract of time,
and succession of days: he (I say) to whom eternity is both the measure, and
possession together. They allege also, that the prophet repeating the creation
which he seemed to have distinguished by days, said thus in the second of
Genesis. [These are the generations of the heavens and of the earth, when they
were created, in the day that the Lord God made the heavens and the earth; and
every plant of the field before it was in the earth, and every herb of the
field, before it grew:] Whereby (they say) does evidently appear that al
things were created together. And for that the principal members of this
mundane body, are said to have been ordained and engendered separately, that
that must be understood to have been so expounded, according to the order,
through which man (for whom all things have been made) is very properly
induced as the last work of God: according to the common saying of the
Peripateticks, How the distinction of Gods works must be understood.
[That that which is the first in intention, is the last in execution: but the
means between keeping a like order, do succeed from the first till the
last.] By such reason therefore the division of days mentioned in Genesis must
be referred, not to the time, but to the order, which is to be considered in
the producement of things created. Thus much for their opinions. But others
contend to the contrary, and maintain that God has distinguished the
creation of the world by certain degrees and course of days, according as
Moses describes them, to keep us the more attentive, and to constrain us to
abide in the consideration of his works. For it is most certain that we pass
lightly over the infinite glory of God, which shines unto us here below; and
the vanity of our understanding does willingly carry us away. To correct
which vice, his divine bounty would temper his works to our capacity. And they
which hold this opinion have noted, how the text before cited out of
Ecclesiasticus, wherein this word (together) is read, is not properly so in the
Greek copy: but the Greek word signifies (likewise) or (in common,) and
has relation not to the time, but to the vniuersalnes and community of
creatures. Now to reconcile these diverse opinions, me thinks we may say, that
for the matter, and rich seed of all the beauties and richesses of the
universe, it has been created of God all in one moment; but that afterward he
gave form to it, taking out of them the works, which he did in the six days.
For thus the prophet speaks, Genes. 1. v. 1.2.
[God in the beginning created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was
without form, and void, and darkness was upon the deep, and the spirit of God
moved upon the waters.] Behold then the matter of this All, which had his being
all at once: the chaos, the embryon, created of nothing, which was to take
form, figure, place and abiding according to the order and disposition of all
his parts, and which in the mean while was sustained by the secret power of
God. Afterward when Moses adds, [Then God said, Let there be light, Verse.
3.4.5.
and there was light. And God saw the light that it was good; and God separated
the light from the darkness: and God called the light day, and the darkness he
called night. So the evening and the morning were the first day.] In this (I
say) and in all the rest which ensues, concerning the works of God in the
five other days, is showed unto us the form that God gave to the matter in
the space of them: creating and forming all creatures celestial and
terrestrial contained in the whole Universe. See then how we may resolve this
question, [whether all things were created together, or in diverse daies] and
thus we may reconcile their sundry opinions.

Let us farther note, S. August. de ciuit. Dei lib. 11. ca. 7.
how Saint Augustine accustomed to mount (as we have said) with the wings of
contemplation unto the Anagogicall sense, discoursing upon this point,
concerning the light, which was said to have been created the first day, with
evening and mormng, three days before the sun; confesses freely, that it is
farre-remote from our sense, what light this is, and by what alternate motion,
the evening and morning were made: and he uses this disjunctive question
[whether it were some corporal light (that is, some lightsome body) in the
highest parts of the world far from our sight: or else a light without body,
in some place, whereat the sun was shortly after kindled: or else by the name
of light, Gal. 4.
was signified the holy city of Angels and blessed spirits, whereof the
Apostle says, Jerusalem which is above, is the eternal mother of us all in
the heavens.] Therefore in another place also this great doctor of the church
refers the evening and morning, to the science and knowledge of angelical
thoughts; calling it morning, when by the view of things created, known in
themselves (where there is darkness, and most deep night) these blessed
spirits advance themselves in the love of God. And if loving and contemplating
him, they acknowledge all things in him (which knowledge is much more certain,
then if one should view them indirectly) then is it day. But it is evening,
when the angel turns himself from God to things created, regarding them not
in him, but in themselves. And yet this evening comes not to night, because
these angelical thoughts never prefer the works before the workman; neither
have them in greater estimation, for so should it be most profound night.
Behold then, how deeply Saint Augustine does discourse in this place
concerning the evening and morning. But for the place before-cited concerning
the point of the light, he refers the same terms, evening and morning, to
the condition of our soul. For he says, that that, which it can know and
understand in comparison of the knowledge of God, is like an evening, and that
yet when it is bent to praise and love the creator, then does it return to
morning. And for the distinct days, concerning the works of God, he applies
them likewise to the orderly and perfect knowledge of things produced: The
distinction of the days inferred to the acknowledgement of the works of God.
saying thus, [When the mind stays in the knowledge of it self, then is
there one day: when in the acknowledgement of the firmament, which betwixt the
water beneath and above, is called the heaven; then is the second day: if
concerning the earth, the sea, and all things fructifying, which keep
themselves in the roots of the earth; there is the third day: and when it
stays in the acknowledgement of the lights, both the greater and lesser, and
of the stars; there is the fourth day: if of the creatures which live in the
waters; there is the fifth day: if of terrene things, and man himself; there is
the sixth day.] And thus does this good father travel to discover the great
mysteries closed and concealed under the covert of Moses words, which in the
relation of his history he does most undoubtedly apply to the capacity of
the rude and common people, with whom he had to deal, delivering to the wise
and more learned enough wherewith to satisfy their minds. But without farther
disputing about this present matter, we may note, that in the creation of the
light, wherewith the world was to be adorned, was the beginning of form given
to the matter of the world, and of the distinction of creatures. Yea in that
the light did precede the sun and moon, which were created but the fourth day;
God would thereby testify, that in his only hand light is resident, and that
he can confer it upon us without any other means. For we are so inclined, as
nothing more, to alligate the power of God to those instruments and organes,
wherewith he serves himself; because that for as much as the sun and moon do
minister light unto us, we will willingly assign to them, according to our
fantasy, such virtue, that if the world were deprived of them, we might hope
of nothing but darkness. Wherefore the Lord in this order of the creation
causes us to see the contrary, and how it is in him, and by him, that the
light subsisteth. Now of you (ASER) we may hear of some excellent mysteries
concealed under the number of the days of this mundaine fabrication.


Of the mysteries hidden under the number of six in the creation of the
universe: and of the seventh day of rest. Chapter 13.
ASER. THat all things consisted in numbers, and that there was need of the
knowledge of them to conceive the sacred mysteries of God and nature;
Pythagoras, Plato and all other Academicks have laboriously taught. But they
have spoken so superstitiously and so obscurely concerning the mysteries in
these numbers, that it seemed, they would even co^ceale them from those, who
were devoted to the study of their doctrine. Plato speaks thus in his
Epinomide, [If we take away number from the nature of men, we leave them no
whit prudent, nor capable of science: Of the profit and use of numbers.
for the mind can comprehend nothing without reason, and none can render a
reason for any thing, that is ignorant of number. The arts likewise, this set
apart, would altogether perish.] He assures us also, that number, (to wit the
unity which is God) is cause of all good, but of none ill. And he calls man's
soul a number, and reasonable measure, by which we measure all things, which
may be understood and put in practice by us, to the end that in our works we
may eschew all error, folly and deformity. Now not only the Philosophers, but
also many great personages, Christians, both Greeks, and Latins do testify
unto us by their writings, that there be many mysteries in numbers: Amongst
whom Saint Augustine speaks thus, Lib. 11. de ciu^^. Dei cha. 30.
[The reason of numbers is not to be despised of us, which how much it is to be
esteemed in many texts of Scripture is apparent to those, which mark it
diligently. And it has not been spoken in vain to the praise of God: [Thou
have ordered al things in number, Wisdom 11.
weight and measure] Now hereupon we must note, that the number, weight and
measure, whereby all things have been numbered, poised and measured, subsist not
properly in the things created; no more then the measure by which the cloth is
parted into else; or the weights, wherewith every thing is weighed: or the
number, by which all things are counted, do consist within the things
measured, poised, or numbered: but are doubtless without them. So then we
contemplate the number, weight and measure, by which God has disposed all
things, In God is the member, weight and measure.
out of the creatures. And forasmuch as there is nothing, besides all things
produced, but God, it is necessary, that in him should consist their number,
weight and measure. In him then is the weight without weight, for by it the
great worker is not poised, but remains stable, giving all things the power
to be moved, and at last to repose themselves. And in truth, this frame of the
whole world duly proportioned, and balanced by weight, could not sustain it
self, if it were not poised by the creator and governor thereof; who likewise
has the measure, by which he moderateth and disposes all that is contained
therein, in well ordered justice, according to the state and proper end of
every of his works. And in him also are the numbers without number, because
that all things which are in him, are the same only God. And as he is the true
unity, he contains in himself all number, giving all things the power to be
numbered. For all multitude arises from one, and nothing can be one, making
with any others a multitude, if by the participation of the highest one it does
not obtain the state of unity. And to it also all things created (imitating
the course of numbers, as the true pattern does the original, and the end of
Gods works) endeavor to return, in such sort as they first proceeded.

We need not doubt then, but that the consideration of numbers does therewith
import much doctrine. Wherefore particularly respecting the distinction of the
works of the Universe in six days (which is the subject of our discourse) we
will note how many have acknowledged the number of six to be full of deep
mysteries. The number of six full of deep mysteries.
First therefore Mathematicia^s teach, that six is the first perfect number,
because it is co^pounded of certain parts perfectly added together, as of one,
two and three: for which cause it is called of the Pythagoria^s (Gamon) or the
Marrying number, because all the parts thereof set aside do make it up.
Moreover some parts of it multiplied together, to produce it: as six times
one, three times two, two times three. In this consists the perfection of the
number, which is accomplished by all his parts: and but few such have been
found out by Arithmeticians. For within the number of an hundred they have
observed but that of twenty eight, to which they have attributed such
propriety: because it consists of fourteen, seven, four, two, and one: as
within the number of ten, there is but that of six which is accomplished by
all his parts. Saint Hierom entreating of this number where he writes upon
Ezechiel, says, that it contains the sacrament of creatures. And in truth
there could not be invented any number more proper for the making of the world,
then this of six, which consists of a double proportion that it does next
contain in it self: (to wit) of four with two, which numbers added together
make six: which can hardly be found in other numbers, but such as are of the
nature of six: as the double, triple, quadruple, or square thereof, and such
like. So then six resulteth of that double proportion which makes the diapason
in Music, which is the perfectest and most entire harmony of all the
concords. For which it seems that Pythagoras would apply it to Natiuities
and to Marriages, and then it does consequently very properly fit the
Creation of the world, wherein were celebrated the true nuptials, and
conjunctions of all things. Likewise six, the first perfect number cannot but
aptly agree to God, the sovereign and most perfect creator, or to his work,
wherein there is no defect: Genes. 2.
And therefore when he had finished and accomplished his works in six days,
Moses says, [Thus the heavens and the earth were finished, and all the host of
them.] But if we will farther proceed in the consideration of this number of
six: we shall see how by the triangled or three-square figure thereof, it does
properly accord with the creation of the world. For the base or foundation is
the number of three, the point a unity, and the number of two is the mean
between both, as appears in this figure pyramid of balls Now every work
proceeds from the three persons in the Godhead to the unity, from which the
outward works (performed in time) are inseperable: they tend also to an end, to
which all things address themselves: and the passage to proceed thither, is
the number of two, which we may properly attribute to the matter first created
by God, to form thereof all his works. For the first beginning of the
production and order of creatures was the matter, which in respect of number
represents the nature of the binarie, and seems to be reduced to the unity,
by the form, which bears the shape of the ternary: so that on every side of
the premised figure of the number of six, the ternarie tends to the unity
by the binarie. And by this consideration we may make way to the most high
contemplation of the number of seven, Of the number of seven and his
excellency.
attributed to the rest of the Lord. For we make no doubt, that when we shall
be all reduced to the unity, as we took our original from it, then shall the
rest of the sabbath ensue, that is figured by the seventh day; wherein it is
said that God ceased from his works: and which shuts up and closes the
course and circle of all days. Now that this number of seven has been much
reverenced by men of ancient times, we have many witnesses. For the Jews
because of the sabbath (as Saint Hierome writes upon Esaie) did honor it
much. And Aulus Gellius and Macrobius, upon the dream of Scipio, do show great
mysteries out of this number of seven, which they call full and perfect, and
attribute great power to it, in the sea, and amongst men. And the Pythagorians
(as says Chalcidius) commended it for the best, most natural, and most
sufficient number. Moreover it is composed of three, which is the first uneven
number, that cannot be divided by any numbers (for unity is no number, though
it gives all numbers the power to be numbered) and of four, which is a full
even number, and the first double number of all others. For this cause the
number of seven is oftentimes used for universal and general, and to signify
perfection. Prouer. 24.
As it is written [The just shall fall seven times a day, and shall rise
againe] that is, how often, or how many times soever he falls, Psalm. 119.
he shall not perish. Again [I will praise thee seven times a day] which in an
other place is thus spoken [His praise is ever in my mouth. Psalm. 34.
] And we may find many places in holy Scriptures, wherein the number of seven
has customably been used for the vniuersalnes of any thing whatsoever, and to
demonstrate a perfection. And so does saint John in the Apocalypse, ^poc. 1.
writing to the seven churches, and speaking of the seven spirits, which are
before the throne of God. For it is certain, that he compriseth there all the
universal church, and proposes God in his Majesty, accompanied with
innumerable blessed angels. But among all the great mysteries, which the
ancients have acknowledged to be concealed in the seventh day, by which the
rest of the Lord is recommended after his work perfected and finished, this is
the most notable, by which they teach us, ^he true signi^^tion of the ^^^baoth
day.
that this Sabbath day signifies the repose of those, which rest in the Lord,
even as the joy of the house betokens the joy of those which rejoice therein,
although that not the house it self, but something else do make them joyful:
and like as (the effect being signified by the efficient cause) an epistle is
called joyful, to declare the pleasure of those, whom it delights by reading
thereof. Likewise when the Scripture recounteth, that God rested, we must not
take it childishly, as if he (who by an intelligible and eternal word spoke,
and it was made) had travailed in his work: but understanding by this manner
of speech, that God ceased from all work, because he no more created any new
kinds of creatures; we may conveniently refer his rest, to the rest of
those, whom he himself causes to remain in eternal rest, after that he
has first drawn them to himself by faith in this life. Whereas also the
prophet having made mention in each of the six precedent days of the
creation, of evening and morning, does mention no such matter of the seventh
day: it seems he would signify, that this Sabbath day was ordained to
represent the great and last day of everlasting rest, wherein there should be
no more any such distinction of evening and morning, nor of day and night, as
now is: but altogether light, by which we shall contemplate God face to face in
true and perfect felicity, such as eye has never seen, ear never heard, nor
ever has entered into the heart of man. Which we must doubtless believe was
figured to the Jews by the rest of the Sabbath commanded in the law: for
these names (Rest, and Sabbath) in the Hebrew tongue full of mysteries,
signify both one thing. In which matter we may farther note, how the sacred
history declares, that man was created the sixth day, which was the ^euen of
the Lords rest; for this agrees well to the principal thing, which the Lord
intends in his law: to wit, to admonish man, that he was not placed in the
world; but to return at length to him, who set him there: and to seek his
rest in him. Thus have we sufficiently spoken of the subject, which we first
entreated of: for else if we should fully prosecute the mysteries included in
the history of the creation of the world, we should have matter enough to
make up a very great volume. We will therefore proceed to the particular
consideration of the famous works contained in the glorious frame of the
world. And first we will speak of the division thereof, that we may afterward
discourse with more ease concerning the parts thereof. Then (AMANA) let us
hear you concerning this point.


Of the division of the universal world. Chap. 14.
AMANA. THe learned and venerable antiquity figureth, and makes the
universal world (to be) one, and threefold, as signifying and representing
(though very far off and much behind) the omnipotent, triple-one, most wise,
and most good worker, by whom it has been created, Eusebius. lib. 11. de prepar.
Euangel. Plat in. Phedro. Of the three worlds.
formed and ordained. For there is the uppermost world of all, which Divines
name, the Angelical, and philosophers call the intellectual world: which (as
Plato says) was never yet sufficiently praised. Then is there the celestial
world, or that of the spheres, which succeeds and is next the first: and the
third and last is the elementarie world which we inhabit, under the concauitie
of the moon. Now as this is the world of darkness, so is the Angelical world
the world of light, and the world betwixt both is tempered with light and
darkness. The elementarie world is designed to us by the flowing waters, and
instable substance: the Angelical by fire, because of the shining of the
light, and elevation of the place: and the heaven of mean nature is called of
the Hebrews by a name signifying the same to be composed of water and fire. In
this lowe-world life and death strive for the maisterie, by a kind of
vicissitude, change and rechange all things: but in the highest is eternal
life and permanent operation: and in that of the spheres, is certain assurance
of life, but there is changing of works and of places. The elementarie is built
of the perishing substance of bodies: the intellectual of a nature more divine
and excellent: and the mean heaven is compounded of bodies (but incorruptible)
and of a disposition convenient for the nature thereof. The third is moved by
the second, and the second is governed by the first: and this remains stable
in his work fit for his own nature, under the holy of holies, the Lord-God
almighty, which was, which is, and which is to come. And it seems that our
great prophet, of whom we have learnt the creation of heaven and earth, Exodus
25. The figure of the three worlds in the tabernacle o^ Moses.
has evidently described these three worlds in the structure of his marvelous
tabernacle. For he divides it into three parts, whereof each does lively
represent each world: so that the first being not covered with any roof or
covering, was open and exposed to rain, snowes, winds, sun, heat and cold:
and (which has more reference to our elementarie world) in this former part
haunted not only men both clean and polluted, temporal and ecclesiastical,
but also beasts of all sorts: and there was likewise, because of the ordinary
sacrifices and offerings, a perpetual exchange of life and death. The two
other parts of the tabernacle were closed on every side; and defended from all
outward injury: even as neither the celestial nor supercelestiall world can
receive damage. Moreover these two were honored with the title of holy: yet
so, that the most secret was named the holy of holies, and the other simply the
holy or sacred. So likewise the sphericall world is holy, because that it
perseuering in the order, which was appointed it by the sovereign creator,
has in it no fault or crime: but the Angelical is even the most holy and most
divine, wherein the blessed souls incessantly resound this song. [Thou art
worthy, Apocal. 4.
O Lord, to receive honor, and glory, and power: for thou have created all
things; and for thy wills sake they are and have been created.] But moreover, if
we consider how the last part of the tabernacle was common to men and to
beasts: how the second all shining with the splendour of the gold, was lighted
with the candlestick divided into seven lamps (which, as many Greek, Latin
and Hebrew interpreters will have, do signify the seven planets;) and how in
the third the most holy were the winged Cherubins: should we not say that these
three parts manifest unto our sight three worlds? To wit, this which men and
all kind of creatures frequent: the celestial where the planets shine, and
give light: and the supercelestiall which is the dwelling and abode of the
blessed Angels, the way to which has been opened by the cross, and bloodshed
of our Savior Jesus Christ, true God and true man, as the veil of the temple,
by which the holy of holies, being a type of the angelical world, was
separated from the other parts thereof, renting and tearing at the death of
our Savior, was a certain sacrament to us? Matthew. 27. Luke. 23. Psalm. 18.
Genes. 3.
For thereby we had assurance, that from thencefoorth was free access granted
man to the kingdom of God (of God, I say, who flies above the cherubins)
through the very same entrance, that from the beginning for the since of the
first man, had been barred up by the laws of justice.

Thus have we many notable things concerning the division of the universal
world, Why the triple is called one.
which we may also call [One,] not only because the three worlds do proceed of
one only and self cause, and tend to the like end; or else because being duly
tempered by numbers, they are joined together by an harmonious accord and
affinity of nature, and by ordinary succession of degrees: but also because
that that which is in all the three is likewise comprised in one of them, and
that there is not one, wherein all things, which are in the other three, do
not remain. It is most certain, that that which remains in this low world,
is in the uppermost of far better stuff: and that which is in those above,
is seen also in this of far worse condition, and as it were of a bastard
and sophistical nature. For here heat is an elementarie quality, in heaven
it is an heating virtue; and in the Angelical thoughts, an Idea and exemplarie
form. Or to show this more clearly; we have with us in this base world the
fire, which is an element: the sun in heaven is a fire: in the
supercelestiall region the seraphicke, or burning intellect is another fire.
But let us note how much they differ: The element burns; the celestial fire
quickneth, and the supercelestiall is embraced by love. There is also here
below water; and so there is another water above being motresse and mistress
of this below, which is the moon, in the first circle of heaven; but the
cherubin, or cleere-sighted spiritual substances, are the waters that flow
above the heaven. And as touching the disagreeable condition among these three
kinds of waters; the elementarie humor quenches vital heat: that of heaven
nourishes it: and the supercelestiall has an intellectual apprehension of
it. Furthermore in the first world, God the first unity rules over the nine
hierarchies of Angels; like so many spheres, and remaining immooueable moves
them al unto him: In the celestial and mean world the imperial heaven
commands likewise, as a captain does his bands, the nine celestial spheres,
in such sort, that though they be moved by continual agitation, yet it
remains stable by divine power. So likewise is there in the elementarie
world, after the first matter being the foundation thereof nine spheres, or
circular reuolutions of corruptible forms: that is, three of things inanimate,
which first are the elements, then their compounds, and thirdly the means
between these two, truly mixed and compounded, but imperfectly: and such are
the impressions which appear in the air. Then are there three reuolutions of
vegetable nature, distinguished likewise into three kinds, as of herbs,
shrubs and wood of old growth. And lastly three other of the sensitive soul,
which are either imperfect (as the Zoophyta) or to speak English [creatures of
a middle condition between things sensitive and plants:] or very perfect; but
such as are within the bounds of the fantasy not reasonable: and in the third
place that which is found excellent in beasts, being capable of man's teaching;
a mean thing between man and beast, as the Zoophyta partaketh of the plant and
animal. But it may be we have said more concerning these things then is
requisite for our purpose: I will only therefore add, that the mutual
vicinity and communication of the worlds, which we have here described, is also
declared in holy writ. For it is written in the Psalms, [In wisdom he made
the heavens. Psalm. 136. 2. Cor. 12.
] And Saint Paul says of himself, that he was ravished into the third heaven,
which afterward he calls Paradise. Psalm. 103. and 104.
We read also that the Angels of God are spirits, and his ministers a flame of
burning fire. And thence without doubt it comes, that oftentimes to divine
natures are attributed both celestial and terrestrial surnames: when as
sometimes they are figured by stars: Apocal. 2. Ezech. 1.3. Apocal. 2.
Apocal. 21.
sometimes by wheels and beasts, and sometimes by elements: as we sometimes
also appropriate divine and celestial names to terrestrial natures. For even
as the three worlds being girt and buckled with the bands of concord do by
reciprocal liberality, interchange their natures; the like do they also by
their appellations. And this is the principle from whence springs and grows
the discipline of allegorical sense. The original of allegorical sense.
For it is certain that the ancient fathers could not conveniently have
represented one thing by other figures, but that they had first learned the
secret amity and affinity of all nature. Otherwise there could be no reason,
why they should represent this thing by this form, and that by that, rather
then otherwise. But having the knowledge of the universal world, and of every
part thereof, and being inspired with the same spirit, that not only knows
all things, but did also make all things: they have oftentimes, and very fitly
figured the natures of the one world, by that which they knew to be
correspondent thereto in the others. Wherefore the same knowledge, and the
grace of the same spirit is requisite for those, who would understand, and
directly interpret such significations and allegorical meanings. Moreover
besides these worlds, which we have also distinguished, there is also another,
a fourth, Of a fourth world.
wherein may likewise be found all that which subsisteth in the others. And
this is (man) who for this cause as our doctors show, is understood in the
gospel by the name of every creature, then when Jesus Christ commands to
preach to men the good news, Mark. 16.
not to beasts nor angels, being nevertheless enjoined to publish it to every
creature. Likewise it is a common use in schools to teach, that man is a
little world, and that within him the body is composed of the elements, the
reasonable soul is celestial, the vegetable power common to men and plants,
the sense common to brute beasts, the reason participated to Angels: and
finally the image of God is therein seen and considered. But of him we have
sufficiently entreated in the second part of our Academicall discourses;
wherefore of this great universal world must our ensuing talk be. And as we
have divided it into three general parts, so must we particularly discourse of
them. First therefore let us say something concerning the Angelical and
intellectual world, and of the celestial intelligences or Angels: which
(ARAM) shall be the subject of your discourse.


Of the Angelical, and intellectual world. Chapter 15.
ARAM. NOw shall I have great need to say with the kingly prophet (Oh that I had
wings like a dove: Psalm. 55.
) wings, I say, of silver and shining gold, that I might fly up into the
supercelestiall region, where rests true rest, true peace and certain
tranquillity, which this wretched and worldly corpse cannot yield. Open mine
eyes you supermundaine spirits (but rather thou, oh father of them) and I shall
contemplate the wonder of your city, wherein God attends for those that
fear him; that which eye has never seen, ear never heard, nor any heart
woorthily thought upon. Well I wot that many call disputations and searching
out of the nature, and multitude of angels and their orders, vain questions,
and fit for idle imaginations; but surely they are secrets, which Saint Paul
himself who had been rapt up above the third heaven, has not only taught,
but has also protested, that he had there heard many things, ^ Cor. 12.
which were not lawful for him to reveal. And I am likewise of belief that
the full revelation of the angelical, and intellectual world is deferred till
the last day: yet will we here speak soberly thereof, and as briefly as we
can, according to that which divines have written, without any ways offending
piety, or christian religion.

When the holy Scripture speaks of the creation of the world, it is not
evidently expressed in what order, and how the angels were created. Genes. 2.
That the angels are God his creatures.
But forasmuch as it is said that God created heaven and all things therein
contained, it is most certain, that therein are comprised the spirits
celestial, as well those that through obedience have stood in their
integrity, as those, who rebelling against God have been cast out unto
destruction. Neither is it heereto repugnant that Moses reciting the Genesis or
creation of the world, makes no express mention thereof. For we see how that
in silence passing over all things which surmount our capacity; or else
covering them under the mystical sense of his words, for those whom God would
fully illuminate with the brightness of his holy spirit; he only entreats of
those, which we behold with our eyes, yea and that too in familiar and vulgar
sort, conforming himself to the rudenes of the people, with whom he had to
deal. And for this cause has the opinion of sundry great personages, and
namely of Saint Augustine been, Lib 2. de ciuit Dei cha. 9. and 1^.
that the angels have been signified either by the name of heaven, there where
it is said [In the beginning God made heaven and earth] or else by the name of
the light, which he says was created the first day. But howsoever; this is
doubtless, that the angels are the work of God. For the holy Scripture does
testify it in infinite places, with a most clear voice: and namely in the
song of the three children which were in the furnace, Dan. 3.
who having said (Bless the Lord all his works) in pursuit of the narration
of them, the angels are also named. And the prophet says, [You creatures of
the heavens praise the Lord, you which are in the hie places praise him. All
his angels, Psalm. 148.
and all his armies praise him.] Since also they are the ministers of God
appointed to do that, which he commands them (as the apostle to the Hebrews
says) there is no doubt but they are his creatures. Moreover the holy
Scriptures teach us, that they are always watching for our safety: that they
are always ready to defend us: that they direct our ways, and have care of
us in all things. Psalm. 34. Genes. 24.
And therefore Abraham promised his servant that the angel of God should be
his guide on the way. And so often and so many times as God would deliver the
people of Israel out of the hands of their enemies, Judge. 2.6. and. 13.
he was served by his angels to perform this deed: 2. King. 19. Isay 37.
as we read that the angel of the Lord slew in one night an hundred
fowerscore and five thousand men in the camp of the Assyrians, to deliver
Jerusalem from siege. But to stand no longer in so clear a matter; Matthew. 4.
Luke 22. Matthew. 28. Luke 24. Acts. 1.
I will only add this, that is said, that the angels ministered to Jesus
Christ after he was tempted in the desert: and that they assisted him in his
anguish, at the time of his passion; and that they published his resurrection
and his glorious coming.

Of the number order, names and offices of the angels. Dan. 7.
But to determine of the number and orders of Angels were (me thinks) above
all humane power. For Daniel speaking of the Majesty of the throne of God,
says, [Thousand thousands (of Angels) ministered unto him, and ten thousand
thousands stood before him. Psalm. 68. Apocal. 5.
] And David sings [the chariots of God are twenty thousand thousand Angels.]
Saint John also makes mention of ten thousand times ten thousand, and a
thousand thousand that give glory to God: Matthew. 26.
and Jesus Christ himself witnesses that there are many legions. In brief
all the Scripture reports of an infinite number of Angels serving God, whom
he employeth in the protection of his elect, and by whom he bestows his
benefits upon men, and does his other works. And for their orders although they
be not noted in express text of Scripture; yet the different names whereby
they are described have affoorded matter subject to Saint Denis in his
celestial Hierarchy, to Iamblicus in his book of Mysteries, and to many
other modern divines to set down nine orders and degrees of Angels: to wit:
The Seraphins, Cherubins, Thrones, Dominations, Virtues, Powers,
Principalities, Archangels and Angels: all which are celestial spirits, to
whom the Scripture attributes such and the like names, according to the
ministry wherein God commands them to serve, so applying them to our
infirmity. For they are called Angels, Ephesians. 1. Col. 1.
because God makes them his messengers to man: and virtues, because that by
them God declares the power of his hand: and Principalities, Dominations,
Powers, Signiories; because that by them God exercises his empire throughout
all the world: and his armies, Luke 2. Apocal. 19.
because as soldiers are about their Prince and captain; so are they present
before God, to honor his Majesty and attend his good pleasure, to employ
themselves about all things that he gaueth them in charge; yea sometimes they
are named Gods, because that by their ministry, they do as it were in a
mirror represent unto us the image of God. And we see that S. Dan. 12. 1.
These. 4. Dan 10. and. 12.
Michael is called in Daniel the great Prince or captain: and Archangel in S.
Jude. And Saint Paul says, that it shall be an Archangell, who shall summon
the world with a trumpet unto judgment. Daniel also declares that the Angel
of the Persians fought, and also the Angel of the Greeks against their
enemies: as if he would show, that God has sometimes appointed his Angels to
be governors of countries and provinces. Matthew. 18.
And Jesus Christ telling how the Angels of little infants do always behold
the face of his father, declares thereby that there are certain Angels who
have them in guard. Saint Peter also being miraculously come forth of prison,
Acts. 12.
and knocking at the house wherein the faithful were assembled, they that
could not think that it was he, said that it was his angel. Yet for all these
considerations, I hold it a thing of too difficult enterprise for mortal man
to constitute and appoint, which are the degrees of honor among the Angels, and
particularly to distinguish one from another by any name or title, and to
assign to every one his place, his abode and office. We will therefore leave
these things for curious heads to dispute upon. Yet will we hold our selves
ascertained of that, which the holy Scripture does openly declare unto us, and
which may best serve us to our comfort, and for the confirmation of our faith:
that is, That the Angels, Gods creatures, are disposers and ministers of his
beneficence toward us: and that such kind of belief is a certain argument
against Atheists, concerning the providence of God. Of the blessed estate of
the angels.
And for the blessed estate of these celestial spirits, it is certain, that
for as much as they have no whit swarued from the light, wherein God created
them, they remain in blessedness and felicity: from which they shall never
more fall. Now if we demand what this (felicity) is? Without doubt it is the
vision and contemplation of the glory and Majesty of God, whose face (as we
said even now) they always behold, and to whom they give praise without
ceasing; singing with a loud voice this song, as Esaias declares, Isay. 6.
[Holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hosts: all the earth is full of his glory.]
For there is no good in the reasonable or intellectual creature, through which
it may become happy, but God only. Wherefore the cause of the felicity and
happiness of the angels, is for that they belong to God, in such sort that their
nature lives in him, is wise by him, reioiceth everlastingly in so great and
ineffable a good, without death, without error, without impediment.

Against those which deny that there are any angels.
I know well some men be so fantastical, that they make it a doubt whether
there be any angels or spirits. The Sadduces in times past held this opinion,
that by the word Angel was signified nothing else, but the motion that God
inspireth into men, or the power, which he shows in his works. But there are
so many testimonies of Scripture which contradict this madness, and histories
both ecclesiastical and profane are so replenished with wonderful acts of
invisible spirits, as we daily see come to pass, that it is a wonder how such
ignorance could be in former ages, Error of some Philosophers.
and yet among many remains at this day. There have also been men of great
authority, who discoursing according to the reasons of Philosophy, have dared
to affirm, that God the first father and author of all things did only
produce one intelligence or angel: because, say they, being always of one
manner, he cannot by any natural reason produce diverse things. For this
cause therefore they would limite the powerful production of God, to one
only intelligence: which being created of God, had recourse to the first
thought, whereof it produced the second intelligence: and knowing it self, it
engendered the soul or moouer of the first sphere; and this moouer knowing also
his work, it proceeded to produce another: and so successively the cause being
varied in substance and operation, diverse effects were produced. Which obscure
opinion might have some color, if the first and almighty creator were
restrained to produce but one effect only: too absurd a thing to be imagined
in the father and author of the universe; seeing that not a particular, but an
universal effect is answerable unto him, to wit the world only, and the
entire estate of all things, as we have heretofore sufficiently declared. And
so it follows, that this universe, like a body entire in it self, and diverse
in the members thereof, was engendered by one only father and creator, and
lives by one only universal life. But we will combat against these
Philosophers, with more strong weapons, maintaining against them according to
the truth, How God came to his work.
that the sovereign maker came to his work without being tied by any natural
law, but free and frank in every work, as he pleases, being abundantly full
of all virtue, and of all manner of bounty and essential good will, proceeded
to his outward work: as these things have been declared unto us in our
precedent discourse. But this by the way; albeit the maxim of the
Peripateticks be, (though false) that the first cause works of necessity,
and that it is always of one sort, (which is most true;) yet does it not
therefore follow, that it should produce but one effect: seeing that of the
sun, which is ever the same, and of the earth, which being stable changes
not, are produced diverse effects, without any variety coming to their nature,
yea, and without any tilling of the ground. For herbs, flowers and roots of
diverse kinds do grow therein, and many other essences are therein produced by
power of the sun. But if these Philosophers tell me, that diverse effects
appear in these things, because that other particular causes do work therein
together: they have left the proof of this point to their children, to wit,
whether this variety proceeds from diverse causes, or else from the same
sun, fruitful and full of virtue to engender diverse things. Then with how
much greater reason may the first, true and eternal son do it, being
abundantly full of all fruitfulnes, light and life? How all things are in God.
For all things were and are in him, not as if they were seated in any local
place, but are lodged in his thought, from whence producing them he is called
their father and creator. He only free from the laws of nature without any
matter presupposed produces all things; yea and the matter it self altogether
full of fertility. But the second or natural cause (as Philosophers speak)
requires the subject and matter created by God, wherewith it works. And here
does that take place which the Prince of Peripatetickes says, [That in common
acceptance of the soul, it is convenient that it be made of nothing,] and
therefore also our Divines affirm that the angels can create no nature at all,
and that they are creators of things, no more then Gardiners of fruits. And
therefore all those, who have received the light of the truth, confess God
alone to be father and author of all things contained in heaven and in earth:
whether spiritual or corporal; visible or invisible natures. And let us never
think that in so great consonancie of the Universe, there are many creators:
nor that there is any more then one only king and prince, nor many things that
consist of themselves. For so should there be confusion and discordancie in
this great world, and so consequently easy dissolution. Thus much have we
thought convenient to be known, concerning the Intellectual world, wherein
having spoken of the blessed estate of those angels, which are not fallen from
God, my mind is, that we say somewhat concerning those who are fallen from
their first estate, which we call commonly Devils or evil spirits. We will
hear you then (ACHITOB) discourse of them.


Of devils and evil spirits. Chap. 16.
ACHITOB. IF we here discourse somewhat by numbers, we shall make more easy
way to that, which we would understand concerning the devils, yea concerning
every creature. I say then every number after the unity, attaineth to be a
perfect and accomplished number within it self. Now the unity alone totally
simple, does not pass from it self, but therein remains in indivisible and
solitary simplicity, because it is most fully content with it self, not
having need of any thing, being full of his own riches. But every number
being by nature a multitude, does by the benefit of the unity become simple,
because it is capable of simplicity. And although every number the more it
departs from the unity, the more it falls into a great multitude, having
in it self more disagreeablenesse, more parts and composition: yet is there no
number how near soever to the unity, being a multitude and made of unities,
that is one by nature, An excellent theological consideration by numbers.
but by composition. Now if we refer this to divine matters after the manner
of Pythagoras and Plato, we shall say thus: God alone, who proceeds not from
any thing, and from whom all things proceed is an entire, most simple and
indivisible essence; and which deriueth all that he possesses from himself:
and by what reason he subsisteth, by the same reason he is wise, he is willing,
he is good, and he is just. And we cannot imagine any essence, whereof he may
consist, but the same being which he is. But all other things are not the same
essence, but are through him, and therefore an angel is not this unity; for
so should he be God: or else there should be sundry Gods, which may not be
imagined. For what should be one, but the unity alone? It rests then that
the angel must be a number, which being so, on the other side it is one in
multitude, as every number comes of the unity by composition, and every
number is imperfect, because it is a multitude, that which is perfect being
entirely one. So then the angel being a number, that is, a creature, he is not
the same being it self, but he is only an essence, to whom the being arriueth
by communication, to the end that he may subsist. Neither is he understanding
it self, but so he understands, as being by a spiritual nature capable of
understanding. Those things that betoken imperfection, are incident to the
angel, as he is a multitude, or creature. But all that which is perfect and of
accomplished form in him, is by reason of the unity, whereof it is composed,
and which he receives, because that he is conioined with God (who is the
simple unity) from whom all being, all life, and all perfection is derived to
the creature. And therefore the philosophers, as also the wise Hebrews ^ll the
angels (separated Intelligences:) because, say they, Of the separated
intelligence
being separated from the most simple understanding, they receive a certain
composition in an essence and virtue, which perfecteth them of a Metaphysicall
and supernatural matter and form. Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 11. cap. 10.
For this point also, Saint Augustine teaches, that there is one only simple
good, and therefore immutable, which is God: and that by this good all things
have been created good, but not simple, and therefore they are mutable. Which
is manifest not only in man, Cause of the fall of the angels and man.
but even in some part of the angels, as this doctor of the church excellently
discourses in the most part of his work De ciuitate Dei. And these are those,
of whom the scripture teaches, that they have not remained in the truth: but
declining from their first state have overthrown themselves, and have been
made instruments of perdition to many.

But as we heard by our precedent speech, John. 2. 2. Peter. 2. Jude.
some have been in this error to believe, that the good angels were nothing
else, but good inspirations and motions which God gave men; so there have been
that thought, that the evil devils were no other, but evil affections,
through the suggestion of our flesh. Yea the impiety of our age has passed
farther: For there are many, Against those which deny that there be any devils.
which will not believe that there is any God or devil. And it is not long
since, that certain talk being moved between a prelate of this kingdom,
and certain others (concerning the devil) he blushed not to ask them if they
had ever seen any one, who had sold him spectacles, considering he must needs
be very old, since (they say) that he came first into the world. Now such
contemners of all religion, do evidently show their ignorance and beastliness.
For there was never any, I will not say Christian, but Ethnicke, nor Pagan,
endued with any natural knowledge and faculty of teaching, but has spoken of
devils and evil spirits, and have by many writings left to posterity infinite
testimonies concerning their nature and marvelous effects. Yea and the
doctrine of the Assyrians, Arabians, Egyptians, and Grecians confirms that,
which our most divine theology teaches us, concerning the evil angels chased
from the service of God. And amongst others Pherecides the Syrian describes
the fall of the devils, and says that Ophis which signifies the devilish
serpent, was captain of the rebellious army. Trismeghistus also the glory of
the Egyptians has touched the same fall. And Homer the most excellent Greek
Poet, and setter forth of mysteries, sings in his verses the fall of the
first rebel, under the name of Ate goddess of injury and wrong. The
Theology also of the Arabians in imitation of the Hebrew, confirms the same.
Yea the devils themselves have oftentimes confessed their own fall: as many
writings testify, and they know, who have traveled in the searching out of
ancient monuments. Wherefore this matter needs not long disputing, and it is
not our intent to satisfy the curious and fantastical of our age, to whom
nothing is pleasant, save new doctrine. Creation, and fall of the angels and
the cause of them.
But pursuing the Christian truth, we say that since the angels have been
created of God, and the devils have been all created angels, there is no
doubt, but they are his creatures, but not of the first condition, wherein they
were at the beginning. For they were created good like the other angels and
like man; but they have made themselves evil by their rebellion, pride and
sin (like as our first father fell from his native integrity by imitation of
them) so that of angels they have made themselves devils. John. 8.
And therefore it is written of them, that they have not perseuered in the
truth, that is, that they have not for ever stuck to God, who is the only
good of every reasonable or intellectual creature, Lib. 12. de ciuit Dei cap.
1.
as Saint Augustine does learnedly teach: adding moreover the cause of their
fall, when he says, that the creature which may attain to the gift of
blessedness, can not do it of it self, because it is created of nothing: but it
receives this benefit from him, by whom it has been created. Thereupon is
concluded, Sweet Christian doctrine to acknowledge all our good of God.
that immutable good is no other thing but the true blessed God: and that yet
all things which he has created are very excellent good, because they proceed
from him: but yet they are mutable, because they have been made not of him
(that is of his own substance) but of nothing. Because then the devils have
been created by God, we must understand, that they have not that malice, which
now we say is their natural estate, from their first creation, but for so much
as they have depraved themselves. For that which is damnable in them, they have
gotten it since they turned voluntarily from God. John. 8.
And therefore it is said that Satan speaks of his own when he speaks a
lie; because he abode not in the truth: Whereby it appears that he was once
in it. And in that he is called the father of lying all excuse is taken from
him, so that he cannot impute to God that evil, whereof himself is cause. 2.
Peter. 2. Jude.
Wherefore as the devils have declined from their first estate, God has not
spared them, but has bound them in the deep with chains of darkness, to
reserve them to the judgment of the great day, who likewise perseuering in
their first malice and envy, have always endeavored and shall continue to the
end, to be instruments of perdition unto men. And therefore all that, which the
holy scripture teaches us concerning them, tends to this point, that we
should stand upon our guards, to resist their temptations, and not to be
surprised by their ambushments, arming us to this effect, with all the armor
of God, as Saint Paul does thereto exhort us. Ephesians. 6.
For he that has a long time judged them, holds them so with the bridle, that
they cannot annoy those which are firm in faith to resist them, nor do any
thing, without his will and leave. 1. Pet. 5.
But he makes them serve for a time measured and prefixed, for scourges, as
it pleases him, in the execution of his judgments: giving them much power of
error in prodigies and miracles, to abuse those which turn from the light of
truth, to follow darkness and embrace lying. And thence spring the idolatries of
the Pagans and inuocations on devils, which have caused so many evils to lay
hold on man. For the purpose of the devils has always been to make
themselves to be served and honored of men, to the end that being associated
with them, they might likewise be a most provoking and effectual cause of the
judgment of God.

And yet how many do we see even at this day, Against those that seek after
devils.
who make boasts to have at their command such ministers of iniquity, whom
they think to disguise when they call them by the name of familiar spirits? I
will not stand here to disptue whether there be diverse kinds of devils, or
not, as many have written: but I believe the word of God, that all of them
tend to this purpose, to be hurtful to men. And though some conjure them by
the names of God, and so keep them bound and chained (as many brag that they
do) yet are they ever watchful, till at length they deceive their masters. I
will also believe, that they are not ignorant in ought, which either the
reasonable, or intellectual nature can comprehend concerning corporal and
temporal things: Lib. 2. de ciuit. Dei cap. 22.
yea (as Saint Augustine says) by experience of certain signs unknown to
us, they foresee very many things to ensue, more then men do, and do sometimes
beforehand tell the dispositions of them. Matthew. 8. Mark. 1. Luke. 4.
They are so skillful, that they said to Jesus Christ clothed with the
infirmity of our flesh [What have we to do with thee Jesus of Nazareth? art
thou come hither to torment us, before our time?] But (as the same doctor of
the church proceeds) because they do not contemplate the eternal causes of
times in the wisdom of God, but only conjecture of temporal things, by the
temporal; and of mutable, by the mutable; they are oftentimes deceived. For
they cannot behold the events of the eternal and immutable decrees of God,
which flourish in his divine wisdom, by such a direct insight as it has
been given to the holy angels: and they see not the thing (if we may term it
so) to which are fastened all causes, and whereupon they turn; neither do they
know the fountain out of which they spring: wherefore it comes to pass,
that as all things, which are not collected and concluded by their certain
principles, but by erring and estranged conjectures may deceive; so the devils
are oftentimes beguiled in those signs, whereupon they rely, and tell lies
even then, when they think themselves most assured to speak truth. But they
always tend to this point because of their malignant and envious nature, to
bring all hurt to men, which in the end they cannot avoid, when they forget
themselves so far, as that they will (against the word of God) take counsel
of the devil: an offense surely worthy of all punishment. Moreover I doubt
not, but as the pure and superior powers (whom according to the style of holy
writ, we call the good Angels, which is a word among the Greeks signifying
Messenger) do not commonly suffer themselves to be entreated by every one, but
do require and attend the cleannes of heart, the holiness of life, and the
commandment of God: so on the contrary the devils or evil angels, to whom
these two names do properly agree, this last according to doctrine of the
scriptures, and the other (Demon) of a Greek word, signifying (to know) they
do make themselves easy, and show men a kind of lying favor, to the end
that drawing to themselves by their craft and subtlety those, who require and
seek their aid in their occasions, they may put God in oblivion, and abandon
themselves to be possessed and governed by the devil, who is their prince. For
so in fine it comes to all those, which serve themselves with these ministers
of iniquity: To all magicians, soothsayers, necromancers, sorcerers, witches
and enchanters; Leuit. 2^. Deuteronomy. 18.
with whom the word of God does expressly charge us in many places, to have no
communication; commanding also that they should be rooted out of the earth. And
what woonders do they by the aid and help of evil spirits; often performing
that, which neither art, nor humane understanding can permit to be done? Yet
can we no otherwise name all their works, then very coosenage and illusion:
because they do it either in appearance only, or to the hurt and damage of
those, which allow and suffer them. Such were those miracles, as we read in
many authors to have been done amongst the idols of the gentiles, by the art
of the devils. Of whom Saint Augustine after a long discourse, adds these
words. [What shall we speak of these woonders, Lib. 18. de ciuit Dei chapter 1^.
Ier. 51.
save that we must flee out of the midst of Babylon? For this prophetical
commandment must thus be spiritually understood of us, to wit, that with the
wings of faith, which works by charity, we flee out of the city of this
world, which doubtless is the dale of devils, and of most wicked and impious
men. For by how much greater we see the power of evil spirits in these
inferior things, by so much the more must we most firmly cleave to our
mediator Jesus Christ, by whom we mount up from below.] And indeed it is by
his grace that we may discern the spirits whether they be of God, 1 John 4. 2.
Cor. 11.
or not; yea that satan cannot deceive us, though he were transformed into an
angel of light. Otherwise let us not doubt, that if we will harken to him, or
to his ministers and spirits, whom the fools of this age flatter with the name
of familiar spirits, that he will easily glide into our souls, to lead us at
last in triumph to his kingdom of perdition, where we shall dearly buie the
familiarity of so pernicious an enemy. Wherefore let us rather have always
in our heart, and in our mouth, that prayer which our Savior himself has
taught us, Matthew. 6. Luke. 11.
[That he lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil.] And let us
leave the magicians and sorcerers, which run to their own destruction, seeking
after the spirits, who lead them to the eternal Gehenna, which is prepared for
the devil and his angels. Matthew. 25.
But now since it is time to put an end to our talk for this day, having
surueied the angelical or intellectual world, according to the capacity of
our feeble spirit, we will to morrow entreat of the celestial world, or of
the spheres. Whereupon you (ASER) shall begin to discourse.


The end of the second days work.
THE THIRD DAYS WORK.
Of the celestial or sphericall world. Chapter 17.
ASER. IF we begin our speech concerning the sphericall, and of the
elementarie world, and entreat of them both according to the proper
definition, we shall do very well, to the end that that which we intend to
discourse of, may more easily be understood. The world then, What the world is.
which yesterday we called the threefold-one being contemplated with one view,
is the perfect and entire composition of all things, and the true image and
admirable workmanship of the Godhead. The greatness whereof is incomprehensible,
and yet limited: being also adorned with all bodies, and kinds of creatures
which are in nature. And the description thereof is properly called
Cosmographie, which does comprise in it the first part of Astronomy and
Geographie, that is, the order and reason, as well of heaven as of the earth:
under which we understand all natures and essences in them contained. And for
this cause it seems that God being father and author of all things, is
oftentimes called in the scriptures, creator of heaven and earth. And as the
Greeks did first call the heaven (Cosmos) because of the surpassing beauty:
so afterward the name of (Mundus) has been attributed thereto, because of the
perfect and most pure hiew and neatnes thereof. Again, because the world is a
solid body, that is full of celestial or elementarie substances; and because
it is of a round and orbicular form, performing a circular motion without
intermission upon his own poles, and round about the earth (as about the
center thereof) it is called a Sphere. What a sphere is.
For a sphere is a body contained under one round superficies, in the midst
whereof is a point, from which all lines that are drawn to the circumference
are equal. Division of the world.
But as we consider the world in this sphere, so must we also contemplate it in
two distinct parts, which manifest themselves by continual experience and
natural reason: to wit, the elementarie region, continually occupied in
generation and corruption, in change and alteration of all things, as well
living, as not living; and the celestial part, being of inuariable substance
and adorned with innumerable stars, as well fixed as wandering, which enuiron
the said elementarie region round about: so that the elements being diversely
intermingled, infused and proportioned are the material cause and nouriture of
all things: and the heavenly part by the light thereof, by the motion and
influence of the stars, is the formal cause of their figure, variety and
specificall difference, and from it proceeds their life. Now that we may
entreat of this first part of the world, which we have named in our first
division of the Universe (the world of the spheres) we must note, that this
celestial region (which philosophers call the fifth essence, thereby meaning
that it is of another, and more simple nature then the four elements) is by
them divided into eight orbs and particular heavens, one joining to the other,
and all concentricall, that is, having one common and self same center, to
wit, that of all the world; and of these heavens the greatest does enuiron, and
by a sphericall order enclose within it that which is next and less then it
self, being each discerned by the proper and particular motion of those stars
which they contain: all which motions do vary one from another. And these
eight orbs or spheres are, the heaven of fixed stars, which keep an
unchangeable distance between themselves, and for this cause it is called the
firmament: then follow the seven planets, of which the sun and moon are
properly called Luminaria or great lights. Reason of the name of Planets.
And for Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus and Mercury, they are especially named
planets, that is wandering in their motions. Whereupon we may note in regard of
their names, that Astrologians to the end to make their doctrine to be more
easily retained, and for certain good respect and secret reason, making
themselves like painters to instruct the ignorant, have also named and
represented these stars by personages of diverse habits and countenances: as
likewise they have disposed under diverse figures the twelve signs of the
Zodiac, which are certain stars, appointing to one the fashion of a ram,
to another of a bull, to another of two twins, and so of the rest. So
likewise they have signified the images of heaven, which are out of the
Zodiac; one by a bear, another by an eagle, another by an harp; this by a
dog, and that by a dragon, and so of the rest. To the sun it self they have
assigned a proper form and figure, as also to the moon. And we see that
painters have always made the picture of stars with five beams, to denote
their twinkling light, though all of them do not glister so, but are of round
fashion, without points or corporal beams. But return we to our matter
concerning the heavens and celestial spheres, and let us speak of their order
and situation.

Of the order, and situation of the heavens.
The firmament, which is the eight heaven, as the highest and greatest of all
the rest, and as the uttermost ornament and beawtie of all the world, does
enuiron round about the heaven of Saturn; that of Saturn, the heaven of
Jupiter; that of Jupiter, the heaven of Mars; and that of Mars the orb of the
Sun, which possesses the middle place among the seven planets: then the
heaven of the Sun compasses round about the heaven of Venus; that of Venus
the heaven of Mercury; and lastly that of Mercury, the heaven of the Moon,
which is the least and lowest of all the rest, and placed next about the
elementarie region. And this number and order of the heavens is commonly
received of all Astronomers and Philosophers; and shows it self to be such
both by natural reasons, and by Mathematical observations. Moreover, for so
much as by the Astronomers ring and other instruments fitting for the
demonstration of this science, one may perceive that these eight spheres are
distinguished and separated one from the other, certain reason does thereupon
conclude, Of the first moouer, which is the ninth heaven.
that beside these there is a ninth, which is called the first moouer, which is
the guide of the heavens, and which by his own power and violence does carry
away all the others with it, being no whit governed by any lower circle, but
only by that intelligence which moves it, or else by the commandment of
God, to whom all motion is drawn, as to the first moouer, to the end that the
whole harmony of heaven be not confused as Aristotle in the end of his
Organon proves. True it is also, that some modern Philosophers do place
between the firmament and the first moouer a ninth sphere, Of the Chrystalin
heaven.
which they call the Chrystalline heaven, for that some stars are not seen
therein. And this is because that they cannot perceive, how there might be made
in the eight sphere, the motion called Trepidation or tottering of the fixed
stars if there were not a ninth heaven enclosed within the first moouer. For it
seems not likely to them, that the firmament which is turned with three
motions, should be joined to the first moouer which is carried with one only
course. For this eight sphere has one daily motion from the west to the east
upon the poles of the Zodiac, which is the circle of the signs, upon which
(according to Ptolomie) in each hundred years it runs one degree; or else
in sixty years, as others hold; then has it the foresaid motion of
Trepidation. Whereupon they conclude that there is a ninth heaven, that has
only a twofold motion, betwixt the starrie heaven and the first moouer, which
is only turned with one motion; to the end that in good order all things may
be reduced to the first moving. For as Aristotle in his profound Philosophy
says; it is necessary, that by most fit agreement and consent every thing may
be reduced to that, which is the cause thereof. But because Ptolomy, Hermes,
Aratus, and other ancients, most exquisite beholders of the heavens and of
their motions and aspects, are contented with the number of nine spheres, many
therefore reject the opinion of those which make ten: because that nothing
makes for them but only the motion of Trepidation, which, say they, may be
well considered under the first moouer, put for the ninth sphere. Besides
which, our divines do yet declare to be a tenth heaven, which they call
Empyreall, vital, flaming and divine, Of the tenth Empyreall heaven.
into which are received the souls of the blessed. And it seems that Plato
and his Academicks, especially Plato in his book of the world, does consent to
them. But this heaven and throne of God, cannot properly be reckoned with the
other nine. For they be mooueable, but this is stable and immooueable, they be
of one substance only, and this of another. Wherefore we may aptly refer it
to the Angelical and intellectual world, whereof we discoursed yesterday. And
if we may be permitted again to discourse by numbers, as we have begun; it is
certain that as the number of ten retains a double nature, because it does
partake with that number whereof it is the end, and with that other whereof it
is the beginning: so the tenth in all the prime kinds of things does consist
of double nature. For man, which is the tenth kind of things subject to
corruption, and at whom the other nine finish, is of a corruptible and
incorruptible composition. So the nine heavens end at the imperial heaven,
which in that it is material, agrees with them, but in dignity of matter it
does participate with the supercelestiall throne. As likewise they that speak
of the nine orders of angels, say, that they end in Christ their king, who
holds and embraces in all perfection both the nature of angels, and also of
God; to whom at last all things must be reduced, as to him, of whom, from whom,
and by whom all things consist.

Now that, which here we speak of the heavens, may likewise be learned out of
Moses, the prince of all Philosophers, or rather of the creator of all things
himself, who has spoken by the mouth of his prophet, as also by himself. For
after Moses had prayed the Eternal that he would be always with him, and
that he would by continual oracles instruct him, as there should be great
need, that he might rule such a number of people, and that he might give them
the law; [I will be (says he) with thee, and will dwell in the midst of thee:
And according to all those things, which I shall show thee, even so shall you
make the form of the Tabernacle. They shall make an Arc of Shittim wood,
whereof the height and the breadth shall be a cubite and an half.] Such as have
diligently interpreted this text, do amongst other mysteries find therein the
nine heavens aptly represented: for a cubite is six palms, then a cubite and
half hie and broad are nine palms. And again, when he commands that upon
the same arc he should make a crown of gold, which should serve it for a
covering, and which was of precious stuff, far above that of the arc of
wood, they would thereby make us understand, that the tenth heaven was figured.
Which for that cause is not numbered commonly with the other nine, but is
considered by our understanding to be the beginning of an other combination
and coupling. For ten as it does accomplish the other numbers, so is it the
original of the tens; so an hundredth finishing the tens, begins the
hundreths: So this covering of gold, otherwise called propitiatory, crowning
the arc, was beginning to a better thing; for upon the same were placed the
Cherubims, and there were obtained the merciful and favorable graces of God.
In such sort likewise the imperial heaven, though it accomplisheth and
finisheth the number of the nine heavens, yet is it the beginning of spiritual
and divine things, and retains an angelical nature; yet so, that it is
proportioned to the spheres, who are appointed to have a place. Again we have
heretofore heard in the general division of the universe, how in the partition
of the Tabernacle into three special parts, was very aptly signified that of
the world, being a threefold-one. How also by the seven lamps of gold ordained
to be set to the candlestick in the arc, might fitly seem to be represented
the seven planets shining in their spheres: as likewise by the body of the same
candlestick, out of the sides whereof proceeded six branches, to wit, three
out of either side, might be particularly denoted the sun, which is placed in
the midst of the planets, whereof there be three on each part in round form,
which like cups or vessels receiving influences from above, do confer them on
things here below, by which means sundry flowers do spring up. But because it
would be too tedious for us to compare all that which belonged to the making
of the arc with that which is taught us concerning the spheres, we will come
to conclude that there be nine Heavens: to wit, the first mooueable, by which
the supreme worker and first moouer of all, moves all things. Then is the
starrie heaven or firmament, by which the same creator distributeth his power
into innumerable instruments to perform such things as he executes,
especially by means of the seven planets, which have every one their heaven,
according to the order heretofore declared. And upon which, (according to our
yesterdaies speech) the Hebrew doctors, and many other divines do teach, that
certain spirits (which they call celestial, or separated intelligences) do
make abode, who being before the throne of God, reioicing in his presence, do
behold in his countenance as in a mirror, all things which may be
contemplated, and at the very beck of the prince of nature, do put his will in
execution, using the heavens as instruments by which, and according to the
number of diverse influences proceeding from all the stars and signs, here
below are produced with one concurrence, metals, stones, plants, and living
creatures. But before we more amply touch these things, which respect the
nature and admirable effects of the heavens in all creatures, we must first
entreat of their figure and motion, which (AMANA) shall be the subject of your
discourse.


Of the form and figure of heaven, and of the motion thereof as well general
as particular. Chap. 18.
AMANA. THat the heaven is generally and particularly of circular form, and
altogether round; the Latin name (Orbis) by which the ancients have commonly
called it, That heaven is of round form.
is a sure testimony unto us. So likewise there are many natural reasons,
which declare it to be such. For all the parts of the frame thereof do
consist of themselves, do sustain themselves, and do comprehend themselves,
not having need of any stay or joint, having neither a beginning nor ending
place. Moreover this roundnes of heaven may be known by the sight of the eye.
For on which side soever you behold it, you may see the half in our
hemisphere, as it does show it self: which could not come to pass in any
other figure, but in a round; which also is the most perfect, and most capable
of all other figures to be comprised in one selfsame circuit: and is
therewithal the easiest to move every way. And therefore it is not only
convenient, but also necessary for all the heavens and celestial orbs, of
which we before entreated, as well because of the perfection of their essence,
as by reason of their proper motions, which are circular, and correspondent to
a round form, and besides all this, because these spheres are placed one
within another, making their reuolutions upon diverse poles, and in diverse
spaces of time. Which could not be observed, nor the integrity of the whole
heaven maintained, if the celestial form were any other save round and
circular. Of the proper and natural motion of the spheres.
For the proper and natural motion of the spheres is circular, that is, framed
equally distant round about their center, which is the point in the midst of
the world, so that neither the whole heaven, nor any of the particular spheres,
does wholly abandon or pass out of his own place and situation, but only the
parts of them do incessantly change place, in that they turn about their
said common center. And therefore is this circular motion much more noble and
perfect, then that which is made by a right line, either mounting from the
center of the world toward the circumference, Of the motion proper to the
four elements.
or else descending from it toward the center: which motion is proper to the
four elements. For fire and air do mount upwards, but water and earth descend
naturally downwards. Also fire mounteth higher then air, and earth descends
lower then water, and each of these enuiron the center of the world, which is
the lowest place of all, and farthest from the circumference, which is the
highest of all. So then the circular motion is naturally due and convenient to
the most noble and most simple body, which is the heaven, and most necessary
for it: as it appears more clearly to us by the continual motion of the
stars, both fixed and wandering, which proceeds of the only moving of
their spheres. What stars are.
For we must note that the stars are nothing else but certain firm, clear,
and solid parts of their heavens, made in round form like the heaven, whose
motion they follow, which likewise receive their light from the sun, who is
the very source and fountain, whereinto the sovereign creator has put the
brightness of the whole universal world.

Now this circular motion of heaven is found by observation to have two
principal differences: that is to be made upon sundry poles and axes, and in
sundry parts and positions of the world, as also in diverse spaces and
quantities of times. Of the axis of the spheres and of the poles.
[We call that the axis of the sphere, which is the diameter that passes
through the same, upon which it is turned, and the uttermost points of the same
axis are the poles.] For the whole universal world has his proper and
natural motion like a living creature, and every of the orbs and particular
heavens have also a peculiar motion, like to the parts and members of the
whole great body. For which cause, as also for diverse other considerations
many learned personages have affirmed, that the world is an animal or living
creature. And amongst others Origin is wholly of that mind, who enforces
himself to prove it, as well by reasons, as by authority of holy scripture.
And therefore he says thus in his book of principles. [Though the world be
ordained to diverse offices, yet the estate thereof must not be thought to be
dissonant or any whit disagreeing. But even as our body alone is composed of
many members, Reasons of such as have said that the world is an animal.
and is contained by one soul; so I think we must suppose that the universal
world is a great and unmeasurable animal, which as by a soul is sustained by
the power and wisdom of God.] The Platonists do all with one mouth teach the
same thing. And among many reasons, by which they would confirm this point, we
will take only that of Plato in his Timaeus, which, me thinks, is most
excellent. [There are (says he) two motions, the one proper, the other strange
or exterior; now that is more divine, which of it self is moved, then that
which is stirred by the power of another. And this motion proper and divine is
in our souls only, from which the beginning of the other strange motion is
taken. Seeing therefore that all motion proceeds of the ardor of the world,
and that this ardor is not moved by exterior agitation, but of it own accord,
it is therefore necessary, that there must be a soul. Whereupon we gather
that the world is an animal, and that not without understanding.] Now if
thereupon any ask why heaven changes not, nor becomes diseased, nor dies,
nor fails as other living creatures do? The answer of Chalcidius in this
point pleases me very much, Notable difference in the works of God.
when he says, commenting upon Timaeus, [That which is instituted by God
without means, is free and exempt from change, from age, from sickness, from
oldnes, and from death.] And in this point agree all Academicks: as also might
be well proved by circumstance, if that be well considered, which the sage
philosopher Moses declares to have been produced by the creator, without
help or matter, and that which has been also performed by means of the
second causes. For though man was created and formed by the hands of God, yet
was he not made without dust or earth, which was a mean subject. But the
Eternal has made the heavens, and the whole frame of the world of nothing:
For which reason it might seem perpetual, and not perishing. For as we have
heretofore declared; though the heavens and earth must pass away, yet does not
this plainly conclude an annihilating of them, but rather a changing and
renewing. Psalm. 102.
For so speaks the kingly prophet, saying, [The heavens shall wax old as
does a garment, as a vesture shall thou change them, and they shall be
changed.] And of this consideration we may frame an excellent reason concerning
the immortality of the soul, because it was made without any means by God
himself. But leaving this argument, let us pursue that, which we began to say
concerning the principal differences of the circular motion of the heavens.

Wherefore the first and universal motion of all the spherick world, is that,
which we see is made round about the earth, Of the first, and universal motion
of heaven.
from the east by south toward the west, always with one and the same orderly
celeritie and swiftnes, and without any ceasing, which performs his course in
a natural day, which is divided into four and twenty equal hours, as is
plainly showed unto us by the ordinary course of the sun. So that the whole
heaven, and each of those celestial spheres, do follow the said daily
motion, though it be not proper to them but accidental, in that they are the
parts of the universal world. For (as we shall presently see) every sphere has
an other proper and particular motion. But this same, whereof we speak, does
in such sort by accident agree with all the parts of the world, that the most
thin and subtle elements, especially fire, and the superior region of the
air, are in like sort carried away therewith. So likewise does the sea, though
it enuironeth not the earth round about, in some sort follow this motion by
ebbing and flowing every natural day, not performing an entire revolution.
Wherefore nothing but the earth remains immovable, because of the weight,
and insensible quantity of it in respect of the whole world, as being the
center thereof. The stablenesse whereof is very necessary, that so both the
universal and each particular motion may be discerned; for otherwise there
should be a confusion in stead of harmony. And for this cause many have
supposed, that this whole Universe generally considered, is the first and very
true moouer of the universal motion, and not any heaven or particular orb. Now
for the second kind of circular motions, Of the second kind of circular
motions.
it is that which is proper to every of the eight spheres and celestial orbs,
which are the parts of the whole heaven, from the firmament to the sphere of
the moon. For each of these spheres (as is evidently perceived by the stars
enchased therein, which can have no motion but according to their heaven)
performs his own natural and peculiar motion, contrary to the first, and
upon other poles and axes, to wit, from the west by south toward the east. And
the entire reuolutions of those spheres, are done and finished in diverse spaces
of time, to wit, of the greater and superior more late, and of the less and
inferior (being next to the elements) more soon. For the heaven of fixed
stars, according to the most likely opinion and apparent observation of
Astronomers, performs his own revolution in thirty six thousand common
years, without bissext, whereof each contains 365. natural days: Saturn
the highest planet, in thirty years; Jupiter, which has his circle much
lower, in twelve: Mars in two; the Sun in 365. natural days, and almost one
fourth part of a day, which make up the time and space of a year. For one
shall always find, that number of days being run out, the shadow of the
sun to be such, as (if you mark it) was the year before, at the very same
instant, yea to the difference scarce of a minute. Of the bissextile day, or
leap year.
Whereby it comes, that from four year to four year, is reckoned a
bissextile day, which serves to make the year answerable to the course of the
sun. The revolution of whom, Venus and Mercury do near approach unto: and
for the Moon she makes hirs in seven and twenty natural days, and almost
one third part of a day: so that in so small time she makes as much way in
regard of us, as Saturn does in thirty years: because he is the farthest
from, and she the nearest to the earth, which causes her course to be shorter
then any other planet. Of distances between the spheres.
And this is the consideration, which has given occasion to many to cast the
distances and spaces which are between the spheres: saying, that there is
nineteen times so much distance between the Sun and Moon, as is between
the Moon and the earth, and so of the rest. Pythagoras himself, Pliny in his
natural history lib. 2.
a man very ingenious, counted by his calculation (as Pliny relates) that
there were 125000. stades or furlongs between the earth and the circle of the
Moon: and that from the Moon to the Sun there were the double of them; and
between the sun and signs of the Zodiac the triple. Now a stade (or
furlong) was measured by the ancients to consist of one hundred five and
twenty common paces, or else of seven hundredth and fifty feet. But so
certainly to determine of the dimensions and distances between the spheres,
should (me thinks) be too great an enterprise for the capacity of our
spirits. Yet may the curious by some infallible reason of Geometry, or rather
by imagined conjectures resolve upon it. And to conclude our discourse
concerning the motions of heaven, we see that though by the rapiditie and
violence of the continual motion of the first moouer, all the spheres are
carried away with it, in the space of four and twenty hours from east by
south toward the west, returning by north, or midnight toward the east; A
good cause o^ the motions of the spheres.
yet nevertheless every one of them has his proper and particular motion,
clean contrary to the universal, that is, from the west toward the east.
Which is chiefly done because that by the reuerberation of these contrary
motions, the air may be parted and dispersed, which otherwise would heap and
gather together, and become immooueable and heavy, because of the continual
revolution of the world, turning always one way. And besides these principal
differences of the circular motion of the heavens, all the planets have other
motions of farther consideration, which are called circuits of the great
revolution, and which do concur in the great year, which is taken for the
time when all the planets shall fully finish their courses together. But we
have said enough concerning this matter, considering the intent of our
discourse; wherefore we will prosecute as briefly as we may the other
particularities serving for the knowledge of the spheres, even so much as we
shall hold needful for our present history of heaven and earth. Then you
shall discourse to us (ARAM) of those circles which show themselves in the
sphere, and of the diversity and disposition of them.


Of the circles in general, and particularly of the Equinoctial and Zodiac,
and of their signs. Chapter 19.
ARAM. IN the sphere of the world are two kinds of circles demonstrated,
whereof some are named greater, Of the greater and smaller circles of the
sphere.
and some lesser circles. They which have one selfsame and common center with
the whole heaven, are called greater circles, and are one equal to another,
and do divide the globe into two equal parts. But such circles as have their
centers out of that of the sphere, are called lesser circles, of which those
only, that have their middle points alike distant from that of the whole
heaven, are equal one to another: being by so much the smaller, by how much
their center is farther from the center of the whole. And therefore they which
have their centers unequally distant from that of the heaven, are unequal, and
that is greater then the rest, whose middle point is nearest to that of the
sphere: and consequently the one is by so much the more unequal to the other,
by how much the center of the one is farther distant from the center of the
other. And it is to be noted that all circular motion of any heaven and planet
whatsoever, must be considered and measured by means of a greater circle: to
wit that, which is directly placed between the poles of the same motion, and
is equally distant from the same: because it is a circle of the greatest
circuit and swiftness, that may be designed by the same motion. Some circles
are mooueable and some are immooueable.
But we must understand, that among all the circles, there is one part
mooueable that is incessantly turning therewith, and the other fixed and
immooueable, serving for to discern the better the accidents and effects of
the sphericall motions and moving circles. First then to entreat of the
mooueable circles, as likewise to prosecute that which we have heard in our
precedent discourse, that there be two principal motions of heaven, whereof
one is of the universal world, making his revolution from the east toward the
west, and the other contrary from west to east, as is proper to the planets:
we must imagine in the sphere of the world two principal circles, to wit, the
Equinoctial or Equator serving for the first of those motions, and the Zodiac
or Ecliptic for the second. The Equinoctial then is a great circle, Of the
equinoctial circle.
dividing the total sphere into two equal parts, being placed directly
between the two poles of the world, and equally distant in all parts from
them. By the which circle is measured and considered the prime and universal
motion of the whole world: and consequently the time, which is nothing else but
the measure of the succeeding of the same motion, which is always of one
selfsame course and quicknes, and whereof the said circle is called the
Equator. Under which the sun directly coming (which is twice every year)
the days are of equal length with the nights throughout the whole world: for
which cause likewise the same circle is called the Equinoctial, that is the
circle of equal nights. And the poles thereof are those of the whole world;
about which the universal and regular motion is made: whereof that which is in
the north parts, is called by the same name, Of the poles of the world.
either the pole Artick, north pole, or septentrionall, which is always seen
where we inhabit, and about which there is a certain figure of seven fixed
stars, turning circularly, which is called the great Bear, or most commonly
the Waine. And the other pole opposite to this is named the pole Antartick,
south-pole, or Meridionall being toward the south, and is always hid from us.
For the second great and principal circle among those which are mooueable, Of
the zodiac.
it is nominated the Zodiac or Eclipticke, or else the oblique circle: and it
is that, wherein the twelve signs are placed of diverse names and figures,
being indeed obliquely placed in respect of the Equinoctial, and poles of the
world: so that one half thereof extends toward the north or pole artick,
and the other moitie declineth toward the south and pole antarticke. And this
circle is the very path way of the sun and rest of the planets, all which
keep their peculiar motion in the Zodiac, to the end to distribute their
influence and virtue upon the earth, for the life and production of all things.
Now the Zodiac both divide in the midst the Equinoctial, and is thereby
divided also into two equal halfes. Of the equinoctial p^in^ and solstists.
And the points of these intersections are called Equinoctial points, because
the sun being in them, they days are universally equal to the nights; as
also the points of the foresaid Zodiac, which are means between the said
Equinoctial points are named Sunsteads or Tropicks, that is to say, stations,
or reuersions of the sun: because that, it arriving about those points, the
meridian altitudes and artificial days do long remain in one estate, without
any notable variation; as also for that coming to the said Sunsteads, it
returns toward the Equinoctial. And thus the two Equinoctial points, and
the two Sunsteads divide the Zodiac into four parts, answerable to the four
seasons of the year: which are the Spring, Summer, Autumn, Of the four
seasons of the year.
and Winter. Of which, the Spring time begins at that Equinoctial point,
from which the sun by his proper motion, comes and enclineth toward the
highest point called Vertical. Summer begins at the Sunstead next
following. Autumn at the other Equinoctial: and Winter at the second
sunstead; so that the said Equinoctial points are called by the names of the
foresaid seasons. And because that every natural action has beginning,
middle, and end: Division of the zodiac into twelve parts called signs.
therefore each of these said quarters of the Zodiac is divided into three
equal parts, and so the whole Zodiac into twelve: which parts are named
signs, because they signify, and design the most notable and apparent
mutations of things here below, being chiefly caused by the yearly course of
the Sun along the Zodiac. Every of the said seasons of the year is likewise
divided into three parts, and the whole year into twelve, called months, that
is to say measures of the time, wherein the sun passes the said twelve signs.
And as the twelve months have been divided some into thirty, and others into
thirty one natural days; even so is every sign parted into thirty degrees,
and the whole Zodiac into 360. Then every degree into 60. prime minutes, and
every prime minute into 60. seconds, and so consequently into other
subdiuisions so far as one will. Wherein is to be noted, that this number of
60. must always be observed, because it may be divided into more equal parts
then any other number under 100.

Now forasmuch as the sun, according as it is removed or approaches near
the highest points called Vertical, does cast forth his beams more directly
(...) obliquely upon the earth: for this cause also the heat, and proper
action of the stars and planets is more forcible, or feeble in things here
below, and according as it finds them prepared causes diverse effects. Which
diversity is notoriously apparent from sign to sign. And therefore the
twelve signs of the Zodiac are called by certain proper names, extracted
from the nature and property of things correspondent with their said effects.
Of the names of the twelve signs and the causes thereof.
The first sign is nominated (Aries) because that the Sun then begins to
approach to the highest point, and the heat thereof does increase, which mixing
with the humiditie that the precedent winter had brought in, makes the
temperature of the air hot and moist, which agrees with the nature of a ram.
The second sign is called (Taurus) because that when the sun is therein, the
heat fortifieth it self, and consumes the moisture, so that the temperature
of the air tends somewhat to dryness, which seems very answerable to the
nature of the bull, which is of greater power then that of sheep. The third
sign is named (Gemini) because the Sun being therein, has his heat
redoubled: and amongst all kinds of beasts the males and females have
natural copulation, two and two together to engender one like themselves, and
to continue their kind. The fourth sign is said to be (Cancer) for even as
the crab goes backward, so the sun entering into this sign retireth back
toward the Equinoctial from whence he came, making his declinations
contrary to those of Gemini. The fifth sign is called (Leo) because the sun
being therein, by the redoubling of his beams, the heat is strong, and
dryness great, even as the lion is a puissant beast, of hot and dry nature.
The sixth sign is named (Virgo) for as the virgin is a weak creature, and of
her self barren; so the sun being in this sign the heat diminishes, and
dryness rules; whereby the production of things cease, and the earth
becomes barren. The seventh sign has to name (Libra) because the
disposition of the air is then in balance between the wasted heat and
new-begun coldness, and because also the sun being in this sign, the days
and nights are in balance between the decreasing of the one, and increasing
of the other. The eight is called (Scorpio) because that then the cold ruling
with dryness are great enemies to nature, and do corrupt the air, which has
the proper quality of hot and moist: whereupon ensue plagues, and other
dangerous diseases, which surprise the creature, like the venom of a scorpion,
which lies in his tail, and is engendered of corruption. The ninth sign is
named (Sagittarius) for the sun being in it, the too much weakened heat is
surmounted by cold, whereupon there ensue fogs and frosts, and other
alterations of the air, as hurtful to creatures, as enuenomed arrows. The
tenth sign is nominated (Capricornus) because that the sun entering
thereinto, is the farthest that all the year it can be from the vertical
point; so that by rigor of the cold mixed with dryness, which has then full
domination, as also by reason of the debilitie of heat, the disposition of the
air is melancholy, retaining the nature of a goat. The eleventh sign is
signified by (Aquarius) because then the dryness is surmounted by the moisture
now beginning, the cold nevertheless remaining: wherefore the air is cold and
moist like water, and disposed to snowes and rain. The twelfth and last sign
is (Pisces) because as fishes are cold and moist, following naturally the
water, having yet some little natural heat: even so is the temperature of the
air then cold and moist, having yet some heat growing by the approach of the
sun to the vernall Equinoctial point, so that the cold diminishes. And thus
much concerning the signs of the Zodiac, and the names to them ascribed, for
which cause the fixed stars, which are in this circle and comprised within
the said signs, both of the one side and on the other, have been painted
according to the fashion of the said beasts: and their influence judged from
the causes by us here declared; and not that the said signs have taken their
names of the nature and disposition of the said stars. And by this
consideration of the property of each sign in the Zodiac, we learn, that
by the introduction of one quality, ensues the expulsion of the contrary;
and by the augmentation of the one, the decrease of the other. Which must only
be understood concerning the qualities happening in the air, by the radiation
of the sun only, being strong, mean, and weak, and the disposition of
inferior things; without comprising therein the other constellations and
aspects of the planets, changing and greatly altering the said disposition of
the air: neither do we touch the opinions of professors of judicial
Astrology, who for other reasons and principles of the said art, attribute to
the same signs other qualities then those that we have expressed. But from
them we may extract four triplicities, which make the twelve signs
correspond with the four elements: to wit, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, with the fire:
Pisces, Aries, and Taurus, with the air: Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius,
with water: and Virgo, Libra, and Scorpio, with earth. Now must we pursue our
purpose concerning the circles of the sphere, as well great as small, mooueable
as immooueable: the treatise whereof (ACHITOB) I refer to you.


Of the two great circles named Colures, and of the four less circles and
parallels, of the five Zones of the world and immooueable circles. Chap. 20.
ACHITOB. BEsides the two principal mooueable circles which have been
declared unto us in the precedent speech, there are also demonstrated in the
sphere two other great circles; whereof one passes by the Equinoctial points,
and the other by the Solstists or sunsteads and poles of the Zodiac, and both
by the poles of the world, where they are divided into three angles. And by
this means they part as well the Equinoctial as the Zodiac into four
parts; the parts whereof answer together in just and equal proportion. Of two
circles called Colures.
These two circles have to name Colures, that is to say, imperfect, because
they have an imperfect revolution in turning with the sphere upon the points of
their circumference, and not about their proper poles, like other circles. One
of them then is called the Equinoctial colure, and the other the Solstitial
colure. And the one passes by the circle of the Zodiac at the beginning of
the signs Aries and Libra, which are the Equinoctial signs: and the other at
the beginning of the signs Cancer and Capricorn, which are the Solstitiall
signs. And it is to be noted that the arck of the Solstitiall Colure comprised
between the Equinoctial and one of the Solstists, is the measure of the
greatest declination of the Sun: which must of necessity be equal to the
arck of that Colure, which is between one of the poles of the world, and the
next pole of the Zodiac. For by how much one greater circle declineth from
another, by so much the poles of the one are distant from the poles of the
other; because all greater circles are equal, and have one common center, and
do equally part themselves: and likewise their declination is just in the midst
of their cuttings or intersections.

We must also consider in the sphere four principal lesser and mooueable
circles; whereof the two first do limit out the whole obliquenes of the
Zodiac, and the declination thereof from the Equinoctial, as also the
conuersions of the Sun toward it. And these circles are nominated Tropickes,
Of the two tropick^.
that is, turning or conuertiue, because they pass by the two Solstists of the
Zodiac. That then which passes by the first point of Cancer, which is the
Sommer-Solstice, is called the Tropicke of Cancer, or sommer-Tropick: and that
which passes by the first point of Capricorn, or winter-solstice, is named
the winter-Tropicke, or Tropicke of Capricorn: being therefore one equal to
another, because they are equally distant from the Equinoctial. For the two
other lesser circles, Of the two polary circles.
they are those which be described about the poles of the world, by the poles
of the zodiac, limiting the deuiation or distance of the said poles: and for
this cause they are called polarie-circles, and do retain the names of the
Poles of the world. For one is named the North or Arcticke-circle, and the
other the South or Antarcticke-circle, being also equal one to another by the
same reason, as is understood of the Tropicks. And you must note that these
said four lesser circles do divide the whole sphere into five parts or
principal regions, commonly called Zones: whereto as many parts, or diverse
regions answer upon the terrestrial globe: Of the five zones of the world.
which Zones are different as well in figure and greatness, as also in nature or
accidental disposition, caused chiefly by the radiation of the sun. The first
then of these five parts or regions of the sphere is comprehended between the
two Tropicks, and divided by the Equinoctial in the midst; for which cause it
is the most ample of all the rest. The two extremest and smallest are comprised
about the poles of the world, within the Arcticke and Antarticke circles:
wherefore the one is called the North, and the other the South Zone. And the
other two are means between the greatest, which is middlemost; and the two
extremest or least, which are about the poles of the world, being larger
toward the two Tropickes, then toward the polary circles, which together are
the bounds of them. And among these five Zones which enuiron the earth, some
parts of them are become habitable, Of the causes which make some parts of the
earth habitable and others not.
and others not, by means of the diverse effects caused by the sun. For the
mean region about the equinoctial, is for three causes temperate. First,
because the sun being under, or about the said Equinoctial, it makes a
greater circuit in the Universal motion of the whole world, and runs faster
away; for which cause his heat makes not so great impression upon the earth.
Secondly, because it passes suddenly from the South to the North part, by
reason of the transuers disposition of the Zodiac about the Equinoctial. And
thirdly, because the days are there equal with the nights, whereby the heat
of the one is tempered by the coldness of the other. But about the Tropicks the
heat is excessive in Summer. First, because the sun is then in those
stations, wherein his shining endures longer upon the earth, and by reason
also that he performs less compass, and passes slowly away, whereby his
heat takes more deep impression. And besides all this, the days are longer
then the nights, in such sort that the heat of the one surmounteth the cold of
the other. For the two polarie regions and the circumiacent parts, it is
manifest that they are far out of the funs way; whereof ensues, that by the
too much oblique radiation thereof, heat is there exceeding feeble, and cold
great and intolerable. Finally, in the midst or about the two other foresaid
regions between the Equinoctial and poles of the world, the disposition of
the air is temperate; as well by reason of the commixture of the heat, which
is about the Tropicks, and the cold which is about the polarie circles, as
because of the mean radiation of the sun; that is to say, neither too
direct, nor too oblique. So then the middle Zone, comprised between the two
Tropicks is temperate about the midst, and intemperate through excessive heat,
about the extremities thereof: whereupon it is in this part called the
Torrid-zone, because the sun does always turn about it. And the two polarie
and extreme regions, are perpetually intemperate through cold. And the two
means are temperate about the midst; and in one extreme thereof intemperate
with heat, and in the other with cold. But thereof follows not, that all
intemperate places should be inhabitable, but only very hard, and difficult to
dwell in.

Hitherto has our talk been concerning the principal and mooueable circles
of the sphere: Of immooueable circles, and first of the Horizon.
now let us entreat of the immooueable. Even then as the Zodiac and
Equinoctial are the two chiefest amongst the mooueable circles: so are the
Horizon and Meridian amongst the immooueable. By the Horizon is meant a great
circle imagined in heaven, which divides that half of heaven which is seen,
from that half which is not seen: that is, which parts the Hemisphere under
us, from that which is above us. And to this same circle one of the poles is
always the vertical point, and the other pole is the point opposite.
Wherefore by how much each place has his point higher, by so much does the
Horizon of each place differ; for there are so many Horizons as there be
particular places. And therefore the Horizon of those, which have the vertical
point (that is, the point which is right over head) under the Equinoctial, is
named the right Horizon, because it must needs pass by the poles of the
world, and divides the Equinoctial at right angles one equal to another.
Whereupon it is also called a right sphere, because it seems to be rightly
placed in respect of that Horizon, and the stars to make their motion
directly by the universal motion of the sphere. But the Horizon of those whose
zenith is out of the Equinoctial toward the one or other pole of the world,
is called oblique, because that one of the poles (to wit, that which the
vertical point is next to) is elevated above the said Horizon; and the other
pole is so much depressed under the same: which for this occasion does divide
the Equinoctial at oblique angles, unequal one to another. Wherefore also the
sphere is said to be oblique, because it is obliquely placed in respect of the
said Horizon: and the stars turn obliquely in the universal motion. And
therefore it is evident, that all direct Horizons are of one selfsame
disposition, but amongst the oblique, there are as many differences of
obliquitie, as are distances between the vertical point and the Equinoctial,
or as the elevation of the pole is diverse above them. For the Meridian, it is a
great circle, which passes by the poles of the world and that point of heaven,
which is directly over our heads, wheresoever we are: and divides both the
Equinoctial and Horizon at right angles, Of the Meridian circle.
separating also half the sphere being east, from the half that is west. The
poles whereof are the intersections of the Horizon and of the Equinoctial. And
because it divides the natural day, and the artificial day (whereof we must
hereafter entreat) into two even parts, it is called the Meridian, or midday
circle, which is as much to say, as the noone-tide circle. For when soever the
sun is come from the east to this circle, above the Horizon, it is high
noone: when to the opposite point under the Horizon, it is midnight. All places
then, according as they are more oriental, or more occidentall, have their
proper Meridian, and they which ly alike east, or west, have one self
Meridian, though they be not alike distant from the Equinoctial. And you must
understand, that every Meridian is a right Horizon to some, and every right
Horizon a Meridian.

Now do I next proceed to the other immooueable circles of the sphere, without
which, no man can understand the making and use of many instruments, especially
of the Astrolobe, which represents the sphere reduced into a plain form. Of
these circles, some are called vertical, some parallels of heights: then are
there circles of hours, and those which distinguish the twelve houses of
heaven. Of vertical circles.
The vertical are certain great circles, which proceed from the vertical
point (whereof they are named) above the Horizon, which they divide into 360.
degrees, and of the number of those si the Meridian. But there is one
especially called the vertical circle, which in the right sphere is the
Equinoctial it self, to wit, that which divides the Meridian at right
angles, and the Horizon also in the same points, where it is separated from the
Equinoctial, which circle with the Meridian designeth the four principal
angles of the world, that is, the exact points of East, West, North and South,
dividing both the Horizon and upper hemisphere into four parts, one equal to
another. And the other vertical circles serve for to discern in what quarter
of the Horizon the stars rise and set, or in what part of the superior
hemisphere the same stars are elevated above the Horizon, and how much they are
distant from the Meridian, or from the foresaid principal vertical circle. Of
parallel circles.
Now for the parallels of heights, they be circles being every where alike
distant one from another, divided from the Horizon from degree to degree
toward the verticall-point; whereof the greatest is next the Horizon, and the
least of all nearest to the said superior point. Which parallels do divide
every quadrant of the foresaid vertical circles, comprehended between the
vertical point and the Horizon, into 90. degrees, and are also divided by the
same circles into 360. degrees. Moreover they determine or distinguish the
heights of the stars, which are above the Horizon, as well in the east, as in
the south and west. For by the height is to be considered of every star, you
must understand the arch of the vertical circle, which passes by the center
thereof, comprised betwixt the Horizon, and the parallel of the same, passing
also by the same center. Whereupon ensues, that in all vertical circles,
which are equally distant from the Meridian, the stars have equal heights,
which comes to pass in time equally distant, or reckoned from noone-tide.
And the greatest altitude that any star may have, is when it comes under
the Meridian circle, at what howersoeuer it be. Now must we look upon the
hour circles, and those which divide the twelve houses of heaven: whereof ASER
I impose the task on you to discourse.


Of the hower-circles, and what is done by them in sunne-dials: and of the
circles, which divide the twelve houses of heaven. Chap. 21.
ASER. Since that time is nothing else but the measure of the prime and regular
motion of the whole world, as we have heretofore declared, and that this motion
is measured by the Equinoctial, as out of our precedent speech may be
excerped: thereupon it is consequent, that the Equinoctial is the measure of
time, and that the entire revolution of the same circle comprehends the
natural day: whereupon ensues that the division of the one must needs be
answerable to the parting of the other. Division of the Equinoctial.
Now the Equinoctial is divided into twelve signs, and each sign into
thirty degrees, as is the Zodiac. Therefore parting each sign into two
halfes, the whole Equinoctial shall be divided into 24. equal portions,
containing each 15. degrees: which are the measures of 24. such hours of a
natural day. You must therefore imagine by the hower-circles, twelve greater
circles (therein comprising the Meridian) which pass through the poles of the
world, and by the distinctions of the foresaid four and twenty parts of the
Equinoctial: so that each quarter thereof, Of the hour circles.
comprehended between the Meridian and the Horizon, is divided by the said
circles into six of the foresaid parts, making together the number of four and
twenty howerly spaces, whereof the said circles receive their name. Amongst
which, that which divides the Meridian at right angles, passes by the
intersections of the Equinoctial and Horizon; and makes the distinction of
six hours, both before and after noone. So that there is no greater circle
which may be divided into four and twenty equal parts by the hower-circles,
but only the Equinoctial, except it be conioined therewith. Wherefore as
well the oblique Horizon, as the Vertical circle, which cutteth the Meridian
at right angles, is divided into four and twenty unequal parts; which are so
much the more one differing from the other, as the poles of the world are
elevated above, or under five and forty degrees: and though these parts are
unequal, yet the spaces of the hours are equal in the said circles, because
they proceed of the equal parts and divisions of the Equinoctial; yet so,
that the said equal spaces as well in the Horizon, as in the Vertical circle,
which are equally distant from the Meridian, are equal, as well on the one
side, as on the other: and are by so much greater the one then the other, by
how much they are farther distant from the same Meridian. Wherefore those next
to the intersections of the Horizon and the foresaid upper circle, are the
greatest of all: and in the same sort are the four quarters of the said
circles divided. It is to be noted, that every right Horizon is joined with the
hower-circle of six hours, without any division: and the Vertical circle
joined with the Equinoctial is divided equally as it is. But in the most
oblique situation of the sphere, where one of the poles of the world is the
superior point, or Zenith, the Horizon is right with the Equinoctial, and
divided like it by the said howerly circles, which are all of them then called
Vertical circles.

Cause of the diversity of dials, or quadrants.
Those dials therefore or quadrants, which are made to take the height of the
sun, are composed by diverse considerations: for some depend upon sections
made by the foresaid hower-circles, as those which are graven on the face of
the Equinoctial, and are therefore called Equinoctiall-dials: or else upon the
plain of the Horizon, which are named Horizontall: or upon the face of the
Verticall-circle, which divides the Meridian at right angles, which are
erected toward the south, and are nominated Vertical. In which three sorts of
dials, the hower-spaces are noted by straight lines proceeding out of one only
point, which represents the center of the world: and the Index or gnomon to
show those hours represents the Axis, upon which the heaven makes his
first, and universal motion. The other sunne-dials depend upon the coextension
or impression of the foresaid hower-circles: as those which are described upon
the face of the Meridian circle, and are erected toward the east or west,
being named Laterall, and can serve but only for the forenoone, or afternoon:
or such as are made upon the face of the six hours circle, hanging and
inclining toward the south, by the axtree of the world, for this cause named
hanging-dials. In which two sorts of dials the hower-spaces are designed by
parallel lines, and the Indexes by the axtrees of the circles, or else they
are described and erected perpendicularly upon the face of the said circles.
And in all the fore-recited dials, and such like, the hower-spaces are
unequal, and have notable difference one from another: except those only,
which are drawn upon the face of the Equinoctial: because it alone is divided
into even portions by the hower-circles; whereof the proiection in Plano must
observe equal spaces. And by consequence it is evident, that only Equinoctial
and Horizontall dials serve for all hours of the day at all times of the
year: and the Vertical only six hours before, and six hours after
noone: the hanging-dials ten hours; five before, and five after noone: and the
Laterall from sun rising till noone, or from noone till sun set. Moreover
it is manifest, that all these dials, except the Equinoctial dials, must be
described particularly according to the proper elevation of the pole, above
every oblique Horizon: because the hower-spaces and Indexes are diverse,
according to the variety of the said polary-eleuations. But the Equinoctial
dials may serve universally, in applying them according to the height of the
Equinoctial, above every oblique Horizon; because those spaces are equal, and
of one sort.

But breaking off this talk of dials, Of the twelve howses of heaven.
let us now entreat of those circles, which with the Horizon and Meridian
divide the whole heaven into twelve equal portions, which are named the twelve
houses of heaven. First then is to be noted, that as the sun and the rest of
the planets in performing their revolution, by their proper and peculiar motion
in the Zodiac, according to the radiation of the sun, being notably
diuersified from sign to sign, and according to the disposition of
elementarie substances, do imprint their influence and virtue diversely, causing
sundry effects upon the earth: so likewise these fair celestial lights being
turned every day about the earth, by the first and universal motion of the
whole sphere, do make the very like mutation of their power and influence upon
the terrestrial globe, by the variation of their shining; as may be marked
from sign to sign, either mounting above, or descending under the Horizon.
Circles that divide the twelve houses of heaven.
For this cause you must divide the entire sphere of the world in regard of the
Horizon being right, or oblique, into twelve equal parts or signs, which are
called houses, that is, notable mansions of heaven. Which is done by the proper
Horizon and Meridian, with four other great circles and particular Horizons,
passing by the two intersections of the said proper Horizon and Meridian
circle, and dividing every quarter of the principal Vertical circle (which
makes right angles with the said Meridian) comprehended between the said
Meridian and the Horizon, into three signs, which amount together to the
number of twelve. And these houses, or notable mansions of heaven begin at the
east side of the Horizon: and the first six are distributed under it, and the
other six above it, according to the order of the twelve signs of the Zodiac
and the proper motion of the planets, which is from the west, eastward. So that
by the Horizon with the Meridian, the four principal angles of the said
houses are distinguished: that is, the east angle, which is named the
Horoscope, being the beginning of the first house; the west angle of the
Horizon whereat begins the seventh house; and the midde heaven, which is the
third angle, and there begins the tenth house; and for the fourth the angle
under earth, where begins the fourth house, by the Meridian: Agreeablenes of
the twelve houses with the diverse seasons of the year.
Even so (as we have heard) as the colures distinguish the two Equinoctial
points, and the two Solstists or sunsteads of the zodiac, which are the four
notable points thereof agreeing with the four angles aforesaid. For the
Horoscope agrees with the vernal Equinoctial point; mid-heauen with the summer
Solstice: the west angle with the Autumn Equinoctial point: and the angle
under the earth with the winter Solstice: and so consequently the four
quarters of the foresaid Vertical circle are correspondent to those of the
Zodiac, which make the four seasons of the year, and each whereof is divided
into three signs, as also every quarter of the said circle into three houses
equal to those signs; so that the six houses, which are above the Horizon do
accord with the six septentrionall signs of the Zodiac; and the six other
houses with the south or Meridionall signs. And these twelve houses of heaven
are called by diverse names; for those four which begin at the four foresaid
angles, are named Angularie houses: the next four following are called
Succedent; and the rest Cadent. Moreover we must note that in the right sphere,
each of these houses comprehends one sign of the Equinoctial; because this
circle is joined with the foresaid Vertical: and all the circles which
distinguish them pass by the poles of the world, because they consist in the
foresaid sections of the Horizon and Meridian: which has caused many to err
in this point, who would make the distinction of the said houses in the
Equinoctial, both in the oblique and in the right sphere, lightly following
the authority of Ptolomie, not noting how that author had the sphere right to
him: so that in that respect he spoke well, referring the manner how to
distinguish the said houses in the oblique sphere to the judgment of all good
Astronomers. Finally it is to be understood, that every house is divided into
thirty degrees, like the signs of the Zodiac, and that by other great
circles, proceeding from the foresaid intersections of the Meridian and
Horizon. Moreover you must note, that every great circle which passes by the
said intersections, and by the true place of any star, which is proposed, is
called the Horizon thereof: for all the foresaid circles (as already has been
declared) are but oblique Horizons except the Meridian, which represents the
right Horizon. Then to erect the twelve houses of heaven, is nothing else but
to find the twelve principal intersections of the Zodiac, and of the
foresaid circles; which is performed by the ascensions of the arcks of the
Zodiac, above each of the said circles (whereof we must presently entreat) not
regarding which arck of the said Zodiac is contained in each of the said
houses. Wherefore (AMANA) let us hear you discourse concerning the ascensions
and descensions both of the stars, and of the signs of the Zodiac.


Of the ascensions and descensions of the stars, and of the signs and other
arcks of the Zodiac, and of the oriental and occidentall latitude of the
sun, or degrees of the Zodiac. Chapter 22.
AMANA. WE should reap small fruit and commodity of things, hitherto by us
entreated of in the sphere, if we should be ignorant in the ascensions and
descensions both of the stars and signs, and other arcks of the Zodiac,
according to the use and principal consideration of good Astronomers, who
mark what hour the stars ascend above the Horizon, or descend under it,
whether it be day or night: and how long time the signs and other arcks of the
Zodiac are elevated above the said Horizon, or depressed under it; not
respecting the simple apparition or absence of the said stars and signs,
which diverse do usually observe, and which the Poets do commonly mention, when
they would express and describe the seasons and months, and other parts of
the year. What the ascension, descension of any star is.
To enter then into the substance of our discourse, we must understand by the
ascension of any star, that we propose, the arck of the Equinoctial,
comprised according to the order of the twelve signs of the Zodiac, between
the beginning of the said signs and the oriental part of the Horizon, then
when the center of the said star attaineth to the same part of the Horizon.
And consequently the descension of the same star is the arck of the said
Equinoctial, comprehended according to the order of the said signs between
the beginning of them, and the west part of the Horizon, when the same Horizon
passes by the center of the said star. Which consideration is every whit
agreeable in each part of the Zodiac, or elsewhere. For the stars are in this
place taken for points, howsoever they be of notable greatness: wherefore it is
necessary that their ascensions and descensions should be measured and
discerned by the arcks of the Equinoctial, having some convenient beginning
common to all Horizons, as the vernall Equinoctial point is the beginning of
the signs of the Zodiac. And by the same arcks taken as aforesaid; and for
that the Equinoctial is the measure of time, one may know at what hour and
minute the star rises above the Horizon, or descends under it, or
attaineth to the Meridian circle, either above or under the earth, by the first
and regular motion of the whole world. And you must note, that the said
ascensions or descensions are called right ones when they are referred to the
right Horizon, or to the Meridian circle, which retains such qualities in all
obliquenes of the sphere, as the right Horizon does: and consequently they are
called oblique, when they are referred to the oblique Horizon.

For the ascensions of the signs of the zodiac, very necessary to be
understood, for to measure and know the quantity of the artificial days and
nights in all places of the earth, as hereafter we may declare: it is to be
noted, Of the ascen^ion of signs.
that the ascension of every sign is nothing else, but the arck of the
Equinoctial elevated together with the said sign above the Horizon; as the
descension is the arck of the said Equinoctial which descends under the
Horizon equally with the said sign: wherefore according as this arck
coascending or descending with any sign is more great or less; so likewise
the time that the said sign shall be elevated above the Horizon, or depressed
under it, shall be longer or shorter. And it is to be noted, that that sign of
the zodiac wherewith is elevated one sign of the Equinoctial precisely, is
said to have an equal ascension: I omit here to specify the accidents and
differences of the ascensions and descensions of the signs, which are
particularly considered both in the right and in the oblique sphere, and which
are common to the arcks of the zodiac, (which arcks are particles of the four
quarters of the said zodiac, and do begin at the Equinoctial points, and
Solstists:) for our intent is not particularly to discourse of every thing that
Astronomers teach concerning the sphere, and which cannot be understood, but by
demonstration of the material sphere, or by the figures placed in their
books, which it is necessary to mark diligently to conceive this part of the
Mathematics. But we will here summarily and grossly run over the most
notable points required for our instruction in the universal description of
the whole world, and of the most noble things which come to pass here below
by reason of the prime and universal motion of heaven. Yet may we not step
out of this matter without considering in the ascensions and discensions of the
sun, that is, concerning every degree of his way; which is the Zodiac, the
oriental and occidentall latitude of him; and which he obtains from degree
to degree in the Zodiac, either in rising above, or descending under the
Horizon. But for the other planets or fixed stars, no mention is made of them
concerning this point. Of the latitude of the sun.
It is then most manifest by that which we have already heard, that the
intersections of the right or oblique Horizon, with the Equinoctial and
vertical circle, which divides the Meridian at right angles, are in the midst
and equally distant between the intersections of the said Horizon, and of the
Meridian, and that they design the points of the true east and west. And
because that the Zodiac declineth from the Equinoctial partly toward the
pole arctick, and partly toward the antartick: the sun does not rise in the
true point of east, nor set in the direct point of west, but when it is upon
the Equinoctial points, which are the intersections of the Zodiac and
Equinoctial. For while the sun is in the north part of the Zodiac, he
rises and sets on the north side; and when he is in the south part, he
rises and sets on the south side: and that in diverse distances from the
true east and west, according as the true place of the sun declineth more or
less from the Equinoctial. The arcke then of the Horizon, which is between
the true east and the center of the body of the sun, when it is come to the
eastern part of the Horizon, is called the oriental latitude of the sun,
and that which is comprised between the direct west, and that same center when
it is in the west part of the Horizon, is called the occidentall latitude of
the sun. As also the latitude of the stars is taken from the Zodiac,
toward the one or other pole thereof. For all stars both fixed and wandering,
hold their longitude and latitude of the Zodiac, as of the Equinoctial their
declinations, ascensions and descensions. So that the latitude of the sun
both oriental and occidentall, is necessarily northerly one half of the
year, and the other half it is southerly. And likewise the oriental latitude
is equal to the occidentall in one day. And because the variation of each
latitude proceeds of the diversity of the suns declinations, they are
therefore such on the septentrionall part, as on the meridionall. Consequently
you must note; that in the right sphere, the foresaid oriental or occidentall
latitude, is such without difference, as is the declination of the sun:
because the right Horizon passes by the poles of the world, and shows both
the one and other. But in the oblique sphere those latitudes are greater, then
the declinations of the sun: and so much the greater and more different, as
the pole of the world is elevated above the oblique Horizon, and the place of
the sun declineth from the Equinoctial. So that the greatest are those of
the solstists, which do most decline from the Equinoctial: and besides these,
there are four points in the Zodiac, which have equal latitude both
oriental and occidentall; that is, two on the north side, and two on the south
side. But thus much may suffice concerning this matter, for our purpose. And
that we may not swerue from the substance of our former discourse, it will be
good for us to entreat of the days, both natural and artificial, which are
caused by the prime and regular motion of the whole sphere, with the nights
likewise, as you (ARAM) can manifest unto us.


Of the natural and artificial days, and of the nights, of their diversity
and cause. Chap. 23.
ARAM. AMongst the most excellent and note-woorthie things, which depend upon
the first and universal motion of the whole heaven, and upon that which has
been expounded in our forepassed talk; there appears next to be handled the
understanding of the greatness and quantity of the days, and the parts of
them, called hours; as also of the heights of the sun above the Horizon, and
of the shadows as well right as oblique. Beginning then with the days, you
must note, that some are called natural, some artificial days, which with us
are named properly days, though indeed they be but parts of natural days,
and so of nights. Of natural days.
Now the natural day is nothing but the time of the entire revolution of the
body of the sun about the world, made by the natural and proper motion of
the universal sphere: which revolution must always begin at the Meridian
circle, and comprehend the time, which is from one noone till the next ensuing.
But because the sun this while goes contrary in his own peculiar course;
the point of the Equinoctial, which is under the Meridian with the sun,
performs his revolution sooner then the sun it self. Wherefore you must
add to the entire revolution of the Equinoctial, the ascension being taken in
the right sphere, from the part of the Zodiac, which the sun has passed
that while, to have the entire revolution of the sun, and the true measure of
the natural day. For all accidents of ascensions, which happen in the right
Horizon, are common to every Meridian circle in the right or oblique sphere:
whereupon ensues, that the true natural days are unequal one to another,
both because of the proper motions of the sun, as also because of the said
ascensions taken in the right sphere. For the sun by reason of the obliquenes
of the Zodiac declining on either side from the Equinoctial (which only is
the measure of time) is irregular in his own proper motion, and performs not
every natural day a degree precisely, but sometimes a little more, sometimes a
little less. And though it should make a degree just, yet would not the
ascension in the right sphere be equal. For these causes then, the true
natural days are unequal. But this inequality is scarcely to be perceived
by vulgar judgment and sensible observation. Moreover it is to be understood,
that forasmuch as the motions of the planets, and the middle conjunctions and
oppositions of the sun and moon, cannot be reduced into tables nor
calculated, but by equal days, and even reuolutions of times: there must be
assumed for this cause, certain natural days, one like always to another,
which are called middle, or mean days, containing each the entire revolution
of 360. degrees of the Equinoctial, and above that 59. minutes, and almost
eight seconds of a degree: Which make up the quantity of the regular and
middle motion of the sun, correspondent to one of the said even and mean
natural days, according to which days the tables of the foresaid motions are
composed and calculated. And by this means the proposed term of an entire
year is reduced into true natural days: which of Astronomers is called the
Equation of the days.

Of artificial days, and nights.
For the artificial day; thereby is understood that part of the natural day,
which the sun makes passing from the east by south to the west, through the
proper and universal motion of the whole world: During which time, the sun
illuminateth the superior part of the Horizon; for which occasion, the said
part of the natural day is properly termed day. And that which remains
thereof, being comprised between the west to the east passage of the sun, is
named night: during which time the shadow of the earth is above the said
Horizon in form of a round Pyramid, which does then deprive that superior part
of the light and shining of the sun, whereby the darkness is caused, which is
called night. And also the two twylights, that is, Of the twylights.
the cleerenesse which we see before sun rising, and after sun setting, are
parts of the night. For the true artificial day begins, when the sun is
in the east part of the Horizon; and ends, when he passes to the west. And
these days and nights are called artificial, because that according to the
diverse and artificial situation of the sphere, and according to the true place
of the sun in the zodiac, they do differ in quantity one from another. To
understand which variety you must know, Of the diversity of the days and
nights.
that in all artificial days, of what length soever they be, there rise
above the Horizon six signs of the zodiac, beginning at the true place of
the sun; and the other six signs which begin at the opposite point do rise
in the night time: because that the zodiac and Horizon are great circles of
the sphere, which do always divide one another equally. And according as with
the six elevated signs, by day or night, any part or quantity of the
Equinoctial does arise above the Horizon, either more or less; by so much the
artificial days and nights are of shorter or longer continuance: so that the
ascension of the elevated signs by day, is the true measure of the artificial
day, and the ascension of the other elevated signs by night is the measure
thereof. Because then, that in the right sphere, together with the moitie or
one half of the zodiac, wheresoever it begin, the moity of the equinoctial
does precisely rise above the Horizon; for this cause therefore the artificial
days are equal to the nights in the said right sphere. So that all the
reuolutions of natural days comprised between the two Tropickes, are divided
by the right Horizon into two just halfes, and at right angles like the
Equinoctial. But in the oblique sphere the days are never equal to the
nights but twice a year, that is, when the sun is in the first point of the
sign of Aries and of Libra: which points are for this reason called the two
Equinoctial points. For in the oblique sphere, there are but the two halfes of
the Zodiac, comprised betwixt the said Equinoctial points, which may have
equal ascensions; because that the two Colures do never agree with the Horizon,
which cannot divide the zodiac and Equinoctial also into two equal parts
together, except in the same Equinoctial points. Whereof the one is never with
the Horizon without the other; because the said greater circles, are in them
divided into two exact halfes. But out of these Equinoctial points, while the
sun is in that half of the zodiac, that declineth from the Equinoctial
toward the Pole, which is elevated above the Horizon, that is, from the
vernall-Equinoctiall-point, by the Sommer-Solstist to the
Autumne-Equinoctiall-point, the artificial days are longer then the nights.
And during the time that the sun is in the other part of the said zodiac,
which declineth toward the opposite Pole, which is depressed under the said
Horizon, the nights are longer then the days: which inequality is so much the
more, by how much the sun is nearer to the Solstists, and the sphere is more
obliquely placed in respect of the Horizon. So that the artificial days
increase from the winter-Solstist, by the Vernall-equinoctial-point to the
summer Solstist; and do decrease from the same by the
Autumne-Equinoctial-point, to the winter-Solstist. I do not here particularize
the diversity of days, which comes to pass all the year long from degree
to degree, being a thing little necessary for the substance of our discourse,
and which they may easily learn, that will study upon the Astronomicall
sphere: But that we may finish this day without going from our sphericall
matter; let us speak somewhat concerning the hours of the day and heights of
the sun, and of his shadows; the declaration whereof I commit (ACHITOB) to
you.


Of equal and unequal, temporal and artificial hours of the heights of the
sun above the Horizon, and of his right and reuerse shadows. Chapter 24.
ACHITOB. Having entreated of natural and artificial days, it now rests
that we say somewhat concerning the parts of them, which are called hours.
Even as then there are two principal and great circles in the sphere, the
zodiac and the Equinoctial: so likewise are there two manner of hours: one
sort are equal and natural, taken from the Equinoctial, the other unequal,
temporal or artificial derived from the zodiac. Of equal hours.
Equal hours are spaces of time measured by the ascension or revolution of
one half sign: that is, of 15. degrees of the Equinoctial. For time must be
divided according to this circle, which is the measure thereof. And though the
Equinoctial be first divided, as every other circle, into twelve equal
parts, called signs, and each of those into thirty degrees like the zodiac:
yet nevertheless, because that each sign demands more time to be elevated
above the Horizon, then the facility of distinction and supputation of time
requires, therefore is every sign divided into two equal parts. And so in
the whole revolution of the Equinoctial are 24. half signs of 15. degrees a
piece, which make the distinctions and measures of 24. hours, divided by the
hower-circles, whereof we have heretofore spoken. Which hours we call equal,
as well by reason of the equality of the 24. half signs, as also because that
one requires no more time to be elevated above the Horizon, then the other.
And for that the Equinoctial is the measure of the regular and natural motion
of the whole world, and that every sign is measured naturally and commonly by
the said equal hours, they are therefore called natural and common hours.
We must know then, that the sun makes his entire revolution about the earth,
between one noone and the next following, according to the natural days in
24. hours, and one fifteenth part of an hour: because the same revolution
comprehends the whole Equinoctial (which is the measure of 24. hours) and
59. minutes, and 8. seconds besides, which are almost one degree, which is the
fifteenth part of the measure of one equal hour.

Concerning unequal hours, Of unequal hours.
they are referred to the zodiac, being in number 24. that is, twelve of the
artificial day, and twelve of night. And the day-howers begin at sunne-rising,
and those of night at sunne-set. And they be all unequal one to another,
whereby they have their name. Which that we may well understand, we must note,
that in all artificial days and nights, of what quantity soever they be,
there rises above the Horizon one half of the zodiac, comprehending six
signs, which begin in day at that degree, where the sun is; and at night in
that degree, which is diametrally opposite: And thus there are elevated by day
twelve half signs, and as many by night. And as one half sign of the
Equinoctial makes the space of an even hour; so one half sign of the
zodiac makes the space of an unequal hour. Whereby appears that in each
day and night there are twelve unequal hours in the day, and twelve in the
night. And that these hours must be unequal one to another, it appears in
this, because that the zodiac, by reason of the obliquenes thereof, cannot be
the measure of time, but the Equinoctial only. Wherefore it is necessary
that the time of the said hours should be measured by the arcks of the
Equinoctial coascending above the Horizon, together with every half sign of
the zodiac containing fifteen degrees. And for that the arcks of the
zodiac, which are equal, cannot have equal ascensions, even in the right
sphere: it is necessary that the said twelve hours both of day and night
should be unequal one to another; and by so much the more unequal, by how
much more the Pole is elevated above the Horizon, according to the diversity
of the artificial days and nights: whereof they likewise are called
artificial hours. They are also named Planetarie and temporal, for that they
are taken in the way of the planets, which is the zodiac; and also because
the ancients have assigned the time of the seven natural days of the week,
to the domination of the seven planets, attributed to the said unequal hours:
and have appointed to the said natural days, the names of those planets which
reign, the first unequal hour of the artificial day. But leaving this
discourse, we must now entreat of the altitudes of the sun, and of his
shadows, according as has been declared in our antecedent speech.

That we may better then understand the reason of shadows, we must first have
knowledge of the altitudes of the sun above the Horizon: because that the
diversity of shadows proceeds from the variety of those heights. Of the
heights of the sun.
Now by the height of the sun is understood the arck of the vertical circle,
which passes by the center of the body of the same sun, being comprised
between the same center and the Horizon, and distinguished by the parallel of
the same Horizon, which passes together with the same center, as heretofore
has been related. So that the height of the sun increases from sun rising
till noone, and proportionally decreaseth from noone till sun set. So that
the greatest altitude that the sun may have in an artificial day, is at the
noone hour: wherefore it is called the Meridian altitude. Which surmounteth
the height of the Equinoctial in the oblique sphere, by the quantity of the
declination of the sun, so long time as he is in that part of the zodiac,
inclining toward the pole, which is elevated above the Horizon: and is less
then the height of the Equinoctial, by the same quantity, when the sun is
in the other moitie of the zodiac, which inclines toward the opposite pole.
So that the least altitude that the sun may have, is under the winter
solstice, and the greatest is when he is in the summer solstice. But the sun
being in the Equinoctial points, his Meridian altitude differs not in the
oblique sphere, from the height of the Equinoctial. Whereupon ensues, that in
all the degrees of the zodiac, which are alike distant from the one or other
solstice, the sun has one selfsame Meridian altitude. And thereupon
ensues, that in all hours, whereof the one is before noone, and the other
after, and equally distant from noone; as are ten a clock in the morning, and
two a clock after noone, the sun has one selfsame altitude: which is the
cause, that in all sun dials, being composed by help of the said hours, as
the old quadrants are, the hower-spaces serve indifferently as well for before,
as after noone. And because that the altitudes of the sun vary according to
the obliquenes of the sphere, the said sun dials cannot serve generally, but
only to that polarie elevation, whereunto the altitudes of the sun have been
calculated. Concerning shadows, they are made by mean of solid-darke bodies
exposed against the sun: Of right reuerse shadow.
And of those some are called right shadows, and some reuerse shadows. The
right shadow is that which is caused by interposition of the shadowing body,
rightly erected upon the Horizon: and the reuerse shadow is that, which
proceeds from every shadowing body, equally distant from the said Horizon.
So that the right shadow reaches out at length upon the Horizontall
superficies: and the reuerse shadow is turned over perpendicularly above the
said Horizon. Whereby it is manifest, that right shadows are infinite, and
reuerse none at all, either at sun rising, or sun set. Again right
shadows decrease by little and little from sun rising till noone; and do
proportionally increase from noone till sun set: to which the reuerse
shadows are contrary. So that the least right shadow, and the greatest
reuerse shadow that can be in any day whatsoever, is at noonetide. And you must
note, that the sun being elevated above the Horizon more the^ 45. degrees,
every shadowing body being directly erected upon the said Horizon, surmounteth
his right shadow; but every reuerse shadow surpasses his shadowing body which
causes it. And when the sun is raised less then 45. degrees, the contrary
comes; for the right shadow exceeds his shadowing body, and the shadowing
body surpasses the reuerse shadow. But if the sun be precisely 45. degrees
high, then all shadowing bodies are equal to their shadows both right and
reuerse. From which equality is extracted the Geometrical square, which is
set in quadrants, or upon the back of the astrolobe, by which are measured (by
means of the shadows, or visuall lines, representing the said shadows) all
lengths, heights and depths, by reason that the two sides of the said square,
which meet at right angles in the center of the instrument, represent two
shadows one equal to another. Yet Geographers do commonly use but right
Meridian shadows, to know in what part of the world the regions of the earth
consist: and how far they decline from the Equinoctial: which shadows do
vary less about the Solstists, then about the Equinoctial points, like to
the altitudes of the sun. But we have said enough concerning this matter:
and to morrow we will prosecute our first discourse concerning the celestial
world, now entreating of the substance and nature of heaven, and of the
particular effects of the sphericall bodies in things here below, whereof you
(ASER) shall begin to discourse.


The end of the third days work.
THE FOVRTH DAYS WORK.
Of the substance and nature of heaven, and of the celestial bodies: and of
their continuance and change. Chap. 25.
ASER. BEing this day to entreat of the substance and nature of heaven, and of
the particular effects of the sphericall bodies in things here below; we shall
make more easy entrance thereto, if we first begin with some brief
consideration concerning all essences. First then will we propound this
principle, that among all creatures in heaven and earth, some are spiritual,
and the rest corporal. By the spiritual we mean those that have no body,
and cannot be perceived by corporal senses (as are angels, or devils, and the
souls or spirits of men:) And by the corporal, we mean all other
creatures, that are visible and sensible to the senses of our bodies. Now of
these, some are without life, Division of all essences, or natures.
and the rest live. And amongst those which are without life, there is a
difference in two points: One is, in that some have natural motion, and the
rest have not. And amongst those which have this motion, some are mutable and
corruptible, and subject to change, and the rest are immutable and
incorruptible, persisting always in their estate, during the course of this
world. Stones, metals, minerals and such like creatures, are of the number of
those that have neither life, nor any natural moving whatsoever, but like the
earth it self. The water, air, wind, and fire are creatures, which though
they have not life, yet have they moving: but they are subject unto
corruption, as are all other creatures composed of the elements, whether they
retain life, or not. For by reason that they are compounded of matters and
contrary qualities, they do at length corrupt and are changed, not in regard
of their first nature and substance, which perishes not, Nothing perishes in
regard of the matter.
though it change forms, but returns always into the same elements, whereof
every compound consists. And though stones and metals be exceeding hard,
yet are they not exempt from corruption, but are consumed by usage, yea even
gold and silver, which are the most precious metals and of so excellent
temper, that they resist fire. But the celestial bodies, whereof we entreat
now, consist of such matter, nature and substance; that being in perpetual
motion, they ever persevere in their entire and first form, not being subject
to any change in their bodies, nor any way consuming, like to the other
creatures, winch are under them.

Of the matter or substance of heaven.
But what this matter or substance is, has been much disputed on amongst the
most learned. For some Philosophers have affirmed, that the heavens, stars,
and planets which we behold, are compounded of the same elements, whereof all
other creatures are made; but yet of the most pure parts and portions of them:
And render this reason (viz.) that they could not be visible, if they were not
created of visible matter. For none can make a visible thing of an invisible.
Whereupon they conclude, that there is in the composition of celestial bodies
some portion of earth and water which are visible elements, and more water then
earth, because it is more pure and clear then the earth is, and because it
has motion. And in that they are most splendant, clear and mooueable, they
attribute the principal cause thereof to the nature of the air and fire, and
the most subtle parts of them, whereof (say they) they are singularly
composed. But others hold, that the heavens consist of another kind of
substance, then of the elements, which they name a fift-essence, of most rare
and different substance from the elementarie, and much more excellent and
noble. Others more cunning find in the heavens diverse and unequal substances.
Whereto may seem to accord that which Americus Vespucius has declared in the
discourse of his third Navigations to the Indies, concerning the magnitude of
the stars, making mention of three very great ones, called (Caponi) which are
not clear. And many other authors have noted diversity of shining and
cleerenes among the stars, and that some part of heaven is thicker then the
rest. But whatsoever may be subtly invented in this matter, it seems very
well, that heat is the substance of celestial bodies, which is inseparable
from brightness, Of heat, light and brightness.
which is a similitude and semblance of light, having the substance of it and
of heat so annexed with it self, that it is almost nothing else. So that the
light, brightness and heat may be taken for one self same substance and matter
of heaven, and of all the spheres. Which we must moreover note to be so
established and ordained by God, that the Sun, Moon, and all the other stars
and planets are no whit changed since the day of their creation, any more then
their said spheres: neither are they more wearied, worn, Of the continuance
and changing of the heavens.
or corrupted, for all the labor which they have performed by the space of so
many years, then they were the first day of their creation. For you must not
hold it for a change and alteration of their natures and qualities; in that
according to their diverse courses, the stars and planets are sometimes far
from, and sometimes near to one another: and that they have oppositions,
conjunctions, and diverse and different respects, according to the variety of
their motions: nor yet for the eclipses of the Sun and Moon: For such
changes are not in their proper bodies, substance and quality, but only in
regard of us, and our sight.

But to this constancy, stablenes and continuance of the heavens and the
celestial bodies, the words of the kingly Prophet in the Psalms may seem to
be repugnant, Psalm. 102.
when he says [ Thou (O God) have aforetime laid the foundation of the earth,
and the heavens are the work of thine hands. They shall perish, but thou shall
endure: even they all shall wax old as does a garment: as a vesture shall
thou change them, and they shall be changed. But thou art the same, and thy
years shall not fail.] Also it is written, Math. 24. 2. Pet. 3.
that the heavens and earth shall pass: That the day of the Lord shall come
like a Thief in the night, and in which the heavens must pass away like a
noise of a tempest; the elements must melt with heat, and the earth with all
the works that are therein, shall be burnt: That the heavens being set one
fire shall be dissolved, Esaias. 65. and 66. Apoc. 21.
and that we look for new heavens and new earth, according to the promise of
God: in whom dwells righteousness. All these testimonies yet, do not
contradict that which we heretofore said concerning the nature of the
celestial bodies. For we refer their stabilitie and continuance to the course
of all this great world, which God has ordained and established to endure,
till the consummation and ending thereof; in such sort, as he has declared to
us in his word. Moreover, it is one thing to speak of the heavens comparing
their nature with that of other visible and corporal creatures; and another
thing, when we compare them with the nature of God or of his word, as the holy
Scripture commonly does. Psalm 90.
For according to the doctrine thereof, a thousand years are as one day before
God: wherefore also this visible frame, both celestial and terrestrial, is
nothing else, but as a vesture which wears, waxes old and is clean done,
after that it is worn al out. And since that both heaven and earth are created
by the word of God; John. 1.
there is no doubt, but they shall fail rather then it. For it remains for
ever like God, from whom it proceeds from all eternity. There is yet
diversity of opinions amongst the ancient doctors about the understanding of
the holy Scripture, concerning the matter which we do now treat of. For some
indeed say, that the heavens shall perish with the rest of the world; if it so
please the creator, and if he will have it so; considering that all creatures,
both visible and invisible receive their essence and continuance, not from
themselves, but from God alone: Yet for all that do they not think that the
heavens shall altogether fail, nor that God will have it so. And others
maintain that though the heavens must pass and be dissolved according to the
word of God; that yet this defect shall not be an entire annihilating, but
only a certain change which shall come to them, by which they shall be
renewed in far more perfection. Whereto it seems that Saint Paul agrees,
Romans 8.
when he clearly testifies concerning all creatures ingenerall, that they are
subject to corruption because of the sin of man: and for that cause they do
attend with great desire for the revelation and redemption of the children of
God: because they shall not be relieved nor delivered from the servitude of
corruption, to be in the liberty of the glory of them, and restored to their
integrity, till the day ordained by the creator, for the acceptance of his
into eternal felicity. For thereupon ensues, that the heavens and celestial
bodies sigh and groan, attending together with the other creatures, this
blessed day to be changed, renewed and restored, which S. Peter likewise
teaches in the place before cited. Yea and some philosophers accord with him
concerning the dissolution of the world by fire, but not concerning the cause
thereof. For they refer it not to the sin of man, which has infected the
heaven, the earth, and all things contained therein; and put the world into
disorder and confusion: but to the nature of fire, which at last consumes all,
and whereof they give a reason by natural causes. There are also some
Astronomers, who affirm, that some change may be perceived in the spheres and
heavenly bodies concerning their courses and ordinary motions, and that they
are somewhat different from those which they have had from the beginning: how
they wax weary, are worn, and become old in their function, like to other
creatures: although this change does much less appear in them, then in the
other works of God: but we will leave this argument to the professors of
Astrology. And let it suffice us, for conclusion of this matter, to consider
what the stabilitie and continuance of men in this world may be, seeing that
all other creatures must receive a change, and have an end, yea the very
heavens themselves. For what are all people in respect of this great Universe?
And again, what is every one of them particularly, in comparison of the
generality of mankind, and of all those which have already gone before us?
But let us return to that which concerns the heavens and sphericall bodies,
considering that which does touch their motions, besides that which has been
already declared, which (AMANA) shall be the subject for you to discourse upon.


Of the motions ingenerall of their first cause, and of their union in all
nature. Chapter 26.
AMANA. Ear we enter into the declaration of the subject, which is now
propounded unto us to discourse upon concerning heaven, my desire is, that we
may call to our memory that which we have already heretofore heard of the
nature of the heavens, concerning the matter whereof they are compounded, and
concerning their beauty, stabilitie, and continuance. For so shall we reduce
the end of our discourse to that principal point, whereunto we have already
from the beginning destinated it; that is, so much the better to acknowledge
our God, and his providence, to the end to glorify him. I say then, that if we
considerately meditate upon the excellency of the celestial bodies, we shall
therein find a more express image of the eternity and majesty of God, and
of his divine and immutable nature, then in any of all the other visible
creatures. Moreover we may accept of them as a testimony and example, not only
of the immortality which God has ordained for men's souls, which are
spiritual natures: but also of that which he has promised our bodies after
our resurrection. For that he can accomplish his promise, we neither may nor
must make doubt of, if we believe that he is almighty: No more must we make
doubt of his will, since he has declared it unto us in his word. If then he
has been able to create the heavens, and the stars and planets, which in them
are, like splendant precious stones enchased in rings, of a matter so firm and
durable, that it remains incorruptible, and as it were immortal, whether it
be taken from the four elements, or be of an other quint-essence, as we have
already heard: It shall be no less easy for him to make our bodies
incorruptible and immortal, having delivered them from corruption and death,
to which (through sin) they were subject. Now let us pursue that which
particularly concerns the heaven in his motion, wherein we have notable
signs of the glory and bounty of our God.

Three sorts of motion.
To understand then sufficiently that which concerns the present matter, we
will first note, that there be three sorts of motion in the whole world. For
there is one which tends to the midst and to the center of the Universe, which
is in the earth the lowest of elements: which motion for that it descends, is
proper to the most heavy elements, and to such creatures as do most
participate with them. Then is there another motion contrary to the first,
which always tends from the midst, and from below upwards: and this is
proper to the most light elements, and to those natures which do nearest
approach unto them, and which participate with their qualities more then the
rest. But the third kind of motion is that, which neither mounteth nor
descends either one way or other, but goes round, ever turning about the
midst like a circle or a wheel. And this is that which is proper to heaven,
and to the sphericall bodies, being most certain, disposed, and composed by a
most constant and firm order. For though that all the elements, and all other
creatures which have motion, observe an order therein, yet is it more subject
to change, according as the inferior bodies are subject to the superior. But
those have a more certain course, because they depend not upon other bodies,
which are above them, but immediately upon God, without the means of any other
corporal nature. And therefore of all the motions, which are in all creatures,
that of the heaven and heavenly bodies is chiefest and most excellent. Of the
motion of the spheres attributed to the angels.
For whereas some attribute the motions of the spheres to the angels, as if God
used their ministry herein (as we have already declared) whether it be so or
not, yet this is most certain, that the heavens have their motion immediately
from God, seeing there are no corporal natures above them, whereby they may be
moved. For the angels are certain spiritual creatures, on whom if the
omnipotent has imposed this charge, we must be content to leave the
understanding thereof to him alone, since it is so much hidden from man. Now in
that the celestial bodies, and the elements, and all creatures have their
proper motion, wherein they continue according to the first ordinance
established in nature by the sovereign creator thereof; we are much to admire
both the cause and effects of such a constancy. I intend here to speak of a
near cause, which is a secret amity ingraffed into every creature toward his
own nature. For there is a love, Every creature follows his own nature.
an appetite or universal inclination in all creatures, which urges and
inciteth them to desire and search that which agrees with their nature: so
that there is none so insensible, which has not in it self this amity
innate, which ever pusheth it to follow the nature thereof: and for this cause
may we say, that all motions proceed from love. And passing further, we may
contemplate the love of God, as the eternal source of amity and inclination
of all nature, and as the first cause of causes: and we shall say, that in the
same love, God loving himself, proceeded to his work, which hitherto we have
celebrated, and do now mean to prosecute. For since that God is the sovereign
good, and that all goodness is by nature loving, it cannot be but he must
likewise love himself exceedingly, and consequently love all that which he
judges to be good, insomuch as it proceeds from him, who is the supreme
good, and the limit of all goodness. This love then not being able to be idle,
The love of God is the first of all motions.
nor yet the good which it loved, would manifest both the one and the other,
first in the creation of the world; namely in that of man; and then again in
the restoration and reparation of his fall. So we learn, that the first
motion, whereupon all the rest depend, is the love of God, which proceeds
from his bounty, which he would not keep shut up nor enclosed in himself,
but would manifest and communicate it with his creatures, whom he has created,
to the end that he might be glorified in them and by them. And as he loves
them for his own loves sake, and for that they were his work: so has he set
in them the seeds of love, both toward him and toward themselves, according
to the diverse nature, which he has conferred upon them. It is then this
natural love, which constrains them by a secret feeling of nature imprinted
even in those essences, which have neither reason nor understanding, to take
delight in that, which is agreeable to their creator, and to follow his
ordinance, tending all to him, and to that which he loves, because it is good,
and therefore good, being done according to his will; and because it pleases
him to judge it and approve it for such. Whereupon we may conclude, that love
and amity is the good, by which all creatures have an accord and agreement,
first with God their creator, and then one with another: and that upon the same
cause their conservation and perfection does depend. Of the union and accord
between all creatures.
Wherefore love must be the bond and union of all the world, which is an
universal peace and concord between God and all his creatures. For the
divine providence has so disposed all the order of them, that they be all
conioined one with another, by such love and amity, that even they, which
seem to be clean contrary, are allied, reconciled and united together by
those, which have more correspondencie between them. In such sort that we may
therein behold, a very pleasant and perfect harmony, like as in music;
wherein although it seems that the notes, tunes, and sounds be different one
to another; yet notwithstanding, there is such a moderation in them, that they
yield together a goodly concord and sweet melody, keeping their proportions,
times and measures. As then by such peace and concord the celestial spheres
follow the general and common course of the first, highest, and greatest of
all, within which they are contained and enclosed; performing likewise each of
them his particular course, without endommaging themselves, as we have
heretofore made mention: so do all the elements follow the heaven, and observe
their order after it, every one in their degree, from the highest to the
lowest, having their motions agreeable to their nature. And even as living
creatures have their agreements and conjunctions one with another, every one in
his degree, according to the covenant and participation of nature, which they
have together, and as they are either near to, or far off one from another:
even so is it in the agreement and consent of nature, which is between the
celestial bodies and the elements, and all creatures composed of them. For
this cause, as the angels retain the first degree among living creatures, and
then man the second next them, by reason that in his nature he nearest agrees
with the angels, and does nearest approach them: so does the heaven and
celestial fires retain the first degree among creatures, which are without
soul and without life, in their proper and convenient motions, according as we
have already declared. And as man does in some sort hold the middle place
between the angels and the most perfect beasts; so does fire betwixt the
heaven and the air: and as the air does keep the middle place betwixt the
fire and water; so the water is a mean betwixt the air and the earth. But
these things will claim a fitter place, when we come to entreat of the
elementarie world. Wherefore we will return to that which only concerns the
heavenly bodies: which for so much as we have said to be of the number of those
creatures which are without life, being contrary to the opinion of the most
famous philosophers: my mind is, that we should consider nearer of this
matter; because that by the excellent political and military order, which is
amongst them, it seems that they are not altogether deprived of life, reason,
and understanding: as (ARAM) we may learn of you.


Of the life, reason, and understanding of the celestial bodies: and of the
excellent political and military order, which is amongst them. Chap. 27.
ARAM. THis being true, that all creatures have a certain motion agreeable to
their nature, and a natural love which ever urges them to seek and pursue
that, which is most natural for them; as has been already related in our
antecedent speech: it seems that this can hardly come to pass, but that
there must be in them, some kind of soul and life, yea even in those
creatures, that are most insensible. And more I will say, that it is not only
to be presumed, that they have some kind of life, but also a natural
understanding, which we may properly name inclination; since there is no essence
but can follow his proper course and order in his own nature and peculiar
motions. For the stones themselves, and metals by a kind of soul and
vegetative life, do grow and increase in the earth: wherefore it seems that
they are nourished in the earth like to plants. Yet we must note, that to
speak properly, there is neither soul nor life attributed unto them. Four
kinds of soul, and life.
For according to the common rule of the learned, there are but four kinds of
souls, and of life: except by abuse of the language this name life be taken
generally for the estate of all creatures. But when it is taken in his proper
signification, the soul and life is only attributed to four kinds of
creatures: A kind of creature of a middle nature between plants and beasts.
that is, to herbs, trees, and plants, a nourishing or vegetative soul and
life: to * sensitive plants, as sea-sponges, oisters, cockles, etc. a
sensitive: to perfect beasts a soul and life cogitatiue or knowing: and to men
an intellectual or reasonable soul and life. Though therefore that stones and
metals do increase and grow in the earth, yet this is done by addition of
matter, which is converted into their nature, rather then by any nouriture
which they draw from the earth, as plants do. And therefore when we speak
properly of life, we must understand something more, then that which we simply
call [being.] And yet one may sometimes signify (the estate or being of any
thing) by the name of life, taking the word generally, and not in his most
proper signification: for the being of every creature is like the life thereof;
insomuch as thereby it is conserved in his proper estate. John. 1.
And so it may seem that Saint John means, saying, That all things were made
by the eternal word of God, and that without it nothing was made that was
made, and that in it was life: for here the word, Life, might be taken for the
being of all creatures. In this respect it may be permitted us to say, that all
creatures have life, but not like any of those, which are properly called
living creatures, and each one according to the distinctions by us before
alleged.

Understanding proper to men and angels only.
Now let us speak of the natural understanding, which seems to be in all
creatures. I know that to speak properly, understanding and reason cannot be
attributed but only to angels and men. For though all creatures observe their
order and course in their natural motions: yet do we not conclude that they
do this by understanding and reason, whereof they should participate with men,
but rather by a natural inclination, which God has bestowed upon them to
guide and direct them so. Yet it seems, that there is great difference
between the celestial bodies, concerning which we now discourse, and the
other creatures which are without life and understanding, considering their
well ordered motions and incorruptible nature, as we have heretofore showed.
For this is the cause why many Philosophers have taught; Opinions of diverse
touching the life and understanding of the celestial bodies.
that the heavens retained some kind of life and understanding: briefly, that
the world was an animal or living creature, for the reasons heretofore
alleged. And therefore some have supposed, that the celestial and luminary
bodies did nourish and preserve themselves by the moistnes and vapors, which
they attracted and drew up by their heat, out of the water and other elements.
And for faculties of sense and reason, they also considered the same to be in
them; because that they have their course and motions so well ordered and
comprehended one by another, that therein can be found no fault, disorder, or
confusion. Which so excellent order could not be kept nor maintained (it
seemed) amongst them, without great reason, understanding, and wisdom, yea
more great then is seen in all the men of the world together. For although
they were created partakers of these graces and gifts; yet so far are they
from maintaining such an order amongst them, as do the celestial bodies; that
contrariwise there is nothing but disorder and confusion in them, and in all
their actions. For these reasons therefore sundry Philosophers have concluded,
that as there are animals or living creatures in the earth, in the waters, and
in the air, so likewise are there in heaven; and that the sun and moon and
the other planets and stars are celestial animals, not only living, but also
participating of reason and understanding: Of the excellent political and
military order in the heavens.
yea some have named them celestial intelligences. And in truth they which
have good skill in Astronomy do consider how the Sun, the goodliest and most
excellent of the lights of heaven, possesses the middle place among the seven
planets like the king and prince of them, and which has about him the lords of
his court. For on one side is Mars the warrior, which has charge of armies;
and on the other side Mercury his Orator and ambassador. Then is there betwixt
him and Mercury the planet Venus, which is the day star, messenger of the
morning, which always attends on the sun, at his rising and setting: for
she rises every day before him, and sets every day after him; and under
those is the Moon. These two planets seem to be allowed him like mistresses
of his house, and huswiues of the most moist natures. Then above Mars is the
mild and benign planet Jupiter, to the end to moderate the vehemency and
fury of him. And higher yet is Saturn, who is cold, slow, and sad;
wherefore he may the better temperate the heat of Mars, and serve the sun
like a sound and well stayed counselor, near about his prince. Then may be
seen the high heaven, commonly called the firmament, which contains all the
rest of the stars, under which the sun marches in his royal magnificence,
accompanied (like a king) with his court and army, all in gallant order. Is
not this then a goodly policy, and like a royal court, a celestial common
wealth, and a brave army, wherein every star and planet keeps his rank and
order? And not only for these considerations, but even by testimonies of
Scripture, there are some will undertake to prove, that the celestial bodies
have reason and understanding. Deuteronomy. 32. Isay. 1.
For the prophets, namely Moses and Isay, sometimes addressing their speech to
the heavens, call them for auditors: as when they say [Oh heavens, heavens,
hear that which I shall speak, and give ear to my words] So that they
wonder, why these holy men should call to the heavens, if they had neither
soul nor life, Psalm. 148.
nor reason, nor understanding. And the Psalmist in his canticles does exhort
the heavenly bodies to praise God no less then the angels themselves. But now
let us tell them, that if by these authorities we must conclude, that the
spheres have in them a soul, life, sense, and reason: we might say the like of
the air, of the clouds, waters, fire, hail, snow, vapors, winds, yea and of
all earthly creatures, to the very plants. For the royal prophet inuiteth them
all to praise the Lord, as well as the heavens. Yea he proceeds farther, when
he says, that all of them perform the word of the Lord. And when Moses and
Isay call the heavens to record, they do as much to the earth, as if it had
ears to hear, and understanding for to understand. Why the word of God is
sometimes directed to insensible creatures.
We must then know, that the prophets using this manner of speech, do speak
to insensible creatures, and which are without understanding, the better to
move men to their duty, and the more to induce them to acknowledge their
ingratitude and rebellion against God, by rendering to him that honor and
reverence, which they should bear to his Majesty, which is of such weight and
virtue, that the very sense and feeling thereof reaches to all nature and to
every kind of creature. Whereby me must learn, how great reproach shall
redound to men, and the number of witnesses that shall appear against the^, if
they will be more deaf at the voice of God, then the deafest creatures, and if
they will be less moved with his presence, and hardlier acknowledge it, then
those his works which are farthest remote from reason understanding. And in
truth what shame may this goodly order which we whilome spoke of, to be amongst
the celestial bodies, every day breed in us? For if they had a soul, life,
sense, and understanding; we might less wonder to see them ever continue and
maintain such a constituted order. Because we might ascribe the good
government of them to the reason and wisdom, which might be resident in them.
But if they have neither sense nor understanding, by means whereof they might
attain to that intelligence and wisdom, for to know how to guide and govern
themselves: so much more just occasion has been given to the prophets to
appeal to them as witnesses and judges against men, and leave to look to
other creatures, seeing that they show in effect, that they do better
understand the voice and word of God, whereby they have been created and
disposed, and which has appointed and ordained the estate wherein they serve;
then men do, whom he has made partakers of reason and understanding. Wherefore
we will here note, that when the prophets do exhort the insensible creatures
to praise God, it is chiefly for two reasons. The first is, in keeping every
one their order, they glorify God after their fashion, and according to their
nature, because they are like preachers of his puissance, wisdom, and
bounty, and as witnesses of them, and of his glory toward men: and the other
reason is so much the better to induce men to praise their creator, as it
behooves them. But for the Philosophers, yea the Pythagorians and Academicks,
which proceed farther concerning the life, reason, and understanding, which
they contemplate in the spheres, saying, that they are replenished with souls
lodged in them, and by which many of our Divines also will have to be meant, the
angels and celestial spirits, who (say they) move the heavens: but what, and
how many there are of these intellectual forms in the sphericall bodies, he
only knows, Psalm. 147.
who (as David says) counts the number of the stars, and calls them all
by their names. I will only say thus much, that since every planet has his
proper force and influence upon things here below, it seems very fit, that
it should have his governing intelligence, which gives it the virtue to work:
considering that the operation cannot proceed simply from a body. But now I
enter into a new matter, the discourse whereof (ACHITOB) I impose on you.


Of the influence and effects of the planets and stars in things here below,
either to good or evil. Chapter 28.
ACHITOB. SOme might marvel, why christian philosophers do always (when they
entreat of the sphere) retain the names of the gods and goddesses of the
ancient idolaters; which the Pagan philosophers, both Greeks and Latins, have
long ago given to the stars and planets. In French the names of the days
are so, but in our tongue not.
But this should seem no more strange, then that we yet observe in the days
of the week the names, which were attributed to them by the said authors, and
which they have likewise taken from the names of the planets, except sunday.
For, because that these celestial bodies have been so called at the first by
those, who have most curiously and diligently searched them out, and left
precepts of the Astronomicall doctrine; therefore do these fond names yet
remain amongst us, like many other things taken from the ancients. But the
discourse is very great and of deep study, concerning the diverse properties,
virtues, and powers which Astronomers assign to the planets, above all nature,
yea and over all men: of whom making their predictions, they name one man a
Saturnist, another a Martialist, or Iouialist, or else a Mercurialist, or a
Venerian, or a Phebaean, Properties attributed by Astrologers to planets.
or a Lunatist. In such sort, that the diverse affections, inclinations and
manners of men, are by many holden, not to proceed only of the matter
diversely disposed (as there be some that esteem:) but also by the diverse
influence and sundry form, not in specificall diversity, but particular and
proper. And thence it comes, that Ptolomie and other professors of Astrology
do teach, that the stars and planets do give influence of good and of evil:
for (say they) by Saturn is infused a firm and stable prudence: by Jupiter, a
righteous justice: by Mars, a constant force and puissance; by the Sun, an
ardent charity: by Venus, a mild hope: by Mercury, a penetrating faith: and by
the Moon, a moderate temperance. Moreover, that by Saturn, as by a most grave
and sublime fautor, men are induced to the most profound mysteries of all
divine and natural Philosophy: That by Jupiter they are governed in a good
and due temper, so that they make and observe laws, and dispose all things
with equity, pursuing always that which is righteous. That from Mars they
receive the ability and power to perform any exploit, to the end to be
fortunate in their enterprises. That the sun bestows upon all, generation,
operation, and life; as charity (which is appropriated to him) adorneth all
the virtues, like life, and form. That Venus gives grace, cheerefulnes, and
love; by which men being moved do perform all high matters with delectation;
because we could not sustain the labor, which is in the study of natural
and divine matters, no not in temporal things, if love did not thereto inuit
us; wherewith being afterward recreated, we easily suppress the affliction
which continual thought in profound matters and of difficult understanding
does bring unto us. That Mercury makes us prompt, sharp and subtle in every
business, but chiefly in searching out of the truth, and in obtaining eloquence,
music, and glory. That the Moon in the foresaid effects of the other
planets, gives a more near and variable motion; so that she causes to be
correspondent to man (as to the end and image of the whole Universe) all the
lofty members of it. All these properties (I say) are attributed by sundry
Astronomers to the planets, in regard of the good which they cause to men.
Again, others acknowledge some of them to be the cause of many evils, and
those they call ill planets, not celestial. For they say that Saturn is
foolish, niggardly, difficult, Euilnes of Saturn.
inducing to dangers, fraud, mischief, treasons, violence, captivity,
banishment, loss, perjury, contumacie, wrath, hatred of all good, fear,
anguish, grief, burials, sorrow and loss of children; also that he causes
sorceries, empoisonings, and theft, and makes Magicians. Of Mars they say,
that he provoke to treason, war, Of Mars.
murder, boldness, rashness, pride, sedition, contention, rapine, ambushments,
woundings, flights, disloialties, villainies, foolish love, easy offending,
many cogitations, ill counsel; and that he makes princes violent, cruel,
inhumane, desirous of blood and slaughter, perjured, deceitful, inconstant,
cursing, and full of all wickedness, and that he foresheweth a misshapen and
impudent man: and that he is pernicious to birthes, causing abortiue fruit:
Finally, that in all parts of heaven he menaceth some mischief. For the rest,
I pass them here in silence, that I may not be too tedious in this matter,
which some Mathematicians and Poets ascribe to other planets, making them cause
of many other evils, according to the diverse constellations, where they do
contemplate them. But to speak my mind, we like Christians must believe, and
not think as many naturalists do (who in stead of acknowledging a God, do
forge to themselves an Idol of Nature, that it should be the planets or
stars, who like fountains or Ladies of virtues, properties and powers, give
influence to men of the foresaid qualities: but only that in disposing their
bodies, being compounded of the elements, upon which the planets work, they
serve to aid them to abound in virtues or vices, according as their mind
being moderatrix of all their actions, does dispose her faculties, to intend
good or evil. For this cause we say, that to those which want the gifts and
graces of Gods spirit, all things cannot but succeed badly, and the influences
of the spheres hurt them rather then otherwise, yea some more then other some:
as to the contrary, the mind of the faithful well instructed does correct the
naughtines of the stars, and delivers himself from all perverse inclination.
This is it, that the thrice great Philosopher Mercurius says, entreating of
those whom the divine power, whatsoever it was, had forsaken, leaving and
abandoning them to the evil (as he speaks) and all that, which was sensible
in them. For thus says he. [Of such the forces of anger and appetite, which
being well directed would cause every good work, turn into a nature deprived
of reason.] So then we learn, that very vain is the faith that is given to
the planets, to constellations, and to foolish diuinations and superstitious
prognostications of Astrologians. For true Christians fear not the signs of
heaven, nor their aspects and regards: but do wholly depend upon the grace of
God and of his providence, which turns all to the good of his elect.

Against judicial astrology.
And therefore though we condemn not true Astrology, namely Astronomy, yet
must we not approve the superstition and curiosity, which is in many
concerning that part of this science, called Judicial, which they hold for a
certain and infallible doctrine, by which may be foreseen and known the
events of men. But let us rather hold with that which Jeremy teaches us,
Ierem. 10.
saying, [Feare not the signs of heaven, according to the gentiles; for the
customs of the people are vain.] Which is as much, as if he had said, that
such curious observations full of superstitions, are frivolous and false;
belonging to pagans and idolaters, and not to the people of God. For this cause
also we have in the books of the other prophets many things spoken against the
predictions and prognostications of the Chaldees and Babylonians; Esaias. 47.
namely in Isay. For God, which is above all nature, has means, which men
cannot perfectly know, either by reason of their ignorance, or for that those
means are supernatural. So that it happens, that things oftentimes succeed
clean contrary to that, which the Astronomers have forespoken and
prognosticated, Against the casters of natiuities.
according to their contemplation. But I would willingly ask them, what
foundation they can have, when (like prophets) they enterprise to foretell men,
good lucks and ill lucks, and all events which they must expect, and chiefly to
kings, princes, and other chief personages? For where do they find, when God
created the stars and planets, that he gave them commission to reveal to
Astrologers, what should be the nature and complexion of every one, according
to the planet under which they should be borne? And again, how can such
judicial science have certainty, seeing there are a thousand men that are
borne every day in the world, in one selfsame country, at one selfsame time,
hour and instant, one sometimes to be a king, and another a poor shepherd,
being neither like in nature, nor like in manners, but sometimes more contrary
then fire and water? For this is much proved in many twins, as the scripture
gives us a notable example in Jacob and Esau. For they were borne so close to
one another, Genes. 25.
that Jacob held with his hand the sole of his brother Esaus foot: and
therefore the name of Jacob was given him. And by how much the one was humble,
good and peaceable; by so much the other was proud, wicked and warlike. And who
can believe that God has set marks in any of the signs of heaven, to signify
to men that, which he has ordained concerning every one in his eternal
counsel, which is hidden from the angels themselves? Surely whatsoever we can
learn, is through his holy spirit, which he communicates to such as he
pleases, revealing to them his secrets, as heretofore he did to his most
faithful servants. And therefore he that would have most certain
prognostications, must not go away to seek and ask them of other more true
Astrologians then the prophets and apostles, with their writings. For they have
surely foretold all that must come to pass in the world, to the very
consummation of time, and chiefly touching the monarchies, empires, and
kingdoms of the earth, namely Daniel. And I believe that God has not created
the stars and planets more for kings and princes and other great personages,
the^ for the simple and least. Too sound and true a prognosticatio^ have we
against them all in Isay, Isay. 60.
by which he prophesies, that every kingdom and every nation which serves
not the Lord shall perish. So likewise all the blessings and cursings of the
law, Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
are so many most certain prophesies, of all that which good and bad men may
expect for good or evil. Now I could in this present matter, concerning the
influence of celestial bodies upon men, produce the testimonies of the most
renowned amongst the ancient divines, against those, who attribute so much
virtue to the stars: but because the authority of a Christian is of no value
with the Atheists and superstitious, which are willingly the greatest idolaters
of nature, I will bring them the proof of strangers, yea of those, who first
gave the precepts of pronogstications: by which they may easily find their
teachings thwarted by themselves; and to have been left otherwise by them,
then the troop of their followers do suppose. Let them read the text of
Ptolemie, prince of Astronomers, Many things to be considered in horoscopes.
in the beginning of his Apotelesmes (which is as much to say, as the effects
referred to the natiuitie-hower) there shall they see that he attributes this
to the stars, that to the manner of the birth, something to the seed of the
parents, one thing to the diet, another to the place, and another to the
orders: So that very little rests in the planets. And the author concludes
his speech in this sort: [As we commend physicians, who search out the
original of the disease, and the causes in diverse fashions: so must not we be
despised, if to judge upon the infant borne, we inquire of the region, of the
birth, diet, manners, and other occurrences.] And in his book entitled
(Alarba) he says, That oftentimes such accidents meet in the infant borne,
that he cannot receive the celestial influence, sometimes very little, and
sometimes much, which many are ignorant of. How then can any by the stars
only determine of that, which must happen to man from the hour of his birth,
as infinite many do believe? But because some, who are abused by this
judicial science, do willingly reply, that Astrologians and prognosticators
do often foretell many things, which are afterward found true: I desire that we
may examine their reason, which (ASER) I leave to you to discover.


Of the truth which is found in prognostications of Astrologers: and how the
stars are appointed by God for signs, and that from their influences no
evil proceeds. Chapter 29.
ASER. WHo diligently should mark in predictions and astrological
prognostications, the falsehoods and truths which therein are found, I doubt
not but he should perceive these much more rare, then the other. But people do
commonly take so great delight to be deceived, that it suffices them, if they
be once told truth, for a thousand times wherein they have been foretold lies.
And God knows, how the professors of this art do advance that point as
much as they can, and do dissemble in all others, whereby their leasings may
be discovered. And when they will most floute fools, they use ambiguous and
obscure manners of speech, like the answers, which long ago the devil made
by oracles, both of Apollo, and other pagan-idols. For such kind of speech is
fit to strike the ignorant in a dumpe: who though they understand not the
prognosticators speech, yet according as things come to pass, they will
expound them to their mind, and chiefly, when among many things, some one does
stumble upon some like appearance with that prediction, although the astrologer
speaks at adventure, and sometimes understands not himself: yet this is
certain, and is daily seen by experience, that indeed the most cunning in
this science foretell many things, which are after found true. And this may
happen chiefly in three manners. The first is, How astrologers may foretell a
truth.
when they contain themselves within the bounds of Astrology, and will
prognosticate nothing, but whereof they foresee the causes most manifest in
nature: as in eclipses of the Sun and moon, the changes thereof, in the
courses of the planets, their aspects, and dispositions, and such like natural
inclinations, the knowledge whereof they may by their art attain unto. But
when they pass farther, it happens to them which is sometimes seen in bad
archers and bowmen, who though they take their aim badly, neither yet draw
right, may nevertheless shoot so often, that by great chance, one or other
may hit the white. But this comes not often; for if one should reckon the badde
shoots, they would be exceeding few that had hit in respect of the rest. And
in this sort have we in the beginning of our speech meant, concerning the
copious and ambigious manner of Astrologers writings and speeches, very proper
for their intention. Finally God in his secret and most just judgment, does
many times permit that the things foretold by such deceivers do oftentimes
succeed, to the intent to punish the curiosity and vanity of men, as it
commonly falls out, and has in old time been known by the oracles of
devils, and by the predictions and diuinations of Necromancers and inuocators
upon evil spirits. For they who rather believe such inuentious of the devil,
then the true and sacred word of God, deserve to be holden in error, by the
events which they expect, when they trust to the father of lying, to the end
that they may afterward receive their due and condemnation. So came it to Saul
when he went to the witch, 1. Sam. 28.
to understand the issue and event of the Philistims war against him. For he
heard that which he desired not to know; and that which was prophesied to him
came to pass. Thus in three manners do we pereciue that Astrologers may
oftentimes prognosticate the truth. But because some suppose to have a very
good foundation for judicial Astrology, in so much as Moses says; speaking
of the creation of the sun and Moon and stars, Genes. 1.
that God set them for signs; I would desire them to consider, that the
Prophet expounds himself in these words, [And God said, Let there be lights
in the firmament of heaven, How the stars are given us for signs.
to separate the day from the night, and let them be for signs and for
seasons, and for days and for years: And let them be for lights in the
firmament of the heaven to give light upon the earth.] Hereby it is apparent
to us, that God created the planets to distribute the light, and to distinguish
and signify unto us by certain signs the times, seasons, years, months,
days and nights, for all political, public and private order. For it is most
necessary, that men should direct themselves according to times and seasons.
But although the stars were given us for signs in this respect, and that
after the deluge they were in that estate reordained by GOD: yet must we
abstain from superstition, and too much curiosity which abuses many in
Astrology (as is abouesaid) and which often occasioneth that they not being
able to prognosticate upon every cause apparently by the stars, according to
their desire, do search and have recourse to other means, to wit, to
Necromancy, and Geomancie; by which they divine what they list, leading men
unto double error, and phophaning the contemplative doctrine of the heaven,
which is otherwise of it self good and profitable.

But beside all this I might likewise say, that if all things here below were
disposed and directed by the governance of heaven, and the influence of the
planets, as our naturalists (better Philosophers then Christians) do maintain:
we should behold nothing save what were good, as being governed by good
causes. And in this case I demand what sold become of those evil influences
of the stars, upon which Astrologians do found their predictions? Genes. 1.
I will not here allege that which Moses teaches us, saying, that God saw
that all things which he had made were good (for perhaps they would not believe
it:) but let them give ear to Mercury, whom the ancients called the thrice
great and supreme in Philosophy, Metaphysics, and Theology. For he left
written upon pillars in Egypt (as Iamblicus in a long discourse declares) how
that all influences of the stars are good: Against such as assign evil to
the influences of the stars.
and if there chance any evil, it must be imputed to the indisposed subject,
and not to the planets: demonstrating this by the brightness of the sun, which
of it self is good, and yet hurts the bleare eye, because of the badde state
thereof. Plato also says, Plato in Epimenide.
[God has made the Moon increasing and decreasing, and has established the
months in the year, and has taught by a kind of happy fortune, to bring in
count the number of them. Whereupon ensues, that the earth being most
fruitful, conceiueth and engenders her fruit for the nouriture of man, at
such times as the winds gently blow, and the rain prosperously droppeth into
her lap. But if any evil befall herein, we must not blame the divine and
celestial nature but the humane, which leads an unjust life.] And the
Stoicke Hieracles cries out in the verses of Pythagoras in these terms. "Each
one, through his own evil, ill will be,
"For from the heavenly source no vice does slow
"To soil our souls; the cause are only we,
"The blame of mischief then on mortals throw.
And Plato in the sixth book of laws, and Aristotle in his Politics do
testify, that man having attained to the true doctrine becomes a very divine
and perfect debonaire creature: but not having been well brought up, he be
comes the most cruel of all creatures borne upon the earth. What then
remains for us to attribute to the stars? I demand of them also, who
affirm some influences to be evil, from whence (will they say) that this
malice proceeds? Whether from God which commands: or from the intelligence
which moves the heavens: or from the heaven it self? Reasons to show that
the influences of the stars be not evil.
Surely it cannot come from God, who is the sovereign good, and the first
cause ordaining all things. For that is evil or sin, which is done against
the will of the creator, or which declineth from his iustnes: and in nature,
evil cannot proceed from the spring of goodness. Wherefore it should be too
foolish and absurd a thing to think, that evil should take original from God
all-good: and that from the sovereign governor should proceed the violation
of the law, seeing that his will is his own law it self. For the
intelligence or angel, which some say continues in the motion of the spheres,
and to whom some assign the cause of evil influences: I would feign ask
them, whether this intelligence does so work by the commandment of his
Prince, which is the eternal and sovereign governor of the world, or else
against his will and ordinance? If it accomplish any thing according to his
precept, certainly that cannot be bad: for nothing is bad but that which is
done contrary to the order established by the prince of Nature. But if it
operate against his will, it might seem to turn to the scandal of the
Omnipotent creator, to suffer his servants so arrogant in rebellion unpunished.
For at the beginning he spared not those amongst the angels, who exalted
themselves in pride: And for the rest who persisted in obedience, he in such
sort confirmed them, that they cannot sin any more. Whereupon also ensues
that the Intelligences, being loyal servants of the Eternal, do not cause
evil influences, neither yet do dispose any thing to evil, since they always
accomplish the ordinance of the Soueraigne-good. Against such as accuse the
heavens to be evil.
And for those, who not being able to blame God, nor the moving intelligence,
do accuse the heavens, as cause of evil influences: I desire them to tell me;
if the heavens be malicious, whence comes their malice? Whether have they
been created evil, or else been depraved by evil manners? Or else, their
nature failing them, did they become evil? Certainly they were not created
evil by the most good woorker. Neither have they been depraved by manners or
a failing nature, because they have no choice in their works, and for that
their motions and influences are natural and inuariable, not of freewill, as
all Philosophers affirm. Again I ask them, whether the heavens give
influence, as second causes, or as instruments? If as instruments, then since
they neither move nor operate, but according to the will of the Prince, who
created them; he should remain in fault: which is already confuted. But if it
be as second causes, seeing the work is performed by that which lives, the
error should be referred to the intelligences, who move them, and are ordained
for souls to the spheres: to which we have also satisfied. I will farther add
this point, That the heavens do work either by nature or by will. If by
nature, since the order thereof is established by God, the sentence of Aristotle
is worthy the remembrance, where says, [What we possess by nature, we are
therein neither praised nor blamed: for the praise belongs to the worker, and
the blame cannot be assigned to the order of the sovereign Good.] But if the
heavens work freely, being guided by an intelligence, it must needs follow,
that being the causes of so many mischiefs, which abundantly light on man,
they are guided by a furious, or else by a covetous soul. If by a furious,
seeing there is a certain planet, which (as these Astronomers say) does
always design violent influences, wherefore is it not consumed with such a
sempiternall fury? Moreover why say men, that a planet is inflamed sooner in
one house, then in another? What meets it in his own house or in another,
that disposes it to signify evil? Again, how is that inflamed with fury,
which they affirm to be immutable? But if the heavens be led by covetousness,
what profit or gain do they attract from things here below? For this covetous
desire remains only in themselves. And whosoever coueteth evil, does it (as
the Philosophers say) because that he is as it were intoxicated and overcome by
inebriating matter. But since the matter of the heavens is far from all change
and error, it is neither inebriated nor subverted. Wherewith then will they
blame the heavens? If any say that by nature they are evil, Reason and
original of evil in nature.
how is it, that this evil should come into their nature? For the Sages
collect these reasons and original of evil in nature: either for that the
efficient cause cannot govern the superfluity of the matter; or else cannot
supply where it fails; or else cannot duly dispose it; and such other
reasons, as presuppose a feeble power of the cause. But for as much as the
smith and carpenter of the heavens is of infinite power, how should he fail in
his workmanship? For there was no other cause which might encounter him, since
that without any aid, he framed the heavens; neither could any thing resist
the infinite worker, who reduced all things into a due and proper estate, as we
have heretofore amply declared. Yet notwithstanding so many reasons, how many
are there which obstinately leaning to the vain and curious observations of
the stars, as an infallible rule of the life and estate of man, do above all
things fear, least in the ascendant of the nativity, any evil planet should
have domination? And indeed do we not behold that Astrologers, and above all
Magitians, are so much sought after amongst us, that many do (as one may say)
hold him to be miserable, who knows not his Horoscope? To the end then that
we may better expel out of the brain of every one such foolish opinions, let
us (I pray you) stretch out this discourse in particular against such as accuse
Saturn and Mars for most evil planets: the charge whereof (AMANA) I commit to
you.


Of the Planet Saturn, and how it is not evil, nor any other star. Chapter
30.
AMANA. WE shall do very well, if keeping our selves from the superstition
and curiosity, which misguideth many in the study of judicial Astrology and
Divination, we stay our selves in the most simple and most certain Astronomy,
which the spirit of God teaches us by the creation of the world: that is, to
contemplate the creator by his works. For so should we become good Astronomers
and Christian Astrologers, if (I say) contemplating the heavens, and all the
ornament of them, we propose them unto us, as universal preachers of the
glory of the Sovereign, and consider them as the high works of his hands, as
the Psalmist does exhort us. Psalm. 8. and 19.
And so by creation of the Sun, Moon, Stars, and other celestial bodies, we
shall learn to meditate, what light there is in him, who dwells in the
inaccessible brightness, and which is the father and fountain of all lights, as
also, what good we are to hope for of him. For by that good, which the
corporal light brings unto us, for our bodies; and the Sun, A good, and
true use of astronomy.
Moon and Stars, for the life of men, we may somewhat judge, what felicity
is prepared by the Divine and spiritual light for our souls, and by God our
Creator, in whom it abides: being a sure means not to fear the signs of
heaven, nor the constellations and aspects of the stars, wherewith many do so
menace men, as if in heaven, as in a court of tyrants, it were ordained, that
so many mischiefs as should happen to the world, should be contrived.

But let those who so charge the stars of crimes, and therefore turn over
the books of Pagan Astrologers, and Atheists, rather then divine writings,
lend a while an care to some good witnesses, whom they themselves cannot
reprove, and who do even praise the planet of Saturn, the malice of whom we
have heard to be so great. Behold then first of all, how the prince of the
Astronomical doctrine deposes and testifies concerning this planet in these
terms: Ptol. in 3. apotel. How the planet Saturn is good.
[If Saturn be only signifier in the estate of the mind, and Lord of the
place of Mercury, and of the moon, and blaseth toward the corners of the
world good aspects and beams; the child shall be a lover of good things, of
great and firm counsel, and a searcher out of secret things and divine.]
Likewise Julius Firmicus adorning this planet with many great praises, says,
that from his virtue proceeds a quick and subtle spirit in the
deliberation of affairs, a certain word, a stable amity, a long foresight,
and a royal counsel. There be also many modern Astronomers, who say of the
same Saturn, That even as the common and civil life is designed by Jupiter,
so likewise the solitary and divine life is appropriated to Saturn: Yea the
ancient Philosophers and Poets have sung that he is most good, and that the
golden world did pass under him: fayning that Jupiter did afterward usurp the
kingdom, having chased out Saturn, and that then began the silver age. Praise
of ancient poets.
And let us note in regard of the most famous Poets amongst the ancients, that
they have by their writings penetrated into the most profound cabinets of
nature, and approached the secrets of the divine thought. For they sung not
iestes (as some hold) which the old fathers would not mention to their little
children: but they have been acknowledged of the Sages for great divines, who
hid the mysteries both of the one and other nature under the veil of fables,
and for this cause are they celebrated of such as understand well their
doctrine. That it is so, Aristole does plainly manifest, in that the confirms
great points of Philosophy by the testimony of Simonides, and of Homer. And
Archesilaus the inuentor of the new Academie, ascribed so much honor to Homer,
that he never went to bed, but he read some of his verses first, and said
likewise in the day time (that he might have more leisure to read) that he went
to his beloved. Anaxagoras also, yea and our Basil with laud admire the
excellent virtue in the writings of this Greek Poet. And how many be there
likewise who esteem Virgil the imitator of Homer, for a doctor in all natural
and moral Philosophy? For many refer all that, which he has fained, to an
allegorical sense. Lucretius also entreats of all the precepts of
Philosophy in verse. And Orpheus sings more loftily then humane knowledge
can extend to, the mysteries of Theology and of the sacred ceremonies, which
he had learned out of holy letters, as himself confesses. Ovid likewise has
covered many of the secrets of Pythagoras, and of the creation, and disposition
of the universe, in his Metamorphosis: but because he depraueth the^ with too
lascivious a discourse, he loses very much of their dignity. Wherein he has
been imitated of many other Poets, Against the poets of this age.
as in this our age, wherein there are very many, who do the office rather of
bauds, then of the true children of the chaste Muses, because they delight to
weaue poisoning sense in the web of their fair words. Such indeed Plato
commanded to be chased out of the co^monweale. But to return to our purpose;
it is most evident that these ancient Poets, great Philosophers and Divines, do
testify that Saturn is an happy and willing planet. And in so much as they
accuse him for devouring all his children, except four, they themselves
interpret that of Time, by which indeed he consumes all things, except the
four elements, which still remain, because that out of them, and into them
all nature is changed. And thereof it comes, that they so call them, to wit,
the fire Jupiter; the air Juno; the water Neptune, and the earth Pluto.
Moreover if we will in excuse of Saturn, consider the cause of the malice,
which commonly Astronomers attribute unto him; From whence the evils do
proceed, which are attributed to Saturn.
it is certain, that the evils wherewith they accuse him proceed from his cold
and dry nature, by which he seems to favor melancholy, whose property is
to oppress and stop the desiring power and natural love, whose seat is hot
and moist. And in that they separate Saturn from humane society, we must
understand, that this is not the planet which properly they mean, but rather
the child disposed to such complexion and disposition, partly through the
influence of the stars, partly through his birth and seed of the parents, or
the place of his generation, or of his food, and partly also through the
disposition which he may get by nurture and manners: and especially if the
said planet ruling in the nativity of the child, The means to correct all
evil influences.
it be invaded with the drines of Mars, and coldness of the Moon. But yet one
may correct every such evil influence. For the child increasing in years and
judgment may addict himself to study and contemplation of high and divine
things, which are the delights of him, who leads a solitary life: and
doubtless he shall perceive that Saturn is not evil, but does rather favor
him with a good influence. And if any find himself heavy by reason of his
Saturnine complexion, Matthew. 5.
let him meditate on that which is written, [Blessed are they which mourn:] if
he be pensive or silent, let him harken to that which is said, [ Marie has
chosen the good part:] if he have desire to store up riches, let him lay up in
heaven. For so may he easily correct every evil inclination, which he shall
naturally have. And as much may we speak of him who shall be stirred up with
the infla^mation of Mars. For if the Martial choler makes him hasty, and
subject to anger, let him not use it against the poor and little ones, but to
repress vices. For as golden Chrysostom says, [Where there is no wrath nor
indignation, there science profits nothing, the judgments are not constant,
and crimes are not corrected.] Let then wars, murders, boldness, magnanimity,
spoils, captiuities, flights, violences, and such like be exercised against
the enemies of God, and for the public peace: and then this Mars will not be
evil, Nomb. 25.
but rather numbered amongst the saints and servants of God, with Phineas son
of Eleasar, commended for his zeal, and with David who fought the battles of
the Almighty. But if among warriors there happen deceit, perjury frauds,
temeritie, fury, man-slaughters, thefts, and such mischiefs; all this comes
to pass, because the rule of reason is broken. And then this gate being open,
the winds of passions whiske out, and blow violently, like a great tempest. But
so long as they remain under the commandment of Eolus, to wit, so long as
reason duly governs; every violent motion proceeding from Martial choler, is
easily moderated, and turns to profit. The like must be judged of Venus, who
is said to induce men to a lustful and lascivious desire. For if we govern
well the concupiscence or appetite heated by this planet, the sun and Mars
thereto ministering feruor; thereupon would ensue a good love inflamed toward
God and our neighbor. So then we may conclude our speech, that men do
wrongfully complain of their nature, or the influence of the stars, when
they should rather accuse the perverseness of their il-inclined will, which
causes their voluntary sin, as in the second part of our Academie we have
related. But this will be more clear unto us, if we consider how the stars
work in man, not in constraining, but disposing: which (ARAM) shall be the
subject of your speech.


Of the planets in general, and how they work in man, not in constraining,
but disposing. Chap. 31.
ARAM. MAny holding opinion, that we obtain nothing by the influence of the
stars, do reject the doctrine of Astrologians as absurd, and altogether
differing from philosophy. And amongst other reasons, they allege that there
have been many grave philosophers, who have applied their care and diligence,
to search out the causes of things, borrowing their knowledge from physic,
from the Mathematics, and from many other arts and sciences; and yet never
looked after the causes in astrology: namely Pythagoras, Plato, Aristotle,
Plotin, Auicen, Auerrois, Hippocrates, and others the most renowned ancient
authors. But one may answer them, that as it was forbidden by the Mosaicall
law, that any should reap his field all throughout, Leuit. 19. and 23.
but should leave some corner for the poor and needful, whereof they might
make bundles and fardles to sustain themselves, and appease their hunger: so
it may be, that the former philosophers have left to their posterity, in the
spacious field of the secrets of nature, enough for others to gather and to
search out after them. And indeed if any one should set himself against us,
saying, [Saint Augustine, Ambrose, Jerome, Origin, Damascene, and other doctors
both Hebrews, Greeks and Latins, have with most diligent labor sounded the
sense of the scriptures, without touching that, which now you do: wherefore
that which you say, is not true.] What could this conclude against us? For it
is a common thing in schools, that nothing is concluded of pure negatiues.
Nothing concluded by denying.
And the Sages condemn not that, which any one has found out for excellent by
the subtlety of his own wit, though it never before had been touched by
others. Wherefore no man is to be condemned, if he make a farther search of
causes, then many ancient philosophers have done, who would not pass the
bounds of the elementarie nature, being contented to sound the causes by the
power and qualities of these inferior bodies, as many of our age do, whose
theoricke and practick does too much fail. Let us moreover add, that the most
renowned amongst the ancients accord in this point. Inferior things draw favor
from the superior.
[That the inferior things, and such as are called natural, do draw to them
the favor of the superior and celestial, rather by one aspect then by
another.] Which skill is holden excellent to be known. But for the
Peripatetickes, who abased in their sensible objects, content themselves with
the sensible qualities for the cause of all effects, saying, that if there be
found any effect, over which such a quality has no power, that this
proceeds from a cause to us unknown: we may evidently see, Error of
Aristotle in the cause of the heat of the sun.
that they have erred in all their teachings. For when Aristotle entreats in
the Meteors of the heat of the sun, he says, that it proceeds from two
causes joined together: to wit, from his motion and place: not from his motion
only, as being quicker then Jupiter, Mars and Saturn: which forasmuch as they
are more remote, their inflammation in a very quick motion, does not attain
to us. Neither also can the heat of the sun proceed from the moon, Venus,
and Mercury, because that though they be nearer unto us, yet being more slow
in motion, they are not so much inflamed. This reason he delivers, and this
makes me to wonder, how a person so celebrated could imagine an inflammation
in such things, as receive no strange impression. For he would attribute that
to the distance and motion, which should be referred to the natural virtue.
Might not some other then, better sound the cause why the interiection of the
sun beams does bring heat, though Aristotle a most subtle searcher of
natural causes, could not attain to it? Which perhaps he abstained to do,
because he would not pass the limits by him appointed in his basest
philosophy, which he calls natural. Yet nevertheless mounting somewhat
higher, in that which he writes to Alexander, he teaches, that in taking of
medicines the aspect of the heavens must be diligently observed. But
Hippocrates proceeding farther, does foretell the diseases, recovery and
death, by the house of the Moon, A physician must be an Astronomer.
and the aspects thereof, with the other planets. And Haly in the beginning of
the work of this author, and according to his aduse, says, that the physician
ignorant in astronomy, is like a blind man that gropes for his way with his
staff. Besides, it would be too long to collect that which Plato in his
obscure discourse, and diverse Academicks and unknown philosophers, do teach
to be extracted from the heavens, both how, and when.

Of the power of the stars in men, not constraining but disposing.
And what do the heavens by their continual motion, but only work in us? Some
may say, they give influence to the elements and to plants. But I demand; are
not our bodies heated by the sun; and altered, and (with cold) benumbed by
the Moon? The simple vulgar is not ignorant hereof. Why then do we not say,
that the stars communicate other influences no less known to the Sages,
then these of the said lights are to the vulgar? And yet not that their power
performs entire effects. For with them (as we have heard) concur the diet,
manners, nativity, and place, but above all, the liberty of the mind is
always dominant, to moderate and govern all the inclinations thereof, which
indeed proceeds of the proper spiritual nature thereof, which moves the
body; and not the body the mind: and with this consents that which Ptolomie
says in the beginning of his Apotelesmes, and in his book of fruit, speaking
thus, [A good Astrologian may well prevent much evil, which otherwise might
happen by the disposition of the stars, if he foreknow their nature, and
forecast how to hinder that it happen not, and that the ill-disposed subject
receive no dommage by the place, by which it should receive profit. So then,
we should not impose upon Saturn; an harmefull sadness, or wicked severity:
nor upon Mars, a cruel rashness: nor on Mercury, a cautelous malice: nor on
Venus, lascivious loves: nor an inconstant proceeding, on the Moon: no more
then he that has bleare-eies, should impute his infirmity to the light, nor
the flaming of an house to the fire, nor the bruise to the stone; nor bo^ds,
prisons, and executions of malefactors to the severity of the judge. For every
evil effect ensues upon the indisposition of the subject receiving, and not
upon the influence of the superior powers* which (to the contrary) we may
maintain (as already we have done) to be of it self good still, yea by the
particular ordinances of the stars, according to the doctrine of
Mathematicians. For thus many of them say [Saturne disposes the intellectual
virtue, he provoke to wisdom, and to contemplation of divine and humane
things, and pierces to the brightness of true Philosophy. But if the Saturnist
apply his profound thoughts to evil, to accomplish his disordinate appetite,
then he wholly intends to deceit, fraud and coggings, and yet the loftiest
and diuinest part thereof called Synteresis, resisting it in him; then full of
melancholy, he feels himself so oppressed with anxietie and tediousnes, How
the stairs become ill.
that he supposes that most good and profitable, which is most noisome and
dommageable: and as he finds himself more oppressed with the often
remembrance of his wicked life, many visions do oftentimes present themselves
unto him, like semblances of the dead, shadows of the deceased, horrors of
sepulchers and tombs of such as are departed. To the inner eye of his thought
presents it self the wrath of God, the assaults of the devil, despair and
hate of salvation. And as much may we speak of the Martialist, who if he
excite the violence and force of his courage, not to zeal of justice as he
ought to do, but to accomplish his desires and carnal appetites: then commits
he theeueries* rapes, and many other mischiefs. So that thereupon some will
attribute evil to the planets, which are called wel-willing: For the ordinance
of Jupiter, which by the hot and moist, or by a debonaire nature guides to
clemency, might be so much augmented, that the curbed and perverted spirit
might be forced to an entire dissolution. So the noble and mild influence of
Venus, which makes man benign, if it be not moderated, will make him be
effeminate, and a slave to all lustful appetites. And the sun, father of
life and giver of light, directs men to true wisdom and royal dignity,
and yet if the splendour of the mind be abused, and that it be converted into
pride, it mounteth into an ambitious presumption, arrogancy, and scorn of
others. Thus then may we say, that many evils may proceed from that which is
good; as of the abundance of wine wherewith any man is glutted, does arise the
oppression of the heart, abating of virtue, and many such accidents: though
being moderately taken, it reioiceth the heart, and comfort the natural
powers. So the water likewise, which is a good element, and very profitable for
all, drowneth and choaketh those which take not heed thereof* and ouerturneth
those buildings which are not very firm. Wherefore let us conclude, that all
influences are good, so that the subjects be well disposed, and can use them:
and especially, that the stars and planets operate in man, not in
constraining, but in disposing his inclinations, the which by reason the mind
may always moderate and correct. And taking occasion upon this matter, let us
come to the true Astronomy and Astrology of Christians, which is to
contemplate the glory and greatness of God by the work of the heavens: as
(ACHITOB) finishing this days work you may relate to us.


Of the true Astronomy, which the heavens teach us, and especially the sun
in his admirable effects. Chap. 32.
ACHBTOB. IT is not without cause that the prophet says, [The heavens declare
the glory of God, Psalm. 19.
and the earth shows the work of his hands.] For thereby he evidently
teaches, that the work of the spheres, and their well ordered motion do
demonstrate, as with the finger even to our eyes, the great and admirable
providence of God their creator, even as if the heavens should speak to every
one. In an other place it is written, Eccle. 43.
[This high ornament, this clear firmament, the beauty of the heaven so
glorious to behold, is a thing full of hough then that the heavens have neither
voice nor speech like men, yet when the workmanship of them, and the goodly
images pourtraied and placed in them, do present themselves unto us, it is as
much as if God spoke to us. For sight belongs to the eyes, as hearing does to
the ears: and that which offers it self to those, The heavens are visible
words which preach unto us God.
is as the sound is to these. Wherefore in very deed we may call not only the
heavens, sun, moon and stars, but all other creatures also, visible words,
which speak to the eyes, as those which are in sound and voice do speak to
the ears. If likewise we can very well understand dumb folks by the signs
which they make us, and say that they speak by signs: why then should we not
harken to the language of God, speaking by the heavens, and by the signs,
which he has placed in them? For may we not truly say, that they speak unto
us by signs? And if we call books (dumb teachers) because they teach by the
means of writing, which they lay before our eyes, what fairer book may we
see written in a fairer letter, and of more neat impression, and printed with
goodlier characters, then this great book of the whole universe, and chiefly of
the heavens? Again if it be needful for us to seek out images to represent
God, that so he might become visible to us, where may we find them fairer and
more lively, and which speak unto us a language most easy to be understood,
if we be not altogether deaf? Wherefore it is not without good cause, that
when God, willing to make his greatness, his magnificence and providence known
to his people, says by Esaias, [Lift up your eyes on high, Isay 40.
and be hold who has created these things, which is he, that brings out
their armies by number, and calls them all by their names. By the greatness of
his power, and mighty strength nothing fails.] This is it in all these
considerations, that David in the place before alleged, after he has
acknowledged that there is no language nor speech, where the voice of the
heavens is not heard, does further add, that their line is gone forth through
all the earth, and their words unto the ends of the world: meaning by this
line, the magnificent frame and excellent workmanship of them. For all is so
well made and composed therein by the workmaster, that it seems to have been
all drawn out by line, rule and compass. And when he speaks of their words,
he understands the mark and impression which is in them; by which they
preach unto us, in stead of words. And for this cause also he says before:
that one day utters speech unto another day, and one night teaches knowledge
unto another night: which is as much, as if he should say, that one day
teaches and preaches another, and the night does the same: because that from
day to day, and from night to night God manifests his power and glory.

And let us note, Of the excellency of the sun and true testimony of the
providence of God.
that the prophet proposing unto us the heavens thus in general, as true
preachers of his divine providence, makes principal and express mention of
the Sun, because it is the most goodly creature, the most agreeable, most
profitable, and necessary for men, and for all the rest of the works of God.
For this cause also, every one gives more heed unto it, then to all the other
celestial bodies. For it is by the course and means of the Sun, that we
have ordinarily days and nights, and that they be sometimes longer, sometimes
shorter, and another time equal (as has been already told us) and also, that
we have the distinction of years, and of the diverse seasons of them; as of the
spring time, summer, autumn and winter, and of the time fit to sow, plant,
till the earth, and to gather the fruits thereof, and generally to perform
all other works necessary for the life of man. And then may very well be
considered the course and compass of this goodly light, which is from the one
end of heaven to the other end, and how there is nothing that is hid from the
heat thereof. Shall we let pass in silence the gallant course, which every
day it makes, compassing the whole world in the space of four and twenty
hours, without being any whit weary? For from the hour, that God has
created it, it has never desisted from work day nor night, and has never
failed one jot, neither shall cease, so long as the world shall endure. And
therefore it is also said in Ecclesiasticus, [The sun also a marvelous
instrument, Eccles. 43.
when it appears, declares at his going out, the work of the most high.]
And presently after, [Great is the Lord that made it, by whose commandment it
does run hastily.] Then speaking in general of all the planets and stars,
[It is a camp (says he) pitched on high, shining in the firmament of heaven:
the beauty of the heavens are the glorious stars, and the ornament that
shines in the high places of the Lord. By the commandment of the holy one
they continue in their order, and fail not in their watch.] And who is it,
except the blind, that beholds not this goodly sun, to pass out of his
pauilion, like a magnificent king, that marches forth of his palace? Who
sees not the fair countenance that he shows to all, being as the eye, and
mirror of the whole world? Who vieweth not his trim locks, and the golden
hairs and yellow beard of his rays, by which he spreads his light, and
heat upon all creatures? In such sort that as none can avoid his heat, so
none can fly from his light. For as it is written, [By the word of the Lord
are his works: Eccles. 42. Eccles. 43.
The sun that shines looks upon all things, and all the works thereof are
full of the glory of the Lord. At noone when it burns the country, who may
abide for the heat thereof? The sun burns the mountains three times more
then he, which keeps a furnace with continual heat: it casts out fiery
vapors, and with the shining beams blinds the eyes. Have thou commanded the
morning since thy days (says the Lord to Job) and have thou caused the
morning to know his place? Job. 38.
That it might take hold of the corners of the earth, and that the wicked might
be shaken out of it? For (as it is said in another place) They are among those,
which abhor the light, Job. 24.
and know not the ways thereof, nor continue in the paths thereof. The
murderer rises early, and kills the poor and needy, and in the night he
is as a thief. The eye also of the adulterer waits for the twylight, and
says, None eye shall see me, and disguiseth his face. They dig through houses
in the dark, which they marked for themselves in the day: they know not the
light. But the morning is even to them as the shadow of death; if one know
them, they are in the terrors of the shadow of death.] By which testimonies
aptly agreeing with that, which is written (every man that does evil hates
the light) we may know, John. 3.
besides the greatness of the works of God, which principally shines in the
creation of the Sun, how even they, who would not behold the light thereof
but fly from it as much as they may, because they hate it and fear it as the
death, cannot for all that avoid it. To the end then that we may reap some
profit by this discourse, and so finish this days talk, let us think, that
if the most ignorant and most doltish, are inexcusable for their ignorance and
ingratitude toward God, for the sermons of the heavens, which they continually
make to all creatures: how much more are the learned, and chiefly Astronomers
and Astrologians; if they know not very well how to use their science to the
glory of God. Of the names of Astronomers and Astrologers, and of their true
intent.
For they are called Astronomers, because they have the knowledge of the laws
and rules, which the sovereign creator has established and ordained among the
stars and their courses and motions; according as their name derived from the
Greek tongue imports: as also the name of Astrology will infer as much,
seeing that thereby is signified, that they understand and can render a reason
of the nature, and of the effects of the celestial bodies. Wherefore then,
since they have greater knowledge, then the ignorant and common people as well
by the knowledge, as by the observations and continual experience of the
effects of the planets, they shall be therefore found the more culpable before
God, if they understand not the language of the heavens, thereby to learn how
to glorify him. And yet so far are the greater part of them from doing that
which we say, that contrariwise we see very many, which impute that to the
spheres, that they should attribute to the spheres-creator, and so draw men
from God their father, by the vanity of their human dreams, under color of
their Astronomy and Astrology, causing them to stay in regard of the
creatures with them, and so make them Atheists, as they are, when they
acknowledge none other God, but an idol of Nature. And therefore I desire that
we may to morrow again proceed to behold the admirable effects of the Sun,
being most apparent to all, and most easy for to know, by which the rudest and
most simple may learn to come to God: as among other effects is that of the
rising and setting of this goodly light. For the providence of God shines
maruellously in this point, as (ASER) we may learn of you.


The end of the fourth day.
THE FIFTH DAYS WORK.
Of the rising and setting of the sun: and of the providence of God, which
shines in the commodities of day and night. Chapter 33.
ASER. IF with understanding we read the books of the heavens, we shall
verily esteem the celestial bodies to be the chief natural Philosophers,
Doctors and Astronomers, by whom God daily teaches us that principal
Astronomy and Astrology, which he will have us learn, and whereof we must
not be ignorant, without being convicted, as well the unlearned as the learned,
of very great unthankfulness toward him, and of more beastly brutishnes, then
is amongst the brute beasts. For he has assigned us teachers and masters
which keep common school with us day and night, as by our precedent discourse
we have already understood. And yet the greatest part of men, yea almost all,
do no more profit in this school, then the very beasts, though indeed it
stands continually wide open to all: yea and they, which should chiefly
learn out of this great book of nature touching the knowledge of the creator
of all things, are those which oftentimes are farthest to seek. For in liew of
committing themselves to be guided by this book, so to approach to God, as he
points out the path and way to those, who have eyes to see and a spirit to
understand; they rather take occasion therein, by the vain dreams of their
own apprehensions to wander from the truth. And for this cause Moses, David and
the other Prophets and servants of God, speaking of the works of the creation,
and of the divine providence in them, do propound unto us, but simply, those
which are the most apparent to al, and the most easy to be understood, because
they will not only teach the most learned (who are they which willingly make
least profit in their writings) but will also instruct the simple and ignorant,
who^ God does oftentimes make capable of his secrets. For which cause likewise
these holy fathers speak not of the spheres, and heavenly bodies subtly, as
Philosophers in their schools do, but rather vulgarly; to the end that the
most rude and playnest may understand their philosophy, replenished with the
doctrine of salvation. For it is very necessary that every one should be
instructed therein, according to his own capacity.

To pursue then our yesterdaies speech, Vtility of the light and heat of the
sun.
begun concerning the Sun, which the holy Scripture sets so often before
our eyes as an universal preacher of the sovereign Majesty, I pray you let us
first consider, what joy and what good it is, that men receive by it, so long
as it distributeth his light, as we have already heard, being like the
chariot of God to bring it to them. Likewise how much pleasure and profit
receive they by his heat? Again do we not see how he has his determined time
to make us day? And how that after he has lightened one part of the world,
during such time as was assigned to him by God the creator, he then
transporteth his light to the other part? And when he has performed his task
on one side of the world, he returns to the other, without any ceasing, rest,
or fainting. Wherein we must especially acknowledge gods wonderful
providence, who has created him neither greater nor less then is necessary to
perform the office, which has been committed to him. And for his greatness we
may truly judge that it is immense and admirable, because that in what place
soever men may be, whether in the east, or in the west, or in the north, or in
the south parts, yet do they all behold it, of one selfsame greatness. And
therefore does the prophet say [They which dwell in the uttermost parts of the
earth, Psalm. 65.
are afraid of thy signs, and thou make them joyful with the going forth
of the evening, and the morning:] that is, with the rising and setting of the
sun, and other planets and stars. Wherein we must note, that though we
commonly say of the sun, that he rises and sets, as if we spoke of a man,
that went to take his rest in the night, after that he travailed all day: yet
in truth he neither rises nor sets, for that he is continually busy; How
the rising and setting of the sun must be taken.
bringing day to some, when others have night. But men say commonly so, because
that in regard of us, he seems, when he retyreth, as if he went to rest, at
euen-tide: and that he rises in the morning, when he returns unto us.
Wherefore we say, that he is hidden and down, when we see him not: and that he
is risen, when he appears at point of day. And so do the rude people and
children, which dwell near the mountains, accustomablie say, that he is gone
to hide himself behind them. And they which are near the sea suppose, that he
goes to plunge and wash himself therein: as the Poets also say, accommodating
their style to the vulgar. And yet al may behold that he rises not on the same
side where he sets, but on the other quite opposite. Whereby is easy to be
judged, that he has not reposed all the while that men slept, but has passed
much way. And that he still carries his light with him, for it is a most
certain thing that he has not delivered night and darkness to those people and
nations, by which he passed; but light, and day. But if there be few amongst
the rude and ignorant, which meditate these things so far; there be fewer,
which consider of the providence of God, that manifests it self in this
perpetual changing of day into night, and of night into day. For there is
nothing more contrary then light and darkness, and consequently then night and
day? And yet has God so well disposed, compacted, and reconciled these
contrarieties together, that if things were otherwise ordained, there were
neither man nor beast that could long live upon the face of the earth. And
therefore Ecclesiasticus says, Eccles. 42.
[Oh how delectable are all his works, and to be considered even to the very
sparks of fire: they live all, and endure for ever; and whenever need is,
they are all obedient. They are al double, one contrary to another: he has
made nothing that has any fault. The one commends the goodness of the other,
and who can be satisfied with beholding Gods glory?] And indeed if the day
should last perpetually, and equally alike in all parts of the world: the heat
of the sun would so scorch every thing that it would dry up and consume not
only men and beasts, but even all moisture and humiditie which is in the
earth. Meruailes of the providence of God in the commodities of day and night.
Whereby all living creatures should fail, for they could not live for two
causes. First because that life does principally lie in heat and moisture, and
is conserved by them, according to the order that God has set in nature, to
guard and maintain it. Wherefore as men and beasts loose their life, if their
natural heat be altogether extinguished: so does it likewise befall them, when
their moisture is entirely consumed. For there must be a very equal
proportion in all those qualities, which are in the bodies of living creatures,
to wit, in heat and coldness, in drines and moisture, according to the nature of
the four elements whereof they are composed; for the excess of the one does
confound the other. For which cause God has so disposed the course of the
Sun, that he distributeth his heat in so good and just measure, that he
hinders the too much coldness and moisture, which might quench the natural
heat: and yet does not so consume them by the heat and drines which he
causes, but that there always remains so much as is needful for the life of
all creatures. And for the other reason that they would fail, it is, that
neither man, nor any other animal can live without nourishment, to repair in
them that, which the natural heat, like a fire incessantly flaming, has
consumed of radical humor in their bodies: and yet this heat must be likewise
maintained that it be not extinguished, as we have amply discoursed concerning
these things in the second part of our Academie. For this cause then God has
ordained eating and drinking for the nouriture of all living creatures, and
has appointed to the earth as to the mother of al, the charge and office to
produce fruits, and other nourishments needful for them. Which she cannot do
being by nature cold and dry, if as she is warmed by the heat of the sun,
she be not also moistened by the waters both of heaven and earth. And therefore
when that the sun has heated and dried it up all day long, the night (which
is the shadow of the earth) does afterward ensue, and taking from us the sight
of the sun and his light, does by this means bring unto us darkness, which
causes night, wherein the Moon who is cold and moist, has her rule; as the
sun, who is hot and dry, has his rule in the day time. And so we must
consider these two celestial bodies very nearly, according to their proper
effects, which we perceive and experiment here on earth below, Genes. 1*
as also Moses testifies unto us, saying, that God created two great lights
amongst others, to be as regents and rulers, the one of day, and the other of
night. So then as the earth, and all that it bears, together with all animals
or living creatures that it nourishes, are heated and dried up in the day time
by the sun: even so are they moistened and refreshed in the night time by the
withdrawing thereof, and by the humiditie and coldness of the Moon. Wherein
there especially happens a mutual accord between heaven and earth, under
which we comprise the air, waters, and al creatures therein contained, with
their natures and qualities. Moreover in this marvel, we are to consider, that
as men and animals cannot survive without nourishment, which God has provided
by the means aforesaid: so likewise could they not live without taking some
rest. For they are not of nature like the heavens, and planets which have
continual motions, and yet wear not away. And therefore as God has appointed
the day for his creatures to travel in, so has he ordained the night for them
to rest in. And as waking is proper to travel, so is sleeping peculiar to
rest. In which, sleep being requisite, and sleep requiring humiditie and
freshnes, the better to dispose and induce living creatures to sleep, the
night is much fitter therefore, and for rest, because of the moist and cold
nature thereof, then is the day, which participateth most with heat and
drines. And because all repose is in the night, it is also more quiet then the
day: neither is there so much noise, which may hinder sleep and rest. Wherein
we have yet another commodity of the distinction and exchange of days and
nights, whereto we may likewise add that which David declares when he says,
Psalm. 104.
[Hee appointed the moon to distinguish the seasons, the sun knows his
going down. Thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of
the forest creep forth. The lions roar after their pray, and seek their
meat at God. When the sun rises, they retire and couch in their dens. Then
goes man forth to his work, and to his labor until evening.] Behold here
goodly considerations; how God has provided for the preservation of the life
of his creatures, by means of day and night. For because that the wild
beasts, which live by pray are dangerous and cruel, he so guides and
governs them by his providence, that he keeps them quiet, and shut up all
day in their caves and dens, in such sort, that they seldom come forth but in
the night, to seek their pray, even then when men and domestical beasts
retire themselves, and rest out of their dangers. Thus have we very many
commodities by the day and the night: And more should be found out by a
careful search. For all that which we have hitherto declared, is so evident
before the eyes of every one, that the most rude and simple amongst men must
needs consider and understand it. But I think it most convenient that
continuing the principal subject of our discourses, we should speak of the
excellent instructions, which do likewise present themselves in the
consideration of the second course and motion of the sun and moon, for the
distinction of years, months, and seasons, whereof we have heretofore made
mention. Then to you (AMANA) I commit this discourse.


Of the second course and motion of the Sun and Moon, for the distinction of
years, months and seasons: and of the providence of God in these things.
Chap. 34.
AMANA. THe Sun, as we have heretofore heard, has two sundry courses: the
one by which he brings unto us night and day; and the other by which he
distinguishes unto us years and seasons. Now every one sees that the sun
passes and runs through the heavens: and it seems to many that the heaven
stirs not, though in truth it be otherwise. For it is the heaven which
turns, and takes, and carries away the sun with it, so causing him to
perform his course. So likewise every one knows that the days, nights,
years, and times are divided and measured by the course of the Sun; but the
ignorant and common people understand not how this comes to pass, neither
do they consider of it. For these causes then, there be many, who cannot
so-well acknowledge the excellency, magnificence and divine glory, which
shines in the heavens, as they do who have been conversant in the study of
Astronomy and Astrology, considering that the celestial light continually
lightneth their understanding. And without this guide all science little
avails for the true knowledge of God. It is then from Astronomers that we
learn, Of the two courses which the sun has.
how that besides the course which the sun and moon do ordinarily make,
within the space of four and twenty hours, which is commonly called a
natural day, as likewise all the other planets and stars make their course
by violence of the course of the highest heaven, who comprising all the spheres
within the concauitie thereof, carries them away with him, and causes them to
perform the same course which he pursues; like to a great wheel that should
draw about other lesser ones that were conioined with it: Besides (I say) this
common course of all the heavenly bodies, the sun, the moon, and the other
planets, have another course proper and peculiar to every of their spheres,
which God has assigned them: according to which, the sun performs his in
365. days, and six hours, and certain minutes; as long observation and
daily experience has taught those, who have diligently applied themselves to
the contemplation of the heavens: who likewise have knowledge of the proper
course of the moon, and every one of the stars; as has been already
related in our precedent speeches.

Of the effects of the second course of the sun, and moon.
Now as by the first course and motion of the sun, we have a distinction of
the days and nights: so likewise by the second course thereof, is given unto
us the difference of their length and shortness, and the distinction of the
years and diverse seasons. For we take the succession of the years from this
second course of the sun, as from the moon we have the distinction of the
months, according to which she increases and decreaseth, as we ordinarily
behold, by reason of the diverse opposition of the sun, from whom she
receives her light in such quantity, as is sufficient for her to shine upon
the earth. Eccles. 43.
So Ecclesiasticus says, That the Lord has made the moon to appear
according to her seasons, which should be a declaration of the time, and for a
perpetual sign: that the feasts are appointed according to her, her light
diminishing to the last end; and the months take their name of her, and that
she grows woonderously in her changing. Likewise each one knows that the
moon declares the times fit to sow, plant, and loppe in, and to do other
such like businesses, whereof one must judge according to the state and
disposition of her. So then these two great lights, the Sun and Moon are
most notable before all the world, for so much as every one may see with his
eyes (if he be not altogether deprived of understanding) the excellent works
which God performs in them, and by them. Psalm. 147
And therefore also the holy scripture does propose them unto us more often,
and more especially, to induce us to consider of the majesty of God in his
works, then any other of the celestial bodies, which are infinite in number.
Which, for this cause, none can know particularly, nor yet number them, nor
name them, save God alone, as his word teaches us by his prophet saying, [He
counts the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names.]
Whereupon we may affirm, that all that we shall here discourse upon, and
that the most subtle amongst men can describe, is a very small thing, in
respect of the greatness and excellency, which their creator has engraued in
them. But yet by this which is proposed unto us, we may easily consider, into
what an admiration men should be ravished, if it might be permitted them to
behold, view, and contemplate fully, and in perfection all the stately works of
the heavens, and of all the lights in them contained, and to understand their
natures, effects and properties, and all the beauty and goodly order, which
therein is, and the great utility which thereby redoundeth to men and to all
creatures. For all therein is disposed by an excellent order, like an host and
army, whereof God is the leader and governor. Deuteronomy. 17. Psalm. 24. Isay. 60.
And therefore this whole ornament of the heaven and of these fair lights is
called in the scripture the host, army, and soldiers of heaven: and God, who
is the Lord and prince, and the great and sovereign captain, is likewise
named the Lord of hosts.

Moreover as we have noted, that in the succession of day and night, the
providence of God does publicly declare it self: so have we excellent
testimonies in the diversity of the months, Diversity o^ the seasons in the
^eere to testify the providence of God.
and of the seasons, which are throughout the year. For some are cold, others
excessive hot, some dry, and some wet, some temperate, and other some
intemperate. For according as the sun does approach near, or recule from us,
or as it is higher or lower, according as our sight considers it, and the
situation of the places and countries, which we inhabit, does present it unto
us; and that his heat remains more or less upon the earth, by means of his
proper and particular course: so have we the days longer or shorter, and the
nights likewise, and more or less hot, cold, dry, and wet weather, and more
temperatenes and vntemperatenes: So that it may seem that the year is
distinguished by diverse ages, like to the life of man. And therefore many say
that the springtime is as the infancy and childhood of the year: the summer
like the youth and virilitie thereof: autumn like the ripe age inclining to
oldnes: and winter like the decrepite and last age, wherein it seems that all
is mortified, and become dead: then we behold the springtime again return
like a new creation and reparation of the world, and consequently all the rest
of the seasons, not failing of the time ordained to them. For as the sun
never fails to bring the day in due time: so likewise does it not fail to
distinguish always unto us the diverse seasons in every year, in such sort as
it has done from the beginning. Power of the moon upon all creatures.
The moon also has her proper effects in all these things, and is very
powerful as well among living creatures, as among the fruits of the earth;
through the changes, which are in her. For it is seen by experience, that
according as she increases or decreaseth, so do the humors in all creatures
augment and diminish, and are tender or firm, and change diversely. Moreover,
as this planet alters her course, so does the weather change in disposition,
turning sometimes into rain, sometimes being fair, and sometimes tempestuous.
But above all, the power which God has placed in her, manifests it self
most evidently in the waters of the sea, especially in the flowings and ebbings
thereof. And although that amongst so many effects produced by these two goodly
lights, Testimony of the providence of God in the harmony of the seasons of
the year.
there are great contrarieties and marvelous differences: yet God by his
providence can reduce them to singular agreement, and make them all return to
one bound and point. For the excess of the one is the temperature of the
other. For as one season is apt to sow and plant in, so is another fit to make
the fruits grow, and ripen in: and another is proper to gather them in, and
prepare them to serve our uses. And as the cold and drought do much hinder
corruptions and infections, which might arise through excessive heat and
wetnes: so does heat and moisture temperate the great cold and dryness, and
conserve and repair that which they would destroy: so that by the one of these
qualities the defect of the other is supplied, and the excess of the one is
the temperature of the other: as we have heard that there comes to pass, by
the succession of day and night, which causes that many commodities do flow to
men and animals. By how much the more we consider of these things, by so much
the more shall we find occasion to wonder at the works and providence of God.
For whereas the property of one contrary is to destroy another: he has so
well tempered and reconciled them, that he causes the one to be preserved by
the other: yea that the one cannot subsist without the aid of his companion.
Which takes place not only in these things, which we have here already
mentioned, but likewise in all creatures, which are in the universal world.
For it is all composed of contrary natures. And yet God their father makes
them to fit so well together, that he reduces all discord into concord, and
all enimitie into amity: as the example is notable in man's body being
compounded of elements and qualities clean contrary one to another; and yet
conioined by such a unity, that the composition and preservation is most firm
and assured, so long time as it pleases God to maintain his work. But this
matter will be more clearly expounded, when we shall discourse of the
elementarie world. Yet before we leave the worthy subject, which has been
given us to discourse upon the celestial fires, it will not be a little
fruitful, if we consider of the image of God, and of his eternal light, which
is proposed to us in the sun: and how the felicity of man's life is
represented by changing of the light into darkness. Which (ARAM) I desire that
we may hear of you.


Of the image of God, and of his light which is proposed to us in the sun:
with the felicity of man's life in the changing of light and of darkness.
Chapter 35.
ARAM. THose matters which hitherto have been by us delivered concerning the
celestial bodies, although they be very briefly touched of us, yet may they
serve for a very good foundation* to give us some entrance into a more lofty
and more excellent Astrology, wherein we have the word of God for our guide.
For it is easy for us already to understand, if we be well instructed
concerning the unity of God in trinity of persons, and if we have in memory
the discourse which we have held concerning the creation of heaven and of the
celestial bodies; what goodly images of this divine essence we have pourtraied
in them, and principally in the sun; who alone is in the world sufficient for
the total universe: even as there is but one God, who is the sufficiency of
all creatures. Moreover as this visible sun is a fountain of light, which is
never exhausted nor yet diminishes in communicating himself with all
creatures, Eccles. 42.
but is perpetual; so is it of God, concerning whom it is written, that he
has garnished the excellent works of his wisdom, being from everlasting,
and to everlasting for ever; and that unto him nothing can be added, neither
can he be diminished. 1. Tim. 6.
Moreover, when it is said of God, that he dwells in inaccessible light, by
reason that it is incomprehensible to all creatures: James. 1. Mal. 4. John.
13.8.9.12. Matthew. 5. Ephesians. 6.
and when he is called the father of light, and his son Jesus Christ the
son of Justice, and the light of the world and his word; and likewise they
who hear it, and who receive it are called lights, candles, lamps, and
burning torches: we must by so many testimonies, propound unto us in our
understanding another invisible and spiritual world, of which this same
visible and corporal one is nothing but a very rude pourtraiture, and an
image much differing from that which it represents: and so conclude, that if
this image and picture, and that which yet we behold not, but as in a dim
glass, be a thing so goodly and so excellent; that indeed it may be covered
with the veil of this All, which we so much admire. Eccles. 43.
For we may say with Ecclesiasticus: That there are hid yet many greater things
then these be, and we have seen but few of his works. For (as he adds) who
has seen him that he may tell us? And who can magnify him as he is?
Consequently let us set before our eyes all this invisible and spiritual
world, replenished with souls and spirits, as we behold this visible world
replenished with bodies: and let us contemplate twice as many spiritual eyes
in this intelligible sphere as there be corporal in all men, and in other
living creatures: and then let us mount up to God, and to Jesus Christ our
Lord, which is the Son that illuminateth and lightneth all: and so let us
consider how bright this son must be, and what is the light and splendour of
him, considering that he is the great Son, eternal, infinite, and
incomprehensible, who has created that Sun which we behold, the light
whereof is not so much in proportion comparable with the least beam of the
divine light, as is the brightness of the least star, yea of a candle compared
with all this visible sun, or as one drop of water balanced with the huge sea.

Now let us consider, that if the sight of this heavenly planet be pleasant to
us, and bring unto us joy and comfort through his light and heat, being cause
of so many profits and benefits to all creatures: how much more should the
contemplation of the great everlasting Son be delightful unto us? and what
inexplicable benefits does it bring to men, namely to their souls and spirits?
For this is the true Sun of justice, which according to the prophet, has
health in his wings, that is, in his beams, Mal. 4.
by which he makes men enjoy life eternal. And therefore very fitly does the
Scripture compare, not only the knowledge of God, but also his favor and
grace, and the times of prosperity, and of his aid and succor, to the light:
as also it compares men's ignorance of God, and the times of adversity, and of
his fury and vengeance, to the night and to darkness. Isay 60.
For this cause Isay willing to declare a great grace of God to the people of
Israel, says amongst other things. [Thou shall have no more sun to shine by
day, neither shall the brightness of the Moon shine unto thee: for the Lord
shall be thine everlasting light, and thy God, thy glory; thy sun shall
never go down, neither shall thy Moon be hid: for the Lord shall be thine
everlasting light, and the days of thy sorrow shall be ended.] And when the
prophets denounce unto men any great and horrible and fearful judgment of
God, they commonly say: that the sun, Isay. 13. and 24. Joel. 2. Acts 2.
Matthew. 24. Isay. 34.
the moon, and the stars shall loose their brightness: that the sun shall
wax dark, and the moon shall be turned into blood, and the stars shall
fall from heaven; and the heaven it self shall roll like a scrowle: so that
the whole face of the world shall be changed, as if it should be turned vpside
down, and perish clean. And though these things come not to pass just so in
respect of the creatures, yet do the prophets by such manner of speech
signify the greatness of the judgments of God, and of his wrath, when he
punishes man. For though the nature which he has created, does still remain
in one estate; yet it happens commonly to men, according to the feeling which
they have of the wrath of God (except they be altogether obdurate against his
judgments) as if the whole frame of the world were ouerturned, and as if all
creatures should set themselves against them to war upon them and confound
them, by rushing on them, and running at them. Isay. 9.
On the other side Isay declaring the grace which God would show to his people,
speaks thus: [The people that walked in darkness have seen light; they that
dwelled in the land of the shadow of death, upon them has the light shined.
Isay. 60.
] Again, in another place: [Arise oh Jerusalem, be bright, for thy light is
come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee. For behold, darkness shall
cover the earth, and gross darkness the people: but the Lord shall arise upon
thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee. And the Gentiles shall walk in
thy light, and kings at the brightness of thy rising up.] But the prophet
speaks in another kind of language to the people, when he talks to the
wicked, Isay. 59.
and tells them amongst other things: [Therefore is judgment far from us,
and justice does not come near us: We wait for light, but lo, it is
darkness: for brightness, but we walk in darkness. We grope for the wall like
the blind, and we feel with our hands, as one that were without eyes. We
stumble at noone days, as in darkness: we are in solitary places as dead men.
Luke. 22. Ephesians. 6.
] And therefore also the kingdom of the devil is called in holy-writ, the
kingdom of darkness; and he which is the king is named the Prince of darkness.
But the people of God requesting that the knowledge of him might be spread
abroad throughout the whole earth, with all prosperity and blessedness says in
the Psalms. Psalm. 67.
[God be merciful unto us, and bless us, and cause his face to shine amongst
us.] So likewise the author of these divine Canticles chaunteth to the same
purpose. [Lord lift up the light of thy countenance upon us: Psalm. 7.
] that is to say, thy favor and benignity, as afterward he declares.

Pursuing then this doctrine of the holy scriptures, we must learn by that
which has been propounded unto us, concerning the image of God in the sun,
and by the discourse of his light, and of the darkness contrary thereto,
Worthy instructions concerning the effects of the sun.
how the sovereign and great eternal Sun hides his face from us, and how
he shows it unto us, and what good, and what evil does thereby redound unto
us, according as his word teaches us in the fore-alledged testimonies. For as
we have in the course of nature, one while day, and another while night; and
those sometimes long, sometimes short; and as many of one as of another; in one
season summer, in another winter; now hot, anon cold; then dry, and afterward
wet; so at this time tempest, presently calm weather: even so runs all the
course of man's life. For we have therein the time of ignorance and adversity,
of chastisements, punishments, and vengeance of God, which are the night and
time of darkness to men, and their winter and tempestuous seasons. And so have
we the time of knowledge and understanding of God, and of prosperity, of
grace, of joy, of felicity, and of consolation, which are to men like the day
and the light, and as the springtime and summer. And as the days and nights
are some longer, and some shorter: so the Lord prolongeth or abridgeth the
times of grace and of rigor; of his favor and of his wrath, as he pleases, and
in such measure as he knows to be expedient, as well for his own glory, as
for the good of his elect. Wherefore as we expect day after the night; the
springtime and summer after autumn and winter: so in the time of adversity
we must attend in good confidence the time of prosperity, as we are assured to
have light after darkness. Likewise as in the day time we look for the night;
and for autumn and winter after the springtime and summer: so in time of
prosperity we must prepare for adversity. For as it is written, [To all
things there is an appointed time, Eccles. 3.
] and therefore there is a time of joy, and a time of sorrow, a time to laugh,
and a time to weep. Now if we could consider these things by the course of the
sun, and by the change and succession of the days and nights, of the light
and of darkness, and of the diverse seasons, which succeed in each year: we
should learn in this school a most profitable and laudable Astronomy, which
is not found in the books of Ptolemie, nor of all the other Astrologers, how
skillful soever they were, which have written concerning the knowledge of the
stars. For when we should be in prosperity, we would take heed not to abuse
our selves, to misgouerne our selves, and become too insolent, as it ordinarily
comes to pass, when we are too much at our ease, and think it will be
always so with us. And thereupon ensues, that so soon as we are deceived of
our persuasion, we become desperate, because that we find our selves in the
danger and snares of mischance before we think of it. But when we shall
consider the reuolutions and changes which have been accustomed to come to the
world: we shall foresee like good Astrologers and prognosticators, the tempest
coming a far off, and the eclipses of the sun and of the moon; and while it
is day, we shall prepare for the night: and in summer time for the winter, like
good housekeepers. So likewise being in adversity, we shall not loose courage
nor despair: but we shall comfort our selves in the hope of Gods help, and
will patiently endure the bad season, until such time as he has by the light
of his favor and grace chased away the darkness of the scourges of his wrath and
vengeance. Thus concluding the subject of our speech, let us entreat
especially of the eclipses of the sun and moon, and of their nature and
effects. For we may thereby again receive excellent instructions for this
life: as (ACHITOB) you can declare unto us.


Of the eclipses of the sun and moon; and of the image which we have
therein: of the constancy which is in God, and of the inconstancy of men, and
of humane things. Chap. 36.
ACHITOB. THe consideration of the eclipses of the sun and moon has opened
to men the knowledge of many excellent secrets in nature, as the writings of
the learned make mention. Cause of eclipses.
Now they concur all in this point, that the eclipse of the sun happens
through the diametrall interposition of the moon between it and the earth:
and that the shadow of the earth reaching out betwixt the sun and moon,
causes her also to be darkened and eclipsed: So that as the moon depriueth
the earth of the brightness of the sunne-beames; so likewise does the shadow of
the earth hinder the moon of the solarie illumination. But the eclipses of
these two planets do differ greatly: Difference of eclipses.
for that of the sun happens not through default of light in the body
thereof, as it does in the eclipse of the moon. For the sun is never without
light, inasmuch as it is the proper substance thereof. But when the earth is
directly between these two planets, then does the moon become thorough dark,
because she retains no light, at least that may appear to us, but only so
much as she receives from the sun. Therefore then according as her course is
direct, or opposite in respect of that of the sun, she does augment or
decrease in light, continually changing her estate in appearance, and according
as we behold her, though that in effect, and according to the verity of her
essence, she has always one half lightened by the sun. For we must
understand, that the moon is round like a bowl, and that always, except when
she is eclipsed, How one moity of the moon is ever light.
she receives light from the sun into one half of her globe, the other
half remaining without brightness. But insomuch as she moves continually,
therefore according as she retireth from, or approaches to the sun; so does
she appear diverse in her light: which notwithstanding does illuminate at all
times one moitie of her circularly, from one part to another, that is, from her
superior part to her inferior part, or from her inferior to her superior part.
Now her inferior or lower part is that which looks toward the earth, all of
which, or any part thereof we behold when it is lightened: and her superior or
upper part is that which is toward the sphere of the sun, which we cannot
behold although it be illuminated by him. Now once a month all her inferior
moitie receives the brightness of the sun, and then does she appear unto us
full of light: which comes to pass on the fifteenth day of the moons age,
because that then she does oppositely confront the sun. Another time the
superior moitie is fully illuminated, to wit, when she is conioined with the
sun, which is over her; and then is her lower part darkened, not appeering to
us for two days: which comes to pass at the end of the moon: and all the
rest of the month she has diverse illuminations. For from her conjunction with
the sun, the light in the upper part begins to fail, and by little and
little to come to the lower part toward us, according as she moves,
reculing from the sun: and so does till the fifteenth day, wherein all the
inferior part toward the earth is shining, and the superior part is clean
without light. After which time the light begins to convey it self to the
upper moitie, decreasing by little and little toward us in the lower moitie,
which at last is left clean without brightness, and the other which we see not
becomes all shining. And it is to be noted, that the horns of the Moon
which her diverse aspect shows us, turn their back-parts toward the sun:
and if she increases, they are turned toward the sun rising; if she be in
the waine, they turn to the sun setting. She shines moreover, adding to each
day three quarters and the four and twentieth part of an hour, beginning from
the second day, till the time she make full moon; and from that time forwards
using the like substraction every day, till the time that she appears no more
at all. And when she is within fowerteene degrees of the sun, she is seen no
more. Whereby it appears, The moon smaller then the other planets.
that all the rest of the planets are greater then the moon: for none of them
is hid or obscured by the beams of the sun, except it be within seven
degrees thereof. But in that they are all of them higher then the moon is,
they seem to be lesser: so in the same consideration it comes to pass, that
the brightness of the sun hinders us of the sight of the fixed stars in the
day time, which nevertheless shine as well in the day as in the night time; as
may be perceived at the eclipses of the sun, as likewise in a very deep pit,
if one should descend thereunto in the day time. Things to be considered in the
shadow of the earth.
Moreover all these stars are never eclipsed: For the shadow of the earth,
which causes the moon to loose her light, reaches not beyond her heaven. And
the night also, is no other thing but the shadow of the earth, which shadow is
in form like a pyramid; growing still less and less taperwise toward a
point, till at last it fades: For all shadows wax less and less till they
be clean diminished by distance, as may evidently be seen by shadows of
birds, which fly in the air. Now the shadow of the earth finisheth in the
air at the beginning of the region of fire: and above the moon al things are
pure: wherefore it is not possible that the terrestrial shadow can hinder the
brightness of the stars, which are above the moon. And therefore likewise we
behold them in the night time like a candle in a dark place. But the shadow of
the earth is the very cause that the moon is eclipsed always by night. Why
the eclipses happen not every month.
And it is to be noted, in that, that the eclipses both of the sun and moon
happen not every month, that it is by reason of the obliquenes of the
Zodiac, and of the variable motions of the moon, which being sometimes north
and sometimes south (as we have heretofore declared) meets not always in
conjunction, or in opposition in the knots of the ecliptic circle, which are
in the head, or in the tail of the dragon. We may note also, that the
consideration of the shadows and eclipses aforesaid, has taught men to judge
of the greatness of the sun, of the moon, and of the earth. How one may ^udg
of the greatness of the sun, the moon and the earth.
For first it should be impossible that there had been any universal eclipse
of the sun, by the diametrall interposition of the moon, if the earth were
greater then the moon. Again this planet, and the shadow of the earth
delivers unto us greater certainty that the unmeasurable magnitude of the
sun is much more then their own: Hist. not. lib. 2.
in such sort that (as Pliny says) there need nothing more be required to
judge of the immensitie of the sun by the eye, or by conjectures, since that
the trees planted by the way side have all of them their shadows
proportionably equal, though there be much distance of ground betwixt them: as
if the sun were in the midst of them, and did give light to all alike. And
during the time that the sun is in the Equinoctiall-point, over the southern
climates and regions, he casts his light down right, without making any
shadow: and yet in the north regions on this side the solstice-circle, the
shadows fall on the north side at noone, and toward the west at sun rising,
which could not happen if the sun were not very much greater then the earth.
But leaving this discourse, we must out of our speech learn some point of
Christian Astrology. Now we have heard, that the moon has no light of her
self (at least that can appear unto us) but so much as she receives from the
sun, according to the disposition or opposition of their diverse courses: in
such sort, that the moon never persisteth in one estate, but changes
incessantly. But it is not so with the sun, for he has always as much
light, at one time as at another, and is not subject to any change. I say then
that in him we have a goodly image of the constant and immutable God, who is
always one, The image of God in the sun.
and ever without any variation, and who, firm in his counsel, has ordained
concerning all things for ever, according to his endless, right, and just
will. Mal. 3. In the moon is an image of the creatures.
So contrariwise we have represented to us in the moon a perfect figure of the
creatures, by which is demonstrated unto us, that all things under heaven are
mutable and subject to continual change: and also that according as we receive
our salvation in Christ through faith, and as we increase therein; in such
degree are we made partakers of his divine light and of all his graces and
blessings, even as the moon participateth of the brightness of the sun. Many
worthy points to consider of in christian Astrology.
Moreover we shall have learned a worthy point of Christian Astrology, when
we shall consider, that as these two celestial planets have perpetual
alliance and communication together: even so the conjunction which is betwixt
Jesus Christ and his church is eternal. And therefore according as it is said
in the common proverb, (God keeps the moon from wolves) the faithful may
very aptly speak this of themselves concerning their enemies, because they are
much surer in the alliance of the Almighty, and under his protection. For as
the sun shall never be without the moon, nor the moon without the sun: so
the eternal son of God shall never be without his church, nor his church
without him, although we see it sometimes increase, and sometimes decrease, and
sometimes as if it clean failed, and were vanished, like the eclipsed moon.
But as the moon does not so fail by any eclipse that can happen, but that it
persisteth to remain a moon still, though she be not seen of men: so the
church can never clean fail, nor be so consumed, but that it shall ever be
a church, notwithstanding that it may seem to humane sight and exterior
appeerance to be nothing at all, and without any vigor. For it is founded upon
the firm rock which is Jesus Christ, and therefore all the power of hell
cannot prevail against it nor waste it. And the Lord can always tell who be
his, though men know it not. Next we must learn, that as the moon is
eclipsed, when she is so opposed to the sun, that the shadow of the earth,
spread out between them both, hinders her to receive that light from him,
which she is accustomed to attract: so comes it to men in the church when
their sins are like an obscure cloud, and an obstacle, which hinders the
favor and grace of God, that it cannot attain to them; and when there be mists
and darknesses of ignorance, which do detain them from beholding of Jesus
Christ the true sun of their souls, and to commit themselves to be guided by
the light of his word. But as the sun fails not though he be eclipsed in
regard of us; so the sovereign head of the elect does never fail to his
church; though he may seem sometimes to be absent, and quite withdrawn: for
he always supporteth it by his power. And therefore also it is written that
the woman (by whom the church is signified) has the moon under her feet:
Apocal. 12.
which is as much to say, as that the conversation of the children of God,
which are members of the church, is not in earth, but in heaven (as Saint Paul
testifies) and that they have already put under their feet all worldly
things, Phil. 3.
which are mutable and inconstant: insomuch as they live after the spirit and
not after the flesh, Romans 8.
and are illuminated by Jesus Christ, who is the true sun of justice, that by
the brightness of his word and of his coming discovers all things. It is most
certain, that the number of these is very small in respect of those worldly
men, Man subject to greater changes then the moon.
who following the nature of elementarie and corporal things, are subject to
greater changes then the moon hirselfe: which being lower then all the other
stars and planets, and by so much nearer to the earth, receives likewise some
mutation greater then the rest of the stars: as if God would represent unto
us in her, the changings, whereto the elements and all creatures composed of
them, which are under the celestial spheres, are ordinarily subject. And yet
does not the moon change from her proper nature, which was ordained by the
creator from the beginning, as we have already declared: yea though that in
regard of us, and of our sight, she have the foresaid mutations; yet does she
never fail, but does evermore repair himself, and presently renew: so that
we see her not wear away in such manner, but that she persisteth without
ceasing in her proper and natural course. But it is not so with men, who
change not only from day to day, but also from hour to hour, from instant
to instant, from age to age. For as they daily proceed in growth of body and of
strength, from the hour of their conception and birth from time to time,
until they be arrived to their full vigor like the full moon: so after they
are ascended to this degree, they always abate and decline, till their
extremest age, and to death, wherein they utterly fail in respect of this
life, as if they had never been. For they cannot do like the moon, who after
her defect does continually repair and restore herself, till such time as she
show herself full and entier: But they are constrained to attend for that last
day, Acts. 3.
which is called by Saint Peter the day of the restitution and restoration of
all things foretold by the prophets. So then in that day shall we be renewed in
a permanent estate for ever. Behold then what (me seems) we must consider
like christians upon our discourses of the sun and of the moon. And having
hitherto entreated of the heavenly world, and of the spheres sufficiently to
content a Christian astronomer: we will now proceed to describe the elementary
world: whereof (ASER) you shall begin to speak; instructing us in the
principles of natural and corruptible things.


Of the beginning of natural and corruptible things. Chapter 37.
ASER. ALl Philosophers with one consent do teach, that there has been at
first (or at leastwise one must understand so) some subject without form, Of
the first matter of a^^ things.
capable of all forms, which they called (matter) or (Hyle) that is to say,
the substance or stuff, which some also have named (Chaos) and which is
properly described by Moses in these Hebrew words (Tohu and Bohu) which is as
much to say, as I wot not what thing without form, containing by possibility
all that which could be formed. Plato in his Timaeo calls it a Bosom without
form, a power which is mother of the world, a nurse, a subject, and a
receptacle of forms; and says that it was not distinguished by any quantity,
nor by any degree. And because that out of this first subject innumerable
things were to be produced, Anaxagoras disputes how that in the same were
contained infinite forms and numbers not limited, which the only understanding
and thought creator of all things had drawn out in effect. And this Aristotle
attributes to nature, though sometimes he seems to distinguish this nature
from God, and make them companions, oftentimes repeating these words [God, and
Nature made] or [made nothing without cause.] Now for us we know, that that
nature which the philosophers called disposing and distinguishing, can be
nothing else but God only, as appears by sundry reasons which we have
heretofore deduced. Wherefore holding this to be confessed, we must be sure,
that the perpetual generation of things, declares that it is a matter which
has at first been made by some other means. For corn comes of the earth,
and of humor: animals of seed, and of blood or eggs: ashes are made by wood,
and there is nothing so little but it is made of some subject. But in all these
generations, it is necessary that something remain, from which they are
drawn in their first original. When then any creature is engendered by
another, if the form perish, and any thing do remain, it must (of necessity)
be the matter: Nothing can clean perish.
which the corruption it self does manifest, because that nothing can wholly
perish so long as it is corrupted. For the apple perishes, and is converted
into worms, so is the wood into cinders when it is burned: so water changes
it self into vapors and smoke by the heat of the fire, or of the sun. Now
all vapor and smoke is something, for it can stifle a man, and if it be
received and gathered into a vessel, it turns to drops of water. Behold then
how manifest it is, that in all this universe there is a certain thing hidden
under every form, which is not made by common generation, nor yet does perish
by corruption: and which like some prime subject, being divided under many and
sundry forms, we call, as we have already said, the first matter not
engendered, permanent, because it perishes not, but remains and consists
according to the effect thereof. And when we compare it to the forms, we say
that it is by power the same which they are, because that it can receive all
forms: so that the matter of a child being formed, is said to be a child by
power; and by effect it is the subject, whereof the child may consist: for it
is a mixture so fashioned, and such as one may see it. But when it is compared
to the form of the child, it is simply called a matter by power: for if it
were such by effect, then were it a child of it self, and not a subject of
him. So then by the consent of all Philosophers, there is a certain gross
matter disfurnished of forms, but capable of all, though by nature it be
deprived of all. For which cause also they establish with this matter,
privation, Of privation of the changing cause.
for a beginning of natural things. And mounting higher, they consider of a
changing or working cause, by force whereof, the matter being wrought and
mollified, which is only in power, is at length actually performed: even as
wax being plied and softened by handling and working in the hand is fashioned
into diverse forms, according to the will of him that does it. Of the final
cause.
And because that nature does nothing at adventure, but al for some good
purpose: thence it is that the final cause is by some considered as a
principle. Of the form.
And likewise because that the nearest end of the working cause is the form,
which it takes out of the bosom of the matter, and that for this intent it
works and mouldeth it, to the end to reduce it to a perfect estate to receive
a form: for these causes Aristotle constituteth the form for the third
principle. The which cannot be drawn out of the womb of the matter, except it
be first disposed, and prepared by convenient qualities: and therefore the
Philosophers say, that about them the maker bestows and emploieth all his
labor, and all the time of the action, to the end that the species may
presently appear in a point and moment inseperable, as it were for the wages
of his pains. But the Peripateticks call the worker the cause, rather then a
principle. And the followers of Plato, being more cleere-sighted in sacred
mysteries, do teach, that although the natural causes do appear to us of
themselves, forming, fashioning, Th^^ natural^ causes (...) principles.
and moulding every body: yet nevertheless are they not the prime and first
causes of every thing that is made, but rather instruments of the divine art
to whom they serve and obey: even as the hands of a cunning workman though
they compose, place and change the whole matter of an house, as wood, stone,
and mortar, and that nothing besides them may be seen, whereto the fashion of
the edifice might be attributed: yet are they known of us to be an instrument
obeying and serviceable to the Idea, which being seated in the mind of the
Architect, he performs and acts with his hands in sensible matter, the
work which he has conceived. And for this occasion the Academicks speak of
these two causes (the instrumental and the exemplarie cause) when they entreat
of the framing of all things. Which me thinks is often confirmed by the
Peripatetickes, when this axiom is read in their writings, [Euerie work of
nature is the work of Intelligence.] And both the one and the other do
confess, that God has drawn all things out of the matter. But because that
for to draw them out, the matter must necessarily be presupposed, and the
form which thereof is fashioned must be conceived, as also the power or
application and disposition of the said matter: Three principles according to
Aristotle.
Thereupon are sprung the three principles of natural things which Aristotle
ordayneth; to wit, matter, form, and privation. Which opinion Pythagoras
seemed to lean unto; teaching that in the first production of things, there
were present the Even and the Odd: for the Even (according to the doctrine of
those which do philosophically discourse by numbers) and principally the
binarie (or number of two) signifies the matter, and the uneven or odd
betokens the form. Moreover, the degrees of forms and things composed, are
excellently and harmoniously distributed by the Even and Odd numbers, as by
their writings we may easily learn. But let us note, that that which the
Pythagorians signify by numbers, Plato does abundantly describe by greatness
and smalnes: because all that which is, does retain a greater or less degree
of essence and perfection, which nevertheless is distinguished by even and
odd numbers. And if one speak of bodies, every one of them has a great,
little, or mean quantity: which likewise is by the same numbers limited and
distinguished.

But to leave the curious disputation concerning these things to the
Philosophers, and so to grow to the conclusion of our speech concerning the
principles of natural and corruptible things; we must call that into our
memory, which we have already declared: how that the matter stood in need of
a worker and ordayner. Now this same is none other, Of one alone, and only
principle.
but the alone and only principle of principles, and the cause of causes, God
omnipotent, author of the Universe: who being a sovereign worker, has produced
out of the subject by him created all compound bodies. From whom likewise it is
necessary, that all forms do flow, whether they be drawn out of the bosom
of the matter (as some Philosophers affirm) or proceed without any means of
the forme-giuer, as many learned dispute; for he must always be said to be
engendring and producing, which draws the matter into an effect by any manner
whatsoever. Moreover, Motion, and place set by some for principles.
some subtle spirits do account among the principles of natural things Motion
and Place. For they say that the principle Motion seems to be naturally in
all bodies; of which some, as light, are carried aloft; others, as heavy,
descend down: and yet are they not forcibly driven; for then violently they
would return to their proper place. Neither are they drawn: for the place is
an accident and draws no element at all. Then for so much as all motion is made
in place, it seems very well that it must be set for one of the principles
of all things. Now place is the supreme superficies of every body, enuironing
the same round about: which superficies remains, the body being separated.
And every place is equal to the body therein contained. Every body
likewise is in a place, and in every place is a body. For every body has
his extreme superficies, and the place cannot be without a body, considering
that every place is the highest superficies containing a body. And when the
place is taken in regard of the roundnes of the heavens, it is immutable,
insomuch as it contains the entire body of the Universe. But being considered
as the superficies of any particular body, it is changed by the diverse
disposition and alteration of the creatures, and remains not always the
same. Behold then that which I have thought worthy to be summarily noted in
regard of the principles whereof the Philosophers dispute, and of which, and by
which, namely of the form and first matter, the sensible elements of all
corruptible things do consist and are composed. Whereof we are according to
the course of our talk to inform our selves, as [AMANA) you shall presently
do.


Of the elements, and of things to be considered in them in that they are
distinguished by the number of four. Chap. 38.
AMANA. WHen we take the heaven in his most proper signification, we mean
thereby the firmament, and the celestial spheres, which cover and encompasse
all things that are in the universal world. But heaven is likewise taken
oftimes for the air, and for the regions next to the spheres, because they
approach nearest to the nature of them, and for that they be elements drawn out
of the first principles for the composition of corruptible things. And yet in
the division of the world there are commonly mentioned but two principal
parts: that is, the celestial and the elementary part, as we have heretofore
related. Now under this last part, whereof our ensuing discourse must entreat,
we must understand all that, which is comprehended within the concauitie or
hollow vault of heaven, under the Moon, even to the center of the earth: Of
the elementary region.
that is, the four simple elements, which are Fire, Air, Water and Earth,
incessantly employed in the generation and corruption of all creatures, under
the which part we comprise all the diverse and innumerable species of all
bodies, both perfect and imperfect, The number and qualities of the elements.
materially engendered by the natural commixture and power of the said
elements. Which cannot be in number above four; that is just so many, and
neither more nor less then there are first qualities predomina^t in them,
which are heat, moisture, cold and drienes; which nevertheless alone and by
themselves do not constitute an element: for they cannot have the power both to
do and to suffer; as it is needful that there should be in the generation and
corruption of all things: neither can the foresaid qualities consist above two
together, for fear least contrary things should be found in one self same
subject; but being joined two and two, they are correspondent the one to the
other, as the qualities of heat and drines, which are in the fire: the heat and
moisture, which are in the air: cold and moisture, which are in the water: and
cold and drines, which are in the earth. But heat and cold which are active
qualities, and moisture and drines which are passive qualities, are altogether
contrary. And therefore can they not consist both together in one self same
element: Situation of the elements.
whereupon it comes to pass, that the fire and the water, the air and the
earth are clean contrary one to another, which causes also that the fire, as
the most subtle and lightest element tending naturally upwards, is placed
above the other three elements, and enuironeth the air round about, which
agrees in heat with it: which air encompasseth the water, agreeing therewith
in moisture: and the water is dispersed about the earth, and agrees therewith
in coldness; and the same earth, as the most heavy and hardest element, is
heaped and compacted together in the midst of the whole world, containing the
center thereof. It is certain, that the water enuironeth not the earth clean
round about, but is spread abroad by diverse arms, branches, and lakes (which
we call seas) as well within, as about the same: for so it was necessary that
some parts of the earth might be uncovered, for the health and habitation of
living creatures; so as it has pleased the sovereign king of the world to
ordain for the benefit of all things.

There are then four elements and first foundations of things compounded, and
subject to corruption. How the number of four is note-woorthy in diverse things.
And by this number of four perfectly consonant, the elementarie world is
divided into these four parts: the fiery, the airie, the watrie, and the
earthy part: so also is this terrestrial frame distinguished into four
points, to wit; East, West, North, and South, as we know the like to be in the
celestial bodies. And by their diverse motions and courses we obtain the four
seasons of the year, to wit, the spring, summer, autumn, and winter. From
whence likewise proceeds all aid and favor to the substance and composition
of the creatures comprised under these four kinds, that is, corporal,
vegetable, sensitive, and reasonable creatures, which subsist of these four
qualities, hot, cold, moist, and dry. We likewise see that all quantity is
divided into four, to wit, into a point, into a length, breadth, and depth.
There are also four sorts of motion: ascending, descending, progression and
turning round. Moreover if we will here draw out some mysteries of the
Pythagorians, we shall know, that all the foundation of every deep study and
invention, must be settled upon the number of four, because it is the root and
beginning of all numbers, which exceed four. For a unity being joined to a
four, makes up ten: and in this number all the rest to ten are found: as may
appear in this figure [1. 2. 3. 4.] Above which number of ten (as Aristotle in
his problemes, and Hierocles in his verses upon Pythagoras recites) no land,
nor language has ever proceeded. For the Hebrews, Greeks, Latins, and
Barbarians themselves being come so far as to ten, begin again with an
unity; saying (11. 12.) and so forward, imitating nature guided by her
sovereign, who by the order of tens parts the fingers of the hands, and toes
of the feet: as the same creator would distribute the terrestrial,
celestial, and supercelestiall world by this number of ten, as the divinity
of the Hebrews does teach, and as we have heretofore made mention. The which
number likewise does contain all manner of numbers be they even, odd, square,
long, plain, perfect, cubicall, pyramidall, prime, or compound numbers. And
thereby, that is, by denarie proportions, four cubicall numbers are
accomplished: so four is the root of ten, and ten of an hundred, and an
hundred of a thousand. For as 1. 2. 3. and 4. make ten: so by tens are hundreds
made; and by hundreds, thousands. Moreover four contains all musical
harmony, because that therein is the proportion double, triple, quadruple, of
so much and an half, and of so much and a third: whereof resulteth the
diapason, the bisdiapason, diapente, diatesseron, and diapason together with
diapente. For this cause Hierocles the interpreter of Pythagoras, does so
extol this number of four, that he affirms it to be the cause of all
things, and that nothing can be said or done, which proceeds not from it, as
from the root and foundation of all nature. And therefore did the Pythagorians
swear by this number, as by some holy thing, making (as may be easily
coniectured) allusion to that great fower-lettered name of the Hebrews, The
name of God foure-lettered.
from whom they received their instructions. Which name of the holy of holies,
God eternal and most good, requires no fewer letters among the Greeks and
Latins, no not amongst the most barbarous nations: wherein one may directly
believe that great mysteries are hidden.

That the four elements do found all doctrine, and art.
But not to wander farther from our elementarie region: as therein we
acknowledge four elements; so many likewise are there in the Metaphysics, to
wit, the essence, the estate, the virtue, and the action. The naturalist also
teaches four nurses of nature, to wit, power, growth, the form grown, and
the composition. And the Mathematicians have these four elements, the point,
the line, the plain, and the solid. And that which the point is in the
Mathematics, the same is the seminary power in the Phisickes: the line is as
the natural growth: the plain or superficies as the form perfect in
greatness, and the solid or cube, or deep body, as the composition. There are
amongst the moral philosophers also four seeds of virtues, prudence,
temperatenes or temperance, fortitude and justice. And there are four
faculties found to judge of things, that is, understanding, discipline,
opinion, and the senses. Artificers likewise accustom to settle their
buildings upon four corners, to the end they may be firm and durable: wherein
they imitate nature, which works so in all this world. And the sovereign
governor thereof has willed, that there should be four foundations of the
most perfect, eternal, and firm law of grace, to wit, the four Evangelists.
Agreement of the elements.
It then plainly appears, that not without great mystery the creator settled
four foundations of all this mundane frame: which in admirable proportion do
accord together, as al square numbers, which are enclosed by a proper number,
refer themselves by a middle proportional to both sides. For (as we have
said) the elements are agreeable one to another, with their coupled qualities,
whereof each retains one peculiar quality to it self, and agrees in the
other, as by a mean with the next element. So that the four elements are (as
if each one of them had two hands, by which they held one another) as in a
round dance: or else, as if they were conioined and linked together, as with
chains and buckles. And therefore the water is moist and cold, retaining the
moisture as peculiar to it self, and in coldness participating with the nature
of the earth: by the moisture thereof, it is also allied unto the air; which
also in some measure participateth in heat with the nature of fire. Wherefore
as the earth accords in coldness with the water; so is the water answerable in
moisture to the air; and the air is correspondent in heat to the fire:
retaining yet nevertheless each of them one proper and predominant quality. But
above all, the Academicks have invented a goodly concord between these
elements, in their discourses of the quadruple proportion; from which only
their musical proportions do proceed: for if one pass farther, men's ears
seem to be offended. They say then, Of the harmony of the elements.
that the fire is twice more subtle then the air, thrice more mooueable, and
four times more pearsing. Likewise that the air is twice more sharp then the
water, thrice more subtle, and four times more mooueable. Again that the
water is twice more sharp then the earth, thrice more subtle, and fower-times
more mooueable. And in this proportion have they found out the harmony of the
elements, and showed, that though the fire be sharp, subtle, and mooueable;
the air subtle, mooueable, and moist; the water mooueable, moist, and
corporal; the earth corporal, immooueable, and dry; yet is there a certain
accord and union between them: because that betwixt the fire and the earth,
the air and water have been placed by such a covenant, that there is the same
respect betwixt the fire and the air, that is between the air and the water;
and between the water and the earth: and again, that such as the earth is
toward the water; such is the water toward the air, and the air toward the
fire, in correspondencie of qualities, and harmonious contrariety. Wherefore
they conclude, that the harmony is on all sides so great among the elements,
that it is no marvel if in their proper places, and in their compounds, they
maintain and repose themselves with very great and friendly concord. Whereby
it appears, that none can induce a goodlier reason, why the water does not
ouerflow the earth being higher then it; then to say, that it will not swerve
from this agreement. But further concerning this matter, what shall we say of
those, which accept but of three elements; namely the air, the water, and the
earth; and reject the elementary fire? I would feign hear you (ARAM) discourse
thereof.


Of the opinion of those who admit but three elements, not acknowledging the
elementary fire. Chapter 39.
ARAM. Between the lowest place and the highest, it is necessary that there
should be two places simply mean, to wit, the places not exactly lowest, nor
highest. And for that consideration some of the learned conclude, that there be
so many simple bodies made, and consisting of the prime and first matter, which
are called by the Greeks ((...)) that is, beginnings or elements, and of those
proceeds the generation of all corruptible things. And if probable arguments
may ought prevail, each one must acknowledge four elements in all compound
bodies, as the most part of those, who have diligently considered the works of
nature, are of opinion. Now there is none that can doubt of the earth, of the
water, and of the air, because of their greatness and huge extension seen by
every eye. But for the fire, we only see the increase, the power, and simple
matter thereof, and his force or fountain is esteemed to be in the concauitie
of the moon above the air. Of such as say that there is no fire under the
sphere of the moon.
Yet some among the natural Philosophers affirm and maintain, that there is
no fire under the orb of the moon: neither will acknowledge any other
elementary fire, but the fires of the celestial bodies, and the heat of them,
which they communicate to all the rest of the creatures. And therefore they
assign to these fires all the space, which is from the moon to the highest
heaven. Saying moreover, that since the heaven is a thing most pure, it is not
convenient to place a thing most burning under that which is exempt from all
quality. For nature does always join extremities with things of mean
quality: as is found betwixt the flesh and the bones where she has placed a
filme or thin skin; and between the bones and the ligatures, she has put
the gristles: so betwixt the scull and the brain, because it is softer then
flesh, nature has placed two filmes, the hardest whereof is nearest to the
bone of the head. Thereupon then they conclude, that the air is much fitter
then the fire to be next the heavens, and serve as a mean to join them with
the earth and water. And against it they argue, that swiftnes of motion is the
cause or argument of the heat, and that there is no other fire: others again
avouch, that this cannot be. For (say they) although that solid substances may
by motion be heated (as stones, lead, and living creatures) yet those which
disperse or scatter themselves abroad, become thereby so much the colder, by
how much they are more lightly moved, witness the air and the water. For all
strong and swift winds are cold, and rivers that have a quick course are very
cold. Again those that deny the elementarie fire, Reasons of such as deny the
fire to enuiron the air.
do bring this argument; to wit, that the comets and flames which oftentimes do
appear in the heavens, do cause in the air very great and as it were
intolerable heates: Therefore they demand, what might happen if the universal
world, especially the elementarie, were environed by fire, who could hinder but
that that fire would inflame the air, and after it all other things, since the
heat of the celestial bodies would thereto give aid? They add how Auerrois
does esteem that all brightness is hot, and that the air is such: and that
every moist quality does least of all other resist heat. How then (say they)
shall the air resist the fire which is the most vehement, and most sharp of
all elements? It is true that this Arabicke author has said, that sometimes
the fire is not actually hot: but what then shall be his possibility? We say
that some medicines are hot by possibility, because that being taken they heat
woondrously. But by what creatures shall the fire be devoured, to the end to
reduce it to the quality of medicines? Moreover, if the fire be not hot, then
is not the water cold: which should be to confound al reason, and the very
order of the world. Again, they demand what it is that lets the fire, that
it shines not, and that it is not seen in the elementarie region? Again, if
fire be in the air, why then, the higher we mount, do we find the air more
cold, and why do snowes more abound on the mountain tops, then in the lowest
places, yea under the torrid zone? Which nevertheless might not seem strange,
if one should consider, how snow falls in winter only, and very cold hail
in midst of summer, the cause whereof we shall hereafter discover. But (say
they) if one should object that the highest places are farthest remote from the
reuerberation of the sun: this may be an argument of less heat, but not of
coldness. In fine they add, that if heat were in the highest of the air in an
elementary body, it should principally there rest, for to cause the generation
of things. Now for this reason it cannot be there, considering that the
celestial heat is it that does engender, as al Philosophers maintain.
Thereupon they conclude, that this imagination of fire above the air is vain.
It seems also that be a thing never so light, as is the fire; yet can it not
mount so exceeding high: and to say that it was carried aloft, only
coniecturing so, and that the place thereof must be there, such Rhetorical
arguments are not worth rehearsing in serious matters.

Answer to many reasons which are alleged to prove four elements.
There are some also, which to the reasons by us before touched in the beginning
of this speech, do reply; that it seems they do not conclude that there be
four simple bodies, but rather the contrary. For, for the first betwixt two
extremes one mean (and not two) is commonly assigned: which being considered
in regard of the elements, there should only be three in number. And for this
vulgar opinion, that in all compound bodies there are esteemed to be four
elements; the heat which is in mixed and compound substances cannot consist of
elementarie fire: For if the fire should remain in them, it should much more
rest in the herb called (Euphorbium) and in Pepper, which are of an extreme
hot and dry nature; and therefore one might more commodiously get fire out of
them then out of most cold stones, which yet we find to be clean
contrary. Moreover, the distillations wherein many strain themselves to
search the four elements, do demonstrate but three substances only, to wit,
water for water, oil instead of air, and the earth which is in the bottom.
Now if that any do say that the reddest part of the oil does represent the
fire, because it is very sharp and very subtle, we will answer, that such
piercing sharpnes of savor proceeds from the vehement virtue of the fire,
which operateth in the distillation. Which likewise does manifestly appear in
the oil extracted from metals: every part whereof is of a very sharp
savor. Wherefore if every thing of such a quality represents the fire, it
must follow of necessity, that in every such essence no portion of air may
subsist. But all the world does allege, that there may four humors be
perceived to remain in the bodies of all living creatures. And yet what
avails that to prove so many elements? Nay, what if I should say with
Thrusianus expounder of Galen upon the art of Physic; that there are but
three humors only? But leave we this disputation, and let us speak of a more
strong and forcible argument, taken from the combinations and conjunctions of
the elementarie qualities which are in number four, as we have heard in our
precedent discourse. They alone then and apart do not constitute an element;
for they cannot have the power to do and to suffer: neither also can they
consist more then two togegither; for else, contraries should remain in one
self same subject. Neither can heat be joined with cold without some mean,
nor dry with moist: Whereupon does follow that the qualities not contrary,
being joined two and two together, do declare unto us four well ordered
combinations or couplings, which do argue unto us the four elements. But
hearken what the aduers part answers: Such conjunctions and copulations do
only show themselves in mixtures and compound bodies: for some things being
hot in the first degree, are also moist; and some being cold, are dry: others
are hot and dry; others cold and moist; and so consquently of the rest. But
for the elements because that heat and great drines had reduced all things to
an end, in steed of ministering a beginning unto them; Nature, or rather the
author of Nature, Of the celestial heat producing fire.
has ordained a celestial heat well tempered, by which all things should be
engendered: And by it, and by putrefaction and motion, the creature called Fire
is incessantly produced. Whereupon ensues, that though there be a fire, yet
nevertheless it is no element: And therefore they conclude, that there are but
three elements. The earth most thick and heavy seated below: the air most
thin and light placed above: and the water mean betwixt these qualities
situate between both. They also affirm, that unto these elements it is common
to have no natural heat: because there is no heat, but from the heavens, and
consequently from the soul, and from brightness: That the earth because it is
exceeding thick and solid, and the air, because it is beyond measure thin,
seem to be least cold: but the water which is of mean substance between
both, seems to be most cold. That the earth, because of some certain
thinness thereof, admits heat: and therefore is esteemed less cold then
stones. And the air because of the temperate cleernes, and for that by the
thinness thereof it is easily changed, is esteemed not only not to be cold,
but to be hot, though in truth all the elements are cold by their own nature.
Which coldness is nothing else, but priuatio^ of heat, which heat does wholly
rest in the stars, and which is a proper celestial quality moving the body,
which aided by motion produces fire. But (say they) many may be deceived by
reason of the violent heat, which sometimes makes impression in the elements.
For by the action of the stars, some parts of the elements are mixed and
participate with the nature of the celestial bodies, as Pepper becomes hot:
And yet such mingling cannot be said to be an element, but a thing composed
partly of elements. And for the fire which lights by the striking and beating
of stones, that it is likewise an heat of the stars in a body rarefied by the
celestial power. By these reasons then they conclude, that two qualities do
only appear unto us, the heat of heaven, and the proper moisture of the
elements: and as for dry and cold, that they be the priuations of those
qualities: and that therefore a thing very hot, or very cold cannot properly
be called an element: What an element is.
but that that may be said to be an element, which has no need of nourishment,
which of it self is not corrupt, neither wandreth here and there, but
retayneth a certain place in great quantity according to nature, and is
prepared for generation. All which things not agreeing with the fire, because
it is always moved, neither can subsist without nouriture; and burns the
air which is next it, whereby being inflamed, it is called a flame (for flame
is nothing else, but the air inflamed:) it follows that it cannot be called
an element, but rather an accidental and great heat. Behold then how
Philosophers do diversely dispute upon this matter: but our intention is not to
give sentence therein, especially against the ancient, and generally confirmed
opinion, which admits four elements. Wherefore as leaning thereunto, tell us
(ACHITOB) how they may be considered by the perfect compositions which are in
the world.


Of the perfect compositions which are in the nature of all things, by which
the four elements may be considered. Chap. 40.
ACHITOB. ACcording as we are taught by those, who have first diligently sought
out the secrets of nature, we shall consider an elementarie fire, and the
element thereof, approaching the heavenly spheres, by reason of the natural
agreement which they have together, being much greater then there is of the
heavens with the air, the water and the earth. Now these four elements do
demonstrate themselves by the like number of perfect compounds, The agreement
of stones with the earth.
which follow the nature of them: to wit, by stones, metals, plants, and
animals or sensitive creatures. For stones have their foundation or original
upon the earthie corner of this worlds frame: because that agreeing with the
nature of earth, they descend always toward the center, except they be such
as are ouer-dried and burned; as are the pumice-stones which are made spungie
in caves full of air. But when they are turned into dust, then resuming their
proper nature of stones, they descend. Crystal and the Beryll are also
numbered among stones: because that though they may be engendered of water, they
are nevertheless so congealed and in manner frozen, that being made earthie
they descend downwards; which is not the manner of frost and snow. So is it
with those stones that are bredde in the bladder, though they be produced of a
waterie humor. And all these kinds of stones become so close and solid in
their nature, with such fastnes and binding, that they cannot be molten like
metals: although the said metals descend downewardes like stones. Metals
agreeing with the water.
And therefore also upon the second watrie angle of the elementarie world,
metals are builded: which though they be said to be composed of all the
elements, yet because they are principally made of water, they retain the
nature thereof, and will melt, as Abubacher does excellently discourse,
speaking thus: [We see in mines, that by reason of the continual heat of some
mountains, the thickest of the water steweth and boileth so, that in tract of
time it becomes quicksiluer. And of the fat of the earth so stewed and boiled
together with heat, is brimstone engendered, and through continual heat also
are metals procreated. For gold that has no default is engendered of
quicksiluer, and of brimstone that is pure, tough, clear, and red. Silver of
the same liquid silver, and of close, pure, clear and white sulphur; wherein
color wants, and something of the closenes and surenes, and consequently of
weight. Tin, that is more imperfect, is engendered of the same causes, and
parts imperfect, because they are less concocted and attenuated. Lead, of the
same terrestriall-siluer, and full of filth, deprived of pureness and surenes:
and of gross sulphur or brimstone somewhat red, whereto wants fastnes,
clearnes, and weight: which makes this metal imperfect and impure. And Iron
is procreated of the same quicksiluer, impure, tough, part earthie and burnt,
white, and not clear: which makes this metal base and foul, failing in
pureness and in weight. All which metals being made of quicksiluer, which is
waterie, do (for this cause) retain the nature of the water.] To this author
accords Auicen in his Phisickes, and in the epistle to Hazem the philosopher.
But Gilgil the Spanyard supposed that metals had been engendered of cinders,
because they sink in water, and melt like the glass, which is drawn from
terrestriall-cinders, and beaten stone. But this concludes not: for metal
sinketh and descends, by reason of that terrestrial part which it has
incorporated with the liquid part, and because that the pores which retain the
air, are closed and shut up. And for glass, it is not extracted out of the
earthie matter, but out of the radical moisture, which is within the cinders
and stones. For in every compound are the four elements, though the nature of
one has more domination therein. For this cause likewise plants are founded
upon the third angle of the world, called airie: Concord of the plants with the
air.
for they do not grow nor fructify, but in open day, and do properly
retain the nature of the air, which they always require, as being fittest
and aptest for them. Yea the wood it self would presently corrupt and rot,
being deprived of the air, if the watrie humor do not succor it, which
participateth with the air. Finally upon the fourth angle of this fower-faced
edifice, to wit, Animals accord with the fire.
upon the fire, is the living sensitive creature built, whose life (as many
learned do teach) is by means of fire, and obtained from the Empyreall
heaven, and from the spirit of life, which is a quickening fire, and
distributeth life to all the mundane wheels: as we may learn by the oracles
of Ezechiel, saying, Ezech. 1.
[And the spirit of life was in the wheels.] Behold then, how upon the four
bases of the elements are planted four sorts of perfect compounds, to wit,
stones, metals, plants, and living creatures.

True it is, that under every universal kind of these, there are diverse
particular species distinct the one from the other: for although stones may be
properly earthie, yet are they sometimes nominated of some other element, which
most prevails in their composition. For doubtless all the elements do meet
together in the procreation of them, but chiefly earth and water. Whereupon
obscure and thicke-darke stones are called earthie-stones; and clear
transparent stones, waterie; Diversity of the nature of stones.
and some also are melted by a great fire, to be turned into glass. Some also
with rain falling drop by drop are engendered in the shells of oisters; as those
pearls which are found in the Indian and Britain seas. The crystal and
Beryll are made of water frozen, void of pores or subtle passages, so that
they can neither receive heat nor be melted. It appears also, that there is
fire in the composition of stones, which likewise is forced out of the flint
being stricken with a gad of steel. To which purpose Hermes amongst his secrets
teaches, that a stone does sometimes spring out of the fire, mounting from
earth to heaven, and then again returning to the earth, that nourished it. For
metals likewise, Diversity of the metals.
though they be waterie, some of them do nevertheless retain the nature of
fire, as gold and iron, one of which imitateth the fire of the sun, and the
other the fire of Mars. But tin and copper are airie, this receiving
influence from Venus, that from Jupiter. Silver agrees with the moon, Lead
with Saturn, quicksiluer with Mercury: and yet all of them are endued with a
waterie nature, and will melt, and do differ in weight. For as one water does
differ in weight from another; so does metal from metal, not only in
special, but also in vndiuisible proportion. For common gold differs in
weight from that which the Latins call (Obrysum) or else (Ofiryzum) of the
Hebrew word (Ofir) which we call (fine gold) and which has been oftentimes
purged and refined in the fire, and wastes not therein. The gold of Tharsis
also does differ from the gold of India and Hungary, and so of others. So
likewise do waters differ in goodness and in weight, according to the region
and place wherein they are: and by how much they are nearer to the fountain,
by so much are they better and lighter. And by their weight (as Vitruuius will
have it) one may know the goodness of the air: according to which he wills
men to choose out places to build houses in. Concerning plants, although they
may be by nature airie, A different property of the plants.
yet there are some, whose roots, juice, leaves, and blossoms are said to be
hot in the first, second, third, or fourth degree; and others are cold and
dry; some also are moist: which diversity happens, according as the plant
obtains more or less of the nature of one of the elements. Diversity of
nature in animalibus.
The like is of living creatures. For though they may properly be said to be of
the nature of fire, yet are there some, which being more earthie, delight in
the earth, as mowles, woormes, and commonly all creeping things. Likewise all
fishes are nourished by the water: the chameleon by the air: the salamander by
fire, as some affirm, because that he long time indureth fire through his
excessive coldness. There are some also which burn with great heat, as doves
and lions: some are cooled with moisture, as the lamb; and some are dry, as
hares and dear. But nevertheless in regard of their life they are all
especially of the nature of fire distinguished by degrees: wherefore diverse
names have been assigned to them, being borrowed from the elements or from
their qualities.

Of the celestial and supercelestiall elements.
And besides all this which we have here discoursed concerning the elements,
which may be found in the perfectly compounded substances of this elementarie
world, many learned men affirm, that they are also resident in the celestial
and supercelestiall world. But that as they are here thick and gross: so by
a contrary reason they are pure and clean in heaven, and in it living and
every where well doing. They say then, that these celestial elements are as
the woorthiest and excellent portion of those, which subsist under the
moones-sphere in the second degree, and which remain also in the bowels of the
earth as the most base and gross lees of the elements. And that in heaven they
are certain virtues or powers; and in nature the seeds of things; and in the
world below gross forms. For (as they argue) if there were no elementarie
powers in heaven, how then by the celestial influences should these elements
here below be engendered and transformed: in such sort as that which now is
air may be converted into rain, the water exhaled into air, the earth turned
into wood, which nourishes the fire, and from the wood rises air, and ashes
fall, which is earth? For these causes also it is very likely that the
Astronomers distinguish the signs of the Zodiac and the Planets by the
elements, attributing three signs to every of them, as we have already
declared. But we shall find enough to content us concerning this matter, when
we discourse particularly as touching the firm concord which remains betwixt
the terrestrial elements and the Planets. Which (AMANA) let be the subject of
your morrow speech.


The end of the fifth day.
THE SIXTH DAYS WORK.
Of the agreement betwixt the Elements and the Planets. Chap. 41.
ASER. AS the celestial spheres do follow that universal and common course
which the first heaven that contains and encloseth them all does begin,
beside the motions that are proper and peculiar to each of the^ (as we have
already heretofore declared:) so must we in like sort note, that the elements
do follow the heavens, and observe an order after them, every one in his
degree, having their motions also agreeable to their nature. And that likewise
there is betwixt them and the celestial bodies, a certain accord and
answerablenes of powers and qualities aptly proportioned by degrees, even as is
found in all creatures compounded of them. We will then first entreat of this
agreement betwixt the elements and the heavens; Agreeablenes of the earth with
the moon.
beginning with the earth, which is correspondent to the moon in diverse
respects. For as the earth draws the water to it, and soketh it up, in such
sort that it is numbered by the Sages amongst those things which are never
satisfied, to wit, with water: so does the moon with a perpetual attraction
draw the water, making it sometimes to rise, to wit, when from the oriental
Horizon she comes to the midst of heaven, from whence descending to the
occidentall Horizon she carries it away with her with such violence, that it
seems to fly from us. Again, when the moon runs in the point opposite
to the midde heaven, she draws the water away with her; then returning again
to the eastern Horizon, she causes it to follow after her in like sort. When
she increases also she draws up the humors in trees and men's bodies; when
she waineth, she chaseth them down. Again, the earth and moon do agree in
the first qualities of cold and dry, wherewith the earth is actually, and the
moon operatiuely replenished, which also (according to her nature being
somewhat terrestrial) does suppe up the celestial waters, and all the
influences of the bodies above her, which as nearest to us, she does
communicate with us. For she receives from the other planets, and principally
from the sun, that which she distributeth here below. And therefore Plato in
his Banquet says, The moon and earth singular in variety.
That the moon participateth with the sun and with the earth. Moreover, the
moon is singular in variety: whence it comes to pass, that one while she
is crooked with horns, another time divided into equal proportions or halues;
then being full round, she is here and there bespotted: sometimes she seems
vnmeasurably great in her round fullness; presently after she appears very
small: now she shows very fair toward the north; afterward again she is
couched in the south: so within a few days she submits her self to
conjunction, and by and by is she full and big; presently after she is
delivered of the fruit, which she had conceived. Now in this great
changeablenes, the moon does show us that the earth is like unto her. For now
being disrobed of her ornaments, she appears black: afterward being painted
and adorned with herbs and flowers, she seems very fair. One part thereof
is stony, another part is marish. In one place it is lean, in another place
fat; here abased in valleys, there lift up in mountains: here fertile, and
yonder barren. One part is checkered with diverse spots, this red, that black,
one white, and another brown. One portion is close and clammie; another thin
and sandy. Moreover the earth is sometimes void and empty, and then she
receives the conjunction of the planets, whereby in short space being filled,
she brings forth fruit. So then the moon amongst the stars, and the earth
amongst the elements do agree in many particulars.

Now as touching the water, The water correspondent to mercury.
it seems to be answerable to Mercury and to Saturn also. For the order of
the planets, and the correspondencie which they have to things here below, did
require, that next after the earthly moon, waterie Mercury should be situate,
whom poets have named (the Arbiter or vmpier of the waters) then follows
next airie Venus, and after her the sun, which is of the nature of fire. Then
again Mars participating of the same force, has his seat next above the
sun: airian Jupiter above Mars: waterish Saturn over Jupiter: and the
signe-bearing heaven above Saturn, as answering to the earth; then higher
again is the first mooueable, of the nature of fire. It is certain that the
nature of Mercury is by so much more hard to be deciphered, by how much his
star is more hidden and hard to be seen, and that very seldom too. And
therefore do Astronomers affirm, that his influent power is secret, by
reason that he easily accepting the nature of the planet wherewith he is
conjoined, or of the sign wherein he is resident, seems to operate, not
according to his own proper nature, but as the executor of the influence of
another. Whereupon he is by them nominated (Hermes) to signify, that he is as
it were interpretor of the other stars intendements. For by the testimony of
Ptolemie, he dries up being with the Sun; he cools with the Moon; he
favors the understanding with Saturn; he bestows advise and policy in
warlike affairs, where stoutnes is required, with Mars: and conjoined to
Venus, he engenders the One that is of both sexes.
Anerogyne or Hermaphrodite: which must be understood concerning him, who
exercises subtlety of wit, which he receives from Mercury, in the second,
Venus, which is disordinate. For such a man is effeminate, retayning the
property of both sexes. So that Mercury agreeing with the reasonable
discourse and favoring the same, as he is turned toward the superior stars,
or else toward the inferior; he likewise produces diverse effects, in so much
that his property cannot easily be comprehended. And yet may he very aptly be
said to be of the nature of water, as many Philosophers are of opinion,
considering that the order of the planets requires (to observe the harmony
and league of things here below with those above) that he should be watrie.
Moreover, as water does in washing, take away the spot that covers, in such
sort that the naked bare form does appear: so Mercury contributing favor to
the promptnes and subtlety of men's wits, is to them as an interpreter, taking
away the veil from strange languages, obscurenes from riddles and parables,
and difficulty from every profound and mystical speech: and opening that
which is shut up in the secret cabinets of God and nature, presents the naked
truth to be contemplated. Neither must we think that the star of Mercury
performs this, but so far as it may operate in bodies by disposing, or else
as an instrument of the divine omnipotency, as we have heretofore declared.

Concordance of the air with Venus.
Let us now speak of the air. It seems to be answerable in nature to Venus,
which is hot and moist: And by the foresaid order of the planets succession in
course, that it must be referred to Jupiter. For this cause the Astronomers
have dedicated to Venus the airie living creatures. For even as the air and
wind coupleth and conioyneth things severed, so does the Venerian power:
whereupon we will note, that the Academicks taught how that there were two
Venuses, the one Etherian, and the other Aerian: the highest, cleanest,
chasteth, and most temperate according with Jupiter, and conioyning the
superior, divine and spiritual things: the lowest, most disordinate,
slipperie, variable, and lascivious, which conioyneth in lust the creatures
here below. Of this Venus so many ribauldries are sung by wanton Poets, because
she is cause of all evil; even as the other is cause of all good. To which
speech the saying of Saint Augustine has relation: namely, that two loves have
made two cities. For the well disposed and good love of God, and the love of
one neighbor to the despising of ones self, has edified the city of God.
But the perverse love of ones self, to the forgetting of God, has reared up
the city of the devil. Moreover, the Grammarians deliver this reason, why the
power of this star is called Venus: because it does concur in all things, be
they good or evil. And surely all is filled with love, and nothing is void
thereof, as all things are full of air, which fills the natural appetite
that abhors emptines. By love (says Boethius) are the heavens conjoined, and
the elements agree with bodies compounde. Through it creatures dwell together,
the city is preserved, and the common wealth increased. Through love God made
the world, and does govern it: and the sum of all that, which he requires
of us, is love. Saint Denis in his Hierarchy speaks thus. [The love of God
has not permitted that the king of all things should remain in himself
without fruit. And as through love he is spread abroad in all things without
himself; so he delights to attract all things to himself, and principally
man, in whom all is enclosed. And therefore when he shall be united (with God)
even so shall all other things be. Whether then that we speak of divine or
angelical, or spiritual, or quickening, or natural love, we mean a power
engraffed, and conioyning, which moves the superior things to providence and
care, for the good of the inferior, disposes equal things in a sociable
communion, and in fine admonishes inferior things, that they turn themselves
to those that are better and superior.] Thus speaks this great Doctor and
Philosopher. But let us pursue the subject of our discourse. We have declared,
that the Academicks have taught a double Venus. The like may be said of the
Air, for we consider it in two parts, the one thick and foggie, which is next
the earth; and the other pure and aetherian next unto the stars: which being
heated by force of the wind which mixeth it self in all things, seems to be
very fit for the propagation and maintenance of nature: for which reason also
the wind and the air are called by one name of the Hebrews, who call all
things according to their properties.

Finally, the elementarie fire is answerable to the Sun, That the fire
agrees with the sun.
and to Mars, who are both of the nature of fire. For as the Sun is the true
and celestial fire, boiling all that which appertains to the viands of this
great animal the world; so this elementarie fire causing all things to boil
by his great heat, does perfect the nourishment of creatures living in the
earth. Both the one and other fire heateth; but this driving the humors
inward, and the other drawing them out. This imparteth his commodity to that
only, which is near it; but the superior bestows his virtue upon the
farthest remote bodies, in such sort that the force of his beams pierces even
to the bowels of the earth, where it boyleth and makes metals, which
afterward the elementarie fire purges. Moreover, as Apollo (so named) as of
(...) which is a privative letter in composition, and of (...), which
signifies multitude, as being he, who alone contains the power of the
heavens and of the stars; or else because that his virtue and power
consists of many fires, by which he gives light to all the stars, whose
natural vigor produces not their effects, till such time as they be filled
with the powerful seed of this fair Phoebus, who is so called of his beauty
and amiablenes which shines in him, as he is also named Sol, as soly-shining;
or else by a name amongst the Hebrews, which one may interpret: That which
properly does subsist, because that the light and benefit thereof is proper and
peculiar unto him.] As this fair planet (I say) was acknowledged by the
ancient Poets and Philosophers, for the inuentor of physic, because of the
quickening heat and well disposing power thereof: so the fire here beneath does
aptly pattern him, by reason that heating the cold frozen creatures, it does
in a manner restore their life unto them. So it is heat that gives life and
fruitfulnes. For eggs are not converted into chickens, nor the silkeworme into
a butterfly, neither do plants grow, nor yet are living creatures nourished
and warmed, except either by the superior, or by the quickening, or by the
elementarie heat, which by a certain sympathy do seem to be of one
selfsame kind, as it were through a correspondencie. Yea the fire is so
fruitful, that it engenders it self, and gives power to other natural
things to engender, not by the heat thereof only, but by the force of the
light, which it receives from him who has said, Genes. 1.
[I am the light of the world.] Wherefore Moses being desirous to make
manifest, that all things had been produced by the benefit of the light after
that the matter which he calls earth turned out of darkness, was made, he
says that presently the light was created: as that by means of which life and
form must be given to all things, and aptnes to be seen. Which vital vigor
did no doubt consist in the divine fire which is called (the spirit of life)
the which resting upon the face of the waters, infused into all things the life
and the forms, by which every thing might be discerned from other. But let us
now return to our elementarie world, and particularly behold the nature of the
four elements, and of things engendered in them and by them. Then have we
enough to stand upon for the common opinion of those, who establish this number
of four in that which has been already declared, and now also in this
discourse. Let us first then (AMANA) hear you discourse of the fire, and of
the air, and of their maruailous effects.


Of the fire, and of the air, and of the things engendered in them: and of
their motions, and of the Winds. Chap. 42.
AMANA. MAny Philosophers do divide all that, which subsisteth under the
concaue of the Moon, into three parts: one of which they call the highest, the
other the middle, and the third the lowest part. The highest they place above
the middle region of the air, and make as it were the same element partaker
with the most pure fire, which the ancients nominated (Ether) because that
there the elements are pure, subtle, thin, and rare, and for that the air
there is very temperate and clear, agreeing with the nature of heaven: as to
the contrary in the lower part, which is that where we inhabit, there is not
any sincere element (for a sensible element is not pure) but all things are
there compounded and mixed with the muddie and gross part of this mundane
body. And concerning the middle region of the air, it is that very place
where the meteors and high impressions do appear. So then above, the elements
are pure: beneath, the perfect and composed bodies do fail, by reason of their
mixture of the elementary simplicity: and in the middle they compound
themselves imperfectly, in such sort, that one may say that they possess the
middle place betwixt the nature of the elements and of things compounded. Now
as we have said before, and as the common saying of people is, the heaven is
often taken for this supreme and middle region of the air, and for the things
which are to them conioined, and do depend upon their effects. Of the things
conjoined and depending upon the effects of the fire and of the air.
So that in this regard we may understand first two of the four elements, to
wit, the air and the fire; then all things engendered in them, and by them; as
winds, thunders, lightnings, hail, whirle-windes, clouds, Psalm. 8. Matthew. 6.
Luke. 8.
tempests, rain, dewes, frosts, snowes and all kinds of fire and such like,
which arise and appear in the air. And therein we may also comprise all the
creatures which converse in it, as birds and all creatures that fly, even as
the holy Scripture teaches us, when it makes mention of the birds of heaven.

Now the element of fire is known to have his place nearest to the moon,
being by nature hot and dry; and is for this cause lightest, having his motion
quicker then all the elements, because that lightness and quicknes is proper to
these two qualities (heat and drines) and therefore also the property thereof
is to mount always upwards, Of the proper nature of the fire, and of the air.
until that it has attained to the place destinated unto it, being most
convenient for the nature thereof, and which ioineth next unto the spheres.
Next the fire the air possesses the second place, and agrees in nature with
the fire, in that it is hot: but is contrary thereto in that it is also moist.
And therefore the motion thereof follows that of the fire, but it is not so
light and quick by reason of the humiditie, which makes it more heavy and
slow. That the air is always moved.
And yet it appears that it is always moved, because that in narrow places
small winds do blow without ceasing. For considering that the air has the
motion thereof tending always upwards, and that it is continually moved up
and down, it blows in a great space very gently: but passing through a
creuisse or straight place, all the violence thereof being drawn together by
reason of the narrownes of the place, drives out and flies vehemently upon
us: after the manner of the waters of great floods, which, when it seems that
they can scarce flow, being urged through a narrow place, or through sluices,
are constrained to run out by much force, with noise and roaring. Moreover
according as the air is moved, either by the heat of the sun, or by the
vapors and exhalations which this heat causes to rise out of the waters, and
out of the earth, or by the waves of the sea, or by the caves of the earth and
such like causes, What wind is.
we perceive the air diversely agitated. For we must note that the winds are
nothing else but the air, which is moved and driven more violently then
ordinary, and which has his motion more sudden, more violent and strong;
being driven and pressed forwards according as the causes are more great or
small, and according to the places from whence they proceed. And this is the
reason why the air is sometimes so peaceable, that one cannot feel so much as
one only small puff of wind: but it is as calm as the sea, when it is not
tossed with any wind or tempest. As is evident by those vanes and weathercocks
which are set in the tops of turrets and houses: for when the wind blows
not, their plates are nothing moved: and yet the air does never fail to
blow by reason of the perpetual motion thereof: but insomuch as it is not
hoised up and down, it passes and flies lightly away, without any noise or
brute toward that part whereto we see the point of the vane inclined. Of the
diversity of the winds, and of the order and bounds of them.
Sometimes also one may feel some small pleasant and gentle wind to blow
without any violence, which is very delectable, recreatiue, and profitable, not
only in regard of men and other living things, but in respect also of all the
fruits of the earth. At another time likewise the violence of the winds is so
great, that it raises up whirle-windes, storms and tempests, which drive the
air with such fury and roughnes, that it seems they would overthrow and
confound heaven and earth together, beating down and carrying away all that is
before them: like a great deluge and water-floud, which bears away with it
all that it meets with. But though one may suppose so during such tempests, yet
the course of the winds are not so confused, but that all of them observe
their order and certain places, out of which they issue and proceed, and their
bounds likewise whereat they stay, and wherein they are confined, as the
element of which they are engendered. And therefore by experience we see, that
they follow the course of the Sun, and that they are distributed, and
disposed according to all the parts of the world, as we usually divide it,
having respect to the moving of the spheres. For as we divide the course of
the sun, and all the regions of the earth into East, West, North and South;
so must we consider the four principal winds, which proceed out of these
four places one opposite to another. Besides which there are certain others
which are called collateral winds, because that each of the first has them
upon the one or other side of them, so that those who have ordinarily written
concerning the winds, do appoint to the number of twelve common and ordinary
winds; saying also, that there are others which are proper to certain regions
and countries, according to the nature of their situations and places: as we
may hereafter find matter enough thereof amply to entreat.

But here it will be good to touch one difficulty, which may be alleged upon
our discourse, Notable things in the diversity of the qualities of the winds
and of the air.
touching that which we have said concerning the qualities of the air. For
since that it is hot and moist by nature, and that the winds are nothing else
but the same are moved and puffed forwards: what may be the cause that the
winds do not all of them retain the nature of the air? For we know by
experience, that there are as many diverse qualities in the winds, as in all
the elements: for some are hot and dry; others hot and moist; others moist and
cold; and some cold and dry. Hereupon then we are to note, that all creatures
which subsist of a sensible and corporal nature are commonly divided into two
kinds, which comprise them all. The one are simple, and the other compound; of
the first sort are the elements taken every one alone in their proper and
particular nature, such as we have already declared. And all other creatures
compounded of all the elements conioined together, are of the second kind.
Wherefore if the elements were pure, not any way mixed one with another, then
would each of them retain their natural qualities purely. But because they
are intermingled one with another, they have their qualities likewise mingled.
And therefore by how much the higher the air mounteth, by so much the more it
is pure, neat, subtle and thin; and by how much the lower it descends and
approaches the water and earth, by so much the more it is gross and thick,
and partaketh more of the elements near to which it remains. And according
as it is warmed by the heat of the sun, or by any other heat, or else as it
is cooled by the absence and default thereof; even so does it become either
more hot, or more cold. The like also may be said concerning the natural
moisture thereof. For according as it is more or less mixed with water, or
near unto it; so does it receive either a more moist, or a more dry quality.
So therefore according to the places out of which the winds proceed and issue,
and through which they pass, they are hotter or colder; drier or moisture;
pure or impure; healthful and wholesome, or pestilent and infectious, yea even
stinking. And for the same cause also it comes to pass, that as the
diversity of lands and countries is disposed, so winds, which are felt in one
place warm, are in another place cold: and so is it of their moisture and
drines. By the same reason also those that are healthful for some, are
unwholesome for others; and those which bring with them fair and clear weather
in one place, do in another place bring rain and tempests. For the property
of some of them is, according to the countries wherein they blow, to chase
away the clouds, and to make the air clear, and the weather fair: whereas
others do assemble and heap them together. Whereupon ensues, that some bring
rain with them, others snow, and others again hail and tempests, according
as God has ordained the causes in nature, as the sequel of our discourse
shall minister occasion again to speak of. Wherefore pursuing the order of
our speech, we will consider those things which are conjoined to the fire and
air, and do depend upon their effects: as are thunders and lightnings.
Whereof (ARAM) do you discourse.


Of thunder and lightning. Chapter 43.
ARAM. THere is a certain universal love and appetite in all creatures, which
inciteth them all to love their own kind, to desire it, and to search after
it. But as their natures are diverse, even so is the love and the appetite which
is in them. And therefore there are as many sorts of desires, as there are
diversities of natures. And thence it is that the fire and the air do
naturally desire the highest places, and do thither tend evermore, as the
water and the earth do require the lowest, and do thereto descend
incessantly: neither can these elements find any stay or rest until they be
arrived at those places, which are appointed unto them by nature. And therefore
what hinderance soever there may be, yet every thing does always seek to
return to his natural home, and therein does all possible endeavor. Now here
we are to consider the cause of thunders, lightnings, tempests, earthquakes,
and such like motions and perturbations in the elements. For all these things
happen, when the creatures, which by their contraries are hindered from
pursuing their own kind, do fight with those which keep them back, as if
there were open war betwixt them. Which causes that that which by force can
make way does at last vanquish. But because of the resistance which there is,
this cannot be performed without great violence, and marvelous noise: from
whence proceed many admirable effects, and namely thunder, which has
ministered occasion to many great spirits to search out the causes somewhat
nearly. But men's opinions, as in a very deep matter are diverse hereupon. Of
the causes of thunder.
For some maintain, that thunder is caused by the blows and strokes that the
fire makes being enclosed within the clouds, which it cleaves, so making it
self to appear as is seen in lightnings. Aristotle in his Meteors writes,
that thunder grows and proceeds of hot and dry exhalations ascending out
of the earth into the supreme region of the air, being there repulsed back by
the beams of the stars into the clouds. For these exhalations desiring to set
themselves at liberty, and to free themselves, do cause this noise, which is
often stopped by nature, whilst they fight with the clouds: but when they can
gain issue, then do they make the cloud to crack, like a bladder full of
wind that is broken by force. Moreover Pliny imitating the opinion of the
Epicure teaches, Plin. hist. nature. lib. 2.
that those fires, which fall from the stars (as we see often in calm
weather) may sometimes meet with the clouds, and fall upon them, and that by
the vehemency of this blow the air is moved. And that this fire plunging it
self into the clouds causes a certain thick and hissing smoke, which
makes a noise like an hot iron thrust into water: From whence the whirlewindes
which we see in the air do proceed. But when the wind or vapor enclosed in
the clouds, will needs get out by force, then this causes thunder. And if
there come out fire which breaks the cloud, then is it lightning. But when
these inflamed vapors do show forth a long train of their fire out of the
cloud, then this is that which we call a flash of lightning. Whereupon ensues
that these lightning-flashes cleave the clouds: but the fire of thunder
teareth and renteth them, and causes them to crack.

But referring these arguments to Philosophers, we may fitly say, that the true
cause of thunder is the wind enclosed, which seeks to issue out. Of the
difference of heat.
But that which is most admirable therein, is the great violence of the flashes
thereof, and the strange accidents which happen by the fire thereof. For it
does not only pierce more then any other fire, by reason of the passing swift
motion thereof: but it is much hotter then all other fire. For it is to be
noted that there is a difference in heat; and that not only by reason of the
matter one fire is hotter then another, as that which is in the iron is hotter
then that which is in straw; and that which is in oken wood is hotter then that
which is in willow: but even as in ice we find some scarcely frozen, othersome
hard; and other again very hard: so is there in fire that is scarce fire, as
when the iron begins to wax somewhat red, and another fire that is shining,
and other that shines very bright. Wherefore we must note that fire exceeds in
heat and in force six manner of ways. 1. By nature as I have said (for the
most ardent burns quickest and soonest.) 2. By the soliditie of the matter
(as that which is in iron:) 3. By motion, (for thereby it is made more
piercing.) 4. By greatness either proper to it self, or caused by continuance
of time, (which is common to every fire.) 5. By hindrance of respiration, and
by constraint together, (as is manifest in lyme, which is kindled with water;
for the heat being gotten in, and hid in the furnace, being of the kind of
fire, is enclosed and gathered within the lyme, so that it returns into fire,
by the motion and mixture of the water.) Now the constrained motion must not
only penetrate very much, but also it enkindleth heat, and (as I have
declared) it makes one fire hotter then another. And therefore it may be no
great wonder, Of the violence and force of thunder.
if the lightning of thunder be of very much force and violence, and that the
fire thereof being very different from the nature of other fires, does effect
strange things. For it is not only more pearcing by reason of the quick
motion thereof, but it is also much hotter then all other fire. Whereupon it
comes, that it can kill any kind of creature by the only touch thereof. And
sometimes the purse remaining whole and sound, it melts the money that is
therein: which is not fabulous as many think, nor yet on the other side very
much to be admired. For that which hurts, does corrupt either by means of
the quantity, or for the long continuance thereof. And therefore the
thunder-fire which is most subtle, breaks not the purse: for by reason that
it has very quick motion, it staieth not on it, and therefore cannot it
endommage it so. Moreover, as the air does demonstrate unto us, that by reason
of the subtilitie thereof, it passes thorough the purse, without any resting
upon it, and enters thereinto, filling it when it is empty, though it be fast
shut (which could not be, if it found not passage through insensible ways and
holes, since the mouth of the purse is very close shut:) So likewise one little
spark of thunder-fire, far more subtle then the air, may easily enter into
the purse, where finding metal, it fasteneth thereon, and staieth therein,
causing it to melt by the extreme violence and sudden force thereof.

So then the solid bodies, as iron, silver, and gold are by so much the sooner
spoiled and molten by the lightning, by how much they do more withstand, and
make resistance against it. But in those bodies which be rare, full of holes,
soft and weak, the thunder passes quick over them, without hurting them, as
is seen in the garments that men wear, and in very dry wood. For other wood
burns, by reason that the moisture which remains therein does resist and
kindle. Whereupon it follows (if we believe Plutarch) that such as sleep are
never stricken with thunder: because that the sleeping man is loose, and
becomes soft and unequal, and in manner dissolved, with his pores open, as
if his spirit failed, and left him: so that the lightning finds no such
resistance in him, as it would do if he were awake. Whereunto this may be also
added; that he which sleeps, having no fear, astonishment, nor dread in him,
is by this means oftentimes defended from thunder. For it is certain, that
many have died with fear only and apprehension which they have taken thereof,
without suffering any violence. Wherefore considering that the sense of hearing
is of all other senses the most subject to suffer violent passions; and that
fears and dread which proceed of noise, do bring the greatest trouble to the
soul: thereupon he which waketh and apprehends very much, becomes bound
and thick in his body: so that the lightning falling upon him, gives a
greater blow and a ruder stroke, in so much as it finds greater resistance.

Marvelous effects of thunder.
It is wonderful to consider the strange cases, that many authors report to
have happened through thunder. But amongst all, that is very admirable, which
Julius obsequius recites of the daughter of Pompeius Lionis a knight of Rome.
For she returning from certain plays and turnayments celebrated at Rome, was
suddenly stricken from her palfrey with a thu^derclap, stark-dead, without
appearance of any wound, or fracture of member. But when her father caused her
to be stripped to bury and interre her, they perceived her tongue to come forth
at the bottom of her womb: whereby they knew that the thunder and fire had
stricken her directly through the mouth, and so had issued out at the lower
passage: a thing exceeding fearful, and worthy of great marvel. That which
Du Bartas, the honor of the Poets of our age, has written in his no less
learned then Christian week, to have been seen of the effects of thunder by
a woman, though it may rather minister cause of laughter then of sorrow, yet is
it very marvelous. For he recounteth that the flame sindged away all the hair
about this woman's secrets at one instant, without doing her any harm. But
omitting these discourses, I will note certain particularities, which some
philosophers affirm touching thunder. They say then, Colomn^^ and the keeles
of ships exempt from the danger of thunder.
that it never or very seldom touches pillars, nor the keeles of ships, by
reason of the depth of the one, and roundnes of the other. So that the blow
thereof running along the pillars does very seldom strike them: as also not
being able to descend above five cubits under ground, and the bottoms of ships
being very low, it scarcely ever falls there. And therefore it is a sure
remedy against lightning to hide ones self in deep caves. It is also to be
noted, that although the brightness of the lightning be seen before the noise
of thunder be heard, yet proceed they not one before another, but are both
together. And the reason hereof is easy to understand. Why the lightning of
thunder is perceived before the sound be heard.
For because that sight is quicker and sharper then hearing, the eye does
sooner behold the brightness of the lightning, then the ear does hear the
sound of the thunder; as we see plainly when a man cuts down a tree, or
beats upon any thing that resoundeth, especially if we be far off. For we
shall see him strike the stroke sooner then we can hear it: as likewise we
prove in ordinance, and in all guns and pieces, whose fire we shall see,
before we hear the noise of their shoot, notwithstanding that they are both
performed together. But we have dwelt long enough on this matter, concerning
that which philosophers do teach. We must now consider what the true meteors
of Christians are, as we have already discoursed of their Astronomy and
Astrology: wherein we shall learn the supernatural causes of those thunders
and lightnings, which God sends when and how he pleases: as you (ACHITOB)
can relate unto us.


Of the true Meteors of Christians: and of the supernatural causes of thunder
and lightning. Chap. 44.
ACHITOB. THE Philosophers call Meteors, by a Greek name, that part of natural
philosophy, which entreats of the air, and of the things engendered therein,
and appertayning thereto: as namely the clouds, rain, snow, thunders,
tempests, lightnings, and such like, because that they are over and above us.
For the signification of the Greek word (Meteoron) imports so much. But the
principal profit that like Christians, we must desire and purchase from this
part of Philosophy, is, that we learn by the contemplation and consideration
of the works of God, of which we now entreat, what is his power, wisdom,
bounty, and benignity toward us, and how it manifests it self before our
eyes; not only in the highest heavens, wherein the sun, moon, and stars
are contained (as we have heretofore showed) but also in the air and in all
the elements placed under the spheres. For by this knowledge we may reap very
great fruits. Of the profit which the knowledge of the meteors brings to
Christians.
First, in that we are assured, that all these things are in the power of our
father, who is the creator of them: and that they are all created for our good
like the rest of his works, and not for our ruin and perdition. Then we learn
by so many rare works and marvelous effects, to fear and love the author of
them only, and nothing else, except in him, and for the love of him;
acknowledging and firmly believing that he alone is the author and governor
of all nature. For we behold how terrible and fearful he shows himself by
thunders and lightnings. And again, how loving, gracious, and benign he
declares himself to be, by rain, dewes, and such like blessings, by which he
gives nourishment to men, and to all other creatures. For these causes also
the kingly prophet calls thunders, Psalm. 29. Psalm. 18.
lightnings, te^pests, and great inundations of waters (the voice of the Lord)
and in another place he speaks of the Lord as of a magnificent and maiestical
prince, speaking great, like the sound of thunder, and casting fire out at his
mouth, with great floods and deluges of water: saying again in another place.
That the almighty makes great clouds his chariot, and that he walks upon
the wings of the wind, Psalm. 104.
that he makes the spirits his messengers, and a flaming fire his ministers.
By which fire, no doubt, Luke. 17.
but the prophet means the lightning, which the Lord sends, when, and where
it pleases him, to cause men to leave him, 2. Pet. 3.
and to punish them like their just judge: as he declared in effect, when he
rained down fire and brimstone upon them of Sodom and Gomorrha, and the other
cities round about them: which are proposed to us in the Scriptures for
examples of the judgments of God, as that of the flood.

For this cause also David addressing his speech to the great and mighty, to
the proud and lofty, which have God in contempt, says [Giue unto the Lord
ye sons of the mighty, Psalm. 29.
give unto the Lord glory and strength: give unto the Lord glory due unto his
name: worship the Lord in his glorious sanctuary:] consequently deducing the
wonders that God does by the voice of his thunder, and how that it sparkleth
with flames of fire, by reason of the lightnings, which proceed out of the
clouds when they open, and rent themselves with so great noise, whereat the
deserts, and mountains tremble: the hinds calue and bring forth before their
time for fear and dread, and the forests are discovered, their trees being
ouerturned and broken, as they are very oftentimes with tempests, and
whirlewinds, as if the Author of all nature did blow through them. For it is he
(as is written in Ecclesiasticus) that sends out the lightnings as he
lists, Eccles. 43.
who having opened his treasures, the clouds fly out like birds; at sight of
whom the mountains leap, and the southwinde blows according to his will:
and the voice of his thunder makes the earth to suffer: which is as much to
say, as that it is moved and trembles in regard of men. Whereby we may learn
what shall become of them all, if they enterprise to stand up against God. For
surely their force cannot but be much less then that of the high mountains
and great trees, which might seem to the ignorant able to oppose themselves
against thunders, whirlewinds and tempests.

For this cause also Elihu says in the book of Job. Job. ^7.
[At this also mine heart is astonished, and is moved out of his place. Hear the
sound of his voice, and the noise that goes out of his mouth. He directs it
under the whole heaven, and his light unto the ends of the world.] Now he
means by this light, the lightnings which our God causes to appear in one
moment and instant from the east to the west, and from the one side of the
world to the other (as the Scripture declares otherwhere) and it is easy to
note, by reason that he proceeds, saying: Matthew. 24.
[After it a noise sounds: he thundreth with the voice of his majesty, and
he will not stay them, when his voice is heard. Me^^^les to be c^nsidered in
the fire of thunder.
God thundreth maruellously with his voice: he works great things, which we
know not.] And who (I pray you) would not wonder to see the fire and water,
which are of contrary natures mingled one with another, and lodged both in one
lodging, and proceeding out of one place together? For where remains this
fire, which shows it self in lightning? comes it not out of the clouds,
wherein it is enclosed before they be opened, and burst by the thunder? And of
what substance is the cloud? Is it not of water massed up together, which
covers and keeps in the fire, as in an harth? For do not we oftentimes
behold while it raineth, and great floods and streams of water do fall, so
that it seems that all the clouds, and the whole air should melt and
resolve into water, that great lightnings of fire flash, appear, and run
every where about like burning darts and arrows? For while the hot
exhalations are enclosed in the cloud, Causes of the noise and of the
lightning of thunder.
and retained therein peforce, with the violence and contention which is
betwixt these contraries, the noise of thunder is made. And when the matter is
so abundant in the cloud, that it makes it to break and open, and that it
may reach to the earth; then is there not only thunder and great lightning,
but also thunderbolts, and which are of diverse very marvelous and fearful
kinds. For some bring with them that fire which is not easy to be quenched as
we have already declared: others are without fire, and pierce through the most
solid and firm bodies, so that there is no force which can resist them. And
sometimes also it happens, that those which are stricken therewith, be they
men or beasts, remain all consumed within, as if their flesh, sinews, and
bones were altogether molten within their skin, it remaining sound and whole,
as if they had no harm, so that it is very hard to find in what part the
body was stricken.

We are not then to hold in small account that the holy scripture proposes God
unto us so often thundering, and lightning, when it would declare unto us his
majesty and how terrible he is, and to be feared. For it is certain, that he
has many weapons, and of diverse sorts, very strong, and inevitable, when he
will punish men, and that his only will is sufficient to serve him, when, and
how he pleases. Supernatural causes to be considered in thunder.
And therefore also we must acknowledge besides these natural causes, which
make and engender thunder, the prime, eternal, and supernatural cause of all
things, from which proceed so many signs of the marvelous judgments of God
through the ministry of his creatures, oftentimes contrary to that, which
seems to be ordained by the laws of nature. For when he will thunder upon
his enemies, he breaks and suddenly consumes them in strange manner. And
therefore it is written, 1. Sam. 2. and 7
that the Lord shall destroy those who rise up against him, and that he shall
thunder upon them from heaven. And in the battle which the children of Israel
had against the Philistims it is said, that after the prayer of Samuel the
Lord in that day thundered a great thunder upon his enemies, and scattered them,
and slew them before the host of Israel. When Moses also stretched out his rod
toward heaven, it is said, Exodus 9.
that the Lord caused thunder, and hail, and that the fire walked upon the
ground: and that hail and tempests stroke many men and beasts in Egypt.

Moreover we doubt not but that evil spirits do sometimes raise up tempests,
thunder and lightning, because that the principal power of them is in the
air. And therefore when it pleases God to slack their bridle, they raise up
terrible and woondrous storms. Which is apparently demonstrated unto us in
Job, Job. 1.
whose servants and cattle Satan burned with the fire, which he caused to
fall from heaven: and by a great wind that he raised, he ouerturned the house
upon his children. And therefore also the scripture calls the devil, Prince
of this world, Ephesians. 2. and. 6.
and of darkness, and of the power of the air: teaching us also, that we must
fight against the evil spirits which are in the celestial places. It is no
marvel then, if evil spirits join themselves with tempests, to hurt men to
their uttermost ability. For which cause David calls the inflaming of the
wrath of God, choler, Psalm. ^8.
indignation and anguish (the exploit of evil angels.) Wherefore it is
certain that when God has a meaning, not only to punish the wicked, but also
to chastise his own, or to try their faith, constancy, and patience; he
gives power to devils to this effect: yet such, as that he always limiteth
the^, so that they can do nothing, but so far as is permitted them. Now he
permits them so far as he knows to be expedient for his glory, and for
the health of his: or so much as the sins and infidelity of men deserve, that
he may chastise and punish them, and bring vengeance upon them for their
iniquities. And therefore me seems that to such meteors the Epicures and
Atheists should be sent, who mock at the providence of God; as likewise the
tyrants of this world, Against Atheists and Tyrants.
who tread all justice underfoot; to make them think a little, whether there
be a God in heaven, and whether he be without power, and without meddling in
the government of the world. For I cannot believe that there is any one of
them, but would be waked out of his sleep, how profound soever it were, when he
should hear God shoot out of the highest heavens, and should understand the
noise of his cannons, and should behold the blows that he strikes. For he is
in a place so high, that all the wicked together cannot make battery against
him, nor yet avoid his inevitable strokes, who can slay them with the fear
only which they shall have of his noise, without touching them. But though
they cannot assure themselves in their hearts against this sovereign majesty
and power of the eternal, yet are they so perverse and wicked; that rather
then they will render to him the honor and glory which is due, they forge unto
themselves a nature, to which they attribute his works, or else believe that
they happen by chance, as things coming by haphazard, without any divine
providence. But leaving such manner of people, we will pursue our discourse
concerning things engendered in the higher elements, entreating of snowes,
mists, frosts and hail, the discourse whereof (ASER) I refer to you.


Of snowes, mists, frosts, ice, and hail. Chap. 45.
ASER. Since that God is not subject to the nature which he has created, but
does ever rest the Lord and master thereof, who can perform both without it,
and with it all that he pleases: it therefore follows, that we must refer,
not to the creatures or to nature, the works, which he has done in them, and
by them, but to him alone, and must attribute to him the total glory thereof,
and to depend wholly upon him, and upon his providence. Now if we shall consider
all creatures in their original and end ordained by God, we shall find that
they are all good, and ordained by the creator for the benefit of the good. And
yet it might seem that he has established some things, principally to take
vengeance on the wicked, as by this text of scripture, Job. 32.
where the Lord says to Job; [Hast thou entered into the treasures of the
snow? or have thou seen the treasures of the hail, which I have hid against
the time of trouble, against the day of war and battle?] In which text is
delivered unto us a goodly doctrine of the form, and of the place, where the
snow and hail are engendered, to wit, in the chambers builded by God among the
waters, which he gardeth as treasures, and congealeth them to serve him for
scourges, to chastise and punish the froward. Psalm. 147.
For it is he (as the Psalmist chaunteth) who gives snow like wool, and
scatters the hoare frost like ashes. He casts forth his ice like morsels:
who can abide the cold thereof? He sends his word and melts them: he
causes his wind to blow, and the waters flow. This is he also (as says
Ecclesiasticus) which hasteneth the snow by his commandment, Eccles. 43.
and strengthens the clouds with great force to make the hailestones crack.
The south wind blows according to his will: the storm of the north, and the
whirlewinde flying out like birds, scatter the snow, and the falling down
thereof is as an heap of grasshoppers or locusts that light down in any
country. The eye has the whitenes thereof in admiration, and the heart is
astonished at the fall of it. The Lord powers out the frost upon the earth
like salt, which when it is frozen sticks on the tops of pales. The cold
north wind blows, and the water is frozen: it abides upon the gatherings
together of the water, and clotheth the water as with a brestplate. It
deuoureth the mountains, and burns the wilderness, and destroieth that that
is green, like fire. The present remedy against all this, is a cloud, and
the deaw coming before the heat, appeaseth it. It is also written in the
book of Job, [The whirlewinde comes out of the heap of clouds, and the
cold from the northwinde, Job. 37.
at the breath of God the frost is given, and the breadth of the waters is made
narrow.] And therefore the Lord says to Job, [Out of whose womb came the ice?
who has engendered the frost of the heaven? The waters are hid as with a stone:
and the face of the deep is covered. Job. 38.
] Which is as much to say, as the waters take to them the form of a stone,
when they are converted into hail and ice, and that the sea is frozen over:
for when the water is frozen, it seems to be hid and lost, and to be no more
water.

Surely in these discourses we have much to consider concerning the woonders of
God. For is it not an admirable thing, that the water, which is so soft, and
runs so swiftly, should become as hard as stones, and that it can fall from
heaven in such form, yea sometimes so great that it does not only spoil the
fruits of the earth, but does also break the branches of trees, and kill men
and beasts. Hereof that is a certain testimony which we read concerning the
hail, which God sent upon the Egyptians, Exodus 9.
by the ministry of Moses, Josh. 10.
and upon the Amorites in the time of Ioshuah, in the war of the Gibeonites.
Indeed this was done contrary to the common course of nature, in respect of
the Egyptians especially. For their land is not moistened, nor watered with rain
from heaven, but only by the river Nilus. And therefore the power of God was
evidently showed, Deuteronomy. 11.
when he caused so great hail to fall down upon the enemies of his people,
that no man could judge it to be natural. For hail is made of rain frozen in
the air: and is different from snow and mists, in that the hail is engendered
of rain more hard frozen: snow of moisture more softly thickened: and mists
and fogs of cold deawes. So that when the congealed water is frozen by a strong
cold, it becomes hail: if by a small cold, it engenders small drisling
hail, such as falls commonly in the spring time, as in March and April. But
this me thinks is worthy of greatest wonder, that the water in summer time
should be congealed into hail, and that during the great heat of the sun,
the greatest congelation should be made, from whence comes this word amongst
the Latins (Grando) which is as much to say, as a great drop of water: which
is not seen in winter, when every thing, through the exceeding cold, freezeth
here on earth: or if so be this happen in such a time, it is spoken of as a new
and strange thing that comes not ordinarily in this season, like the snow and
mists, which are proper to winter and cold weather. For though the Naturalists
travel much to show that all things are produced by inferior and natural
causes; yet must we principally acknowledge a divine puissance above all, who
has causes hidden in his incomprehensible treasures from men, by which the
hail, thunder, lightning, tempests and storms are disposed and dispersed
according to his good pleasure. Exodus 16.
For as God made known to his people, by the Manna which he sent them in the
wilderness, wherewith he nourished them for the space of forty years in a
barren and uninhabitable place, that he could evermore very easily find means
enough, both ordinary and extraordinary, to nourish and maintain them: so
has he made manifest by the rods and scourges wherewith he has beaten the
Egyptians, that he can evermore very easily invent means ynow to punish his
enemies, so often and whenever he pleases, yea even then, when there shall
be no appeerance thereof amongst men.

Now as God, when he pleases, conuerteth the water into stones, Of the frozen
water and how it is thawed.
and so hardneth it that by great cold he does (as it were) paue, not only
rivers, ponds, and lakes, but also great seas; which he makes so firm, that
one may pass over them, yea and draw over great and heavy chariots, as it were
over bridges, and firm land: so when it pleases him, he causes all this
water so hardened to return into the proper kind thereof, as if it had never
been frozen. And as there be winds to congeale it, so there are winds to
dissolve and thaw it. For we must note, that ye does not dissolve and thaw by
the heat of the sun only, but also by the power of the winds ordained
hereto, yea and much sooner so, then otherwise. Concerning all which things,
and the causes of them, which God has created and established in nature, we
shall here make a brief and general discourse. For if we should speak as
the Philosophers have written and disputed, we should have matter enough to
compose a great volume. But we will content our selves simply to propound here
the admirable works of God, by which every one may learn to fear, and honor
him: which is the only, Of the true profit that must be reaped concerning
meteors.
and the greatest profit that we must make of meteors, whereof our speech has
hitherto been, and which do yet rest for us to consider of. For our intent is
to manifest in them, not only the works of the creation, which are therein
proposed, but those also of the divine providence, which are in the same after
diverse sorts declared: and not to do as many, who are esteemed very learned in
natural Philosophy, and in all other letters and humane sciences; who are so
badly advanced in the knowledge of God by them, that in stead of acknowledging
and gloryfying him as it behooves them, they rather become Atheists and
Epicures, contemners and mockers of his Majesty, and of all religion. But the
judgments of God shall therefore light very grievous upon them, because they
shall be by so much the more inexcusable. For they are of the number of those
of whom Saint Paul says, that by their infidelity, and injustice, Romans 1.
they detain the truth in injustice, because they unjustly and wilfully
suppress the knowledge of the Eternal: for having known him in the works of
the creation of the world, Heb. 11.
which are as a mirror and show of invisible things, they glorify him not as
God, neither are thankful: but become vain in their imaginations, and their
foolish heart is full of darkness, and when they profess themselves wise, they
become fools; because it has pleased God so to punish their proud
presumption, and the vanity of their understanding. Wherefore likewise as the
Apostle says in another place: Ephesians. 4.
They have their cogitations darkened, and are strangers from the life of God,
through the ignorance that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts.
For by reason that they abuse the gift of knowledge, which they have in a more
ample measure then others, therefore does the Omnipotent by his just judgment
make them more blind then the simple and ignorant; so that they are rather
worthy to be accounted as beasts then as men. And yet the science and
knowledge which they have of the works of God more abundant then others, is not
cause of their blindness, considering that it is an excellent gift from above,
profitable for all those, which can and will well use it: but their malice,
ingratitude, and peruersenes of heart and understanding pulls this evil upon
them, through their own fault, and by the just vengeance of God. So that
whereas their skill should open their eyes to guide them by the knowledge of
the creatures, to that of the creator, it is rather an hinderance unto them,
and depriueth them of that great and sovereign good. But we shall have
worthy arguments against their impiety in that which remains for us to
view, concerning other things engendered in the highest elements; amongst which
many comprehend comets, saying that they are of the number of sublime or high
impressions, which are made in the region of the fire and air. Wherefore
pursuing our purpose we will hear you (AMANA) discourse upon this subject.


Of comets. Chap. 46.
AMANA. ALthough we have hitherto spoken of sundry sorts of the creatures and
works of God, by which he manifests and declares his power, glory,
majesty, and eternal providence, and chiefly in the region of the air,
nevertheless there do yet a great number remain, which we have nothing at all
touched either particularly or in general, no not so much as cursorily. For
there are so many sorts of fires of diverse forms that appear in the sky
above, that it is impossible to distinguish them all particularly. And amongst
them there are some which sometimes seem to fall from heaven, or as if the
stars did snuff themselves, as men snuff a candle: so that the most part of
the rude and ignorant people suppose it is so. Many others think that
sometimes the stars sparkle. Why it seeme^^ that the star^ do sparkle.
But the cause of such appeerance is, for that the substance of heaven being
very clear, their beams shining toward us, are evermore broken
perpendicularly. For the air being moved, even as we see the stones in the
bottom of a river seem to tremble, because of the running motion of the
water; so do the stars seem to sparkle: and when the middle of the air is
vehemently stirred above, then they seem to sparkle both more and oftener. But
we will leave this talk to speak of certain heavenly fires, which we call
comets, and which are worthy of great consideration, and of much marvel. Of
comets and of the place where they are engendered.
For they appear like bearded and hairie stars, having their motion with the
heaven as if they were very stars: and certes we might well suppose them such,
and placed in heaven like the rest, if they should long time continue. But the
opinion of many is, (as Aristotle likewise writes in his Meteors) that they
are naturally made of an hot exhalation, which attayneth to the supreme region
of the air, where it is enflamed by the element of fire: so that of such an
exhalation are fires kindled in heaven of diverse sorts and fashions.
Nevertheless some learned modern writers which have diligently observed the
height, whither these vapors may mount, do think clean otherwise: for they
affirm that comets cannot be engendered in the region of the elements: and are
not afraid to give sentence against Aristotle, who in truth being an Ethnike
and Pagan, has failed in the resolution of many particular questions. For he
has strained himself to affirm many general propositions, which our
experience shows to be utterly false: as these. Some propositions of
Aristotle false.
[That no living thing apprehends by sense that which is good; that a thing
poized can incline neither to the one side nor to the other; and that the earth
is in no part higher then the waters; and sundry others.] Now if it has been
permitted him to abandon the opinion of his master Plato who taught the truth,
yea and to reprehend him: it shall be also lawful for us, and very laudable
to separate our selves in opinion from him, and to contradict his writings for
the truth.

They then that do not acknowledge comets to be conjoined unto, and depending
upon the effects of the elementarie fire, and air, by means of exhalations
and vapors arising from the earth, do allege among other reasons, that the
place which is seen by the inhabitants of Milan under the circle of winter or
the Tropic of Capricorn, is distant from the earth ten times more then the
height that the vapors attain to. Reasons of those who say that the comet^ are
situate in heaven.
And therefore the comets being seen there higher then the place of the
vapors, it necessarily follows, that they are not there engendered, neither
yet in the highest of the pure air called (Ether) considering that there is
no matter, which may be kindled. But if any one allege that the combustible
humor is ravished and attracted thither by the power of the stars, though that
this place be higher then the common place of vapors; we may answer, that
for so much as we behold many comets to continue more then two months, and some
three, that this their long continuance may be an impediment thereto: because
that the total mass of the earth would not be sufficient for such an
inflammation. For fire is not perpetually fed with one only matter, but
requires a new supply. And seeing that these comets have for the most part a
beard or a tail, and are seated in an higher place then the air; a man cannot
judge them to be less then the Moon. And it seems impossible that so much
matter should be consumed as might maintain this huge flame for three months.
Moreover, there is a means to know, whether the comet be in the region of the
air, or else be inge^dred in heaven. For if it be quicker in motion from west
to east, the^ the moon is; the^ of necessity must the place of the comet be
under the lowest sphere: but if it be more slow, Comets moved with three
motions*
then without doubt it is bred in heaven. Now it is common to all comets to be
moved with three motions: namely, with the first from east to west in the
space of four and twenty hours, like all the stars: with the second from
west to east, almost in like space of time with the planet Venus. For a comet
which appeered the two and twentieth day of September 1532. and ended the third
day of December, proceeded (as Fracastorius writes) in 71. days from the fifth
part of Virgo, to the eight part of Scorpio. Which makes manifest that it
could not be under the Moon: for then it should have been more swiftly moved
then this planet: which retrogradeth thirteenth parts of the Zodiac in four
and twenty hours, according to the ordinary course of the first motion: and
the comet had proceeded but 63. degrees in 71. days. But for the third motion
peculiar to all comets, which is considered according to the latitude, it is
such and so great, that if the foresaid Author be not deceived, one is now
moved with incredible speed toward the North, and another in an instant
toward the South. Which comes to pass when the comets are near to any of
the Poles, for then a little variety of place conferred to the Zodiac does
greatly change the latitude. Besides, it is to be noted, that the beard of
every comet does directly stretch out that way, which is opposite to the
Sun: and when it sets, the same tail is straight Eastward: As the like
may be daily seen in the dark part of the Moon. Moreover, the comet does
most usually accompany the Sun, and appears not but at euen-tide, and at
the shutting up of the day. Which gives us to understand, What a comet
properly^^
that a comet is a globe placed in heaven, which being enlightened by the Sun
does plainly appear: and when his rays pass farther, they show like the
fashion of a bread, or of a tail. Whereupon it appears, that this flaming
globe may be made in the midst of the spheres, if the generation thereof be in
them: or else we must say (and that seems true) that the heaven is full of
many stars, not very massy, which (the air being dry and attenuated) do
present themselves to our sight. For Venus hirselfe is sometimes seen in broad
day, which none can say to be newly engendered. Of the prodigies which are
attributed to comets.
Then through this drines of the air it commonly happens, that the seas are
much turmoiled with tempests, and that great blustering winds do follow
thereupon, and that Monarchs and great Princes, who are most dry through cold
and watchings, or else through abundance of hot and delicate meats and of
strong wine, do thereupon die: So likewise the dry and attenuated air causes
the waters to diminish, fishes to die, and scarcity of victuals, which
oftentimes stirs up seditions, and the change of laws, and finally the
subversion of states. All which things (I say) do seem in some sort to
proceed through the great tenuitie and drines of the air: and thereof the
comet then appeering may be a sign and token, but not the cause. But if we will
meditate upon these things like christians, we will say, that what natural
causes soever Naturalists and Astrologers can render concerning comets, signs
and woonders which appear sometimes in heaven, that they should be so often
unto us, like so many trumpets, heralds, and forerunners of the Justice of
God, to advertise men that they remain not buried in their filth and sins,
but return to the infinite goodness of God, who reaches out his hand, and
calls to us through such signs to change our life and leave our execrable
vices, to the end that through his mercy, we may obtain pardon for our
faults.

Of diverse kinds of comets.
But let us likewise note, that although sundry sorts of comets are seen, yet
the Greeks call them properly stars that have a sanguine bush of hair, and
are bristled at the top. And those, which have under them a long beard made
like hairs, they call (Pogonies.) Pliny reports of sundry other sorts: and
says, that the shortest time that ever comet was seen to appear, has been
seven days, Hist. not. lib. 2.
and the longest time eighty. He makes mention also of one, which seemed
terrible about the clime of Egypt and Ethiopia. For it was flaming and wreathed
round like a serpent, having a very hideous and dreadful aspect: so that one
would have said, that it had rather been a knot of fire, then a star.
Afterward this author concludes his speech, with the opinion that many have
(as is abouesaid) that comets are perpetual, and that they have a proper and
peculiar motion: saying also, that none can see them, except they be very far
distant from the sun, in such sort that they may not be covered with his
beams. And yet the opinion of Aristotle is clean contrary thereto, and so
are a great number of other philosophers, who affirm that comets are composed
of a certain fire, and of an humor which it lights on by chance, for which
cause, they are subject to resolution. But we will proceed no farther in this
argument, nor yet concerning the situation of them, whether they be under the
spheres, or amongst them: but will pursue our purpose concerning things
undoubtedly engendered in the highest elements, as namely the clouds. The
discourse whereof (ARAM) I refer to you.


Of clouds and vapors. Chap. 47.
ARAM. AS the Lord and father of this great universe does publish his glory by
the motions of the heavens, and the marvelous courses of all the lights in
them; so does he likewise in the air after many sorts, as we have already
heard, and as we have yet good proofs in that which is presented unto us for
the matter of our discourse. And therefore the kingly prophet says, Psalm. 19.
that the heavens report the glory of God, and the firmament does declare his
works. For the Hebrew word, which we call firmament, does properly signify (a
spreading abroad) and comprehends both the heaven and the air. Now let us
first note, that there is nothing more weak then the air, nor any element
that can worse sustain a charge, if it have no other prop. Then let us
consider of what matter the clouds are made, and what firmenes they may
retain. How clouds are made of vapors.
It is certain that they are nothing else but vapors attracted out of the
waters by the power of the sun, as we behold after a great rain, when the
heat of the sun strikes upon the earth. For we perceive the water to ascend
upwards like a great smoke: and we see an other clear experience hereof in
wet clothes and linen, when they receive the heat of heaven, or of the fire.
So it is then, that the water cease not to mount from earth up into the air,
and then to descend down again; so that the course thereof is perpetual, as
if there were a sea mounting from earth to heaven, which we call (Air,) then
descending from thence down hither to us. For after that of vapors, which
ascend from the earth, the clouds are gathered together, which like spunges
do receive the steame of the waters, whereof they themselves are engendered;
then do they carry them like chariots, to distribute them through all the
quarters of the world, according as is ordained by the providence of God. And
therefore Elihu says in the book of Job. [Behold God is excellent, and we
know it not, Job. 36.
neither can the number of his years be searched out, when he restrains the
drops of water, the rain powers down by the vapor thereof, which rain the
clouds do drop and let fall abundantly upon man.] Then proceeding to show, how
God spreads out the light of the sun upon the waters of the sea, to draw
out and produce vapors, he adds: [Who can know the divisions (that is the
varieties and diversities) of the clouds, and the thunders of his tabernacle?
Behold he spreads his light upon it, and covers the roots of the sea.]
Meaning by roots the waters of the sea, as well because they are deep, as for
that they are divided by diverse waves like the branches of roots. Property of
the winds in regard of the clouds.
Moreover, we must consider that to carry and convey the clouds hither and
thither, God has created the winds, which blow from all the quarters of the
world: some to gather the clouds together, and to bring rain and snow, or
hail and tempests, by means of the same clouds, according as pleases the
Creator to dispose them: other winds on the contrary do disperse them and make
the air clear and pleasant, bringing fair weather. Hereof then it comes,
that above in the air, between heaven and earth, there is, as it were an
other heaven made of clouds spread out like a curtain, and like a vault or
covering over our heads, which hinders us of sight of the Sun, Moon and
stars. But as this mass of clouds is made by means of winds ordained
thereto, so when it pleases God to give us fair weather, then does he send
us other winds, which chase away all these clouds, and clear the air, as if
they had been swept away, and the heaven shows another countenance to the
world, as if it had been changed and renewed.

Now while the air is so filled with clouds, this may very well be
considered by us, that men have then (as it were) a great sea of water over
their heads, contained and held within those clouds, as the waters of the sea
are within the bounds which are assigned them for their course. Which it
seems that Moses taught, when he shows that God creating all things
separated the waters, which are upon the earth, from those which are in the
air, Genes. 1.
saying thus: [That there was a stretching out between the waters, and that it
separated the waters from the waters. God then made the firmament (or spreading
abroad or stretching out) and separated the waters, which are under the
firmament from those which were above it, and it was so. And God called the
firmament, Heaven.] It is sure that by these words, many have thought that the
prophet would teach, that there were waters, both under and above heaven: which
seems to be confirmed by the Psalmist, Psalm. 148. Whether there be any
material waters above the heavens.
saying [Praise ye the Lord heavens of heavens, and waters that be above the
heavens, praise his name.] Nevertheless it is not very easy for us to
understand what waters may be above the heavens, if we do not take the name of
heaven in these two texts, for the air, as we have heretofore showed, that it
is oftentimes so taken. For what shall we answer being demanded to what use
the material waters may serve, either among the spheres, or above the planets
and stars? And for to take the name of waters here, for spiritual waters, not
corporal, as many have argued: me seems, (under correction of the wiser)
which we prefer in all our discourses, that this cannot fitly be affirmed,
because it does evidently appear, that Moses speaks of material waters. For
he accommodating himself to a gross people, amongst whom he conuersed,
makes no mention in all the creation of the world, but of the creating of
visible and corporal things; so that there is small likelihood that he should
speak of other waters, mixing spiritual things with corporal. But because
the Latin translator of the common version of the bible has used, in this
text, the word firmament, following the translation of the Greeks, and not the
proper word (spreading abroad) as the Hebrew phrase does signify; some of the
learned have observed, how that many Latin divines have been hindered from the
understanding of this doctrine. For they have taken the name Firmament, for the
starrie heaven (as also the Greeks have judged) imitating their translation.
Whereupon the imagination is sproong of waters above the heavens, and of a
christalline heaven: which I suppose to have been so called, Of the chrystaline
heaven.
by reason of these waters, which were supposed to be above the firmament:
because that crystal is made of ice, and ice of water. For it had been very
difficult to conceive how material waters, which by nature are corruptible,
might be above the celestial spheres, except they were hardened and converted
into crystal, because that from the moon upwards, there are no creatures
subject to corruption and to such changes, as those that are under the moon.
Behold then, why these men have supposed such waters to have been made
partakers of the nature of heaven. But what need is there to travel in such
disputations, and to take pains for to have recourse to allegories, when one
may be easily satisfied with the literal sense? For there is nothing more
easy, then to make the words of Moses clear and evident, being thoroughly
considered. For first he has declared, Of the separation of the terrestrial
and celestial waters.
how that the earth was covered all over with water, and that there was a great
deep overwhelmed with darkness, so that the earth did in no wise appear, till
such time as God had commanded the waters to retire themselves into their
places, which he has assigned for their perpetual residence. And then the
earth was discovered, even so much thereof as was needful for the habitation
and nourishment of men, and of all the creatures, which God did afterward
create. Psalm. 104.
Therefore David (as the expounder of Moses words, says) That the Lord has
set the earth upon her foundations: adding straight after, That he had covered
it with the deep, as with a garment, and that the waters did stand above the
mountains; but at his rebuke they fled: which is as much to say, as when God
had commanded the waters to retire and to discover the earth, they suddenly
obeyed the voice of their creator. Now Moses having spoken of those waters
which are resident here below on earth, gathered as well into the sea, as into
fountains and rivers, he afterward declares, how God would assign unto them
another abode in a certain region of the air, which he first calls a
spreading abroad, and after that heaven, which the Psalmist also signifies
when he says of God, that he covers himself with light as with a garment,
and spreads the heavens like a curtain, which is to say, that the light is
to the creator like a stately garment, wherein we behold his glory to shine
and glister every where, and that he has spread abroad the heavens like a
pauilion for his habitation. Moreover he adds, [The Lord does lay the iousts
of his high chambers amongst the waters: he makes the great clouds his
chariot: He holds back (says Job) the face of his throne and stretches out
his cloud upon it. Job. 26.
] And therefore the Scripture does also teach us, that God has oftentimes
declared his presence, Exodus 13.14.16 and. 40. Acts. 1.
and manifested his glory both to Moses, and to all the people of Israel by
the clouds. And when Jesus Christ ascended into heaven, a cloud taking him,
bare him up in the sight of his apostles: to declare unto them, and make them
sure of the place whither he went: using this cloud as a triumphant chariot,
which has given testimony of his sovereign and eternal majesty. And
therefore it is also written, that he shall come in the clouds of heaven with
power and glory. Wherefore if we were well instructed in the sacred word of
God, we should have a very clear doctrine concerning Meteors, and which were
much more profitable then that which Philosophers teach. For the clouds would
excellently declare unto us the magnificence and majesty of God, so often as
we should behold them, Matthew. 24.
and would represent unto us all the woonders by us here mentioned: as we shall
also be induced to admire them, considering more nearly the great miracle of
the waters sustained and hanged in the air, as pursuing our purpose I leave to
you (ACHITOB) to discover.


Of the waters sustained and hanged in the air, and of the raine-bowe. Chap.
48.
ACHITOB. I Will begin my speech with the saying of the kingly prophet, Psalm.
104.
who after that he had appointed the heavens for the pauilion of God, and
ordained the clouds for the planchers thereof, whereupon are raised the lofty
chambers (that is to say, the great and spacious waters amassed up within the
clouds, which he also proposes unto us as the chariot, upon which the
Eternal is borne) being consequently willing to show what the horses are, by
which this chariot is drawn and driven, he says [He walks upon the wings of
the wind. He makes the spirits his messengers, and flaming fire his
ministers:] which is as much, as if in sum he would declare, that men need not
labor to mount aloft into heaven there to co^template and behold God, since
that he so clearly manifests himself throughout the whole world,
principally by the celestial creatures, and then by the magnificent and
marvelous works, which he daily performs here in the air near unto us,
and before our eyes. So surely, if we must account as great miracles, the
coming of the Sun unto us and his return, which daily continues, and the
courses and motions of all the other celestial bodies; we have no less
occasion to account as a thing miraculous and worthy of great wonder, that we
so often behold here below, Wonder of the waters carried in the air.
a great cel of waters over our heads in the air, sustained by the water it
self, and by vapors like to smoke, as if they were hanged in the air, and
were there borne up without any stay and prop, but by the invisible virtue and
power of God. For otherwise, how could the clouds sustain so great heaps,
and such deep gulfes of water, considering that they are nothing else but
water, and do also come at length to resolve into water? Again how without
this divine power could these clouds be supported in the air, seeing that the
air it self seems to consist of waters most subtly distilled, being very
light, and in continual motion. For it evidently appears, that the air
retains much of the nature of water, because that so ordinarily it conuerteth
thereinto, being enclosed in a cold and moist place: so that many fountains
are by this means engendered of air, if we will credit Naturalists. And
therefore as David says of the waters, which run about the earth, that God
has appointed a bound unto them, which they may not pass, nor return any
more to ouerflow the habitation of men: so may we likewise say, that he has
bounded the waters that hang in the air, within the clouds, to the end that
they may not run loosely astray. Job. 26.
And therefore Job says: [He binds the waters in the clouds, and the cloud
is not broken under them.] For else it is most certain that so often as these
waters should fall upon the earth, they would drown up all things whereupon
they powered, like as when the sea and rivers ouerflow the banks, or like a
great deluge; as came to pass, when God punished the world by waters, Genes. 7.
in the time of Noah. For it is written, that not only all the fountains of
the great deep were broken up, but that the windows of heaven were opened, and
that rain fell upon the earth forty days and forty nights. For which cause
also the Psalmist sings [The voice of the Lord is upon the waters, Psalm. 29.
the glory of God makes it to thunder; the Lord is upon the great waters. He
was set upon the flood, and he shall remain king for ever:] which is as much to
say, as the Lord has executed his judgment upon the wicked, by the waters of
the flood, and that as then he took vengeance, so it is he, that does for ever
remain judge of the world, and that makes all creatures to tremble before
him. Where we have great matter of fear and trembling, if we believe the
word of God, and the testimonies which it delivers of his judgments, when I
say, we diligently consider the effects of the nature of the higher elements.
Therefore whenever we see close weather, and the air filled with clouds,
threatening us with rain and tempests, the sight thereof should always refresh
and renew in us the memory of this judgment of God, so terrible and
universal in the flud, to teach us to walk in more fear of his Majesty. But
there are few, which think thereupon, and can make their profit thereof: and
many to the contrary, do but jest and scoff at it, as if it were a fable,
and a fantasy.

I know very well, that the scripture says that God set the rainbow in the
clouds for sign of an accord and atonement between him and men, and every
living creature, to the end that the waters might never after increase to such
a flood as should root out all flesh. But we must note, that the Eternal does
not here promise, never to send any deluge upon the earth, Genes. 9. Many
goodly things to be c^^^^dered in the rain^^^^w.
but only not a general and universal flood, as the first was in the time of
Noah. For how many times has he punished particularly many people with great
inundations and deluges of water: signifying unto all, that he has all his
creatures at commandment for ever, to make them serve, either to his wrath, or
to his mercy, according as he will entreat men? and hereupon we shall learn,
that though it seems, that in the place before alleged, the raine-bowe is
named, as if it had been spread in the air at that time only, when it was
given by God as a sign and sacrament of his covenant renewed: yet nevertheless
we must not doubt, but that when God created the causes of this bow in nature
ordained by him, he did also create it in the establishing of the world with
other creatures. But it was not used by God for a testimony of his atonement
with mankind, till after the flood. So likewise it is certain, that this
heavenly bow has naturally had at all times the significations which at this
present it retains, to presage rain or fair weather, according as it
diversely appears. But since that the creator has accepted it for a sign of
his covenant, it has had this vantage, to be ordained as a gage and witness of
the promises of God. And therefore whenever we behold it in heaven, we must
not only consider of it, as of a natural thing, and as a prognosticator
sometimes of rain, sometimes of fair weather: but likewise as a witness and
memorial as well of the judgment of God, as of his grace and mercy, and of
the assurance of the conservation of all creatures by his providence. But
though it should teach us nothing of all this, but should only retain the
beauty and natural signification thereof; yet might it serve us for an
excellent testimony of the majesty of God, and incite us to give him praise.
Eccles. 43.
For which cause Ecclesiasticus says, [Looke upon the raine-bowe and praise
him that made it: very beautiful it is in the brightness thereof. It compasses
the heaven about with a glorious circle, and the hands of the most high have
bended it.] For what man is so dull, but does admire the great variety of so
fair colors as appear in it, even in a substance so fine and subtle, that
it cannot be perceived by any corporal sense, save by the sight?

I know that the philosophers do teach, Of the cause of the (...) rain^^bow.
that as a drop of water, which one sees in the sun, represents many
goodly colors like those in the raine-bowe, which is made of a thick watrie
cloud full of drops, in the middle region of the air. For every dark obscure
thing is, as it were, almost black, as the shadows do demonstrate, which by
reason of their obscurity seem to be black. And when an obscure thing is
illuminated, if it be bright, it passes in colors, according to the abundance
of the brightness. Now the cloud is obscure, and the drops of water are bright;
and for this cause they represent unto us colors according to the variety of
that light which shines upon them. And for so much as the innermost circle of
the bow is nerest to the obscure or dark cloud, it seems commonly to be blew;
that in the middle, which is more illuminate, appears green: and the upper
circle, which is greatest, and most lighted with celestial brightness, is
yellow. Forasmuch then as there is a cause of every thing, the Naturalists do
much endeavor themselves to render reasons, concerning the diversities of these
colors: as Astrologians do also, to argue upon the diverse predictions of this
bow, as presaging sometimes rain, sometimes fair weather, sometimes wind,
and sometimes calm and clear weather. Hist. not. lib. 2.
Yet Pliny says, that it is often seen, when it does not prognosticate any
thing, and that no heed is taken of it, for the time to come. But let every
one ascertaine himself, that it is caused by the beams of the sun, which
striking into an hollow cloud, are constrained to reuerberate, and return
vpwardes toward the sun. And that the diversity of colors, which are
therein represented, is made by the mixture of the clouds, of the air, and of
the fire, which are found there together. Moreover, that this bow never is, but
when the sun is opposite to that cloud, and that it exceeds not the form of
a semicircle: also that it appears not by night, though Aristotle says that
it has sometimes been then seen. But we will leave the philosophers to dispute
upon these things, and to search the depth of their natural causes; and will
conclude this speech, and make an end of this day with a point of doctrine,
concerning the meteors of Christians: which is, that we must take very good
heed, not to be of the number of those, who boasting of the knowledge of humane
sciences, have despised the spiritual and divine: and of whom Saint Peter has
prophesied saying, 2. Pet. 3.
That there should come in the last days mockers and contemners of God,
walking according to their own lusts, which should say, [Where is the promise
of his coming? for since the fathers died, all things continue alike from the
creation.] Which is as much as if they should say, that there is a common and
continual course of nature, which has hitherto continued from the beginning
of the world, and shall endure for ever, without end, and without any judgment
of God to come. Against Atheists.
For thus prate our idolaters of nature, who do altogether deny the
providence of God. And therefore the blessed apostle does also add, that they
willingly know not that the heavens were of old, and that earth that was of the
water, and the water by the word of God. By which things the world that was,
perished, being ouerflowed with waters. Likewise saint Peter had before
concluded; 2. Pet. ^.
that if God has not spared the old world, but saved Noah the eight person, a
preacher of righteousness, and brought in the flood upon the troup of the
ungodly: it cannot be that the wicked, which are borne since into the world,
may think that their condemnation sloweth, and that their perdition sleeps.
For a thousand years are but as one day, and one day is as a thousand years
before the Lord. Psalm. 90.
And the long term that God allows to men, to prevent his judgment by
repentance and amendment, shall not hinder him to execute his judgment, yea by
so much the more rigorously, by how much the more long time, and more vilely
they have abused his stay and patience. Let us then imprint this at this
present in our memory, concerning our discourse of the waters sustained and
hanged in the air, which have served God for so terrible ministers in the
execution of his justice, when it pleased him to punish the iniquity of men:
and to morrow, pursuing our subject, we will speak again of raines, and
heavenly waters, to the end to consider of the admirable providence of God,
which shines in them: even as you (ASER) shall give us to understand.


The end of the sixth day.
THE SEVENTH DAYS WORK.
Of Dewes and Rain. Chapter 49.
ASER. THe providence of God has so disposed the nature of the air and of the
water, that these elements seem to repair and maintain one another. For
there is a place in the air where water is, as it were, converted into the
nature thereof: there is another place again, wherein water returns into his
own natural kind, saving that whilst it hangs and is sustained in the
air, it is much more light and subtle then that which runs in the earth,
for it retains more of the earth. How the water ascends up from the earth
and changes nature.
Although then that water is by nature more heavy then the air; yet does not
the heaviness thereof let it from mounting up from the earth, because that by
the heat of the sun which attracteth it, and other such like natural
causes, by which it may be elevated into the air, this waightines is taken
from it, or at least is so diminished, that it does then retain more of the
nature of air, then of water, and so does till such time as it has ascended,
and attained to the place which God has assigned to it in the air. For the
heat of the sun does convert it first into vapors, which are drawn out of the
least terrestrial and most subtle parts thereof, which approach nearest to the
nature of the air. For which cause these vapors are more easily converted into
air, the which resolves it self again into water, then when such vapors are
arrived at the middle region of the air, which is the coldest part thereof, as
well by reason that it is farther distant from the sun and from all the other
celestial and aetherian fires, then the supreme part thereof is; as likewise
because it cannot be heated like the lowest part thereof, by reuerberation of
the suns heat, which scorcheth the earth. Wherefore Moses declaring unto us,
how the Lord made the water mount from the earth, and converted it into vapors,
says: [The Lord God had not caused it to rain upon the earth, Genes. 2.
neither was there a man to til the ground, but a mist (or vapor) went up from
the earth, and watered all the earth.] For we behold every day, how that after
the air has been refreshed by the coolenes of the night, the dew falls in
the morning upon the earth: and if the cold has been great, it is turned
into miste, and white hoarie-frost, from which proceed the frosts that do
oftentimes spoil vines and trees, which are most tender in cold weather, when
their branches are yet feeble, and they begin to budde.

And let us note, that there are two sorts of vapors, Of two sorts of vapors,
which make dew and rain.
which do commonly rise from the terrestrial toward the celestial region:
the one is fat and thick, whereof the dew is made; and the other is subtle
and thin, which turns into rain. Cornefields are fatned by the dew, which
by reason of the thicknes thereof mounteth not very high: and if that any part
of it be better concocted (as does happen ordinarily in hot countries) it
rests condensate through cold upon the plants, and is called Manna. Of this
it is that Pliny speaks, when he says, Hist. not. lib. 11.
that the great stars being risen in summer, and specially the most
excellent, or else when the raine-bowe is over the earth, and that it rain
not, but only make a small dew, which is heated by the sunne-beames; that
which then falls is not home, but is an heavenly gift and singular medicine
for the eyes, for ulcers, and for those accidents which may happen in the
navel and interior parts. Which Manna is plentifully gathered in Targa, a
wilderness of Libya, near to the city Agades, especially when the nights are
very fair, partly for that they are colder then the day; and partly for that
the dewes cannot convert themselves into the substance of clouds: because as I
said it is condensate by the cold. Whereupon ensues that when the rain is
engendered of vapors, the cold cannot be great: for then such vapors are
attracted by the heat, and are presently after thickened by the cold in the
region of the air. And therefore there is but little Manna found when the
night is cloudie, and less when it is rainie, for then it melts. Behold then
how the fattest part of vapors turns into dew, and that which mounteth up, is
condensate through cold in the subtle air, Why it raineth but little in
summer* and diversely in other seasons.
and is afterward converted into rain. And because that in summer the heat
does dry up very near so much as it attracteth in vapors, there is therefore
very seldom little rain therein: for considering that in our countries the
heat is weak, it attracteth by little and little the vapors, which the
dryness does oftentimes consume before they can be converted into rain.
Wherefore it comes to pass, that if it rain in summer, the rain is
suddenly engendered: for when the clouds are too slow, they are consumed by
the dryness of the sun. And there where the air is very cold, and
consequently thick and gross, the vapor, which is thither drawn, being very
light, cannot be condensate, because of the thicknes of the air and the
thinness of the vapor. Which causes, that in stead of rain, snow is
engendered: for snow is a congelation of a vapor not condensate for the
subtilitie of his proper substance, and for because of the thicknes of the
air. Wherefore when the cold is great in winter, it raineth little. And for
the spring time, because that the succeeding day does consume more vapor, then
the precedent day had attracted (for in the spring time the latter days are
still hotter, and have shorter nights) for this cause it raineth then less
then in autumn, and oftener then in summer or winter. But in Autumn showers of
rain are commonly great, and of long continuance: For the sun being as then
still powerful upon the earth, many vapors are drawn up. But because the
succeeding day has still a longer night then the precedent, and for that it
was also warmer, it is necessary that the vapor should thicken, and
afterward descend. And when the earth is moistened, then that which did
descend, is again attracted, lying then upon the superficies of the earth, and
being still somewhat deeper then before. Whereof are made not only raines, but
also rainie and windy clouds.

Difference of rain water, and earth water.
Thus have we in sum then the form of dewes and rain, and the diversity of
their course, and how the earthly and heavenly waters differ from one another,
the rain water retaining more of the air, and being much purer and lighter,
then that which does always remain in the earth. For in comparison of
terrestrial water, it is like water distilled through a limbeck. And yet how
light soever it be, it must nevertheless be heavier then the air, and
especially when it is frozen within the clouds, and converted into snow or
hail, which is like stones of ice. Wherein it seems that this rule of nature
and natural philosophy is not generally true, which affirms, That every
heavy thing does always draw downwards, considering there are waters hanged
in the air, which is much lighter then the waters that it sustaineth.
Wherefore we must say, Clouds are in the air, as ships are upon the waters.
that clouds are in the air in the region that is assigned unto them, in such
sort as ships are in the water. For none doubts, but that stones, iron, lead,
and all other metals, yea infinite other things of less weight, are heavier
then the water; yet we nevertheless do behold, that there is no burden so
weighty, but the water does easily support it, by means of a boat, or a
wooden ship, or a galley, which shall be even of it self a great and heavy
load. And yet the water, which will sustain such a charge, cannot bear up a
pin, or a nail, or a small piece of gold, or silver, or a little stone, but
all shall sink to the bottom. Now the cause of all these effects is in the
participation that the wood has with the air, which makes it much lighter
then the other bodies, which are more solid and massy. For by reason that the
wood is more open, and more loose to give way to the air, it receives
lightness thereof, which causes it to floate upon the water, whereas the other
more terrestrial bodies do sink thereinto. So then the air sustaineth by
means of the clouds, the waters, which they contain enclosed within them:
even as the sea and great rivers sustain gross and heavy burdens by means
of ships. For though the clouds do consist of water themselves, and are
engendered of it, being drawn into the air, through blowing of the winds, and
afterward massed up in one body (as we have already understood) yet do they
subsist of a water less terrestrial, and more airie, then those waters, which
flow here below: for which cause they are also more light, and more easily
sustained by the air, upon which they floate, like ships upon the sea and
other waters. And afterward when the clouds return into their first nature
of water, and when they be opened to let fall the waters which they contain,
the water which proceeds from them does resume also his proper course,
according to the natural heaviness thereof, and returns downwards, descending
to the earth. And as ships sink down into the water, when they are
ouercharged, as likewise the charges and burdens, wherewith they are laden,
when they are split or broken by violence of winds, or by some other force
which makes them dash one against another, and against the rocks: so is it
with the clouds, and with the things which they bear, and with the winds
also wherewith they are driven, or else are enclosed within them, which make a
great noise, when they strive to issue out, so that the clouds are rent and
crack, as the thunders testify unto us, and the tempests, lightnings, and
thunder claps which proceed from them, as also the great deluges of water,
which shower down with great violence and fury. But we have stayed long
enough in this matter: let us now consider of the marvelous providence of God,
which shines in the dispensation of the rain and heavenly waters. As (AMANA)
I leave to you to discourse.


Of the fertility caused by dewes and rain, and of the providence of God
therein. Chap. 50.
AMANA. IN vain shall we consider in meteors the works of nature, which are
therein proposed very great and excellent, as our precedent speech does
manifest; if we do not learn in the same to consider and acknowledge the
providence of God governing all things, as it reuealeth it self in sundry
sorts. For all these goodly visible works must serve us as images of the
invisible and spiritual things, so that all the creatures of God may be
competent judges to condemn us, if by them we do not learn to acknowledge
their and our creator, and to obey and honor him as behooves us: we need no
other judges, I say, to make us inexcusable before the throne of Gods justice,
Romans 1.
according to the testimony of Saint Paul, since he has as it were, made
visible to the eye his divinity, his power, his bounty and his wisdom
through his works, and that so near unto us, as almost to be touched with our
own hands. For (as this holy apostle in another place says) he is near to
every one of us: Acts. 17.
so that howsoever we be blind, yet should we at least find him by groping
like those that want sight. For he never wa^teth very evident witness amongst
men, in co^ferring benefits upon them, and namely in giving them rain from
heaven, and fruitful seasons, according to the subject we are now to speak of.
Let us know then, that it is he who distributeth the rain and heavenly waters
by an admirable providence: and who also keeps them hidden when he pleases,
in such sort, that there is no cloud seen in the air, and sometimes for so
long space, that the earth becomes dry, and as it were burnt up with the
beams of the Sun, for want of moisture from heaven, 1. King. 17. and. 18.
as it was in the days of Elias. And then he executed the sentence wherewith he
threatened the transgressors of his law, when he denounced to them by Moses,
Leuit. 26. Deuteronomy. 28.
that he would make the heaven as brass, and the earth as iron: that is to
say, that there should come no more rain from heaven, then if it were of
brass: whereupon does also follow, that the earth not being moistened with
water from heaven, should become barren, bearing no more fruit, then if it were
of iron. For as it is written, [The earth, which drinks in rain that comes
often upon it, Heb. 6.
and brings forth herbs meet for them by whom it is dressed, receives
blessing of God. But that which bears thorns and briers is reproved, and is
near unto cursing, whose end is to be Burned. And therefore likewise the
Prophet says in the Psalms, Psalm. 107.
that God turns the floods into deserts, and springs of water into drynes,
and the fruitful ground into saltnes: which is as much as if he should say,
that he makes it altogether barren, as if one had sowed salt there. Adding
also afterward, that it is for the wickedness of those that dwell therein, and
that contrariwise he turns the deserts into pooles of water, and the
drie-land into water-springs, making it an habitation for such as were
famished, who there sow the fields and plant vines, which bring forth yearly
fruit. For this cause the Lord being angry with his people, says by Isay,
Isay. 5.
[I will command the clouds that they shall distill no rain upon my
vineyard.] Meaning by this kind of speech, his people whom he has elected.
And surely the holy spirit would give us to understand this one thing more in
this text, that as the earth waxes barren, if it be not watered by rain from
heaven; so men cannot perform any thing, if God power not down his grace upon
them, as he causes the raine-waters to shower down upon the earth. Wherefore
as it is unfruitful, not being watered from heaven: even so is mankind, when
God withdraws his blessing. For we are all cursed by nature, as the earth is,
as we even now heard the Apostle give evidence.

When therefore it pleases the creator, he commands the clouds to
distribute their waters, to the end that the earth may be moistened and watered,
to make it fertile. And therefore the kingly Prophet says again. [Thou
visitest the earth and watrest it: Psalm. 65. Of the fertility caused by rain.
thou make it very rich; the river of God is full of water; thou preparest
the corn, for so thou appointest it. Thou watrest abundantly the furrows
thereof; thou causest the rain to descend into the valleies thereof; thou
make it soft with showers, and blessest the bud thereof. Thou crownest the
year with thy goodness, and thy steps drop fatnes.] Meaning by the steps or
paths, and walks of the Lord, the clouds, for that the Scripture proposes
him unto us, walking upon them: and by fatnes he understands the rain which
droppeth upon the earth, as it does also serve therefore. And in another Psalm
he again records: [The Lord watreth the mountains from his lofty
chambers:] which is as much to say, as God causes it to rain upon the
mountains to make them fruitful. And therefore he further adds, [That the
earth is filled with the fruit of his works.] Wherein the Prophet does also
expound his own meaning, saying before, that the Al-mightie laid the
planchers of his high chambers amongst the waters, and after that he has
generally entreated of the fertility which God bestows upon the earth, by
means of the rain, he does declare it more particularly, Psalm. 104.
saying [He causes grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the use of
man, that he may bring forth bread out of the earth; and wind that makes glad
the heart of man; and oil that makes the face to shine, and bread that
strengthens man's heart. The high trees are satisfied, even the Cedars of
Libanon, which he has planted. That the birds may make their nests there: the
Storke dwells in the firre-trees.] Where we clearly behold how God sends
his blessing upon the earth, by means of the rain, to the end that it may
bring forth fruits, not only for the nourishment of men; but also for the
commodity of beasts. Which may serve us for a certain testimony of his
providence toward mankind. Testimony of the providence of God toward men.
For if he has care of the bruit beasts which he has created for men; there
is no doubt, but he has much more care of them whom he has created after his
own image and semblance, and above all, of his children and elect. And for
this cause also the Psalmist signifies, how that God has not only been
careful to provide for their necessities, as for the necessities of other
creatures; but it has also pleased him to bestow upon them pleasures and
honest comforts, convenient both for his Majesty, as also for the nature of
man: when he says, that GOD has given wine to man to make him merry; and
oil to make his face shine. For although he already had the waters for
drink, and which might suffice him to staunch his thirst, and for his
necessary beuerage, it has nevertheless pleased him through his great
liberality to bestow wine upon him also, which is a much more delicious
drink, and which does so comfort him, that it brings joy and pleasure to
him. And for oil, it does not only serve in meats and medicinal ointments;
but also to make compositions and sweet savors, to beawtifie and refresh man's
countenance. Which specialities the prophet would not omit: because that in his
days oil was in great use, to make such precious ointments, as the ancients
used to anoint themselves withal, as is now adays done with oil of Spike,
and other such odoriferous oils and sweet water. 2. King. 4.
And if God has at some times multiplied by the hands of his faithful
ministers the poor widows oil (as his word teaches us) he causes it to
abound much more every day, when he makes it increase in the lands which he
has destinated to that purpose, converting the water, which runs upon the
olive trees into oil: yea and that water, which droppeth upon the earth into
corn and bread, which he daily does much more abundantly multiply then in
times past he did the poor widows meal by Elias, 1. King. 17. Matthew. 14.
and 15.
yea then Jesus Christ did multiply the loaves in the wilderness. And therefore
if we shall consider how the Al-mightie creator of heaven and earth causes so
many fruits to grow in this round-masse through the distillations of rain, and
through the heat of the Sun, we hold in great admiration this worthy
natural Alchimie, which he has set before our eyes in the nature by him
created. Of true natural Alchymie.
For all this world is to him as a furnace, and a limbeck wherein he makes so
many goodly and profitable distillations, that it is altogether impossible to
express in words their worth and value. The earth is this furnace, and all
the plants and trees so many limbecks. And if we have in such estimation the
distillations made by men following some imitation of nature, this surely is a
kind of Alchymy very worthy of great reputation and wonder. For let us
consider only what it is that he extracteth out of a vine stock and the
branches. There is no doubt but that this is a plant of no great show, so that
many have doubted whether it might rightfully be counted amongst trees, for
besides that it is crooked, it is so weak that it cannot stand upright, nor
sustain not only the branches thereof, but even it self, if it be not
always propped, at leastwise when it rises never so little high: And yet this
is a marvelous and very rare Limbeck, wherein God conuerteth water into wine,
and makes it to distill out. The like may we say of Oliue-trees, figge-trees,
and many other fruite-trees, saving that they make more show, and retain more
of the nature of a tree, then the vine does. For all the excellent liquors and
fruits, which we draw out of these plants, and all others, are principally
caused by the heat of the sun, and by the waterings of rain from heaven,
which by this means seems to change nature, and put on diverse forms. And
yet this sun, by means of whom, as by a fire, God performs so many sundry
and admirable conuersions and distillations, has not his face smeared with
coals, to kindle and maintain his fire, nor yet his fair eye soiled
therewith, or with any smoke. So then I hold them very wise, who profit in the
contemplation of this Alchymie, and emploie their time and cunning therein, as
husbandmen do who till the earth, attending in good hope after their travel,
the blessing which is promised them of God, as he also does daily send upon the
earth by the effects of the sun, moon, stars, and planets; of the air,
clouds, rain, and such other means which it pleases him to use for the same
purpose. Psalm. 127.
For we may fitly say with Solomon, that without this blessing, it is in vain
for those, which eat the bread of their travel, Deuteronomy. 11.
to rise early, and to go late to bed. For it is he that has promised the
first and the latter rain, as well for the time to sow in, as for to ripen and
gather fruits in: using for this purpose (according to the testimony of the
prophet) great clouds in form of chariots, Psalm. 18. and 104.
whereupon being borne on the wings of the wind, he makes the winds his
messengers. And since we are in this talk, before we deal with any other
subject, let us acquit our selves of that which we have promised, to entreat in
a particular discourse concerning the winds: the charge whereof (ARAM) I
impose upon you.


Of the winds, and of their kinds and names: and of the testimonies which we
have in them of the power and majesty of God. Chapter 51.
ARAM. Hist. not. lib. 2.
ACcording to the testimony of Pliny, there are more then twenty Greek
authors and many other ancients, who have entreated of the nature of the
winds. But to know from whence they proceeded, the difficulties and doubts are
great and uncertain amongst them, and amongst all the philosophers. Yet that
is the only truth, which the divine poet teaches us, saying, Psalm. 135.
[That the Lord draws the winds out of his treasures.] Aristotle in his
Meteors maintains that the winds are produced by the heat of the sun:
which it seems that the author of the natural history does contradict when
he says, that there are certain caves wherein the winds are ordinarily
engendered, as may be seen in a deep pit, which is in the coasts of Dalmatia
at Senta, wherein if one cast any thing, how light soever it be, there issues
suddenly out a whirle-winde, although the weather be never so calm and
fair. And in many obscure places in houses, one shall commonly feel a
certain small wind, as if it were enclosed therein. But we must note that
there is much difference betwixt these particularities, or small puffes caused
by exhalations, which proceed out of the earth, and that, which is properly
named the wind. For they are not felt in one place only, but have their
course generally through all the earth, and their means limited therein to
exercise their power. Diverse opinions concerning the generation of winds.
And therefore whether the wind be engendered by continual motion of the
heaven, or by the cross motions of the planets, which go contrary to that of
the firmament, or else that the wind be an air driven by the sundry turnings
of the spheres, and by the multiplicitie of the beams of the celestial
signs, or else that it proceed from stars particularly appointed to engender
it; or from the fixed stars (for all these opinions are found amongst
Philosophers:) yet nevertheless we see by experience, that the wind is
subject to the rules and laws of nature, and that it has his determinate
course, although man's wit cannot pierce to sound the reason of this secret.

But for the names and species of these winds, they have amply entreated
thereof. True it is that the ancients made mention but of four winds, which
they comprised under the four parts of the world. And then the natural
Philosophers appointed twelve, giving them names taken partly from the regions
from which they proceeded, and partly from the effects and qualities which they
cause upon the earth. But the Hydrographers and mariners account sixteen. Of
the names, and kinds of the winds.
To have the understanding of which, we must note that every horizon is
divided into four quarters by two right lines, which cross in the center
thereof: the one of which is correspondent to the Meridian circle, and the
other to the vertical circle, which divides the same Meridian at right
angles, which lines demonstrate the four principal parts of the earth, that
is, the East, West, North, and South part: of which proceed the four
principal winds, to wit, out of the Septentrionall part, the North wind:
from the Meridionall the south: from the Oriental the East: and from the
Occidentall the West: Between which are other middle and notable winds, whose
names are compounded of those of the four foresaid winds, and are therefore
called North-east, North-west; South-east, and South-west. Then again each
distinction of these eight winds, is consequently divided into two equal
parts, which make the distinctions of eight other winds, called
sub-principall, and which compound their names of their two next collateral
winds, expressing the most notable first: to wit, North-northeast,
North-northwest; South-southeast, South-southwest; East-northeast,
East-southeast; West-northwest, West-southwest. Moreover they that frequent the
Mediterran sea (as Greeks and Italians) do call the north Transmontano: the
south, Austro: east, Leuante: west, Ponante: northeast, Greco: northwest,
Maestro: southeast, Sirocho: southwest, Garbin: and so of them compound the
names of the other eight winds, which are betwixt them, as has been before
declared. And we must note that the winds have commonly every one their turn
in such sort that when one opposite wind cease and is laid, his contrary
rises. Notable things in the winds.
But if at any time the next wind to that which cease, begin to blow, it
runs byas-wise from left hand to right, as the sun does, and one may know the
fourth day of the moon, what wind will reign longest during her time. But
the eastern winds do longer endure then those which rise toward the west.
And the sun does strengthen the wind, and also appease it: for at his rising
and setting they are commonly greatest, at noone he calmeth them, especially in
summer. The wind is also commonly found to lie still, either at midday, or at
midnight: for it does always cease either through great cold, or through
vehement heat. Likewise the rain does make it cease: whereupon this proverb
sprung up, that little rain allaieth much wind.

But it is woondrous, that the winds, which are as it were but a puff, should
perform such things as men could not do with their hands, yea though there
were a multitude together. For how many people need there be, yea horses and
oxen yoked together to break, burst, and pull up the great and mighty trees,
which the wind abateth, ouerturneth, breaks, and rooteth up, with a blast
only? And herein we have goodly matter again, Testimonies of the divine
omnipotency in the winds.
whereby to profit in the acknowledgement of the sovereign majesty and
almighty providence of the creator and governor of all nature. For it is
certain, that as the Lord manifests himself to men, such as they may
comprehend him to be, when he calls the sound and noise of thunder (his
voice) that he performs admirable things, as we have already noted: we may
perceive that he does the like also by violence of the winds. And therefore
the prophet says, [I know that the Lord is great, and that our God is above
all Gods. Whatsoever pleased the Lord, Psalm. 135.
that did he in heaven and in earth, in the sea, and in all the depths. He
brings up the clouds from the ends of the earth, and makes the lightnings
with the rain; he draws forth the wind out of his treasures. Ierem. 10.
] It is he (says Jeremy) that gives by his voice the multitude of waters in
the heaven, and he causes the clouds to ascend from the ends of the earth, he
casts out lightnings in the rain, and brings forth the winds out of his
treasures. [The wind (says the Preacher) goes toward the south, Eccles. 1.
and compasses toward the north: the wind goes round about, and returns by
his circuits.] Now if the blasts of the winds be so strong, it must needs be,
that the bellows out of which they are blown must be puissant and mighty.
For although it is written of the wicked, Psalm. 10.
that they are so proud and do presume so much of their force and power, that
they seem to be able to overthrow men, towns, and fortified places only with
a blast; yet nevertheless it is the Lord, who has the power to abate them, and
all the lofty and stout with all their forts and bulwarks: For all the winds
together, are but as one little puff, which passes from his mouth. Wherefore
if in breathing only, he drives and remooueth heaven, earth, and the sea, and
all this world, performing acts so great and wonderful: what may we esteem
of his sovereign force, when he would employ his whole power? For there is
neither wind nor thunder, nor deluges of water, nor any thing that is
comparable to the wrath of God, and to the power which he has to execute his
vengeance upon his enemies. But he emploieth his creatures, as the ministers of
his wrath, when, and how he pleases. And therefore the divine poet in his
canticles, wishing lively to describe the assistance that God had showed him,
Psalm. 18.
in delivering him out of the hands of the wicked, and in punishing them; he
proposes him coming accompanied with fearful thunders, with thick clouds,
with vehement winds and storms, with lightnings, tempests, great rain, hard
hail, and dark weather, so that the foundations of the sea, and of the earth
covered with waters, were discovered, and the earth was moved and trembled,
the mountains shook and bowed because of the fury of the wrath of the Lord.
For indeed who is God but the Lord, and who is mighty but our God? Now it is
certain, that because men cannot comprehe^d the greatness of the power and
wrath of God against the wicked, the holy Ghost does often speak of natural
things by the prophets, for to make them understand by that, which is visible
in nature, and which may most astonish and affray them. So then if we shall
consider so many excellent points of doctrine concerning the providence of God,
as are taught us in the school of nature, by means of the meteors (as we have
hitherto discoursed) of the clouds, thunders, lightnings, storms, floods of
water, winds, whirlewindes, and tempests, they will serve us no less for
preachers, then the celestial bodies do, to manifest unto us especially the
judgments and heavy plagues of the almighty, and to make us oftener think
thereupon then we do: as also the raines, by the fertility which they cause
in the earth, will minister matter unto us to acknowledge his blessing, and
perpetual grace upon those, who fear and honor him. Wherefore we have
rested long enough in that which particularly concerns and is dependent upon
the two higher elements, the fire and the air: saving that, before we entreat
of the earth, and of the water, and of the principal things worthy of
consideration in them, we will say somewhat concerning the birds of the air,
seeing that we have already comprised them, as in truth they must be, amongst
the things conjoined and depending upon the higher elements, I will leave you
then (ACHITOB) to discourse upon their nature.


Of the fowls of the air: and namely of the Manucodiata, of the Eagle, of the
Phoenix, and of other wild foul. Chap. 52.
ACHITOB. Having discoursed (though simply like disciples of Christian
doctrine, and not like masters and professors of natural philosophy) upon the
two higher elements the fire and the air, and having considered their nature
and effects, and the things engendered in them, and by them: it falls very
fitly for us, to entreat of the visible creatures, which converse in the air,
Psalm. 8. Matthew. 6. Luke 8. Genes. 1.
and of which the holy scripture speaks in diverse places, under the name of
the fowls of the air: considering also that Moses teaches, that the fowls
and fishes were created before any of the terrestrial creatures. For as there
is a greater accord between the two elements of water and air, then of air
and earth; even so is there a more correspondencie of nature between fishes and
fowls, then between beasts of the earth and fowls. For the flying of birds in
the air is like the swimming of fishes in the water. Moreover there are many
water-foules, which are as it were of a middle nature between those which
converse but only in the air, or in the earth, and which therein receive their
nouriture, and between the fishes that live in the waters. For these birds
fly in the air like other birds, and swim also in the water like fishes, and
live partly in the water and partly in the air. But before we entreat
particularly of these things, it seems good to me to note upon the beginning
of our discourse concerning living creatures, that there are two principal
kinds of living creatures, Of two principal kinds of beasts.
the first are those, which have life in every part being divided and cut
asunder, called in Latin (Insecta) because of the incisions which they seem
to have upon their bodies, and which are engendered of putrefaction. The second
sort is of perfect creatures, to whom the former properties agree not, but they
have their generation through propagation and race. Now we must hereafter
speak of insect creatures. And for the perfect, Of nine kinds of perfect
beasts.
there are found nine principal kinds of them, whereof some remain only in
the air, and have no feet, as the bird called (Manucodiata:) other converse in
the air and in the earth, as (the Eagle) and sundry other birds: some are
earthly, and yet like fowls nevertheless, as is (the Estridge:) some inhabit
both in the earth and in the water, as (the Beauer) called in Latin (Fiber:)
some fowls swim as (the swan:) some creatures are flying fishes: others are
altogether earthly (as the dog:) some keep under ground as (the Mole:) others
live in the water only as (the dolphin:) our speech then shall be concerning
these nine kinds of creatures, and we will briefly discourse of some of the most
excellent of them.

Of the bird named Manucodiata.
Now to begin with the birds according as the order of our treatise does
require, we will speak of the Manucodiata, commonly called the bird of God,
or of paradise, according to the interpretation of the Indian name, which bird
is found dead upon the earth, or in the sea, in the Isles named The Malucos,
because it is never seen alive out of the air: For this bird only has no
feet, for that it abides aloft in the air, and far out of man's sight,
having the body and beak like a swallow, both in bigness and form. The
feathers of his wings and tail, are longer then those of a sparrow-hawke, but
very slender, agreeable to the smalenes of the bird. The back of the cock is
holow, whereby reason shows, that the hen lays her eggs in this hollownes,
seeing that she has the like creuise in her belly, so that by means of both
these pits she may hatch her eggs. The meat of this foul is the dew of
heaven, which serves it for meat and drink: it never fails, but through
age only: and so long as they live they sustain themselves with their own
wings, and their tail being spread out in a roundnes: by which means it does
more commodiously inhabit in the air.

Of Eagles. Hist. not. lib. 10.
Next I proceed to the birds which converse in the air, and in the earth: of
which the Eagle for greatness and strength bears away the price. Pliny
sets down six kinds; of which the least in body, called the black eagle,
is strongest, and it of all others does only nourish her eaglets. For all the
rest chase and drive away their young ones, because that when they have them,
their nails and claws are turned vpside down, as if nature would declare
hirselfe very provident in this, to deprive the eagle of al means to help it
self with any more purchase, then will even serve her own turn; for
otherwise it would destroy all the young venison of a country: therefore
through hunger which by this occasion they do then sustain, they become white
and hate their young ones. But the Ossifragi, which are another sort of wild
eagles, do, as diverse affirm, gather together the young eaglets which their
dam has expelled, and do nourish them with their own. And eagles never die
through age, or any other malady but for hunger only, their uppermost beak
growing so great and so crooked, that it is impossible for them to open their
mouths to feed themselves. Their feathers being mingled with the feathers of
other birds, do devour and consume them.

The Phoenix is said to be found in no other place of the world but only in
Arabia, and is very seldom seen. It is as big as an eagle, Of the Phoenix.
and the plumes of her tail are gilded, being intermixed with certain blew
and carnation feathers, the rest of her body being of a purple color. She has
her head decked with exquisite plumes, and with a tuft of very goodly feathers.
She lives six hundred and sixty years, as Manilius a Senator of Rome
records, and so Pliny does make report. And feeling herself aged, Hist. not
lib. 10.
she makes her nest with pieces of cynamon and incense, and having filled it
with all sorts of aromaticall odors, she dies thereupon. And out of her marrow
and bones there comes first a worm, which afterward turns to a little
bird, that in time proves another Phoenix.

Some report almost the very same of a bird called Semenda, which is found in
the midst of India, which has her bill cloven into three parts, boared and
pierced every where through, and she sings at her death as the swan does.
Afterward by beating of her wings she kindles a fire made of the twigs of a
vine, which she gathers together, wherewith she is burned, and of her ashes
there is a worm engendered, of which springs again another like bird.

Swans are birds clean white, and differ but little from geese, Of Swans.
except in bigness. They sing sweetelier then any other fowls. Their property
is to tear their young ones in pieces and to devour them, for which cause they
are very rare to be found. And some say, that they presage their death by their
songs.

Cranes come from the farthest oriental seas of India into the regions of
Europe: and do never part from any place, Of Cranes.
but that they seem to do it with counsel, and by the common consent of all:
and by the same means they elect a king to conduct them. They always soar
very high, so to make a farther discovery of the country. Every troop has a
captain, who is always in the rereward: at whose only cry all the rest do
obey and do keep their ranks and order; and each of them takes his place by
turns. They do also set their night watch, and keep sentinel one after
another. The sentinel stands upon one foot only, holding a little stone in
the other, to the end, that if he happen to sleep, the stone which falls out
of his paw might waken him. All the rest do this while sleep, having their
head under their wing, keeping watch nevertheless, sometimes upon one foot,
sometimes upon another. But their captain holds his head always in the
air, to make sign to the rest, of what they are to do.

Of Storkes.
The Storkes are resident in winter in Egypt and in Africa; and in summer in
many other warm countries. When they will pass to any country, they do all
assemble in one place at a day appointed, and so depart in a troop. Some say
they have no toongs. In Thumenestia this kind of foul is had in such respect,
because they rid the country of serpents, that no man dare kill any one upon
pain of hanging, and to be punished as an homicide: for such are the laws of
the country. And in Suessia the like is almost used. The storkes do never
change their nests: and do retain this property by nature, that the young
ones nourish the old so long as they live.

Of wilde-geese.
Wilde-geese are a kind of wild fowls as the foresaid birds, they make their
squadrons pointed like the beak of a ship, (for so they cut the air better
then if they should fly in a square) and they spread themselves abroad by
little and little behind like a corner, the better to gain the wind, which
guides them. The hindermost-doe commonly rest their heads upon the foremost,
and when the guide is weary of going before, he comes hindmost, to the end
that every one may keep his turn.

Of Quails.
Quails are also a kind of flying fowls, very small of body, but singular in
diverse properties. They soar not very high in the air in these countries, but
fly near to the ground. They fly in troops, and that sometimes to the great
danger of those which sail upon the sea, or are near the ground: For these
birds do perch in so great number by night upon the sails, that they
oftentimes sink barks and small vessels. They know their ordinary pearches,
and do never fly abroad in a south wind, because it is too heavy, and too
moist: and yet they must of necessity be aided by the wind, to perform their
voyage, by reason that their bodies are more heavy then their wings can
sustain. And therefore they hang their wings, as if they were pained with
flying: So then they make choice of the northern wind for their coming: And
when they retire themselves, they assemble their troops. If the wind be
contrary to them, they swallow much gravel, and take little stones in their
tallents, to make themselves more heavy, that they may not be carried away by
the wind.

Swallows also are a kind of wild foul, Of Swallows.
for they go away in winter. But they retire not themselves very far off, but
keep in those coasts which are warmed with the Sun, many are seen bare and
vnfledged. This bird only, of all those that have not crooked claws, does
feed on flesh. One may put in the number of wild fowls, Blacke-birdes,
Thrushes, Stares, Other wild fowls.
Ringdoues and Pigeons, although they use not to retire to far countries. But
they mew not as others do, neither keep themselves close, for they are
usually seen in the country where they winter. The property of Stares is to
go in a great troop together, and to fly in a round, every one of them
endeavoring to gain the middle place. The swallow only of all other birds
flies askew, and is passing quick of wing; so likewise is it hardest of all
birds to be taken. Moreover it is peculiar to her, not to feed but in flying.
Thus then you see what I thought to deduce briefly concerning wilde-fowle. You
ASER shall prosecute the discourse of this matter.


Of singing birds, and chiefly of the Nightingall, and of sundry others, and
of their wit and industry. Chap. 53.
ASER. NAture shows herself very admirable, in that she does not produce
every thing indifferently in all places; nor does privilege some countries
rather then others, as well for plants, as for living creatures endued with
sense: so that many times that which men think to bring home for mere
strangenes, dies before it come there. To declare, that it is very difficult
(if not altogether impossible) to make any thing live in what place soever,
Rarenes, and changes of many birds.
against the ordinance of nature. So it was, that in the whole Isle of Rhodes
there could not be found one only nest of an Eagle, though that in the
neighboring territories there were enough. So though the lake of Como, which
is on the other side of the river Po in Italy, be very plentiful in fruit trees
and fair pasturage: yet for all this there cannot be found within eight miles
almost one storke. It is said also, that in all Tarentum there is not one
Wood-pecker to be found. And in the territory of Athe^s, the partridges pass
not the limits of Boeotia: So in Mar Maggiore, or the Euxine sea, there is no
foul seen. And in Volaterra the ring-doues are seen to come every year in
great vollies over the sea. But besides all this, there is great difference in
seasons for birds: for some appear all the year long; others show themselves
but half the year; and some are seen abroad but three months. Some also go
away presently after they have hatched and brought up their young ones. But
above all, there are marvelous things found in singing birds. For some there
are which change their feathers and their note, one season of the year; so
that one would say, they were quite other birds: which happens not to the
greater fowls, except to the crane, which waxes black in age. Black-birds,
Of blackbirdes.
which are naturally black, being old, become of a reddish color. They sing
in summer; in winter they do but chatter; and are altogether dumb, when the
days begin to lengthen, as about mid-December: and the cocks of a year old,
have an iuorie white bill. Thrushes have their neck parti-colored in summer,
but in winter it is all of one color.

Of the Nightingale.
But amongst singing birds the nightingal is most admirable. For it is a
miracle that so shrill a voice can proceed out of so small a body, and that it
can hold breath so long. Moreover, it has a very harmonious note, and
perfectly musical. For sometimes she draws out her notes long, another
while she quauers; straightwaies she cuts her tune short; and then she will
warble, as if it were by musical crotchets. Another time she will whistle
producing her notes with one breath, by and by quickening her tune, as if it
were by semibriefes: sometimes abasing her voice, presently raising it, and by
and by after cutting it thick and short. Sometimes also she will make the
points of the organes, lifting her voice high like a pipe, when she lists,
observing sometimes the treble, sometimes the base, and sometimes the
countertenour. Finally, there is no instrument in the world, wherein one may
find more perfect music, then this which resoundeth in so small a throat.
And that which merits greater marvel in this bird, is, that there are many
songs all different, and that every nightingall has her own in particular.
So also they debate amongst themselves who shall sing best, contending herein
one against another: so that sometimes the vanquished cease rather through want
of breath, then of song. And the young little nightingals hearken to the old,
and do record by themselves apart the songs which they heard, from point to
point: so that these disciples, after they have attentively hearkened, do
repeat the lesson which they have learned, and then cease. Then may one hear
the reprehensions of the schoolmaster, and may very well discern when the
scholar is waxt cunning. Moreover the excellency of their singing does not
commonly endure above fifteen days and fifteen nights: all which time they
sing without ceasing: and that is when the trees begin to wax thick of leaves
in springtime. And afterward this great melody begins by little and
little to cease: and yet not so, that one may perceive them to be weary of
their singing. And when the heat begins to trouble them, they whistle not as
before, but change their voice and sing a full note. They also mew and change
feathers. To conclude, they retire themselves in winter like all other wild
foul.

Also Finches and linnets are numbered amongst those little birds, that sing
very harmoniously, Of finches, and linnets, parrats, and pies.
and easily retain that which is taught them, whether it be in voice, or by
any demonstration that they may imitate either in foot or bill. But above all
birds, parrats do most counterfeit the voice and speech of man. They come from
the Indies, and have commonly their feathers green, except only a collar of
red vermilion feathers that compasses their neck: this bird speaks all that
which one will take pains to teach her. It loves wine much, and having well
drunk, is much pleasanter. There is likewise a kind of Pies which do
pronounce better that which is taught them, then the parrats do: yet are they
not so much accounted of, because they are ordinary with us. They take
pleasure in the words which they speak, and do so delight in them, that one
shall often find them studying very attentively by themselves, that which
has been showed them. Crows also do easily learn to speak, and show many
testimonies of great wit and industry. A marvelous history of a crow.
There was one in the time of the Emperor Tyberius so admired and loved of the
people of Rome, that they revenged cruelly the death thereof upon him that
kilde it. It had been nourished by a shooemaker, and so taught and instructed,
that it flew every morning to the palace to salute the Emperor, and after him
all the other princes, naming them by their names, and then returned to the
shop to her master, continuing this use for many years, to the great
astonishment of every one. It happened that a certain spiteful neighbor of
this shooemaker, taking occasion for that this crow had muted upon some of his
ware, did kill it. Whereat the people took such indignation, that they caused
this poor merchant to lose his life: preparing on the other side very
magnificent funerals for the bird. For the carcass thereof was covered over
with nosegaies and chaplets of flowers, and borne by two Mores to the fire,
which was kindled in a void place, there to burn it solemnly; so much was the
understanding of this crow esteemed in a city, where many princes and great
personages had died before, and none would solemnize their funerals: and
wherein there was none that would revenge the death of Scipio Africanus, though
he had conquered the Carthaginians and Numantines.

Of the industry of birds in making their nests.
But since we are lighted upon a discourse concerning a kind of towardness and
facility to learn, which is found in many birds; we may not pass over in
silence the marvelous industry of their architecture, in the building of
their nests: for all of them, and especially the small ones do use a wonderful
dexterity therein. And that I may not be too tedious in this point; I will
produce for testimony but the swallows only, who build their nests of dirt
or claie, and strengthen them with straw. And if perhaps the drines of the
weather will not minister dirt enough for them, then they load themselves with
water, which they shake upon the ground, to moisten the dust, and to make
slime. The inside of the nest is all covered and lined with down and flocks,
both of wool, and of other things; to the end to keep their eggs warm, and
that their young ones may afterward find their bed soft. Which they always
keep very clean, by casting very carefully out of it all the ordures of
their little ones, which being grown bigger they teach to mute out of the
nest. There is another kind of field swallows, which do seldom make their
nests in houses; and yet they make them of such stuff as the others do, though
not after the same manner: for all their nests are turned vpside down, and
have a very straight mouth, but a large paunch: so that it is an admirable
thing to see the industry, which they use to keep their young ones soft and
warm. Of the nests of these swallows joined and fastened one upon another,
there is a bank in the mouth of Nilus which is near to Heraclia in Egypt (as
Pliny recites) of six and twenty paces in length, Lib. 10 (...)*
and so strong that it resists the ragings and inundations of this flood: a
thing, which one may say were impossible to be performed by the hand of man.
But we should find writing matter enough to fill up a great volume, if we
were minded to entreat of all the excellent properties which are in the nature
of birds: but our intent is not to dwell long upon this subject; as namely to
speak of all their different species, whereof many learned men have written:
but only to consider summarily of certain of the most notable, as we will
do in regard of all other creatures both living and destitute of life; to the
end that we may nothing at all deprive any part of this universe, which we do
here contemplate, of those goodly portraitures of the divine majesty, which
are engraven in every part from the highest heaven to the lowest center of this
terrestrial mass. Look then (AMANA) what birds you hold most worthy to
have place in your discourse.


Of the Estridge, of the Peacocke, of the Cock, and of other fowls. Chap. 54.
AMANA. AS we have heretofore heard of a bird that never abides upon the
earth; so contrariwise the Estridge does always stay upon the earth, Of the
Estridge.
never mounting aloft to take the air. This is as big a bird as any other,
and is common in Africa, and in Aethiopia. It has a long neck like a camel;
the beak, eyes, and head like to a goose, but that they are much greater:
their wings and tail have feathers of diverse colors, skie-coloured, white,
red, black and green, and there is no bird which has such fair plumes, of
which those feathers are made wherewith men of war adorn their helmets. The
Estridges pass horses in swiftnes, being herein aided with the wings which
Nature has bestowed upon them, although they fly not at al, neither rise from
the ground, but run with their wings spread. They have cloven feet like an
heart: with which (men say) they use to take up and cast stones at those which
chase them when they fly. It is also said that they swallow and digest iron:
which comes to pass through the vehement heat and thicknes of their belly.
Some also have reported, that the Estridge hatcheth her eggs with her eyes:
but the truth is, that she only watches them; because that her young ones are
brought forth by the heat of the sun. The manner of taking this bird is
very easy; for when he is weary of running, he is of so foolish a nature,
that he thinks himself closely hidden, when he is only in the shade of some
tree or shrub; so that it is then easy to approach him so near as the pursuer
will desire.

Of the peacock.
But let us speak of the bird, which for the beauty and sense which it has,
does merit the chief degree amongst the greater sort of birds; to wit, the
Peacocke. For when he knows that men esteem him, then turns he round to
show his colors shining like precious stones, and sets them directly against
the sun, to give them a better luster. And he assayeth also to do so with his
tail, spreading it round and showing those colors, which seem fairest in the
shade, drawing all the eyes thereof abroad, as if he knew best how to make
himself most noted. Also when he has lost his tail (as he does every year
at the fall of the leaf) he hides himself, as if he mourned, til the next
spring, when his tail grows again. It is marvelous that this part of the
peacocke is so filled with eyes, being so long and thick of feathers of sundry
colors, and so splenda^t; and yet neither the color of white nor of black
(this being of it self sad, and that obscuring all colors) are found in the
tail of this bird. Which bird lives ordinarily five and twenty years; and
at three years he begins to shoot the sundry colors which he has in his
feathers, and knows his beauty: and seems to rejoice that men do marvel
at his tail when they see it, and therefore he will hold it up, be he never so
weary.

Of the Cock.
Next to the proud nature of the peacocke, that lofty bird seems to
resemble a Sentinel, which Nature has appointed to interrupt men's sleep and
call them to work, that is, the Cock. For wheresoever he is he will be
master, and command all the rest of the fowls. And if there be two together,
then must this rule remain to the strongest, and he must get it by those
weapons which Nature has placed in his legs: wherein they put such trust, that
the issue of their combat, does oftentimes fall out with the death of the one
or other. And he which remains victor, makes sign of his conquest by his
crowing, sounding himself his own tantaraes: and the vanquished runs and
hides himself. This lofty bird marches proudly, holding up his neck stiff,
and his comb aloft, except he be not well. And there is no bird which does
oftener cast his eye toward heaven, then this: for he always beholds it,
holding his tail up, and yet crooked like a sickle: so that arming himself
after this manner, he puts the Lion in fear, which is the stoutest of all
beasts. Moreover, the cock by a secret instinct of nature knows the course
of the stars, and divides the day by his crowing from three hours to three
hours. They roust at sun set, and never let the sun rise, without
aduertising men: for with their crowing, which is accompanied with beating of
their wings, they give notice of the day. And their voice is heard very far
off, yea in the night time a mile, or more. The Romans honored so much the
majesty of this bird, that they judged of the good or evil luck of their
Augurations, by the countenance which he showed, being either pleasant or not,
at such time as he fed.

Hens are of the kind of domestical birds, Of hens.
renowned above all for the delicatenes of their flesh, and goodness of their
eggs, being much better then all other, and which are most used in meats and
medicines. They lay at all times, except the two first months of winter, when
they commonly rest themselves: So is it the first and last bird that lays;
and is so fruitful, that there are some will lay sixty eggs together,
without missing one day. Whereupon we will note that in all yolks of eggs,
there is a little drop of blood in the midst, which is holden to be the heart
of the bird, because this member is esteemed to be first formed in all living
creatures. And indeed this little drop tastes very salt, and stirs in the
egg. And for that which particularly concerns the chicken, it is certain
that the body thereof is made of the white of the egg: for being formed, it
is nourished by the yolke. And so long as it is in the shell, it has the head
bigger then all the body, and the eyes, which are shut, bigger then the head.
And when it begins to grow, the white of the egg retireth to the midst,
and the yolke disperseth it self round about: And if at the twentieth day one
take the egg, they may hear the chicken peep within. For from that time
forward it begins to wax feathered, and to get strength: and staieth not
long in consuming the whole yolke, but presently begins to open the shell.
And it is to be noted, that as well this as all other fowls, come out of their
shells with their feet forwards, contrary to other living creatures. Moreover
the hen is known to be good, when her crest is straight, and sometimes double,
and her feathers black, and in some places red: as also when the claws of her
foot are fair. But above all there is nothing more worthy of great
admiration, then the care which it takes to hatch and nourish her chickens:
yea though they be not of her own kind. And it is a pretty pastime to make an
hen hatch ducke-egges: For at first when they open the shell, she knows them
not; and nevertheless having been a little accustomed to them, she does nourish
them as carefully as if they were naturally her own. And when these young
duckes, according to their kind, cast themselves into the water, it is a
wonder to see the mourning of the hen, fearing least ill should betide them.

Of the pigeon.
The pigeon likewise is an house-bird much to be considered of, and brings no
less profit and commodity then pullen do. It is very chaste by nature, and
never changes mate neither cock nor hen: and yet the cocks are very rude
toward the hens, beating them with their bills, and chiding them with a kind
of grumbling in their throat, as if they were jealous: But afterward as if
they repented themselves, they make much of them, and bill together, running
round about them, and specially when their time of treading is come. Both cock
and hen take great pains to hatch their young ones: insomuch that when the
hens are idle, and tarry not in the nest, the cocks will correct and beat
them with their beakes. But they do likewise aid them, as well helping them
to make their nests, as to serve them while they hatch: yea and the cock does
sometimes hatch in the daytime. It is their property to bill together before
they tread. And they lay ordinarily two eggs, out of which issue both cock
and hen, that is, the cock first, and the hen the morrow after. They hatch
commonly eighteen or twenty days, and breed after five times treading. And
one shall sometimes find eggs with little pigeons in them: and shall see in
one nest some young ones but newly out of the shell, and some that are ready to
fly. They may lay eggs eight or ten times a year: but the ordinary use is
to take out four good layings. They are of sundry colors of feathers, but
the ashcoloured, or the brown, or the black are best: the rough footed, and
tufted are most barren and domestical: so are the black and white checkered:
but those that seem gilded about the neck, and that have the eye and foot
read, are the freest and fruitfullest: the white are good to hatch, and most
in danger of the kite, and birds of pray: the yealow and red are very barren.
They have all this maruailous quality, to give their young ones at first some
corn of salt gravel, so to provoke their appetite, and season them to eat,
when time shall be. Now me thinks, we have stayed long enough in this
matter, since we will not here describe a natural history of creatures: and
since that which we have discoursed concerning fowls, has been only for
that we will not deprive the air of the natural creatures thereof; as we
will endeavor to do the like in the behalf of the earth and water: whereof the
sequel of our speech requires us to entreat, to accomplish our discourse
concerning the elements. First then let us speak of the earth, and of the
firmenes, figure and quantity thereof. And it is your turn (ARAM) to
discourse thereupon.


Of the earth, and of the situation, immobility, figure, and quality thereof.
Chapter 55.
ARAM. AS we have heretofore heard that under the name of heaven is comprised
commonly both the supreme and middle region of the air, and all things also,
which are conioined unto them, and depending upon their effects, namely of the
two higher elements the fire, and the air: so by the name of earth, we do
often understand not only the lowest element of all, which is as the foot of
all this mundane frame: but also the sea, which is next to it, and the lakes,
ponds, fountains, rivers, and other waters, and all that is contained in them,
and in the earth, and which receives life, and nourishment, whether they be
men, beasts of all kinds, plants, trees, herbs, fruits, metals, mines,
minerals, stones, and generally all other things produced here below for the
use of all other creatures. Pursuing then the order of our discourse, we will
first entreat of that which concerns in general the terrestrial globe, and
afterward will meditate of the most rare beawties, which enrich the parts
thereof, to the end to represent unto our selves more and more the greatness and
glory of the creator of all these things, as we have already well begun in the
matters by us hitherto entreated of.

Situation of the earth.
Now it is certain, that by reason of the weight and heaviness of the earth, it
is necessarily situated in the midst of the world, as the center thereof, being
the lowest place, and the farthest remote from the circumference of the whole.
And from which the earth cannot be parted, (for otherwise it should mount aloft
contrary to the natural inclination thereof) as likewise it cannot be moved
by the first and universal motion of all the spheres, by reason of the
foresaid heaviness thereof, and subtilitie of the other elements, which are
about it: and again because it is of insensible quantity in respect of the
whole world, as being the point and center thereof, being also immovable, to
the end that the motion of the heavens might thereby be discerned, and that
which depends thereupon. Immobility of the earth.
And as the seat of the elementarie fire does not extend beyond the fire, and
as that of the water is in the place of water, and that of the air where the
air should be: so the earth can retain no place but in it self; because that
the other elements cannot suffer it to rest upon them. Which causes that it
remains hanged amongst them, not being able to fall, nor decline more toward
one place, then another. Wherefore also it is made habitable in every part
(except it be by accident: The earth habitable throughout.
) so that men are therefore Antipodes one to another, that is, going feet
against feet, having nevertheless all of them their heads toward heaven, and
meeting each of them in the midst of the earth. Now that it is justly situate
in the midst of the universe, one may see by experience of the days and nights,
which are equal throughout the whole earth, so often as the sun is in the
midst of heaven betwixt the poles of the world; as also by the augmentations
and diminutions of the same days and nights regularly proportioned one to
another (as we have demo^strated in our precedent discourses upon the
celestial spheres) and likewise by the eclipses of the moon, and by the
inclination of shadows, which at noontide are one proportionable to another,
as well on the meridionall, as on the septentrionall part. That the earth is
round.
Moreover there is no doubt, but the earth (together with the whole element of
water, which is spread abroad and dispersed in diverse arms, and portions about
it) is of a round and circular figure in all parts: for as for the mountains
and valleies they are insensible in regard of the whole globe of earth. The
roundnes whereof does evidently declare it self by the shadow thereof, which
shows it self in the eclipses of the moon to be round: for it could not
seem so, if the earth were not also of the same form. Moreover, the diverse
and certain supputation that Astronomers calculate concerning the times of the
eclipses of the moon, according as the places are more oriental, or more
occidentall, does manifestly conclude the same round form: so also does the
natural inclination of all the parts of the earth, and of the water, who still
tend down declining to a lower place: and this common descent of every part
causes this round figure. The earth is of insensible quantity.
Consequently it is to be noted, that this earthly frame, although it be in it
self of marvelous greatness, yet is it of very little and insensible
quantity, in regard and comparison not only of all the firmament, but also of
the sphere of the sun, the same earth being but as a point in the midst of
the whole world, which is apparently demonstrated by the foresaid equalities of
the days and nights, and by the observations of the courses of the celestial
bodies, and chiefly of the sun, taken here below by instruments fit for such
effects, in such manner as if one were in the center of the world. For in a
little space that one may pass here upon the earth proceeding from one place
to another, the view and disposition of heaven does change and vary notably.
And in an open plain place wherein one may stand upon the earth, or be in the
sea, they may always discover the one half of heaven. All which things
declare (as we have said) that the earth and the water make a round globe,
which is but as a point and center in regard of the universal world.

So much for the situation, immobilitie, figure, That the earth only meriteth
the title of a mother.
and quantity of the earth; which only above all other elements has merited
the title of a mother, by reason of the great good which it affoordeth to all
breathing and living creatures. For this gentle mother receives us when we are
borne, she nourishes us being borne; she maintains and sustaineth us being
nourished; and finally, when the other elements refuse and leave us, she
receives us into her bosom, and covers us, having (as it were) a perpetual
care of us. Moreover, she rises not up against man as other creatures do. For
the water conuerts it self into rain, snow, and hail; it swells in surges
and waves, and ouerfloweth all with floods; the air thickeneth and ladeth it
self with clouds, out of which proceed storms and tempests; and the fire is
often cause of strange calamities upon earth: But this gentle and debonaire
mother makes her self as a slave to serve for all the commodities of man. For
how many things do we cause her to bear by force, and how many things does
she bestow of her own goodwill? What odours and perfumes, what savors, what
juices, what, and how many sorts of colors? With what exchange and interest
does she restore that, which is lent her? How many sundry things does she
nourish for man? What quantity of precious metals does she conceive, and
keep in her entrails for his use? Of two kinds of earth.
And therefore it seems that the earth subsisteth not of one only kind: and
indeed Aristotle divides it into two; the one fossible, which may be dug;
and the other transmutable, which may change quality. For the fossible earth,
it does always remain the same, and is very earth: but the transmutable
remains not the same in kind, and in view; for it conuerteth it self into
metal, or into juice, or into some other matter. But before we do proceed
unto the consideration of so many admirable effects produced by the earth: we
may now here behold, that we have summarily set down particulars enough,
wherein we may learn to acknowledge the infinite power, wisdom, and bounty
of God the creator: Testimonies of the power of God. Isay. 6.
and how according to the testimony of the angels, all the earth is full of
his glory. For first of all, is not this a great wonder, that the earth which
is so huge a mass, and the heauiest element of all the rest, should be hanged
in the air in the midst of the world, being so counterpoised, that it
sustaineth, as one may say, all the other elements, and that it is environed by
them, and by all the other spheres and celestial bodies, it remaining firm
for ever, not moving from the place thereof? For where are the columns and
the pillars which bear and sustain it, and upon what foundation are they
founded? And therefore it is not without cause, ^ob. 38.
that the Lord says to Job, minding to cause him to acknowledge his power and
majesty, [where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the earth? declare
if thou have understanding, who has laid the measure thereof, if thou
know? Or who has stretched the line over it? (to wit, to sign and mark
out the foundations thereof) whereupon are the foundations thereof set? Or who
has laid the corner stone thereof?] And afterward he adds, [It is turned as
clay to fashion.] Wherein it seems that he had reference to that, that he
created the earth (as all this great visible world) in round form, because it
is the most capable of all forms that may be. Behold then the testimony that
God himself delivers to Job his servant of the admirable creation of the
earth. Psalm. 104.
And to the same purpose the kingly prophet says, that God did form the earth
upon the bases thereof (that is to say, upon firm foundations) so that it shall
never move. But what may we say then to the motions and tremblings of the
earth, which have ever been known, and are ordinarily seen? This might seem
repugnant to that, which David here speaks, and to that which we have
delivered concerning the immobilitie and firmenes of the earth. And therefore
mine advise is, that pursuing this discourse, we should consider the causes of
such tremblings, to the end that we may know, how that the earth fails not to
remain ever firm, though such shakings happen in some parts thereof, which
(ACHITOB) let us hear of you.


Of earthquakes. Chap. 56.
ACHITOB. FOrasmuch as the earth is not only heavy by nature, but even the
heauiest of all elements, and is heaped up and compacted together in the midst
of the great universal world, as the point and center thereof: it therefore
follows that it is immooueable, and without any natural motion. For if it
had any, as the other elements have, it is certain, that it must be downwards.
But because that God has placed the earth in the midst of all his works,
toward which all heavy things tend and descend; it cannot descend lower
then it is by the nature thereof. And therefore because it is solid and
thick, and not liquide and fluent as the water and the air, it cannot glide
as they do, nor remove out of one place into another, if it be not by some
violence elsewhere moved and made to stir, and tremble somewhere, as it has
happened through diverse and marvelous earthquakes, of which histories and the
holy scripture it self do give evidence. We must note then, that there are
diverse sorts of motions, by which the earth is so shaken, that it lifts and
casts some parts, sometimes vpwardes, sometimes downwards. Of diverse sorts
of earthquakes.
And it is long of such motions and tremblings, that there have such masses and
heaps been cast out of it, that great isles have been newly made, as
Geographers do witness, namely the isle of Rhodes, and of Selos. It sometimes
also happens, that the motions of the earth be such, that it opens like a
great gulf, whereinto some parts thereof are clean swallowed up and devoured,
together with the countries, and towns situate therein; so that there has
been no mark left of them, no more then as if they had never been. And it
has often happened in such cases, that some mountains have fallen one against
another, because the earth, which was betwixt them has sunck, and been
swallowed clean up. And then one might say, that the proverb is not ever true,
which says, that two mountains never meet. There is yet another kind of
motion, wherein the earth moves and shakes, sometimes one way, sometimes
another way, and tottereth like a ship that floateth on the water. Which kind
of trembling is most dangerous: as also when all the motion runs one way.
Then is there yet another motion, which philosophers properly call (trembling)
to wit, when two motions are opposite one to another, as if two rams should
rush one against another. And this is least dangerous of all: although indeed
they be all very fearful, yet the fear is much greater, when the tremblings
continue with horrible and fearful sounds, like the bellowing of bulls, and as
if the earth and all nature quaked and groaned, being sore pressed and forced,
as is oftentimes seen.

^ the causes of earthquakes.
Now for the causes of all these kinds of earthquakes, I may well say, that
there is no point in all natural philosophy, wherein the professors of this
science find themselves more intricately entangled, nor wherein they more
differ in opinions then in this. For the Chaldeans and Astronomers refer the
causes of motions and earthquakes, to the heaven, to the stars, and to the
planets, and many philosophers assign it to the water: And yet those, which
are of this opinion differ amongst themselves. For some suppose that the earth
floateth upon the water like a ship, because it is environed with water,
according to the natural order of the disposition of the elements: whereby it
is diversely moved. Others do attribute the cause of earthquakes to those
waters only which are enclosed within the veins and caves of the earth. Some
also to the fire: and some to the winds shut up within it: and some to the
heat chased by the cold, which strives against it, and causes it to search
an issue out. For as the water undermines the earth, and those places through
which it does pass: even so may the fire do: and if either of them be so
enclosed, that they cannot find an easy issue, they strive then to do it by
force and violence. So do the winds, and the heat chased by the cold. So
then, if the earth be undermined, it is no marvel if the upper part sink and
fall down, being swallowed up, as into a gulf, considering that the earth,
because of the heaviness thereof, tends always downward toward the center
thereof, which is the midst of it, and of all the world. And if the waters, or
the fire, or the winds enclosed and shut up in the earth, or the contrary
qualities, which contend one with another, cannot find a passage or issue,
their power is so great, that they constrain the earth, which resists them,
and by forcing it, make it to cleave and open, and to remove, and to shake in
those places, wherein it is forced: Concerning all which things one may make a
near conjecture, Of the force, and violence in artillery.
by the force and violence which is seen in ordinance and artillery. For
every one beholds what force there is by means of fire, and of the matter
enclosed within, to wit, powder, and of the contrary qualities whereof it is
compounded, and of the wind that therein is engendered, not only to drive out
with marvelous violence all the charge that therein is, but also many times to
burst the piece it self, if there be any resistance to hinder it that it
discharge not quickly, or if it be not well made, and very strong, and well
proportioned to the charge. We behold also, what a wind there issues out, and
what noise it makes, and how the noise makes the earth to sound and tremble:
and oftentimes it happens, that this only wind kills those that stand
near the cannons mouth, such is the violence thereof, although they be not
touched at all with the bullet, that it shoots. But we behold more clearly
in mines, which are made under ground, the violence of this powder, when it is
therein enclosed with the fire, which is set thereto by trains. For there is
neither town nor castle, be they never so well founded, nor any fortress,
which is not only shaken, but ouerturned also, like as by an horrible
earthquake. Wherein we may note, how that it has not been sufficient for
men, to counterfeit thunders, and lightnings in artillery, but they have also
invented the means to represent the motions and shakings of the earth: in such
manner as we have signified. There are some philosophers also, Earthquakes
compared to agues.
who have taught, that the same reason is in earthquakes, as there is in the
shaking of men's bodies: and that they are like fevers and maladies of the
earth, which come unto it through diverse causes, save that they hold not all
the body thereof, as they do in men, but only some parts of it. For they
argue that the water is in the earth, as the blood, which has his course
through the veins of man's body; and the wind is as the vital spirits, which
pass through the arteries thereof. And as there happen diverse stoppings in the
body, which hinder the blood, and vital spirits, that they cannot keep their
right course and ordinary passage, whereupon their order is troubled, and the
body pained, in such sort that groans ensue, and difficulty of breathing,
shakings, and such like accidents: So is it with the body of the earth, when
any thing happens to it contrary to the natural disposition thereof, by the
means which we have already heard, whether by water, by fire, by wind and
such like. Whereto we will add also this opinion of those, who attribute the
cause of such motions and tremblings, either to the dryness of the earth,
which is the occasion, that it cleaves and chappeth, and by this means gives
open way to the air and to the winds, which penetrate thereinto; or else
because of the older age thereof, to which they esteem all creatures subject:
whereupon it happens to it, as to old buildings, which being ruinous and
almost rotten, do fall down in some places of themselves.

These are the diverse opinions of men upon this matter: wherein if we desire to
take a very short and sure way to attain to the true cause, we must refer
it to the wrath and judgments of God, because that what causes soever the
learned can invent, the Eternal shows himself very powerful, The true cause
of earthquakes and the profit that we may reap thereby.
and to be feared therein, considering that he has disposed all of them, and
that they all depend upon him alone. And surely this is a work of the
omnipotent worthy to be woondred at, and which may well cause men to move
and tremble before his majesty. For if he show himself terrible and
fearful by deluges of water, by hail, thunder, lightning, storms and
tempests, he does no less by the motions and shakings of the earth, which are
in regard thereof, as thunders are in the air. For seeing that the earth is
as the foot of the world, and that it is assigned to men for their habitation,
whither is it that they may have recourse, if it quake under them, and fail to
sustain them? Whither shall they retire, if she will allow them no more
dwelling in her: but will spue them out as the scripture says? For if it be
hard for them to fly before fire, Leuit. 19.
and before water, and to find harbor against winds, thunders, and tempests;
whither shall they fly, if the earth will not receive, nor bear them? And
what dread may invade them, when sometimes it quaketh in such sort that it
opens, and is swallowed up, as into a bottomless pit; as it came to pass,
when it swallowed Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, and their families? Nom. 16.
Who will not be astonished when it rises up, ouerturning all, even the
highest mountains, and hardest rocks, and moves it self in such sort, that
it makes houses and buildings dance like rams and sheep, that would one
butte at another, wherewith many are utterly destroyed: Examples of marvelous
earth quakes.
as it happened in the year 1531. in the realm of Portugal, which was so
shaken by an earthquake, that at Lisbone the chief city thereof, there were
ouerthrown almost twelve hundred houses, besides a great number of others which
were greatly spoiled. This horrible earthquake continued the space of eight
days, and gave very furious assaults five or six times a day. And in the
time of the Emperor Tiberius, twelve cities in Asia were quite ruinated in one
night by an earthquake. And Josephus records that by another, Lib. 1 de
bello. Iud.
thirty thousand Jews died. So Iustine recounteth, that by another
earthquake many cities were destroyed, and an hundred and seventy thousand
persons perished in the reign of Tigranes in Armenia. What causes then soever
there may be in nature of so many terrible events; yet we must always have
recourse to the Author and Governor thereof, without whom it can perform
nothing: and he it is, Psalm. 135.
that brings earthquakes out of his treasures, as he does the winds; either
by his commandment without a means; or by his ministers ordained thereto; or
else by some power infused into things, the which may according to his good
pleasure display it self in effect, to denounce his judgments on men. For he
it is of whom the prophet speaks. [The earth trembled and shaked, and the
foundations of the mountains were moved and quaked, 2. Sam. 22. Psalm. 18.
and the foundations of heaven were bowed and trembled, because he was angry.]
Wherefore we may very well conclude, Isay. 66. Matthew. 5. Acts. 7.
that as God declares his magnificence and wonderful glory in heaven, which
is assigned to be his seat (as his word teaches us, and as we have heretofore
amply discoursed) so likewise he does manifest it no less in the earth, which
is his footstool, when he causes it to shake and remove, as if being
supprised with some great and strong fever, it shook and trembled before him.
Job. 9.
And therefore Job also says: [The Eternal is wise in heart and mighty in
strength; who has been fierce against him, and has prospered? He remooueth
mountains, and they feel not when he overthrows them in his wrath. He
remooueth the earth out of her place, that the pillars thereof do shake: Job.
26.
the pillars of heaven tremble and quake at his reproof.] But now let us note,
that all that, which we have here delivered, disprooueth not the earth to
remain always firm and immooueable in it self, in so much as it moves not
out of the place which was appointed to it by God, neither does it swerue never
so little: considering that the moouings and tremblings are not universal, but
particular only in some places, in such sort that the foundations thereof are
not any whit altered. And if we consider well of these things, the Earth will
serve no less for a preacher unto us, then the air and the fire, yea then all
heaven to denounce unto us the sovereign majesty of the Almighty, ruling
above all his works: as I hope to morrow, we may have goodly testimonies
entreating of the water, which is dispersed throughout the earth, and
afterward speaking of the excellent commodities and precious riches, that
these two elements do yield to men, into which matter you (ASER) shall enter
with your dicourse.


The end of the seventh day.
THE EIGHT DAYS WORK.
Of the sea, and of the waters, and of the division and distribution of them
throughout the earth. Chap. 57.
ASER. THE holy Scripture does certify us, how that in the beginning the earth
was covered over with water, and that it appeered not in any sort, but only
under the form of a great deep, till such time as God commanded the waters
to retire into the channels and places, which he had prepared for their
aboade. So that then the earth was discovered, even so much thereof, as was
needful for the habitation and nourishment of men and beasts. But this
sovereign creator of the Universe would not have the waters to be gathered all
into one place, and not to have their course through the earth: but providing
for every commodity for his creatures, he ordained, that out of the great
Ocean sea, which is as the great body of the waters, there should issue diverse
arms and members, by means whereof we have the Mediterran seas: out of which
again proceed many other waters, as lakes, floods, rivers and brooks. For
although that all these waters seem to have their Springing out of certain
fountains, which many affirm to be made of the air; yet the very truth is,
that their chief source is out of the sea: which (as it is named in Job) is as
the womb, out of which all waters, both celestial and terrestrial have their
first original, and do engender and repair themselves continually by the
means that we have already heard. Why the water is mixed with the earth.
Now according to the opinion of the Philosophers, all reason teaches us, that
this ordinance in nature concerning the distribution of the waters throughout
the earth, has been made of necessity for the mutual maintenance of these
two elements: for so much as the Earth being naturally dry, cannot subsist
without moisture: and contrariwise the flowing water, could not have ought to
stay upon, without being propped up by the earth. Wherefore it was necessary,
that the earth should give it place, and that it should open all her veins and
conduicts, that the water might pass through the same, both within and upon
it, yea and to pierce even to the highest mountain tops: in which place being
pressed with the weight of the earth, and also in some place moved by the
air, which drives it, one shall see it issue out in great vehemency even as
if it were squirted out.

Whosoever then will consider of the whole circuit of the earth, shall learn
that the moitie of the roundnes thereof is environed by the sea, which flows
round about it, causing the waves thereof to go and come continually,
sometimes aloft, and sometimes very low: like as if this terrene globe were a
bowl cast into the water, one part whereof should lie discovered out of it,
That the water is round.
and the other covered within it: Which water the Philosophers hold to be
entirely round, having the open heaven in every part over it. And this is
confirmed by those drops of water which fall upon the ground, or upon leaves of
trees and of herbs, which are round. If also one fill a vessel top-brim-full
of water, they may evidently behold, that the water rises and swells in the
midst, making a kind of round form. In truth, by reason that the water is
subtle and soft, these things are far better comprehended by arguments and
concluding reasons, wherewith the books of the learned are replenished, then
by the view of the eye. Notwithstanding this is very admirable, that if one
put never so little water into a vessel already brimme-full, the uppermost
part thereof will shed over: and yet if one cast into the same so top-full
vessel, some heavy thing, yea to the weight of twenty pence, the water will
not spill therefore, but will swell only, till such time as it stand much
above the brimme of the vessel, by the rising thereof. Moreover the
roundenesse of the water, which causes this, does also make that those which
are in the top of a ship, do sooner discover land, then those which are in the
foredeck, or in the stern thereof: so likewise, if any shining thing be
fastened to the top of the mast at parting from the port, it seems that the
vessel still goes downwards, till at length the sight of her will be clean
lost. Moreover how should it be possible that the ocean sea, which enuironeth
the earth, as being the mother-sea, and the receptacle of all the rest, does
not run abroad, considering there is no banck to withold it, if it were not
of round form? Wherein this is to be noted, that the water of the sea does in
no sort ouerpasse the limits thereof, nor does ever run but toward the place
of the natural situation thereof. Why the water does retain it self in it
self, without running abroad.
Of which the Greek Philosophers have rendered an especial reason by
Geometrical propositions and conclusions: making demonstration, that this
water cannot run otherwise, what room or scope soever it have. For they say,
that considering the nature of water is to fall always downward; and that
also the sea stretches it self out, so far as it can; nevertheless according
as the declining of the sea can suffer, as every one may see with his eye: and
by how much the lower it is, by so much the more it does approach to the center
of the earth: whereupon ensues, that all lines drawn from that center to the
waters nearest to it, are shorter then those lines, which are drawn from the
uppermost waters to the extremity of the sea: so that by that means, the water
of the sea does always decline toward the center, from whence it can in no
sort fall, but does there retain it self.

Surely if we do nearly consider this marvelous work of God (the sea and
waters) we shall therein find goodly mirrors wherein to contemplate his
majesty and greatness. Good christian instructions taken from the waters. Io^.
38.
According as he says to his servant Job, [Who has shut up the sea with
doors when it issued and came forth, as out of the womb? When I made the
clouds as a covering thereof, and darkness as the swaddling bands thereof? When
I established my commandment upon it, and set bars and doors: And said,
Hitherto shall thou come, but no farther, and here shall thou stay thy proud
waves.] The like is also taught by the Psalmist, saying: Psas. 33.
[Hee gathers the waters of the sea together, as upon an heap, and lays
up the depths in his treasures.] Which is as much as if he should say, (GOD
holds back the waters, as with a bridle, that they may not ouerrunne and
cover the earth.) Wherein we are moreover to note, that the holy Ghost speaks
concerning the sea, in this fore-alledged text of Job, and in many other places
of scripture, as if it had some sense and understanding, and that God had
caused it to hear his voice, and had commanded it, as he commands men, to
obey his ordinance, although it be a senseless creature and without life; but
this is to the end that we may better learn to acknowledge the power and
providence of God over all his works. For the sea is not only deaf and
deprived of all sense, and much more without understanding, but also exceeding
furious and outrageous, being moved by force of winds and tempests, in such
sort that it often seems, as if it would ouerrun and swallow up all the earth
with the waves thereof, and would rise with the floods thereof and mount up to
heaven. For one may behold how at one time the waves will swell and rise up
like high mountains: and suddenly after, will tumble and couch down like
valleys, and as if the sea would cleave and divide it self, and so discover
the deep bottom thereof. Psalm. 107.
And therefore the kingly prophet having divinely described all things,
together with the power that the sovereign creator has to raise, and to
appease such tempests; he exhorts all men to acknowledge this infinite power
of the Eternal, and those great works and woonders, which he declares in the
sea: and to have recourse for their deliverance out of all dangers, to the
creator and true Lord of the waters and of the winds, and of all nature. But
yet we must here consider the obedience that the sea shows, even in the
greatest furies thereof, to the commandment which God has delivered to it from
the first creation thereof. For although it be often moved, as we said; yet
does it contain it self shut up within the bounds, which were appointed unto
it by the ordinance of God, as if it were afraid to run out, and durst not
pass farther, as having heard and understood that which the creator thereof
had commanded, and had engraven it in memory for ever. And therefore we may
see, that after it has swollen and risen aloft in waves, and that it has
menaced the earth, as if it would ouerflowe it, and cover it again with the
deep, as at the beginning: it is neuerthles arrested, and beaten back to
return into the proper gulfes thereof, which are assigned for it to lodge in,
even by a very little sand only. For what is the sea shore, but sand only,
which is a kind of loose earth like the dust, and is easily driven with the
wind? And yet the word of God, which has given commandment to the sea (which
is so horrible and fearful a creature being moved) is of such power; that
this small sand is sufficient to make it keep within the confines and limits
thereof, and to break the furious waves thereof, as if he, who has
established this ordinance in nature, stood in presence upon the shore side, to
command it to do so, and that for fear and reverence of him, it returned to
hide it self in the deep: How much more then should his word and voice move
the hearts of men, breaking, cleaving, and pearsing them thorough, if they were
not harder then stones, and rocks, and more senseless then the waters? For
this cause the Lord says by Esaie: Isay. 66.
[And to whom shall I have respect, but to him that is afflicted, and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my words?] And Jeremy showing to the people
of Israel the malice and rebellion, which was in them, Ierem. 5.
against the Lord their God, does give them the sea for a pattern, and
refers them to learn to obey their creator, after the example thereof. Let
us learn then that the sea and other waters do not ouer-passe their bounds and
limits; but when it pleases God that they should ouerflow to chastise men, by
deluges and floods: as it oftentimes comes to pass through his just
judgment. But it shall be your office (ACHITOB) to speak of this point,
discoursing upon the ebbing and flowing of the sea, whereupon me thinks the
order of our speech does require that we should entreat.


Of the flowing and ebbing of the sea; and of the power that the moon has
over it and over all other inferior bodies. Chap. 58.
AMANA. IF we do not refer all things to the heavenly disposition of him, who
has framed and compassed all with his hand, and does govern all by his
prudence and sustaineth all with his power: it will be very difficult, yea
impossible for us, to declare the causes and reasons of his works in an humane
discourse, which are of such authority, that they may put a good spirit out of
all scruple and doubt: Yea even in the subject which we intend now to entreat
of; to wit, the flowing, and ebbing of the sea. The searching out of which
secret did so trouble a certain great Philosopher (some say, Aristotle) that
being upon the shore of Euboea now called Negropont, only to search out and
to behold the natural cause thereof, and not being able to inform himself
sufficiently therein, it did so vex him, that chafing at nature himself, and
against the water, he cast himself into the sea, saying to it (since I cannot
comprehend thee, yet shall thou have the honor to comprehend me, and keep me
within thy gulfs) and indeed he was here swallowed by the deep. And certes
this ordinary ebbing and flowing of the ocean, according to which it goes,
comes, spreads it self abroad, and then does every day retire, without
ever failing in the order thereof, must needs be a most wonderful thing. And
that which is most admirable therein is, that the flowing and ebbing thereof
do follow the course of the moon. Of the ebbing and flowing of the sea.
To which planet likewise is attributed with most apparent reason the cause of
this flowing and ebbing; she being as the regent of the seas and waters, by
the appointment of the sovereign creator, as is seen by experience and by the
agreeablenes of nature, which they have together. For we must note, that as
the moon increases or waineth, so is it with the state of the flowing of the
sea: And therefore although that it happen diversely, yet the principal cause
of the motion thereof resideth in his planet. For between the two times that
she rises, which is in four and twenty hours, wherein she compasses the
whole earth, the sea does twice flow, and does as oftentimes ebb. And when the
moon begins to mount in the east, then does the flood rise, and the sea
swell, till such time as this planet does attain to our right meridian, which
is in the mid-heauen, and that it begin to decline toward the west: at which
time the water ebbeth. Yet nevertheless all those six hours, wherein the moon
makes her course toward the line of midnight opposite to our noone-line, the
flood returns and increases, till after it has passed that line; and then
it does ebb again, till such time as the said regent thereof the moon
return again above our horizon. It is most certain that the flood does never
return just at that very hour and instant, wherein it flowed the day before.
But this does proceed likewise from the course of the moon, which serving for
these base and inferior things, and not rising every day at one selfsame
instant, she does draw the course of the sea with her: in such sort, that the
tide is more late, and of shorter continuance at one time then at another, and
yet does not the distance of time between the tides change one whit, for it
endures six hours in ebb, and so long time in flowing. But here we mean not
all manner of hours, as our common hours are, according to the different
situation of places, but we mean equal and equinoctial hours, by
consideration whereof the ebbing and flowing of the sea will be found always
of like time, as is abouesaide. Moreover from seven days to seven days, the
flowing is found different by the same power of the moon: for it is but very
small the first quarter thereof, and till it be half round. In the second
quarter it always increases till full-moone: at which time the sea is at her
greatest height. From thence forward the flood decreaseth: so that the third
quarter it is in the same state wherein it was the first quarter. Nevertheless
when the waining moon is half round, the flood begins to rise. But when
she is in conjunction with the sun, the tide rises as high as at full moon.
And when the moon is high and septentrionall, the tide is not so vehement as
when she is meridionall, because that being then more near to the earth, she
does the more exercise her power.

But many have endeavored in this matter to understand, Why the ocean does
differ in flowing from other seas.
why the flowings of the Ocean sea do reach farther, then those of the other
Mediterranean seas, wherein the ebbings and flowings do not appear as in the
Ocean. Which may be said to proceed, because that a thing which is entire has
more power, then any part which is separated. Also the high sea retayneth in it
self more of the power of the Moon, which works upon it at ease and
pleasure, beyond all comparison more forcibly then upon other seas which are
narrower, and minister less means to this planet to exercise her rule
therein. From whence it comes to pass, that lakes and rivers do never flow.
And for the Mediterranean seas they are enclosed about with the earth, as in an
haven, though there be some places, or some arms of the same seas very
broad. Some likewise are very much subject to the Moon, as the Adriaticke
gulf, wherein Venice is builded, which ebbeth and flows twice every day
like the Ocean. And it is to be noted, that such motions are better perceived
on the shore and seacoasts, then in the midst thereof: even as the pulse of
the arteries is better known in the extremes of the body, then in the bulk
thereof. Other causes of the flowing and ebbing of the sea.
Some also do render this cause of the flowing, and ebbing of the sea, to wit,
that though the waters thereof be salt, yet were not this sufficient for their
conservation, no more then of their neighbor the air, if they had not a
continual motion. For we see, that seawater does presently corrupt being in
a vessel, and not moved. Many also have noted that in every revolution or
course of the moon, the tide rests for three days long, to wit, the 7. 8.
and 9. day thereof: and that when she is at full, all seas do purge themselves
by scummes. Certainly it is woondrous to see what power this planet has, not
only over the waters, but also over the earth, and over all living creatures.
Of the power of the moon over all creatures.
Which has ministered occasion to many Philosophers to suppose, that the moon
was that quickning-spirit, which nourishes the earth; and that also by her
inconstant course approaching diverse ways to the inferior bodies, she produced
diverse effects, sometimes replenishing them, and sometimes leaving them void
and empty. Whereof it comes, that all fishes having scales and shells, do
increase and decrease according to the course of the moon: and that all living
creatures also, which have blood, do feel themselves refreshed, when she
renueth. It is likewise supposed, that the blood augmenteth or diminishes in
man, according as the moon increases, or waineth: yea that herbs and trees
do partake of her power. Aristotle also does note, that those creatures which
are ready to die, do die only when the sea ebbeth. But in this matter, as in
all things which do concern the ebbing and flowing of the Ocean, we must ever
have recourse to the ordinance that the Eternal father of the universe has
established in all his creatures: according to which they persevere in obedience
to their creator, without transgressing one title of his laws: as we have a
notable example in the sea, and in the waters, which contain themselves in
such admirable sort (as in our former speech is declared) within their bounds
and limits. A maruailous inundation of waters in the year 1530.
And if at any time they ouerflowe (as whilome happened in Holland, where the
water brake through the dams and banks, wherewith the country is bounded;
swallowing up the coast-townes, with an incredible loss of men and riches: as
also at the same time Tiber did so ouerflowe at Rome, that it rose in the
fields the height of a lance, ruinating in four and twenty hours many bridges
and stately edifices, the endommagement whereof, comprising therein the
mooueable goods lost, was esteemed to amount to the value of three millions of
gold: there being above three thousand persons choked and drowned.) Such
deluges, I say, do not come to pass (what natural causes soever the learned
force themselves to render) without the express command and ordinance of God,
who will after this sort use the water, to take vengeance upon those, whom he
pleases to wash from off the face of the earth, as being unworthy to dwell
longer thereupon. And so he himself has prophesied unto us, saying: Luke. 21.
[There shall be signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars,
and upon the earth, trouble among the nations, with perplexity: the sea and
waters shall roar.] Adding afterward, [For the powers of heaven shall be
shaken.] Moreover we may say, that although the celestial bodies have no more
life, sense and understanding, then the earth and the sea: yet nevertheless they
have as it were a secret feeling by nature of the majesty of God their
creator, who causes them to rise up against men for their rebellion and
wickedness. Surely when we see them rise and stand up against men, to work them
evil in stead of doing them good, contrary to the end of their first
creation; we must consider of them, as if they envied and denied to serve men
any more, which turn disloyal, ungrateful, and perverse toward him, from
whom their total good proceeds: As the sun did witness when it waxed dark
at the death of our Redeemer, depriving those of his light, which were risen up
against the eternal Son of God, that had created them. For it is certain,
that the creatures do groan and travel altogether (as the scripture says)
till such time as Jesus Christ shall come in judgment; Romans 8. Acts. 3.
which is the day of the restitution and restoring of all things, foretold by
the prophets. And which day being near, it is no marvel, if God do daily
show his particular judgments upon men, to put them in mind of this general
and universal judgment, whereto heaven, earth, the sea, and all creatures
shall come together: and therefore also he gives them so many signs of his
wrath, by thunders, tempests, deluges, and inundations of water, as we have
made mention. But let us proceed to contemplate his other works and great
woonders, which abound every where, both in the earth, and in the sea, and in
other terrestrial waters: by which very many commodities do redound to men
thorough the providence of God. And first we will speak of the diversity of
waters. Which (ARAM) I would have you to discourse of.


Of salt, fresh, and warm waters; and of other diversities in them. Chapter 59.
ARAM. ACcording to the nature of the most wonderful works of God, in all
that, which he has created, the maruels are innumerable, which may be
considered in the sea, and in all the waters which proceed out of it, and
return into it, without any increasing or diminishing in it self, as we have
already heard. And if there were no other thing, but that the waters of the sea
are always salt, and other waters are for the most part fresh, would not that
be sufficient to teach us to acknowledge the great power, wisdom, and bounty
of the creator, and how puissant he is in all his works? For though that all
waters are of one nature, as making up one only element: yet does he make them
of diverse qualities, according as he knows how to purify, distill and purge,
or else to mingle and mix them, Of the diverse qualities of water, and of the
providence of God therein.
with his other creatures. Whereupon it falls out, that we have not only
salt waters in the sea, but that there are some found also in fountains, yea
oftentimes very near to other springs of fresh water: Wherein the providence
of God declares it self to be very great. For if all waters were salt; men
and beasts could not live, nor the earth fructify, and nourish the fruits
thereof: because that living creatures cannot want fresh water, whether it be
for their drink, or for their other necessary commodities: neither is salt
water fit to water the earth, considering that salt makes it barren. On the
other side, if all waters were fresh, where might men find salt enough to
suffice them, for the necessary commodities of their life? For although that
there be some salt-mines, and some salt-ground, as appears by the salt
waters of fountains, which pass through such grounds: yet the best means to
have good salt and in abundance, is by the waters, and chiefly by sea water.
What may we say also of so many sorts of water, whereof some participate with
Sulphur; some with allom; others with iron or brass, or with other metals or
minerals, which do heat some of them in such sort, as men make natural bathes
of them, having diverse virtues and powers, which serve for medicines in many
kinds of diseases?

Why the seawater is salt.
Now the Philosophers do much strain themselves to declare the causes of so
many marvelous effects. For some say that the sun, which is the greatest of
all planets, drying up by his heat the moisture of the water, and burning and
sucking up all the humiditie of the earth, does by this decoction cause the sea
to become salt, because the force of the solarie fire does attract unto it the
most fresh and subtle part of the water, making the more heavy and thick
part that remains, to be salter and of more substance: whereof it comes,
that the water toward the sea bottom is fresher, then that which is above.
Others allege three efficients, which both cause and continue the saltnes: to
wit, the heat of the sun, for the foresaid reasons; and also because it
makes the water to putrify: then the continual agitation thereof by flowing
and ebbing, which causes that the sea neither rests nor runs a direct
course: and thirdly the ordinary receiving of rain. For they say, that when
salt rests in the water, it descends downwards by reason of the weight
thereof: and when the water runs, it is purified by the earth: and that all
raine-water, because it is heated by the sun, and does putrify through
tardation and slownes, is somewhat brackish. But they are much more troubled
when they entreat of fountains. For some say, that the sea yields none but
salt-waters, as is seen by many waters near it: And that those which are
fresh, become so by a long and vehement course. Others maintain that they be
engendered by the air. Now experience manifests, that their saltnes is
diminished by the length and continuance of the course of the water. For the
farther that wels are from the sea, the more fresh they are: because the water
does more purge it self, by the earth over which it trauerseth, leaving a part
of the force thereof, and sometimes all of it, in the slime, and in the sand.
And here we may note, that waters, Of fountains and wels, and why the water of
them seems hotter in winter then in summer.
especially well waters, which do all come from some springs, do seem to be
hotter in winter then in summer, although they do never change their nature:
for this proceeds of the air, which is cold in winter and hot in summer.
Through the opposition then of these things one self same water seems to
receive diverse qualities: even as we see, that according to the disposition of
our body, the quality of the air, which enuironeth us, is esteemed. For when
we are hot, we do suppose that which we touch to be cold: and when we be cold,
we esteem that which we touch to be otherwise. Wherefore we must judge even so
of the inner parts of the earth, esteeming them to be simply neither hotter nor
colder in one season more then in another, but only in respect of the air.
Indeed water does wax a little warm, when through the coldness of the air,
the heat is constrained to retire it self downward in such sort as it cannot
issue nor spread it self upon the earth: and therefore the snow which does not
ly long upon it, does commonly make it more fertile; for it retayneth the heat
in the bowels thereof. Moreover, the uppermost part of the earth, which the
water may come to, is of a clammie slime of the nature of brimstone or of salt,
or of metal: which also causes that the exhalations enclosed in this part
do heat the water. And therefore such waters are either odoriferous, or of a
bad smell, or without any savor, of which qualities one may easily judge by
the smell and taste. For some waters savor not only of lime, or of salt; but
they do also boil, as in the bathes near to Padua; Why some waters do boil.
yea such waters are very ordinary, so that there are few regions, but have
some of them. But they are most common in Germany and in Italy. And the cause
that they so boil is, either fire or putrefaction, or else natural or
celestial heat. But for the celestial heat, it seems that it cannot be so
great, especially in winter and in the night time, that it should heat the
water very much. And for natural heat, it is never actual but in living
creatures, because they have life and sense. Neither is putrified heat so
powerful, that it can make water to boil; neither is it very likely, that
the substance of any thing may be engendered and corrupted at one instant. It
rests then, that the cause should rather be in the fire; considering also,
that heat has but little motion, except it attain to the height thereof,
whereas otherwise it does quench it self. And therefore it is that matter
which burns under the earth, that ministers this puissant heat, which does
so warm the water. And we may moreover note, that all those waters which
boil so, are naturally light, and have some medicinable faculty and
property: And yet they are not to be so much accounted of, as that which is
fit for common usage in men's affairs to preserve health. What water is best.
For good water has neither color, smell, nor savor, and is passing clear;
and being drunk it abides not long in the belly: such (they say) is the water
of the river Euleus, which falls from the mountain Zager by Susiana, whereof
the kings of Persia did make provision in their expeditions and warlike
voyages. For to the preservation of health, water is no less to be carefully
chosen, Diverse causes of cold waters, and their tastes, colors, and smelles.
then air. Now as warm waters are famous for the reasons heretofore
delivered; so there are some waters also very much admired for their great
coldness, whereof snow, marble, metals, cold air, sudden motion, and the
great fall from aloft, (every one in his degree) may be the cause. Again, the
savors or tastes of waters are very diverse, and the principal cause thereof
is heat. For sodden earth (which is of sundry sorts) gives a taste to water,
according to the quality thereof. And the like reason is concerning colors;
for fine and thin clay does cause the color of waters: but thick clay tarrieth
not in water, and therefore dies it not. The same cause is also in the
difference of smells. And always waters that are of a good smell, are profitable
for creatures: but stinking waters cause diseases: for (as Philosophers say)
contrary causes appertain to contrary things. Good water likewise is
lightest, as that which fleeteth above other water, be it in rivers, springs,
or wels. From whence it comes that fresh water floateth upon sea water: which
likewise being more massiue and weighty, bears more heavy burdens. And
amongst fresh waters, the water of Rhodanus or Rosne (in France) swimmeth upon
that of the lake of Geneua, passing over the midst thereof. Also many rare
properties and great woonders are written concerning waters, with the causes of
them: as that, Of a flood which ran not on the sabbath day.
which is reported by Josephus, of a certain flood in Judea near Syria, which
ran every day, except upon the Sabbath day: which was reputed a matter
religious, and as a miracle: although that this might happen and come to pass
through a natural cause, if we will so argue, to wit, that no more water was
gathered into this flood by orderly spaces, then was sufficient to run for
six days and not for the seventh: in such sort as Physicians render a like
cause concerning the renewings or fits, and ceasings of feauers. For the world
is the great man, as man is the little world. But not stretching this
discourse any farther, we will only note for conclusion thereof, that in the
diversity of the kinds of waters, that which is gathered together in one
place and is salt, Of the diverse appellations of waters.
is called the sea; the fresh water so gathered together is called a lake; and
if it move not at all, it is named a marish or fen: but if it be somewhat
deep, it is a standing poole; and if it run, then is it a river: if it
gather through raines, or by snow, then is it a torrent, or raine-floud: and
if it spring, it is a fountain; which is ever the best water, and does
slowliest putrify. For it is least moist, and is most concocted by the
heavenly heat. Also the lightest water does hardliest corrupt: for which cause
it is most fit for the maintenance of man's life, as approaching nearest to the
substance of the air, by which we breath. We have said enough then concerning
this matter. But me thinks that our succeeding discourse requires that we
should entreat of those commodities, which men receive by waters through
navigations, which (ACHITOB) shall be the subject of your discourse.


Of the commodities which men reap of the waters, by navigations, and of the
directions which seamen receive from heaven, and from the stars upon the
sea. Chap. 60.
ACHITOB. AMongst such things as are worthy of consideration in the sea, and
in other waters, we must not pass over in silence those goodly commodities and
great profits which they bring unto men, by the means of nauigations, and of
the dealings and trafficks which they exercise by them. For it is to be noted,
that every land and country cannot be furnished with all commodities, because
God has so disposed thereof, that some abound in those things which othersome
do greatly want and stand in need of. But by means of sailing by water, all
that which can be required may be transported from one country to another,
with very small trouble and charges: so that one nation may communicate those
commodities with another, which the creator has particularly bestowed on them
all, each granting mutual help to the other by this means. Wherein surely we
may acknowledge the providence of God to be very great and manifold. Of the
providence of God in distribution of his gifts.
For first the Lord has disposed of his creatures, and distributed his
treasures according to the diversity of lands and countries, even in such
manner as he divides his gifts and graces amongst men. For he bestows not
all either upon one or upon two, or upon three, or upon any other certain
number of them: And therefore there never has been, nor shall be any one,
which either could or may surpass all others so much, that he may have no
need of another, or that has sufficient for himself. For if one man possessed
all, he would think himself to be no more a man, but a God rather, and would
therefore contemn all others. Moreover it is most certain, that if every one
were so well furnished with all things, that they might all surpass one
another, there would be no humane society. For one would make no account of
another: but being all puffed up with pride (whereto they are naturally
inclined) there would arise a thousand quarrels and dissensions amongst them,
as we ordinarily see to happen amongst the proud, mighty, puissant and rich.
For seeing that charity, which should dwell amongst men, can take no place;
how could they be united and allied together in amity, if they were not
constrained thereto through necessity? and if it be a difficult matter to
conioine and maintain them in peace and mutual good will, what need soever
they have one of another, one may easily judge what would ensue, if they had
not necessity for their mistress to this effect, which causes them to do in
spite of al their abilities, that which she cannot obtain of them, but by
force. Again how could men exercise the works of charity amongst themselves,
(which works are very much commended unto them by God, to be done toward
their neighbors) if every one could at his pleasure excel his companion? As
then God has placed and disposed sundry members in one body, and yet has not
appointed them one selfsame office, but to every one his own: so has it
pleased him to divide and distribute his goodness, gifts, and graces amongst
men, to the end that they may one serve another, as members of one and the same
body, which can not consist without the reciprocal help of all. So likewise
has he established the sundry regions of the earth, enriching every one of
them with certain particular commodities, which do often constrain men to
help and succor one another, and to live in peace: without which, they would
like mad beasts overrun and destroy each other, as we (wretches) do find
true, especially in time of war. But we may well note upon this point, that
although the most mighty do by their hate, enimities, dissensions,
reuengements and wars, contend oftentimes with all their power, to stop and
hinder the traffic, dealings, and transportations of merchandise from one
country, and out of one place to another, especially of food and victuals;
yet whatsoever they may or can do (be they kings, princes or Emperors) they
cannot for all that make such a stop, That nothing can stop the intercourse
of men.
but that they will always pass and escape by some means, maugre all their
powers. Wherein we must acknowledge, that seeing God has ordained, that those
which bear his image, should have communication one with another, for the
causes aforesaid, and that chiefly by the aid of navigations: it is a great
presumption in mighty men to oppose themselves against the order of the
Omnipotent, and against that communion of benefits, which he will have to be
maintained amongst men. Whom he can constrain to observe his ordinances, even
through their own covetousness, when their charity fails, making them to
despise all dangers, that they may supply where need is, though they be
forbidden upon pain of death. For such restraint by commandment is so far
from hindering their covetousness, that it does more inflame it, because they
expect greater gain, then if there were mutual liberty, and therefore they
cause more ware secretly to pass, and by that means they put all to hazard:
yea they would rather open a way under ground (like moles) or else would fly
in the air (like birds) then leave such trading: so wonderful is God in all
his works, and in the government of all nature. For when he pleases, he
serves his own turn with the affections and evil works of men, yea drawing
good out of their evil, even against their own wills. And therefore we may
very well affirm, that seeing God will have men traffic together; it cannot
choose, howsoever they enterprise to the contrary, but that this order must be
continued. For this cause likewise it was not the will of the creator, that the
waters should so gather themselves into one place, that they might not run
through the earth: but he ordained, that out of the great Ocean (which is like
the great body of the waters, and like the womb, out of which they do all
first spring, and wherein they are engendered, and whereby they are repaired for
ever) there should issue diverse arms and members, by means whereof we have
the Mediterranean seas, lakes, floods, rivers and brooks. So also in this
distribution, and by the means of navigations, God has given us many other
means; to the end we might behold with our eyes, many testimonies of his
providence engraven in every part of the universe, by the disposition of the
works of his almighty hand, as they who sail upon the waters are constrained
to acknowledge. Of the direction that mariners have by the stars.
For as he has appointed the watrie element, to serve men to nauigate therein;
so has he established the heaven, and ordained the stars enchased therein, to
direct them in the midst of the great gulfs and deeps of the sea. For when the
ships are entered very far into it, they that be therein do clean lose the
sight of land; so that they cannot judge by the consideration thereof, in what
place they are, nor upon what side, neither to what place they may bend their
course to find a convenient port, but they must take their directions from
heaven.

And for this cause also, though that the heaven be in perpetual motion, and
that all the planets and stars do follow it, rising and setting in such
sort, as they do not always appear to men: yet there are some of another
condition. For near to the place, which Astronomers take for the pole, there
are certain stars which have their motion and course so disposed, that they
are always seen at sea, being never hidden like the rest: and among these
that is one, which is called the Pole-starre, which is never seen to remove
(except a very little) out of one place: so that it seems the whole heaven
turns about this star: As we also maintain, that it has the like place
correspondent thereto directly over against it in the other part of heaven,
with a like appellation of name (as we have heretofore declared in our
discourses concerning the celestial bodies) excepting the difference, which is
put between these two poles, taken from their opposite situation in heaven,
and from the stars, which are next unto them; which also have their course
and motion like the rest: but do only differ in this, that rising and setting
are not attributed unto them, because they may be always seen, when the
spheres are discerned. For when the sky is covered with clouds, mariners do
find themselves very much hindered and troubled. For then they prove that
which Job says concerning the works of God, to wit, Job. 9.
that he commands the sun, and it rises not, and he closes up the
stars, as under a signet. And that he makes the star Arcturus, Orion, and
Pleiades, and the Climates of the south, doing great things and unsearchable,
yea marvelous things without number. Whereupon we may note, that here is
especial mention made of the septentrionall stars, as well because that they
are more seen then the rest, as also because it is their property to bring
and to procure rain and tempests (if we may credit Astrologers) which cause
that the heaven cannot be seen. Of Charles hi^ waine.
And because that some of these stars are so disposed, that they seem to
represent the figure of a chariot with four wheels, and they are very much
glistering above others, they are commonly called by the name of Charles-waine:
because also they have three other very bright stars near to them, placed in
such order as if they were cart-horses or oxen. Indeed some have called them
the Bear, seeing them so co^ioined together, taking the four quarters apart
as if they were the four quarters of a Bear, and the other three as the tail
thereof. There are some also, who have named them the Dragon or Serpent,
because that being considered together they might seem to represent some such
form. But howsoever, it is certain that pilots of galleys and ships do
direct and guide themselves chiefly by these northren stars, as being most
seen, and best known by men, and because they do almost always remain in
one place, like the pole, or else do move so little, that they are never out
of sight, especially that constellation which is properly designed by name of
the Bear, and is called the greater Bear in comparison of a less called the
lesser Bear. And for which cause also the pole, which is in this region and
part of heaven is called Arcticke, which is to say, of the Bear: for (Arctos)
in Greek signifies a Bear. Now hereby we farther learn, that it is very
requisite for mariners, and chiefly for masters and governors of galleys and
ships, to be Astronomers, at leastwise so much as to know the foresaid stars,
and to know how to judge of the elevation of the pole, and of the degrees, and
the distances of every land and country, according to the elevation. For it is
by it, that not only mariners, but Geometricians and Geographers also do
take their measures, and dimensions to part and measure out the earth. But we
have stayed long enough in this matter, now we will consider how God has
divided and limited out this terrestrial globe, and the sundry countries and
regions that are therein, by the sea and separation of the water: as (ASER) you
can discourse unto us.


Of the division of lands and countries amongst men by the waters; and of the
limits which are appointed them for the bounds of their habitations. Chap. 61.
ASER. STrabo a man as well seen in good letters as any other that has
written of Geographie, says; That the earth is environed about by the Ocean:
and therefore he parts it into four very great gulfes: Division of the Ocean
into four gulfes.
the first whereof turns toward the north, and is called the Caspian or
Hircanian sea: the second and third is that of Arabia, and the gulf of Ormuz
or the Persian sea, turning toward the south: and the fourth being greatest of
all the rest is that whereinto the Ocean enters at the straight of Gibraltar,
which some call the pillars of Hercules; which gulf is called by the name of
the Mediterran or Middle-earth-sea, because it is compassed round about with
land. And the same Mediterran sea runs, enlarging it self, and making many
bays and gulfs, sometimes washing the coast of Europe, and sometimes that of
Africa, and so it extends toward the east, and receives diverse names
according to the places through which it passes. For the first coast by which
it runs is called Mauritania Tingitana, which is that of Tremissen; Of the
mediterranean seas.
then does it take the name of Mauritania Caesariensis, toward Algier, and
Tunis; then is it named the Africke-sea toward Tripoly in Barbary; then
passing the quick sands it is the Lybian sea; and entering upon the Marmarica
and Cyrenaica, it glideth with that name till it water Egypt, and then it is
said to be the Egyptian sea. And all this coast is from the east to the west,
till you arrive at the gulf of Larissa beyond Damiata, and at the uttermost of
the deserts of the south-east, where Asia and Africa do separate. From which
port being in Palestina, you must turn north and north-east, as if you would
take your course by the west: and then this sea which was called the
Syriack-sea because of all Syria to Tripolis, changes name, and is called the
Egean sea, till you come to Galli-polis, or Helespont, making all this way
diverse baies and gulfes: and under this name it coasteth Thracia, and the lands
which abutte upon Macedonia, and Morea, till you come to Albania, and there it
begins to be called the Adriatic sea: then doubling toward the south, it
flows by the country of Calabria to the town of Rhegium, under the name of
the Ionick sea, and passing between Sicilie and Italy, in stead of the old
name Charybdis, it is called the Tyrrhene sea, and from thence it runs
toward the coast of Genoa, by name of the Ligustick sea, which divides and
separateth France from Italy, being nominated the French sea: then to end the
course, and finish the compass, it approaches the isles of Maiorca and
Minorca, being called the Balearick sea. And proceeding farther, it runs to
the straight of Barbary, bearing name the Iberian sea, where it returns to
the first point, from whence we said it first parted, to wit, at the straight
of Gibraltar, which is the entrance of one sea into another.

Now in this brief discourse, upon which Cosmogrophers have written many great
volumes, we have very goodly matter to consider upon, not without much wonder
of the providence of God; in that it has pleased him to divide, part, and
limit out the earth, Things to be considered of, by the division of lands by
the waters. Acts. 17.
and the sundry countries and nations that are therein, by the sea, and by the
bosoms, gulfes, and arms thereof. For as it is written [God has made of one
blood all mankind, to dwell on all the face of the earth, and has assigned
the times which were ordained before, and the bounds of their habitation.]
Which is as much to say, that as men have not made nor created themselves, but
have been created by the Eternal; so are they borne where he pleases, having
assigned them a place upon the earth, not at their choice but at his pleasure.

And therefore also he establishes their habitation, or changes it, according
to his good will, either keeping them within the country in which they were
borne, or else driving them out, and bringing them into strange lands, as we
have very evident examples throughout all the holy History, where mention is
made of the children of Israel. For though the Scripture does deliver us no
testimony of the providence of God so special toward other nations, as it
assures us to have been toward the people of Israel: yet we must
nevertheless believe, that there is not any one man that dwells upon the
earth, to whom the Lord has not by his providence assigned the place of his
habitation: But he would give an example and more certainty in his people, of
that which he ordinarily does toward all nations, although he does it not so
openly, nor with so great favor and grace, as is declared in those whom he
accounts for his children. Dan. 2.
And therefore the prophet says, [That it is God, who changes the times and
seasons, he takes away kings, he sets up kings: because he gives and
takes away kingdoms, and he augmenteth, cutteth off, and alters the limits
of them as he pleases.] Whereby we also learn, that we must not attribute
either to the prudence and wisdom of any one, or yet to the force and power,
or to the weapons or armies of men, the changes which we daily see in the state
of the most mighty: but to the only ordinance and disposition of God, by which
such alterations come to pass, according as the sovereign judge knows to
be expedient and just for the chastisement and punishing of men by one
another, or else to show himself benign and favorable toward them. For which
cause the scripture says, that the Lord using as his instrument Senacherib the
tyrant of Assyria to chastise many people and nations; Isay 10.
he calls him the rod and scourge of his wrath: and does greatly reprehend
him by Isay, for that he attributed to himself the glory of those victories
which he had given him, not because of his virtues (considering he was a fierce
and cruel king) but because God would use him against those who deserved to
be chastised by the hands of such a tyrant and murderer. If then we consider
(as behooves us) upon that which we have here summarily touched, we shall
find therein excellent doctrine for all kings, princes, and people, and for
all men, as well in general, as in particular: to the end to induce them, That
every one must contain himself within the limits of his habitation.
that they may contain themselves within the enclosure of those confines
wherein God has placed them. For as he is cursed in the law, which passes
the bounds of his neighbors possession; so must we not doubt, but that they are
subject to the same curse, who cannot contain themselves within the bounds of
those countries, Deuteronomy. 27.
in which God has confined them, bestowing upon them power, signories, and
habitation therein. For from whence proceed the greatest dissensions and
cruellest wars, but from the ambition and avarice of men, which will one usurp
above another, that which appertains not unto them, and by such means do
out-passe their limits? whereas if every one would content himself with that
part and portion of land, which the creator thereof has bestowed upon him, who
doubts, but that men should live in much more peace? As then God through his
providence would constrain them by necessity and need which they have one of
another, to traffic and communicate together in liberty and mutual
security, by that means to receive out of one country into another those
things which fail therein, and abound elsewhere, and for the causes by us
heretofore delivered: so it has pleased him to set mighty and strong bounds
and limits against their ambition and avarice, especially of kings, princes,
and great men. For we see how he has divided and separated one country from
another, and the diverse regions and kingdoms of the earth not only by means
of seas, lakes, and great rivers, but also by craggie, high, and impassable
mountains, which (as the kingly prophet witnesses) he has established by his
power, Psalm. 65.
that by this means men might be co^fined within the bounds of the habitation
assigned by the Eternal to every people, in such sort as he has enclosed the
waters within their places, to the course which he has ordained them, Against
the ambition, and avarice of men.
having bounded them with hills and rocks. And yet there are no bounds so
difficult to pass, which may bridle and restrain the ambition and insatiable
desire of men within any limits, but that they will pass over the deepest, the
longest, the amplest, and broadest waters, and the highest and steepest
mountains in the world: so that there are no places so inaccessible, through
which they will not cut a passage, one to ouer-run another by great outrage and
violence. Wherein surely they evidently declare, that they are much more
furious then the sea, how outrageous and rough soever it be; seeing they can
in no wise contain themselves within their limits, as the waters do: which
also makes them more unreasonable then brute beasts. For although there be
many unruly and furious horses in one stable, yet each of them will commonly
be stayed with an halter made but of a little coard or leather, and will be
kept by a little bar of wood, from striking and running over one another, so
that one only stable will serve them all. But men do to the contrary show
themselves to be such furious and contentious beasts, that the whole world
cannot suffice them. For there is neither river, sea, lake, nor mountain,
which can be a bar sufficient to withhold them from forcing and rauaging one
another, destroying themselves by horrible massacres, and cruel wars. Which
no doubt comes unto them especially through want of acknowledging and
considering upon the providence of God, by which he has appointed bounds to
their habitation, ambition, and avarice, as we have said, and for that they
will not contain themselves within them, obeying the ordinance of their
creator. But we have said enough concerning this subject. Let us now discourse
upon those commodities which come to men and to all creatures, by the course of
the waters thorough the earth. Which (AMANA) shall be the substance of your
speech.


Of the commodities which are incident to men, and to all creatures, by the
course of the waters through the earth. Chap. 62.
AMANA. IF men do but slenderly acknowledge the providence of God in the
limits of their habitation which he has appointed, as well by means of
mountains as by waters (as we have heard in the precedent speech:) they do
also make but small stay in the consideration of those great commodities, which
he gives and sends continually to them by means of them, and of all the
earth. For as he waters this fruitful mother by dew and rain from heaven,
as has been heretofore expressed: so does he moisten it by means of
fountains, floods and rivers, which do run through it. Whereupon we must
note, that the life of all corporal creatures does principally consist in
heat, and that this heat cannot be preserved and maintained without moisture,
whereby it is nourished: even as the flame of the snuff, or match of a candle
or lamp is nourished and maintained by the fat and humor which is therein.
Therefore as God has placed the sun in heaven like a great fountain of
heat, and a great furnace of fire for to be distributed and disposed into all
parts of the world: so has he established the sea here below in the earth,
as a great and perpetual fountain convenient for the nourishment and
conservation of this heat, which is communicated to the earth, and to all the
creatures that are therein. And therefore also this sea spreads it self into
diverse places, by the means which have been declared: so that the courses of
the waters in the earth are like the veins in a man's body. Goodly similitudes
of the course of the waters, and of the veins, which are in the body.
For even as the sovereign Creator has placed the liver in the bodies of
living creatures, which is as the fountain of blood needful for all the
body to give life thereto: and then has made veins like rivers to disperse
and distribute this blood to every member, disposing them in such sort, as
there is not any part but does by means of these veins receive as much blood,
as is needful for the nourishment and preservation of the life thereof: so
likewise he has ordained here below in earth, the sea and springs of waters,
which he afterward disposes into every place by means of fountains, floods
and rivers, who are as the veins through which the water, that is as the blood
of the earth, is conveyed and communicated, that it may be moistened to nourish
all manner of fruits, which God has commanded it to bear for the nouriture
both of men and beasts. Wherefore as in one body there are many veins, some
greater, larger, and longer; and some lesser, narrower, and shorter, which
nevertheless do all answer to one self same source and fountain, and then
do divide themselves into sundry branches: so the earth has her floods,
rivers and streams, some great, others small, which have all their common
springs, and do oftentimes join themselves together, or divide themselves
into diverse branches and arms, in such sort as the earth is moistened by them,
so much as is needful in every part thereof. Moreover, as it is watered to
nourish the fruits; so men and other living creatures do thereby receive their
beuerage necessary for the preservation of their life.

Of pleasure mixed with profit in the works of God.
But amongst all these things we are to consider, that God the most-good has
not only provided by means of them for the necessities of his creatures, but
even for their honest pleasures, so that it has pleased him to conioyne an
excellent beawtie with profit and utility. For how goodly a thing is it to
behold the fruitful islands in midst of the sea, the clear and sweet bubling
springs, and gentle rivers and floods issuing out of rocks and caves of the
earth, which tumble down the mountains, flow through the valleys, and glide
along the plains, through forests, fields and meadows, being decked with many
sundry kinds of branched trees, that are planted aside from inhabitants; in
midst of which, infinite little birds fly up and down tuning their voices
to sing in sweet melody, and natural music? What unspeakable pleasure
befalls to all creatures, especially to man, to live amongst such abounding
beawties? And who will not also admire the great variety which is in the
disposition and distinction that we behold in the earth, by the mountains,
rocks, valleies, plains, fields, vineyards, meadows, woods and forests:
especially if we consider the fruits and profits, which redound to men thereby,
besides the gallant diversity of infinite delectable pastures beawtified in
all sorts? For there is not one foot of earth, which may not be said to serve
to some good use, no not in most desert places. Some places are fit for fields,
and champion grounds; others for pastures; some for vineyards; other for
fruitful orchards; and others for high and well grown trees fit for building
timber, or for firewood, to the end that men may help themselves therewith
in all their needful uses for firing. Some places also are particularly
commodious for cattle to graze in, by which great gain and pleasure is
received. And for deserts, mountains and forests, they are the proper
retyring places for wild beasts, by which likewise men do not only receive
profit, but very great delectation also, and healthful exercise in hunting of
them: and which is more, such places are very commodious for household cattle,
which do there feed in every place to marvelous profit. But let us note, that
all these properties and profits should not be found in the earth, if it were
not conjoined with the water by the course thereof thorough every part of it.
Which water likewise does cause many and unspeakable profits, that redound to
men by fish, which remain not only in the sea, but also in lakes, ponds and
rivers, being of so sundry kinds and natures, that it is not possible to
number them. In which if the providence of God be most admirable, Commodities
that the waters do bring in fishes, and what is to be admired therein.
it is especially to be observed in the sea. For how many sorts of fishes are
there, great, little, and of mean quantity; and how many sundry forms, and
what diversity of Nature? I believe verily, that whosoever should undertake to
number them, by every kind, and particularly, should be almost as much
troubled, as if he would purpose to empty the Ocean. But though there be not
any little creature in the sea, wherein God does not declare himself, and show
himself great and admirable; yet does he chiefly manifest himself so to be in
two things. The first is in the hugenes and power of the great fishes which he
has created, as whales and such like, which seem to be rather sea monsters
then fishes, there being no beast in all the earth so great and strong: for
there are some that seem a far off to be islands or mountains, rather then
fishes. And the other most wonderful thing is, that the Creator has set such
a correspondencie in many points betwixt the fishes and beasts of the earth,
that it seems he would represent a great part of the one by the other. So we
see also that many names of earthly beasts are given to many fishes, because of
the similitude and likeness, which they have together in figure and in nature:
yea it seems that God would represent in the fishes of the sea, almost all
the other creatures which are in the rest of the world. For there are some
which be called Stars, because they are like that shape, according to which men
commonly paint the stars. Moreover, how many are there which bear the shape
of earthly creatures, yea of many instruments made by men? Of the fish called
the cock.
For amongst others, there is a fish called (the Cock) which is also named by
fishers in some countries, the Ioyner, because it has almost as much
diversity of bones and gristles, as a Ioyner has of tools; the form of
which they also represent. But if we speak of the sundry fashions of fishes,
and of their colors, scales, heads, skins and fins, and of their
understanding, industry and chase, and of their shells and abiding places, and
of their natures and infinite properties; who should not have just cause to
wonder? Moreover, have not men forged many fashions of weapons, the form of
which they have taken from diverse fishes? What shall we also say of the finnes
and little wings which God has given them, to direct them, and to hold them up
in the sea, and in other waters, like birds in the air, and as ships are rowed
and guided by oars, and the rudder? Seems it not that God has created them
like watrie birds, to whom he has given wings agreeable to the element for to
sustain themselves with, and fit for their nature, as he has done to the
fowls of the air? Genes. 1.
We also read in Genesis, that the Lord did make in one day the birds and
fishes, and every flying thing. For as the air has more agreement with the
water (then with the earth) and approaches nearer to the nature thereof; so is
there more answerablenes between the creatures which live and converse in
these two elements, then is between the^ and the beasts of the earth: And
therefore we see that the seed of both kinds is multiplied by their eggs. And
we must also note, that forasmuch as men can receive no great fruit, nor much
profit by fish, except in their victuals, or in some medicine or such like use,
which is not so common as ordinary nourishment, God by his providence and
blessing has made them so fruitful, that they multiply and increase
woondrously: as experience does evidently manifest unto us, by the great number
of fry or spawne that is found in one only fish. Which fertility we must
believe to proceed from the power, which the Almighty bestowed upon them: as
also upon all his creatures, when he said unto them, [Bring forth fruit, and
multiply, and fill the waters in the sea, and let the foul multiply in the
earth.] A thing which we must well consider upon, to the end that we may
refer to this blessing of God all those commodities which we daily receive,
either from those creatures, or from the earth it self, or from the other
elements, and that we must render him continual thanks and praises therefore.
For he has in no less wise blessed all his creatures, then the fishes and the
birds, when by his word he gave their nature to them, in which he created
them, and did presently after command them to bring forth fruit according unto
that nature. To the end then that we may be the more induced to glorify so
great a workman, for the excellency of his works, which shines in all
creatures, let us now entreat of some fishes most accounted of by those who
have written of their nature, and let us consider of their singularities and
woonders, so much only as the scope of our discourse will permit us, in such
sort as we have declared in our antecedent speeches. To you then (ARAM) I
refer the relation concerning this matter.


Of diverse kinds of fishes: namely of the whale, of the dolphin, of the
sea-calfe, and others. Chapter 63.
ARAM. IT is affirmed by all the learned, who have diligently searched out the
secrets of nature, that the water brings forth both more and greater
creatures, then the earth does, because of the abundance of moisture that is
therein. And the sea is so ample, and so fit to give nourishment, and a gentle
and fertile increase of all things, by means of that generating seed which it
attracteth from heaven, and the aid of nature ordained by the creator (which
has this property, to produce always something that seems new) that it is
no marvel if there be found incredible and monstrous things in the water. For
the seeds of all forms do so interlace and mix themselves therein, as well by
the winds, as by the agitation of the waves, that one may well say (as is said
commonly) that there is nothing on earth, which is not in the sea: yea, The
admirable property of nature.
and that there are many things in it, which cannot be found either in the
air, or on the earth. Now great fishes are chiefly resident under the Torrid
zone, because that in the Ocean heat and moisture serve for augmentation, Of
the whale.
as saltnes does for conservation. And in this number is the whale, of which
the ancients write, and whom some moderns call Gibbar (because that the common
whale, which some take for the Musculus of Aristotle does not answer to the
description of this) which is of incredible hugenes. For if we will believe
histories, there have been some seen of four acres of ground in length.
Plin. lib. 9. hist. not.
They make an horrible cry, and spout out of two holes (of a cubite long,
which they have near to their nostrils) so much water, that they oftentimes
drown ships therewith. And of their crests men make fair rods, which seem to
be of bone, or of horn, black in color, and like to the horns of a buffe,
so flexible, that they can hardly be broken, and they do shine in the sun, as
if they were gilded. Of every piece of his crest is a rod made, so that in one
crest there are many rods. Moreover the bone of his whole head is so great,
that one might make a ship thereof.

Of the dolphin.
And as this kind of fish is the heauiest and mightiest of all, so the dolphin
is the swiftest and most ingenious not only of all watrie creatures, but of
those of the earth, and of the air. For they swim faster then a bird can fly.
And therefore if this fish were not lowe-mouthed, there were no fish could
escape him. But nature providing therefore, in putting his mouth under his
belly, has so restrained him, that he can catch nothing but backwards: whereby
the great swiftnes of such fishes does evidently appear. Wherefore when the
dolphin, pressed with hunger, pursues any fish to the bottom, and that he
has stayed long there, always holding wind, when he rises he leapes above
water with incredible quicknes and force, to take breath again. Some have
marked in this kind of fish, that they have their tongue mooueable, contrary
to the nature of all other water-creatures. Their voice is as when one waileth.
Their back is bowed, and bends outward: they are very loving to men, and
like well of music: and indeed they do not shun men, as other fishes do;
but come right before ships, making a thousand leapes and frisks before them.
Sometimes also as if they had challenged the mariners to try who should go
speediest, they take their course along with the ships, and do outstrip them,
how good wind soever they have.

Of the seacalf.
Amongst seafish also the sea-calfe is very admirable. For he has vdders and
hair, and calueth upon the earth as sheep bring forth, and is delivered of
the second burden presently after her young ones. He snorts mightily when he
sleeps near to the shore; he bleates and bellows like a calfe, and for that
cause bears the same name. The sins wherewith he swimmeth, serve for feet
on ground to go upon. His hide (whereof the Islanders make girdles) has a
marvelous property, for the hair which is thereupon rises when the sea
increases, and falls when it diminishes. Some hold also that this creature
is very capable of discipline, easily learning that which is showed him: and
that he saluteth people by his looks, and with a certain noise and shaking
that he makes.

Now let us speak of the tortoise which is of a very strange form. There are
found of them in the coast of India so great, Of Tortoises.
that one shell only is sufficient to cover a good pretty shed. And in the
country of the Chelonophagi, there are some isles, where they ordinarily use
tortoise shells in stead of boats. For we must note that there be three sorts
of Tortoises: the terrestrial, which breeds in forests: marish ones, which
breed in fens: and watery ones, which breed in the sea. Those then of this last
sort have instead of feet so many broad gristles: they have no teeth, but the
nibbe of their beak is passing sharp: and their vnderchappe does close as
justly within their upper chap, as a box does with the lidde of it. Being in
the sea, they live upon shell fishes, for their mouth is so strong and hard,
that they crush them, yea even stones in pieces: yet when they come on land,
they never live but upon herbs. They lay eggs like birds; so that sometimes
one may find an hundred together. And they never hatch them in the water, but
putting them into an hole which they make in the ground, and covering them
well, they smooth with their shells underneath the place wherein they are, and
hatch in the night time for a whole year long.

Also amongst the fishes which are famous for their strange operative power, is
the Torpedo or crampfish: Of the crampfish.
which is a kind of hedgehogge, and has many bristles, the touch of whom be
nummeth the fishers hands, by some natural and secret virtue. And there be
many kinds of these fishes, who have all of them their shell covered with
bristles very thick, which bristles they use in stead of feet to stay
themselves upon, when they move and stir from one place to another. Their
head and mouth is the lowest part of them, and toward the ground. And amongst
the rest, there is one, not of the kind of this bristled crampfish, but a
shell fish, which the Latins call (Remora) because it has such power that if
it take hold of the bottom of ships, it staieth them. Yet we cannot read that
any such thing has been seen since the time of Caius Caligula the emperor:
whom Historiographers report to have been one time stayed in his ship by this
fish to his great endommagement.

Of the Triton.
But the most wonderful of all fishes is the Triton, (otherwise called the sea
Bugge) for he has hair upon his head, the nose of a man, a broad mouth, and
the teeth of a wild beast. His hands, fingers, and nails, are somewhat like
those of a man. And the rest of his body is covered with a thin shell, with
a tail under his belly in stead of feet like a dolphin. Hist. not. lib. 9.
Pliny reports that in the time of the emperor Tyberius the people of Lisbone
sent ambassadors only to advertise him, that in the coast of their sea, there
was a Triton discovered, blowing of an horn in a cave.

Of the Nereides.
The Nereides also (otherwise called Sirens or Mermaides) do very near approach
to humane form, saving that they be rough and full of shells in every part of
their body. There are some also who testify that they have seen a seaman,
having the entire form of a man. Finally it is a thing that seems altogether
incredible that the diversity of fishes, (or rather sea monsters) should be
such as they affirm, who have written thereof. But we may well believe, that
the facility of generation and of life in the waters, Of the cause of
innumerable forms of fishes.
is cause of so many strange shapes. For heat and moisture consist together in
generation, and nourishment maintains life: and in the sea heat and fat
moisture, and nutriment do abound. It is also to be noted, that by reason of
motion, the pestilence never comes into the water, (as into the air) for the
sea is ever moved, and the air is often still. For which cause all kinds of
creatures may easily be preserved in the sea, but not so in the air. Again,
fishes move themselves in the sea easily, and without labor: which the beasts
of the earth do not, who therefore are constrained to be hungry, or
necessarily to be consumed by too much labor and travail. Moreover the sea
freezeth not, neither yet is too hot (like the earth, and like other waters)
except it be (and that very seldom) in the superficies thereof, which is
touched by the air. Therefore through so many commodities, and by the mixture
of creatures of diverse kinds, many monsters are engendered in the sea, so that
sometimes when it arises, by means of the flowing thereof, one may find upon
the shore of the western Ocean to the number of three hundred kinds of
monstrous fishes. But although it seems that nature would express in fishes
the forms of all terrestrial creatures, and put in them some resemblance of
shape; yet in the hinder part all fishes are (except some few sea monsters) of
a peculiar form agreeable to their nature, and do only resemble other
creatures in the forepart. For as the rudder directs and governs a ship in
the stern, so the tail of a fish does guide it in swimming. And for this
cause the tails of all fishes almost are forked. But this is most certain
that their sorts and kinds surmount the kinds of other creatures in multitude,
in greatness, in force, and in variety of shapes. But our intent is not here
to number them as we have said: for so we should find matter enough to make a
great volume, as others have done. Wherefore to finish this argument, and this
days speech, see (ACHITOB) if by our discourses of the sea and of the waters,
and of the living creatures which are engendered and do live in them, you can
deliver any instruction, which may be answerable to that end, for which we
especially continue our treatise concerning this great universe.


Of the image that we have of the state of this world, and of men, in the sea
and in the fishes thereof. Chap. 64.
ACHITOB. LEt us not doubt (companions) but that we have a goodly image in this
days discourse of the state of this world, and of all man's life. For first,
That the world is like a sea.
what is this world but a sea, wherein we nauigate and are in continual
danger? Nay is the sea it self so variable, so inconstant, and so outrageous?
For if we have never so little respite, peace and rest, (like as when the sea
is calm, and quiet) presently there arise such violent whirlewindes, storms
and furious tempests, as it seems oftentimes that heaven, earth, and all the
elements conspire and run together to work nor ruin. Yea when this wicked
world shows us fairest countenance, and becomes most calm and gentle, and
that it feeds us with the fattest morsels; then is it most false unto us, and
then are we in greatest danger. For when we think our selves most sure
therein, then are we suddenly tossed and carried away, as with violent waves and
horrible whirewinds, into the lowest gulfes and deepes of the earth. Moreover
as the huge monsters of the sea, and the greatest and strongest fishes do eat
up and devour the smallest and weakest; and as the craftiest entrap the
simplest, and pray upon them: even so is it with the men of this world. For the
mightiest tyrants and the richest, strongest, and greatest rouers, thieves, and
robbers do pill, and take away the substance of the least and feeblest, and do
consume and devour them. And they which cannot do so by force, have recourse
to sleights, deceits and treasons, by which they surprise the simple and meek.
And therefore also as the holy Ghost compares in the Scripture tyrants, Soph.
3. Dan. 7. Ezech. 22. Psalm. 74. Luke 13.
rouers, thieves, and murderers, to woolues, bears, lions, and such like
beasts: and the crafty and deceitful, to foxes, dragons, and serpents, who do
by subtlety and guile that which they cannot perform by power and force: so
does he compare them to huge whales, and to the great fishes of the sea. So
because Nilus (a renowned river, whereof we have already spoken) passes
through the land of Egypt, and runs into the sea, by seven mouths or arms;
Isay calls Pharaoh the king and tyrant of that country, Isay. 27.
(Leuiathan, or Whale, which God did strike with his strong hand, and his
mighty arm, ouerwhelming him in the red sea.) It is also said for the like
consideration in the Psalms [Thou brakest the heads of dragons in the waters.
Psalm. 74.
Thou brakest the head of Leuiathan in pieces, and gave him for meat to the
people in the wilderness. Abac. 1.
] And the prophet Abacuc does likewise compare the king and tyrant of Babylon
to a great fisher who casts his nets into the sea, and causes the fishes to
come into them, and so he takes them.

But here we are to note, that although there be some kinds of beasts who eat
one another: yet are they not all of this nature. For there are but certain of
them that live so upon pray and rapine. And amongst them that so live, there
are but very few that eat beasts of their own kind, except great famine
constrain them thereto: Yea hunger does inuit them that live by pray, to
chase and devour others, rather then their own kind. For it is necessity and
want of sustenance that drives them thereto. And though especially fishes do
least spare their own kind, yet do they not eat one another, except when
hunger constrains them thereto to preserve their life. How men are more
cruel then beasts.
But men (most wretched surely) have not all these causes to move them against
their own kind, against their own flesh and blood, as it is ordinarily seen
that they are more cruelly and more fiercely bent one against another, then any
brute beasts: but contrariwise they should be much better furnished in all
their necessities, and should live much more at their ease, if they could
maintain good peace and unity one with another. Wherefore in that they do
otherwise, it is easy to judge how much their nature is corrupted and
perverse, except they be regenerated by the spirit of God. For there is no
bond of nature whatsoever, no not that which is kept amongst the brutest beasts
(as of the female toward her young ones, or of the male toward the female,
and such like) which men do not shamefully break and violate. But we must
herein acknowledge a terrible judgment and fury of God against them, because
of their sin, which has so perverted and infected the first original nature of
the stock of mankind. For when he gives strength and power to the one for to
torment and destroy the other, yea to most cruel tyrants and bloody
murderers, who make less account of men then of beasts; we must learn this
doctrine, that herein the just ordinance of the Almighty is very evident, by
which he punishes the wicked by the wicked, Good doctrine touching the
tyranny of the wicked.
and takes revenge upon his enemies even by his enemies themselves, as he has
threatened them in his law. And therefore there is less marvel herein, then
that God suffers the small fishes to be eaten by great ones; the weakest by
the strongest; and the simplest by the craftiest; as also the gentlest birds by
the cruellest; and lambs, sheep, and other private, domestical and
harmless beasts; by woolues, bears, lions, and other wild beasts. For it is
very certain that the beasts have not offended their creator, nor deserved his
wrath through any sin against him, as men have done, who being created in his
own image are fallen from innocence and holiness through their own fault, and
through the corruption of nature which the transgression of Gods ordinance has
brought upon them. And if we cannot make answer for the cause of this nature
of unreasonable creatures, but only that it has so pleased God, who is the
master and lord of all these works, and who has provided for them according to
his good pleasure: surely also when we can conceive no other reason for the
tyranny and cruelty of men, exercised one upon another, this same reason
should then suffice us. For the only will of the eternal, the which cannot be
but just and reasonable always, must ever serve for a reason, when we cannot
understand the causes, as we would. But (as I said even now) this reason
manifests it self sufficiently in his just judgments upon men, because of
their sins. Now albeit we hold this sufficiently good in regard of the
wicked, and of those who oppose themselves and rebel fiercely against the
Almighty: yet the consideration might seem to us to be otherwise in respect
of the meek, and of those whom he holds not only for his servants, but
also for his beloved children: who nevertheless are commonly a pray to the
wicked, as sheep are to woolues. I must indeed confess, that these judgments
of God seem more strange to humane reason, then the other do: yet they are not
so secret and mystical, but that he manifests causes enough, not only by
his word, Notable things to be considered in the adversities of the good.
but also by common experience. For first, how much goodness, holiness and
perfection soever can consist in any man, yet nevertheless as concerning his
flesh, he walloweth altogether in sin, and very much natural corruption, in
pride, arrogancy, rebellion, and disobedience against God, which have great
need to be better mortified, humbled, tamed, and brought down. Again how
easy a matter is it for us to forget our Creator, and our own selves, and to
abuse all the graces and benefits, which we receive continually at his hand?
Also seeing that he will be glorified, and that his power shall be known in
the faith, constancy, charity, and patience of his; we should not think it
strange that he puts them to trial, exercising them by diverse great and
dangerous temptations and afflictions. Now the tyranny, malice, cruelty, and
perverseness of the wicked, serves in all these things for his children, and to
his glory, through his providence; notwithstanding that he hates all the
wicked, using them only as rods and scourges, to chastise and punish those whom
he pleases; as he is likewise served by devils, without approouing their
works, insomuch as they proceed from themselves. But there is more yet: For
considering that God has not created men like unto beasts, only to live in
this world, with a corporal and temporal life, but has made them to
immortality and eternal life like the angels: he will then by the adversities,
which he sends unto them, here give them to understand, that other blessings
do attend for them far greater then those, which may be tasted upon earth, and
which are common betwixt them and beasts. Behold then the fruit, which me
seems must be gathered in our discourse this day: now to morrow we will step
out of the sea and waters, to take land again, and to consider upon the
treasures and benefits therein, which it produces for the commodity of men,
and the diversity of creatures that live therein: whereof (ASER) you shall
begin to discourse.


The end of the eighth days work.
THE NINTH DAYS WORK.
Of fruits, and of the fertility of the earth, and the causes thereof: and of
herbs, trees and plants. Chap. 65.
ASER. AS the holy scripture teaches us, that before God did create the beasts
of the earth, Genes. 1.
he commanded the earth that was discovered and free from the waters, to bud
forth the bud of the herb, that seedeth seed, the fruitful tree which
bears fruit according to his kind, which has his seed in it self upon the
earth (and it was so:) we must likewise understand, that this commandment had
not such virtue for that time only, but that it endures and remains
always, and so will do till the consummation of the world. For all herbs,
trees, and plants that the earth ever has borne, does bear, or shall bear,
even from the creation of the same until the end of the world, do proceed
from the first ordinance and eternal word of the sovereign, by which all
things have been created. Wherefore Moses, to the end that men might
acknowledge this divine power, which makes the earth so fruitful, does
expressly tell us, that God gave this fertility before there was any sun,
moon, or star in heaven. For he says, that these goodly lights were
created the fourth day: but that the production of herbs, What is the cause of
the fertility of the earth.
trees and plants was on the third day. Thereby then we must learn, that
although the sun, moon and stars, besides the husbandry of man, do serve by
the ordinance of God for to make the earth fertile; yet for all that it can
bring forth no fruit, if the word and blessing of the Almighty do not give it
power. For as it was fertile before it was aided by the stars, even so is it
now in regard of the tillage and husbandry of man. For there was neither man
nor beast when it budded forth the fruits, which God commanded it to bear:
yea so much wants it to become fruitful by the travel of man, that to the
contrary it has lost very much fertility, and a great part thereof has
become barren since his first creation, because of his sin. For in lieu of
the blessing that God at first gave thereunto, Genes. 3.
he said afterward to the man that it should be cursed for his sake, and that
it should bring forth thorns and thistles, and that he should eat the fruits
thereof in sorrow. For these causes then we must always have respect to the
power of the word, and of the blessing of God, by which all things have been
created in their order (as we have heretofore declared) and man last of al, as
the masterpiece of the Lords work. Who having determined in his eternal
counsel to create man after his own image and likeness (to the end that he
might in this visible world represent his creator, as in his most lively
semblance) was not only pleased to build him his lodging first (to wit the
whole world) but would also replenish and furnish it every where, to the end
that nothing might be found empty. But that which is herein to be chiefly
considered, is, that this divine providence having given essence to all
corporal creatures, has therewithal provided necessary means to keep and
preserve them all in their natures. For minding to give life to birds, to
fishes, and to the beasts of the earth, he had already prepared their food,
before he had created them, and had ordained the earth as the mother and the
nurse of all creatures which are engendered and which dwell and are conversant
therein; How creatures are nourished, and preserved.
and in the waters and air also, for the birds and fishes. Moreover as all
bodies are composed of fire, of air, of earth, and of water; so the Lords will
was, that all these enemies should conioine together, and receive aid one from
another; to the preservation of living creatures by virtue of the alliance and
agreement, which is not only betwixt the said elements, but also betwixt them
and the celestial spheres, as we have already discoursed. For considering
that they be the principles of things having life, they cannot live, nor be
naturally conserved but by mean of the very same elements, from which they
take their original. And therefore the providence of God causes, that they
do all accord together, to nourish and maintain those creatures, which he
has made and created.

But seeing that we are in talk of the fertility of the Earth, Of the
fertility of the earth.
ordained by God to that end, according as we have declared, who is it that
can number the diverse kinds of herbs, of trees, and of all sorts of plants
which it produces? And who is it that can but only name and find proper
denominations agreeable unto them? And if we should speak of their diversities
and varieties in roots, in stalks, in stocks, in tops, in branches, in
boughs, in leaves, in shapes, in flowers, in colors, in seeds, in fruits, in
tastes, in smells, and in savors: who would not marvel very much? We see how
the Lord speaking only of the Lilly of the field, does testify, that Solomon
in all his royalty was not adorned like one of those: and therefore he
brings it as a testimony of his goodness in reproach of those, which take care
for their clothing, as if they distrusted in the providence of God, Matthew. 6.
Luke 12.
and as if they supposed him not able enough to apparel them; or at least,
that he had not so much care of men, as he has of the herbs and flowers of the
field, which he endueth and decketh with so gallant clothing, and with so many
sorts of excellent fair colors, and yet they neither spinne nor have weauers,
nor clothiers, nor drapers, nor other worke-folks and tradesmen to deal for
them. Yea, how marvelous is the conservation and multiplication of all plants,
by means of their own seeds, syons and fruits, according as the Creator did
at first constitute? For that I may first speak of the smaller sort, who could
believe, if experience did not assure us, that of one little grain of mustard
seed should grow a great and high plant, like a little shrub, Matthew. 12.
in such sort that the birds of heaven might make their nests therein? Then let
us consider, how corn, pulse, and all other sorts of seeds do bud, grow, and
multiply. But who of himself would judge, that out of one little kernel of a
nut or filberd, there could grow so great trees, and so much wood, as should
bear innumerable leaves and buds, and so much fruit each year, every one
according to his own kind, and that for long time? Would not all this seem
incredible, if we were not ascertained by continual experience, and a sure
course in Nature? And if God does show himself most wonderful in all these
things, in regard of the herbs, trees and plants: what shall we say, if we
proceed to the consideration of their natures, properties and virtues; and of
the commodities, remedies and profits, Woonders concerning the properties, and
virtues of the fruits of the earth.
which men receive thereby? This surely is the most principal point. For how
admirable is it, that by the means of herbs, trees, and other plants, which
have no soul, that may minister life unto them, with motion and sense, and
which may much less participate with any reason; God does not only preserve
the life of men, and of other creatures (a thing to be woondred at) but does
also thereby give them strength, vigor, and force? For what are these herbs
and plants, which produce all sorts of corn, pulse, and other grain, of which
men make food, and are thereby nourished? What is the vine and other
fruit trees? Who could think, if he saw it not with his eyes, that there is
neither man, nor beast, that could be nourished and preserve his life, but by
such means? For how can that thing either give, or preserve and maintain
life, which has no life in it self? And yet if we will consider of the
medicines and remedies, which men find in herbs and plants only, besides
those which they may take from other creatures, who can in truth either declare
or write, I will not say all of them, but only the thousandth part? For
although the most excellent physicians have always traveled in this part of
their art, which is commonly called the Knowledge of Symples; yet how far off
are they from the full and perfect theoricke of them? For what a number of
herbs and roots be there which are unknown, and have yet no name? And how
many are there which are taken one for another, and wherein the most skilful
Physicians and Herbarists are oftentimes deceived? And yet this little which we
know, should move us to think upon the great and ineffable bounty of God
toward men, and upon the fatherly care which he has of us all. For though
that by our sins we have merited death both of body and soul, which death
our sin has not only gained, but also many diverse and strange sorts of
diseases and corporal infirmities most grievous and terrible; yea sometimes
hideous and horrible, which are like butchers and slaughterers to put them to
death: yet the charity and love of our God is always so great toward
mankind, that he gives us as many and more; yea sundry medicines for one
only malady. But we will be instructed more amply by you (AMANA) in this
matter, that we may acknowledge therein very clear testimonies of the
providence of God.


Of the virtue that herbs, and other fruits of the earth have in physic and
in food; and of the true use of them. Chap. 66.
AMANA. IT is daily seen, that by the means of some small herbs, which grow
in a garden or in a mountain, or in some other desert place, and which also
are oftentimes trodden under foot, without any account made of them; many are
commonly delivered, not only from great pains and grievous maladies, but even
from death it self, which otherwise it seems would most certainly approach.
Wherein certes, we have a goodly subject to consider, that if God gives this
virtue to creatures of small estimation in comparison of many others, and that
by the means of them he ministers so great help, and does so much good to
man; what must be the power and bounty of that great and sovereign physician,
which makes them prevail, and gives them power to heal? For we must
understand, that it is not the herbs, nor other drugs and preparatiues, nor
yet the apothecaries and physicians, who make and compound them, that are the
true cause of restored-health to the sick: but God alone, who does not only
give the remedies, but also knowledge to men how for to use them, and to be
skillful how to apply them to their own necessities, for which he has created
them. Herein then we must acknowledge two great benefits, that the most good
and most puissant God has conferred upon us. The first is, Two great good
things that God has done for man.
that he has given us medicines fit and necessary for healing. The other is
the knowledge of them, and the theoricke how to apply them to their convenient
purpose and usage. And one of these benefits without the other, would indeed
but little avail us. For as the workman cannot work without such stuff as is
requisite for him to make his work of, as also it would be unprofitable if no
man should employ it, and put it to use: for the same cause, God, which takes
care of the least of his creatures, has imprinted in the nature of brute
beasts, that want understanding and reason, a certain knowledge of things that
are fit for them, not only for their nourishment, but also for remedies in
their diseases, so that they need no other physicians but themselves only.

What judgment must be made of the virtue that the fruits of the earth do
retain for the good of men.
But in this discourse we are to note, what judgment we must make of so great
virtue, as we find in all herbs and drugs, and by like reason, that we must
consider thereof in the property of corn, bread, wine, and of all meats and
drinks, which are as ordinary and continual medicines for the preservation of
life. For if that which is diminished and consumed daily in us, were not also
repaired and restored daily by our meat and drink; we should fall suddenly
into grievous maladies, and finally into death. Forasmuch then as it pleases
God to preserve the life, which he has given us, and to maintain us in health
and good disposition; he gives power to that, which we eat and drink, to do
this. But if it should please him to do otherwise, there were neither meat
nor drink, which could give any sustenance and convenient nourishment unto us,
but would rather convert within us, into deadly poison, to take away our life,
and hasten our death, even as God does oftentimes to that effect use the air,
without which we could no more live, then without meat and drink. And
therefore when it pleases God that we shall live in health and long time; he
makes the air good and wholesome for us: if otherwise it pleases him to strike
us with sickness, and to hasten our death, he changes it, as if it were
impoisoned, as we do very often find in diverse contagious sicknesses, and
chiefly in time of pestilence. The like also is in victuals, drinks, and
medicines. And therefore the Lord menaceth his people by Isaie, declaring unto
them, that he will take away the staff of bread and of water: that is to say,
the substance and natural virtue, which he has given them to nourish, which
is the force that sustaineth them, who are sustained, as a staff sustaineth
him that is weak: and as man cannot live, except he have both meat and drink
sufficient; the prophet has comprised under bread and water, all things
needful for nourishment, and for the life of man. It is therefore in these
things, that God says, he will take away all power, Leuit. 28. Deuteronomy. 16.
as also Moses does amply declare in the blessings and curses of the law. For
let us also note, that when God will punish men by dearth and famine, he does
not only make the earth barren (as he threatens) but also curses that little
fruit, which it bears, yea in such sort, that it still diminishes, and has
not the accustomed virtue and power to nourish. And therefore, when the corn
is sown, it yields not so many ears nor so many grains in the field, as is
expected, and as it seems that it should yield. And afterward when it is
gathered and reaped, and that it comes to be threshed, there is yet found
less corn then was esteemed to be. And being laid up in the barn, it
consumes more then of custom: carried to the mill, it yields less meal then
is looked for: yea being kneaden into dough it seems to diminish: briefly it
seems to fail being made in paste, brought to the oven, and so baked, when
it is in the binne, and upon the table, yea in the hand, in the mouth, in the
stomach, and in the belly. For it does not satisfy, nourish, and sustain so
well as in time of plenty and abundance, but they which feed thereof, are
always hungry and famished. And so we may think of all other meats and
drinks: even as we find the contrary in the blessing of God, when through it
he gives fruitfulnes to the earth, and abundance of all things, according to
the testimony of his word. As then we are admonished to have recourse to him
only, to demand our daily bread, and all other things needful for this
life: so must we also do, when we are visited by sickness. For he is the
sovereign and only physician, who can of himself heal us. It is he that
strikes, and gives remedy, which brings to the grave, and draws out
again; which kills, and raises up again. And therefore he says to his
people by Moses, [If thou will diligently harken unto the voice of the Lord
thy God, Exodus 15.
and wilt do that which is right in his sight, and wilt give ear unto his
commandments, and keep all his ordinances; then will I put none of these
diseases upon thee, which I brought upon the Egyptians: for I am the Lord that
heals thee.] But although that God alone can do all things, without the aid
of any creature, and without the use of any means, except he please: Why God
does serve himself with his creatures toward man.
yet does he choose out such means as he pleases, to perform his works
toward us, and to distribute his gifts, and that chiefly for two causes. The
first is, for that he will not have his creatures remain idle, but serve to
his glory, and for the good and health of men, considering that they were
created to that end. And the other cause is, that it pleases him to
accommodate himself to our infirmity, which is such, as we do not think that
he is near unto us, nor that he can or will do it, except we have always some
visible signs. Although then it is as easy for him to nourish us without
victuales and without drink, as with them, and to heal us without Physicians
and medicines and drugs, as he does by means of them: nevertheless it is his
pleasure to do it by such aides, and he will have us subject to this order. And
therefore let us think, that to despise the means which he gives for the
maintenance of this life, is as much as to despise his commandments, like
mockers and rebels. And if we be such, we may not hope for any succors from
him, seeing we reject the remedies, by which he will give them unto us. But we
must always come to this point, that although we cannot receive the benefits
which it pleases the most good God to communicate unto us, except by the
means ordained by his providence thereto; yet nevertheless we must not
attribute this power to any of his creatures, but to him only, and must give
him the whole glory; considering that he takes them not for any need which he
has, or that without them he could not perform his works, but only for the
aid and supportation of our infirmity. And therefore let us believe, that
bread, wine, and all other meats, drinks, drugs and medicines, have not any
virtue of themselves, but so much only, as God infuseth into them, and as he
thinks needful for our good, by such instruments as he ordains thereto.
Wherefore men run in vain to such aides, and especially to Physicians and
apothecaries to be succored by them, except God the sovereign Physician do
put his hand thereto, and except he bless their art and labor. Of the true
use of physic, and how it is abused.
Experience certainly does yield us daily testimony thereof. For it
oftentimes happens that in stead of helping, Physicians do hurt; and in stead
of healing, do kill. And how so? Because there are very few which address
themselves to the true and Almighty Physician, and who have not more
confidence in mortal men then in the immortal God, as king Asa is accused in
the Scripture, and punished for this fault with death. True it is, that some
fail, in that which they make none account of the ordinary means established
by God, despising both Physicians and all the medicines of their art, which is
almost as much, as to refuse the usage of those benefits which God gives us at
need. But the greatest number consists of those, who not only have recourse
chiefly to the professors of this science, and put all their confidence in
them, but will moreover in stead of using the advice and assistance of good and
learned physicians, address themselves more willingly to Empiricks, and such
as are ignorant, or else are sorcerers, enchanters, witches and worshippers of
devils. If then our desire be, not to fail with the one nor the other, we must
rest in that way which is showed us in Ecclesiasticus, to wit, [Honor the
Physician with that honor that is due unto him, because of thy necessity:
Eccles. 38.
for the Lord has created him. For of the most high comes healing, and the
Physician shall receive gifts of the king. The knowledge of the Physician
lifts up his head, and he shall be in admiration. The Lord has created
medicines of the earth, and he that is wise will not abhor them. Exodus 15.
Was not the water made sweet with wood, that men might know the virtue
thereof? So has he given men knowledge, that he might be glorified in his
woondrous works.] Which is as much to say, that as God has sweetened the
bitterness of the waters in the desert, by means of wood which he caused Moses
to cast thereinto; so likewise does he manifest his power by the art of
Physic, showing marvelous effects thereby. And therefore the wise man does
add [With medicines God heals men, and takes away their pains. Of such
does the apothecarie make a confection, and yet he cannot finish his own
work, for of the Lord comes prosperity and health over all the earth.] And
finally he exhorts the sick to pray: saying, [My son fail not in thy
sickness, but pray unto the Lord, and he will make thee whole: leave off from
sin, and order thine hands aright, and cleanse thine heart from all wickedness.
Then give place to the physician, for the Lord has created him: let him not
go from thee, for thou have need of him. The hour may come that their
enterprises may have good success: for they also pray unto the Lord, that he
would prosper that, which is given for ease, and their physic for the
prolonging of life.] Wherein namely this holy personage does evidently declare,
what is the virtue of physicians, if they desire, that the Lord would bless
their works, without whose blessing they can never come to a prosperous end.
Behold then what seemed good unto me to note concerning the true use of the
great and excellent gifts, which God communicates with us for the maintenance
of man's life. And pursuing this subject, let us speak something more
particularly concerning the diversity and singularity of diverse plants: the
discourse whereof (ARAM) I commit to you.


Of the diversity of plants, and of their difference and natural growth; and
of their parts, and of the most excellent amongst them. Chapter 67.
ARAM. Four kinds of plants.
THE learned teach, that there are four kinds of plants, to wit, trees,
shrubs, vnder-shrubs and herbs. Now a tree is that, whose stock waxes green
every year, and therefore grows to great height, as the peare-tree. The
shrub called of Latins (Frutex) is that whose stock remains for many years
together, but it grows not very high (as the rose-tree and the myrtle.) The
vnder-shrub called (Subfrutex) rests also upon the stock, but exceeds not
the height of herbs (as the broom.) And the herb is that which has neither
stalk nor stock (as housleeke and sage:) or else has a stock, but so as it
changes every year (as the fennel.) And yet a fifth kind may be added between
the herb and the shrub (as rue:) because that sometimes it grows great like
a shrub, and sometimes remains like other herbs, which is also usual to the
cabbage. But generally all plants may attain to great height by husbandry.
Also amongst sallet-herbes, specially those which are green, do oftentimes
grow into shrubs, by the industry of man in winter time: whereby it
appears, that we must not take the true difference of plants, and of their
kinds, by their greatness or growth: no more then in that the leaves of plants
are not all of one bigness, or because they always stay upon some, and fall off
from others: or because they differ in color, or else because one plant is
barren, In what we must take the difference of plants.
and another bears fruit. But we must take this difference in four things,
which are the virtue and property, the odor, the savor, and the shape of the
leaves, buds, fruit, bark and roots, and generally of the whole plant. Of
which four differences the principal is the faculty, virtue, or property:
for the virtue proceeds from the form, and the form is that which
distinguishes the kinds. And therefore though the willowe, and the Vitex
(called Agnus castus) have their leaves and bark alike, it should nevertheless
be a manifest error to use the one for the other. For the Vitex is hot and dry
in the third degree (of which it has this mark, that it drives away
ventosities, and flourishes first amongst all trees:) but the willow is cold
and moist, flourishing very late, and causing ventosities. Now for the odor or
sent, one may evidently know by them the temperature of plants. And therefore
they which are of one kind, although the one grow in India, and the other in
Scythia, yet do they necessarily participate with the self same principal
virtues. And for the savor and figure, they are discerned by the taste and
eye: wherein it is necessary to employ much diligence and labor, to judge
well concerning the difference of plants. Those then which are alike in form,
in power, in odor, and in taste, may without doubt be accounted of one self
same kind: For we search out the names of them according to their virtues.
Whereupon ensues, that they which have one self same virtue, may be comprised
under one kind, though the herbalist call them by sundry names, according to
the proportion of their figure.

Now some plants do grow naturally in fields, and forests, some in the sea,
others in rivers, others on the shore side, some in marshes, some amongst
stones, sands, and gravel, some in pits, and so of others in such like places.
For the place, in which they grow, or to which they are removed (and the
temperature of the air) are much auailable to cause them grow, and fructify.
Through which occasion, there are higher trees, more flourishing, fairer to
behold, and more charged with leaves, and fruit, The place, and temperature of
the air, of great efficacy in the production of plants.
in some places, rather then in other. Whereupon ensues that such as love
mountains (as the Cedar, Saple, Pine, the Turpentine tree, Box tree, Juniper
tree, Beech, and the Plane-tree) do there grow high, and fair: as in the
plains and low forests, the Oak, the Beech, the Corke-tree, the Elm, the
Maple, the Ash, the Hasell-tree do grow best. But near to rivers and ^atrie
places, the Plane-tree, the Alder, the white and black Poplar, the Tamariske,
the Willow and the Reed do sping at pleasure: though many of them do grow
in mountains, valleys, plains and forests, but they prosper not there so
well. This difference also is marked in herbs and shrubs. For some grow well
in marshes, others in lakes and pooles, others on rivers sides, other prosper
in watrish and muddie places, others again not abiding them, do grow in dry
and stony ground. Some spring indifferently both in moist and dry ground. And
some require the fields, others vineyards, and others meadows. Some also love
the valleies, others hillocks, and others high mountains. Some likewise
prosper in private places, and grow near to walls of towns and cities, and
some grow in old ruins. But it is to be noted, that though each kind of
plants grow and prosper best in his proper ground, and does love very much his
own natural situation; yet sometimes herbs are found indifferently in
mountains, hillocks, valleies, fields and meadows. Likewise the industry and
travel of man does bring to pass, that that which is strange, becomes
domestical; yet not without some manifest difference between the pure natural
production, and that which is caused by art. Moreover the parts of plants are,
the root, the stock, The parts of plants.
the branches, the leaves, the fruit, the stalk, the tufts called (Vmbellae)
the grains, the seeds, the flowers, the mossie-downe, the wood, the bark,
the sinews, the inner pil, the veins, the sap, the pith, the gum called
(Lachryma) the knot, and many other small parcels, which the curious observe
therein: all which serve to distinguish trees and herbs one from another:
which parts are somewhat answerable to the parts of living creatures. For the
roots seem to agree with the belly (as Theophrastus holds) or else with the
mouth (as others maintain, who refer the lower part of the stock to the
belly) and the leaves have some reference to the hair; the bark to the hide
and skin, the wood to the bones, the veins to the veins, the matrice to some
entrails, which cannot live without the matrice, the flowers to eggs, the
seeds to seed, the branches and boughs to the extreme parts of living
creatures, and the fruit to the menstruous blood, wherein the seed is many
times enclosed. Moreover the parts of parts are worthy of consideration, as
those of the root, whose middle part is as it were of wood, out of which the
plant does oftentimes bud, and is therefore defended with greater strength. And
therefore if this middle part be taken out of garlic, that which remains
is not so sharp, and of so strong savor as before, and it seems likewise to
be less full of juice. Next, the second part is (the rind or coat) which is
very small, and the third is the peele or husk: and the fourth is the
inner-peele, which enuironeth the husk, which is not properly called so,
because it is meant for that, which compasses the seed of the fruit, and the
fruit it self; and also because it contains that which enuironeth the wood
in the root, instead of the seed. Whereby it appears, that they which cast
away this part full of wood when they make their decoctions, do very ill,
considering that it is the most excellent of all the rest, and of greatest
force: That the wood of roots must not be cast away in decoctions.
for that which produces the seed, that only contains the whole virtue
thereof, because it alone has life. That part then which is of wood, seems
to be the chief and principal substance of the medicine: because that that
thing only which lives, produces the seed, and in that part only wherein it
has life. For although that in succorie, and such like herbs, some leaves
grow out of the bark: yet the herb it self, and the seed do proceed out of
the wood. As the leaves then are in the stalk or slip; so is the bark in the
wood: and both leaves and bark are therein for safeguard thereof. In the lower
part the juice falls into the root: by the middle part the root is
nourished, and in the uppermost part it is converted into seed. Wherefore the
uppermost part of the root is best, and most different from the nature of
earth. The flowers likewise have their parts; for there is a kind of leaf in
the flower which always shines, and is in all flowers, because it is made of
a very fine substance. The buddes likewise wherein the flowers are contained
are parts of them; and the seed of which the flower springs, as it is cause
of the generation thereof; so is it a part of the flower, What plants and what
parts of them have the greatest virtue.
and so is the stalk or foot, called (Pediculus) in which all these things
are as it were planted and adjoined thereto. Let us also note, that amongst
trees the old are of more subtle quality then the other. And every tree,
which bears leaves all the year long, is hot and dry (as the palm tree,
the olive tree, the cedar, the myrtle.) But this reason is not available in
herbs: for houseleeke is of a gross substance, and yet bears leaves all
winter. And indeed both in herbs and trees they which grow wild abroad are
better then the domestical: and so are they which are odoriferous, much more
then they which have a badde savor, and have no sent at all, especially if
they grow in mountains: and therefore they are preferred by physicians before
the other. And we must note, that most commonly the roots smell better, and are
sweeter then the other parts of the plant, except the flowers, which is so
because the concoction is best done in the roots. For all things, which have
the humor well boiled, smell best: for that humor is most subtle and close.
For which cause, all flowers almost do smell well. For by reason that the
humor which is in them is very subtle and little, it is the more easily
concocted therein: and therefore also it sooner perishes. But this humor
remains, and is preserved in the roots and in the stock; for the subtle
substance thereof being well concocted, does abide in the earthie substance,
Why young folks breath is sweeter then that of the old.
whereby we may learn why young folks have sweeter breath then old and
distempered people. For children have their humor very subtle, and the small
humor may be very well concocted in young folks, by the great heat which
abounds in them. But want of heat hinders it in old folks, and the
quality of the humor is hurt in those that are distempered, and causes that
the decoction cannot be performed. Now we have staide long enough in this
discourse: But as we have distinguished plants into four principal kinds,
let us now speak of the nature and property of the most especial among them;
to the end that according to our intention we may not pass over any of the
works of God, without producing some testimonies, which may cause us more and
more to celebrate his divine providence. Then (ACHITOB) begin you to entreat
of trees.


Of trees, and especially of the Pine, the Fir Tree, the Cypresse-tree, and the
Cedar. Chap. 68.
ACHITOB. Four differences of plants transported.
IT is doubtless, that the difference of trees of one kind is chiefly caused
by the diversity of regions. And therefore amongst those trees that are
transported from one place to another; some do bear fruit (as the Palms at
Genoa) some also bear, but imperfectly (as the Pepper-tree at Millaine.) There
are some that cannot grow, (as the wood of Aloes brought out of India into
Italy:) And some bear perfect fruit, because they can agree with the air, and
with the soil as well of one country as of another (as the Vines transported
out of Spain into India.) But above all, the calmenes of the air, and the
answerablenes of the place are of great efficacy in the natural property of
trees, and do often cause them to bear great quantity of fruit and blossoms,
and are the cause that some are always green. And therefore about the Grand
Cairo, and in the country of Elephants, the leaves do never fall off the
fig trees and vines: and in the Isles and other regions of the west Indies
discovered by the Spaniards, there is never a tree, but is always green. And
therefore there are diverse trees, both of one, and of diverse kinds also,
higher, greener, and fairer to behold in one place then in another. For in hot
and moist countries all plants grow greater, fuller of juice, and greener,
Property of the plants according to the quality of the regions where they grow.
if the proper nature of the plant do not hinder: and in hot and dry places
they are smaller and drier, and yet of no less virtue: But in moist and cold
regions, the plants are weak and full of sap. And they, which are hot by
nature grow broad and high; but the cold are small. Now all trees, whereof we
now particularly entreat, do by nature grow greatly for the most part, and
flourish a very long time. As Josephus records, that Abraham's Oak did yet
stand in his days: And there were betwixt the destruction of Jerusalem and
the death of Abraham, two thousand years. And next to the oak, the palm, the
beech, the oliue-tree, the elm, and the pine tree do flourish longest.

Now will I proceed to a particular description of some trees, the most
worthy to be considered of: Of the pine.
amongst which the Pine chalengeth the first place: whereof there are two
kinds: one is domestical, and the other savage. The domestical kind has an
infinite sort of branches upon the very uppermost top of the stock, which
spread round about it, being very thick of leaves, which are pointed in the
end, and long; it bears plenty of great and sound apples, wherein are
certain hard kernels enclosed, as black as soote, in which the fruit is
found, being covered with a thin yellow skin, easy to get off, by pilling
it with your fingers. And this fruit is sweet and pleasant in taste, of a
fat and oily substance. For the savage or wild one, there are many sorts of
them. Some grow on mountains, others on the sea coast. They of the mountains
are of three kinds. For there are some that be highest of all the rest, which
abound in the forests of Bohemia, Silasia, Polonia, and other places, whereof
the country men make pitch. Which are every whit like to the domestical sort,
saving that their apples be less: for they be not much greater then those of
Cypress, but they are a little longer, and more sound, and husked like those
of the domestical Pine, being full of gum, and of a sweet sent. The second
kind of these mountain Pines are such as have no stock or trunk, but sprout
their branches out of their root close to the earth, running along the ground
till they attain to ten or fifteen cubits length: they bear fruit like
unto the other, but of a bigger sise, and fuller of gum; and are found in
many places of Italy. Finally there are many other which are of goodly height,
and yet not so high as those of the first kind, neither have they the bark of
their stocks yellow like the other pines: likewise their fruit is somewhat
enclining toward red, but more brittle then all the rest. And the kernels of
them are three square and crooked, and in taste somewhat like those of the
garden pine, saving that they leave a certain quick sharpenes in the mouth
(which is proper to all wild trees) and they abound in the territory of
Trent. And the gum that proceeds out of all these sorts of pines, is white
and sweet. The sea pines are of two sorts, differing only in the greatness and
smalnesse of their fruit: and do all of them produce white odoriferous gum,
which turns into a thin liquor, Qualities, and virtues of the pine kernels.
whereof men make black pitch. Moreover, as concerning the fruit of the pine
in general; it is most certain, that therein are many great virtues and
properties, and that it is very profitable for man's body. For it is of a
moderate temperature, but that it enclineth more toward heat. It ripeneth, it
mollifieth, it resolves, it fatneth, and it nourishes well. It corrects the
humors, which are corrupted in the intrailes; nevertheless it is hard in
digestion: and therefore to such as are cold of nature, the kernels are
ministered with honey; and to such as are hot, with sugar, to correct the
strength of those kernels. They do help (being often eaten) the pains of the
sinews, and are good for those that be troubled with the Sciatica, palsy,
shaking, and numbnes of members. They cleanse the lungs and the corruption of
them, purging out all clammie hummors and rottennes. They are profitable
against the cough, and the corruption of the reins and bladder: wherefore they
ease them much who piss but drop by drop, and feel their urine burn. They
fatten lean folks, and being taken with the juice of purslaine, they do
help eruptions of the stomach. Also the picked leaves of a green pine being
stamped and drunk with wine, do appease pains of the heart. Other properties
of some parts of the pine.
But the patient must abstain from all fat meats. Of the scales that cover
the pine apples being sodde in very sharp vinegar, is made a singular perfume
against the Dysenteria. And the water of those apples very green, being
distilled through a limbecke does wash out the wrinckles of the face. Moreover
of the oldest pines is pitch made, which is called Nauall, by reason that it is
very good to pitch ships: which to do men cut down the pines with an hatchet
which are become full of gummie juice, and hew them in pieces, as they do
other trees to make coals of. Whereupon let us note, that they which inhabit
mountains say, that it is a malady amongst pines, when not only the heart
thereof, but the outward part of the stock does convert into a gummie
substance: which happens to them through great abundance of liquor, which
causes them to die, even as too much fat suffocateth living creatures. And
out of this gummie wood is pitch, by woondrous skill extracted, and the oil
and foot are separated, which have diverse properties in medicines.

Let us now speak of the Firre-tree, Of the firre-tree, and of the rosin which
it produces.
which grows vprightest of all the trees, and therefore is very fit to
emploie in all works: There are such high ones, that in Sweden some are seen
of an hundred foot in length, and that of some, which are straight and of a
like thicknes every where without knots, men may make work of an hundred and
ten foot long. This tree bears fruit of a spanne long, composed of certain
scales, being one compiled upon another, under which the white seed is
included, without any juice in them. It produces an exquisite liquor and gum
betwixt two barks, which is called in vulgar Italian (Lagrimo) that is, the
Tear of the Firre-tree, and it runs under the first bark, which being
opened, lies like the matter of an old impostume. This gum is liquid, of a
very good smell, and somewhat sharp in taste. It is very good for green
wounds, not only because it searches them, but also because it is
mundificatiue and incarnatiue. Being assumed in drink, it cleanses the reins
of gravel, and does much assuage the pains of the gout, and of the sciatica.
It heals marueilously well all wounds of the head, so that no other thing be
applied thereto.

The Cypress is likewise rich in beauty and in properties: Of the cypress
tree, and the properties thereof.
of which trees there are male and female: the female grows always pointed
toward the top, and the male has his branches spread abroad. Each of them is a
very high tree, straight, and bearing branches only in the top thereof. And
this tree is driest of all others, having the humor very fat, and well
digested. And therefore it agrees not with dung and excrements, and waxes
dry near to waters. The wood thereof is odoriferous, and loses not the sent
by oldnes, neither is eaten with worms, nor does rot through any fault: but
the leaves of this tree beaten into powder, and strowed amongst apparel, or
with the seed, do defend them that worms cannot annoy them. It bears fruit
three times a year, which is hard and sound, containing the seed within. It
casts out of the stock some gum, but very little, like unto Turpentine, and
almost of the same nature. This tree is very common in Italy. But the right
and natural country thereof is the isle of Candie: for in what place soever
the ground be there removed and tilled, if nothing else be sown therein, the
Cypress will presently spring up of it self. The decoction of their nuts made
in strong vinegar, asswageth the pain of the teeth, if the mouth be often
washed therewith. So much does the decoction of the leaves. Which nuts being
stamped and drunk with old wine, appease the ^ough. They are very good, and
the leaves also, to search great wounds in tough bodies. Whereby it appears,
that this tree has the virtue to dry up, without much sharpnes and heat, as
the taste does testify. For one shall taste therein very little sharpnes, much
bitterness, and more sowernesse.

Of the cedar, and of the gum thereof.
The Cedar also is a tree that grows very big, and bears fruit almost like
to that of the Cypress tree, but a little bigger. There be some that bear no
fruit although that they bud. And that which bears fruit buddeth not, and the
new fruit appears thereupon before the old is perfectly ripe. Out of this
tree runs an excellent white and liquid gum, which in time is by heat of
the sun congealed into grains. In Syria, and especially in mount Libanon the
Cedars grow very high, and in great plenty, and are very like to Firre-trees.
Their branches from the bottom to the top, are almost spread and placed round
about it, in fashion like the spokes of a wheel, and the highest are evermore
shortest. Wherefore this tree a far off seems to represent the figure of a
Pyramid. The heart or pith of the Cedar is very hard, sweet, and red: wherefore
the ancients supposed, that the wood could not wear, nor become worme-eaten:
but would endure for ever. So Solomon caused the holy temple of God in
Jerusalem to be builded thereof: and the pagans made their statues of it,
thinking it would endure as long as marble or brass. Some say that the
greatest which was ever seen, was hewed in Cypress to make the gallie of
Demetrius, which had eleven oars upon a side. For it was one hundred and
thirty foot long, and as thick as three men might fadome. There are also in
many places of Greece, two kinds of small Cedars, which are like to the
Juniper tree. Now all Cedars are of nature hot and dry in the third degree:
And the oil, which is made of their gum approaches to the fourth degree, and
is very subtle. Wherefore it does easily and without pain rot soft and
delicate flesh: but in hard bodies it operateth with more time and difficulty.
It dries dead bodies, and preserves them from putrefaction, by consuming the
superfluous humors, without touching the sound parts: but in living bodies, the
heat which consists in them, does augment the forces of this oil, which
causes it to burn the tender flesh. Wherefore having such virtue, it is no
marvel if it kill nits, lice, worms, and vermin in the ears: and if being
applied it kills the child in the mothers womb, and being dead does void it
out, with many other effects which physicians attribute unto it. But I commend
to you (ASER) the sequel of our discourse concerning trees.


Of trees bearing Cinnamon, Cassia, Frankincense, Myrrh and Cloves. Chap. 69.
ASER. THe love of ones native soil has a marvelous power in all things: for
nature produces in some places such stubborn plants, that for any endeavor and
pains, which one may take with them, yet can they not be retained or kept but
in their own proper ground. Many great personages both in France and in Italy
have taken pains to tame them, and cause them to grow in gardens, orchards,
and other most pleasant places, as any in the world. But as rusticall
mountainers despise the delights and gallantnes of cities, and esteem not of
civility and honesty of manners, not being able to live any where at ease and
pleasure but in their own cottages: so it seems that many plants, which are
brought amongst us, and husbanded with great care and labor, despising the
sweetness of the air, the beauty of gardens, the pleasant watring of
fountains, and the goodly company of infinite herbs and trees already made
familiar, have at last retired into their own deserts and wildernesses, and
into the place of their original. Now of the number of these is the Cinnamon,
which though that whiles Rome flourished (as many authors record) it was
planted in diverse places, yet now is there not any of it to be found
throughout Italy, nay in all Europe. But Asia abounds therewith in many
places, yea so does Arabia foelix in diverse parts, and much more India,
especially in one island called Monorique, the mountains whereof bear plenty
of Cinamon-trees.

Of the tree that bears cinnamon.
This tree is somewhat like to our Laurel tree, having many branches, at the
end whereof, it bears very small blossoms, which being dried by the heat
of the sun, and fallen on the ground, there is formed thereof a little round
fruit, not much bigger then an hasell nut, out of the kernel whereof the
Islanders do extract good oil, wherewith the diseased do rub their sinews,
and other in^^^^ parts. The king of Monorique receives great pr^^ through
these trees: for none may be permitted to touch them without his license. And
certain months of the year he causes some twigges and syons to be cut, the
smallest and finest that may be in the tree, and the bark of them to be
peeled off, which is sold very dear to such strangers as traffic therein.
For this is the best of the tree. But the Cinnamon which is brought hither, is
nothing else but the second bark, that is peeled off, which being cut with a
little knife, rowleth up together of it self, Property of cinnamon.
and changes color. Moreover the property of Cinnamon is to dry and heat to
the third degree: for it consists of very subtle parts, and is very sharp
in taste, and of a certain quick astriction: by means whereof it takes away
and dissolueth the superfluities of the body, and fortifieth the members. There
is a distilled water made of Cinnamon, which is strong in smell and taste, and
is of great virtue. For take a pound of Cinnamon, braie it, and put it into a
vessel with four pound of Rose Water, and half a pound of white wine: then
set your vessel being very close stopped, in warm water, and then make your
distillation in the same water, being placed upon a furnace, wherein the fire
is temperately maintained, in such sort that the said warm water do always
boil. And this distilled water is very sovereign against all diseases that
come through cold, for it dissolueth and consumes fleame and clammie humors,
and chaseth away all windines. It does especially comfort the stomach, the
liver, the spleen, the brain, and the sinews. It is a singular and present
remedy against faintness of the heart, against pains and prickings of the
mouth and stomach: it resists poisons, and bitings of venomous beasts; it
provoke urine, and the flowers in women: It is good for those that have short
breath, that are sick of the palsy, or have the falling sickness. And in a
word, when need is to heat, to open, to pierce, to resolve, and to comfort;
this water is very profitable therefore.

Now let us speak of the tree that bears Cassia. Of the tree bearing cassia.
For it is in the number of the greatest and most singular trees. The wood
thereof is massiue, close, of the color of box near the bark, and black in
the midst like Ebonie. When it is green, it has a bad smell, but this savor
does wear away being dry. It bears certain cods, which hang upon the
branches very long, round, and massiue, which being ripe, wax black and
somewhat reddish. And they are full of a soft and black sap, like to thick
cream, not sticking altogether like marrow in a bone, but is contained as it
were in little cases, being one separated from another by thin skins set very
close together: betwixt every one of which there is a very hard grain. In
Egypt and in India are very many of these Cassia trees, and in the isle of
Taprobana. Their cods are not very great, but clear, heavy, and very full:
in such sort, that if they be shaken, one cannot hear the grains rattle
therein, and these are the best. The sap or juice of them is hot and moist in
the third degree. Property of the cassia.
It is lenitiue and loosening, and purifieth the blood. It stancheth heat of
choler, and does moderately loosen the belly. It is marvelous profitable for
those that cannot make water, especially if it be used with medicines that
provoke urine. It purges choler and fleame, and mollifieth the breast and the
throat, and resolves inflammations therein: it cleanses the raines from
gravel and sand, if it be drunk with the decoction of licor as and other
simples fit to provoke urine: and if it be often taken, it hinders the stone
in the raines. Besides all this, it is good against hot agues, and being
outwardly applied, it asswageth inflammations.

Amongst aromaticall trees, the tree that bears frankincense is worthy to
be considered of. Of the franckincense tree.
The form thereof is somewhat like to a pine, and out of it runs a liquor, that
afterward waxes hard, which we call frankincense: whereof there are two
sorts. One sort is gathered in summer in the dogge-daies, in the greatest
burning heat of the year, at which time the bark is split, being then
fullest of moisture. And this frankincense is whitish, transparent and pure.
The other kind is gathered in the Spring time, by means of another incision,
which is made in this tree in winter, and it is somewhat read, approaching
nothing near either in goodness or value, or else in weight or virtue to the
first. Arabia has many forests wherein frankincense is found. And the
inhabitants of the country do lance the trees with a knife to cause them
distill gum the better, or else the liquor whereof it is made: Property of
franckincense.
amongst which trees there are some, that may yield above threescore pounds
every year. Moreover being taken in drink it is very good against Dysenterias
and fluxes of the belly. It increases the memory, chaseth away sadness,
reioiceth the heart, and is profitable for all the passions thereof. It also
staieth the bleeding at nose, being incorporated with the white of an egg and
aloes, and put into the nosthrils in a tent. It likewise appeaseth the pains
of the megrim, being mixed with myrrh and glaire of an egg, and applied to the
forehead and temples. It is also hot in the second degree, and dry in the
first, and has some astriction, which is but little found in that which is
white.

Of the tree that bears mirrh.
Let us speak of myrrh, which grows abundantly in the same regions where
frankincense does. The tree which bears it is full of prickles in some
places, being of five or six cubits high, very hard and crooked, and thicker
then the frankincense tree, the bark smooth like a laurel tree, and the
leaves like those of the olive tree, but rougher, having certain sharp
prickles at the end. Out of this tree there distilleth a gummie liquor like
tears, which hardneth by little and little, and is of color somewhat green,
and is clear and sweet, though somewhat unpleasant in taste through
bitterness. Whereby it appears that the myrrh which here we have is not
right, for all these marks are not found therein, but it is black, and as if
it were scorched, mouldie and mossie on the outside. Which we need not think
strange, considering that even in Alexandria, where our men do commonly buie
myrrh, there is scarce any to be gotten which is not sophisticate. For the
Arabian Mahumetans, who bring it thither, and sell it, do therein use a
thousand deceits, mocking at such Christians as traffike with them, and at
their curiosity. There is great difference then betwixt natural myrrh, which
distilleth out of the tree; and artificial being sophisticated with gum, and
mixed with other things, Property of mirrh.
such as is ordinary in our Apothecaries shops. Now the right myrrh is of hot
and dry quality in the second degree: and being drunk, it is very
profitable for those that have the quartaine ague. It is used in Antidotes
against poisons, against hurts by venomous beasts, and against the plague. And
being applied to wounds in the head, it will heal them.

Let us now speak of the tree that bears cloves, Of the Cloue-tree.
which grows in the southeast countries in certain isles of the Indian sea.
The stock thereof is like to that of a box tree, and so is the wood. It
flourishes almost like to a laurell-tree, and the fruit grows in this
manner. At the end of every little branch there does first appear a budde,
which produces a flower or blossom of purple color, afterward by little and
little the fruit is formed, and comes to that pass, as we behold it, being
red when it grows out of the bloome: but by heat of the Sun it waxes
black afterward in such sort as it is brought hither. The inhabitants of the
country, especially of the Isles of Molucca, do plant and set cloue-trees
almost in the same manner, as we in Europe do our vines. And that they may
preserve this fruit and spice a long time; they make pits in the earth, wherein
they put the cloves, till such time as merchants come to carry them away. This
tree is full of branches, and bears many blossoms white at first, afterward
green, and at last red. The people there shake and beat the uppermost boughs
of the tree having first made clean the place underneath: for no herb grows
near about it, because it draws all the moisture of the earth to it self.
And the cloves so shaken down are put to dry two or three days, and are then
shut up till they be sold. That cloue which sticks still fast to the tree,
does wax great; yet differs not from the rest, except in oldnes: though some
have held opinion that the greatest are of the male kind. This tree springs
of it self, out of one only corn of a cloue, which has fallen on the
ground, and it indureth an hundred years, as the inhabitants report. The
virtue of cloves is very great. For they are good for the liver, Of the
property of Cloves.
the stomach, and the heart. They help digestion, and bind the flux of the
belly. They clear the sight, consume and take away the web, and clouds in
the eyes. They heat and dry to the third degree: they strengthen and open both
together, and are very piercing. Being beaten to powder and drunk with wine,
or the juice of Quinces, they stay vomitings; cause lost appetite to return;
fortify the stomach and the head. They heat very well a cold liver. And for
this cause they are ministered very profitably to such as have the dropsy,
especially to those, who have water spread throughout all their body. The
smell of them fetches those again that have swouned, and being chawed they
sweeten the breath. They are good for such as are troubled with the falling
sickness, with the palsy, and with the lethargy. Being eaten or taken in
perfume, they preserve from the plague, and are very commodious for such as
are subject to catarrhes, and for such as are stuffed in the nose, if they
receive the smoke thereof into their nosthrils. In brief their use is
infinitely diverse and profitable, both in physic and in our ordinary diet,
whereby we restore nature. And since we are in this talk, let it be your part
(AMANA) to entreat of other trees bearing spices.


Of trees and plants that bear Nutmegs, Ginger, and Pepper. Chap. 70.
AMANA. AMongst five kinds of nuts which the earth produces, to wit, the
common Nut, the Nut of India, Nux Metella, Nux vomica, and the Nutmeg, this is
the most singular and of rarest virtue: which has taken name from musk, by
reason of the sweet and pleasant sent thereof. Now they who have traveled
into India make great report, Of the Nutmegge tree.
that the trees which bear Nutmegs, do abundantly grow in an Isle named
(Banda) and in many other Isles of the Moluccaes: and that it is as great, and
as long branched as a walnut-tree with us: and that there is but small
difference in the growing of nutmegs, and of common nuts. Moreover, this fruit
is at first covered with two barks, whereof the outtermost is hairie or mossie,
under which is a thin bloome, which like a net or fillet does embrace and
cover the nut, and is like a skaule or coife called (Mace) whereof there is
great account made, and it is reckoned amongst the most precious and rarest
spices: which we plainly see in those nutmegs that are brought whole from the
Indies, being preserved in sugar or in juice of carrouges. The other bark which
covers the nutmeg is like the shell of an hasell nut, out of which they take
it to bring unto us, which is very easy to do by reason that the time of
ripening being come, this hard shell opens and shows an inward rind that
enuironeth the nut about, which we call as aforesaid Mace: which at that time
appears as red as skarlet; but when the nut is dry, it turns yellowish, and
is thrice as dear as the nuts themselves. That which is more to be admired in
this tree, is, that it bears the fruit thereof, being so excellent, naturally
without any industry or husbandry of man. Moreover, the best nuts are the
newest (not rotten) the heauiest, fullest, most oily, and abounding in
moisture, so that if one thrust a needle thereinto, there does presently some
juice issue. They are hot and dry in the second degree and restrictiue. They
make sweet breath being chewed, Property of the Nutmegge.
and take away all stinking smell thereof. They clear the sight, strengthen
the stomach and liver; abate the swelling of the spleen, provoke urine, stay
the flux of the belly, drive away ventositie, and are marvelous good against
cold diseases in the womb. In sum, they have the same virtues that Cloves
have. And when they are green or new, being bruised and well heated in a
vessel, and then put into a press, there issues a licour, which being cold,
is congealed like to new wax, and smells passing sweet, and is very
excellent for old griefs of the sinews and ioints engendered through cold.

Now speak we of Ginger and other spices, Of Ginger.
which for the most part grow in the same regions of Asia, and especially in
the Indies, and Molucca-isles, where Nutmegs abound. In them there is great
quantity of Ginger, which is a root, not of such a plant as may properly be
called a tree, but rather an herb, considering that it grows not very high,
but bears leaves like a cane or reed, which do wax green twice or thrice a
year. This root is very knottie, and not above three or four spans deep in
the ground, and sometimes so big, that it waigheth a pound. They that dig up
these roots, do always leave a space between two knots in the pit, and cover
it again with earth as being the seed of this plant, to receive the fruit
thereof the next ensuing year, that is the roots, which shall be newly
sprouted. In Calecut the green Ginger is steeped and conserved in sugar, or in
a kind of honey that is taken out of certain cods or husks, and is conuaied
into Italy, where it is much more esteemed then that of Venice. For that which
is there is made of dry roots artificially mollified, Property of Ginger.
and which want much of their virtue and power. Moreover Ginger is very
profitable: For it helps digestion, it looseneth the belly moderately, it is
good for the stomach, and profitable against all things that may dim, or
blind the sight. It heateth much, not at first tasting like pepper. For which
cause we may not think it to consist of so subtle parts: the heat would else
presently declare it self, and it would suddenly become hot in act. Whereupon
Ginger is known to be composed of a gross and indigested substance, not dry
and earthie, but moist and watrie, which is the cause that it does easily
corrupt and rot, to wit, by reason of the superfluous moisture thereof. For
such things as are very dry, or moistened by a digested, natural, and moderate
humiditie, are not subject to corruption and rottenness. Thence also it
proceeds, that the heat which comes of Ginger does endure longer then that
of pepper. For as dry stubble is soon on fire, and soon burnt out: even so
is the heat that proceeds from simples, and dry drugs. But that which
issues from moist ones, as out of green wood, does inflame slowlier, and
endure longer.

Of Pepper and the diverse kinds thereof.
Pepper does grow abundantly in the Indies, and especially in the two isles
called (the greater, and lesser Iaua) It does grow upon little trees, the
leaves whereof resemble much the leaves of a Citron-tree, the fruit whereof is
no greater then a ball. And according to the diverse places where Pepper
grows, it is different in kind: yea in one place there are diverse sorts, and
chiefly round and long Pepper. Now in some isles (as along the river
Ganabara) when the inhabitants plant Pepper, they bury the root thereof near
to some other fruit trees, and oftentimes near to young palms or date trees,
upon the top whereof the twigs or syons do at length grow. Which the rods and
small branches pulled from pepper trees do likewise, being planted with the same
trees, which they embrace running to the very top of them: where the pepper
hangs in clusters, like the grapes of a wild vine, but closer, and thicker.
And when it is ripe they gather it, and lay it in the sun to dry upon
lattises made of palm trees, till such time as it become black and wrinkled,
which is commonly done in three days. And this pepper is round. But the trees
that bear long pepper do differ from the rest especially in leaves and fruit:
For the leaves are sharper at the end, and the pepper hangs upon the tree
like clusters of nuts, made and heaped with many little grains. There is yet
another kind of pepper, called (Ethiopian pepper) or (pepper of the Negros)
which grows in cods like beans, or pease: and the grains thereof are a
little less then those of black pepper. Moreover all pepper is hot in the
fourth degree, and therefore it burns and blistereth the body, so that the
use thereof cannot but be dangerous, though it have many secret properties
against the quiuerings and shakings that accompany fevers, which usually come
to one; and against the cough, and all maladies of the breast. There is also a
kind of watrie pepper, which grows near to slow waters, that run but
softly. The stalk thereof is knottie, massiue, having many pits, out of which
the branches do grow. The leaves of it are like to mints, saving that they be
greater, softer, and whiter. The seed is sharp and strong, and grows upon
little twigs near to the leaves in manner of grapes. It is so named of the
places where it grows, and the likeness of taste, which it has with common
pepper. But we have spoken enough concerning spices. Let us now consider of
other most rare and singular trees, the wonder whereof declares the author of
nature to be exceeding admirable, as we may note (ARAM) by your discourse.


Of the Date-tree, of the Baratha or tree of India, of the Gehuph and of
Brasill. Chap. 71.
ARAM. THose Portugals, Spaniards, and some Frenchmen that in our time have
nauigated through the Atlanticke sea toward the south, and from thence toward
the cast unto Calicut, Taprobana, and other isles of the Indian sea, and
regions unknown to ancient Cosmographers, do make credible report unto us of
so many diverse singularities which they have beheld, that we should be too
ungrateful toward them, if so often as we behold any of them in their
writings, we should not attribute praise unto them for their laudable
curiosity, which has urged them to such discoueries, considering that they
are like so many mirrors, to represent unto us that great Architect of nature,
who amongst the very Barbarians has engraven images of himself in every work
of his omnipotency. Now among such trees as they have written of, and which
(as me seems) are worthy of greatest admiration, although they be not
altogether so rare as many others, the Date-trees require place, which are very
common in Arabia, Egypt, and almost in all parts of Africa, and in Iudaea, as
likewise in many Isles of Greece, and regions of Europe (where they bear no
fruit, Of the Date-tree.
which is not so throughout all Africa) for the Palms, or Date-trees bear in
many places a sweet, pleasant and very delicate fruit to eat, and this tree is
very high, and has the stock thereof very hard, bearing no branches but round
about the top, with the ends of them hanging down to the ground-wards. It
buddeth forth many blossoms, hanging at certain fine small stalks, clustred
together in figure like to clusters of saffron, but much less, and white: and
of those are formed reddish Dates, which have a very hard, long, and crested
stone within them. And there are of these trees male and female; which are
discerned, in that the femall buddeth without blossoms, Marvel of the female
Palm Tree.
or flowers. And that which is most admirable in this diversity of kind, is,
that the female being separated from the male, will hang down her branches
and wither, turning her self that way, whither her male has been carried: so
that the inhabitants of the country fearing to loose her, take of the earth
and of the root of the male, which they lay about the foot of the female, who
through this means springs, renews strength, and bears fruit. It is
noted in Date-trees that there are some, which naturally follow the Sun, which
way so ever he turns, as many other plants do, which having a sympathy and
secret inclination to this star, as acknowledging his virtue, and that their
vigor is derived from him, do always behold him, they themselves loosing
color, when he is far off from them. And this is also very wonderful in the
Date tree, that being dead, it reuiueth of it self, by means of the proper
roots thereof, which being (very deep under ground) maintained by the
radical humor, there do at length spring out of them certain stalks, which
are afterward sustained by the Sun, there nourished and made trees, Drink
that distilleth out of the Date-tree.
bearing fruit as before. Moreover out of the trunck of Date-trees, many people
(especially the Negroes) do extract a licour (which they use for beuerage in
stead of wine) by making a large slit therein with a certain instrument a foot
or two above the earth. And this licour is of the color of whay, very good to
drink, and almost as much inebriating or as strong as wine, for which cause, it
must be very oftentimes mixed with water. And when it runs out of the
stock, it is as sweet as new wine: but it loses that sweetenes from day to
day, becoming more pleasant to drink, when it tastes somewhat more tart,
because it does then slake thirst best. They also draw out of this tree
certain threeds as fine as our thread, Tapistry made of Palm trees.
whereof they make tapistrie work, which serve like other things to cover them:
which need not seem very strange, considering that in many other places they
beat the barks of some trees so hard (after they have wet it) that they do
draw it out so fine, and weaue it so artificially, as one would suppose it to
be some fair and thin taffata. Such as have sailed to Manicongo, and along the
coast of Ethiopia, do assure us thereof in their writings. For if that cotton
comes from trees, and silk is spunne by worms (as all men know) what should
hinder the foresaid things to be of such ability through the ordinance of God
established in nature, to the end that men might receive from these plants,
that which is needful for them, and which they cannot obtain by the means
that are common to others? But if any make doubt thereof, because it is not
notoriously known unto all, then must we shut the door against al things that
seem rare. But what shall we say to that, which is taught us by many grave
Authors, that of the fruit of these trees, called (the Thebane Date) being
dried in the sun, til such time as it may be ready to be ground, Bread made of
Dates.
men use to make bread, which is a common practice amongst those of that
country? Moreover, for the particular virtues and properties of Dates, they
are so much different, Property of Dates.
as there be diverse kinds of them: for some are dry and binding (as those of
Egypt) others are soft, moist, and sweet (as those that grow in Syria,
Palestina, and Jericho.) And the rest are in mean betwixt these two kinds: and
all are hard in digestion, and breed headache. Some say that two green dates
(having their stones taken out, and then filled up with powder of Vermilion)
being eaten, do keep women with child that they may not abort: and that being
dried they be good to eat by such as spit blood, to such as have a weak
stomach, and are troubled with the bloody flux.

Now let us speak of a tree, Of a tree serving for bread, oil, wine, and
vinegar.
that does much resemble the Date-tree, and is no less worthy of wonder
then it, because it serves for bread, wine, oil, and vinegar. This tree is
called by the Arabians (Baratha) and of some (Iansialindi) which is as much to
say, as, the Indian tree, and the Indians name it (Trican) and the fruit
thereof (Nihor) or Cocco. It is found in many Islands of India, chiefly in
Zamat, and in the circumiacent Isles, where the people live upon the fruit of
this tree, which fruit is as big as a man's head: and is that, which we term
(An Indie Nut.) The outtermost bark of this tree is all green, and above two
fingers thick: amongst which they find certain fillets, whereof they make
cords, wherewith the inhabitants of the country sow their boats together.
Within this bark is another, which they burn and beat to dust: afterward
they use this powder as a medicine for their sick. Under this second bark
again is a certain white pith covered, which is about a finger thick, and
this they eat in stead of bread, with flesh and fish. And to make it the
better, they dry it first, and then bring it into meal, and make very good
bread thereof, as the ancients in old time made of Acornes and of chestnuts,
for want of corn. In the midst of this pith they find a very clear, sweet,
and cordial water, which being curdled, and converted into an oily substance,
they boil it, and then this mixture becomes so fat, as the best butter that
can be made amongst us. But if they would have vinegar, they set this water in
the sun without making it to boil, and it will become clear and sharp, and
as white as milk. For their drinking liquor, it runs out of the branches in
great abundance. And two of these trees suffice for the nourishment of an whole
family. Furthermore, their fruit is hot in the second degree, and moist in the
first. Property of Indie Nuts.
There is oil drawn out of it very good against the hemorrhoides, and which
heals the pains of the reins and of the knees, and purges the belly of
worms. This Indie-Nut brings also men's bodies into a good fat estate, and
restores lean and consumed persons.

A tree named Gehuph.
In the Isles of the Malucoes, especially in Taprobana does likewise grow a
tree of a marvelous property and effect, which is named in their language
(Gehuph) and of the Indians (Cobban) It grows very high, but the leaves
thereof are small. The bark is all yealow, and the fruit big and round like a
ball, having a nut enclosed within it, wherein is found a marvelous bitter
kernel: the taste whereof upon the tongue does near approach to the savor of
Angelica-roote; the fruit is very good to staunch thirst, the kernel (for all
it is so bitter) does much surpass it in sweetenes through the excellency
thereof. For they of the country do make an oil, which they keep carefully,
because it is very good against the pain of the liver, and spleen, whether it
be taken inwards, or outwardly applied to the diseased part. They keep them
also from the crampe. This tree likewise yields a certain gum, whereof they
use plasters against all pains of their members.

But amongst many singular trees, found out in our days in the South in the
wild country, that is one, which does serve to die with, which has been a
great commodity to Merchaunts, and a means of new voyages for such, as had
accustomed to go to sea: who entering into those countries, when they beheld the
Savages decked with many fair plumes of diverse colors, and that they had
their bodies likewise diversely painted, they made inquiry by what means they
became so colored: Of Brasill, and other trees sit for tincture.
who showed them a certain tree, which we name (Brasill) and the Savages call
(Orauoutan). This tree is very fair to look upon, having the outter rind of
grayish color, and the wood within red, and especially the heart, which is the
most excellent part of all the tree: and therewith merchants do chiefly furnish
themselves. This tree has leaves like the Box tree, as small, but thicker, and
fuller, and always green: and it bears not any fruit, or gum. That which
grows in the land of Morpion, and at Cabo Frio, is better then any other. And
there also is great store and quantity of other trees serving for tincture,
and every one of a sundry color. One is so red, that it imitateth in fresh
color the finest scarlet of the world. Another has the inside so yealow, as
nothing can be seen to approach nearer the pure color thereof. Some are all
black, and others reddish: and there are some of so fair a purple color, as
the ancients never used fairer. Moreover there is found a tree as white as fine
paper, marvelous fair, and very pleasant to behold: which might have been
very good, in times past, to make tablets to write in, then when men were
ignorant of the use of paper. In fine we have no color, be it simple, or
compound, whereof there be not some trees to represent it naturally in the
country of Savages. But here let us leave strange trees, and speak somewhat
of our ordinary trees. And because that the history of them were sufficient to
make up a very great volume, we will content our selves to consider upon a few
of such, as shall seem to us most fit for our purpose, that we may conclude
the discourse of this day, and of this matter together: as you (ACHITOB) shall
presently perform.


Of the Citron-tree, Limon-tree, Orange-tree, Oliue-tree, and Pomegranate-tree.
Chap. 72.
ACHITOB. BEcause that Citron-trees, Limon-trees, and Orange Trees, do prosper
best in an hot and moist air, in a thin and tender soil, near to the sea
side, and where moisture abounds, they do not only abound in our Europe,
but also in many places of Asia and Africa, and in the Isles of the Savages
which have been discovered in our days. Now these three kind of trees have
like agreeablenes of nature, and do resemble each other in property and
virtue, Of the Citron-tree.
and therefore require one manner of culture. The Citron-tree is as great as
the Orange-tree and Limon-tree: and the leaves thereof are always green,
differing little or nothing from those of the Orange-tree, being all of them
pierced thorough with such little holes, that they can scarce be discerned. The
branches thereof be flexible, clad with a green bark, and thorny. It bears
blossoms somewhat purple, of the fashion of a bell, having some fillets
hanging in the midst of them, and they have fruit at all times. For when the
ripe citrons fall, there be others that wax ripe, and others that begin to bud.
But there is very great difference in this fruit, both in bigness and in taste.
For there are some as big as Melons, as those are upon the coast of Genoa, and
in the isles of the Adriaticke and Egean seas. Some are a little less: others
are as great as Limons, or a little greater, as are those of the Lake of Garda,
which are better with meat then all the rest, and taste more pleasa^tly. And
for the biggest, being not so good to eat (because they have more substance)
they are fit for Apothecaries to conserve them in sugar or in honey. All of
them bear the color of gold; they are long like Limons, having a thicker
rind, wrinkled without, and of a sweet smell. They have a sharp pith within,
full of juice, in which the grain is hidden, in figure like to barley corns,
being covered with an hard peele, and of bitter taste. They grow all the year
long, and are gathered when they be yellow. Moreover these trees are nourished
by the south wind, but are annoied by northern blasts. They are sowed in
their grains, and planted in twigs, boughs and graffes. Property of Citrons.
The property of their fruit is to resist poisons, which their grain does
chiefly effect. And the decoction of citrons does sweeten the breath, if one
wash his mouth with it. Being put whole into chests with apparel, they do not
only cause them to smell sweet, but do also defend them from moths. If they
be eaten raw, they are of hard digestion, and engender gross humors: but
having been confected in honey or sugar, they heat the stomach well, and
fortify it. They are good against melancholy, and all maladies proceeding
thereof. The grain is especially good against the stinging of serpents, being
taken in drink, and applied outwardly. Their sharp juice does repress
choler, and is very good against the plague: by means whereof physicians do
happily use the sirrope which is made of it against pestilent fevers. Likewise
the sharp and dry quality rules in the juice of citrons, and therefore it
is dry and cold in the third degree: but the rind thereof is dry, with much
bitterness: so that it is dry in the second degree, not cold, but temperate,
a little differing from the mean. Their meat is of gross and flegmaticke
substance, and their kernel bitter, and loosening, heating, and drying in the
second degree. If a citron be boiled whole in rose water and sugar, till such
time as it be all consumed into juice, and if one take every morning to the
quantity of a spoonefull of this juice, it will be a sovereign preservative
against the plague.

Limons also have the very same property, and their juice kills the itch of
the body, it cleanses the spots thereof, Of Limons.
destroieth worms, takes away pimples in the face, kills worms in the
belly, and being mingled with sirrope, it is singular good against hot and
contagious fevers. This same juice is of so strong and pearsing virtue, that if
you power it out twice or thrice fresh, and wash whole pearls therewith,
steeping them in it, and afterward expose them to the sun, they will within
five or six days become as soft as honey, in such sort that you may fashion
them how you list. Likewise if you steep for certain hours gold therein, it
will diminish in weight. In brief, limons do not much differ from the virtue
and nature of citrons: but they are commonly somewhat less, longer, and not of
so thick a rind, fuller of juice, sharper in taste, almost alike in seed, of
color pale.

Oranges are more round, and being ripe they have a very orient golden color,
Of Oranges, and of their fruit.
their peele is thicker then that of limons, and more bitter. The juice within,
whereof they be full, is not in all of one taste; for some are sweet, some
sower, and some tart. Orange Trees are always green like citron-trees. They
have leaves like laurel, broad, thick, smooth, sweet, and pointed. Their
branches likewise are flexible, pricklie, and covered with a green whitish
colored bark. Their blossoms are white, of a very excellent smell, and are
diligently gathered by perfumers, where there is any quantity, for the
composition of perfumes. Some also distill water of them, not only for the
excellency of the smell thereof, but also to serve in medicine, especially
against pestilent fevers, which cause blisters. Being taken in drink, it is
very profitable when need requires to have infected humors euacuated out of
the inner part of the body to the outtermost part by sweatings: for this water
does cause much sweating, and does greatly comfort the heart. The peele of
oranges is hotter, sharper, and bitterer in taste then that of citrons and
limons. And sweet oranges are hot in all parts: but the juice of all others is
cold, and resists corruption. Wherefore they are good against fevers, which
the sweet are not. Moreover their juice pressed out of the rind does easily
inflame: and does also penetrate through great tenuitie within a glass, even
to the wine therein contained.

Of the Oliue-tree.
The oliue-tree also is excellent amongst trees, and does require a warm and
temperate air as is that of Prouence. It is planted of twigs, and fair and
fruitful young branches pulled from off the boughs of the tree, being very
thick, and of a foot and half long. Oliue-trees have long pointed leaves,
thick, smooth, green above, and whitish underneath, bitter in taste, and
somewhat sharp. They bud in Iulie, and have white flowers hanging in clusters,
out of which grow the fruit, green at first, and as they ripen paler; then
wax they purple, and at last turn black. They are gathered in the latter
months of the year, being no sooner ripe. They are strowed upon the floor,
till such time as they become wrinckled. Afterward they are ground, and then
put into the press with hot water, and so they yield their oil. The wood of
the oliue-tree is fair, full of veins, speckled, massy, and burns as well
green as dry. It is in no wise subject to vermin, especially so long as it
is planted, because of the odor thereof which is strong, yea it defends all
other plants therefrom, which are near unto it, as likewise through the
bitterness thereof it causes Cabbages and Lettuse to die, and all other moist
herbs, which are sowed in the plot with it. Of the use of Olives.
Olives are gathered for two occasions, either that oil may be extracted out
of them, or that they may be reserved for bankets, wherein they are served to
excite the appetite: but all kinds of olives do not serve indifferently for
these two uses: for the greatest are best to eat, and the least to draw oil
out of. They which are kept for feasts are conserved in brine, and salted
vinegar, in such sort as they retain their natural verdure. For the property
of the olive, it has in it a very restringent virtue; for the decoction of the
leaves in a clyster, staieth the flux of the belly: and the juice pressed out
of the leaves with white wine and rain water, restrains all manner of
bloody flixe. The licour which distilleth out of the green wood as it
burns, heals the itch, tetters, and ringwormes. New olives being eaten
provoke the appetite, and get a good stomach, although they harden the belly.
Being very ripe they are moderately hot, otherwise they are more binding and
cooling. The oil that is extracted out of olives is of singular virtue, being
either applied outwardly, or taken inwardly, according to the indisposed parts
of the body: it looseneth and mollifieth the belly, dulleth the malice of
poisons, and does subtly drive them away, yea if any venim or burning happen
on the skin of the body, and begin to make an ulcer or sore there, nothing is
better to heal this hurt, then to anoint it with new fresh oil of olives.

The Pomegranate tree also is to be no less esteemed of, Of the Pomegranate
tree, and of the fruit thereof.
then the forenamed trees, because of the excellency of the fruit thereof. The
leaves of it resemble those of the Oliue-tree, of a darck-greene color, very
thick, and full of many red strakes, hanging by a red stalk. The branches are
pliable, and full of prickles. The blossoms red, and open like bells, the mouth
of them cut in fashion of a star: out of which proceed thin red leaves, with
certain small seeds hanged by the midst, like them in a rose. The fruit is
covered with a rind like unto leather, red without, and yealow within, full of
infinite pointed grains, red, full of a wine-like juice, with a stone in them.
And these grains are separated one from another with maruailous cunning of
nature, by fine thin yealow skins. Moreover there are three sorts of
Pomegranates, sweet, sharp, and winie. And the quality of them all is
restringent, but not alike. For by their taste you may judge of their
difference. And their grains are more binding and drying, then their juice:
the rind more then the grains; and the blossoms have the same virtue with
the fruit. And the powder of a Pomegranate, dried in an oven, in a new earthen
pot close stopped, being taken in drinck, is maruailous singular to stay the
flux of the belly. The leaves also of a Pomegranate tree well beaten, or the
juice of them mixed with oil of roses, does very much ease inueterated pains
of the head, being often laid to the forehead. The boughs of this tree do
chase away venomous beasts; for which cause the ancients were wont to lay them
over, and under their beds. The decoction of the root being drunck, does also
kill great worms in the belly, and does void them out. Now have we said
enough concerning trees for the subject by us undertaken: To morrow we will
discourse of the most singular herbs and roots, to the end that in each sort
of all kinds of creatures, we may have somewhat wherein to acknowledge in the
chiefest manner the infinite power, and unspeakable bounty of him, who has
made all these things for the use of man. It shall be then your charge (ASER) to
begin to entreat concerning simples.


The end of the ninth days work.
THE TENTH DAYS WORK.
Of Mallows, Wild Mallows, Purple Violets, Betonie, Ceterach, and Saint
Iohns-Worte. Chapter 73.
ASER. THE knowledge of Symples has always been had in such estimation
amongst the Ancients, that many great Monarchs both Grecians and Romans,
although they were much troubled in the government of their estates, have
nevertheless studied how to obtain this science, and to illustrate it. For
indeed it is not only pleasant and delectable, but also very profitable and
necessary. And for this cause they have been much commended who have
diligently written books concerning plants, and concerning the virtues of
them. And surely we are not a little beholding to their diligence, by reason of
the commodities that do thereby redound unto us daily for the maintenance of
our health, which is the thing most to be desired of us in all the world. For
so much then as we have so many goodly volumes amongst us, that all persons may
thereby with small travel become learned in this part of physic, which is
abundantly therein entreated of, we will satisfy our selves to pass away this
day in discoursing only concerning the most singular herbs and roots, which
we could therein note, and as we yet do bear in memory.

All herbs may be divided into two kinds, one is under the name of
pot-herbes, the other of phisick-herbes: although in very truth, there is in
all of them, yea in many of those which are most common, very apt and proper
virtues for the aid and maintenance of health, and healing of diseases. But
omitting those which are used in common food, and which are well known to
every man, we will only speak of the most excellent in property, in respect
of their marvelous effects in the nature of men. Amongst which, although
Mallows be very common, yet are they worthy of consideration. Of Mallows
and of their property.
And we read that the ancients did sow this plant in their gardens of
deliberate purpose: for in those days they did eat them like other ordinary
herbs. And even to this day in Italy, they are so well ordered by the
gardiners, that they will grow as big as a shrub, yea in six or seven months.
We need not make here a particular description of Mallows; for there is none
but knows them well enough: but their virtue is very admirable: for their
leaves sod, being eaten do take away all hoarsenes; and being powned with sage
leaves, they make a singular plaster for wounds and other inflammations: they
are also very good against bitings of venomous beasts being applied with leekes
and onions: and the juice of them dropped in ones ear, appeaseth the tingling
therein. Being sod roots and all, till such time as the decoction be all
very thick and clammie, they are given to women (to drink) who are delivered
of their children with great difficulty; which helps them much: and the juice
drunk to the quantity of half a pound weight, does profit them as much.
Their seed also drunk with red wine, does deliver one from all desire to
vomit. And their young and tender stalks being eaten with salt, vinegar, and
oil (as Sparage also) are very healthful and laxatiue. Six ounces of their
juice being drunk, is very good for melancholy people, and for mad-folkes.
In brief the Mallow is very profitable in many things, and was for that cause
called by the ancients (Omnimorbia) that is to say, good against all diseases.

Of the wild Mallowe, and the property thereof.
The wild Mallowe has no fewer properties, and was therefore called by the
Greeks (Althaea) as being singular amongst all simples, and fit for many
medicines: the use thereof being very ordinary in physic: and it is a common
herb known by every one. Being sod in wine, or in honied water, or beaten,
and applied alone, it is good for all wounds, against the kings evil, against
worms in the ear, impostumes, inflammation of the breast, rupture of the
fundament, ventosities, and shrincking of the sinews: for it resolves,
ripeneth, breaks, and heals. The leaves thereof incorporated with oil are
good to apply to all bitings, and burnings by fire: the seed and root of this
plant have the same operation with the leaf: but they are more subtle, and
more drying and abstersive. The seed is good against the Dysenteria, against
spitting of blood, and flux of the belly: and so also is the decoction of the
root. And both of them serve greatly for difficulty in making water, for
gravel in the body, and do break the stone in the reins. I must not fail
here, to remember amongst the most excellent herbs, the purple violet, Of the
Purple-violet, and virtue thereof.
for because of the admirable virtues, which it contains. I will not speak
of the rare beauty of the flower thereof, nor of the sweet and pleasant smell
thereof, though it be to be maruailed at. But we may affirm it to be as
excellent and singular a medicine, as may be found in any part of the world.
For violets are temperate, and very good to alter and change the ill quality
of humors, and to euacuate them. They chiefly purge choler, and qualify the
vehemency thereof. They are good for pains in the head which proceed from
heat: they cause sleepines: mollify the pricking of the breast, and of the
lunges: they are profitable against the squinancie, against the falling of the
pallet in the mouth: they chiefly serve against inflammations of the breast,
and of the side: and staunch thirst. Being dry they open the liver, cause
inflammations to cease, and are very fit against the Iaundise. Moreover the
juice of Violets, and the sirup that is made of them, mollify the belly, and
they be good to use in pleurisies, to purge. And if any one receive a blow
upon the head, he shall be kept from dizzines, and other greater inconveniences,
if soon after he is stricken, he drink the flowers of Violets brayed, and use
this drink for some time. It is also a singular, and gentle purgation and of
no less virtue then Cassia; if you drink so much of the infusion of the roots
of Violets in white wine as you can hold in four fingers, after they have
been beaten in a mortar, being steeped a whole night in wine, and afterward
strained through a clean linen cloth, which drink you may sweeten by putting
sugar therein. This secret was taught me by a learned physician of our time,
and I have oftentimes seen the experience thereof.

Betonie is likewise an herb that is stored with many great virtues and
properties. For which cause the Italians, Of Betonie and the property thereof.
when they would highly praise any one, say in a common proverb (Tuhai piu
virtu, che non ha la Betonica) Thou art endewed with more virtues, then Betonie
is. This herb has a small stalk, and in many places is found of a cubit in
height: having leaves like an oak, soft, long, cut round about, of sweet
smell, great near to the root, and the seed thereof at top of the stalk
looks like that of sauorie. Now for the property of this plant; the leaves
thereof brayed and laid to wounds in the head, do presently search them, and
healing them from day to day, it is not long ere they fortify the hurt part.
Being beaten and applied to the forehead, they heal the pain of the eyes:
which likewise the decoction of the root does, being sod in water, til one
third part be consumed, if you wash your eyes therewith. The juice of the
leaves being drunk, does purge downwards that blood, the great abundance
whereof does dazzle and dim the sight. Wherefore Betonie being eaten does
sharpen and clarify it. And being beaten with a very little salt, and put
into the nosthrils, it stancheth bleeding at the nose. And the warm juice
being distilled with oil of roses, and put into the ears, does assuage the
pain of them. The use of this herb is very profitable for those, which are
pained at the stomach, and have short breath, who spit corruption, who have
pain in their liver and spleen, and are troubled with running of the raines;
it provoke urine, eases the gnawing of the belly and guts (if it proceed
not from increasing of humors) and is very good against dropsies, breaks
the stone, stays the spitting of blood; and taken fasting, keeps from
drunkenness; being drunk often with wine, it heals the iaundise, refreshes
those that have traveled far, sharpneth the appetite, resists poisons,
venims, and bitings of serpents, and all other venomous and mad beasts; being
not only taken inwardly, but also applied outwardly to the wounds. In sum
this plant has so many properties therein, that a very learned physician
amongst the ancients has written a whole book thereof. Anton. Musa.


Of Ceterach, and the virtue thereof.
Ceterach has many virtues of Betonie, it grows on walls and old ruins, and
upon rocks, and in shadie places. It has neither stalk, flower, nor seed,
but has many leaves growing out of a root, which are cut like those of
mountain Polipodie, red and hairie underneath, and green above. The decoction
of this herb is good for all melancholy passions, it consumes spleen, is
profitable for those that can hardly make water, breaks the stone in the
bladder, and is good for them that have the iaundise. Some bray Ceterach
leaves, to lay them having been steeped in wine upon the spleen, which
serves well for to open it. The yealow powder which is found behind those
leaves being drunk with a little white Amber, and with the juice of Plantaine
or of Purslaine, is marvelous profitable for those that are troubled with
running of the reins.

Saint Iohns-woort also is a very excellent herb. It is full of branches of a
span in height, reddish, bearing a leaf like to Rue, Of Saint John's wort, and
the property thereof.
having a yealow flower like to a violet; which being rubbed betwixt the
fingers, yields juice as red as blood. This plant is called Millepertuis (or
thousand holes) because the leaves of it are all full of so small holes, that
one can scarce see them, but only betwixt their sight and the sun. It bears
seed in rough, round, and somewhat long husks. This herb has power to open,
resolve, search, and bind again. It heateth and dries, and is of subtle
substance; wherefore it provoke urine. The seed thereof being drunk with
wine, voideth the stone out of the body, and resists poisons both the seed,
and herb being eaten or taken in drink, or outwardly applied, heals
inuenomed bitings. The water distilled of this herb when it bears flower, is
singular good for those that are subject to the falling sickness, or are
troubled with the palsy; if it be given them to drink. The seed being beaten
into powder with the juice of Renouee, is good against spitting of blood. It
purges the belly: the flowers and seed also have a marvelous virtue to heal
all wounds, except such as are in the head. Wherefore the oil, wherein the
flowers and cods full of seed shall have been long time steeped in the sun,
does heal very well all green wounds, especially if it be mixed with
Turpentine. If the belly be rubbed with this oil, it is good against the
Dysenteria: and a spoonefull thereof being drunk kills the worms. There is
a singular balm made of the flowers thereof, with the fruit of an elm and
rosebuds, putting all together in a glass bottle, and setting it in the sun,
till such time as all be so consumed that it seems to be putrified: then must
all be strained thorough a cloth, and kept so to be used, chiefly for wounds
and hurts of the body. Now (AMANA) do you prosecute our discourse concerning
Symples.


Of Celondine, Cammocke, Wormwood, Hyssope, Sage, and Mints. Chap. 74.
AMANA. Of Celondine and of the properties thereof.
IN the description of plants, we find that there is mention made of two kinds
of Celondine, otherwise called (Clarie) either of them endued with many
virtues. That which is called great Celondine, has a slender stalk of a cubit
long, and has leaued branches. The leaves thereof are soft and green,
somewhat inclining toward a blew. The flower resembles that of the white
Violet, which buddeth out according to the order of every leaf. It bears
long and slender cods, made pointed, wherein the seed is enclosed. This herb
is of a very abstersive and hot quality. The juice thereof is very good to
take out spots, and the pin and web in the eyes: but because it is very sharp,
you must before you apply it, mix it with those things that may repress the
sharpnes thereof, as namely with woman's milk: being put into hollow teeth, it
looseneth them that they fall out. If you rub warts therewith, they fall off
and dry up. The decoction of the root being drunk with annise seed and white
wine, does heal the iaundise, and is good for eating ulcers, and being chewed
it asswageth the pain in the teeth. Some make report, that swallows cause
their young ones to recover lost sight, by applying this herb unto them: (...).
and that for this occasion it derived the name thereof from a Greek word,
which signifies a Swallow; as being very well known by these birds, and
commodious for them. Some Alchimists say for (Chelidonium) (Celidonium) that is
(the gift of heaven) vaunting that they can extract out of this herb a
quintessence, not only fit for their purposes, but profitable also to conserve
the health of man, and to heal many diseases. Celondine the less is without
stalk, Of Celondine the less.
the leaves are round and thick, the flower yealow, hanging at a small stalk.
It keeps but a very little while: for it springs and dies in the
Springtime. And it is so named, because it bears flower in that season, when
swallows come in, as also great Clarie does. It is hot and dry in the fourth
degree full, because of the great sharpnes thereof. And therefore so soon as
it is applied, it breaks the skin, and causes bad nails to fall off. The
juice thereof snuffed up into the nose, does greatly purge the brain. And a
gargarisme made of the decoction thereof with honey, has the same virtue, and
euacuateth all evil humors in the breast.

Cammocke (or Rest-harrow) has also many singular properties. It is a plant
well known by countrey-folkes, Of Cammock and the property thereof.
because that as well with the branches, as with the interlaced roots, it
oftentimes stays the plough, maugre the oxen. It also vexes mowers and
reapers much. For how thick lether soever they wear, yet will this pearce
through like an aul, and as with needles wherewith it is armed being ripe. This
herb has many branches of a span long, turned with many knots; the leaves
thereof are small and slender like unto the leaves of Lentiles, approaching
very near to the form of Rue, somewhat hairie, and of a reasonable sweet
sent. The branches are full of very sharp and strong prickles. The flower is
purple, enclining to white, and sometimes yealow. Amongst other properties that
this plant has, it is above all most singular in the root thereof for to
break the stone in the reins and to void it out, especially when the
conduits through which the urine passes are stopped up. Some that have used
for a very long time, to take the powder of the peele of this root with wine,
have been helped of the stone. And according to the testimony of Mathiolus: A
certain man having used for many months together of the powder only of this
root, did help and heal himself of the burstnes in the cods, after that all
physicians had given him over, except they might cut him as they had concluded.
The decoction also of this root, and water that has been distilled,
cleanses the reins of gravel, provoke urine, purges the bladder, the
mouth thereof being stopped up with clammie humors, and is singular good to open
the liver, and all vessels of sense, life and motion. To make this water, you
must take four pound of the rindes of green roots: and being cut small, set
them a steep in eight pounds of malmesie, or of good wine, then distill them
in a glass limbecke in balneo Mariae.

Wormwood is almost infinite in admirable virtues. Of Wormwood, and of the
property thereof.
It produces a branched stalk with whitish leaves, very much cut like those
of Mugwort, small yealow flowers and round seed heaped in clusters. This plant
is marvelous fit for inflammations of the liver and stomach. It is very
profitable for such as are sick of the dropsy, if they often take the leaves
thereof co^fected in sugar. Wormwood is of restringent quality, bitter and
sharp altogether being hot, abstersive, comfortable and drying. And therefore
it purges downwards, and drives into the urine all choleric humors. It does
most principally comfort the stomach, and for this cause wine was made thereof
called by the same name: of the tops thereof is a decoction made with the root
of Dandelion, which is very good to heal the iaundise. The juice of wormwood
mixed with the kernel of a peach kills worms. This herb provoke urine:
being taken fasting it preserves from drunkenness: does sharpen the appetite:
it is a sovereign remedy for those that are subject to stuffings by eating
toad-stooles, if they drink the juice thereof, with vinegar. Being taken with
wine it is good against poison, with milk and home it is good to rub them that
are troubled with the squinancie. The fume of the decoction thereof caseth
pains in teeth and in the ears. And being made in wine of raisins, it
asswageth the pain of the eyes if they be anointed therewith. Being laid with
oil of roses upon a stomach weakened through long sickness, it does fortify it:
with figs, vinegar, and meal of darnell it is good against the dropsy, and
for those that are grieved in their spleen. Wormwood put into chests defends
apparel from worm-eating. There is a conserve made with a pound of the tops of
this plant, and with three pounds of sugar, which may heal an old and
despaired dropsy, if it be often used.

Hyssop and the property thereof.
Hyssop is a common plant, but worthy of great consideration, it is like a
shrub sprouting many wooden branches out of the root, of a foot and half
high. The leaves are set every where about the stalks here and there, being
long, hard, sweet in smell, hot in taste, and somewhat bitter. It bears
flowers on the top of the stalk of a blew color, like ears of corn. The
quality of hyssop is pearsing, attenuatiue, opening and abstersive: and
therefore it has the virtue to heat and to purify. Being sod with figs,
water, honey and rue, and taken in drink, it is good for inflammations of the
lungs, for an old cough, difficulty of breathing, catarrhes, and for those
which cannot breath except they stand still: and it is good also to kill worms
in the belly. Being beaten with salt and cumin, it is good against bitings of
serpents, if it be laid thereupon with honey. It is profitable for those that
are subject to the falling sickness, being ministered in any sort unto them.
Being taken in drink it voideth fleame, and chiefly that which is in the
breast and lungs. It serves also for flegmaticke maladies of the brain and
sinews, not only to purge them, but also to fortify them. It drives away
ventositie, moves appetite, provoke urine, freeth from quakings and
shakings of fevers, and sharpeneth the sight. It maintains good color in
one, and is good for the spleen, and against the dropsy, and is singular
against squinancies, being gargarised with the decoction of figs. The oil that
is made of the leaves and flowers, helps refrigerated or benumbed sinews,
and strengthens them. In brief the admirable virtues of this plant have
begotten this proverb, (He that eats hyssop shall live but too long.) But
the plenty thereof that is every where, causes (even as it is with all other
common things) that it is made but small account of, and is very seldom used
in physic.

Sage also is very common, so that there is no garden but is filled therewith:
yet the virtue thereof is not a whit less, Of Sage, and the property thereof.
as is daily experimented, to the great profit of many. It has many long,
square, and white branches. The leaves are like those of a quince tree, but
more long, more rough, more thick, sharp, strong, of good smell, and yet
somewhat unpleasant. Many make two kinds of sage, common sage, and wild sage.
But we may note that garden sage is all one with field sage: neither can much
difference be marked in them, save in the leaves, which are thinner, whiter,
and rougher in wild then in garden sage. This plant is very singular against
all cold and flegmaticke diseases in the head, and against all pains of the
ioints, either being taken in drink, or applied in fomentations. Wherefore it
is very good for them who have the falling disease, or are sick of the
lethargy, and for those that have their members benumbed or senseless. It is
profitable against defluxions of fleame, and maladies in the breast. It is good
for great bellied women to eat, which are subject to travel before their
time, for every light cause: for it keeps the child in the womb, and does
quicken it. If you give three or four ounces of the juice of sage to them that
spit blood, that they may drink it fasting in a morning with honey, the blood
will presently be stayed. The use of sage in pottage, and otherwise serves to
sharpen the appetite, and cleanse the stomach being full of ill humors. In
sum, when occasion is to heat, dry, and bind, sage is a very good and fit
medicine.

Of Mints, and their property.
Mints have likewise many great properties, and are very common, both in gardens
and fields. Whereof though there be many kinds (for some have small and
crisped leaves, others have the stalk and flower red, and others white) yet is
there no great matter to be made of these differences, considering that one
self same virtue resideth in all. Mints beaten, and made into a plaster do
comfort a weak stomach. It is a sovereign thing to restore the smell, and
feeling to those that have lost it, so that it be often held to the nose. The
leaves thereof dried, and brought into powder, kill worms in little children.
The juice drunk with vinegar, stancheth blood; with the juice of a sower
pomegranate it restrains vomitings, hickets, and the colicke passion. Mints
laid upon the forehead assuage the headache: and laid upon too tender dugs that
are full of milk, it eases the pain of them: applied with salt it is good for
bitings by dogs, and with honied water it is good against pains in the ears.
The water of the whole plant distilled in a glasse-limbecke in a bath of hot
water, and drunk to the weight of four ounces, staieth bleeding at nose. They
that love milk, must presently after they have eaten thereof, chew mint
leaves, to hinder the milk that it do not curdle in their stomach: if also
you sprinkle cheese with the juice thereof, or with the decoction thereof, it
will keep from corrupting and rottenness. Now I refer to you (ARAM) the
sequel of this discourse.


Of Thyme, Sauorie, Marierom, Rue, Parsley, and Fennel. Chap. 75.
ARAM. Of Thyme and the property thereof.
AMongst common herbs admirable in their properties, Thyme is worthy to be
noted. Now there are two sorts thereof; one bearing sundry twigs laden with
very many little narrow leaves, having small heads at the top full of purple
flowers: and the other is as hard as wood, more branched, and like unto
Sauorie. In property it is hot, and dry in the third degree. And therefore it
provoke urine, does heat, and being taken in drink does purge the intrailes.
It is good to make one spit out the ill-humours of the lungs, and in the
breast. Four drams of dry thyme puluerized, being ministered fasting to one
that has the gout, with two ounces and an half of honied vinegar, does profit
them very much: for it purges choler, and other sharp humors. It is good
also for diseases of the bladder: and the weight of a dram being taken with a
spoonefull of honied water, it is good for such as begin to have a swollen
belly: for the sciatica, and pain in the reins, in the sides, and in the
breast, for inflations and stitches about the forepart of the belly, for
melancholy persons; for those that are troubled in mind, and are in
continual fearfulnes, if three drams be given to them fasting with a
spoonefull of honied-vineger it will do them much good. It is profitable also
against inflammation of the eyes, and vehement pains thereof, and against the
gout in the feet, being taken with wine. The use thereof is very good for
them that have but bad sight. Out of Thyme there is an oil extracted of the
color of gold, which comes forth with the water, when the herb being fresh
and green is distilled in a bathe of hot water. This oil smells like a Citron,
and is very tart in taste, and good for all things, which have need to be
heated. But we must note that heed must be taken, that to all the foresaid
purposes black thyme be not used: for it corrupts the temperature of the
person, and ingendreth choler. And therefore that thyme must be chosen, which
bears a carnation flower, and that for the best yet which bears a white
flower.

Sauorie also is an herb known unto all, Of Sauory.
and has the same properties and virtues which thyme has, being taken in such
manner. There are two kinds thereof: one is like to thyme, somewhat less and
more tender, bearing a bud full of green flowers enclining to purple. The
other is greater and more branched, which is often found in gardens having many
boughs that spread about it, being round and woodie. The leaves thereof are
greater then those of thyme, somewhat strong and harder, which do here and
there grow about the branches in bunches together, after the springing whereof
there grow out little buds environed with leaves, which are much less then the
other, wherein grow small carnation flowers. The leaves and flowers of sauorie
being made in a garland or chaplet, and set upon the head of such as sleep, do
waken them. Being used in a cataplasme with wheat-meale sod together in wine it
is very available against grief of the sciatica. But the use of sauorie is
chiefly good for healthful persons, whether it be in pottage, or in sauce, or
otherwise. And it being dried in the shade, and brought into powder, may be
used instead of spices, and so may Thyme and Marierom, with marvelous profit
for health: and strange drugs tbat are hurtful may be spared, as pepper and
ginger are, being commonly used.

Of Marierom.
Marierom is so good for all persons, so that there are but few people which
have it not, either in their gardens, or in earth pots: the whole plant is
very odoriferous, and most profitable in physic. It is branched with small
pliable twigs, with long whitish and hairie leaves growing about those twigs.
It bears flowers in great number on the top of the stalks, and buds of the
color of the herb, being long, and composed of an heap of scales, well
compact together, out of which grows a little grain. In property it
resolves, and is attenuatiue, opening and coroboratiue. It is excellent
against all cold diseases of the head, and of the sinews, both outwardly
applied and taken in drink: as also for griefs in the ears, noise in them,
and difficult hearing, if some of the juice of the leaves thereof be dropped into
the^. The juice thereof also being snuffed up into the nose, purges the fleame
of the head, cleanses the brain, and fortifieth it. The use of this plant and
of the decoction thereof, is good against all evil in the breast, which may
stop the free course and recourse of breath. It is profitable for them that are
diseased in the liver, and in the spleen: not only freeing the liver and
spleen from oppilations and stoppings; but also making them strong and sound.
The decoction thereof also being drunk, is good in the beginning of a dropsy,
for difficulty in making water, and for pulling in ones belly. And the leaves
thereof serve against the stingings of scorpions, being laid thereupon with
salt and vinegar.

Of Rue.
Rue likewise by reason of the great and exquisite properties thereof deserves
to be remembered. This plant is always green, very thick of iuicie leaves,
many hanging at one stalk of small growth, but very broad, of a dark green
color. It produces many little boughs and branches, and on the top yellow
flowers; out of which grow little heads divided into four parts, wherein small
black seed is enclosed. This herb is very attenuatiue, incisiue, digestive,
resolutiue, prouocatiue, and drives out ve^tosities very forceably. For it is
hot in the third degree, and not only sharp in taste, but bitter also: by
means whereof it may resolve and penetrate gross and clammie humors; and
through the same qualities provoke urine. It does also consist of subtle
parts, and is numbered amongst medicines, which dry greatly: and therefore it
is good against inflations, asswaging the appetite of lust, it resolves and
freeth from all windines. The seed thereof drunk in wine, to the weight of
fifteen ounces, is a singular remedy against all poison. The leaves eaten
alone fasting, or with nuts and dry figs, do kill the power of venim, and are
good against serpents. The decoction thereof drunk, is profitable against
pains in the breast and in the sides, inflammation of the liver, the gout, and
shakings of agues; being eaten raw or confected, it cleereth the sight, is good
against difficulty in breathing, and against the cough: being mixed with
French cherries dried, it alayeth pains of the eyes; being mixed with oil of
Roses and vinegar, it eases the headache; being brayed and put into the nose,
it stancheth the bleeding thereof. The distilled water of it, infused into an
equal portion of wine and rose water, is sovereign for the pain in the eyes.

Parsley is ordinary and common in all gardens, Of Parsley.
and the use thereof great, and very commodious for the mouth and stomach.
Neither is there any herb more used in meats, and in sauces. But it has many
properties in physic, for which it is much to be commended. For the decoction
of the leaves or roots thereof opens the passage of urine, and purges out
gravel that has long lain in the urine conduits: it eases the colicke and
pains in the raines, being used in manner of fomentation upon the grieved
parts. The seed thereof is yet of greater virtue in the foresaid effects: it
serves (being drunk) against venime of serpents, and drives out
ventosities. The often usage of parsley does take away stinking of breath:
being applied in a cataplasme with crumbs of white bread it heals tetters,
asswageth the swelling of the dugs, and for women in childe-bed does diminish
their milk. There is also another kind of parsley called Marsh-parsley,
commonly named (broad smallage) which has as much or more efficacy in
physic then the other, especially the seed thereof which has most singular
uses. Which being sharp with great bitterness, is hot in operation, with a
pearsing virtue. Wherefore it is good for wringings in the belly, windines of
stomach, and for the colicke: it is singular in drink, for pains in the
sides, in the raines, and in the bladder.

Fennel does also consist of two sorts; one is of set fennel, Of Fennel.
and the other wild fennel. Garden or set fennel is very pleasant in taste,
for the sauorie sweetenes thereof, and is profitable being used in physic.
The decoction of the leaves serve greatly for pains in the reins, being
drunk, and provoke urine. The herb of fennel eaten, or the seed sodden
with barlie water does make very much milk come into women's breasts. The root
braied and applied with honey, heals the bitings of dogs. The seed is
excellent to suppress wind, being taken after meals, though it be of hard
digestion, and does but badly nourish the body. But fennel is most
principally good, both the leaves and seed thereof, to clear the sight: and
therefore some press out the juice of the leaves, and tender stalks, which
they preserve and keep for this purpose: And they do also distill the water
thereof for the same use. In the western part of Spain the fennel yields a
licour like unto gum, which is of greater efficacy then the juice thereof in
medicines for the eyes. Wild fennel is sharper in taste, has greater leaves,
and grows higher, then garden fennel. The root thereof has a good sent,
and being taken in drink does profit them much that hardly make water: it is
good against bitings of serpents; breaks the stone, and heals the iaundise:
which the seed thereof does likewise. Now (ACHITOB) do you proceed in talk
concerning simples.


Of Rosemarie, Cammomill, the Lilly, Baulme, of grass or dogs-tooth, and of
Pimpernell. Chap. 76.
ACHITOB. IT would be very hard to find out in one plant only more virtues
and properties, then they who have traveled to publish the science of simples,
have attributed to rosemarie: and yet it seems to many that it is fit for
nothing but to make garlands and nosegayes, and being so very common, is not
esteemed to be of great efficacy. Indeed it is a very ordinary plant, and in
Prouence it grows to such greatness, that the people use it for fire-fewell
like other wood: and the stock is of such compass, that they make tables and
harpes thereof: Yet all this lets not, but it may be of admirable virtue. For
it is very good against cold diseases of the stomach, against the colicke, and
casting up of meat, Of Rosemary, and the admirable property thereof.
by eating it either in bread, or drinking it in powder with pure wine. It is
profitable for such as are diseased in the liver or spleen: for it does not
only heat, purify and open, but through the restringent virtue thereof it
does also fortify. It is very good against all rheumes, and all cold maladies,
against the falling evil, numbnes of members, the lethargy and palsy. It is
good to wash the head, and for fomentations of the ioints. It does sharpen the
sight, sweeten the breath, and being boiled in vinegar and hard wine, it
staieth the rheumes that fall into the teeth and gums, if the mouth be washed
with this decoction hot. The powder thereof dried does consolidate green
wounds, if they be washed before with wine wherein rosemarie has been sodden,
and then the powder be strowed on afterward. The flowers thereof confected in
sugar, are good for all things aforesaid, particularly against cold passions
of the heart, against maladies of the breast, and against the plague. The
decoction of rosemarie made in water, and taken in drink does heal the
iaundise. So likewise does the seed being drunk with pepper and white wine.
In the plague time it is good to perfume the house with this plant, for the
fume thereof drives away ill aires.

Cammomill also grows abundantly amongst corn, Of Cammomill.
and in the fields, bearing yellow flowers environed with whitish leaves, and
is of a strong savor. But to mollify, resolve, rarifie, and loosen, this
plant is of singular operation: And in this respect no medicine is better for
weary folks then a bath of cammomill. The leaves beaten, and put into white
wine make a profitable drink, to heal quotidian and quartan agues: the
decoction thereof drunk heals pains in the side: and so does the water
distilled of the flowers: which flowers being gathered without leaves, beaten
in a mortar, and formed with oil into trochisks, afterward dissolved again
in oil, if they be therewith rubbed and chafed, which are troubled with
fevers, from the crown of the head to the foot, and that they presently go
into bed to sweat, they shall be helped, because of the abundant heat that
goes out of their body. Cammomill is especially good to dissolve fevers that
are without inflammation of any chief intraile, principally those which
proceed from choleric humors and thicknes of the skin. Being taken in
drink, or the fume thereof received in at the fundament, it is a great help
to void urine and gravel.

Of the Lilly.
The lilly is likewise very worthy of consideration. It bears long leaves,
ever green, smooth, and iuicie; it has a stalk of two cubits high, round,
straight, even, thick, and strong, all clad with leaves from the bottom to
the top. At the top of the stalk grow three or four little branches, out of
which issue small long heads of the color of the herb, which in time become
fair lillies of exquisite whiteness, crossed on the outside, and the ends
turned outward round about. At the bottom of the flower grow certain yellow
stalks, as it were dustie on the upper side, of the fashion of toongs, out of
the midst of which grows one long one, having a round head of the color of
the herb. There is no flower so high, and it surpasses in beauty all other
whiteness. Now for the virtue of this plant. The leaves thereof are good
being applied against the biting of serpents; being boiled they heal
burnings, and confected in vinegar, are good for wounds: water distilled of the
flowers, are profitable for women that are delivered of child with great
difficulty, and voideth out the after-burden, being mixed with saffron, and
Cinnamon. The oil drawn out of those flowers is good against all cold diseases
of the sinews, as cramps, and palsies, and to mollify all stiffenes in the
joints, and all hard-swollen kernelles. Lillies long time steeped in oil,
being applied hot, do ripen hot impostumes without pain, and do break them,
especially such as are in the ioints. And the body of the roots has the same
property. For being boiled, and braied with oil of roses, they ripen
impostumes, and being braied with honey they heal cut and lame sinews, cleanse
the head of scabs, and clarify the visage, and make it smooth. The seed of
Lillies also taken in drink, serves against the bitings of serpents. And the
water that is distilled of the flowers in a limbeck does take wrinkles out of
women's faces, and does beautify them very much.

Of Baulme.
Baulme is a very odoriferous plant, and smells much like a Citron: the stalk
and leaves thereof are somewhat rough, and many stalks issue out of the root.
The property of it is to rejoice the heart, to comfort cold and moist stomachs,
to help digestion, to euacuate the stoppings of the conduits of the brain, to
heal feeblenes and faintnes of heart, to fortify it being weak, especially if
the weakness be such that it oftentimes breaks ones sleep in the night:
moreover this herb staieth the panting of the heart, drives away cares and sad
imaginations, which proceed either from the melancholy humor, or from fleame
combust. It has also a laxatiue virtue, not so feeble, but that it cleanses
and purges the spirits, and blood of the heart and arteries, from all
melancholy vapors: which it cannot do to the other parts of the body. The
leaves thereof taken in drink, or outwardly applied, are good against
stingings of the Tarantula, of Scorpions, and against the biting of dogs: and
it is good to bath such wounds with the decoction thereof. Being mixed with
salt, they are profitable against the kings evil, and mundifie ulcers: and
being applied, do assuage the pain of gowts. They are used in clysters
against the flux. Also the leaves taken in drink with niter, are very good for
them that are stopped by eating toad stools, or mushrums: and in loch for them
that are troubled with shrinking up of the belly, and breath with such
difficulty, that they cannot do it except they stand upright.

Grass, Of Dogs-tooth.
or Dogs-tooth is one of the commonest herbs in the field, yea even in lean
grounds. The branches thereof ly a long upon the earth, and are full of knots,
out of which, and out of the top it often sends new roots. The leaves are
very small and pointed: it is maruailous in property. For the decoction
thereof taken in drink, heals wringing in the belly, and hard making of
water, and breaks the stone and gravel in the bladder. The root braied and
applied, searches wounds. And the juice of the decoction thereof may be used
to the same effect: which the herb also does, being beaten, and keeps wounds
from all inflammation: if to the decoction thereof be put a little wine, or
honey, and the third part of so much Pepper, Myrrh, and Franckincense, and be
made to boil afterward again in some copper vessel; it is a singular remedy
for the toothache, and the rheum which falls into the eyes. Grass also that
has seven spaces betwixt the knots, is very good for the headache being bound
about it. It likewise stauncheth bleeding at nose. The seed thereof does
greatly provoke urine, and binds the belly, and staieth vomiting. It is
special good against biting of Dragons. There is found in some places of
Germany a certain kind of grass, which is tilled with as great care, as
other corn, or pulse, because the people uses the seed thereof in their
meats, which seed they call (Mama) and they sees it in pottage with fat
meat, and find it as good as Rice. It is smaller then millet, and very white.
But it must be beaten in a mortar, to vnhuske it.

Of Pimpernell.
There are three sorts of Pimpernell. One grows very great, and has a long
root, the leaves are couched round upon the earth, being cut and indented
about: the stalk is square, the flowers thick in bunches, small and whitish.
The next sort is little, and has a red stalk; the leaves small, not so much
cut, and thinner dented. The third kind is the most common, which is often
eaten in sallades, and set in gardens. The root of the two first kinds
(wherein all their virtue lies) is very good for pains in the reins, and
bladder, which are caused by the stone. For it cleereth the reins of gravel,
and drives forth long kept urine. The juice also of this root being drunk
with wine, is singular against all poisons, and bitings of venomous beasts. For
which cause some esteem much of this root, to be used against the plague. The
third kind of Pimpernell is different in virtue from the former, although they
be very like in form of leaves. For it is more restringent in taste and very
nourishing; for which cause it may be thought to be of a binding nature.
Wherefore it stays the Dysenteria and other fluxes, and the vomiting of
choleric humors. It heals wounds and ulcers, and it is of special use in
ointments that are made for wounds in the head, and for cankers. Some
physicians have much commended it in the cure of pestilent and contagious
fevers: affirming also that the often usage thereof is a sovereign
preservative against dangerous diseases. Now (ASER) do you proceed in this our
treatise concerning simples.


Of Nightshade, Alkakeng, Pellitorie of the wall, Fumitorie, Angelica, and of
Maidens-haire. Chapter 77.
ASER. IT is wonderful to rehearse the virtues and properties, which many
affirm to us in their writings to consist in the Solanum, whereof the Ancients
made four kinds. But I will here make mention of two only, which are very
common, Of Nightshade and the properties thereof.
since that the rest are seldom found or never. The first kind is called
Nightshade, which is a small little herb, having many pits in the stalk
thereof; out of which grow black leaves, like to those of Basil, but a little
greater. It bears white flowers, yealow in the midst in fashion of a star.
The fruit thereof is round, hanging in clusters, full of a winie juice, no
less then Juniper seed, wherein a small white grain is enclosed: this fruit
is of diverse colors; for in some plants it is black, in others yealow, and in
some enclining toward a green. Concerning the property of this plant, the
juice of the fruit thereof, as likewise of the leaves mixed with oil of roses,
and a little vinegar, is singular against the headache, when it is caused by
heat. It is good for such as are frantic, if one steep linen clothes
therein, and lay them to the forepart of their head. In like sort may they be
applied to the forehead against hot rheumes that fall down into the eyes. It is
good also to gargle it against inflammations of the throat, and falling of the
pallat. It is put in ointments to heal sore and grievous ulcers. The leaves
thereof beaten with salt, and laid on a plaster, break impostumes that grow
behind the ears. In brief, when need is to refresh, to dry up, or to
restrain, nightshade is very convenient.

Now for the other kind of Solanum, commonly called Alkakeng, Of Alkakeng and
the virtue thereof.
it has leaves like unto Nightshade, but broader, stronger, somewhat sharp,
and not so black: the stalk thereof is supple, which being grown up
enclineth toward the ground. The flowers are white, out of which rise little
bladders as big as a nut, and grow sharp: they are composed of eight sides,
of equal distance one from another. And they are at first green, and being
ripe, red: within them they contain fruit one grain in each of them, being
fastened to the bottom of the bladder, like to the seed of a red grape, both
sharp and bitter, and full of a great number of small white grains within. In
this fruit also is great virtue, not only to provoke urine, but also to allay
the burning heat thereof. For the juice of it being drunk with the juice of
white poppie, or of the seed of Melons, or of Gourds, or with the decoction of
Mallows, or with barley water, is marvelous singular for the scorching heat
of urine. And this plant is so contrary to adders, that laying the root
thereof near unto them, they are suddenly surprised with so great sleep, that
they die therewith. The fruit thereof steeped in new wine is very good being
laid on the eye lids. Some put it in a vessel together with ripe grapes,
which they suffer to boil for certain days together, out of which they
extract a very profitable wine, for such as are troubled with gravel:
euacuating the gravel marueilously well, and clensing the reins being drunk
to the weight of four ounces. And the same fruit taken in drink heals the
iaundise.

Of Pellitorie.
Pellitorie is an herb very well known, and has many great properties, the
leaves thereof are rough, the stalk read, about which are bitter grains,
which are fit to lay amongst apparel. This plant has the virtue to refresh
and bind, for which cause it is singular good to heal green wounds. For if
it be laid upon a wound (being half beaten and very fresh) and be not taken
off for three days together, there shall be no need to use any other
medicine. The weight of three ounces of the juice thereof being drunk, is
marvelous good to free urine that has long been holden: and the herb heated
upon a tile, and sprinkled with Malmesey, and applied to the forehead, is very
good for such as are troubled with gravel, and cannot make water. The juice
thereof held within the mouth, heals the toothach. The distilled water
thereof cleanses and clarifieth the visage: the leaves being applied, heal
burnings, swellings, and inflammations, being fried with fresh butter, or
capons grease, and laid in manner of a serge-cloth upon the belly, they ease
the colicke. A cataplasme also made of green pellitorie beaten with crumbs of
bread, and oil of roses, or cammomill, resolves impostumes which grow in the
dugs. And being mixed with goates-grease, or kids grease, it is good for gouts
and falls. The juice likewise mixed in like quantity of white wine, and oil of
sweet almonds being newly made, alayeth the pains and torments of the stone;
and dropped into the ears with oil of roses, it heals the pain of them.
Some minister them to gargle for inflammation in the throat. And some give them
for an old cough. It is seen by experience that this herb is abstersive, in
so much as it is very good to expel worms.

Of Fumitory.
Fumitorie is an herb much branched and tender, having very small leaves
growing here and there, of a white ashie color, and in great number upon
every side. The flower thereof is purple. This plant is one of the most gentle
medicines, and least annoying, that may be amongst laxatiue remedies. But it is
every where so common that none esteem of it. It is not only laxatiue, but
does also fortify the interior members, binds their veins which are too
loose; as also those of the stomach, and of the liver, and heals fevers that
proceed by choler, or through stoppings. It euacuateth the cholerike humor
very much in urine: the seed thereof is bitter and somewhat sharp: and it is
somewhat more hot, then the herb that is temperate: so that the whole plant is
purifying, penetratiue, opening and laxatiue. And because of the cold and
stiptick quality thereof it binds, restrayneth and fortifieth. It does
gently loosen the belly, it purges choler and burning humors. Wherefore it is
good against the meazels, against cankers, and all infections of the skin, and
other maladies which do proceed from oppilations: the juice thereof cleereth
the sight, and causes tears to issue even as smoke or fume does, whereof it
seems to have taken name.

Angelica is a most excellent plant, Of Angelica.
and very worthy to be here described. It is above a cubit in height, it
produces a knottie stalk, crested, and full of pits, the leaves thereof are
long, and indented round about; the flowers white growing in bunches, out of
which springs a little grain, and smooth like a lentill. The root is as
thick as a reddish; divided into many branches, sharp in taste, and sweet in
smell. Also there are sundry sorts thereof: for one kind is set in gardens,
another sort is wild, and another grows in watrie places. All this plant is
hot and dry in the second degree full, or to the beginning of the third:
Wherefore it is opening, attenuating, and resolving. It is singular against
poisons: so that taken in drink, or often chewed, it preserves from the
plague; being taken alone, it attenuateth flegmaticke and clammie humors. And
so does the decoction of the root thereof, which does readily heal the cough
that comes through cold: for it causes one to spit out and void all clammie
fleame. The same decoction received in wine or water, heals ulcers in the
interior members, dissolueth clotted blood, and fortifieth the stomach. The
root beaten to powder is sovereign against fainting of the heart and other
passions thereof. It is singular against bitings of mad and venomous beasts;
being laid thereupon with Rue, or taken inwardly: for which cause many of our
modern physicians employ it in their counterpoisons and preservatives. There
is given half a dram of the root, with a dram of treacle, and the distilled
water hereof, to such as have the plague, who are constrained to sweat; and
seven hours after to resume this drink: and by this only counterpoison some
have been helped. This root chewed, and put into holow teeth asswageth the
pain of them. It also sweetneth the breath. Whosoever shall hold a little
piece thereof in his mouth, or in the morning drink two spoonefuls of wine
wherein it has been steeped, he shall not easily be infected with evil
air all day after. The leaves thereof with the leaves of Rue and honey,
applied in a cataplasme, heal the bitings of madde-dogs, and stingings of
serpents. And being laid upon his head that is sick of an ague, it attracteth
to it self much of the heat of the ague.

Of Maidenhaire.
Maidenhaire also is a very exquisite plant, much like unto fern, but with
smaller leaves, set in order here and there one over against another, in fine
small branches, sharp in taste, black, and shining. It is temperate in heat
and coldenes; and therefore it dries, purifieth, and resolves: It is good to
cause one spit and void out of the breast and lungs, all gross and clammy
humors: It staieth the flux of the belly, resolves the kings evil, and other
tumors, and being taken in drink is singular for hardness of water, when one
can make it but drop by drop, and it breaks the stone. The decoction also
thereof is good for them that draw their breath with pain, and is profitable
for the spleen, and against the iaundise. And the herb thereof being laid
upon the bitings of serpents, is a singular remedy therefore. To open also the
infusion thereof made in parsley water, or in endive water, or in broth of
black chich-pease, or in a little goats-milke, is very good: and adding sugar
thereto, it heals inflammations of the side, and does greatly provoke urine.
Briefly all the virtues that Physicians attribute to Venus-haires called
commonly (Capilli Veneris) agree with Maiden-haire. Now (AMANA) let us hear
you choose out other plants for the subject of your discourse.


Of Rheubarb, Licorice, Aloes, Seen, Saffron and Centurie. Chapter 78.
AMANA. Since that it is not our purpose to write an entire History concerning
simples, but only to consider of the most excellent in their effects, me
seems that it is sufficient for us (so to make way to another matter) to add
to our precedent discourses, that which I intend now to speak concerning some
singular plants: amongst which I prefer Rheubarb to the first place, which is
very plentiful in all India. The leaves of it are commonly two foot long,
broad above, and so growing narrower toward the stalk, Of Rheubarb, and the
excellent virtue thereof.
having a certain cotton or (as it were) hair round about it, as is commonly
seen in the herb called in French (Bouillon blane.) The stalk thereof is but a
foot high, or little more, and is all green like the leaves. In the middle
thereof grows out a very small branch, having certain flowers about it that
enuiron it, which are like unto purple violets save in color only, which is
different being white and blew, of sharp smell, and very unpleasant to their
nose that smell thereat. The root is very deep in the ground, of a foot and
an half long, and as thick as a man's arm, some more, some less; and out of
it there do many small ones sprout, which (before the great one be cut) are
dug up with the principal, to the end that it may more easily be cleft in
pieces. It is on the outside of an ashie color, and full of yellowish juice,
while it is fresh and green, and so clammie, that in touching thereof it
causes the fingers to stick together. Now this root is an excellent
medicine, gentle, and without danger, wherein many singularities requisite in a
laxatiue simple are comprised. And Rheubarb is best while it is green, of a
blackish color, somewhat enclining to a red, and heavy, although it be of a
rare body, and which being broken, is mixed with red and sky color within:
and being chewed, waxes as yellow as Saffron. Besides it purges choler and
phlegm: it cleanses and fortifieth the stomach and liver, and heals the
pains and prickings of them. It clarifieth the blood, opens and heals all
maladies that proceed of stoppings, as the iaundise, the dropsy, swelling of
the spleen, and long feauers. It is good against spitting of blood, and
stancheth it, out of what part so ever it run. And it may be taken at all
times without danger, and in all ages, yea it may be ministered to little
children, and to great bellied women: although the vulgar people think
otherwise, supposing that Rheubarb is a very violent medicine, and that
Physicians use it but in half despaired maladies: which is not so.

Licorice is very worthy to be numbered amongst the most excellent Physic
plants. And thereof are two kinds, Of Licorice.
one bearing fruit, and the other not: that which bears fruit, grows
abundantly in Germany, and in the territory of Bamberg and other places. And
it is a very branchie plant, of two cubits high, being thick of leaves, and
fat in manner of gum: the flowers thereof are like an Hyacinth: the fruit
thereof great like plantaine berries, and more rough and hairie, enclosed
within little cods, like those of lentiles, hairie also and full of small
prickles, of yellow color enclining to a black. The other kind of Licorice
is very well known, and grows of it self in many places. In virtue it is
abstersive, clensing, and alaieth the bitterness of humors: and therefore it
is very good for heat of the urine. Being chewed, especially whilst it is
fresh, it stancheth hunger and thirst, and retayneth that virtue for many
days. And the juice thereof being made thick and held in the mouth, till it
melt of it self, has the same effect. It is good for the breast and lungs;
and is therefore ministered to those who have short breath, or are in a
co^sumption or pleurisy. The juice aslwageth the prickings, not only of the
artery of the lungs, but of the bladder also: and does excellently staunch
thirst, as being tempered with moisture, and colder then our nature. And it is
to be noted, that the root wherein lie all these properties is much better
being fresh taken out of the ground, then when it is dry, and is more pleasant
in taste being employed in medicines.

Of Aloes.
The Aloe is a plant, which is seen green in many towns in Italy, in
windows, and galleries: it is kept in pots full of earth, more for pleasure to
content the eye, then for use in medicine. But the licour and juice that is
pressed out of it and brought to us, is extracted out of the Aloe that grows
in the lower Syria, and Arabia, and in the Indies, where the best is. This
plant has thick and fat leaves, with certain little prickles here and there
on all sides. The root thereof is fat and oilie, bearing a white flower, out of
which grows a little grain, like that of Smallage. In the thick juice thereof
prepared for medicine there is found gravel and earth, which is nothing but
the setlings of pure Aloes: but the good is pure and clean, not sophisticate,
without grauel, or little stones, reddish, brittle, of a good smell, close like
a liver, and very much enclining to the color thereof, easily melting, and
very bitter: that which is black, and hard to break is worth nothing. The Aloe
is profitable for many things because of the drines thereof without any
sharpnes. It purges choler and fleame, the head, and stomach, and is very good
for pains in those parts, it quickneth all the senses, opens the liver, and
heals the Iaundise. It kills worms in the belly, being incorporated with
ox gall, and vinegar, and laid upon the navel. Some apply the powder thereof
to wonnds to search them; it heals ulcers, and staieth them. It appeaseth the
pain of the head, being applied to the temples, and forehead with vinegar,
and oil of roses. In brief the property thereof is to restrain, to dry, to
provoke sleep, to bind the body, and yet to loosen the belly.

Seen has leaves like Licorice, thick, fat, Of Seen.
and in taste like beans: the stalk thereof is a cubit high, out of which
issue many branches as pliable as a leatherne thong. The flowers thereof are
yealow, straked with small purple strakes; after which there grow certain cods
crooked like a sickle, wherein is enclosed a black seed, enclining to green,
very like to kernels in grapes. It is sowed in diverse places in Florence, and
prospers very well, especially in the territory of the city of Florence; but
the best is brought from Alexandria in Egypt, and out of Syria. It purges
without any annoiance, choler, fleame, and melancholy. It mundifieth the heart,
the liver, the brain, the spleen, the lungs, and all parts of the body, and
is profitable for all the accidents of them. It opens the inner parts, and
maintains a man or woman in youth, forsloweth age, and causes joy of mind.
The leaves thereof are good to wash the head with cammomill; for they fortify
the brain, the sinews, the sight, and the hearing. Briefly it is a good
medicine in all long diseases, and such as proceed of a melancholy humor.
And therefore it is very profitable for them that rave, and are out of their
wits: likewise for ulcers over all the body, for palsies, for the headache, and
falling evil. It fortifieth the heart especially, being mixed with some other
ingredient fit therefore, as namely with purple violets. It is very good in the
infusion or decoction thereof to ad some clones thereto, to correct a little
that annoiance, which some say it does to the stomach, and to fortify the
virtue thereof. And being mixed with some infusion of roses, or laxatiue sirup
of roses, it is an excellent purge for all evil humors. There is a sirup made
of Seen, being taken green from the plant, and mixed with infusion of roses,
which is very good to that effect: and is so gentle that one may minister
thereof to women with child, and to little infants, and people of all ages.

Saffron is a common plant, and yet has many virtues. Of Saffron.
It bears many leaves, long, narrow, small, full, not round, hanging
downwards, thick, and soft. The flower thereof is sky colored, and very
fair to behold. Out of the middle thereof grow certain red threedes, big at
the top: with which out of the same place almost, there grow other yealow ones
in fashion like toongs. That Saffron is good, which dies your hands with the
color thereof, and that smells somewhat sharp, and is not very brittle. In
property it is good for feeblenes of stomach, and faintnes of heart, being
taken in some small quantity it preserves from drunkenness, and heals the
bitings of serpents, and stinging of spiders. It is restoratiue, the astriction
thereof very much aiding thereto: which quality proceeds from cold and
earthines, although that the quality of heat exceed therein: in such sort as
in all the substance thereof, it is hot in the second degree, and dry in the
first. But the smell thereof is naught for the head, and being taken too much
it troubles the spirit.

Of Century.
Centurie is likewise worthy of great consideration, because of the properties
thereof in physic. There be two sorts of it, one is called great Centurie:
and the other is lesser Centurie. The great has leaves like a walnut tree,
long, green like Colewoorts, indented about, a stalk of two or three cubits
high. The flower thereof is blew, and the root very big, full of juice, sharp
with astriction and sweetness. The lesser sore has leaves like rue, a square
stalk, somewhat more then a span long: the flowers thereof are red, inclining
to purple; and the root is small, smooth and bitter in taste. For their
properties, the virtue of great Centurie consists in the root thereof, which
serves for ruptures, conuulsions, difficulty in breathing, old coughes,
pleurisies, and spitting of blood. It is also given to them that are sick of
the dropsy, of the iaundise, and are pained in their liver, being either
steeped in wine or beaten to powder, and drunk. Of the lesser, Galen has
composed an whole book, which he dedicated to his friend Papias, concerning
the great and admirable virtues therein. For it purges choler and fleame, for
which cause the decoction thereof is good against tertian fevers; which also,
and the juice thereof helps stoppings and hardness of the liver and spleen.
Being drunk likewise to the weight of a dram with honey, or laid upon the
navel, it auoideth worms out of the belly. The leaves of this herb, wherein,
and in the flowers thereof lies all the virtue, being applied fresh to great
wounds, search them, and heales up old ulcers But now changing our talk, let
us leave physic plants, and say somewhat concerning those more excellent ones,
which particularly serve for the nouriture of Man.


Of Wheat, Rye, Barley, and Oats; and of Rice, and Millet. Chap. 79.
ARAM. AMongsts herbs and plants, wherewith men are fed and nourished, the
chief degree is by good right assigned to wheat, as to that grain, whereof
the best bread is made, which only with water, may very well suffice for the
mainteinance of our life: having many properties also in the use of physic.
Now according to the diversity of places wherein it grows people do name it;
and one sort differs from another; but we will here speak of that which is
most common amongst us. All wheat has many very small roots, Of Wheat, and of
the form, and fertility thereof.
but one leaf; and many buds, which may divide themselves into sundry
branches. All the winter time it is an herb, but the weather waxing milder,
there springs out of the midst thereof a small stalk, which after three or
four knots or ioints, bears an ear, not by and by seen, but is hidden
within a case. The stalk being made, the flower bloometh some four or five
days after, and about so long endures. That past, the grain swells, and
ripeneth in forty days, or sooner, as the climate is in heat. The fertility of
this plant is marvelous, as we behold by daily experience. For there are some
places in Italy especially in the territory of Sienna, about the sea coasts,
where there has been seen to grow out of one only grain four and twenty
ears of corn, and that one bushel of seed has yielded an hundred. The best
wheat should be hard to break, massiue, weighty, of the color of gold,
clear, smooth, and kept three months ripe, fair, and growing in a fat soil,
to be the fitter to make better bread of. And the meal also must not be too
much ground, neither yet too fresh, nor too long kept before it be used: for if
it be too much ground, it makes bread as if it were of branne; that which is
too fresh does yet retain therein some heat of the millstone: and that which
is kept too long will be spoiled either by dust, or by mouldines, or will else
have some bad smell. Now besides the common use of wheat, the manner how to
make it in drink is very notable, which drink serves instead of wine in
those countries, where the vine cannot fructify. Beer.
For there they take wheat, and sometimes barley, rye, or oats, every one
apart; or else two or three sorts of these grains, or else all mingled
together, and steep them in fountain water, or in water of the cleanest and
cleerest river that may be chosen: or else for better in a decoction or wourt
of hops, and this is done for so long time till the grain begin to break:
then is it dried in the sun: being dry, it is beaten, or else ground;
afterward sodden in water, in which it has first been steeped for the space
of three or four hours, putting thereto a good quantity of the flowers of
hops, and skimming the decoction or wourt very well: that done, it is powered
out, and put in vessels for the purpose. This drink is called Beer: And they
which will have it very pleasant to the taste, after it is made, do cast into
the vessels sugar, cinamom, and cloves, and then stir it very much. Some do
put cockle into the composition of beer, the more to sharpen the taste. And
since we are entered into this speech, we will here note, that wheat does easily
convert into cockle chiefly when the weather is rainie and cold: Of Cockle.
for it comes of corn corrupted by too much moisture, or that has been too
much wet by continual raines in winter. It springs first out of the ground,
having a long leaf, fat, and rough, with a slenderer stalk then that of wheat,
at the top whereof there is a long ear, having on all sides little sharp cods
or husks, out of which three or four grains grow together being covered with
a very hard bark. The bread that has much thereof in it does dizzie and hurt
the head, so that they which eat thereof do commonly fall into a sound sleep,
and their head is much troubled. It annoyeth the eyes and dimmeth the sight.
Some also do make ( As some think wafer-cakes.
Amylum) of wheat, which serves for many things. They take very clean wheat
of three months old, which they wet five times a day, and as often by night,
if it be possible; being well soaked and steeped, they power the water away,
not shaking it to the end that the thick, and that which is like cream may
not run out with the water. After that it is very well mollified, and the
water changed, it must be sifted, that the bran which swimmeth at top thereof
may be done away, and then must it be kneaded very hard together casting
fresh water still upon it. And so it must be laid in panniers or dossers to
dry, and then upon new tiles to be parched in the sun, with as much speed as
may be: for if it remain never so little a while moist, it waxes sour. The
best is that which is white, fresh, light and smooth. It has power to mollify
in sharp and rough things: and is good against rheumes that fall into the
eyes. Being taken in drink, it restrains spitting of blood, and asswageth
the sorenes of the throat.

Next after Wheat, Rye is in common use to make bread of. Of Rye.
This plant has many stalks smaller then those of wheat, and blacker, as the
grain is also. Meal made of Rye is good for plasters to draw. The decoction
of the seed voideth worms out of the belly, especially if Coriander seed be
mixed therewith. The straw being soaked in water is good to bind vines instead
of rush or broom.

Barley is also much used every where. Of Barley.
It bears a broad leaf, and rougher then wheat, and has a britler and
lesser stalk of eight knots, with one only rough broad leaf upon the stalk.
The grain is lapped in a cod, which is close shut: out of the top whereof
grows a long and sharp beard. The best is that which is whitest, most full,
heavy, easy to boil, not waxing mouldie. There grows a certain kind of
it in many places; the grain whereof is easily taken out of the husk or cod,
and is therefore called cleansed Barley. Besides, all barley dries and cools,
and is also abstersive. The meal thereof boiled in honied-water with figs,
resolves al inflammations and impostumes: with rosin and pigeons dung, it
ripeneth all hard swellings: with melilot and heads of poppie, it eases the
pain of the sides; and with quinces or vinegar, it appeaseth inflammations of
the gout in the feet. The ashes of burnt barley is very good for burnings
being laid thereupon, and applied to flesh that cleaves not to the bone.
Concerning barley-bread, besides that it lies heavy upon the stomach, it
engenders also cold and clammie humors: it nourishes little, causes
windines; and yet some say it is very good for them that have the gout in their
feet. Of Beer.
There is a certain kind of drink called Beer made of barley, which is
commonly used instead of wine in all the north-countries, to wit in Germany,
Bohemia, Polonia, Fla^ders, and other cold countries of Europe. And if one take
too much thereof, it will inebriate or make dru^ken as well as wine, and that for
a longer time, because that beer is more gross and material, and of harder
digestion then wine: whereto it is so like also in force and virtue, that
aqua-vitae is likewise made thereof. Next after barley, oats are a grain very
commodious. Of Oats.
In leaf and stalk this grain resembles wheat; but it bears on the top
thereof as it were little twolegd grasshoppers, hanging where the grain is
enclosed: which though it seem to be created of nature rather fit for beasts
food, then for man: yet in Germany they oftentimes eat it in good fat flesh
pottage, being boiled therein after it has been cleansed of all filth, as is
used in rice. Oats also in the use of physic do very near approach to the
quality of Barley: For being applied, it dries, and moderately resolves. But
it is a little more cold, and somewhat more restringent in temper, so that it
is good for the flux in the belly, and profitable for those that have the cough.

Of Rice.
We may likewise consider of Rice, which the Ancients did hold to be a kind
of corn. The leaf thereof is very thick, resembling that of a leeke. The
stalk thereof is about a cubit long, knotty, bigger then that of wheat, and
stronger: on the top of it grows an ear parted into little branches, on both
sides whereof is the grain included, in a yealow husk, rough, and having
creuises on the side, of an ouall figure, and being taken out of the husk it
becomes white. It grows in some places of Italy in moist ground: but it
abounds in Asia, Syria, and Egypt. Rice is very usual in meat, and
nourishes meanly: but it is made of more e^^^ digestion, and of better taste
being sod in cowes-milk, almond milk, or fat flesh pottage. It is very good
to give to such as have the laxe, and colic. The flower thereof is good in
repercussiue plasters. It staieth inflammations that rise in the dugs. The
decoction of Rice also is very profitable in clisters, against laxes or fluxes,
and in drink likewise. Now to end this talk, Of Millet.
we will say something concerning Millet, for it has many properties both in
food and physic. This plant bears leaves like those of a reed, having a
stalk of a cubit long, thick, knottie, and rough. At the top thereof do hang
certain hairie heads in which the grain grows in great abundance, being
round, massiue, yealow, and lapped in a thin skin. In many places bread is made
of this grain, and even at Verona it is carried hot about the streets, whereof
they make much account; for it has a sweetness very pleasant to the taste, if it
be eaten a little after it is drawn out of the oven: but being hard it is
unpleasant. The common people of Trent, are nourished with Millet boiled only,
eating it with milk, and it is the best food that they can get. Besides, there
are very good fomentations or serge-clothes made of Millet, to dry moderately,
and to drive out ventosities, especially being mixed with salt. It is happily
applied against griping in the belly caused through windines: but it is much
better yet being mingled with flowers of Cammomill. It is commonly fried in a
pan, and then put hot into a bag, and so laid upon the diseased parts. It has
the virtue to preserve medicines long time from moulding and putrefying, if
they be buried in an heap of Millet: yea and fresh flesh is long kept thereby
in hot weather. Now to finish this days discourse, it seems good to me
(ACHITOB) that you speak of the vine and fruit thereof, of which men make
their most delicious drink.


Of the Vine, of Grapes, of Wine, and of Aqua-vitae. Chap. 80.
ACHITOB. IT were very superfluous to make here a long discourse concerning the
Vine, and concerning the diverse qualities which are found in this plant, of
which we do not only receive Grapes (a most pleasant, and delicious meat)
but have also that most exquisite drink which we call wine: for all the world
has so much cherished the vine, that there are few people of any condition
soever, but can discourse sufficiently well of it, and of the nature thereof.
Property of the Vine.
We will briefly then declare that which we shall think most notable therein,
and chiefly in the use of medicine. The leaves, and tender branches thereof
help the headache, being laid thereupon, and appease inflammations and heat
of the stomach. The juice of them drunk serve against Dysenterias, or fluxes,
spitting of blood, weakness of stomach, and the corrupt appetite of great
bellied women. The licour of vines, which lies thick upon the stock thereof
like gum, being taken in drink with wine, purges gravel. The ashes of the
branches and stones, being mixed with vinegar, helps the hard bindings of
the fundament, and is good against the stingings and bitings of vipers, and
against inflammation of the spleen, being laid thereupon with oil of Roses,
Rue, and vinegar.

As grapes are the most singular fruits of Autumn; Of Grapes.
so also are they the most nourishing of all the fruits of summer, which are
not to be kept; and they engender the best nourishment especially when they
be perfect ripe. But all Raisins do not nourish after one manner: for sweet
ones have a more hot substance: and therefore they cause thirst, do swell the
stomach, and loosen the belly. Contrariwise, tart ones do bind, do nourish
little, and are of hard digestion. Green and sour ones are naught for the
stomach. And the bigger grapes are, the better they are, especially if they be
gathered very ripe. They which are kept hanged up are best for nourishment,
because their great moisture is dried. The fresh and very ripe grape is good
for burnings, if the wine thereof be pressed out betwixt ones hands upon the hurt
places. The mother of the wine or grapes being kept, and mixed with salt, is
profitable against inflammations of the dugs, and hardness of them through too
much abundance of milk. The decoction thereof clisterized, serves greatly for
dysenterias or fluxes. The stones or seeds have a restringent virtue, and are
profitable for the stomach. Being parched and beaten into powder, it is good
to eat with meat against the flux, and weakness of stomach. Dry grapes or
raisins have yet greater virtues and properties in the use of Physic: and
especially they which are sweetest, and of most substance, as they of Damascus,
of Cypres, and of Candia. The meat of them being eaten is good for the cough,
for the throat, the reins and the bladder: being eaten with their stones, they
serve against dysenterias. Being boiled in a platter with sugar and flower of
millet, of barley, and an egg, they purge the brain: being reduced into a
plaster, with flower of beans and cumin, Property of dry Raisins.
they appease inflammations. Besides, the nourishment of raisins is so
distributed through the body according as their nature is, sweet to the
sweet, sour to the sour, mean to them that participate with both qualities;
and the sweet, full and fat raisins do nourish more then the sharp and
lean. They which are without stones, either by nature or art, if they be
sweet, they are so deprived of all astriction, so that they be marvelous
lenitiue. And therefore are they most fit for pains of the breast, for the
cough, for sore throats, for maladies in the reins and bladder, and are good
also for the liver. But we may not here forget to make mention of the fruit of
the wild Vine commonly called in French (Lambrusque) because of the admirable
properties thereof. The grapes of it are gathered and put to dry in the shade:
they are of a restringent virtue, good for the stomach, and provoke urine:
they bind the belly, and stay spitting of blood.

Now must we speak of Wine which is made of the Raisin, Of Wine, and the
properties thereof.
and grape produced by the vine. Concerning it many affirm, that it is the
most sweet licour of all others, the principal aid, and chief prop of
human life, the chief restorer of the vital spirits, the most excellent
strengthener of all the faculties and actions of the body, reioicing and
comforting the heart very much: and for these causes they say that the Ancients
have called that plant, which bears the fruit, out of which we receive this
wine (Vitis quasi Vita) life. But yet we must not deceive our selves by so
many praises attributed to wine, considering that the use thereof by the least
excess that may be, does bring so many evils upon man, that they cannot be
numbered, nor sufficiently bewailed. But being used temperately, we must
confess, that it is a thing of greatest efficacy in the world, to nourish and
strengthen the body. For it engenders very pure blood, it is very quickly
converted into nourishment, it helps to make digestion in all parts of the
body, it gives courage, purges the brain, refreshes the understanding,
reioiceth the heart, quickneth the spirits, provoke urine, drives out
ventosities, augmenteth natural heat, fatneth them who are in good health,
exciteth the appetite, purifieth troubled blood, opens stoppings, conuaieth
the nouriture throughout the whole body, makes good color, and purges out of
the body all that which is therein superfluous. But if wine be taken without
great mediocritie and temperance, it does by accident refrigerate the whole
body. For the natural heat thereof by too much drink remains choked, even
as a little fire is quenched by a great heap of wood cast thereupon. Besides,
wine is hurtful for the brain, for the marrow of the back bone, and the
sinews that grow out of it. Whereby it falls out, that this principal part
being hurt, there succeed in time, great and dangerous maladies thereupon, to
wit, the apoplexy, the falling evil, the palsy, shakings, numbnes of
members, conuulsions, giddines of the head, shrinking of ioints, the incubus,
the catalepsia, lethargy, frenzy, rheumes, deafenes, blindenes, and shrinking
of mouth and lips. Moreover wine immoderately drunk corrupts all good
manners, and discipline of life. For this is it that makes men quarrellers,
wranglers, rash, incensed, furious, dice-plaiers, adulterers, homicides, in a
word addicted to all vice, and dissolution. Besides it is to be noted, that
wine is fitter for old people, then for them of other ages: for it moderateth
and mantaineth the cold temperature of ancient folks, which has come upon
them for many years. Of the use of Wine.
But it should not be sufferable (if we will follow the counsel of the elders)
for children and young folks to drink thereof, till they attain to the age
of twenty years. For otherwise it is as much as to put fire to fire. And yet
if we would follow the counsel of the Sages, it should not be drunk at all,
except in certain indispositions which might happen to the body, according as
the use was in times past in Greece, namely at Athens, where wine was only
sold in Apothecaries shops, as Aqua-vitae now is. But above all, heed must be
taken that in the great heat of the year, wine be not drunk that is cooled
by snow, ye, or very cold water, as we see by great curiosity done among us.
For it greatly hurts the brain, the sinews, the breast, the lungs, the
stomach, the bowels, the spleen, liver, reins, bladder, and teeth. And
therefore it is no marvel, if they which ordinarily use it, are in time
tormented with the colicke and pain of the stomach: also with conuulsions,
palsies, apoplexies, difficulty in breathing, restrainment of urine, stoppings
of the inward members, the dropsy, and many other great and dangerous diseases.

Of Aquauitae, and the manner how to distill it.
It rests for conclusion of this discourse, that we say somewhat concerning
wine distilled through a limbecke in a bathe of water, which the Sages have
called for the admirable virtues thereof (Water of Life.) For to make which:
Take of the best wine a certain quantity according to the vessel wherein you
will distill it, and that fill to the third part of the pot or body: then
cover it with the head thereof very well closed, so that no vapor may issue
out, set it upon the furnace over a moderate fire, in such sort that the wine
boil not. And to have very good Aqua-vitae, you must distill it four or five
times and more: for the more it is rectified, the perfecter it will be. And in
the first distillation it is sufficient to receive the tenth part of the wine
put into the limbeck: for the second the half; for the third another moitie or
less: so that the oftener you distill, the lesser you have, but better always.
Now you may know whether Aqua-vitae have attained to full perfection, by these
signs: [If it arise to the like quantity of water, or very near, as the
liquor put in: if being lighted or set on fire it burn al away, and leave not
any mark of moisture in the bottom of the vessel: if a does being dipped
therein, and lighted, will not burn at all: if a drop of oil being cast
therein sink to the bottom; and if a drop of this water spilt in the palm of
your hand, do presently consume and euaporate.] Now the virtues and properties
of this Aqua-vitae, are very many. For as it preserves from all corruption
those things which have been steeped therein: so all corruption being done
away, it keeps, repaireth, mantaineth, augmenteth, and prolongeth the life of
those that receive it. And it does not only preserve the natural heat, and
mantaine it in vigor; but it also regenerateth the vital spirit; quickneth
and warmeth the stomach, sharpneth the brain and understanding, cleereth the
sight, repaireth the memory, especially if they use it, who are of a cold
temper, being subject to rawnes of stomach, windines, and other cold maladies.
Thus then have we declared enough concerning the plants and fruits which the
earth produces for the commodity of man. Wherefore, we will to morrow
consider of the diversity of terrestrial creatures created to the same end,
that we may be the more induced to glorify him, from whom we receive all these
benefits.


The end of the tenth days work.
THE ELEVENTH DAYS WORK.
Of terrestrial beasts, and especially of Serpents: namely of the Aspis or
Adder, and of the Viper. Chapter 81.
ASER. BEing this day to discourse concerning living creatures of the Earth, so
much as the subject of our speech does require for the accomplishment of our
work: It behooves us to consider that the terrestrial beasts, being as it
were innumerable in the species; yet they consist of two principal kinds: to
wit, of Insect, and of perfect beasts. They of the first kind are called of
the Latins by this word (Insecta) because of the incisions which appear upon
their bodies, retayning life in that part, which we behold divided, and cut
off: and they are engendered for the most part of putrefaction; but these things
agree not with perfect creatures, who take their form in the matrice. Now we
will here summarily entreat of Insect animals generally, and consequently of
the most excellent of their kind, whereof some creep upon the earth, Of
Insect beasts.
as serpents; and others fly, as flies. We are first then to note that all
insect beasts are wild, and are very hardly tamed and made mild: for they
have their inner senses very weak; whereas such creatures as are made tame and
familiar, must have the faculty of imagination and good memory. Moreover,
these kinds of beasts have little blood, or none at all, as Philosophers hold,
who find in them a certain vital humor only, which Nature has given them
instead of blood: for which cause they are naturally fearful; and fear
hinders creatures from being tamed. Likewise they have commonly but short
life: and beasts, who should be made familiar, require time for that purpose.
Furthermore, in this kind of Insect beasts some are engendered only of
putrefaction, as flies: others of eggs, as serpents: and also by another manner,
which is perfected in the matrice by eggs, as the viper. Now in all this kind of
beasts, they are most admirable, which we have here named, to wit: serpents,
because of their greatness and puissant effects, and hony-flies or bees, and
silke-wormes also, because of their work.

But amongst the many kinds of serpents, Of the Aspis.
the Aspis or Adder is very worthy of consideration, and much to be feared:
for there are three sorts, each whereof causes him that is bitten by them
soon to die, except he be quickly and very well succored. One sort is named
(Ptyas) another (Chersaea) both earth-serpe^ts: and the third is called
(Chelidonia) which abides about banks of rivers, and specially of Nilus. The
Ptyas, and Chersaea are of ashie and green color, drawing a little to the
color of gold. But the Chelidonia has a black back, and white belly like to
swallows. And both the one and the other sort are of five cubits long in the
regions of Africa. They raise up their neck when they will cast their venim;
wherewith when one is attained their present remedy is speedily to cut away
all that which is bitten, or else it is hard to save them from death: and yet
many speak of diverse remedies; and amongst others they commend very strong
vinegar, aduising that it should be given to the patient to drink, even so
much and for so long time till he feel the quality in the right side of his
flanks: for they say that the liver is first deprived of feeling in such an
accident. Some use Opopanax (a drug extracted out of Panaces Heracleum) which
is given to drink in wine mixed with water, to cause them vomit the venim
already spread throughout the whole body. And after such vomiting they must
take very good treacle in drink, and apply it also upon the biting.
Mattheolus describes a quintessence, In. Diosco^. Lib. 6.
composed of Aqua-vitae, and some simples, and aromaticall drugs, which is an
excellent remedy of great efficacy, when such accidents happen. For indeed it
is most certain, that waters artificially composed, and ingeniously distilled,
consisting of most subtle parts, are in a moment dispersed throughout all the
veins and arteries, and every part of the whole body. And therefore they
cause, that the blood and spirits wax not cold, and do not congeale in those
vessels which contain them: whereby also the natural heat coming to augment
it self, does strongly resist the force of the venim, and does presently
surmount it.

The Viper also is a kind of serpent, it has a flat head, Of the viper.
and broad near to the joint of the neck, which is naturally small, it has a
quick eye, and a nail in the nosthrill thereof, having all the rest of the
body short, with the tail also, and is of a pale color. Her pace and motion
is very quick, and she bears her head aloft: she differs from other
serpents, in that they lay but eggs, and she brings forth her young ones
alive: which before they come forth do so gnaw and eat her belly, that she
lives not long after. And although the viper be very venomous, yet is her
flesh very good for the composition of treacle, yea though her venim remain
with her after death. Moreover, the biting of the viper is as much, or more
dangerous then that of the Aspis: for they who are hurt die within seven hours
after, except they be well succored; and at farthest within three days,
except they be helped by excellent remedies; of which, amongst others, this is
good: clean a chicken in two, and lay the inside of her hot upon the wound,
and do oftentimes reiterate this order: scarifying the flesh round about the
biting, and applying diverse times cupping glasses thereto. After which, you
must give the patient of the juice of ashtree leaves to drink, and lay the
same leaves upon the wound, or else cammomill brayed, or a plaster made of
barley meal, and honied vinegar. Some use bryar taken in drink with wine; or
the juice of baulme leaves drunk also with wine. Some say also that the viper
being flayed, her tail, and head cut off, and her intrailes drawn out and
cast away, afterward sod like an eele, and eaten by him that has bin bitten,
does greatly aid him to obtain health. As treacle also being chiefly made of
vipers flesh, eaten, and applied to, is a singular remedy in such accidents.

I could here discourse of many other kinds of serpents: but it is not our
intent to represent a perfect history of living things, considering that many
Authors have written thereof for our learning. Wherefore we will content our
selves only to add to that which we have said concerning serpents, Hist.
not. lib. ^. c. 14.
how that Pliny has noted, that in the Indies there are so great and such
prodigious ones, that they will swallow an Heart, or a bull all whole, and that
in the days of Attilius Regulus General of the Romans, in time of the wars
against the Carthaginians, there was seen a serpent in Africa of an hundred
and twenty foot long, near to the flood of Bagrada, which was assailed with
engines of war, and all manner of weapons, in such sort as if they had
determined to give assault to some strong city: that in the reign also of the
Emperor Claudius, there was a serpent killed named (Boa) which was found in
mount Vatican, that had a child found whole in her belly. This author does
make mention of a certain town in Italy called Amycla, Lib. 3 c. 5.
which had been abandoned and left desolate of the inhabitants, by reason of
serpents that chased them away. But this is most admirable which he reports,
Lib. 10 c. 7^
that spiders seeing a serpent laid along under a tree where they have weaued
their cobwebs, will run directly down by a thread upon the head of the
serpent, and will pierce him so to the quick of the brain, that they will
constrain the serpent to hiss and gnash his teeth, to tumble and torment
himself, without ever being able to get away, or break the spiders thread: in
such sort that he shall still remain there. Lib. 11. c. 29.
He says also that a Locust will kill a serpent, in wringing him hard by the
throat, and will not loosen till such time as he be through dead. But who will
not greatly wonder at that which the same author testifies to have seen by
experience: Lib. 16. c. 13.
that a serpent enclosed and environed with ash leaves on the one side, and
fire on the other, he should rather choose to cast himself into the fire, then
to save himself through the ash leaves? So much is this tree contrary to
serpents, that they even fly the shadow thereof both at morning and ceuen;
and indeed to drink the juice of the leaves thereof, and to lay the same
leaves upon the wound, is a sovereign remedy against all their bitings.
Whereupon Pliny takes occasion to note, how that nature does herein show
herself a very benign and provident mother toward men, in that the ash
should always budde before serpents should creep out of the earth, and that
these trees should still be green, till such time as serpents should have
withdrawn themselves. Now let us speak of the other kinds of Insects chosen
by us, as the most excellent, to wit (Bees and silkewormes) concerning which
AMANA) let us hear you discourse.


Of Bees, and of their honey and wax, and of Silke-wormes. Chap. 82.
AMANA. Many grave authors have not disdained, diligently to search out, and
curiously to describe the history of Bees, being chiefly moved thereunto
through admiration of their cunning in composing two so excellent commodities
as are honey and wax: we will here then deliver that which we esteem to be
most worthy of note in their writings. Of Bees.
First Bees are rusticke and wild; or tame and familiar. And the wild are
more illfauored to behold, more fierce and naught. Of the tame there are two
kinds. One kind are round and short, and of diverse colors, and these are the
best. The other are long and like to waspes, and the woorst of these are rough
and hairie. All of them hate stincks and infections, and fly from them, for
which cause they never sting such as are perfumed with sweet odors. They never
fly against the light, nor upon any flesh, nor to blood, nor to any fat thing,
but do only seek out leaves and flowers, which have an odoriferous juice.
They delight in harmonious sounds and noises, whereby it comes, that being
scattered, they are assembled together, by the sound of a basin, or of some
little bells, or by clapping the hands gently together. They use great policy
amongst themselves, and there is no swarm but has a king and captain, which
is bigger then all the other Bees, and has short wings, straight legs, a
brauer march then all the rest, with a spot in his forehead, which serves as a
Diadem or crown, and is in every part more slick, smooth, and fair then all
the rest. When he goes any whither, the whole troop follows, encompassing
and garding him, not permitting that he be easily seen. And whilst all are
at work, the king goes from place to place cheering them, and he himself
does nothing else. He never comes forth except when the whole troop goes
into the fields: which may be known certain days before by the noise which
the Bees make within their hiues, attending for some fair day to part in. If
the king loose a wing, the troop does not forsake him: for always every one
of them desires to be near him, and to do him service. And if he be weary
they help him on their shoulders: if tired, they carry him: and in what place
soever he rests, all the swarm encampeth: If perhaps they loose him, they
establish a new king of the race of the former, having always diverse elected
and known amongst them to succeed those that fail. For the rest of their
government, their wit is no less admirable then their work, as is recorded
to have been observed by Aristomachus Solensis, who delighted himself for 58.
year together to nourish diligently these little animals, so much he loved
them, never applying himself to any other thing. By which kind of means it
was known that in the day time the Bees ward, and watch at the gate as in a
camp, and rest in the night till such time as one amongst them being as
Sentinel, wakeneth them with two or three sounds as it were of a trumpet. Then
all of them assemble to see if it be fair weather: for they can judge of the
winds, and of the rain, and in foul weather they bouge not: but if the
weather be fair and calm, all go to work. Some bring in their feet, that
which they have drawn out of flowers: others bear water in their mouth: and
some again helping them with a small hair do lade themselves with drops of
water over all their body. The yoonger sort go forth to do these things, and
the older travel within the hiues, where their offices are appointed them. For
some build others polish; this brings in matter, that victuals; another water,
and all of them have all things common, and observe equality in meat and
work. They watch who are idle, and chastise and punish them even sometimes by
death. First they make their combs and wax, whereof they build their
lodgings. After they be lodged, they consider how to multiply themselves, and
last of all they make their honey. And they have this witty industry, to mix
in the matter, wherewith they first besmeare or ouercast their hiues, the juice
of the most bitter herbs they can find, to the end to put such small beasts
or flies out of taste that would suck thereof; even as if they had been
informed, that their work was sought after. In brief all their manner of
life, order and policy is every way admirable.

But what may we say particularly concerning their honey and wax, Of Honey.
the use whereof is so commodious and profitable to man? It is certain that
these industrious creatures know how to choose and gather a kind of dew, which
falls from heaven (at the rising of certain stars, especially in the
dog-daies) upon the leaves of plants, whereof they make honey. And the best is
that which is of a deep yealow color, and has a pleasant smell, being pure
and neat, shining every where, and sweet in taste, being also of a mean
substance between liquid, and thick. In virtue it has the property to hinder
corruption, and rottennes: and therefore some make gargarismes thereof to
cleanse and mundifie the ulcers of the mouth. It preserves life especially in
those that are of cold complexion: so we behold that the Be, which is a
feeble, and tender creature lives nine or ten years, because she is
nourished by honey. It is abstersive, opening, and attracteth humors. Being
in time applied to any part of the body which is bruised by some blow, or
fall, it is a singular remedy to heal any such bruise; if so be the skin
be not broken. And the wax (which is made of the combs taken out of the
hiues, Of Wax.
after that they have been well pressed, and that all the honey has been
drained out) is likewise of singular vtility for men. The best should be very
yealow, sweet, fat, light, pure, close, even, neat, and cleansed from all
filth. It is of mean quality betwixt hot, cold, moist, and dry things, and is
of a gross and clammie substance: retaining an hot and resolutiue virtue,
which also abounds in honey. It is ministered in drink against Dysenterias:
but above all it is profitable in the composition of ointments, which are made
for wounds.

Of Silkewormes.
Now let us speak of Silkewormes, which next to Bees merit most admiration
amongst all insect beasts. This worm is first bredde of another worm of the
same kind which has horns: for thereof comes a snaile, which afterward
produces the silk worm called Bombyx, and by some Necydalus, which is like
to a butterfly; and lays eggs through the copulation of the male and female;
out of which eggs in the end those worms creep, who by so maruailous
industry do make us our silk: that in a short time is drawn out of their
mouth by a small thread, which afterward is weaued with such wondrous art, that
therein is nothing broken, false, or uneven, but every whit perfect from the
beginning to the end of every bottom or clewe, being one fastened to another.
And that which makes their labor seem more wondrous, is, that these
creatures are without flesh, blood, or bones; without veins, sinews, or
arteries; without scales, or any intrailes: as also outwardly they are seen to
be without teeth, nails, prickles, or bristles, hair, eyes, or ears: and
yet in less then forty days, how small soever they be when they are
engendered, they become thick, and great; having the benefit of eating and
sleep, and they cast their skin four times. And then their body begins to
glister, oftentimes showing the skeane of silk which is in their belly, which
if they must make white, they have their head as white as silver: if the silk
must be yealow, their head wilbee like gold: if green, or tawny, their head
will bear the sign thereof. Then do they seek where to fasten it, and so
weaue their silk in order, till such time as they have performed their work;
which does not only serve for clothing for men, but for a singular remedy
also to comfort a sick-hart, to rejoice it, and recreate sad, and melancholy
spirits, as we may acknowledge by that excellent confection, called of
Physicians (Alkermes) which for the most part compounded of the decoction and
infusion of silk in the juice of kermes, being drunk is a sovereign
medicine against faintnes and syncopes. But having already said enough
concerning Insect beasts, for the subject of our discourse, we will
consequently speak of some perfect beasts, according as we shall make choice
of, as of the most worthy to enrich our present work, to the end, as we have
decreed that the creator may be glorified: whereof (ARAM) you must now
entreat.


Of the Dog, and of the Horse. Chapter 83.
ARAM. AMongst perfect beasts, the Dog and Horse do by good right deserve the
first and chief degree, as well because of their admirable sense, as also
because of the vtility, pleasure, and commodity, which they bring to man.
Concerning these creatures, Carda. in. 10. lib. de. subt.
then shall our present discourse entreat: and first of the dog; which (as many
authors affirm) took his original from the woolfe, being tamed by the
industry of man. Now there are many sorts of dogs, all which we may comprehend
under two kinds: the one is, of them which are to keep house, and the other to
chase withal. Of the house-dogge.
The house-dogge ought to be of gross and big body, being square set, and
rather short then long: his head great, his throat wide, thick lips, big
hanging ears, his eyes blew and black, burning, and sparkling, his neck
thick and short, his breast large and rough, his shoulders broad, legs thick
and hairy, and a short and thick tail, which is a sign of force: (for the
long and small tail notes swiftnes) his pawe and nails great, his barking
high, big and fearful: above all vigilant and very watchful, not running
here and there, but stayed, and more slow then hasty. Hunting hounds are of
sundry sorts. Of Dogs for the chase.
They which are swift are either white or brown, or gray, or black. And the
white are best: for they are well winded, quick, fierce, and will not leave the
chase for any heat whatsoever, neither will break off for the prease of
hunters, nor for the noise and cry of men: and they observe change better then
any other kind of hound, and are more certain: but they fear the water
somewhat, especially in wintertime. If they be clean white, or spotted with
red, they are the better. The brown does second them, and are of a great
courage, forward, quick and fierce, fearing neither water nor cold: but they
cannot endure heat, and are not so easy to govern as the white. The graie
are not so quick and furious as the rest; neither yet the black, who are
commonly the biggest bodied. Yet there are good dogs of all hairs and colors,
but to choose a fair and good hound indeed, these signs must be observed. His
head must be meanly thick, more long then flat: his nosthrils wide and open:
ears broad, and reasonable thick: crooked reins: thick loins; big and
large hanches; fair thighs; the right hamme-ioint well knit; the tail thick
near to the raines, and the rest small to the end: the hair under his belly
rough, a thick leg, and the pawe of his foot dry, and like to the pawe of
a fox: great nails, as high behind as before: and the dog must be short
and crooked, but the bitch must be long. For open nosthrils declare the dog
to be well winded: crooked raines and straight hams signify quicknes: the
tail thick near to the raines, long and small to the end, denote strength
and force in the raines, and that the hound is well breathed: hair rough under
the belly, declares that he is painful, fearing neither water nor cold: a
thick leg, foxes foot, and great nails, demonstrate that he is not heavy
footed, and that he is strong in members to run long without tiring. Besides
hounds, there be greyhounds, blood hounds, water-spaniels, tumblers and
mungrels, all which are of diverse kinds: but our meaning is not to set down
an entire narration thereof, considering that it is not necessary for that
purpose, which we have decreed in our discourses. Wherefore we will content our
selves to note in general, that there is no beast of greater sense and love,
nor more docible then the dog. For there be few things fit for the pleasure of
man, but may he easily taught to this kind of creatures, especially in all
points concerning hunting. Also histories abound with testimonies of their
knowledge, and love toward those that nourish them. Pliny reports of a dog,
Hist. not. lib. 8. c. 40.
which defended his master being assailed by thieves, till such time as they
had slain him: and that after his death the dog would not leave his body, but
kept it both from the birds, and from other wild beasts that would have
devoured it. That another dog also knowing one amongst a troop of people that
had slain his master, flew upon him, and bit him with such fury, that the
murderer was constrained to confess the cause of the dogs rage, revealing his
own misdeed.

Now speak we of the horse, Of the Horse.
which of al beasts is most profitable for man, and is full of meeknes and
docilitie. He is praised in seven and twenty conditions: of which he seems
to take three of the woman: to wit, young age, meeknes of manners and beawtie:
three of the lion, courage, force, and to be tall before, not bowing in the
midst, nor higher before then behind: three of the Eagle, a good eye, a little
head, and to bear his head straight, and aloft: three of the ox, the foot
great, thighs moderately thick, and short and strong ioints: three of the
heart, quicknes, deliuernes to run and leap well, and lightness: three of the
ass, strong hoofes, an hard skin, and a strong and able back: three of the
fox, a fair tail, agilitie, and a fair skin: three of the goose, to eat
well and quick, and to digest it, to have full bowels, and in his pace his
feet equally distant, without enterfiering: and three which are proper to
himself, a quick and easy pace, liuelines, promptnes, and gallantnes of
heart; and readiness to obey the bridle and spur without being slow therein. If
then we will know when an horse is perfectly fair, That which is required in a
fa^^e Horse.
we must first note, that he have a small head, a gallant and fair forehead,
dry and clean flesh, great and black eyes and standing out; short, sharp
and straight ears; little, dry and thin lips, and not uneven; a wide
throat; big, open, and red nosthrils; his neck neither too short nor too long,
but mean, lofty, not too fat and crooked like an arch and vault, with a fine
curled and long maine: also that he have a large breast, soft, and bearing out
like that of a dove; big boned legs, but lean, and dry of flesh, straight,
high, and even from the foot to the knee; thick, long, fat, sinewie, and
fleshie thighs, but yet answerable to his buttockes, sides, and flanks; high
heels, thick and short ioints, and not close to the hoof which must be hard,
high, round, black and hollow: he must also have the back short, not bunched,
nor high like an asses back, but even, not too high nor too low; broad, long,
great, straight, and well flesht shoulders; a smooth, strong, massiue, thick,
and as it were a double crupper, a short tail of bone, small, strong, long
haired, which he must bear close betwixt his thighs; a large and round
flank, full sides, and long above the belly, which must be round, small, and
well set under the sides, that must be broad, and long with a little distance
from the hinder part to the joint of the haunch, and with small and equal
cods. How an Horse is good.
Moreover, he must have to be good, a stately pace, a deliver trot, a swift
gallop, a light course, a bounding and sudden leap, an assured and ready pace,
quick at hand, and prompt to turn every way, to recule back, and to run
suddenly forward, not stamping or rattling with his bit, nor kicking against the
spur, but conforming himself to the will of his master, without starting, or
being afraid of any thing that he sees, hears or feels, not flinging and
kicking amongst other horses. In a word that horse is to be esteemed which has
a lively and courageous heart, which is obedient, gentle, deliver, quick, and
well mouthed, having a good foot, What hair is best.
and strong reins. For hair, the bay is best of all others, which being of
diverse colors, do depend nevertheless upon these four, bay, rushet, black,
and gray. For these four colors proceed of four principal humors whereof
the body of an horse is composed, and which agree and accord with the fire,
air, earth and water. For choler which resembles the fire engenders the bay;
blood which accords with the air, produces the rushet or reddish colored.
Fleame which is answerable to the water, causes the gray; and melancholy which
agrees with the earth, begets the black. The bay hair then excels all
others, as being that which bears the sign and mark of a courageous horse:
hardy in war, and most singular in iusts and combats, in so much as he
fears nothing, nor loses courage, howsoever he feel himself wounded:
because also he sees not, by reason of his color, the blood run streaming
out of his body. The russet hair betokens a quick, hardy, and prompt horse,
but not of great force; and the black is melancholy, and unsound: and the gray
is heavy, and fearful. Moreover, by how much more these colors are
diuersified, and mixed with marks, and spots; by so much is the goodness or
badnes of the horse greater. We may also say truly, Of the commodity by Horses.
that amongst all the beasts which God has created for the service of man;
there is not one which may compare with the horse, either in beauty, labor,
understanding, or profit, and commodity. For the horse only, serves for an
honorable grace for man: who makes him to go at his pleasure, sometimes
softly, sometimes a pace, now a trot, anon a gallop, another time with swift
posting speed: and sometimes he plaieth with him, causing him to make many
risings, and diverse cur^ets, bounds and leapes: another time he makes him
run wheeling about in a round ring, then to bound, and rebound, and lastly to
go easily forwards. And by means of this use and exercise, a man chaseth
away melancholy humors, fortifieth his stomach and whole body, and augmenteth
his disposition, grace, and ability: Moreover there is no journey so difficult,
which he will not undertake with a good horse, knowing that he can pass any
whither, and save himself from the assaults of thieves, and robbers: yea and
oftentimes the horse fights with feet and teeth for the safety of his
master. But these generous beasts do especially declare their valor and
courage in the cruel encounters of battles, and fights, being incited by
the fearful noise of gunshot, by the hideous thundering of cannons, by the
sounding of trumpets, and rumbling of drums: then I say when all being in
confusion, it seems that the earth opens, that the place flies in peecs, and
that hell swallows up all, in respect of the shiuering of lances, clinking of
armor, and the dreadful cries of men, who are there, by thousands, hewn in
pieces. And many do escape by the only means of their horses, God showing them
such favor as histories are full of testimonies thereof, and of the admirable
sense, wherewith nature has endued these beasts. Amongst which Alexanders
horse Bucephalus is very much celebrated, chiefly because that he would not
suffer any to ride him but his master, although he had been clothed in
kingly robes. It is also said, that this horse being wounded at an assault of
Thebes, he would not permit Alexander to mount upon another, till such time as
he had brought him out of all danger. Hist. not. lib. ^. c. 42.
Pliny reports, that a certain king of Scythia being overthrown in
battle, when his enemy came to disarme him, his horse ran upon him with
such fury, that he killed him, revenging so the death of his master: And that
after the death of king Nicomedes (who was slain) his horse would never eat,
but died through hunger and sorrow: And that one named Antiochus seazing upon
an horse of one Galatus slain in fight, mounted thereupon, reioicing at the
death of the other: which the horse of the dead-man understanding, did in rage
and despite so fling, and run, that he bare Antiochus over mountains, and
rocks, casting himself at last down from an high place, so breaking his own
and his riders neck. But we have said enough hereof. Now (ACHITOE) let us
hear you continue the discourse concerning beasts.


Of the Elephant, of the Camel, and of the Rhinoceros. Chap. 84.
ACHITOB. IT seems that there is no beast, which approaches nearer to the
sense of man then the Elephant. For he is endued with so excellent wit,
discretion, and memory, that he surpasses in these gifts all other beasts:
Of the Elephant.
as he does in strength also. He is bigger then two great oxen, covered with
black hair, having eyes like to those of swine, and such a mouth also, being
covered with a truncke, or snout that hangs down to the ground, which serves
him for an hand to put his victuals into his mouth, both meat and drink: and
out of both sides thereof two great tuskes do issue, which are fastened in his
upper iaw. His ears are two spans broad, his thighs and legs thick and long,
in such sort that some are found of fifteen foot high: his nails (being five
in number about his feet) are round, and each nail a palm broad, and his
tail is about three handfuls long. In many regions of Africa they use these
elephants to ride ordinarily upon, and they serve for many domestic businesses
also, so that the traffic of them there is as that of horses here. But the
Indians use them in the war, putting upon this beast, a certain saddle being
girt very straight about him with two iron chains, upon which they set two
wooden houses, on either side one, and in each of those houses do three men
lodge, between which houses and the elephants neck, is a little seat placed,
upon which a man sits like as if he were on horse back, who guides this
beast by his words, which he understands very well: and he carries neither
bridle, nor halter, nor any thing else upon his head. And even as they, which
are within these houses upon his back are armed with coats of maile, with
bows, lances, swords, and targets: so likewise will he be covered with a
maile especially upon his head, and snout, to which men fasten a sword of two
fadomes in length, thick, and as broad as a man's hand, wherewith this beast
does help himself in fight. In all things else he is of incredible force. For
Jews de Barthema in the discourses of his Indie voiages does testify that he
did see three elephants alone draw a ship out of the sea, and set it a land,
after the people had gotten under it three great wedges of wood. For kneeling
down upon the earth on the seashore, they did with their heads cast the ship
on dry land. Lib. 3.
Pliny records many other wonders concerning these beasts, saying, that they
honor the stars, and principally the sun and moon; that some have been
seen, who being sick, have fallen down back-wards, casting up herbs
toward heaven, as if they would offer up the fruits of the earth in sacrifice,
and prayer to obtain succor from above: that all of them do honor a king,
and fall down upon their knees before him, and that they bring chaplets of
herbs, and flowers unto him. Hist. not. lib. 8.
That some of them have been seen to record by themselves in the night time,
that, which they have been taught in the day time, to the end that they might
the better put it in practice. That marching in troops, the eldest amongst
them goes foremost, as captain: and another behind them as ordering the
rereward: that intending to pass any river, they put the yoongest elephants
foremost, knowing that the great elephants would sink lower, because of their
excessive heaviness, and would by that means make the fourd more difficult to
pass, by reason of the water, which would gather there. That they do no harm
except they be provoked thereto; and also that they are so gentle toward other
weak beasts, that passing by a flock of small cattle, they will gently turn
back with their heads all those beasts which they meet, for fear of hurting
them, or treading them under their feet. They are very long lived, even to
two hundred or three hundred years, as Aristotle affirms: and when the male
and female couple together as man and woman, they withdraw themselves for this
purpose into most secret and hidden places: and the females bear their young
ones for two years together, and do never bring forth but one, and that but
once only in their life. Of their teeth is the true iuorie made: but because
there are but few to be had, therefore some saw and cut in pieces the bones of
Elephants, which they sell for iuorie. Moreover, Historiographers report that
the first time that Elephants were seen at Rome, was in the triumph of Pompey,
after he had subdued Afric, for he had two yoked to his chariot: and that in
the turnies, and fence-playes which Germanicus Caesar made, to show pastime to
the people of Rome, there were Elephants that leaped, as if they would skippe
and dance: and that forty two Elephants were brought in triumph to Rome after
the memorable victory, which Ruscius Metellus did obtain in Sicily against
the Carthaginians.

Of the Cammell.
The camel is also a very tractable beast and profitable to man, very
ingenious, and apt to receive discipline. For they serve to ride upon, to bear
great burdens, and also to show men pastime in many exercises which is taught
them by use. There are some in all parts of the world, but they abound in
Africa. And the Arabians hold them for their greatest riches and possessions.
There are three kinds of them; one whereof is very great, another sort are
very little: these two kinds having but one bunch upon their backs: and the
other are of mean stature, and have two bunches, each whereof are fit to
carry burdens, and to ride upon also: besides, some of them resemble asses in
color, and some are reddish: and they have their hoofes almost cloven in two,
but not exactly, so that their foot expresses a kind of semblance of five
toes fleshie underneath, which makes them tender in stony places. The best
Camels are those of Africa, because they bear their charges for the space of
forty days together, without ever eating any oats, but only such grass as
is in the fields, or some boughs: and their least burden is of a thousand
weight: being by a natural instinct so urged to the service of man, that with
the least touch which may be upon their neck or knees, they will presently
bend and kneel upon the ground to receive their load; which when they feel
to be answerable to their strength, they rise again upon their feet. There
are some of them so swift, that they will run fifty miles and more in one day:
but these are of small stature, being good for nothing but to ride upon. The
noblemen of Arabia, Numidia, and Africans of Lybia do never use other steeds.
And when the king of Tombuto would have any matter of importance to be
signified to the merchants of Numidia with speed, he sends a Post upon one
of his camels, who runs from Tombuto to Darha, or Segelmessa in the space of
seven or eight days, which are about four hundred and fifty French miles:
being a country full of deserts, so that the way is very hard to find out,
but by the very direction of the Camel it self. When these beasts are
lusty, which lasts for forty days together with them, they wax very
fierce and outrageous, and will remember the least blow that their masters
shall strike them with a stick: so that if they may fasten their teeth upon
any of them, they will lift them up into the air, then cast them down again,
and murder them with their fore-feete, in terrible and grievous manner: but
that time being passed, they become gentle and tractable, as before. They never
drink but from five days to five days, and sometimes they stay nine, or
fifteen days; whether it be by custom, or that this beast is dry, or else
that Nature has so well provided that this creature which lives in deserts,
should have no need to drink oftentimes in those places, where water is
seldom found. He daunceth at the sound of the trumpet, and seems to rejoice
at music, refreshing himself, and taking new courage, then, when (being
tired with a tedious journey) his guide begins to sing some merry song:
Lib. 9.
and some also have been seen to dance at the sound of a tabor, as the
Author of the description of Africa does testify.

Now speak we of the Rhinoceros (which is named by some the Bull of India)
being admirable amongst other beasts. Of the Rhinoceros.
For he is almost as big as the Elephant, his thighs are bigger, of the color
of wood, being all naturally armed with shells, which he bears like bucklers.
He has in the uppermost part of his forehead an horn for the length of a span
or more, very hard, strong, straight, and very sharp, which turns toward
the forehead, and when he will fight he whetteth it. And there are some also
which have another little horn upon the skin of their back, which is so
hard and difficult to penetrate, that no arrow how sharp soever it be, can
pierce it thorough. And therefore the Indians arm themselves with their skins,
as we do with harneis and murrions, and cover their horses with it, as we do
ours with barbs and armor. This beast has continual war with the Elephant,
and is his great enemy, fighting chiefly with him, yea and with all other
beasts, when the female brings forth her young ones: of which the male is so
careful, that nothing dare come nigh him, but he will wreake his fury
thereon. And he remains for the most part victorious over the Elephant, if he
can pick him under the belly, as being the softe^^ place of all his body. For
when the Rhinoceros does strike him there, he gives him so deep a wound, that
the Elephant can hardly escape death. And he has this wit naturally, that when
he will prepare himself to fight, he whetteth his horn against some rock:
which horn the Indians use in many things, and especially against all poison:
so that being bitten or stung by any serpent, or other venomous beast, they
have their recourse to this horn. Whereupon the author of the universal
Cosmographie takes occasion to suppose, Theu. lib. 11.
that that which is attributed to the Unicorn, is the property of the
Rhinoceros, and that the pieces which are showed under the name of
Vnicornes-horne, are of the horn of this Indie-beast: considering that there
are as many such Unicorns as Pliny, Solinus, and Munster write of, as there
be Phenixes or Griffrons. But omitting such disputations, let us consider upon
other excellent beasts, the discourse whereof (ASER) I refer to you.


Of the Lion, of the Tigre and of the Panther. Chapter 85.
ASER. Of the Lion.
OF all foure-footed beasts, the Lion does bear away the chief price. He has
a long body of tawny color, a fierce look, his tail long, which he
oftentimes moves, his hair before soft, and broad, his skin impenetrable:
his hinder part narow, a great head, a wide throat, his neck and teeth so
strong, that he can carry away a camel, and he is armed with very great and
strong claws: besides he is so hardy that he fears not alone to assail
two hundred men. And then are they in their chiefest strength, when the hair
of their neck is so long that it covers their neck and shoulders. Africa
nourishes many of these beasts, being most cruel, especially in the kingdom
of Fez, and in all Aethiopia: but they which keep in the cold mountains are
not so dangerous, nor so troublesome to men. For in a little town named (Pietra
Rossa) which is very near to a forest that stretches out all along the foot
of a mountain of the said country, Lions do oftentimes enter, with so great
mildenes, that they gather together, and eat the bones and other things which
they find cast about the streets: and the women and children are so
accustomed thereto, that they are in no wise afraid of them. So many
Historiographers do write, that the Lion only amongst wild beasts, will do
nothing to those that couch and humble themselves before him. And how furious
soever he be, yet will he rather run upon a man then at a woman; and will
never set upon children, except he be very much oppressed by hunger. He knows
when the Lioness, who by nature is very lascivious and wanton, does suffer
her-selfe to be covered by the Leopard: and then does he run furiously upon
her to chastise her: which causes the Lioness to have the craft to go wash
herself in some river, to take away the sent of the Leopard, who has been
with her: or else she will follow the Lion a far off, to the end that he may
not smell her. This beast drinks little, and eats but in one day of twain:
and if he be well sufficed, he will remain three days after without eating.
When he finds himself assailed with shot, he declares his greatness of
courage, in that he makes no account thereof, endeavoring to defend himself by
the only hideousnes of his countenance: and it seems verily that he
protests to be constrained to annoy those who pursue him, in defense of
himself: in such sort, that rather through rage then for fear of death, he
sets him in his own guard. And he demonstrateth also another generositie of
heart, in that that feeling himself ouermatched both by dogs and hunters, if it
be in an open field where he may be seen, he will make semblant to despise
and scorn the hounds, sometimes making head against them, and will retire by
little and little for his honor, always standing upon his guard: but after
that he has gotten the wood, where he may not be seen to fly, he runs away
as fast as he can, knowing very well that the place covers his shame. If he
feel himself stricken and wounded, he can mark him who gave him the blow,
and will ever turn upon him, how great a number soever there be of people: and
yet for all his fury he quaketh to hear the rumbling of wagons, and is afraid
to see a cock which sets up himself and clappeth his wings, and more
afraid when he croweth: but above all he fears fire. They say also that Lions
be never sick but through pride: and that they which nourish them, being
minded to chase them, yea to mad them, do tie apes near unto them, whose
tricks and gestures they take in scorn; and vex themselves much thereat. But
it is strange that these furious and proud beasts, are tamed by the industry
of man, even to make them so familiar as to serve them. For histories report,
that Marcus Anthonius during the civil wars of the Romans; caused Lions to
be coupled to endure the yoke, and draw his chariot; and that he entered Rome
in triumph in such equipage. That Hanno also, captain of the Carthaginians,
did first undertake to touch Lions with his hand, and that he made them go up
and down the town like little dogs: whereupon the people doubting so quick
and pearcing a wit, which could invent how to tame the fiercest beast of all
others, took occasion to suppose their commonwealth but badly assured in his
hands, Lib. 1. de. singul. c. 76.
and so they banished him. Belon also in his observations recounteth, that
there is an ancient church at Constantinople, to every pillar whereof there is
a Lion tied, which the great Turk causes to be nourished, and that their
governors loose them, handle them, and tie them again when they list,
sometimes leading them through the city.

Of the Tigre.
The Tiger approaches near to the force of the Lion, and is more to be feared,
because of his cruelty and swiftnes, which they find true who chase after
their young ones. For when they carry them away, running with all speed upon
good horses, the Tigresse returns to her den, and finding it empty, takes
her course as swift as the wind, following them by the tract, which have
robbed her of her young ones: who perceiving her approach by the noise that she
makes, use to cast her down one, which she takes in her mouth, and carries
to her den with incredible speed, how heavy soever it be: and afterward
returns to the pursuit of the rest, always pursuing her fawnes, till such
time as she beholds that she cannot come at those who bear them away,
because they have gained some town, wherein they are immured. These beasts are
very common in Hircania, as also in the Indies, and in Aethiopia: and the
inhabitants there do hunt them much, because it is a very dangerous beast,
which would do much harm if it might multiply: as also because their skin
is very fair, whereof they make very excellent furs, which have spots of
diverse colors, wherewith they cloth themselves. But howsoever cruel the Tigre
is, yet the Hircanians do nourish and tame them for their pleasure. And Pliny
affirms, Hist. not. lib. 8. c. 4.
that the Tigresse has such fear and respect of man, that so soon as she
perceives him out of her den, she presently conueieth her young ones thence:
whereupon this author does take occasion to admire the power of nature, in that
the greatest and cruellest of all beasts do presently understand wherefore to
fear, without ever having seen any thing before, which might cause fear. He
recounteth also, that the emperor Augustus was the first that ever showed the
people of Rome a tame Tigresse in a cage, and that after him Claudius Caesar
showed four at a time. Ibid. c. 17.


The Panther is another common beast in the regions of of Africa, very savage,
and whom the inhabitants dread much. Of the Panther.
Some say that the Lucernes and Leopards are one kind of beasts, and that they
serve for males to the Panther, not differing from them but in whitenes, which
is very great in her, having little black spots set upon her body, in manner
of eyes. Also very fair furs are made of her skin, which are called
Lucernes. Moreover some say that all fower-footed beasts do very much love the
smell of the Panther: but the fiercenes of her countenance does fear them: and
that to entrap other by her odor, she hides her head that she may catch them.
Some also write that she has a mark upon her shoulder like to an half moon,
which augmenteth and decreaseth as the moon does. This kind of beasts have
the craft to watch passengers in woods, hiding themselves close in the thickest
groves of trees which they can find; out of which they start upon them like
thieves. And they have this by nature, to fold in their claws, when they go,
that they may always keep them sharp and unbroken: and can open them when
they will, and shut them when they graspe any thing. But omitting the fiercenes
of this beast, who will not greatly admire the sense and imagination of a
certain Panther whereof Pliny writes? Lib. 8. c. 17.
She desiring to meet with some passenger, lurked close in the midst of an
high way: One by chance coming thither, and finding her, would for fear have
turned his bridle to flee. But the poor beast couched and fell down before
him, making signs to fawn upon him, and moaned, and tormented hirselfe in
such sort, as he might easily understand thereby that she was in great pain:
and indeed her young ones were fallen into a pit far off from that place.
The man taking heart, at the beasts manners, who drew him gently by the garment,
did follow her to the same pit: whither being come, and knowing the occasion
of the panthers grief, he drew her young ones out of the place whereinto they
were fallen, delivering by this means, their damme of pain, and redeeming
also his own life. For this beast, which could have bereft him of it, did
contrariwise in acknowledgement of the benefit received by him, leaping, and
skipping with her little ones, keep the man company out of the forest,
showing him by many signs, that she rendered thanks unto him. But here change
we talk: and let us hear you (AMANA) deliver that which you have learned
concerning the nature of other beasts.


Of the Woolfe, of the Bear, and of the Ape. Chapter 86.
AMANA. AMongst all savage beasts, there are none more common then the Woolfe.
For Asia, Africa, Europe, and many places of that fourth part of the world,
which late Cosmographers and other famous men have by their long nauigations
discovered, do nourish these creatures. And although many have thought that
England had none of them, yet there are some found in sundry places, and
especially about Barwick. And in times past the country has been much vexed
by them. But histories record, that Edgar their king, who lived in the time of
Lotharius king of France, a very politic prince, being advertised of the
spoil which these beasts did, made an edict throughout his land, that every
Nobleman should bring unto him each year ten woolues, or else the skins of
them; and that the prince of Wales, as he who received greatest commodity by
hunting of them, should every year bring him an hundred. Whereby it came to
pass that in less then ten years, there was no mention made of any of
those beasts. Now though they be very common, yet are they therefore worthy
of no less consideration, Of the Wolf.
and wonder. Many authors have written concerning their shape, manners,
nature, and differences, as also how to hunt and take them. There be few which
are ignorant, that the woolfe is a beast having gray hair, mixed with black,
whitish under the belly, a big head armed with long and strong teeth: and
short, and stiff ears, whereupon the proverb arose (I hold the woolfe by the
ears) when he which speaks is in doubt of what he shall do. This beast
feeds only upon flesh, save sometimes on fish, although Aristotle and Pliny
write, Arist. lib. 8. chapter 5. de. hist. anima.
that being oppressed with hunger he eats earth. But indeed this opinion
did first spring, because that these beasts are oftentimes seen to dig up the
fields for flesh, which they bury after they have had their fill, to serve
them when they want ought to pray upon. When they be sick, they know how to use
certain herbs, to make them vomit, and to loosen their belly: And their
custom is to assail weak and fearful persons that travail alone, much
rather then hunters. They are so known to the fisher men along the lake of
Meotis (as Pliny reports) that these honest people are wont to give them
part of their fish: which if they fail to do, Hist. not. lib. 10. c. 8.
they will in the night time tear and break their nets. When the she woolfe
has young ones, if she find her self oppressed with dogs, or men, she takes
one of her whelps in her mouth to bear away, that she may not loose them
all. And she never leaves them except the he woolfe remain for their guard,
going both by turns out for victuals: and if they have taken any beast, they
bring it unto their whelps, laying it down before them to feed upon: If they
be somewhat big, they will then bring home some lamb alive, to make them kill
it, and teach them their craft. But I find nothing more admirable in the
nature of the woolfe then that which has been noted by the author of the
country farm, Auth. de la Maison rustique.
that there breed and engender certain serpents in the kidneies of an old
woolfe: which being grown do at last work their breeders death, and become
very venomous things. Concerning the subtlety and craft of woolues to entrap
their prays, it is very well known by every one, being to the great hurt of
people; but their industry is very great in forests, where they can tell how
to hunt the Heart and does, watching them in fresh places, as hounds should do,
yea they can direct themselves, like a course of greyhounds to watch and lurk
in the borders of the wood, whilst others hunt within. Besides, it is a common
thing, and many have written thereof; yea Isidore himself, that if a woolfe
espy a man before the man perceive him, he can take away his voice; because
that with his corrupt breath he infecteth the air: which being so putrified
does also corrupt the breath of the man, near to the said beast, whereby he
remains deprived of voice, and hoarse, howsoever he be endomaged thereby: and
that is it which has begotten the common proverb (Lupus est in fabula) which
is said, when one speaking of another, that comes in unlooked for, does hold
his peace, as if that the other parties arriual had taken away his voice and
speech. But if the woolfe be first seen by a man, it is thought that this
malicious effect is not of so great power, and that he loses much of his
fiercenes: the cause whereof may be that knowing himself discovered, he has
not the leisure to spread abroad his venim, and instead of running upon the
man, he deuiseth how he may run and fly from him. If this reason be of any
value, I do not think that it has been yet written by any one, at leastwise
as I have read or heard. There is also another kind of Wolves, Of the Lynx.
called Lynx, the furre of whom Princes wear, which (as Pliny says) resemble
other wolves, but that they are spotted like Leopards. And Oppianus writes
that they are engendered by a Woolfe and a Panther: yet that cannot be affirmed
of the Lynx of Germany, for there are no Panthers.

Of the Bear.
The Bear is a beast, in whom many things are found worthy to be noted.
Barbary and Newfound land nourish a great number, whom the inhabitants do hunt
after diverse manners. But they do chiefly entrap them by means of certain
deep pits, covered over with leaves and branches, which they dig in the way
that these beasts are accustomed to frequent, and especially near unto trees,
where there is some swarm of Bees: for the Bear loves honey above all other
meat, whether it be for that he delights to glut himself therewith, or else
to heal the sorenes of eyes whereto he is very subject: and so passing upon
these pits, he falls thereinto, and is there slain by these Barbarians. The
male when he covers the female, does embrace her, as man does woman; and the
she Bear being full does retire apart into her den, not bearing above thirty
days, and does oftentimes bring forth five Beare-whelpes: which at first do
seem to be but an heap of white flesh, without any form, without eyes,
without hair, and is as small as a mouse, with some little appearance of
nails, but through very much licking the she Bear reduces them into such
form as they have. When this beast is unprovided of a cave, he builds his
lodging with wood; of which he makes so huge an heap, and piles it so well,
that the rain cannot enter thereinto. After that he paues it, and makes his
litter with the softest leaves of trees that he can find. In winter time the
male keeps within his den for forty days long, and never bougeth, and the
female for four months: and the first fourteen days they sleep so
profoundly, that it is impossible to wake them, though they be beaten with
staves: and one would not think how fat they then be: this time being past,
they sit upon their tail and live of nothing else, but by sucking their
forefeete. Being come forth of their den, they first eat of the herb
called Wake-Robbin, or Cuckow-pintle, to open their pipes, which are all as it
were stopped up. Their food is corn, leaves of trees, grapes, apples, honey,
creuises, and ants: which they use especially licking them up with their toongs
from off the ground, when they are sick with eating the fruit of Mandrakes:
for by this means they heal themselves. They go upright upon their hinder
feet when they list, and descend down trees backwards. And when they fight
against the bull, or other horned beast, they hang themselves by all their
four feet upon them, and upon their head, that they may thereby tire their
enemy, and so vanquish him. To conclude, there is no creature more subtle in
his simplicity.

But if we would speak of crafty beasts, Of the Ape.
subtle in all agilitie and sport, then must we have respect to the Ape. For
nature has bestowed very good sense and marvelous craft upon him. Also he
does very near approach to the shape of man, both in his form of countenance,
nose, eyes, and eie-lids: the under part of which there is no beast that has
except the Ape. He has also nipples upon his breast like a man, and uses his
hands and legs as man; having nails and fingers made and disposed as ours, of
which the middle most is longest. His intrailes likewise are almost like to
those of man. Africa and many Isles of the Newfound lands nourish these
creatures in great plenty, and of diverse kinds; some whereof are called
Monckeies, and they have long tails; and others are Iackes or Marmusets, and
they have none: they live of herbs, and corn: and when they mean to steal
some cares of corn, there assemble twenty or thirty of them together, and one
stays for a scout out of the field, where he no sooner espieth the Lord of
the ground to come, but he squeakes very loud, at whose cry all the rest
run away, and do save themselves by nimble flight, climing up trees, and
skipping from one to another, yea and the she apes, with their young ones upon
their shoulders, will leap from tree to tree like the rest. And they are
commonly so fond of their young ones, that with too often embracing, and too
much clasping them, they at last kill them. They which are tamed and taught, do
marvelous and incredible things. Besides the author of the universal
Cosmographie has noted, Lib. 3. c. 16.
that in the solitary Island there are Apes, greater, vnhappier, and wilder
then are in all the world else, which be named Magots: who being seen a far
off, a man would judge them to be human people. Whereupon he thinks that
some are a little deceived, who have written concerning Savages, and men being
rough all over their bodies like goats, living upon snailes and raw flesh,
having perhaps taken such Magots, (because they have not been near to
distinguish them) for very men. But enough of this, I would now have you
(ARAM) to pursue the subject of our discourse.


Of the Heart, of the Bore, and of the Unicorn. Chapter 87.
ARAM. I Will now speak of the most gentle and simple beast of all the world,
Of the Heart.
in his nature, and which nevertheless is endued with great force, which he
sometimes uses to the cost of those who hunt him: and that is the Heart or
Stag, in whose chase great Lords take much pleasure. He is so simple that he
museth, and is astonished at every thing: in such sort, as if he see a cow or
an horse come near unto him, he never takes regard who rides him; or if he
perceive him, he looks down at his feet, as if he were amassed, what bow and
arrows, or weapons soever he have. He museth also at the songs and piping of
shepherds. When stagges be not in rut, they are very sharp at their
victuals: and feeling themselves fat, they search out solitary places apart,
and there abide, knowing very well, that they are not the^ apt for the course,
and that they are then also chiefly hunted. Being pursued, they do ofttimes
stay their flight to take breath, and look here and there round about them;
but when they perceive the hounds that follow them, they run as before. And
they make these stops, by reason of a certain pipe, which does greatly pain
them, and which is so tender, that it presently breaks with the least wound
that may be. They endeavor to run with the wind, that it may carry with
them the sent away from the hounds, so that they may not easily take them. They
hear a far off, and have a very good ear, when they stand upon their
feet: but if they lie down they be very deaf. Pliny recounteth, Hist. not.
lib. 8. c. 32.
that when the hearts or stags of Cilicia will pass from thence into Cyprus,
they swim over the sea, but always in troops, and in order, resting the
heads of the one upon the crupper of the other, and that by turns, in such
sort, that the hindermost go before in their turn, and the foremost turn
behind: directing their course by the smell of the land, because they cannot
see the shore. The bucks only are armed with horns, and they alone of all
beasts cast their horns every springtime: yet some have seen (but very
seldom) horned-does marked to twelve years. When they feel that their horns
will fall, they seek out the most solitary and desert places that they can
find, whether it be to hide them because they are ashamed to have lost their
arms, or else to disappoint men of the benefit that does redound unto them
thereby, for their horn has many properties in use. And many say that of
those horns which hearts cast: the right are never found again, so that it is
holden for certain, that they bury their right horn. Their age is known by
their heads, because that every year they have a knag more, and there are
some seen that are marked to two and twenty: Beyond which, none does note
their age, although they live much longer. For Histories record that above an
hundred years after the death of Alexander the Great, there was an Heart taken,
about whose neck this Prince whilst he lived had put a collar of gold, and
that he was grown so great afterward, and so fat, that the said collar was
hid within his flesh, and covered with his skin. Moreover, stags do change
their place of aboade, and their food according as the sun does approach in
height. For in the month of November, they keep themselves to bushes and
briers, the tops whereof they eat to restore their nature after they have
been in rut. In December they withdraw themselves into the thickest of
forests, which may defend them from the cold winds, snowes and ye. In
January they come to the borders of the forests, and to tilled lands, to
feed on green corn, as rye, and such like. In February and March, because
they loose and cast their horns, they thrust themselves amongst the bushes,
wherein they remain all April and May. In June and July they go into woods
and corne-fields, and then are they fattest. And in September and October they
leave their woods, and fall to rut: and then have they neither any certain
place, nor meat, because they follow the ways which the does have passed:
living then with a little, and feeding upon what they chance to meet with.

Of the Bore.
The Bore is another beast, in whose chase many exercise themselves, and take
singular pleasure: but as the Heart is gentle and fearful; so is the Bore
hardy and furious, not fearing the dogs, but attends for them in quiet, and
oftentimes also he pursues them, to tear them in pieces with his teeth; the
biting whereof, chiefly in the chest of the body is almost incurable. His
place of abode is never certain; and therefore some say he is but a guest,
because he does but run out of one forest and wood into another: and yet he
delights to remain in the same country and place wherein he was first
farrowed: so that if any dogs chase him out of any wood or forest, he
presently runs without any stay to his native place, which he supposes to be
his safeguard and refuge. The meat which he likes best, is hasell-nuts,
beech-mast, and acornes. His flesh is better then harts-flesh: And therefore
the ancient Romans made such account thereof, that in their most magnificent
bankets, they would serve in whole Bores to be set upon the table. Hist. not.
lib. 11. c. 53.
Yet Pliny says, that the Bores of the mountains in Pamphilia and Cilicia,
having eaten Salamanders, become very venomous; in such sort as they poison
those that eat of their flesh. Besides, when these beasts feel themselves
more heavy then of custom, they seek for iuie, and eat thereof: or else for
crabs, which they find in sand when the sea ebs. The sow or female bears
but once a year, although the Bore be very apt to cover her. And the Author
of the aforesaid natural history does affirm unto us, that in the Indies
there are very great wild bores, which have two tuskes in their mouth of a
cubit long, and two other that issue out of their front like the horns of a
cow. And Cardanus says, that in the same country there are bores like to
others in form, in voice and manners, and in their litteridge, which are grown
in two months, and yet are smaller then conies, and can scarce bite: differing
nothing from other, save that they have five or six toes upon their feet
instead of nails.

But let us leave these fierce beasts, to consider upon some others, and let us
speak first of the Unicorn, Of the Unicorn.
which at this day is so greatly esteemed of, the horn of whom is holden of
great virtue in physic, and singular against all poisons. Hist. not. lib. 8.
c. 21.
Pliny describes the Unicorn, to have a body altogether like an horse, an
head like an heart, feet of an Elephant, and the tail of a bore, bearing an
horn in the midst of his front, of two cubits in length: and he says that
these beasts are nourished in the land of the Orsians in India. Jews de
Barthema in his nauigations into Arabia, affirms that he did at Meca see two
Unicorns: and says that the body and color of this beast is like an horse,
of a dark gray, having feet cloven before, and hoofed like a goat. And that
these two beasts had been given to the Sultan of Meca, for a very rich and
precious present, by a king of Aethiopia, to the end to have peace with him.
Lib. 1. de obseruat. c. 14.
Belon has observed out of the testimonies of diverse authors, that there are
two sorts of beasts, who bear one horn only; one of which is the Ass of
India, which has not cloven feet; and the other is the Orix, being a kind of
goat, that has cloven feet. And he makes mention of many Unicorns horns,
esteemed to be of very great price: especially of two, which are in the
treasury of Saint Marks at Venice; each of them being of a cubit and half
long, the greatest end whereof exceeds not above three inches over. He
speaks also of that which our king has, which is at Saint Denis, being seven
foot long, and waigheth thirteen pounds, and four ounces, in fashion like a
taper, being broad at the lower end about a plame and three fingers, and so
grows less and less toward the end, and has a pit in the great end
above a foot deep, which is the place, wherein the bone is fastened that holds
it firm to the head of the beast that bears it. But this author does mock
at the folly of those, who many times do buie pieces of bone, which are cut of
the teeth of the Rohart, and of the horns and ribs of many other beasts, for
true Unicorns horn; paying sometimes for one of these little pieces three
hundred ducats: so much is Unicorns horn esteemed, being most excellent for
many uses in physic. Theuet also flouteth at these abuses, Lib. 5. de co^mog.
and at many fables invented upon this matter: alleging that he had seen an
horn taken from a beast of a clean contrary shape to that, which the
Unicorn is described to be of, whereto the same virtue was nevertheless
attributed. And that the country of the Savages breeds a beast called
Pyrassouppi, as big as the foale of a Mule having almost such an head, as rough
as a Bear, and cloven footed like an Heart, which bears two long straight
horns, that do come near to Unicorns horn: and wherewith the Savages cure
themselves when they be bitten and wounded by venomous beasts and fishes. But
now change we our talk, and (ACHITOB) let us hear you speak again
concerning some of the most rare and worthy beasts of the Earth.


Of the Hiena or Ciuet-cat, of the Muske-cat, of the Beuer, and of the Otter.
Chap. 88.
ACHITOB. IF in all our discourses we have any worthy matter, wherein to
admire the works of God in the nature which he has ordained unto them, we
shall find no less in the consideration of these, whereof I purpose now to
speak, the odor of whom is very sweet. And amongst the rest the Ciuet cat
called by ancients the Hiena, is worthy of great marvel. For from her
comes an excrement so odoriferous, that as soon as it is smelt, does pierce
through all the senses and spirits, and serves to compose very excellent
perfumes. Of the Hiena.
This beast is fashioned like a Bedouant but of bigger body, having black
hairs about her neck, and along the ridge of her back, which she sets
upright being angry. She is mouthed like a cat, and has fiery and redde eyes
with two black spots under them, and round ears like unto those of a Badger.
Besides she has white hair, full of black spots upon her body; with a long
tail black above, but having some white spots underneath. The ancients have
spoken of this beast as of a wild cat, Lib. 9.
and John Leo in his description of Afric, does name her so, saying that she
is common in the woods of Aethiopia, where the people do catch her with her
young, whom they nourish in cages with milk, and porridge made of branne and
flesh: and that they receive ciuet from her twice or thrice a day, which is the
sweat of this beast: for they beat her with a little stick, making her leap
up and down about the cage, till such time as she does sweat, which they take
off from under her thighs, ^. Lib. obseru. ^. 20.
and tail, and that is it which is called ciuet. Belon reports to have seen
one in Alexandria, so tame, that playing with men, she would bite their noses,
ears and lips, without doing them any harm: and that she was always
nourished with women's milk. Mathiolus likewise says, that he has seen many
Ciuet cats at Venice, which had bin brought out of Syria, and attributes
certain properties to their excrements; for which cause they have been more
sought after now; then in the days of our fathers: so that they are nourished
at this day even in France. Lib. 1. de. Dici. c. 20. De. subt. lib. 10.
Cardanus also makes mention of a beast called Zibetum, which is found in
Spain, that is like to a cat, and carries a bladder in her members, the seed
whereof is received into a spoone, being of so excellent an odor, that three
drops thereof surmounteth the weight of three pounds of any odoriferous tree.

But the Musk-cat does yet surpass all other odor, Of the Musk-catte.
and meriteth all marvel in the nature thereof. For it is a beast like unto a
goat in form and hair, but that she is of a more bluish color, and has
but one horn, and is bigger of body. There are many in Africa, but chiefly in
Tumbasco and Sini. When this beast is in rutte, with the heat and rage that he
then endures, his navel swells, and fills it self with a certain blood,
in manner of an impostume: which at length through much wallowing, and rubbing
against trees, he makes to break, out of which runs this blood, being
half corrupted, which in tract of time becomes very odoriferous. And the
people of the country do gather it amongst stones, or upon the stocks of trees,
as the best musk that is: because it is full ripe, after that it has rested
some certain time out of the body of the beast which engenders it, and that
it has been perfectly concocted by the sun; which the other musk cannot
be, that is taken out of the living beast, after that it is catched in chase.
And therefore this most precious musk is shut up and reserved in boxes, and in
the bladders of such of these beasts, as have at any time been taken, to serve
to such uses as it is fit for: whereupon comes that there are muskes very
different in goodness. For there is but little brought to us in true bladders of
this perfect musk, being ripe, and gathered as before said: but all the flesh
of this beast being beaten together with the bones, is commonly put into an old
bladder, and sold us for pure musk. Which we may very well know in that we
usually find little pieces of bone in our musk. And yet this same thus
prepared smells so sweetly, that we may easily judge, how precious and
exquisite the odor of the true and perfect musk is.

Of the Castoreum.
The Castoreum which proceeds from the Beuer, is also very much esteemed for
the virtue of the sent thereof. This beast is as big as a dog, long,
gentle, of black and a shining hair, with a very long tail, and feet like a
goose, having strong teeth, and so sharp, that he uses them as a saw to saw
and cleave timber, whereof he makes himself a lodging with marvelous
cunning. They are found near to the river of Ister, or Danubius, and near to
the Rhine also, and in many places of Afric. In his stones does lie a most
exquisite licour, which is proper to him: And therefore Pliny reports, Hist.
not. lib. 8. c. 30.
that the Beuer feeling himself oppressed with hunters, biteth off his stones
with his teeth, as if he knew wherefore he were pursued: and that is it which
Physicians call Castoreum. De subt. lib. 10.
Cardanus affirms that this beast is a kind of Otter, even as house-wesels
are a kind of wild wesels. For (says he) in one self same kind of beasts,
nature does by little and little convert it self from small to great ones,
from foul to fair ones, and from weak to strong ones. Besides the Otter
(called by Pliny Lutra) lives commonly in the earth, Of the Otter.
and in the water, and has hair softer then feathers: and his stones are fit
and profitable for the same that Castoreum is. But (as Matthiolus has very
well noted) the use of strange compositions does bring many discommodities to
those, De Dios. lib. 6. c. 25.
which think to serve themselves therewith, because they are either
sophisticate, or corrupted before they come to us. And therefore he says, that
the use of ponticke or common Castoreum, which is black with rottennes and
putrefaction, is very venomous. But me thinks (companions) that we stretch
out too long our discourse concerning terrestrial beasts, considering that we
have not undertaken to write a perfect history of them, but only to set before
our eyes some of the most rare and most excellent, to make us meditate upon,
and to admire the works of God. There are many authors out of which one may
gather the entire knowledge of living creatures, and especially out of
Aristotle, who has described their nature in fifty books, by the
commandment of Alexander the great; and after him, Pliny has declared unto
us, in his natural history many things concerning the same subject, which
were not known before. Wherefore as when we entreated of the spheres and
meteors, we referred al to the true astronomy and philosophy of Christians: so
let us now do as much upon (...) discourse concerning beasts, reducing all that
which we have spoken to an inward meditation upon the providence of God,
considering that the effects thereof do continually appear in the commodity,
profit, and utility which redound unto us by these creatures, yea by the most
venomous of them: as (ASER) you may give us to understand.


Of the right use of venomous creatures, and wild beasts; and of the justice
and bounty of God which shines in them. Chapter 89.
ASER. WE must needs believe for a principle, that if sin had not entered
into the world, there had never any creature been hurtful unto man. For he
had been a peaceable Lord, and master of all living things, and all things had
been obedient unto him, if he had been obedient unto God, as he ought to
have been. Genes. 7.
We have a clear testimony thereof, after the fall of Adam, in those beasts
which came unto Noah at the flood, to enter and remain within the ark with
him: Dan. 6.
as also in those lions into whose den Daniel was cast. But as man has been
very rebellious toward God, not acknowledging him for his Lord, according as
duty did require him: even so all creatures, which should show obedience to
man, not only have been, and are rebellious toward him, but do also many
times make war against him, and do greatly annoy him, even according as it
pleases the sovereign Lord to chastise and punish the sins of men, by the
means of them. In this sort then must we think upon venomous and cruel
beasts, who do not only seek to hurt us, but do also serve the wicked,
wherewith to compound their poisons. For we behold how God has created many
and diverse kinds of them, who being good in their nature, insomuch as they
have all been created by God, and in that he is a worker, who cannot perform
any evil business, they do nevertheless oftentimes greatly hurt men, in
stead of ministering aid unto them, yea they do sometimes also work their
death. And therefore we must consider, that the fault does not proceed from
the creature created good, but from the sinn^ ^n, being punished by the just
judgment of God, by such sc^^^ges of his justice, as it pleases him to make
choice of the work nevertheless, which he has done by his creatures
remaining good, insomuch as it serves to chastise those, who do deserve it.

Of the diverse uses of venomous beasts.
There are in earth, and in the sea many very venomous beasts, who by their
poison kill men, as are serpents, vipers, scorpions, and such like. And
although it may seem that these creatures have been created only but to do
hurt: yet has not God given their being without good and just reason. For he
has so well disposed all things, that venims and poisons themselves serve very
well for many other uses then to kill, and impoison: for they are profitable
and necessary in many occasions, and serve for medicines and remedies in
diverse accidents. And concerning their particular effects, which turn to the
dommage of man, besides that which we have said, that they are instruments of
the divine vengeance upon sin; God will thereby moreover make them
acknowledge, and perceive their infirmity, and what all human power is, when
it rises up against his majesty, and that men think to resist him. For who
may be so dull, and disfurnished of reason, that cannot understand how unsure
their life is, and how feeble their force and power; considering that there
needs but some small venomous herb, or some little portion of other venim and
poison, or the stinging of some small beast, or the biting of some others,
which are but as worms creeping upon the earth, I do not only say greatly to
torment, but also to bereave of life the greatest, and most fearful giant, or
prince in all the world. Herein then have we a goodly example to teach us to
know what we are, what we can do, and how we must fear, and be in continual
doubt, though we suppose our selves to be never so strong and mighty. And we
may also instruct our selves, when we behold that there is no man so assured
but that is somewhat moved, and receives some fear, yea and many times very
much, at the only sight and meeting of an adder, or viper, or of some other
venomous beast. We may also imagine that if the eternal creator of every
soul, does show himself so much to be feared in such small and vile
creatures, who do not subsist, nor retain any power, but such as proceeds
from him, what might this be in comparison of his whole puissance, if he would
declare it upon his enemies? But indeed this need not, because he can do his
pleasure by far less force: Exodus 8. Psalm. 78. and 105. Nomb. 11.
as when he was displeased with the proud arrogancy, and perverse obstinacy
of Pharaoh, and of the Egyptians, who held the God of the Hebrews in disdain,
he would not war upon them with great armies of men, but did only raise up
troops of frogs, of flies, and of lice, against which the proud tyrants could
not resist, but remained vanquished. Again, how did he after that chastise
his people in the wilderness by fiery serpents? How many times afterward did
he bring many people into extreme necessity, as if a strong army, Leuit. 26.
Deuteronomy. 28. Joel. 1.
or fire had passed through their country, and that only by cankerwormes,
catterpillers, grasse-hoppers, and such like vermin, wherewith he threatens
those that rebel against his statutes? And do we not consider what vexation
oftentimes flies, lice, worms, rats and mice, do put us unto? Have we not
goodly occasion to be proud, high minded, and to esteem much of our selves,
seeing that there is not so much power in us as to invent the means how to
defend and save our selves from such little creatures, who trouble us day and
night, both at home and abroad? And may we not hereby judge, how we could
defend our selves from wolves, bears, lions, tigres, and other savage and
wild beasts, in whom there is no doubt, but that we have very evident signs
and testimonies proposed of the wrath and fury of God? For who is so stout
that is not much scared to encounter with, or to hear the voice only of any
of these beasts? We know that God has menaced the transgressors of his
commandments with them. For he says thus, [I will send the teeth of beasts
upon them, with the venim of serpents creeping in the dust. Deuteronomy. 32. Ose. 13.
2. King. 7. 2. King. 2.
] And so has he oftentimes done in the land of Samaria, and in Judea, yea not
sparing the young children, as was declared in them, who were devoured by the
bears, because they mocked the Prophet Eliseus. How many such examples of the
wrath of God, do Histories set before our eyes that have been executed in the
days of our fathers; yea amongst us, who cannot be ignorant how that many
times wolves have devoured little children, digging down the house sides for
them, they being close by their parents? Wherefore since the Lord did say by
Amos [The lion has roared, Amos. 3.
who will not be afraid? The Lord God has spoken, who can but prophecy?] Let
us learn two things: first, that if the only voice of the lion terrify those
which hear it, by much more reason must the word of God move us: secondly,
that the true servants of God cannot be silent, when the Lord shall have
commanded them to speak: but will attribute all glory to his name not
standing in fear of venomous serpents, wild beasts, and other scourges of his
wrath, but dreading the Omnipotent only, who executes vengeance upon the
wicked, when, and how he pleases.

Of the bounty of God which shines in venomous beasts.
And as by this discourse, we must acknowledge the image of God being angry,
and the pattern of his fury in all those creatures, which may hurt us, and how
much he is to be feared and dreaded in his most high Majesty, considering
that his judgments are so terrible, being executed but by the smallest
creatures of the earth: so on the other side must we consider upon the great
bounty and benignity of God, of which he gives us testimonies, not only in
beasts created to the only purpose to serve and profit man; but also in those
which seem not to have been made, but only for their hurt. For as we have
already said, venims and poisons may serve to many other uses, then to kill
men, and venomous beasts are not so full of poison throughout all their body,
but that they may profit in sundry occasions: witness the viper (a most
fearful serpent) whose flesh is very requisite in the composition of true
treacle, which is a most sovereign remedy against all venim and poison. And
there are many very dangerous diseases, against which this flesh of the viper
and of other serpents is very profitable, according to the testimony of
physicians. Who likewise teach, that the Scorpion (whose stinging is mortal)
carries with him the true remedy for health, if he be brayed, and laid upon
the wound which he has made; or else if being burnt, the ashes of him be
drunk with wine. But how many rare properties do they assign to the oil
which is made of scorpions? In brief to speak in a word, there is no beast so
venomous, none so savage, none so cruel, be it great or small, by which men
may not receive much profit, if their nature were well known. All which we may
better learn, if we consider how that many creatures are nourished with that,
which to others is venim and poison: the discourse whereof (AMANA) let us
receive from you.


Of the nourishment of many animals, by that which is venim and poison to
others; and of the natural amity and enimitie which is amongst them. Chap. 90.
AMANA. IT may seem to many, that hornets, caterpillars, canker-wormes,
grasse-hoppers, spiders, and such like vermin, were not created to any other
end, save to endomage men: but though we do omit a thousand properties, which
all these creatures have by nature serving to use in physic, and that we do
but only consider, how they serve for food and nourishment to many other
creatures: yet shall we in this have enough wherein to acknowledge the profit,
which does return unto us from most vile and contemptible creatures; and by so
much the more magnify the providence of God, who ordains all things for our
good. For it is very certain, that these small creatures (which otherwise
seem to be unprofitable) do serve for food and meat to birds and fowls,
and to such fishes as we do ordinarily eat of, so that we may rightfully say,
that we our selves are nourished by catter-pillers, grasse-hoppers, and such
other vermin, considering that we eat those beasts that devour them, and do
live upon them. Let us but only note the meat which Turkie-cockes, and other
common fowls, whom we so carefully bring up for us to feed upon, do most
seek after. Certainly, there is no beast which eats more uncleanly and
filthy meat, for they spare neither serpents nor toads: and yet we esteem of
their flesh, eggs and chickens, as of very good and delicate meat. This is in
truth a marvelous kind of natural chimistrie and inimitable art, Excellent
chimistrie in the nature of beasts.
so to sublimate that which of it self is poison, and would prove so to man,
that having passed through the limbeck and fire of a small creature, it is not
only purged thereby from al annoyance; but does also sustain life, and serve
afterward for wholesome nouriture to man. And do we not behold, that the
nightingall and the wood-sparrow (are fat with eating venomous spiders) which
serve both for meat and a medicine to them? Pliny has written, that dear and
quails do feed upon poison, Hist. not. lib. 10. c. 72. Lib. 11. c. 53.
and yet every one knows that their flesh is a delicious kind of meat. But
what another wonder is this which the same author declares, that there be
certain beasts which are not venomous of themselves, and yet are dangerous
meat, when they have eaten any venomous beast or herb? For in the mountains
of Pamphilia and of Cilicia, the bores that have eaten Salamanders, are very
venomous; in such sort as they poison those who eat of their flesh: and yet
they themselves can convert such poison to their own nourishment. What reason
can we give of so excellent a secret in the nature of beasts? I have never yet
learned any reason of the Philosophers. Let us then stay at the admirable
effects of the providence of God, who in those beasts, which we do commonly
eat for our sustenance, does perform this marvelous chimistrie whereof we
but now spoke, and who causes the force of poisons to be spent in the deserts,
to the small hurt of man, to the end that his omnipotency, bounty and
benignity may be declared in all things toward us.

Of the natural amity, and enimitie of beasts.
Moreover, have we not also worthy matter, whereby to give glory to his name,
in that he has created the beasts so different in nature, with a natural and
secret amity, and enimitie which they do greatly bear one toward another?
For it is very certain, that God makes all this serve to the profit and
commodity of men: in so much as there is a kind of amity commonly in private
and tame beasts, toward such as they are, all serving him who has bin
established for their master: and that enimitie does rather remain amongst
wild beasts, as also in tame beasts toward the wild: In such sort as many
savage beasts, which do nothing but harm, have by this means many of their
own kind their adversaries to make head against them, and to resist them in
whatsoever they would do. But we may especially wonder in that the most
mighty, great and strong beasts, yea the most furious and cruel are commonly
put in fear, by the smallest and most weak. For what is an hog in regard of
an Elephant? or a cock in respect of a lion? there seems to be no comparison
betwixt them: And yet the only voice and grunting of an hog makes the
Elephant afraid; and the lion is not only seized with fear at the crowing of
the cock, but is much troubled when he sees him but set up his crest. Also
there are very little beasts, who do not only put very great and cruel
ones in fear, but do also kill them: as the Ichneumon, which is a little rat
of India, does kill the great and cruel crocodile (a most dangerous serpent)
cleaving and piercing his belly, after it is secretly entered thereinto thorough
the mouth of this beast, which is able to devour men, and yet strikes no
fear into this feeble creature. Hist. not. lib. ^. c. 24.
Which (as Pliny records) has another war against the Aspis, over whom it
remains victorious by this mean. It does many times wallowe and tumble in
the dirt, and as many times does dry it self in the sun: then feeling it self
sufficiently armed with slime, it assaileth the aspis, always holding up the
tail against him, to receive the blows thereupon, which the serpent shall
strike, wherewith he can in no wise offend the body of the Ichneumon: in the
mean space it picketh out some such fit place to strike him through the
throat, that he therewith dies: and presently after it does prepare it self,
as before, to fight with another. In this discourse we may behold a perfect
image of human things, considering that we cannot be ignorant, how that it
comes oftentimes to pass, that God abateth the most mighty and strong
tyrants, by the most lowly and abject persons; and kings, princes and
high-esteemed people, by mean and very lowe-esteemed men. And let us also
note, that although the amity and enmity amongst living creatures, proceeds
from a certain instinct of nature, so disposed by the creator, and the causes
whereof are either hidden, or hardly known: that nevertheless, the best
reason, and most certain which may be alleged concerning those examples,
which we have here touched, is, that God would declare unto us in them, how
he does mock at the pride and arrogancy of men, and at all their puissance
and force. For if he bestow so much power upon little beasts, as to affright,
yea even to slay the most furious, and that he can overthrow, and destroy the
most stout and valiant amongst men, by their own selves, how much more should
he astonish them, if with his almighty hand he should beat down their
pride, and punish their sins in his ire? Though the people (says the prophet)
rage and murmur; Psalm. 2.
though kings band themselves, and princes be assembled together against the
Lord, yet he that dwells in the heavens shall laugh, the Lord shall have
them in derision, also they shall perish in the way, when his wrath shall
suddenly burn.

Now concerning that, which particularly respects the amity betwixt private
and domestical beasts, and their hate toward those that are wild, although
that the nearest cause be very evident (as that they do love one another,
because they are nourished together, and receive no damage one from another,
hating the wildenes of those, who desire to devour them) yet must we pass
farther, and acknowledge another more remote, and yet most certain cause
therein, which is a natural instinct to conserve and multiply their own
kind for the vtility and service of man, according as the bounty and
benignity of our God has by his admirable providence disposed of their
nature, whereupon let us hear you (ARAM) plot out the subject of your
discourse.


Of the vtility that comes unto men by beasts, and chiefly by private and
domesticall-tame beasts, and of the wonderful providence of God, which
declares it self in them. Chap. 91.
ARAM. SIthence God has so disposed all things by his providence for the good,
and commodity of men, that they may receive some profit even out of the most
venomous, cruel, and savage beasts, as we have already heard: we may in no
wise doubt (as indeed experience does daily teach us) but that they do receive
great aid and help from private and tame beasts, as are sheep, kine, oxen,
bulls, asses, mules, horses and such like. For we are served with their
labors, and travail, with their fruit, with their flesh, with their wool, and
with their skins. For from whence receive we our clothing, except linen,
but from beasts? With how many sorts of wooles and of skins do they furnish us?
Of the commodity that men have by tame beasts.
And from whence have we the silks, cloth, and works which are made and
which serve to cloth the most stout and proud tyrants, and other princes of
the earth? Have we them not by the industry of worms, and small vermin? In
very truth, we may very well say, that worms cloth worms, and that the most
stately amongst men do take from the most vile amongst creatures the substance
of their bravery and pomp. For what are men, but poor worms of the earth,
who to make themselves a little excel the rest, do take from other worms the
ornaments of their magnificence? And if we consider what commodity the milk
which is drawn from some beasts does deliver unto a thousand thousand persons,
if we consider of the great multitude that there is of all kinds of
foure-footed beasts, of birds and of fishes; all which do serve us for food
and nourishment in diverse manners: if how many sundry tastes and savors we
find in all these meats of different natures, according to the tastes,
complexions and dispositions of men, and which are so tempered, that they be
good for those that are in health, for those that are sick, for great, for
small, for young, for old: shall we not be ravished with all these wonders,
thereby to give glory to the sovereign Creator and moderator of all nature?
What shall we more say in that the skins of earthly beasts, are of so many
diverse colors, and so well compact, either of woole, or of hair, or of good
skins, of the variety and diversity that there is in the feathers of birds,
and in the colors of them, and in their songs, which minister much pleasure to
melancholy persons: are not these so many excellent testimonies of the power of
the Omnipotent, who created all these things through his bounty and benignity
toward us? Surely there is nothing so vile and contemptible in the least
creature that is, but does preach the Majesty of God unto us. And therefore he
said unto his servant Job, Job. 39.
[Hast thou given the pleasant wings unto the peacocks? or wings and feathers
unto the Ostrich?] For we see, that they which will deck themselves, do put
upon their heads the fair plumes of the Ostrich, and of other fowls, which
are sold very dear: also every one admireth the tail of the peacocke,
wherewith he sets forth himself, which he turns like as into a wheel or a
roundell, being so gallantly garnished, that there seem to be as many eyes or
suns, as there be feathers therein.

I speak not here of the nature of beasts, nor of the industry which God has
given to every one of them, to know what is convenient or hurtful for them,
and to covet the one, and avoid the other: as also how they are furnished with
care and power, to preserve their life, and the lives of their young ones. I
pass over in silence the power and diverse properties which consist in each of
them: for the discourse thereof would be infinite: and we have likewise
already said somewhat concerning that, which is most note-worthie in many rare
and excellent beasts. But I will here bring into the number one of the least
and most common sort, which we behold every day in our houses: for perhaps
the consideration thereof will not be altogether unprofitable unto us; Many
things to be considered of in the nature of the Cock.
and that is the cock. If any question be made concerning his beauty, in what
bird may we find more, be it, that we consider of his plumage, and the
diversity of colors, which is commonly therein, or of his fair kingly crest,
or his stately pace and brave carriage, which cannot be more magnificent in the
greatest monarch of the world? And if this bird were not so common, but were
very seldom seen, there are but few other creatures which would be preferred
before him, although there were nothing worthy of consideration in his
nature, save that which we have already declared. What shall we say then, if
we will but meditate, of what heart and courage he is in fight? Is there any
other creature which can less endure to be overcome, and is more ashamed
thereof? Again, what courtesy uses he amongst the hens, with whom he is
conversant? and how much does he love them, even to provide for meat to feed
them, and to take it out of his own beak, to give unto them, calling them
when he has found it, as the hen calls her little chickens together? But
that which I find most strange in him, is the agreement which by nature he
has with the Sun, which is such, as one may very well think, that he has
some natural Astronomy and Astrology, which is bred in him. For he
understands and perceives the course and motion of the heaven and of the
Sun, and when his rising does approach, so that he declares it by his crowing,
very timely in the morning, and that diverse times before any other creature
can perceive it; yea or men themselves, except they rise out of their beds to
behold the sky. And yet for all that they must have obtained some knowledge of
the course and of the motion of heaven; either by the science of Astronomy, or
through long use and continual observations thereof, as is with shepherds, and
those that watch in the fields. But if the heavens be covered with clouds,
what can the most expert of them know therein, save by means of clocks, which
they have in their houses? The cock then is more skillful in this art. For
without ever moving from the place where he is at roust to sleep, and what
weather soever there be, fair or foul; yet does not he fail to sound out the
chimes at his hours, so, as there is no clock so certain: and he serves also
for one to them that have no other. And therefore we may very well say, that
how many cocks there are in the world, so many natural and domestical clockes
are they for those who have them in their houses. And do we not see how that
soldiers, especially Almaines do commonly carry these creatures with them,
to serve as a trumpet to them to sound out the approach of day. Matthew. 26. Mark.
14. Luke. 22. John. 13. Goodly doctrine that we ought to learn by the crowing
of the Cock.
But the cock did not serve for a clock only to S. Peter, but for a preacher
also, to recall into his memory the words, which he had heard of his master,
and for to draw him out of his sin, and to induce him to true repentance as
he did. And the like ought we to do, so often as this bird croweth in the
morning, not only to think our selves advertised of the approach of the Sun,
which brings us the temporal day, after the darkness of the night, but we
must every day wake out of the sleep of sin, wherein we are so soundly
laid; and prepare and dispose our selves to receive Jesus Christ, the true
Sun of Justice, which brings us the eternal and perpetual day, that is
never changed into night; and the light which cannot be obscured by darkness. By
this brief discourse then we may judge how many excellent matters we should
find to entreat upon concerning the nature of living things, to make us still
more and more acknowledge the woonders of the providence of God, if we would
pursue to the full, that which might be said concerning this matter in
searching out the secrets of the diverse faculties of creatures. But we will
content our selves only to add to this, which we have said, that which well
deserves to be considered of in this place, concerning the multiplication of
such beasts as are most profitable for men, and by whom they receive most
commodities, whereupon (ACHITOB) let us hear you presently discourse.


Of the blessing and providence of God, in the multiplication and conservation
of those beasts, that are most profitable to men, and by whom they receive most
commodities. Chapter 92.
ACHITOB. THE holy Scripture teaches us, how that God after he had created the
beasts, he blessed them, saying, [Increase and multiply, Genes. 1.
and fill the waters, and the earth.] And that afterward when the deluge had
overwhelmed every living soul, save Noah and his family, and two of every
kind of beasts; God likewise repeated the same benediction of them, c. 9.
saying, [Bring forth fruit, and multiply, and fill the earth.] Through which
word that admirable fruitfulnes, which we behold in all creatures, did first
come, and is for ever conserved. Wherein, if we have any worthy matter
delivered unto us to acknowledge the providence, bounty and benignity of God
toward men, it is principally in this point which is notorious unto all, that
the virtue of this blessing has been such, that those beasts, from whom we
might receive most commodity, and which are most tame and familiar, have much
more multiplied, then the other wild and cruel beasts, who might bring any
peril or endomagement unto us. Whereto God himself had in some sort, a regard
when he commanded Noah to enter into the arc, c. 7.
and to take of clean beasts, seven and seven, male and female: but of
unclean beasts, two and two only. So that by this mean, there did most
remain of the number of those, the use of whom was most necessary for man:
giving us also a certain testimony of his fatherly bounty toward us, by
which he is induced to have respect unto us in all things.

But if we consider what fecunditie there is in certain savage beasts, and yet
how it vanishes, and is surmounted by the multiplication of the other sort
(wherewith we serve our selves) by a certain kind of manner, which is
altogether incomprehensible unto us: there is no person, but will find
himself ravished in the contemplation thereof. For let us take for instance
the wolves only. It is certain, that they are more fertile then sheep, kine,
and other private and domestical beasts, which serve for the maintenance of our
life, and to other uses for the commodity of the same. For the sheep does
bring forth, Goodly contemplations upon the fertility of beasts.
and nourish but one lamb, the cow one calfe, the mare one foale, and so of
the rest: whereas the woolfe brings forth and nourishes many whelps.
Moreover none of those tame beasts, no nor man himself does eat any woolues:
but they, and many other wild beasts, which live upon pray, yea man himself,
do eat up lambs, sheep, kine, and their calves, and many times foales
escape not: and yet we nevertheless do daily behold, how all these poor
beasts which are a continual pray to men and other creatures, do increase and
multiply each one more in his kind, then woolues and other cruel beasts, who
eat and devour them. Are not these then admirable effects of the providence of
God, the reason whereof does surpass the capacity of our understanding? In
very truth these things are no less wonderful (although there be great
diversity of the subject) then the multiplication of the people of Israel
amongst the Egyptians, which was by so much the greater, by how much the more
they were oppressed by tyranny and cruel dealing.

Let us also note, Other considerations to the same purpose.
how that this eternal wisdom favoring the fertility of those beasts, that
are most profitable for man, has assigned to such as live upon pray and
rapine, an habitation in desert and obscure places, in rocks, caves, and in
dens. For so it pleased God to separate them from the other, to the end that
they might the less annoy them. Moreover he sundered them amongst themselves:
in such sort that they do not live together in companies, as others do, that
they might not ouerrun them. For woolues, bears, lions, and such like do not
communicate one with the other, as private and domestical beasts do: because
they cannot agree one with another, as the peaceable and innocent beasts. So
likewise eagles, hawks, faulcons, and other birds of pray, do not fly
together in volees and troops, as pigeons, cranes, geese, and such like do,
which serve us for food. Thereupon then ensues, that wild beasts cannot
gather so much power, as to hurt the other, upon whom they make continual
war: and who by this mean are oftentimes saved from peril. Let us add in
regard of birds, that they of pray are not so fruitful as those which are
given unto us for food: Witness the great number of chickens which the hen
does hatch at one time, and the number of the young ones of patridges and
quails, in comparison of those who fly to devour them. And although doves do
bring forth but one at a time, yet they recompense that, insomuch as they
breed almost every month in the year. In meditation then upon these things,
we must consider what, and how great the bounty of God is toward us: and that
all his creatures must be as so many preachers still to anounce unto us the
puissance and infinite wisdom of him; and as mirrors wherein he presents
himself every where before our eyes. And when we serve him not according to
our duty, we are well worthy to be set to school to such masters, as being
beasts, more brute, more wild, more savage, then they who live with us, and
are created for to serve us. It is then as Isay said to the Israelites who
were ungrateful and rebellious against their God: [The ox knows his owner,
and the ass his masters crib: but Israel has not known, my people has not
understood.] And indeed in these two kinds of creatures we have a goodly
example to raise us out of our sloth and ingratitude toward God: if we do but
consider only, what benefits do redound unto us by the service which we have
of oxen in tilling of our lands, and drawing of carts and wagons: and by asses
in bearing all loades and burdens which are laid upon their backs. Wherein we
are also to esteem of the providence of God, in regard of the form of the
bodies, and members of these beasts. For he has so disposed them, that their
only figure and composition does admonish men of the works wherein these
creatures must be employed, and of the uses, whereto they must be put. For oxen
do clearly show us, that their back is not fit to bear packs nor saddle, but
that their neck is fit for the yoke, and their shoulders to draw carts and
wagons: whereby one may easily judge as also by their heaviness, that they are
unfit to bear burdens like the ass, whose back, head and shoulders, are apt
for the same.

Of the docility of Bulls.
Moreover shall we not consider of the great bounty, and providence of God, in
that he has created the puissant and strong bulls so docible, that men do
easily teach them to leave all their fiercenes, and make them so tame, that a
little young boy shall lead them like sheep, and put the yoke upon their
neck, couple them, and make them labor as he lists? This may make us
wonder at the indocilitie and wildnes of man, being so difficult to correct
and tame. For we see that one only child can easily direct a great troop of
beasts, be they oxen or bulls, and govern them himself: But contrariwise, the
nature of man is so untoward, that many masters and governors are scarce
sufficient to guide one only child. And what may we more say, in that all the
government of these beasts is done without any need to muzzle their mouths, or
to tie and fasten them in chains or halters, and without keeping them in bits
and bridles like horses, which men tame by such means? Surely we need not
doubt, but if God had not ordained by his providence, that oxen and bulls should
serve men in those uses whereto they would employ them, that we should be able
to draw no more service out of them, then out of the wildest beasts that are in
the world. By so many testimonies then, as we have in the nature of beasts, of
the puissance, bounty and benignity of the creator of all things: let us
conclude, that we may very well say to all such as do not consider upon the
so admirable works of God, and upon his providence therein, that which Job
said to his friends, speaking thus, [Aske the beasts, and they shall teach
thee, Job. 12.
and the fowls of the heaven, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the
earth, and it shall show thee; or to the fishes of the sea, and they shall
declare unto thee, who is ignorant of all these, but that the hand of the Lord
has made all these?] And to morrow (companions) we will take a view of the
goodly riches and treasures, which are hidden within the earth: to wit, of
mettalles and precious stones, the discourse whereof (ASER) you shall begin.


The end of the eleventh days work.
THE TWELFTH DAYS WORK.
Of metals and especially of Gold. Chapter 93.
ASER. AS we have already contemplated those things, which appear to be most
rare upon the earth; so do we now desire somewhat to refresh our spirits by
the consideration of those things which are hidden within the intrailes
thereof. That then shall be the subject of our discourse for this day, to the
end that as the contemplation of the highest heavens did open an entrance into
our discourse, so we should conclude it, by a treatise upon that, which is
within the earth, nearest to the center of this great Universe: to wit, upon
metals and stones. Not that we intend to speak of them, as by a particular
description of their nature and species: for then I dare affirm that there are
so many kinds of metals engendered within the earth, that they cannot be
particularly described: and since that nature adorneth the earth with above five
hundred kinds of plants, and with as many beasts, it is very likely, that she
exercises no fewer means under earth, whereby to enrich it. But as we have
proposed unto our selves no other end in all our discourses of heaven, of
earth, and of the creatures therein contained; but only to consider upon the
most worthy things therein, which might incite us to an holy meditation of the
providence of God, thereby the more to glorify him: even so will we do in
that which we now intend to declare, concerning metals and precious stones.

What metal is, and of the kinds thereof.
Metal is that which is pliable by the hammer, and hard: stones are hard, but
not pliable; and wax and mud are pliable, but not hard. Mettalles are seven in
number, as the planets are. For gold represents the Sun; silver, the Moon:
amber called electrum, Mercury: iron, Mars: lead, Saturn: brass, Venus: and
copper, Jupiter: or else we distinguish them in this sort. All metal is
perfect, soft, and pure as gold: or, it is pure and hard, as silver: or, it is
hard and impure, as iron: or, it is soft and impure, as lead. And for amber it
is compounded of gold, and silver; as cyprus copper is made of brass, and
iron: containing an equal substance of brass, and of iron: which causes that
iron too much concocted and high tincted is easily changed into brass, and
rechanged again into copper. But we will now speak of gold, which is the
most perfect and purest of all mettalles. In very truth nature never took
delight to make a more perfect elementary substance then gold is: for it is as
pure, and neat in the quality thereof, as are the simple elements whereof it
is composed. And therefore by good right do we hold it in price of excellency
far above all other riches, and do esteem it in our judgment to be much more
precious then all other mettalles. For being in the composition thereof
proportioned in equal quality, fitly correspondent in the symmetry of the
elements which compound it, it is even from the original thereof so purified
already, as are the simple elements: In such sort, that by their conjunction
together in equal power, there is engendered so delicate, and perfect a mixture
of indissoluble union, composing an accord so faithfully, that there is made
thereby an incorruptible paste, which is permanent to all eternity in the
excellency and goodness thereof. Wherefore gold cannot be vanquished by
injury of time, and of antiquity, neither can contain in it self nor
support any excrescence and superfluity of rust. For though it be put into
the water, or fire, and there remain for any long space of time, yet is it
never stained, neither does accept any other quality, but that which is
natural, nor yet does fail any whit: which is the particular privilege that
it has above other mettalles. For they are all subject to alteration, and
therefore change, and corrupt for a small matter, and accept a good or bad
quality in their original, or end. But gold is incorruptible, and therefore
not subject to such mutations: yea though it be drawn out in so small wire,
that it be as fine as threeds in a spiders web, and though it be buried in most
piercing medicaments, as are sublimatum, and verdegrease, salt, and vinegar,
and that it remain two thousand years therein, it will not for all that be
corrupted, but contrariwise the more refined; but all gold has not one self
same perfection: for their mines and sources are different in goodness.
Sometimes also gold is counterfeit, sophisticate, and falsified through the
infidelity or avarice of those, who mingle it, and multiply it with other
mixtures of metals of less value, and less pure then it is. But pure and
refined gold is always perfect by nature in all those qualities, which we
have already touched. How gold is found.
And it is found in diverse manners; to wit, mixed with sand, as in Bohemia: on
the shore-side amongst the waters near to Goldebourgh, and Risegronde: and
amongst the stones in mountains as in Calecut, and in the Indies. But the
first generation thereof is at the top of mountains, in the highest places,
because that the sun does there more easily purify that, which retains too
much earthines in it. And when the rain, and torrents do flow down the
mountains, they carry the gold down with them to the foot thereof, where it
is gathered amongst the sand: or else in waters near thereunto whither it is
driven by violence of the floods: except perhaps the ground open with those
raines, and the gold do there stick, as it oftentimes chances. And that,
which is always found in the entrance of the mine, is not the finest: but the
farther you go, the finer and purer it is, of better weight, and greater
value. That then which is found in waters and rivers, is fished for and is in
form of little grains: and in rocks and mountains it is taken out, by
deluing and digging. Three sorts of gold-mines.
And therefore there are holden to be three sorts of gold mines. For some are
called pendent, some iacent, and others oblique and running. The pendent are
those which are found in the superficies of mountains, and have the earth
under them. They which are iacent or lie, are below in the field and plain
ground, carried thither by torrents and storms of rain. And the other that
are oblique, have a cross course whether it be in that which hangs, or
lies, all whereof is driven by floods into the next rivers: for which cause
there are rivers throughout all the world, the sand whereof seems to be of
azure and gold, having indeed pure and fine grains of good gold. How gold is
taken out of mines.
Now according as the mines are, so are there diverse means used to take out
the metal. For in those places which are dry, without water, they which are
expert in the vein of mines, having true knowledge what may be in that place,
do cause it to be dug eight or ten foot deep, and as many foot long and
broad: and as they proceed in their work, they still wash the earth that is
dug up, continuing so till such time as they find the gold, which is
sometimes so deep, that they are driven to set up arches of wood over them,
that the earth may not ouerwhelm them. And when the mines are pendent along the
mountains, the difficulty is then more great, wherefore they also set up
engines to defend them from dangers, which are there very imminent. For some,
to wit, those that dig into the rock, are quite hidden therein, even as those
that cut stone, are within a quarrie; others creep scrambling up the sharp
rocks, with a basket at their backs, seeking out the earth of the mine to
carry it to the water: others wash the same earth in a sieue, by means
whereof the gold is separated, remaining in the sieue, after that the earth is
run out by little and little. Moreover, out of these mines there issues a
stinking breath or damp, which does oftentimes choke and kill them that work
therein, being not able to endure so bad an air: some also are drowned by
waters, which suddenly gush out of those places where they have dug, when
they think not of any such thing, quickly ouerwhelming them, before they can
make sign to those that are above to help them. Again, these miserable poor
souls are oftentimes affrighted by evil spirits, who inhabit in great
numbers in those hollow and solitary places, as many have experimented to
their great hurt. For sometimes it happens, that these devils tumble great
stones and whole rocks upon them, throw down their engines, ouerturne their
ladders, break their cordage, and do a thousand other mischiefs, whereby men
are oftentimes slain. Concerning rivers wherein the grains and sands of gold
are found, the dangers are not so great therein, but the pain is no less. For
if the river be little, the Indians use to empty and let it out till it be
dry: and then take off the bottom thereof, and wash it, as beforesaid: and if
the water be very great, they turn it out of the channel; which done, they
go to gather the gold in the midst of the river, betwixt the stones and great
pibbles, so that sometimes there comes greater profit by this fishing, then
by washing the dug earth, to separate the gold. But howsoever, yet is there
great pains always used to obtain the riches of this metal, so much
coueted by men, and whereof the abuse is very great, as we may in some sort
touch, after that we have spoken of other metals, which shall serve (AMANA)
for the subject of your discourse.


Of Silver, Amber, Iron, Lead, Brass and Copper. Chap. 94.
AMANA. THE most noble amongst metals next to gold is silver, for although
that copper in color, and lead in weight do nearest approach unto gold: yet in
tenuitie of substance, in pureness and fastnes, Of silver.
silver is so like unto it, that good silver may be rightly said to be
imperfect gold in substance, failing in color, and that by succession of time
it is sometimes changed into gold; as in many years space lead turns into
silver. The mines thereof are more ordinary then gold mines; for France,
Italy, Spain, England, Germany, and many other regions of Europe do bear
silver in diverse places, as well as the other parts of the world. And it is
there engendered in four manners: to wit, either in the earth, which being
gathered together, and then molten in the fire, does yield silver; or in lead,
wherewith it is often found mingled; or in brass, or in stones, out of which it
is also extracted by fire. For in the mountain called (Mons regius) stones
retain very much silver: which being also put into the fire, there is found
in every pound of silver that runs out of them, half an ounce of gold at
least. Silver is also many times found to be mixed with copper, as in Alsaria
near to the Rhine, in the mountains of Saint Anne, and in Meissen: for there
are stones full of copper, in which is great abundance of silver. And when it
is separated from lead, it leaves a scumme, Of litharge.
which we call (Lithargyrium) which is a kind of impure lead, Of quicksiluer.
retayning some virtue of silver. For quicksiluer, though it agree in name with
silver, yet it approaches nearer to gold: for it is like unto it in tenuitie,
and weight, and to silver in color only. But for all this it is no metal,
but a water condensate, not by heat (for it is not hardened) nor by cold (for
then it would be a stone or metal) but by some other terrestrial, rare and
pure portion, whereby it comes to be very weighty and cold, splendent and
liquide: and is therefore rancked among those mettalline substances, which
differ but little from water: and indeed the mountains where quicksiluer
grows are very green, and full of fountains.

Of amber.
Let us speak now of Amber, which we have put into the number of metals. Many
authors do disagree very much in the discourse of Amber. For some reckon that
which is called (Electrum) amongst pliable and hard mettalline substances:
others will not acknowledge it to be any other then a gum of a tree, which is
very much like to that of the Pine and Fir Tree, producing Rosin, and is very
common in Arabia the happy. Philemon writes, that in two places of Scythia,
Amber is dug out of the ground, like a kind of stone; and in one place it
is white, in another yealow. But omitting this argument, we will follow those
who make Amber a metal, whose nature and property is in mean betwixt gold
and silver: and that such is the true and natural amber; as that, which we use
in our beads is artificial. And it partaketh more of gold then of silver,
because it is more pure and perfect, and apt to be wrought. For if it did
consist more of silver, it could not endure the forge and hammer. There are
vessels made thereof for beauty and profit: for good amber does discover
poisons in these two manners, by cracking and making the sign of an arch
within. For when the rare humiditie thereof comes to be consumed by the force
of venim, it cracketh: and the color changing, it seems that in steed of the
great splendour thereof, there does a kind of stain represent it self like
unto an arch. Now that this kind of amber is very rare, it is not because
there is not enough to be had in mines: but avarice and ignorance of the virtue
thereof causes that the gold is extracted, whereby it cease to be amber.

Concerning Iron; it is taken out of the earth, Of iron.
and to make it malleable, the mass thereof is (when it is taken up) laid to
dry in the sun, and that which is earthy does soften in the rain, as that
which is moist does melt by the sun, and the most sharp part thereof, which is
as the venim of it, is consumed by the fire. The mines of this metal are
common in Europe, as in diverse parts of France, which are enriched by the
forges that are there set up, to bring this mineral substance to his
perfection. Which by how much the more it is concocted and purged, by so much
the more is it better in goodness: in such sort, as that which is earthy, does
at last turn to scales and dross, and the most subtle part thereof does
convert into steel, after it has been well purged, and a little marble added
thereto. And this is artificial steel. Of steel.
For there is in many places natural steel, namely in Persia very good, in
the Chaldean Isle, and near Damascus, whereof the best cemiters in the world
are made, which cut so well, that there is no rasor be it never so well
steeled and tempered that has a more fine and sharper edge. For this cause
some say that there are some kinds of steel and iron so excellent, that
weight for weight they are esteemed of greater price then gold. Moreover men
may see what art can do in iron, when by much beating thereof, and through the
power of water, iron, be it never so thin, is made vnfrangible by blows:
because that such water, by means of fire does consume the terrestrial and
waterie excrement, which is found in this metal. When then the iron is
brought to be most pure, most hard, and most light, then is it most subtle,
and therefore most strong, and resists best.

Lead consists of four kinds. For there is black, common, Of lead.
and low-pricked lead: white, which is ordinarily called tin: Bisemutum which
is of mean quality betwixt black and white, and is rare, and known but to few
people though it be found in the mountains of Bohemia: and the fourth kind is
compounded of Stibium. The ore of lead is molten in furnaces prepared for that
purpose, and being molten, it is let run through pipes out of the furnace,
whither the workmen will. And whilst it remains very hot, they cast clear
water upon it to make the four arise: which waxes very massiue, hard to
break, yealow, and bright as glass: and this is that which is called litharge
of lead. But this difference is betwixt white lead, and true tin; Of tin.
that this does always grow with silver, and the other does grow of it self:
in such sort that tin is almost white lead blaunched by silver. Brass (as
we have already said) is made of a matter very near approaching to that of
iron: Of brass, and copper.
and so also is copper. But brass has this property, that it never rusteth;
as iron and steel does: and therefore it will continue longer. In times past
also, it was very usual to make armor and bucklers thereof, yea, and lances
likewise: witness Homer, who recounteth that Menelaus pursued Paris with a
brazen lance. Flutes and pipes of organes, and other musical instruments are
commonly made of brass: but it does properly agree with trumpets, because it
makes a great noise in dorick music, and inflameth men to combat. That of
cyprus is harder, and better then any other. Some also because of copper make
two kinds of brass: to wit, natural, whereof the best has spots of shining
gold intermingled; and there is reported to have bin found in new Spain in
America a piece of it of two hundred pound weight. Then is there artificial
brass, which is called copper, or latten: and the most excellent is that,
which in four pounds of brass does contain one pound of white lead called
tin: also when the white lead is mixed to the eight part of brass, then is
the copper very good: but it is base being mixed with black lead. For the use
of copper, it is chiefly fit for fair instruments, as ordinance, cauldrons,
and such like: wherein it is more excellent then brass; because also it does
not give a bad taste, nor smell to such meat as is boiled therein. Thus have we
summarily run over that, which we thought most convenient to be spoken
concerning metals: we will now speak of precious stones: whereof (ARAM) do
you begin to entreat.


Of precious stones, and chiefly of the Diamond. Chap. 95.
ARAM. IF we first say somewhat concerning the original and matter of stones,
the nature and virtue of them shall be so much the more easy for us to
comprehend. Now the original of stones, as of metals, is in the earth: and
they be all made of an elementarie substance, or of a pure and equal matter
which is gathered together, or else is run on an heap, or else has been
purified in some sort howsoever. In which, Of the original, and substance of
stones.
heat does chiefly operate. For that is it which boileth the matter naturally
engendered to perfect the humor, whereof afterward the mineral matter or stone
does consist. Theophrastus distinguishing all that which does so grow within the
earth, says, that some things participate with the water, as gold, and silver,
and other metals: some accord with the earth, as stones, yea precious stones,
and all such earths as are in estimation because of their colors, or of their
sauors, or of some other properties. But if he would infer (as it seems) that
all precious stones are terrestrial, if this opinion were true, then should
there be no precious stone bright and clear, and yet almost al of them are so.
Wherefore we may rather say, that they are not earthie, but watery: that is to
say, that they are composed of a certain humor, which retains more of water
then of earth: for it is a certain kind of clammy slime, wherein there is
more water then earth, which being dried and thickened through contiunance of
the same operation, and by the vehemency thereof, does at last become a stone.
Now that a gross and clammy humor does easily convert into stone, we see
evident in all living creatures, and chiefly in our selves. For those stones
and gravel, which breed in the bladder and in the reins, are engendered of
such humors, as in tract of time have been boiled and hardened by the natural
heat of our body. So then precious stones, which are bright and transparent,
are not composed of earth, nor yet of water only: but are engendered of a pure
and liquid humor, which retains in it self more of water then of earth. For
in that these stones, being cast into water, sink to the bottom, it is
manifest, that they are not made of water only, for then they should swim
aloft like ye and hail.

For the splendour and light of some, and obscurity, Of the splendour and light
in stones.
or thicknes of others: we must first note, that the elements operating (as in
all things else) in the generation of stones, they participate more with the
water and with the earth, then with the fire and with the air. And because
that the earth is not transparent nor shining, as it is evident that the water
is, and clear also; it follows, that all the brightness and splendour of stones,
does proceed from the water. Therefore we say, that al clear and transparent
stones are engendered of humors alike in cleernes and light: and contrariwise,
that they which are troubled, obscure and thick, do proceed from the earth: to
wit, from a slimie and black humor that retayneth much earth, and but little
water. And for so much as some stones are more clear, and more shining then
others, that proceeds from the diversity of humors, whereof they have bin
engendered: for some humors are more clear and more purified then others.
Whereupon ensues that some precious stones which are white, have been
generated by an humor having the color of water, which makes them more
clear and more transparent then others: and so of the variety which is in the
colors of all stones, be they green, blew, red, purple, yealow, or of many
mingled colors, one must judge the humors whereof they did proceed at first
to have been such: and that other precious stones which are not transparent
proceed from troubled, black and obscure humors; for the water it self
though it be never so clear, does become black, if it be mixed with never so
little blacknes. And such precious stones as are splendant, do shine by reason
of their great brightness, which makes their light continue and abound. As much
must we judge of the cause of stains, spots, shadowings, clouds, veins and
other vices, which are found in precious stones: and of the difference that is
in their massiuenes, spungines, lightness, weight and hardness: for all these
things proceed from the diversity of the nature and of the colors of such
humors as have engendered them.

Of the principal stones, and of their proper praises.
Now amongst precious stones, these bear away the prise, and are praised with
especial praise: the white diamond, for hardness, and soliditie: the green
emerauld for beawty: the red carbuncle, called the rubie, for lively color:
the sky colored saphir, for grace: the yealow chrysolite for splendour: the
diverse colored opall, for variety: and the clear pearl for whitenes, and
roundnes. First then let us speak of the diamond. Of the diamond.
For as gold amongst metals, so the diamond amongst stones is most precious.
For the substance thereof is hard, and for that cause the more exquisite: as
that is amongst metals, which is the most pliable. By reason then of the
hardness and soliditie thereof, the diamond bears away the price amongst
precious stones: for in color it is inferior to the emeraulde, to the rubie,
and to the opall. But that which makes it most to be esteemed, is, because
that the filings, and small pieces thereof are precious: so that one scruple is
sold for six crowns of gold: and because that by the hardness thereof, it
cutteth all other stones, being not only commodious in sculpture but also
very necessary. Neither will it be well cut or polished, but by the only
filings thereof, so hard it is. For which cause many have written, that the
point of a dart, being rubbed with the powder of a diamond, it will easily
pierce any armor: wherein this reason is apparent, that the iron or steel is
heated by the blow, whereupon it may be penetrated by the subtilitie and
hardness of the diamond. Which is also commended for this virtue, that being
polished, it does greatly glister amongst precious stones: and for that it
resists fire for the space of nine days time, without having any sense
thereof, and afterward it remains many other days, without being annoyed.
Which sufficiently declares that this stone does consist of most subtle
parts: for otherwise it would have pores and small holes, by which the fire
entering, it should easily break. The diamond then retayneth a lively and
strong splendour, in such sort that it does not only shine, but does also
sparkle, and is besides that, unchangeable, not being corrupted by iron, by
moisture, by fire, by age, nor by use. It has also this property, that being
tied to the flesh of the left arm, it does hinder and withstand the fears of
night. It is not then without good cause that this stone is so much esteemed by
us, and almost by all nations. For even in the Indies, in Calicut, in Persia,
in Tartaria, and other places, where rocks of Diamonds are commonly found, they
are very dear and of great traffic: so that they are transported into all
places, how far remote soever they be: witness the isle of Carge, which lies in
the bosom of the Persian-sea, where bargains are usually made for Diamond
stone: it remaining yet uncut from the rock, although it be scarce within six
hundred and threescore miles of that place where it is had. And therefore it is
no great marvel, if diamonds be at so high a price as they are, considering
that they are so much in request by every one: wherefore there are some found
which are sold for twenty and thirty thousand crowns a piece and above; for
we our selves know, that there is one in the treasury of our kings which did
cost seventy thousand crowns. We are to note, that in the mountain of
Cugarquel, which is near to the river of Goa in the East Indies, are the best
and finest diamonds of all the world: as to the contrary in the isle of
Canada, which neighboureth upon Florida, there are found false ones, but so
fair and well cut by nature, that the most subtle Lapidaries are very much
troubled to discern the one from the other: whereupon this Proverb did arise.
Lo, there is a Canada-diamond. But I have said enough hereof. Now (ACHITOB) do
you speak of the nature and property of other precious stones.


Of the Emeraud, of the Carbuncle or Rubie, of the Saphir, of the Iacinth, and
of the Amethyst. Chapter 96.
ACHITOB. THE Emeraud has been long time holden for the most precious stone
of all other, as well because of the beauty thereof, as by reason of the many
great properties which are natural thereunto: in such sort as the price thereof
did exceed that of the diamond. But as the rarenes of some things make them
dear, so does the abundance of other things make them to be less esteemed: as
it came to pass, Of the emeraud.
that the great quantity of Emerauds, which not long since were found in the
newfound countries of America, has much abated their price, but not their
beauty nor virtue, which ever remains, and is most excellent in those which
are brought out of the East Indies: for they of Peru are of much less worth.
The green Emeraud then is the fairest of all precious stones, but yet the most
brittle. For it sometimes happens to break even in the act of coiture. Being
drunk, it does much resist poisons, by the nature of the softnes thereof: by
reason that the abundance of the well concocted humor which is therein, does
refresh the spirit by the perspicuitie thereof: and so it is profitable to the
nature of man, and resists the force of venim: and for so much as it is a
stone it retayneth the virtue thereof stable. For we may note, that all things
which are pleasant to the sight, are profitable for man; whether it be in
precious stones, or gold, or silver, silk or purple: but above all, the
Emeraud is fair, if that the art therein deceive not the sight, for as well
this stone, as others are oftentimes counterfeited and falsified in diverse
ma^^ers. Moreover, as the Emeraud is very soft, so is it very subject to all
casual chances: for it is corrupted by fire and heat, and by the touch of
other precious stones which are harder, chiefly of the Diamond, yea by every
thing that can give a blow. That which shines most, and almost like the sun,
and which refreshes the sight, as forests and green meadows do, is most to
be esteemed. But I believe there was never any mention made of a more rich
basin then that of an Emeraud, being one of the greatest treasures of Italy,
which is in the city of Genoa: for it is reported that it was pawned in the
necessity of the commonweal for fourteen hundred thousand ducats: think
then but how much this Emeraud must be worth. But that which is also said,
that this is the same platter, wherein our Savior Jesus Christ did eat the
Paschal Lamb in his last supper, makes me to doubt much, whether there be any
people that upon one only stone would lend so great a sum of money.

The red Carbuncle called the ruby is another precious stone, Of the carbuncle
called the rubie.
which is very beautiful, and has the property to quicken the spirit, and
make it joyful. Some authors have made mention of three kinds of carbuncles,
saying that there be some, which shine in the dark: others also that shine, if
water be powered thereupon: and the third kind is of those, whose cleerenes is
only seen in another light, to wit by day time, or by candle light.
Theophrastus says, that there are some of the color of water, some of the
color of the Amethyst, others of the color of the Iacinth, and some of a red
color, which are called Rubies. In the Indies these stones are plentifully
found: and Jews de Barthema reports, that the king of Pegum, which is a
city in India, has carbuncles called in Greek Pyropi, of such magnitude and
splendour, that if any one should see the king in a dark place, with these
stones upon him, he would seem to shine like a clear light, even as if he
were fired by the beams of the sun.

The saphir does approach near to the excellency of the diamond, in great
hardness: in fairenes of color, Of the saphir.
being of a sky color; and in beawtie: and is very good for the sight if it
be not sophisticated. It refreshes a man, and being drunk is profitable for
melancholy people, and for blows and bitings of scorpions and serpents.
Albertus Magnus affirms that he had twice found by experience, that the
saphir would heal an anthrax, which is a kind of bile. Which may be believed
considering the medicinable virtue which is in this stone. For as thirst
comes through the biting of a certain snake called Dipsas, and as the hand
is benumbed by the touching of a little fish, called Remora, so the venomous
fire of the Anthrax may be extinguished by the long touching of the saphir:
but it must needs be so big as it may cover the head of the bile.

Having already made mention of the Iacinth, and of the amethyst, to which
there are great properties assigned, I will now touch some principal points in
them. And first we are to note, that the iacinth is commonly of a yealow
color, but the best is red: yet it is not so big as the other: being put into
the fire it becomes more obscure, and redder: and being out of the fire it
shines greatly. Also this kind of hyacinth does differ but little from the
carbuncle in estimation of price. They that are of the color of water are
counted for base, and of no force. But Serapio has written, that the good
iacinth keeps men that bears it out of the peril of thunder: and defends
them from the plague, and provoke sleep. Albertus Magnus likewise says,
that the iacinth does augment riches, and authority, and that it does greatly
comfort the heart, and cause much joy. Now because these things might seem to
be paradoxes to many, we will here make a little discourse, following the
precept of the philosopher, who thinks it sufficient in hard and intricate
questions, if we can well avoid and shun absurd doctrine. For by this means
many shall be induced to esteem more then they do of precious stones, and to
believe the properties, which are attributed unto them, if not as true, Good
reasons of the virtue of stones.
at least wise yet as possible. I say then that the iacinth is of cold
temperature: for that is almost common to all precious stones, and causes
them, especially the diamond, not to receive fire very easily: for so much as
the coldness does greatly help the soliditie and subtlety thereof, which
makes that stones do resist fire. Besides the iacinth is good for the breath
of man, either because of the likeness of substance, or by cleerenes, or through
some other mystical cause, whereby repairing and confirming the breath and the
spirit, it makes man joyful: for sadness is nothing else but the contraction
of breath, and shortness and difficulty of the same. By such reason then, as
some have said that they have experimented, that if any thing do comfort the
heart, it does likewise resist the plague, which does chiefly come through
fear and imbecillitie of heart (as experience shows us in regard of
children, women, and fearful people, who are sooner taken with this disease,
then stout and hardy men:) the Iacinth abolishing these two things (fear and
faintnes of heart) it may, I say, help greatly to resist the plague. So also
making the heart and the spirit joyful, and by that means more capable of good
counsel, it shall be the easier for man to increase in authority, and to
augment in richesse. For being defended from thunder, although that the Iacinth
be (as we have said) of cold temper, which causes that it will not easily
receive endomagement by fire: yet do not we attribute to it therefore, that it
will preserve a man from being hurt. But we may rather say, that the spirit of
his heart being rejoiced by the virtue of this stone, may have the grace to
direct him into some place where he may be clean out of the peril of thunder.
Concerning the Amethyst, Of the amethyst.
it is also a precious stone and oriental, although it be but of a low price
in regard of others: in it is seen the color and grace of wine, bearing a
purple luster: and it is thought to hinder drunkenness if it be tied to the
navel; and to stir up dreams. Now (ASER) let us hear you pursue our
discourse of stones.


Of the Chrysolite, Topaze, Opall, Turkesse, and of the Agath. Chap. 97.
ASER. Whosoever will nearly consider upon that, which has been written by
the Ancients concerning the Chrysolite and Topaze, Of the chrysolite.
shall find that that, which we call a Chrysolite, was their Topaze, and
contrariwise our Topaze was their Chrysolite. This stone is of yellow color,
not pure, but greenish, and is nothing inferior to the Saphir in hardness, if
it be oriental. For you must note, that the German Chrysolite, and many
other precious stones, which are found under the North, cold, Septentrionall
Zone, are not so hard as the oriental; because that there the heat is not so
sufficient that it may much attenuate the humor, which composeth the stone,
and harden it: for the perfect concretion and gathering together is the cause
of hardness, which is done, when some very small parts are mixed and conjoined
together, as comes to pass in the generation of every stone. Moreover the
Chrysolite is seldom found, without some black spots wherewith it is foiled:
and but for this, it is a very excellent precious stone. It is thought greatly
to repress lust, if it be carried next to ones skin. Besides, it is of great
coldness, whereby this argument is apparent, that being laid upon the tongue of
one that has a fever, it appeaseth his thirst. Pliny records, Hist. not.
lib. 37. c. 8.
that from an Isle called Topazos, there was brought a Chrysolite to Queen
Berenice, mother of king Ptolemey the second, which was four cubits long: and
that the king of Egypt did afterward cause a statue to be made thereof in the
honor of the Queen Arsinoe his sister and wife, which was placed in the gilded
Temple, that this Prince caused to be erected.

Of the topaze.
The Topaze is of a green color, and softer then the Chrysolite, for it is
easily brought into dust with a file: in lapse of time also it loses his
splendour of it self; so that although it be very fair, De subt. lib. 7.
yet none desires much to wear it. Cardanus affirms himself to have found
that fifteen grains of this stone being drunk, make a singular remedy for
melancholy persons.

Of the opall.
Now speak we of the Opall, which for variety of colors is accounted amongst
the most precious stones. For in it the fire of the Rubie, the purple of the
Amethyst, and the green sea of the Emeraud, shine altogether by a marvelous
kind of mixture. There are some which have a luster so mixed with all colors,
that there can no more be seen in a rich tablet nor more lively. Others seem
to sparkle with violet flames, changing in manner of a fire made of brimstone,
or of a fire kindled with oil. Pliny says, that the Greeks did call the
Opall, Paederos, that is to say, pastime for little children, Hist. not. lib.
17. c. 6. and.9.
because of the great grace and beauty which this stone has in it. For (says
he) first one would say that there were a green heaven in a pure crystal,
mixed with a purple color, and a golden luster, enclining to the color of
wine, which is always the last color that does present it self. And yet one
would say that this stone has the head crowned with a purple chaplet, and that
it is confusedly tincted with all these foresaid colors, and respectively
with each of them. Moreover, there is no stone more clear then this: and some
say that it is very good for the head, and comfortable to the sight. Nonius a
Senator of Rome did so love an Opall that he had, that he chose rather to be
banished out of Rome, then to give it to Marcus Antonius, carrying nothing with
him of all his wealth but the ring only, wherein that stone was set. Opals are
found in many places of Egypt, of Arabia, and of the Indies: but the best are
brought from Zeila, and Isle of East India, which produces them as great as
walnuts. But we must note, that the Indians can counterfeit them so finely with
simple glass, that it is an hard matter to discern the natural, from false
ones: yet their deceit is found in the sun. For holding betwixt the thumb
and forefinger a false Opall against the sun, all the diversity of colors
which seemed to be in this stone will turn into one: But the natural Opall
changes luster every minute, and spreads it here and there, so that the
diversity of the colors thereof will shine upon your fingers, being holden
(as is said) and exposed to the Sun.

Shall we say nothing of the Turkesse which is garnished with the color of
heaven, and which has admirable virtue? Of the turkesse.
For it is of a sky color and celestial blewe, and very bright. It is
esteemed, because that in the night it likewise looks green: that part which
is upon the earth is marked with veins: it is soft, and not of too cold a
substance. Also lime slaked and laid upon this stone, seems to be blew, and
receives the color of a precious stone. It is commonly made bunching, and
swelling out like an eye: and is found in this form sowed and set along the
rocks in many places of the Indies: but the fairest Turkesses are in the
kingdom of Rasigut. And because of the difficulty to come to those places
where they grow, the inhabitants of the country beat them down with staves,
in such sort that they fall with their earth and moss: and the people do
esteem so much of them, that they account them as their greatest riches and
delight, hanging them about their necks in manner of Carcanets. It is no
marvel then if these stones be rare amongst us: for we see no very common
traffic made of them, and yet they are much in request at this day. Their
virtue and property according to the report of some, is very marvelous. For
they say, that the Turkesse being worn in a ring, does keep a man from hurt
that falls, yea though it be from his horse: and that it receives all the
blow, and is oftentimes broken in pieces: which is less credible then that
which some also affirm, that the virtue thereof does resist poisons.

Now let us speak of the Agath, Of the agath.
which is the biggest of all such as are called precious stones. But it is of
so variable a kind, that one can scarcely think it to be one only stone. For
the Agath is white, red, yellow, ash-colored, green, black, changeable, blew:
in brief, the colors of all precious stones, and of all other besides do
concur in it. And nature exercises so many fashions upon it, that we may see
it represent forests, fields, floods, flowers and trees. Histories have
celebrated very much the Agath of king Pyrrhus, which represented the nine
Muses, with Apollo in the midst of them playing upon his harp, being all in
sundry garments: in such sort, as it seemed that nature did contend with the
painter to carry away the price of such a representation. Cardanus reports
that he had in his keeping two Agaths, Lib. 7. de. subt.
in one of which, nature had painted the hemisphere of heaven, the distinct
circles, with the round earth in the midst, environed by the waters: and in the
other, an open gulf of the earth, seemed to breath out a fume that darkened the
air: wherein this was most admirable, that the color of the smoke should
seem to differ from that of the air, which was thereby darkened: this
appearing white, and thick, and the air reddish, and somewhat clear. But
though the agath be noble and excellent for the variety thereof, yet because
it is but little bright, and shining, it is but seldom esteemed to be of
great value amongst precious stones. Some do attribute this property thereto,
to be good against stingings of scorpio^s: especially that Agath which is
spotted with little grains of gold, which the Isles of Candie, and Sicilie do
produce. The same virtue is attributed to the agaths of India and to refresh
the sight much, by but only looking upon them: and they say, that they staunch
thirst being held never so short a while in ones mouth. But enough of this:
now (AMANA) do you look to that, which rests for us to consider upon,
concerning these most precious stones that deserve to enrich our discourse.


Of Pearl, Coral, and Crystal. Chapter 98.
AMANA. IT is no marvel though pearls be so much sought after in these days,
by every one for ornaments, especially for women: for of old they have been in
such or more request: so that while the Roman empire flourished this was a
common proverb. That a woman could or might go without pearls, as well as a
consul might go without officers: meaning thereby that pearls were an honor
to women, and made way to be given them in the street, as the sergeants did for
the consul before whom they marched. Of pearl.
Pearl is placed among precious stones, and is of great price, being esteemed
for whitenes, splendour, and roundnes: and when it is found big, polished, and
heavy, then may it be said to be fair in all perfection. But there are very
few pearls that have all these bewties, and conditions. Concerning the
generation thereof, the ancient opinion has ever been, that the pearl was
engendered in shelles of fishes, wherewith the Indian sea does abound, which
engendring at one time of the year, do open and gape in the night time, by
that means filling themselves with dew, whereby they conceive pearls, which
they make according to the quality of the dew received: if it be clear,
they are clear: if troubled so, are they troubled, and foul: if abundant,
the pearls are great: if scarce, they are little. Moreover if it happen to
thunder the shells shut together for fear that they have; so that they have no
leisure to take in dew enough, whereby they remain lanck and empty, as if
they had fasted: and thereof also pearls do proceed that are without
substance, and full of wind. But mark what our French cosmographer says:
Lib. 10. de. cosm. c. 4.
if these shells or oisters have no other substance within them, but this pearl
so conceived of dew, how does the race of this shellfish maintain it self?
Moreover in the west Indian seas, where abundance of these pearls are found,
it cannot be seen how their generation may be judged by the clear, or
obscure disposition of the weather: for if that were so, there is no doubt, but
that all the pearls, which were found in one shell, should be all of one
manner: whereas the contrary is seen, that within one shell are found some
dark pearls, others drawing to a tawnie, some pale, some greenish, and some
again bluish, and very few there are, which have the perfection required in a
fair pearl. Thereupon he concludes, that this pearled fish maintains the
kind thereof by the eggs which it breeds: and that the pearls come out of
the sand and gravel wherein they breed and are hidden: because that by little
and little this gravel refineth it self, and grows into these shells, or
oisters, till such time as it has attained to an entire and perfect form,
remaining still soft, for so long time as the oister is within the water, but
being out, it presently hardneth, and becomes such pearl as we see. But
without much disputing hereupon, every man is of opinion, that these pearls
are bred in the shells of fishes. And the experience hereof is not only seen
in the Indian sea, but also in the British seas, yea in all seas, and fresh
waters: because that such oisters do swim as well as fishes: of which there have
been some fished up in the river Garonne. But the industry of such as fish,
for them in the bottom of the sea is wonderful: for from thence they fetch
their best mother of pearl, which lie within, and upon rocks hidden in the
waters. They which are appointed to such fishing, enter into boats, and
afterward (leaving some within to govern them, and to help themselves also
up, when they have done their fishing) they cast themselves into the water,
diuing down to the bottom, where they sometimes remain for the space of
half an hour, and with nets catch these shells: having taken some, they
return again to the top of the water, and are received by those in the
vessel, where refreshing themselves with meat, and drink, and having fitted
on that, which they put before their face, which is, as of little pieces of
sear cloth very fine like a thin bladder, made that they may see clearly
through within the water; they leap in five, or six times a day. These oisters
are also found fastened upon rocks, which appear above water, from whence they
are fetched with pain, and being catched, the pearls are straightwaies taken
out, which otherwise would consume and lose their fresh color: and in one
shell there are sometimes thirty, or forty small and mean ones, but few great
ones, to wit, one, or two. They were, doubtless, Pearls of great price.
wonderful fair, which were given to Ferdinand Magellano, in a certain Isle
of the Moluccaes, which were four in number, each one of the bigness of a
pigeons egg, esteemed to be worth five and twenty thousand crowns a piece.
But this was a very small matter in comparison to the two Unions of Cleopatra
Queen of Egypt, esteemed worth fifteen hundred thousand crowns: one whereof
she dissolved in very strong vinegar, and drank it up at a banquet, because it
might be said, that she had surpassed in sumptuousnes of cost, the feast
which Anthony had made her. Now for the virtues of pearls, they are very good
for passions, and faintnes of heart, and purge the blood, and being put into
medicines, they take away clouds, and dimnes from before the eyes, and dry up
the moisture that runs from them.

Of coral.
Coral is likewise fished for in the sea, and put into the number of stones,
although indeed it is a plant, or shrubbe, which being drawn out of the
Mediterranean sea, and feeling the air, does wax hard by the power thereof.
And there is found, white, red and black, in one self same plant, which
grows amongst stones and rocks in the bottom of the water: but the best
coral is the red if it be euenly congealed: for the white is not so massiue nor
heavy: but is light, rare, and full of holes like a sponge. When it is fished
for, it is all covered with moss, and has no sign or apparition of rednes.
But being cleansed, it takes color, and appears fairly polished: now those
grains of round coral, which are put in bracelets and collers, are not found
so in the shrubbe: but it consists of many little branches, whereof these
grains are made with a wheel, and files, and are afterward polished with
vermilion, and with a certain earth which is brought from Tripoly in Africa.
The properties which are attributed to coral, are marvelous: for some say,
that being hanged about the neck, or taken in drink, it is good for them that
have the falling evil, for bloody flixes and loosenes of the belly, to fasten
the teeth, to heal sorenes in the mouth: to provoke sleep in such as have
fevers, to diminish the spleen: for those that vomit and spit blood. Auicen
places it amongst those medicines that comfort the heart, and Pliny says that
being burnt and puluerized, and so drunk with water, it is good for them that
have wringing in their belly, and the stone in the bladder. The ashes thereof
also are put into medicines for the eyes: it thickneth, refrigerateth, and does
incarnate hollow ulcers, and makes skars smooth. But amongst other properties
this is most admirable and true, that red coral, which is pure and fulgent
like the carbuncle, being tied about ones neck so that it touch the skin,
when that person is sick, or shall be in short space after, or has drunk any
venim, which he yet feels not, the coral does wax pale and lose the splendour
thereof: which Cardanus has often testified to have proved by experience.

I will hereto add some short discourse concerning Crystal: Of crystal.
because that as it is engendered in the veins of the earth, of the same humor
that the Diamond is, which opened the entrance of this discourse concerning
precious stones; so now this speech of Crystal may shut it up again. Pliny
and many others have supposed that it was made of ice or snow: in a word, that
it was water congealed through great cold. But it appears that crystal is
engendered of some very well purified humor, in that it is the cleerest of all
stones. Again, if the oldest ice in the world be put into an hot place, it
does presently melt, which crystal does not. Moreover, it is most certain
that it is not found on the tops of mountains, where there is continual snow
and extreme coldness: but in quarries of marble and of other stones, yea and in
mines of diverse metals. This also is another reason, that ice does always
swim above water, but crystal sinketh to the bottom. That crystal is
best, which is white and clear as water. It melts with very great fire, and
does convert into glass, whereof there are very fair vessels made. In virtue
it is restringent, and is therefore good for such as are sick of Dysenterias
to drink, in good sharp wine, after it is well and subtly beaten to powder.
The Ancients made a bowl of crystal, wherewith physicians cauterized those
which feared the fire, and common fearing iron: to do which, they laid the
same bowl directly toward the beams of the sun: by the reuerberation
whereof they did their surgerie work upon the grieved part. Now in this little
which we (companions) have declared concerning metals and precious stones, we
may imagine, that if there be sufficient matter to admire the effects of
nature, ordained by the divine providence, what might we think, if we should
enterprise to speak of five hundred kinds of metals, earths, and precious
stones, which the earth hides within her bowels? But since that we have
attained to the end of our discourse, which is to glorify God in the
knowledge and contemplation of his most noble creatures: let us advise our
selves how to give some good instructions upon that which has been delivered
concerning minerals and stones hidden under ground as (ARAM) you can declare
unto us.


Of the instructions that men must take, in that gold and silver are hidden
under the ground, and of their use and abuse, as also of precious stones.
Chapter 99.
ARAM. AS God declares a great and marvelous providence in all his creatures
(as we have discoursed entreating upon them) so also does he manifest it unto
us in the creation of metals, and especially of gold and silver, which are
esteemed for the most precious. For we see how he has hidden them in the most
deep places of the earth, and has covered them with great and high
mountains: so that to dig and draw them out of their profound caves, men must
therein so travel, as if they had enterprised to ouerturne and to transport
these lofty hills from one place to another, and to search and pierce through
the earth from one side to another. For how is it searched by such as work in
mines? It is a marvel that they are not already come unto the Antipodes,
considering the deep pits, gulfes and holes whereinto they are descended. Job.
28.
Job having spoken of gold and silver, does presently make mention of the
bounds of darkness and shadow of death. And in very truth they are things which
do fitly agree with these two minerals: For they are hidden in very obscure
and dark places, and covered with a very thick shadow: yet cannot this limit
the covetousness and avarice of men, notwithstanding that God has sufficiently
admonished them to moderate themselves, seeing that he has so hidden the gold
and silver, which provoke their avarice, making them so furious and
insatiable. And therefore I might very well compare them to brute beasts, yea
to a flock of sheep. For although that they daily behold by many experiences,
Men compared to a flock of sheep.
the calamities which fall upon the world through avarice, and especially upon
those, which are entangled with this vice, yet cannot one take example by
another, but do all follow one by one like poor brute beasts and sheep,
following one another when they are lead to that slaughter house, or when
there is some one amongst them that has lead the way to the rest, and has
made the first leap. For what danger soever there be, yea though it were to
tumble headlong downwards, into some bottomless pit, it is sufficient if one
begin the dance: for he shall presently have good company, yea such, as
there is not one of the whole troop, but will lustily rush after without
thinking upon any danger. Who does not see that it is even so in man's life? For
according as some have wickedly begun, others pursue them, and the latter
cannot discover their own folly by that of the former, nor yet correct it by
so many examples as they have of evil ends, and pernicious events, which have
willingly fallen upon the covetous. For this cause the prophet having described
the folly and presumption of men, which think to build an eternity unto
themselves with temporal riches; he adds [Their way utters their
foolishnes, Psalm. 49.
yet their posterity delight in their talk: like sheep they lie in the
grave: death deuoureth them.] See there the shepherd and the flock of the
covetous, death, and the sepulcher.

Now our meaning is not here to blame the use of gold and silver: but only the
abuse. Of the right use of gold, and silver.
For we behold the great commodities that men have by communicating one with
another, and mutuallie aiding one another in all that which is rare and
exquisite amongst them, and that by means of those metals and money that is
coined thereof. For so may they furnish themselves of all things necessary for
their use, for their life, and according to their wish, not only from one
country to another, but (as we may well say) from one end of the world to
another. And if by their avarice they abuse not this great commodity, it will
be much more profitable to all. But their insatiable covetousness of gain is
cause that the amiable communication, and the good desire of one neighbor to
profit another, which should be by means of gold and silver, is converted
oftentimes into plain robbery. For their hearts are so set on fire with love
of riches, that they propose no other determination unto themselves, save to
heap up treasures by a deceitful means, which nevertheless they do never
enjoy in peace and content, being no more able to settle their covetousness,
and assuage their appetite, then to quench a great fire with laying dry wood
upon it: but that it will always increase and inflame the more. And to speak
truth, what is this gold and silver, but a little yealow and white earth? And
if there be any difference, it is only, in that the substance is more
hardened: and what do they differ therein from the basest hard stones? It is
only in color. Why then do men travail and take great care to heap up gold
and silver, rather then to heap up dust, earth, and stones? But indeed this is
much worse; for they heap up an unhappy treasure, when for earth and clay, they
gain unto themselves the treasure of the curse of God. Abat. 2.
For it is written [Cursed be he that heapeth up that which is not his: how
long will he lade himself with thick clay.] But what? This clay so yealow and
white, firm and exquisite, does dazzle their eyes more then any thing else:
and yet for all that, it is but earth. And therefore it is but opinion that
causes one thing to be esteemed more then an other. For if men had given that
value to other metals, which they have appointed to gold and silver, there
would be almost no difference of the one from the other. I say moreover that if
they had but equal regard to the utility and nature of things, according to
the profit which they receive thereby, and the need which they have thereof,
they should more esteem of iron, brass and copper, then of gold and silver:
considering that by iron, the earth which nourishes us is plowed, and arts and
occupations mantained, and that by it we defend our selves from the fury of
beasts and enemies: and of tin and copper we make the most principal
vtensils and tools in our houses to boil our victuals in, and for other
infinite uses. In all these things then we acknowledge the folly and want of
judgment in men, who govern themselves more by opinion then by reason.

We may say as much concerning precious stones, Of the use, and abuse of
precious stones.
which they have esteemed at a more high price then gold and silver. For how
many crowns do they oftentimes give for one pearl, or for a diamond, or for
some other stone? If the fancy take them, and that they do but only like
some small precious stone, then do they spare gold, and silver no more then if
they were dust and clay: then that which they so much delight in, and for to
obtain which, they direct and govern their whole course of life; yea, and put
it into all confusion, is nothing with them in respect of a small jewel. And
what profit can redound unto them by all this? Nothing else, but a vain
persuasion that induces them to obtain a stone of such and such worth, as it
pleases them to esteem it at. If they would think as much of a flint, a
flint would no less content them. If it be for the beauty and color that
they so account of this merchandise: is there any thing fairer, cleerer, or
cleaner then glass? nay then crystal? likewise the marble, alablaster,
jasper, and such like matters, do they give much place in beauty or hardness,
to the most excellent precious stones? If for their virtues and properties in
physic they are so much respected; why then they should buy nothing more
dear, not esteem of any thing more then of herbs and plants? I speak not this
to despise or condemn the use of precious stones, no more then of gold and
silver. For God did not create them, but for the service of man, and that he
might please himself with them, as with all his other creatures. Exodus
25.26.27.28.
For it was his will that his temple and the vessels therein, the garments of
the high priest, and the service by him ordained in the church of Israel,
should be adorned and enriched with gold, silver, and with precious stones.
Again, David and Solomon, and the other kings of Israel were never reprehended
nor condemned because they did abound in such riches. We do not then condemn
the use, but the abuse. For God requires that his creatures may be used
according to his ordinance, and so moderated, that there be no excess, whereby
he may be dishonored and offended, or our neighbor endomaged. But it is an
hard matter to heap up great store of gold and silver, and to dispend so much
upon precious stones, and other the pomps of the world, but that great wrong
must needs be done to many persons, or at least wise that the deeds of
charity, for which we were borne, must needs wax very slack. Loethen that,
which I have thought worthy to instruct our selves in upon our discourse this
day concerning the richesse hidden within the earth. And since that we have in
the twelve days of our meeting entreated of the principal parts of all this
visible world, and of the creatures contained therein, let us now, to conclude
our discourse, draw all these parts into one body, to the end that we may
show in this mass of the Universe, and propose as it were before our eyes, the
image of the greatness, puissance, and majesty of God, by the which men may in
contemplation, and consideration of his works, learn to fear, honor, and put
their whole trust and confidence in him, as they ought: which (ACHITOB) let us
hear you discourse upon.


Of the doctrine and profit which every one must and may reap out of the
total works of God in heaven and in earth, to acknowledge and glorify him.
Chap. 100.
ACHITOB. IF we do well consider upon those goodly matters, which we have
heretofore entreated of touching the creation of the world, and adorning
thereof in every part: we shall without doubtfeele our selves as it were
lifted up upon an high scaffold, where we may behold and contemplate God our
creator in the excellent works of his hands, and in the maruailous effects of
his providence, in such sort as if all this visible universe were a shop,
wherein we do see him work before our eyes; or else as if he were seated in
a stately royal palace, wherein we behold him reign upon his celestial
throne over every living soul: or as in a goodly temple wherein the glory of
his Majesty shines on every side, yea in every creature, which is therein as
an image, or mirror to show and manifest the creator and moderator of all
things. And indeed without this contemplation and knowledge for which we are
borne, and endued with reason, let us not think but that brute beasts have
more whereof to brag in regard of the world, and of the beawtie and commodity
thereof, and that they receive more rest, pleasure, and profit thereby then
men. For they content themselves with that which they have, and care not for
that, which they cannot attain unto: enjoying all that which is needful for
them, and that with pleasure, and without excess, superfluity, or any hurt.
But men are to the contrary, never content with their condition, aspire
evermore to that which they enjoy not, and which they might well let pass:
have many times need of that, which is necessary for them; and receive no
pleasure, but that which is mixed with some grief and bitterness: neither yet
can they content themselves, but that they must run into excess to their great
detriment.

This is that which has enflamed us with desire, in the progress of our
work, to discourse upon heaven and earth. And having brought our intention to
a desired end: we will here represent (for the last point of our speech, as
we did in the beginning thereof) all the parts of the world in one body, to
declare in this great body of all the Universe, and to propose, as it were
before our eyes the image of the greatness of the power, and of the majesty of
God, and of his infinitenes: to the end that we may all learn by the
contemplation, and consideration of this image, to honor him, and to put all
our trust and confidence in him, as we ought to do. For this is the true
doctrine, and the great profit, that every one must, and may reap by the
grace of God, of this total work in heaven, and in earth, to the end to
acknowledge and to glorify him. First then we are to consider, that not only
all that which we have declared concerning the works of God in this great
universe, but also all that, which the most learned ever could heretofore, or
hereafter ever may comprehend and describe, is nothing else but as a very light
demonstration of some draught of his work, or of some corner of his
magnificent palace, or of some small jewel of his inestimable treasures. For
since he has created all these things, and that the heaven is his seat, and
the earth his footstool (as Isay speaks) what may then be the full
perfection, height, and greatness of himself? Isay. 66.
It is (as Job says) in the highness of the heaven; it is deeper then hell:
Job. 11.
the measure thereof is longer then the earth, and broader then the sea. It is
he (says Isay again) who has measured the waters with his hand, and has
compassed the heavens with his palm, and has comprehended the dust of the
earth with three fingers, and has poised the hanging of the mountains.
Thereby then we must learn that God is infinite, and incomprehensible, and so
high, and so great that all this visible world is nothing in comparison to him,
and that he does contain, and confine, and surpass it in every side, both
above, and below, before and behind on the right hand, and on the left. And
that because we cannot comprehend, nor understand what he is, the image of
him was set before our eyes, in the heavens, and in the earth, and as in a
glass to represent unto our understandings him, whom we neither behold, nor
know except so far, as it pleases him to represent himself unto us in his
works.

Lastly we must learn, that from the very first hour of our entrance into
this world, we have been placed therein, as in the temple of God to adore,
and praise him therein. And in very truth, whosoever shall consider of, and
know God, as he has manifested himself in the creation of the world, shall
not he have good, and just occasion to fear, and stand in awe of him? For as
we read in the book of Job [If God cut off, and shut up or gather together,
Job. 12. and. 12.
who can turn him?] And straight after [In his hand is the soul of every
living thing, and the breath of all mankind.] On the other side, shall not we
be induced to have recourse unto him, and to put our trust in him, as in the
Al-mightie, who can save and defend those, whom he will take into his custody,
and whom he will accept for his people, and for his servants and children? Who
so dwells in the secret of the most high (says the prophet) shall abide in
the shadow of the Al-mightie. I will say unto the Lord, Psalm. 91.
Oh mine hope and my fortress: in my God will I trust: who will deliver us out
of all trouble. And to conclude, we shall have goodly matter, whereby to give
him glory, and laud all the days of our life, by serving him according to
his holy will. We shall be I say, very blind and senseless, if we do not
humble our selves under the greatness of the puissance of God: if we have
recourse unto, or put our confidence in any other, but in him alone: and if we
do not acknowledge his great providence, wisdom and bounty, which he has
used ever since the beginning toward us, and the regard and care which he has
daily had of us, and how that he entreats us so benignly, so tenderly, and
with such fatherly affection, to the end that we may render thanks unto him.
For as we have seen, before that he created man, he would prepare his lodging
for him: the which he did adorn with all beauty, and with all riches, and did
afterward place him in this world, as in a most delectable palace, and made
him Lord and master over all his creatures, of whom he has provided him such
abundance, and in such variety, that it is impossible to comprehend these, or
to desire more. As it were then ravished in the consideration of so great
bounty and liberality of God, let us cry out with the prophet, [Oh Lord our
God, Psalm. 8.
how excellent is thy name in all the world! What is man that thou art mindful
of him, and the sun of man, that thou show him so much grace as to visit
him, and to take care of him!] And so giving glory unto his name, for so many
benefits, and particularly for that it has pleased him to grant us this grace,
as to reduce to a desired end our Academicall discourses, concerning his
works, in the Universe, let us pronounce this goodly Canticle of the Angels.
Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts, all the earth is full of thy glory.


The end if the twelfth days work, and of all the third tome of the French
Academie.

