THE HISTORY OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG, KING OF ALBANIE.

Containing his famous acts, his noble deeds of Arms, and memorable
victories against the Turks, for the Faith of Christ.

Comprised in twelve Books: By IAQVES DE LAVARDIN, Lord of PLESSIS BOVRROT, a
Nobleman of France.

Newly translated out of French into English by Z. I. Gentleman.

ANCHORA SPEI.
printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Imprinted for William Ponsonby.

1596.

TO THE HONORABLE, SIR GEORGE CAREY, KNIGHT MARSHAL OF HER MAJESTY'S HOUSE,
GOVERNOR OF THE ISLE OF VVIGHT, and son and heir apparent to the Lord of
Hunsdon* Lord Chamberlain, etc.
GEORGE CASTRIOT the Prince of EPIRE having long soiorned amongst the French,
is now come as a traveler to see the entertainment of the English: his desire
is, to be made known unto some honorable personage, under whose favor and
protection he may pass freely amongst the English without being wronged or
injured in his travel: but to whom should he have recourse? or to whom can he
be better recommended then to your self? whose respective regard of strangers,
and Honorable hospitality continued without match or compare: and whose Noble
descent united in consanguinitie to the thrice honored house of the most
renowned Empress of our English nation, promises acceptance of his devoted
affection and Honorable patronage, against all such dangers as commonly
accompany travelers in foreign countries. He has heard in places far
distant from this Isle, as well of your succesfull imploiments in embassage for
Prince and country (as best can witness the French and Scottish nations) as
of your grounded experience in military profession, wherein you have been
trained from your younger years: and being himself a soldier, has therefore
resolved to press into your presence, and in your love of Martialists,
entirely to commend himself to the assurance of your protection. If his attire
wherein he is clad, be plain and simple, and nothing sumptuous: if his habit
do seem either too base for the state and presence of the Court, or too
contemptible for the nice curiosity of the city, or too stale for the
variable fashions of the country: yet for that under the meandness of his
attire are hidden most rich treasures of incomparable knowledge, and rare
experience: I doubt not but you will grace the desert of his virtues without
respecting his outward show and appearance: to the intent that so admirable an
example of all military perfections, and the singular precepts which may be
derived out of this history of his life and actions, may have that due
applause and commendation of the world, which the greatness of his exploits,
and the worthiness of the work do justly deserve in the eye and judgment of
the wise. Whatsoever defects do appear about him: you may impute them to the
ignorance and oversight of his guide, who knew not better how to direct him:
and whose willingness was greater to cause this stranger to see England, then
his skill and ability to give him the rightes that belonged unto him.
Notwithstanding, if it may please you in regard of the honorable bounty
shining in your noble mind, and for Scanderbeg his own sake to give him a
gracious welcome: I make no doubt, but others likewise, either all, or the
most, or the best will be glad to entertain him: by means whereof my self
also who have conducted him to your presence, shall both hold me highly
favored, and I shall ever live in the continual contemplation of your
honorable virtues as a vowed Orator for the greatness of your fortunes, under
the favor whereof, I desire most humbly to be reputed.

Yours most deuote Z. I.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, I have here presented you with an History out of French into
English, containing the life and glorious acts of Scanderbeg King of Epyre, a
Prince no less admired in his life, then memorable after his death. I need
not commend unto you, either the excellency of the History, or the
worthiness of the party: for that both the one and the other are sufficient
to commend themselves, and the shadow of my praises will but eclipse the
brightness of their deserts. Notwithstanding because it may be expected that I
should say somewhat, give me leave to speak what I think, though I cannot
think what I ought to speak. First therefore touching Scanderbeg, so
exquisite was his skill and experience in the art and science military, so
excellent and heroical was his carriage and government amongst his soldiers,
amongst his subjects, and toward his very enemies: so amiable and lovely were
his virtues* so unspeakable and unmatchable were many of his qualities, so
honorable and glorious were all his actions, and so extraordinary was his
fortune in the multitude and rareness of his victories, that it may be a
question whether was greater his virtue or his fortune. The one was rare, the
other admirable, and both together have exempted him from comparison: in so
much, that if Hanniball the Carthaginian the scourge of Rome, and Scipio the
Roman the plague of Carthage, were now living, to revive their old
disputation, who should be reputed the best Captain: I doubt not but each of
them would give Scanderbeg the garland, at leastwise they would acknowledge him
(if not superior to all) yet inferior to none, and equal to the worthiest.
If we compare his small means with his mighty exploites, you will say they
were wonderful, if you consider his policies and fine stratageames, you will
say they were singular: if you respect his corporal gifts and ornaments,
nature her self will say she was prodigal in gracing him, having made him as
comely as Edgar Atheling, who was called Englands darling, and as vnpenetrable
as Achilles, whom no weapon could fasten on. If you regard his fortune, fortune
her self will tell you, that she was fond over him. For in him only she
showed a change of her nature, which being usually changeable and inconstant to
all men mortal, yet to him continued constant and unchangeable. As for his
virtues, Oh how they shine most glorious as the sun beams, dazeling the eyes
of the beholders with the excellency of their object. Look into his life, and
let this History be the glass to show you his perfections, you shall find,
that for wariness and prudence, he was comparable to Fabius Maximus, who by
temporizing repaired the estate of Rome almost ruinated: for love to his native
country, he was another Camillus, who being exiled by his ingrate citizens,
yet rescued them from the Gauls. For discipline he was equal to Manlius,
whose severity to his own son has made him ever famous. Courageous as
Hector that never turned back to his enemies, bountiful and courteous as
Caesar, who by giving, forgiving, and relieuing, made himself way to the
Roman Empire: merciful as Traian, who never signed Bill for the execution of
malefactors but he bedewed it with his tears: dear to his subjects and
soldiers as Tytus, who was termed the delight and the Jewel of the world.
Alexander the glory of Macedon, got the name of Great amongst the Greeks,
because he overcame the Orient like a tempest: Pompey the joy of the Roman
Nobility, had the name of Great given him by the Romans, because he purged
the seas infested with Pirates, and because he stood for the common liberty:
Charlemaine the honor of the French was entytled Great because he brake the
force and power of the Sarracens. Gonsaluo the pride of the Spaniards and
Italians was called the great Captain, because he extorted the kingdom of
Naples from the Frenchmen. As justly may the Epyrots vaunt of their Scanderbeg
to be the glory, the honor, the pride, and the joy of Albanie, seeing the
Turks themselves his sworn and mortal enemies have given and attributed the
name of Great unto him, and seeing the greatness of his exploits do testify
that the name and title of Great is no greater then his deserts. Nay all Europe
may worthily acknowledge him to be as great as the greatest: seeing his
conquest in Asia and Europe under Amurath, the strange recovery of his
kingdom, and of the liberty of his country, which he purged from the
Infidels: his often and wonderful victories atcheeued against infinite and
huge armies, and the continual course of his life, and of all his actions do
show apparently, that he was the glory and only stay of his own country,
the sole protector of the common liberty, a bulwark to Christendom, a
champion for the religion, the paragon of that age, and the wonder of
posterity: a terror to his enemies whilst he lived, and adored by them after
his death. Pardon me (my masters) if I be somewhat immoderate or superstitious
in admiring his excellency, for what almost can there be in any man, that was
not abundantly in our Scanderbeg? so many were his perfections, and so few his
imperfections, as it may justly be imagined, that God created him as a mirror
for the world rather to wonder at, then any way possibly to be matched, and yet
most worthy of all men to be imitated.

Now by the excellency of the person here represented, the worthiness of this
history may easily be imagined, for where the subject is so rare and notable,
the estimat of the history must needs be made correspondent and agreeable. I
will not compare it with the best that have been written, but this I dare
auerre, that therein is little or nothing wanting which in a history is thought
needful. The ornaments of an history are, elegancie of the style, truth of
the reports, variety of the discourse, and the profitablenesse of the matter.
For the style, howsoever this history may seem defective, it is not much
material: for though it want the grace of elegant and fine phrases to make it
pleasant to curious ears and to dainty appetites: yet for all other the
accomplements of a good and perfect history I think it may go beyond the
most: if it compare not with the best: touching the truth thereof, diverse
circumstances and arguments do prove it to be without controllment, The age and
time wherein it was first written: the consent of succeeding times which have
received it without reproof, and the testimonies of sundry authors who have
recorded the most notable and strangest accidents contained in this history.
For the variety thereof to procure delight, I appeal to your own judgments
when you have read it. And I doubt not but you will confess: that you have
found few histories or none, more copious, more delectable and more
delightful. For profit likewise: in many points it will show it self to be
excellent, and you can turn to no part through, but you shall find matter of
benefit. Hence may the sage Philosopher and prudent Poletist derive all or the
most precepts of the Art and science military. Herein may both the expert
Martialist and the simple soldier see the excellency and perfection of his
calling and profession: the benefit of good order and martial discpline: and
out of the Idea of Scanderbeg his actions, may they behold (as it were) the
anatomy and shape unto themselves, the image both of an expert General and an
absolute soldier. Here may Princes and great persons behold the bright shining
luster of many royal and heroical virtues, making their names glorious in the
eye of the world, their power fearful and terrible to their enemies, and
their persons dear and gracious to their subjects: here may they take a view
of those pernicious vices and enormities of those rash and inconsiderat
assertions which make them odious to God, hateful to men, discontented in
their estates, and most wretched and miserable even in the greatness of their
fortunes. In some, such is the variety, the verity, the profit and the
excellency of this discourse: that there is no estate, degree or calling, but
may find therein somewhat to admire at, much to delight in, and most things to
imitat and to put in practice and execution.

It rests now (my masters) that you make that estimate and account of it,
which both the excellency of Scanderbeg his virtues, and the worthiness of
the history do require and merit: and that you measure the good will and
painful labors both of the authors, and of the translator by their
dispositions affecting your good and benefit, and not by any sinister
singularity of your misdeeming conceit. For if you be not too ingrate and
injurious to the memory of a Prince so well deserving, if you show not your
selves more then barbarous in contemning a monument of so great reckoning: or
if you be not too austere and rigorous in your censures: you cannot but
graciously accept the acquaintance of this history: you will friendly welcome
the rare example of Scanderbeg his peerless virtues and his surpassing
fortune: and last of all, you will cover the imperfection of this work (if you
find any) with the veil of your selfe-gracing courtesy.

THE PREFACE OF THE FRENCH AVTHOR TO THE NOBILITY OF FRANCE.
MY Masters: If we will exactly weigh and consider the imbecilitie of our
nativity: we shall find (according to the observation of Pliny:) that nature
was very sparie and niggardly in our creation: because that man (who was borne
to have the Seigniorie and Lordship over all other creatures) comes into the
world very naked, frail and poor, in comparison of them. She has bestowed
upon all beasts even in their original and first beginning strength,
wherewith to help them, vestures wherewith to cover them, weapons to defend
them, pasture to nourish and feed them. But how has she dealt with man? he
comes naked out of his mothers womb, weak and feeble, and not able to
sustain and help himself: man alone of all other creatures is borne without
knowledge and has nothing but what is taught him: he is fit for nothing, he is
not able so much as to go or to speak, and when he has continued a long time
learning and getting of experience, and when he is come (as the Philosopher
says) to his own natural: he applies himself to nothing but to vice and
sensuality: and he remains still (notwithstanding all his pains and
trauelles) inferior to the brute beasts: who on the contrary even by the
instinct of nature do give themselves to follow that which appertains to
their function, and which is proper and peculiar unto them.

This conceit of the comparison of the impuissance and infirmity of mankind,
puts me in mind of an old Italian proverb, which is: That it had been
expedient and needful for men either to be borne sage and wise, or to be borne
twice. For if we were borne wise, we should eschew and avoid the
inconveniences of this life, against the which by ignorance we do daily and
howerly stumble: or at leastwise in the course of our second life, we should
put that in practice which we had learned in our first life: and we should not
walk blindfolded in the darkness of error as we now do, coming into this world
deprived and destitute of the light of wisdom which Solomon demanded of God
before all earthly things whatsoever.

Notwithstanding on the contrary, if we do mark and consider the excellency
of man: we shall see that in stead of these goodly corporal faculties wherein
other creatures are his superiors, God has graciously endowed him with a
singular pre-eminence of that part of his nature which is intellectual and
capable of doctrine, and that is our spirit, which of it self is divine and
celestial: and whereas by means of her prison and earthly tabernacle, it is
made rude, savage, and out of taste: yet being tempered, reformed, and
fashioned by the favor and civility of good arts and sciences: it estrangeth
us as far from the nature of creatures unreasonable: as it makes us to
approach and draw nigh to the resemblance of the divine Image.

Seeing therefore all men are by nature both capable of knowledge, and have a
necessity imposed upon them to seek after learning; the gentle man of all
others has most reason to apply his mind thereunto: for that he exceeding all
other persons in dignity of blood, and in the gifts, graces, and qualities of
nature, and being in regard thereof the sooner called to degrees of honor, and
to the managing of great matters, he ought also to beautify and enoble his
mind and understanding, and to make it more and more glorious by the knowledge
of good letters, especially of good and worthy histories: for in truth there is
nothing so lovely, beautiful or amiable, but the study of histories will
plentifully supply any man with the knowledge thereof, that shall delight to be
conversant, and to exercise himself in them. This brings her followers to be
privy counselors to kings and princes: this prefers them to the
administration of kingdoms and commonweals: to the most honorable estates
and offices of the wars, and to the governments of provinces: this teaches
us to be wise, at the cost of others. To be brief (as Cicero well calls
them) Histories are the testimony of times, the light of truth, the life of
memory, the Lady and mistreste of life, and the messenger of antiquity, of
the which who so is ignorant, may justly be accounted as a stranger in his own
country. But I will not proceed any farther in her praises: only I will
encourage you to be familiar with her: for I see (God be thanked for it) that
she has good entertainment generally, and is well received and cherished
amongst you: that you are content to bestow a good part of your honest leisure
in her company. Yet thus much let me tell you by the way, and upon occasion of
this discourse: that forasmuch as the principal and most ordinary profession
of Frenchmen is to follow arms, and yet they take little or no care or pains
at all to study and know the laws and rights depending upon the profession of
arms: I desire therefore, that the study and reading of histories (which
represents unto us manifold examples of so many mighty armies well governed,
and of so many Captains and soldiers which have been most curious and precise
obseruers of the statutes and ordinances of the Art military) may provoke and
allure you also to follow more religiously and carefully this ancient
discipline, and that you would conform your selves to the practice thereof:
whereby those famous and worthy personages have purchased to themselves endless
and eternal honor, to their Chieftaines and leaders innumerable triumphs and
victories, and to their country mighty Empires, and Monarchies of infinite
greatness. What was it that reserved and freed the name and memory of the
Assyrians, of the Greeks, and of the Romans, from the ungrateful silence and
the injurious oblivion of devouring time? What has made their glory and
renown to be so famous even till this day? What was it that spread abroad the
glorious and immortal name of the Gauls, even to the utmost bounds and limits
of this earthly frame? What made them so fearful and terrible even to the
proud and invincible Romans: that upon every rumor made to the Senate that the
Gauls were on foot, they speedily had recourse to the Dictatorship, as unto a
sacred anchor in the most tempestuous storms and perils of their estate?
Assuredly it was not the supernatural force of their bodies: it was not the
infinite number of their squadrons, but the only exact, strict, and rigorous
observation of the laws and discipline of war.

Thus did that famous Conqueror Godfrey Duke of Bouillon: thus did our generous
and Christian Argonauts, and infinite others in times past make themselves way
unto the heavens, and purchased immortal fame upon the earth. What has made
the Saracins and the Turks to grow to that reputation and honor by arms? What
has made them inheritors almost of all the Empire of the Greeks and Romans,
but this only, that they did first imitate and succeed them in their good
orders and discipline? whereof they only of all others at this day are the sole
obseruers, and they alone may justly vau^t, that they have the true discipline
in price and regard: they (I say) only may arroga^ this unto themselves: for I
know not any one nation besides them, who make any account of the same. There
is no care had now a days amongst soldiers and men at arms, of any rules,
precepts or policy of wars: we love rather to learn the duties of the
field by experience, and by the event and hazard of our own proper peril,
then by reason and discipline: and therein do we fulfill the old proverb; In
loss is learning. But (in my opinion) this is but a bad maxim: for the course
of our life is brief and short, and use and experience without reading
requires too long a time to furnish us with all those things which are
necessary for the perfection of our experience. But study and reading of
histories being joined to experience, is sufficient in a small time to advance,
to quicke^, to refine, and to perfect our judgment. For (as Philip of Comines
has Saying of Philip of Comines.
said very wisely) A man may know more touching the practice of deeds of arms
by 3 months reading in one good book, then 20 men shall be able to know by the
eye and experience, if they live in several ages successively one after
another. I return therefore to my matter: and I say, that this science and
practice being most needful and necessary for our nation (whose profession is
to follow the wars*) the speediest and shortest course, and the best way and
means to attain to the true and perfect skill of arms, is to consort and to
marry themselves to the study and reading of histories.

The consideration hereof has moved me to communicate unto you a history, out
of the which (I hope) you shall gather no less fruit and profit, then pleasure
and recreation. Howbeit I know there are few or no good Historiographers
ancient or modern, domestical or strangers, but they are published in our
language by the virtuous labors of many learned and rare spirits amongst the
French: nevertheless, in this our history here imparted unto you, first of all
in reading the haughty adventures and valiant exploites of an age so nearely
conjoined to this of ours, falling in a manner within the time and knowledge
even of our grandfathers: we have good cause to rejoice and to glory in the
same, no less then the world has ever accustomed to make a benefit, and to
attribute unto themselves the honor of great triumphs, and the glory of their
own age and times. Besides, here shall be represented unto you, not the
detestable and bloody effects of our own miseries, troubles, and seditions:
nor the hateful conspiracies of subjects against their Prince and country:
nor the horrible massacres of friends and fellow citizens: of children against
their parents, of brothers fleshed against their natural brethren: nor of
husbands against their wives: you shall not hear in this discourse the piteous
cries and lamentations of wives and maidens violated: you shall not see here
the excess of sacrileges, of burnings, nor the rapine and spoil of the goods
of friends and allies: but you shall read of a most holy, a just, and an
honorable war: of arms lawfully undertaken, for the defense both of the
Christian, and of the civil liberty, against the Turks and circumcised
miscreants, the sworn enemies of Jesus Christ: you shall see their towns
maintained and defended, their country preserved and protected by the arms of
their proper peoples and natural inhabitants: here shall you behold the image
of a Prince most religious, of a warrior most magnanimous, armed with faith and
zeal incredible: his soldiers faithful, loving and obedient: here shall you
trace out so perfect an observation of military discipline, that their notable
victories and exploits will appear unto you worthy of wonder and admiration.
All this shall you see in this history, of the life of George Castriot,
surnamed by the Turks, Scanderbeg, which is, Alexander the Lord, or the Great,
King of Albanie: whose immortal name is worthy without all contradiction, to
be consecrated to the temple of Memory, far above all other Knights, and
champions of the Leuant, whose honorable acts have made them to be
recommended for the defense of the faith of Christ against the detestable and
cursed sect of Mahomet. For it seems that God had a special will and purpose
to mark him with all laudable qualities and prerogatives: as faith, religion,
strength of body, comeliness of person, dexterity of spirit, the practice
and skill of arms: all which were accompanied with so wonderful and
unspeakable good fortune, that it may be justly auerred, that his deeds did
surmount his destinies. The description whereof I have according to the truth
and sincerity of an history, drawn and derived out of the writings of those
that have entreated of them: and specially out of the Latin history of Marin
Barletus Priest, borne in Scutarie or Scodra, a City in Epire, whom we have
chosen and followed as a principal example and pattern, and as an Author who
has been reputed most diligent and sincere, and most grave and sententious. In
regard whereof he has purchased to him self a place amongst the most notable
and famous historiographers of the Latins, that have lived in these latter
ages.

This History do I now impart unto you (my Masters) humbly entreating you,
that if over much temeritie have caused me to forget my self in taking upon
me a task which surpasses and exceeds the feebleness of my spirit, you
would impute the blame thereof to the readiness of my good will and affection,
which I have to do you service: and that you would please to receive this my
travel as graciously as I have made offer thereof unto your courtesies with my
best devotion and ability.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
WHereas many of our Latin writers of great authority, have written many and
diverse things of the famous deeds of Scanderbeg, and of the greatness of his
exploits: for that their honorable testimonies may in some sort argue and
confirm the truth of this history: and because it were too great an injury
to defraud this Greek Prince and stranger, of his true and deserved praises:
I have therefore thought it good here to make mention of their names, and to
cite the places where they have written of him: to the intent the Reader may at
his good pleasure and best leisure peruse them: The Autors are these:

1. Volaterrane, in the 8. book of his Geographie, in the description of
Macedonie. 2. Aeneas Siluius, in the description of Europe. Cap. 15. 3. Andrew
Theuet, in his Cosmographie. 1. Tome. 11. book. Chap. 3. 4. Paulus Iouius
Bishop of Nucera, in his Commentary of the affairs of Turkey, dedicated to
the Emperor Charles the fifth.
The cause why I have not set down the very text and testimonies themselves,
as they are in the preface of the French copy, is, because in many points
they have varied and erred in the report of Scanderbeg his actions, and are
much mistaken in the truth of the history. Howbeit I do impute their error
unto this, that they being strangers to the Estate and affairs of Epire, and
having intelligence of the deeds of Scanderbeg only by hear say and by
report, they could not so truly and exactly set down the truth of matters as
they are here delivered in this History by the Latin Author: who being native
of the same country with Scanderbeg, and living in the same age and time that
he did, is to be reputed the best witness and most perfect reporter of his
deeds.

A CATALOGVE OF THE AVTHORS FROM whence this History has been drawn.
Marin Barletius, Priest of Scutarie in Epire: from whom the most part of this
History is drawn word for word. The life of Scanderbeg, of an uncertain
Author. Volaterrane. Aeneas Siluius, alias Pope Pius the second. P.
Callimachus, experient of the battle of Varna. Paulus Iouius. Andrew Theuet,
in his Cosmographie. Peter Perondin. Bartholomew Facius. Theodore Spandugin, a
Gentleman of Constantinople* Andrew Cambin. Leonardus Chiensis, Archbishop of
Mitilene, of the siege and sack of Constantinople: at which he was present,
and taken prisoner. Isidore Ruthenian Cardinal. Christopher Richier. Wolfangus
Chronicle. Frances Sansouin. Melancthon his Chronicle. Pandolph Callenucius of
Pesaro in his Neapolitane histories. Bonfinius in the History of Hungary.
UPON THE HISTORY OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, ALIAS SCANDERBEG KING OF THE EPIROTS,
translated into English.
WHerefore does vain antiquity so vaunt,
Her ancient monuments of mighty peers,
And old Heroes, which their world did daunt
With their great deeds, and filled their childrens ears?
Who rapt with wonder of their famous praise,
Admire their statues, their Colossoes great,
Their rich triumphall Arcks which they did raise,
Their huge Pyramids, which do heaven threat.
Lo one, whom later age has brought to light,
Matchable to the greatest of those great:
Great both by name, and great in power and might,
And meriting a mere triumphant seat.
The scourge of Turks, and plague of infidels,
Thy acts, o Scanderbeg, this volume tells.
Ed. Spenser.

R. C. GENT. IN COMMENDATION OF THIS BOOK.
PRowes the hand, and policy the head,
By which great kingdoms are both had and held,
Are well observed, but are better read,
By them, in whom it is great States to weld.
For what is all that any one observes,
In that short time, while he has judgments eyes?
Or who is he, that in the state he serves,
Of every action sees the counsels wise?
Now if great men, great actions long to see,
Who may with Scanderbeg the Great compare?
If in the like they will advised be,
Here both his doings and his counsels are.
And with one labor, noble minds may read,
Prowes for hand, and policy for head.
C. C. GENT. IN COMMENDATION OF THIS WORK.
When Alexander came before the grave
Of Peleus son, he cried, O happy knight,
Whose fortune was, so brave a trumpe to have,
To blazon forth the glory of thy might.
So might this Alexander cry aright,
Had he an equal trumpet to his name,
Both the one and the other soon outmatch he might,
And all that went before excel in fame.
But cease o Scanderbeg, with further blame
To blot thy fortune failing, of thy worth:
Lo here a trumpe that does thy acts proclaim,
And all thy prowes worthily set forth.
And ye that hear th'atchieuements of his days,
Admire his value, and his glory praise.
Faults escaped in the printing.
IN the Epistle to the reader For overcame, read ouerranne. For assertions read
affectious. For conquest read conquests. for through read thereof for some read
sum.

In the preface of the Author, for of the comparison read, and the compassion.

In the History, pagi. 1. for Moruua read Moraua. page 31. sor. Tholoies read
Thopyes. page 5. for Darnisse read Daruisses. page 6. for Sanziack read
Saniack. page 13. for, is his cour, read in his court. page 16. and 65. for
capitol, read capital. page 17 for Morauia, read Moraua. page 19. and 42. for
Tribullians, read Triballians. page 23. for Monea read Mocrea. page 25. for, I
have in you, read I saw in you. page 30. for Armathia read Emathia. page 31.
for Turks, read Turk. page 40. for exhort, read extort. page 57. for, at the
rising of the moon, read before the sun rising. pa. 62. for Treigno, read
Turkey. ibid. for of neither read neither of. ibid. for Alcaran, read Alcoran.
ib. for Ruscia, read Rascia. pa. 71. for enlargument, read enlargement. ibid.
for Veruia, read Seruia. pa. 74. for yet would, read yet could. ibid. for left
their king, read lost their king. page 93. for Bola, read Bosa. page 133. for
moorish, read waterish. 421. for his Prince, read this Prince. 471. for Valor
and Valures, read Valmes. page 133. for Chronichea, read Oron ichea.

THE PRINTER TO THE READER.
If there be any other faults, as I hope there are not many, I do entreat the
gentle reader to amend them with his pen, and in courtesy to hear with the
Printer, considering that there was never book printed though but of ten
sheets of paper in bigness without some faults.

THE FIRST BOOK OF THE LIFE AND FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED
SCANDERBEG, KING OF THE EPIROTS NOW NAMED ALBANOIS.
THE ARGUMENT.
AMurath the second of that name, King of the Turks, restores the glory and
estate of the Turkish Empire, being greatly decayed by the overthrow and
captivity of his Grandfather Baiazeth by the arms of Tamberlaine. John
Castriot reigns in Epyre: His lineage, virtues, and goodly issue: The birth
of George his youngest son, and the strange signs prognosticating his future
glory and greatness. Amurath warreth upon John Castriot: who being weary of
the wars sueth for peace, and delivers his sons in hostage. Amurath
causes them to be circumcised, changes their names, and George is named
Scanderbeg. The manner of the Turkish circumcision, and their orders of
priesthood. The education, virtues, and preferment of Scanderbeg under Amurath:
His notable services and good fortune in the wars: He fights two combats in
the Turkish Court. John Castriot the father of Scanderbeg dies. Amurath
usurps his estate, and poisoneth all his sons except Scanderbeg, whose
excellent virtues and the envy of the Courtiers causes Amurath to have him in
ielouzie and suspicion, and to practice by sundry plots his death and
destruction. Amurath warreth upon the Despot of Misia, and expels him his
Estate: who is aided by Vladislaus king of Hungary. Scanderbeg and Carambey
are sent with an army against the Hungarians: Scanderbeg reuolteth, Carambey
and the Turks are overthrown by the Hungarians in the battle of Moruua.
Scanderbeg by a policy seizes upon Croy: and recouereth it and the rest of
his fathers estate. The Princes, Nobles, and Commons of Epyre join with
Scanderbeg, and by their aid diverse of the chiefest and strongest holds of
Epyre are regayned from the Turks. Sfetygrade is besieged by Scanderbeg, who
makes a road into Macedonie, and spoyleth the Turkish territories.

THAT the Empires and Estates of this world are disposed and ordered
immediately by the supreme power of the Almighty, and that they are in the
hands of the most Sovereign and divine Maiestic: next to the holy Scriptures
(which do give us evident assurance of it) there can be none more apparent and
lively marks thereof, then their marvelous establishment and their miraculous
preservation. For notwithstanding that the greatest and mightiest Monarchies in
the earth, have had their original from most vile, base, and obscure
beginnings: yet has the divine Providence vphelde them in so strange a manner,
and has made them to prosper with so long continuance: that neither the sundry
assaults and trauerses of unconstant Fortune, nor the attempts of any human
forces, have had the power to abridge any one day of their date and term
limited and prefixed by the divine ordinance. Of this we have a sufficient,
though a lamentable testimony, by that insolent Empire of the Turkish
Monarchy, (if we may so name that immoderate puissance of those persons) who
by a just and divine judgment, and for the manifestation of our ingratitude
and security, has obtained at this day the absolute dominion and command of
Asia, Afrike, and a good part of Europe: converting that Empire, which erst was
held holy, sacred, and religious, into a fortress of open blasphemies, and
into a filthy stall of profane Miscreants, the professed enemies of the son
of God.

This people being grown famous by the conquest of Siria and the lesser Asia,
and having extended their bounds on this side the sea of Hellespont, and
having planted their Empire, and set it on foot within Europe, and all Greece
being subdued under their obeisance: made the Misians, Bulgarians, and
Albanians, the Valachians, the Hungarians and Sclauonians to quake and tremble
under their victorious arms. Besides, having laid siege, and pressed very
hard upon the Imperial city of Constantinople, and finally having triumphed
of the Emperor, and of the Christian forces in the East: yet afterward in that
famous journey and battle of Nicopolis in Romania in the year 1396. their
glory was in a manner extinguished, and the name of the Ottomans was welneare
brought to nothing. And in the year next following, the mighty 1397.
king of the Tartarians the great Tamberlain (termed the wrath of the heavens
and the scourge of that corrupt age:) and Baiazeth the first then Emperor of
the Turks, encountering each other in the confines of Armenia at the foot of
the mountain of the star; (where sometimes Pompey obtained a famous victory
against Mithridates) euenthere did the Turks sustain so wonderful and
grievous an overthrow, by the great slaughter and discomfiture of their
forces, and the perpetual imprisonment of their Emperor: that the glory of
their Empire was for a long time discontinued, and there remained not almost
any tract or show of their former pride and pomp, or of their puissance or
majesty. After Baiazeth succeeded Amurath Nephew unto him by one of his
sons, who in that time of their fathers calamity, being but infants, were
then preserved alive, partly by the oversight of the Greeks, and partly by the
deuisions and dissentions of the Latins, or (it may be) by the permission of
the destinies: which reserved them for the future plague and miseries of
Christendom. This Amurath in process of time, not without many seditions of
his own subjects, and by great bloodshed by civil wars (for he slew his own
Uncle Mustapha in battle) by good hap obtained the Empire, and restored
their Turkish Monarchy: and was the first amongst his ancestors that
reestablished their good fortune. And the puissance thereof being by him
augmented, he rendered the name of the Turks far more fearful and
redoubted, then it had been at any time before passed.

The Turkish affairs thus standing, though Amurath were always occupied,
sometimes in Asia about the assuring and settling of his own estate, and
sometimes in Greece: The country which the Castriots commanded, lying between
the cities of Durace and Ap^llonse, the common sort termed Ariha.
afflicting and vexing the inhabitants of that country, and laboring to
deprive them of all Dominion and Empire: yet was he constrained for certain
years to keep a loofe and to abstain from the country of Macedony, and from
the neighbor nations and regions thereunto adjoining. In those days (for to
ascend beyong those times to the first beginning of strange Empires, or to
mount higher in recounting foreign affairs is a matter needless and
superfluous) in that age I say, amongst many other Princes, which then
commanded in Epyre, now named Albanie, John Castriot, a man of no mean fame
and memory, had the signiorie of many cities, towns, and villages, but
principally of the strong city of Croie. But for so much as I hold it
inconvenient, that the family and original of Scanderbeg should be altogether
unknown: (and yet my intent is not to lay down the whole pedigree and the
continual descent of his ancestors;) it shall suffice, that I do but (as it
were in passing by) give you notice of this: that the authors and founders of
the lineage of the Castriots had their source and first offspring from Emathia,
and (as some add) out of VVumestia, which is a part of Macedonie. And their
family had erst reigned in Epyre with happy success and prosperity, and
with no less fame and glory.

This John (of whom we are now in discourse) far surmounted all his
predecessors John Castriot the father of Scanderbeg.
in prudence, gravity, and magnanimity, and being of an hardy and invincible
courage, he did excel in all other virtuous qualities: and especially (if that
may import any excellency) the corporal beauty, and the comeliness of his
person was very rare and singular. His wife also named Voisaua the mother of
Scanderbeg. Alias.
Voisaua (a woman worthy of such a husband) was much renowned both in that she
was the daughter of the noble king of the Lord of Pologne which is a part of
Macedonie and Bulgarie.
Tribullians: as also for her beauty and wisdom, and for the excellency of
her spirit, far surpassing that of other women. And it may be, that she
merited no less commendation by reason of that goodly issue and posterity
which descended from her: a thing which has made many women glorious, and
makes them worthy of special praise and commendation. For some do hold that
she was the mother of nine children, five of them daughters; to wit, Mara,
Iella, Angellina, Vlaica and Mamisa: and the other male children: namely,
Reposius, Stanisius, Constantine and George. The youngest of George Castriot
surnamed Scanderbeg.
them all was George: to whom afterward (as shall be elsewhere delivered) the
barbarous Turks gave the name of Scanderbeg.

But ere we proceed further, I hold it not amiss to set down that which (as
I have read) was both by prodigious signs and wonders foreshewed, and by many
persons proguosticated touching the future glory and renown of this famous
Epyrot: albeit Scanderbeg his future glory and renown prognosticated by
diverse prodigious signs and tokens.
I doubt not, but there be many who will make a jest and mockery thereof as of
an old wives tale, and a matter merely fabulous. Some say that his mother
upon his conception did dream, that she had brought forth so great and huge
a Serpent, that the same having wellneere covered the whole Empire, did stretch
out her head over the bounds of Turkey, and did devour and swallowe them up
with her bloody throat: dipping her tail in the sea toward the coasts of
the Christians: and especially toward the confines of the Venetians. This
dream being recounted unto her husband, he considering the quality of the
case, held it a vain and frivolous thing to seek out the meaning and secret
thereof, either by the superstitious view of the entrails of beasts, or by
seeking to the Oracle of Apollo for the interpretation thereof: but he
comforted his wife with an incomparable kind of joy, giving her to
understand by an evident conjecture: That of her should be borne a personage
of that excellency, that should make himself renowned by arms and warre-like
exploites: who should be a grievous and heavy enemy to the Turks: a happy
Captain and fortunate leader to the Christians: a true defender of the faith
of Christ: and over and above, one that should during his whole life, bear
great honor and reverence to the state of Venice. The hope and expectation of
the careful father, and of others was in nothing frustrate. For the infant
being come into the world, did exceed far and beyond all comparison that
which was presaged of him. For on his right arm appeared the form of a sword
so naturally imprinted, as if it had been engraven by the hands of some
cunning and artificial workman. A notable and evident sign of the reputation
which he should purchase by arms. O the notable bounty of nature which even
in our nativity does give us aduertisements and in our bodies does imprint the
ensigns and tokens of that which is to ensue and happen unto us. This infant
being grown to a lad of some years (as soon as his age would permit him) began
to exercise his bow and other weapons, giving such proof of his forwardnes in
the first rudiments and apprentiship (as it were) of his tender years, that
the signs of his future virtue and valor did easily discover themselves in
the eye of each man sufficiently: and in his youthful race also there did from
thenceforth appear in him more and more, such an ardent desire to frame his
life in goodness and virtue; and so comely and elegant a carriage in his
behavior, with a certain show of religion, even then promising a reverence
and regard unto the faith of Christ; that all men had their eyes and their
regard fixed upon him. He only was the man whom both father and mother, whom
his brethren, and the residue of the inhabitants of that country did with a
secret kind of astonishment even admire and wonder at. Of him were all their
discourses: of him did the people murmr in all places as of the most rare and
excellent paragon of that age. Over and above these presages of his fortune, he
had even by nature a certain goodly and stately feature of body, which did
(as it were) season and grace all his actions. But of a graffe so likely and
toward (if it be lawful so to term him) the destinies did not permit the
doubtful parents to gather any fruit answerable to their desires. For after
that Amurath had ranged Greece under the yoke of his obeisance, and had turned
his Ensigns against Macedonie, having afflicted it with a long and tedious
war, and reduced it to the point of extreme misery: John Castriot being
wearied with the travel of continual wars, and weakened by the ceaselesse
discommodities of those troubles: was in the end constrained to entreat and sue
for peace: the which he obtained upon condition, that he should deliver all his
sons to the Turk in hostage. A more grievous and intolerable servitude, or
a more deadly and ignominious bondage could they not have imposed upon any
parents. For what solace or comfort could they reap by such a peace? and what
contentment could they take of their dignity and estate, which was preserved
by such means, so lamentable and grievous? Notwithstanding what is it which
the wretched desire of life, and the greedy thirst of reign and Empire will
not persuade timorous and fearful men to yield unto? So fared it with these
unfortunate old folks, that they loved rather to commit themselves to the
mercy of a most felonous and false enemy, and utterly to deprive themselves
of so precious pledges: then to attend with some delay the extreme ruin of
their fortunes, which were even then tumbling to decay and confusion.

Thus was George (together with his brethren) delivered in hostage to the
Turk, George Castriot delivered in hostage to the great Turk.
causing far greater sorrow and lamentation for him alone then for all the
others both in public and in private. All this notwithstanding, the father
was nothing deceived of that hope which he had erst conceived of his son. But
at the time of his departure from him, after many and often kisses and sweet
embracements, he cast himself upon him as more pitying his misfortune the^ any
of the rest: and daily and devoutly did he pray unto God; that the attent and
expectation which he had in him, might not become frustrate and in vain. And
even amongst the common people there wanted not some, who (wishing unto the lad
the years and strength of man's estate with long life) did seem even to
prophecy that Amurath should in him nourish a domestical enemy, and the
confusion of his own house and family. These young Princes were no sooner
conveyed to Ottoman: but they forthwith felt the first fruits and Ottoman the
surname of the great Turk.
proof of his infidelity, in that (violating the faith and promise which he
had given to their parents) he caused them speedily to be circumcised according
to the law of Mahomet. The manner of which ceremony (for that the knowledge
thereof is not unpleasant) I hold it not impertinent in this place, briefly
and particularly in some sort to recite it. The Turks do herein observe a
custom and usage not much The Turkish ceremony in their circumcision.
differing from that of the Jews, but only in this one thing, which is added
unto it by the institution of Mahomet. And that is: That before any be
circumcized, (if he be of reasonable years and discretion) he is brought and
placed in the midst of some great assembly: and there, by the commandment
of their Priest (whom they call Darnisse,) he holds up his forefinger, and
lifts up his eyes toward heaven crying with a high voice, to the intent he
may be easily heard and understood. La, Ila, La: Mehumet Resulam. Which is to
say, God, God, God alone, and Mahomet his Prophet. After that, his foreskin
being cut off by one skillful and expert in that art, he is presented to the
people, and his first name being changed, they give him a new. Immediately
whereupon, all the standers by both more and less (if the party circumcized
were either a Christian or of any other religion) with exceeding great
rejoicing do contribute money unto him: and they magnify him, kiss him, and
embrace him: and from thenceforth, there is an house assigned for him of the
public charge, with sufficient provisions for him to live upon.

But it shall not be amiss, if (digressing a little from my matter) I discourse
somewhat The diverse orders and estates of Priests in the Turkish religion.
of the Turkish and Mohammedan religion: setting down both the state and
diversity of the orders, condition, and degrees of their Priests and religious
persons in that sect and profession. The first, and those which are of the most
strict rule and order amongst the^ are called Darnisses: (of whom we have
before made some mention) and we may compare Darnisses.
them to the Friars obseruants. But these (in the time of Baiazeth their king
the son of the last Mahomet) being detected of diverse foul offenses and
enormities which they had committed: were by him banished and exterminated:
because that (under pretense of devotion and holiness) going about on begging,
and retyring themselves into deserts and solitary places, they did beset the
highwaies and passages, by which merchants, pilgrims and travelers were to
pass: and espying occasion and opportunity (no otherwise then as thieves and
robbers) they fell upon them, wounded and murdered the^, and then stripped them
out of all that they had about them: The report whereof being come to the ears
of the Ottoman Prince, he was so highly provoked and displeased therwithall,
that he caused all of them (as is said) to be cut in pieces and to be
destroyed, minding that the memory of the^ should have bin for ever
extinguished. Next to these there are a second sort, whom the Turks in their
language call the Hozes: who may Hozes.
well be likened to the Friars conuentuels. And last of all after them are the
Talasmans, Talasmans.
whom they have for their third order: and they do enjoy the last place among
them, and are like to the order of Priests Seculars. Besides these three kinds,
there be not any other orders, degrees, or manners of Priests or religious
persons, in the sect or religion of the Turks: but the whole charge and
administration of the Priesthood, ceremonies and holy rites of their religion
does appertain unto them only. But now return we to the subject of this
Treatise.

These young Epirots having their first names changed at their circumcizion,
had George Castriot circumcised and surnamed Scanderbeg, by the Turks.
others given the^ according to the custom of that nation. George, (whether
that it were by chance and casualtie, or were it, that there was in him a kind
of appearance more remarkable then in the others, promising some thing which
should prove in him most rare and excellent) was surnamed Scanderbeg: That is
being interpreted, Alexander the Lord, or the Great. Inestimable and great was
the joy which was made about Amurath at the circumcision of these young Epirots
(as is commonly seen with us when any one leaving the filth and infection of
Iudaisme does embrace christianity and the light of salvation.) And they had
ample and large allowance ordained them for their expenses and maintenance.

But the gentle disposition which did naturally flourish and excel in
Scanderbeg, The disposition, education, and virtuous inclination of Scanderbeg
amongst the Turks.
and his tender age (for he had scant attained to nine years) did render and
make him more acceptable and agreeable unto Amurath then any one of the rest.
Thereof it proceeded, that he wanted not good masters and teachers of all
sorts according to that age which was most apt and fittest for all the
Sciences. And therefore in a very small time (his spirit being prompt and
ready to apprehend all things) he had learned the Turkish, Arabian, Greek,
Italian, and Sclauonian languages. As his force increased by little and little
with his years, so did he take delight in nothing more then to acquaint
himself with all those virtuous exercises which were fit for the wars,
without letting any one thing to ouerpasse him wherein he had not some
knowledge and insight. And sometimes with his sword, sometimes with his bow
and arrows, both on foot and on horseback, he gave forth daily and almost
incredible Adresse.
proofs, of an agilitle, disposition and readiness of his body most
marvelous: always enterprizing some act or other of great regard more then
was ordinary for one of his age. And first of all, as soon as the force and
strength of his members did match the forwardness and fierceness of his
courage, and that he could show himself of sufficient ability to support the
travels of the wars, he framed himself to gain the favor and good will of
all men, but especially of the Prince: using daily to make challenges to his
companions in open and public shows and often spectacles Ieu^ depri^^.
of and in all manners of combats and martial contentions: and commonly he
bare away honor and estimation, making those exercises the pathway to his
future glory, and to the increase of his reputation. At length being grown to
a goodly stature and full strength of body, and being come to ripeness and
perfection of years, he did betimes and with facility accustom himself to
all labors and travels befitting a strong and able body, were they never so
difficult: as to endure hunger, thirst, cold, heat, watching, and such like.
By the daily practice whereof, it is not to be doubted but he made himself
most apt and able for the wars, and so grew to be complete and accomplished
in all military virtues: and fit to be employed in all martial services.

This was the occasion, that the Sultan (not willing he should any longer
continue about him in the state of a private person) determined to advance him:
and even in The first acts, services, and preferment of Scanderbeg.
the beginning he honored him with the dignity of Sanziack: (which is the
second degree after the Bassaes, and is of greater of lesser authority,
according to the largeness of power which it pleases the bounty and
liberality of the Prince more or Scanderbeg made Sanziac, with a charge of
5000. horse.
less to attribute and impart unto it.) To Scanderbeg with that new degree was
given the conduct of five thousand horse: and his brethren in like case (being
advanced to the like charges, and sent abroad into diverse countries, and
employed in many affairs and services of the wars, grew all of them to be
very famous and renowned. But Scanderbeg had scant attained to the age of
eighteen years, but he was sent into * Asia by the commandment of the
Sultan, jointly and together with other bands Natolia.
and forces: where by a most happy and fortunate beginning, he made the first
assaie of his virtue and good success in war, embrewing his right hand with
a great desire and delight in the blood of the enemies. Thenceforth in many
broiles of one sort and other, which happened to be raised in those quarters:
there was not lightly any expedition made, but that Scanderbeg continually was
there in person with his regiment. And both he and his companions returned from
them victorious to their Lord the Ottoman. In all which exploites his
forwardnes, his virtue, and his fortune were daily observed, and principally
marked of all men both in general, and in particular: all the honor of the
victory, all the good success of the war was cast upon him by the report of
all men without contradiction: and in a manner without any mention of the
chief, or commanders of the army. And to him alone by the favor and
acclamations of the soldiers, was adjudged the triumph and the glory of the
enemy vanquished.

As yet had not envy (hateful and repining at others virtue) assailed nor
gotten hold on the heart of the Turkish Prince: and albeit both the manners and
the state of this noble Epirot, were a fit subject for this humor and malady
to work upon: notwithstanding his youth being as yet but of simple and mean
experience, and his affections in that age being not carried away with any
immoderate, or greedy desire of glory: but having conceived only a kind of
liking and love of honor, it rather purchased unto him the favor, grace, and
good will of all men. And therefore even Amureth himself did singularly grace
and honor him, both with good and gracious words, and with great and
bountiful gifts and favors. Short was the abode of this young gentleman in
Court, by reason that (as seldom are the Turks without great Scanderbeg made
General of an army in Asia.
affairs) there came news of new troubles, and tumults in Asia, whereunto
Scanderbeg was appointed; being chosen by an universal decree, and the good
liking of all men, to have the command as General over the whole army, with
all the honors appertaining to that place in regard of his former deserts, and
for that he had borne himself so well in the forepassed wars. He had no
sooner accepted the charge, but he did easily surmount the glory of his former
acts, by the quick and speedy defait and discomfiture of the enemy: which he
atcheiued with notable good success answerable to his great diligence. First,
over and above the honest and worthy testimony Scanderbeg returns home with
victory.
given by his soldiers, he brought home unto Ottoman most apparent and evident
tokens of his valor and good fortune: namely, great numbers of prisoners: the
spoils of those which were slain: very many Ensigns of the enemies: and such
abundance of engines and instruments for the wars, that it exceeded beyond
all opinion. His own troops remained sound and entire, and in a manner
without show of hurt, so as touching the vanquished, sufficient marks were to
be seen of their distress* but amongst the vanquishers there was scant any
appearance whether they had been at any fight, or that they had come from the
wars. But Amurath did not so much wonder at the happy success of his worthy
deeds, as he did admire his wisdom and prudence. For in the commendation of
his good hap, fortune might justly Sentence.
claim a part, but in the fruit and benefit which proceeded from his wisdom
and prudence, by good and sage counsels: the dexterity of his own judgment
might challenge that as proper to himself only. Through the occasion of this
victory Scanderbeg sent again into Asia, and returns with victory.
greater forces being appointed unto him, he was again sent back and enjoined
to abide in the same Marches, till such time as he should have reduced certain
towns and peoples in those quarters under the subjection of the Turkish
Emperor, wherein fortune did not any way fail this young soldier, but that
every thing succeeded speedily to his mind and hearts desire. All things being
ended and accomplished to his liking, and the Empire of Ottoman being enlarged:
yea farther then he had in charge, or was commanded: He began from
thenceforth to purchase unto himself a great name and marvelous renown even
amongst strange and foreign The city of Andrinople was the chief seat
then of the Turke^.
Nations.

Being returned to Andrinople, though there were no more enemies to be heard of
abroad, yet there wanted not some at home. For so it happened, that there
arrived out of Scythia a certain aduenturer, more fair and arrogant in
outward show and countenance, then valiant and brave in fight and combat: This
gallant defied and challenged A challenge of combat made by a Sythian to the
Turks.
all the Court of the Turk, demanding if there were any one who durst
encounter him in arms, and to prove himself in fight against him. And this
was the order of the combat which he offered: That both the champions naked in
their shirts being shut up in a straight and narrow place, with their swords
only should make trial to whom the hazard of the victory would befall. This
rash and inconsiderate plot had this Tartarian laid, and made choice of,
either because he was prodigal of his blood and life, or, it may be, of a
vain hope and conceit, that none durst accept the chance and hazard of a
danger so ambiguous, and of an act so unadvised: by means whereof his hap
might be to bear away the praise, and to obtain some great reward without
endaungering himself in combat. Amurath also had proclaimed and promised to
the conqueror a certain prize of great and rich value, that he might by all
means possible, animate some of his servants in hope of so great a reward to
accept the challenge: as if indeed the only fruit and glory of the bare
victory alone would not have allured and drawn men on to undertake the combat.
This notwithstanding, there was none but did altogether dislike and abhor the
purchase of honor and estimation, the means whereof were so deadly and
detestable. Only our Albanois surmounting in haughtiness of heart, and
abounding in courage, whereas all others stood (as it were) amazed and
astonished, he advanced himself, and pressed forth The combat of Scanderbeg
with the Scythian.
toward the Scythian, and thus spoke unto him: Either shall not thou, O
Scythian, bear away with thee this goodly prize and glory, without the loss
of thine own blood, or else being made more honorable and glorious by my
death, thou shall be enriched with these spoils, and ornaments: up then and
receive unto thee an enemy which thy own desire has sought and purchased.
And albeit these kinds of fight be more befitting and proper to fierce and
savage beasts, and that valiant men may and ought with honesty to refuse
them, once notwithstanding let it be lawful for me to contemn and neglect the
safety of this my person, in regard that thy self ought ^^ have had as
great reason, as I, to keep thy lymmes and thy life from danger and
destruction. But vile, and of no account is the safety of the body to that
man which hunteth after praise and vainglory. This day therefore I also will
make a present of my blood unto Amurath, and the rest of my companions. The
Scythian being no whit abashed nor terrified, thought with most brave and
fierce words to have affraied and appaled him, calling him boy and child (for
he was not as then but in the prime of his youthful years, and the soft down
had not yet budded on his chinne, nor made his fair and smoth face to become
rough.) Then being conducted toward the Sultan, with loud and high clamors of
the people: and the field being appointed for the combat according as the
Barbarian had demanded: both of them were incontinently shifted out of their
garments, having not so much as their shirtes to cover them: and thus leaping
all naked into the place, by this new and unwonted kind of spectacle, they
made all the standers by to regard them with admiration. And howbeit that
Castriot both by his voice and by his countenance did bewray in himself a
wonderful resolution and assurance, notwithstanding an incredible kind of care
intermingled with grief did assail the hearts of the regardants, and at one
instant both the age, and the comeliness of his person, joined with a gracious
and pleasing carriage of all the parts of his body, had drawn them both to
favor, and to pity him. Goodly, high, and eminent was his stature, his arms
so seemly as the like had scarce been seen: his neck strong and somewhat
bending, such as is much commended in The description of Scanderbeg his person.
great wrastlers: his shoulders large and maruellously well spread: his visage
of color fair and white (and as it were stained with a little tainte of
purpure): the cast of his eyes straight, and pleasant, without bleamish or
imperfection, and in all points correspondent and agreeable. These corporal
perfections did him great service to his other virtues, and the good qualities
of his mind, which seemed to be augmented and increased by them. The two
champions thus resolute and well assured, being furnished with short daggers,
(for longer weapons would not the straightness of the place permit) made their
entry into the field, and were there left with great silence on all parts. It
is not to be imagined that here needed any great counsel and advise, or any
rare and extraordinary hardines and resolution, but only a certain
promptitude, and readiness, and a quick and deliver agility of the hand. Both
of them now standing upon their guard, and each ready to offend the other, the
Scythian gave the first charge, and onset upon his enemy: against whom
dressing and bearing the point of his dagger, he stroke at his belly with
intent to have stabbed him: Scanderbeg bending his body in all parts, and
bowing it arch-wise almost in form of a bow, with his left hand seized on the
right arm of the barbarian, and stayed the blow: and in the same instant
advancing his poignard, at one blow he cut his throat, and that with such
dexterity, as he divided all the arteries of it asunder. So that with his
tongue yet staggering and stuttering The victory of Scanderbeg.
in his head, he tumbled to the ground, little wanting but that he filled all the
place with the massy hugenes of his body. But being soon and speedily
removed by those that stood near at hand to behold the fight, and diverse of
the Courtiers also flocking together full of joy and gladness about the Victor,
they led him safe and sound unto the presence of Amurath, unto whom (being
exceedingly joyous of his good hap) with his hands yet all bloody, his
champion presented the head of the dead Scythian. Then were delivered unto him
the rewards ordained for the party that should obtain the victory, which he
accepted (as it were) unwillingly: protesting that he did not hazard himself
in that enterprise, neither for gold nor silver, but only to maintain the
honor of the Court, and to repress the arrogancy of the barbarian. So great
was the modesty of this brave Epirot, that thereby he allured unto him more
and more the good will of each person: the natural bounty and dexterity of
his gentle heart abolishing the envy and hatred, which the excellency of
exceeding virtue does usually engender in men of his sort and calling. I hold
it not amiss here in this place also to recount one other exploite which he
achieved with no less honor and commendation, and with like courage by force
of arms. At such time as he followed Amurath into Bithynia in a voyage which
he made thither rather for his pleasure and recreation then upon any occasion
of war: There were at that time in the city of Bursa (which is at this
present the capital city of the empire of Asia) two Persians named Iaia, and
Zampsa being of a very fair and goodly stature, and most sumptuously
apparelled, The second combat of Sca^derbeg against two Persians.
(as is the manner of that nation) they came to seek out the Turkish Prince
and demanded entertainment in his service. Each of the^ pleaded in the behalf
of the other, and by magnifying and extolling their own acts, the one sought
to further the others suit with mutual testimonies and soothing up of each
other, that it seemed to proceed more of a kind of impudent and shameless
audacitie, then of any valor or resolution in them. At last Zampsa the younger
of the two spoke unto Amurath in this manner. To the intent (most mighty and
puissant king) it may not be thought, that we are come, furnished only with
glorious speeches and great words to demand thy pay, and that (the certainty
thereof being unknown unto thee) we be not condemned of vain arrogancy, nor
of foolish hardiness and forward temeritie: behold here we are ready to make
proof before thee of our courages, if not haughty, yet at least desirous of
honor and glory. Though there be here many brave men, and full of valor, we
challenge them all to take arms, that it may be tried whether we be worthy or
unworthy to live under the command of thy greatness. Then showing that they
had no other arms but their horse, sword, lance, and shield, and that their
bodies were not otherwise armed: they said that they would combat only thus
appointed. Amurath (as he was both courteous and gracious) after he had spoken
unto them with a kind of benignity, he promised them that they should want
nothing which on his part might be conveniently yielded unto them. And then
turning his head, and looking here and there round about him, he stayed to see
if any one would receive the challenge. But perceiving that every man stood
still and mute, and that all his servants did by their silence bewray a secret
confession and acknowledgement of their faintness and backwardnes, supposing
it would be smally for his honor and reputation, if the presumption of those
Persians should so rest unpunished: casting his countenance upon Scanderbeg as
being well acquainted with his hardines and fierce courage, by means whereof
he made no doubt, but he would upon any terms undertake it though the peril
were very doubtful and hazardous: he thus spoke unto him. What is thy cause of
stay (my son) in whom all virtue and valor do abound so exceedingly? This
does belong to thee, and the glory of this victory does tarry for thee. Go
to then, once again at this time let the gallantise and bravery of thy youth,
and thy invincible arm, be made yet more famous and memorable, by some notable
act in this spectacle. Little entreatie needed to encourage him to this attempt:
for having kissed the prince his feet (according to the Turkish custom) he
called for horse and armor* to be given him, and issuing forth (with great
applause of the people) into the midst of a large plain appointed for the
combat, with a brave audacity he called his enemies unto him: demanding of
them what order they meant to observe in the fight. The conclusion was, that
Iaia should first assay his fortune, and if he were victorious that then the
fight should be determined, but if he were vanquished then his companion should
succeed him, and at all adventures to abide the hazard of the like condition.
Scanderbeg would not refuse their order, albeit the kings servants (who
accompanied him into the listes) did allege the inequality of the order,
affirming that it was against reason that the party which had the victory
against the one (if he happened to be either weary or wounded) should endure a
second enemy fresh and sound: notwithstanding (after that the press of people
was avoided out of the place) the trumpet gave the signal of the battle, and
the champions set* spurs to their horses, fetching a full course each against
the other. Then the Persian having fastened his lance in the shield of his
adversary, bare himself close coutched with all his force full upon him,
thinking to have thrown him from his horse, and therewithal he brake his
staff upon him. On the other side, the Albanois (who ran only at the head)
did miss altogether in his course, by means whereof, both the one and the
other having run in vain, they held on their cariere, each passing beside
other that they might afterward betake them to their courtelaxes. But Zampsa
having lost all patience (without tarying for the issue and event of his
companions fortune) advanced himself, and coutched his lance against
Scanderbeg: who on the other side quickly perceiving the danger, and that it
was not now time with bootelesse terms of expostulation to accuse his enemy
of disloyalty, prepared himself to assail him manfully, and pressing hard
upon him with his lance, he pierced him clean through the throat. Scarcely
was he laid on the ground, but that Iaia running hastily thither, and with an
horrible voice addressing himself against Scanderbeg, with his sword in his
hand, it little wanted that he had not slain him, but he speedily gave his
horse the turn, and returning upon him with his sword likewise drawn, he
sustained the force of his enemy coming against him. And as they redoubled
their blows twice or thrice each upon other, enforcing themselves to draw
blood one of the other, Scanderbeg lighted upon his right shoulder near unto
his neck, and with one only blow he gave him so deep a wound that he had
well near cut it off: and the unhappy horse trailed along the body of his
unfortunate master almost parted asunder. Thus, these two stout and hardy
Scanderbeg his victory of the two Persi^ns.
warriors (to the great contentment of the beholders) came to their end by the
hand and prowess of one man alone: but had they avoided the death in the
conflict, yet could they not have escaped the wrath of Amurath, for that so
cowardly and traitorously they had surprised his champion, and took him at the
disadvantage. Castriot was conducted toward the Sultan charged with both
their heads, as being triumphant in a double victory. From thenceforth all
his former exploites in the wars* and the remembrance of the Scythian lately
conquered (albeit fresh in memory) were now clean forgotten, and did vanish
away to nothing in respect of this new purchased glory: both the Emperor, the
great Seigniours, and all his companinions in general did honor him with
diverse large and bountiful presents: calling him the auenger, and the author
of their honor and reputation.

It may be that I have dwelt ouerlong, and beyond all measure upon the deeds
of this worthy person: but in my opinion the praise and commendation of men of
war and the commemoration of their acts in particular; is a principal point
which does wholly and especially belong unto them. For that which is done in
the wars, others have their part and interest therein: but these exploites
did Scanderbeg atchiue with his own proper hand: and therefore my desire is
(if it must needs be) that our discourse should be noted rather to exceed in
being superfluous, then to seem ingrate in not giving him his deserts, and the
rather, for that I mind to be but brief in other services effected of like
nature and condition, of which also I am presently to entreat. That which he
did in the sight of Amurath at the taking of Nicomedia, and Prusia, and at
Ottrea a good town in Asia is nothing inferior unto his former deeds,
whether we regard the danger, or the greatness of the fact: for he was the
first man that mounted on the wall, and displaied his ensign on the rampire:
and entering the town in manner all alone, he was the chief cause of the
winning of the same. Likewise being sent into Europe against the Christians:
sometime against the Greeks, and at other times against the Hungarians, he did
more often purchase the renown and estimation of a sage and prudent Captain,
then of one too venturous and over hardy. If he saw any necessity that he
must needs join in battle, and that he could not either refuse it without
suspicion, or give it without grief: he would before all things, desire of
God, that it might be far from him to purchase honor by shedding of the blood
of Christians, and to keep him from using cruelty toward them: for in
outward appearance only, and in his external habit, he was a Mahometist, but
inwardly, and in his heart, he did most constantly observe the faith and
profession of a Christian. Nevertheless as often notwithstanding as he was
enforced to march against them, he did ever seek by all means possible, as
little as might be, to endomage them: provided always that he did not thereby
wrong his own forces of which he had the command and government. By means
whereof, he did bear himself so well, and did his deuoire in so good fashion,
and did so fully discharge the duty of a good and politic Captain in all
services of charge both within the camp and in fight, that even the Christians
themselves did not malign him any whit the more for it. And this his moderate,
stayed, and advised behauior seemed to proceed rather of true discipline and
prudence military, then of any fraud, ignorance, or want of courage: and
continually did he govern himself with such art and dexterity, that he
would never suffer himself (if he could choose) to be beaten: and yet by all
means possible, would he give opportunity to the Christians to save themselves:
or (if he could not do otherwise) he would take them prisoners: holding it
far more tolerable for them to endure servitude and bondage, then to be put
to the sword, and utterly to be destroyed. When he would exhort or endourage
his soldiers at any time, he did it with such a grace, and so effectually
(were it in camp, or in the midst, and heat of fight) that he would work
in them both shame and fear almost at one instant: and afterward in the
fury of fight he would order all matters so subtly by the liveliness of his
spirit, and the state of his army should be disposed so cunningly, that the
preservation thereof (seeming to be with a certain difficulty, and by his
extraordinary virtue) did afterward purchase him more honor and estimation
with Ottoman, then others could obtain by many a notable and famous victory.
From thencefoorth there was none that went beyond him in credit and
authority about the King: and no man was more agreeable, and better accepted
amongst the soldiers, by reason that he was courteous, familiar, and friendly,
not challenging to himself in particular, the honor which was gotten in
common, but attributing it to the whole company. Whatsoever money came to his
hands he would distribute bountifully, and dispend liberally; judging the same
(and not without cause) to be of great efficacy and force to draw unto him
the minds and goodwill of men: and the surest bond to tie the hearts of the
popular sort unto him. Every man of his own free will and motion, and without
call, would gladly have been ranged under his ensign: and for the love of him
would expose him self freely to the hazard of all perilles. But fortune did
not long forbear to power forth her venom: for John the father of Castriot
in John Castriot dies.
this mean time happened to dye in Epire, whereof Scanderbeg being aduertized,
albeit by these lamentable tidinges (according to his natural duty) he
conceived exceeding sorrow in his mind: yet did he never discover by any open
and apparent signs of sadness or mourning, the secret dolor and grief which
lay hidden within his heart. For so it was, that usually he called the Sultan
his very father and Amurath usurps the kingdom of Epyre.
soueraigue Segniour. Hereupon Amurath (neither more nor less then as if he
had been the lawful heir of the realm of Epire) did speedily dispatch
thither Sebali^ with a strong garrison: and caused him to seize upon Croie,
and other places of importance: and by this means all at leisure, and without
effusion of blood, he obtained the peaceable possession of all the fortresses
and strong holds of that kingdom, the inhabitants thereof being either of
small force, or ill provided to maintain their liberty, and being not well
able to hinder the Turk in the right and interest which he pretended to the
succession of John their deceased prince: because he had all his sons in his
custody, and at his own disposition, having purposelie gotten them into his
hands: to the intent the scepter coming to be void, and without heirs, he
might in the end usurp it unto himself. Voisaue (who after the Voysaue dies.
death of her husband did continue in her house with her daughter Mamisa, who
was left unto her as the only wretched remainder of that miserable realm) by
the appointment of Amurath had a certain small portion of land assigned her in
Macedonie for the provision and sustentation of the residue of her aged years.
And the report is, that she departed this life in an extreme age, before the
coming of her son into Albanie, unto whom she left her said daughter
unmarried, after that she had long and carefully kept her in the estate of a
virgin, and afterward she being by him provided of an husband was
reestablished in her former place of dignity.

Look with what courage this generous youth had borne and concealed the grief
of his fathers death: with the like did lie dissemble all things whatsoever.
Ottoman on the other side, nothing doubting but that this his dealing would be
very hardly digested both by him and his brethren who were then resident is
his Court (as having reason to expect the possession of that crown
appertaining unto them) continued his disloyalty toward them, and made away
the brethren of Scanderbeg, Scanderbeg his brethren poisoned by Amurath.
causing them (as many have affirmed) secretly and closely to be poisoned. And
afterward converting his thoughts upon Scanderbeg, he cast diverse ways and
devises in his mind how he might not disfurnish his Realm of so worthy a
person (of whom, as of another Hercules, he did serve his turn in all
difficult and perilous adventures) and yet assure him self in the mean time,
and remain free from the burden and danger of that suspicion which did
mightily perplexe him. In this humor and affection he called Scanderbeg unto
him, and (as some say) with a long discourse fitted to that purpose, began to
comfort him, as well for the death of his father, as for the miserable and
unhappy end of his brethren: and withal, he made offer unto Amurath his
notable dissimulation in undermining the thoughts of Scanderbeg.
him (if so be he had ^ desire not to continue any longer in the state of a
subject) that he should either have his fathers kingdom, or some other rich
estate in Asia, and prayed him nevertheless that he would not leave and
abandon him, especially being encombred with so great affairs and so many
wars: for that abiding with him, he should have at his own disposition and
in his own hands, all the best, and most excellent means, which might make
him glorious and honorable, and might render his life most happy and
fortunate. The fraud and cunning of this old fox being soon discovered by
this youth, he took no long time to advise himself, but with a readio and
subtle wiliness framing his countenance to his speech, he made him Sanderbeg
his answer to Amurath.
this answer. John my father, and all my brethren do lieu in thee most
sovereign king and most bountiful Amurath: as long as I may remain near thy
person, neither any desire of my country, nor the regard of any kingdom
shall enter into my mind being sufficiently contented. Albeit then thou do
press me at this instant to accept these gifts, or rather burdensome charges,
willingly do I hold my self contented in the great magnificence of thy spirit,
and I will gladly embrace the liberality of my Prince his favor. But this is
my full resolution, to live continually under the wing of thy Majesty: and
assure thy self that hardly, or not at all, will I be of any other mind.
Besides, old age (which is unprofitable and unfit for the wars) will soon
suppress and mortify my courage (though otherwise invincible) from any such
desire. My present years are far fitter to bear the charge of the wars,
then to sustain the weight and burden of a kingdom: and more fit is this
hand to manage arms then a royal scepter. Give us therefore some enemy, o
Amurath, that we may more cheerfully receive a kingdom conquered by our
virtue, rather then that which should come of thy gift and liberality.

The king took singular pleasure at his speeches, and so great credit did he
give Scanderbeg his wisdom and prudence.
unto his words, that he heaped promise upon promises, endeavoring to fill him
with hopes, and the expectance of great matters. From that time forward the
Albanois began secretly to feel the malady and grief which did daily
spread it self more and more: and notwithstanding that with singular
discretion he did dissemble all things, yet did not that make him negligent,
but that he did look nearely unto him self, and took great care for the
safety of his person; and the more he was in doubt of the tyrant, the more did
he study to purchase the favor of the commons, and the affection of the
soldiers. Nevertheless being incessantly occupied in some one or other tumult
in the wars, he did every day add new matter to make him self renowned,
and no less did he grow to be envied. For he could not so easily prevent the
faithlesnesse of men, either by the modest show of his mind, or by his
liberality and ordinary courtesy: but that with the time even virtue it self
did engender the contrary to his desire. In so much that there were some in the
Court, who (not able to endure the apparaunce of so great virtue in a
stranger, every day Scanderbeg envied, slaundered, and suspected in the Turks
Court.
more and more increasing) as soon as they perceived that Amurath did any
thing incline or hearken unto them: they would daily slander him behind his
back, giving their Lord to understand for certainty, that the sumptuous
expenses which he bestowed upon the common sort so bountifully, and the favor
of the people which he sought for so ambitiously, were a ready mean to raise
him in power, puissance, and authority: Alleging moreover, that he being
suspected by those in court, it was a good and sufficient proof of that which
he did inwardly intend and aspire unto. All this it was easy to persuade the
Prince, and the rather for that the accusation of his magnificence and his
large expenses, did openly show it self to be true according to their surmise.
Also the old age of the Sultan, being of it self fearful, jealous, and
suspicious, did curiously interpret all other matters to the worst; in such
sort that a certain doubt did by little and little engender in his spirit,
causing him to be mistrustfull not only for the Realm of Albany, but also for
the sovereignty even of his own Empire. And his conscience being confounded and
convinced by the gilt of his own misdeedes and wickedness, and the jealousy
which he had of his estate ill gotten, made him repute all things full
oftrechery and infidelity: and to suspect his most inward and familiar friends
as most dangerous and secret enemies. This his suspicion being augmented, he
began secretly to hate Scanderbeg, and to bear a more watchful and intentive
eye upon him: to see if he could by any covert and close means cut him off,
and work his confusion; not that his wicked and pernicious will wanted power
and liberty to do any mischief, but because he had no reasonable cause, nor
sufficient color to procure his death and destruction. To oppress him
wrongfully and by violence he was afeard, because he saw him so well beloved of
all men generally; and for fear least he should alienate the hearts of others,
and by an example of such cruelty, shut up and take away in time to come from
his Kingdom, the hope of all virtues and good deserts by any strangers: by
which means principally the Ottoman Empire had been amplified, and raised unto
his greatness.

But whilst these things were thus a doing, other affairs of greater weight
and importance This Seruia, Bosnia, and Russia is called by the Turks Segoria.
happening abroad, did suck and swallow up these domestical suspicions and
distrusts: for open war was proclaimed against George Lord of Misia, commonly
called the Despot of Seruia. The king of Turks desired nothing more then to
commit this charge unto Scanderbeg, and that for two special considerations:
The one, because he could not find any man, whose service in his affairs was
so fortunate as was his: The other, for that knowing him to be hot and forward
in the war, and prompt and ready to hazard him self to all dangers, he did
well hope that he should see him miscarie in some one encounter or other
against the enemy; as in arms it does oftentimes betide Scanderbeg sent with
an army against the Despot of Seruia.
to diverse. For this cause having leauied his forces, Castriot was sent against
the Misians. This was at that time, that he dealt worser with the Christians,
then he was accustomed, for fear least in temporising, and attending some fit
opportunity of retrait, if he should not take the occasion to overcome when it
was offered, he might minister matter of suspicion to Amurath, who was already
inclined to take any impression of mistrust in his jealous and suspicious head.
Oftentimes therefore he defeated the Despot, and put him to the worse, returning
in all conflictes with victory to Andrinople. Again, at such time as the said
Despot had newly repaired his forces, and did begin to make head again, and to
reenforce his army; Scanderbeg being dispatched against him with more lusty
forces, did vanquish him in battle, and put his army to flight. And having
razed many of his holds and fortresses: he led back his soldiers laden
with the spoils and rich booty of their enemies.

These tumults abroad being appeased, the old wretch by the like pursuit of his
former Amurath conspireth and practices the destruction of Scanderbeg.
detestable desseignes, did again address himself and conspire against him,
who had bin the author of so notable a victory, and of the rest, and
tranquillity of his estate. To this end he caused the same time a solemn Iusts
and tournement to be proclaimed both on horseback and on foot, promising
gifts and rewards of great value to them that should bear away the prize: to
the intent that by this devise and policy he might expose and put Scanderbeg to
all perils and extreme dangers. But as his counsails were abominable, so did
they appear to be vain and of no effect: For albeit great numbers both of
subjects and of strangers, all hardy, active, and able men did daily present
them selves to this triumph: yet did Scanderbeg continually show himself
amongst them, and with an admirable hardines and bravery, and no less good hap
held against all co^mers, and as one fatally predestined to be victorious, he
alone did carry away the honor and the prize, with the extreme wonder and
singular favor of all men. The vnmatcheable virtue in this gentle warrior,
which might have sufficed to assuage and mollify the arrogance and fiercenes
even of his enemies, could no whit bend the courage of Ottoman alone to any
courtesy or clemency, but his distrust each day growing more forcible, his heart
also began to be enraged and enflamed with anger and hatred, making him to
bethink with himself more ardently, how he might by some other secret kind of
death dispatch him. But why am I thus carried away in the pursuit of these vain
reuenges, and foolish counsels of Amurath on the one part, and the providence
of Scanderbeg on the other part? why rather do I not in a word attribute the
safety and preservation of this man unto God only? Assuredly he it was that
confounded the spirits and senses of Ottoman: he it was that raised up those
disturbances of the wars, and new commotions in Misia: finally, he it was that
stirred up the arms of the Hungarians, to the intent that this man's life (being
vowed and destinated to maintain the dignity of the Christian religion) should
not be abridged and cut off: and that the ancient liberty of Epire might once
again be revived: for had not a kind of divine power interposed it self in this
case: there is no doubt but that Amurath had attained to the height of his
intent and desire. Did he want any means to bring him to his end? might he not
have had a thousand devises with which (without the least fear of sedition) he
might have circumuented him? where were poisons? where were secret trains and
ambushments? where were falls and slanderous accusations, which are the ordinary
weapons of tyrants to execute their malicious and mischievous attempts?
Scanderbeg having with great facility discovered these trains and secret
practices, and perceiving that (if he continued long about the prince) he
should hardly be able to avoid his snares, he found it high time to bethink
himself how he might advance his affairs, for the recovery of his fathers
estate by some good and virtuous exploit, and by the subtelty of his own spirit
(a thing which he had always conceived in his thoughts by the sweet
remembrance of his liberty) he devised some honest color to quit him self of
the service of Amurath, and under pretense thereof, to return one day into his
own native country, so greatly by him desired: where all men with one mind did
attend and wish him with a vehement and general affection: yet did he never
impart this his determination to any man living: neither did any person ever
discern his hidden conceit, either by word or by any other sign,
notwithstanding Scanderbeg solicited by the Albanians to the recovery of his
estate.
that there were many, and especially of the Albanois, in who^ he might have
reposed special confidence, by reason of their ordinary frequenting, and long
familiarity together: and especially some of them, who after the decease of
John his father (invited thereunto as well through the brute of his great
renown, as for the desire they had to recover their liberty) were come unto
him on the behalf of the principal and chiefest persons in Albanie, to offer
him the means, occasion, and opportunity, together with the aid of the
subjects, to pull his fathers crown and scepter out of the hands of Amurath.
Notwithstanding, knowing how great the inconstancy and lightness of men is,
and considering the greatness of the peril, he dissembled it very wisely,
and the rather for that (holding it a very easy matter to get the possession
of all other things) yet he had his mind mightily perplexed and distracted,
how he might recover Croie, which was his principal care. The Turk had
furnished it with so strong a garrison, that it was impossible to gain it by
arms or by force, but only by art and industry. It was also the chief and
capitol city of the realm of Albanie, situated upon the crest of a most high
and ragged mountain, and on all sides almost inaccessible, being so fortified
by art, and so defended by the natural site thereof, that (except it were by
famine only) for an enemy to use any other force or violence against it, it
might Scanderbeg his wisdom and singular discretion.
be held mere folly, and a very mockery. By means whereof, if the mind of
Scanderbeg were at any time sounded in it, he would commend their affection,
and the remembrance of their liberty not yet wholly extinguished in the hearts
of their nation: But he alleged the wonderful power and puissance of the
Turk: telling them, that his government was not grievous nor insupportable,
and that it was but a folly and mere madness, rashly to begin any tumult or
commotion, where was wanting sufficient forces to bring them to a good
conclusion. And that they ought not to account of that liberty, the possession
whereof would be of short continuance, and for which they should afterward be
brought, not into the like and so easy a servitude, but into a bondage, and
restraint of liberty far more grievous and intolerable: bringing themselves
in the end to be murdered and massacred as sacrifices to appease the wrath of
the Prince, who would be mightily incensed against them, by reason of their
rebellion. And yet did he always comfort and cheer them up, promising them,
that according to the credit and authority which he had with Amurath, he
would procure, that their yoke might be gracious, and his government so
moderate as might stand with the condition and state of their affairs. Thus
did he discreetly provide on all parts both for them and for him self: and
did continually temporise, finely plotting and devising the way and opportunity
how to escape and get away; no more nor less then as a poor prisoner, who
attending with great patience and devotion some sedition within the place of
his restraint, and a general astonishment of all persons, by means whereof,
whilst every man is busied in extinguishing the fire of the dissension, he
may in the mean time strike off his fetters and break prison: and (assuring
thereby his liberty) it may be the means to avoid the hard sentence of the
rigorous and severe judge.

True it is, that fortune did not long hold his desire in suspense, for whilst
these things were thus in doing, the Despot of Misia (of whom we have lately
spoken) Despot of Misia reestablished in his estate, and expulsed again by*
Amurath.
was reestablished again in his estate, as well by the revolt of his own
subjects from the Sultan, as by the forces of his neighbors, and the aid of
his friends sometime chasing and expelling, and sometimes cutting in pieces
some of the Turkish garrisons. By occasion whereof the Sultan being grievously
incensed against him, and perceiving that to bring him to reason he must not
from thenceforth any more commit the conduct of his affairs to other chiefes
and commanders: he determined to go thither him self in person, and having
levied a most puissant army, he marched against the Misian, with purpose
utterly to suppress and destroy him; the which did very soon and easily fall
out, even according as he wished: for that the Despot being far inferior
unto him in power and puissaunce, did (as it were) at the first stroke, loose
all his holds, and places of strength, and flying into Hungary, left all unto
him, without any one drop of blood shed in defense thereof. Some say that
Ottoman in this voyage, did aid him self with the counsel and service of
Scanderbeg, rather then of any other in his Court: as of one, who by his happy
conduct in many other wars forepassed in those quarters, had gotten more
knowledge and experience of the places, and of that country, then any other
whatsoever. But as yet for all that, could he find no fit occasion to effect
his own dessines and purposes, howbeit that the time was not now far off to
accomplish it. For Amurath had scarcely brought back his troops to
Andrinople, and licensing them to depart, had scant broken up his Camp; but a
public brute and report began to grow of new troubles, and emotions of the
Hungarians, and of other dangers approaching, far more furious then the
former. For the misfortune of the Despotte by the mediation of Julian the
Cardinal of Saint Angel, (whom Pope Eugenius had sent into Hungary,
Vladislaus king of Hungary, aideth the Despot against Amurath.
and had expressly given him in charge to labor the king to that effect) made
Vladislaus king of Hungary, to arm him self for the reestablishing of the
Despot in Misia. The Turkishe Emperor being informed of this practice, did
speedily assemble his forces, and put them in a readiness, to the number of
four score thousand fighting men: and before that the Christian army should
make their entry into Misia, he caused the Bassa of Romania named Carambey, and
Scanderbeg jointly, Scanderbeg and Carambry sent by Amurath against the
Hungarians.
with twenty thousand men to set forward into Hungary, and there to mee^e them
^re they approached any nearer. He (according to his accustomed manner) with
the body of his army, and all the baggage, followed after them fair and
easily. On the other side, it was a goodly sight to see the Ensigns of the
Christians, both for their number, and for the bravery of the soldiers and
the Captains, who were no less then thirty five thousand fighting men; but
especially the great Huniades that famous John Huniades.
Captain, commonly surnamed Iancus, whose very name alone (as has been
reported) had many times foiled and vanquished the Turks. One thing
notwithstanding did much abate the courage and fierceness of our forces: and
that was because for default of bread, the soldiers having no other but boiled
wheat to live upon: they died for the most part suddenly, through a certain
violent flixe of the body, caused by this kind of victual. The Bassa
therefore hastening with his troops, did incampe him self near to the river
of Morauia. Huniades In Bulgary.
not able to endure this brauado, first of all he sent certain espialles to
get notice, and to bring him tidings of the approach of Amurath: and as soon
as he could make any true conjecture of his forces, and of his determination,
with ten thousand men, the best appointed of all his host, leaving the King
behind in his camp, Battle of Moraue, between Huniades and the Turkas.
he passed over the Mora^e, and with notable violence, went to charge the
Barbarian, who at the first approach being somewhat astonished, did a little
recule, and give backward: but all suddenly perceiving and contemning their
small numbers, he attended the coming of Huniades, and received him to the
fight. Castriot (who now spied the time and opportunity ^it to accomplish his
desire and determination, which he had before conceived in his mind, and did
seek with all his power the ruin of the Turks) even in the beginning of the
battle did put him self with his own bands by little and little to the
retrait, and afterward by plain The revolt of Scanderbeg.
^^^ght, did turn his back before the enemy: striking into the others by his
example a fear and terror, and withal a certain persuasion to do the like.
And indeed the Bassa was much terrified by this accident, either because he saw
so brave a man, and one so resolute in the wars, now contrary to his wonted
manner, prepare him self rather to fly then to fight: or because he was in
doubt that he was deceived and betrayed, in regard whereof he charged the enemy
more faintly and with less stomach, This was the occasion that the Hungarians
being encouraged (as it appeared) by the fear of the other, without any great
force or effusion of blood, brake and scattered the battle of their enemies,
who abandoning their arms, and baggage, their Captains Turks overthrown by
Huniades.
and Ensigns, without any care of their companions: and having no other
recourse but to their heels, endeavored to save them selves by running.
Huniades pursuing the advantage of his victory, never left killing so long as
there rested any for execution. Every place was full of mountains (as it were)
of dead bodies heaped together: all was filled with fear and tumult,
especially at the sacking of the pillage and the ransacking of their camp. Of
prisoners there were about a four thousand: amongst others there was one
taken alive, who was in chief account and authority of the great Turk. The
Bassa with a very small company had much ado to escape. Then Scanderbeg as one
careful and diligent in his enterprise, having first communicated and imparted
it unto his friends (amongst whom was Amese his nephew, a young man of singular
hope Amese, son of Reposius, alias Carragusa. Scanderbeg ceazeth upon the
Bassa his Secretary: and can seth him to write letters for the delivery of Croy
unto him.
and appearance of virtue, the son of Reposius afterward by the Turks named
Carragusa, by a wife which he had married before he was empoisoned by Ottoman)
and now seeing the fortune of the Turk to decline toward a change, and their
army defeated, he laid hands upon the Secretary, which was nearest unto the
Bassa, (upon whom of purpose he had borne good espiall) and having stayed him,
with a good courage he caused him to be fettered, compelling him speedily, after
some refusal, yet through fear of his life, to endite for him counterfeit
letters to the Governor of Croy: by the which it was enioined him in Amurath
his name to consigne the place into the hands of Scanderbeg, as newly appointed
and deputed to have the entire charge and guard thereof: making him also to set
down in writing many reasons serving to that intent and purpose, for the
better confirmation of the matter, with some appearance of truth and
probability, to draw the Governor and his people the sooner to credit it. The
letters being written, both the Secretary, and all the rest which were taken
together with him, were presently put to death, to the intent that the matter
might the longer remain concealed from the great Seigniour* and not they
only, but as many as fell into the hands of Castriot had no better fortune. So
that this army of the Turks was almost all brought to nothing: for that those
also which escaped the fury of the soldiers, coming (by means of their
dispersed and scattering flight) into the hands of the Paisants by one and the
same death made an end of their days. A great number of the soldiers Albanois
who were present at this encounter, after they had intelligence of the act of
Scanderbeg, as they went here and there wandering and dispersed, as well to
avoid the hand of the Conqueror, but principally pricked with the desire of
their native country, did gather them selves near unto him: and in an instant
they were found to be a troop of three hundred good and able men. Haniades and
his people charged with inestimable spoil and booty, did retire themselves to
their companions. I may not here let pass in silence that which some have
seemed to affirm: That Scanderbeg had before hand had some intelligence with
the Hungarians, and by secret messengers had acquainted and instructed Huniades
of all matters in particular, and that he was the cause that made him hasten
with his forces. Howsoever it was as I dare not auerre it* so I do not greatly
stand upon it. But this I believe well, that all things were guided, and
directed with singular prudence and good advise: and the event and issue of the
matter (which many times is a true Judge of our actions) does authorize and
confirm this opinion. But leaving Hungary for a season, let us draw back into
Epire, whilst in the mean time the renow me of this great loss; and the
news of this notable discomfiture is posting toward Amurath.

The victorious Castriot having fully satisfied his wrath, and accomplished his
Scanderbeg i^ received into Dibria. People of Misia on the Western part
thereof: after whom succeeded the Bulgarians.
vows and desire upon his enemies: and having likewise rather adorned then
charged his soldiers with honorable spoils: dislodging from thence with very
long iournyes, he arrived with his troop into the upper Dibria the seventh
day after. This town is seated in the confines of the Tribullians, seauenty
miles from Croie, and is very famous amongst the Epirots, for that it brings
forth men very active and valiant: and it was singularly esteemed and favored
of Scanderbeg, by reason of their fidelity, and many commendable services which
they had done for the defense and protection of the state under John his
father, at such time as he was molested by Ottoman. Other town or fortress
there is not in those Marches toward Macedony, but only Sfetigrade: but the
people of the country dispersed throughout mountains, and valleys without any
enclosures of walls, do preserve them selves by the only natural
fortification of the places against the violence and injuries of their enemies.
Castriot then there first of all made some stay, not holding it convenient to
pass further, till he had ordained and set in order certain affairs of some
consequence and importance as you shall hear. Having sent (very secretly) for
some of the principallest in the town to come unto him (for he had a special
care to conceal, and keep all things secret, and therefore had so disposed
his journey, as he might arrive thither in the night) he discovered unto them
the secrets of his thoughts, and he obtained al things to his content, not so
much as one person being found, (as the report goes) that would in any thing
gainesay his demand, either for feate of the grand Seignour, or for mistrust
of an act so dangerous; or of his own disposition, as some would have done.
But on the contrary, their own desire so long time nourished, the incomparable
reputation of himself, conceived by so many years (which was a great
furtherance unto it) and withal the love and singular desire which they had of
liberty, had wonderfully wrought him into the good grace and favor of every
man. All therefore in general, which were about him (as it were) in emulation
each of other, sometime with great joy and triumph: sometime sheading of tears
through excessive gladness, with long embracements, some kissed his hands,
others his face, one the head, another his feet, yea and al parts of his body,
seeming to be ravished with the joy of his good fortune: and showing the
singular contentment which they had in the resource, and restitution of the
Albanois name and majesty. And presenting unto him all the means of their
utmost power, and ability, they offered the same unto him: both their bodies,
their hearts, their children, and whatsoever was of any better account, and
value then other even unto their lives. The first thing that they took order
for, was to set good and speedy watch and ward, for fear that (during these
affairs) some advertisement should come from the Turk to the governor of
Croy, which might discover the practice. It was advised also touching the leuy
that should be made; what forces should take arms at the first signal and
token that should be given them. Of the three hundred horse which he had
brought with him, reserving but a very small number (with which he determined to
ride to Croy to present the Packet to the Governor, and to receive the
government) the residue he sent before, and well near as many of the Dibrians,
who knew all the passages of the country, willing them very closely to ambush
them selves in the woods, and thickets next to Croy, til such time as he had
gotten possession of the town, and that then he would covertly let them in to
cut the throats of the Garrison. All things being well disposed and in order,
the self same night that he came thither (it was in the end of Autumn, when
the nights began to grow long) he whom the ardentnes of his desire did make
impatient of delay, and who held that the least stay, was of great importance
to endanger his enterprise, early in the morning before the break of day, he
departed from Dibria, accompanied with his troop of horse, and his baggage,
and certain of the Dibrians who attended him, and he drew directly toward
Croy, with as great speed as might be. And as he approached toward the town,
willing by this devise to set the better color upon his deliberation, and to
make it seem more probable, he commanded on the way that Amese, with two
others as his servants, should go before to carry the news unto the Governor,
and to advertise him, that he with his train was not far off. The young man
being of an excellent quick spirit, and good courage, and so well dissembling
him self both in habit and in speech, as if he had been a Turk natural, was
received into the town, and went speedily to find the Governor: unto whom,
(having after their manner) done his reverence, with a good grace he began to
make mention of Scanderbeg, saying that he was his Secretary, and with great
modesty told him withal, that his master and his train only, would be there
very speedily. As God would, that which Amese delivered, was from point to
point believed, and from thence forward the Barbarian began to prepare and make
him self ready to depart: and before that he had either read the letters, or
had any notice of the will and pleasure of his Prince, he trussed up his
baggage, and provided to dislodge: in such sort, that Scanderbeg being come,
and the Packet opened, and the letters read, credit was given unto the same,
and they obeyed thereunto, according to their tenor and contents, and the
Albanois was The government of Croy, resigned unto Scanderbeg, by the Governor.
received with great joy. Then were called before him (as is the use) all the
ordinary garrison, and the ancient inhabitants of the town of all ages and
estate. His great renow me being dispersed over all parts, made him much
esteemed and welcomed of every man. The Turks loved his natural disposition
because he was popular and familiar, by occasion whereof, all of them took it
in good part to be under his command. The Croians, who saw before their eyes
the race of their good Prince, did forth with take heart and courage, and
(neither more nor less, then as if they had presently been delivered from some
long captivity and misery) they began suddenly to conceive in their inward
thoughts and wishes, the secret counsels and enterprise of Scanderbeg. And
in especial, some of those who were of eldest years amongst them, and did as
yet retain their ancient desire, carrying in their minds the apparaunt signs
of his virtue shining in him from his infancy, they would discourse of his
education, the beginning of his birth and nativity, and the curious presages of
his parents; yet was there not any one of them all the while, that durst open
his conceit unto the new Captain, nor yet betake him to arms, till they saw
that he him self did advance forward, and set in foot as chief and leader
to regaine their liberty. (It was concluded between Castriot and a few others,
that some should stir up the youth of the town, and when time served provoke
them to take arms: and it was forbidden them to make any sign or token of
alteration, till that the succors of the men at arms, (which lay near the
town in ambushment) were let in within the gates: the which being enjoined
them to be done secretly, and in the dead time of the night, was put in
execution, and they were brought into the town. The ports being shut, the
streets, the cross ways, and all the strongest passages being filled with
armed soldiers, the Turks not knowing any thing of their counsels, or at
least for fear dissembling it: and the error of the night augmenting the
fear of the danger, Scanderbeg gave the signal to begin the massacre. The
first thing that was done, was to oppress The Massacre and butchery of the
Turks at Croy.
the Sentinels, who being dispersed upon the walls, as the manner is, in
little standings or cabinets of wood, were easily subject to their violence,
and soon put to the sword, others being disposed in their places. With no
less fury the private houses being forced open, the bands of Croie were the
first that marched, Scanderbeg himself doing the office both of a commander
and a soldier. At the shutting up of the gates, many being surprised suddenly,
had their throtes cut in their beds. But the alarm being come from one and
other to all the rest, a great number being wakened, ran presently to arms
according as the tumult, and the darkness of the night did give them leisure:
and rendering them selves upon the place, they endeavored to cast themselves in
order of battle, with intent either to die honorably, or by making head a
while against the enemy, and gaining one of the ports, to save them selves by
flight. This notwithstanding, all the passages being shut up, and both the one
and the other of their desseignes being assayed in vain, they saw them selves
on all parts murdered and slaughtered as beasts. Thus the hope of all flight
being taken away from them, and being deprived of all good and honest means to
dye with honor, they had recourse to cries and lamentations, which they had
long forborne; and with tears (abhorred of all generous hearts) they called
for mercy to Scanderbeg, praying and adiuring him to make a stay of further
slaughter, and not any more to deface and stain the fortunate beginning of his
estate with bloodshed: and that he would make choice rather to let them live,
and to reserve them to a servile estate of bondage, for the further increase
and ornament of his triumph: then to disgrace it so with the show of their
bloody and slaughtered carcasses: and by too too much cruelty to dishonor
this day of joy, and the assurance of his estate with their innocent blood,
howsoever justly spilt; that they had not merited any such thing: that they had
not deserved the ill will and malice of the people, nor had been injurious to
any; but that they had as friends (rather then as enemies) inhabited and
conuersed with them in the town which was committed unto them by Amurath: and
that for their part they would not from thenceforth debar any man from
regaining their liberty, but laying down their weapons and their arms, they
did prostrate them selves inuocating the mercy of the vanquishers. On all sides
were heard horrible and fearful cries, clamours, plaints, howlings, sighs,
threats, and lamentations full of confusion. In the midst of the heat and
fury of the massacre, Castriot with all his power causing his soldiers to
retire, and to sound the retrait, was easily moved with the pitiful voices of
these miserable suppliants: and he deferred the course of his proceedings till
the morning following: in hope that this people so beset on all sides, and
overwhelmed with infinite miseries and mischiefs, might peradventure either by
fair or foul means, by flattery or by threats, be brought and drawn to
embrace the Christian religion. Nevertheless for all that, wisely ordering his
companies, and appointing to each man his place, he commanded to keep good
watch, for fear and doubt of some surprise that might be made by the enemy.
Him self in the mean time rode directly to the port, accompanied with Amese
and some others that followed them: and there sent and dispatched him away with
certain Dibrians to carry the tidings to Dibria unto them who were of his
faction, how that Croie was his own, and of all the rest which passed:
admonishing them all in general to take arms, and to solicit their allies
and neighbors to the recovery of their liberty: and that they would not
fail (during this troublesome change, and unexpected astonishment on all
parts) to expel and drive away the garrisons of the enemies: especially now
that Amurath did not yet know any thing, and whilst he was occupied in the
wars against the Hungarians. And as for him, that as soon as he had cleared
the town of the Turks, and set the state thereof in good peace and quietness,
he would incontinently be with them, with the best and brauest troops that he
could possibly assemble. The next morning at the sun rising, being desirous
to make an end of that which rested undone within the town: he caused it to be
cried by sound of trumpet, that all those which would be baptized, and become
professed Christians, should retire them selves near unto him without arms:
and they should both have their lives given them, and be indifferently admitted
to all places of charge and dignity within the town. But all those which
should neglect and refuse this favor, should be held for enemies, and it
should be lawful for every man to punish them with all extremity of cruelty.
The terror of this Proclamation did not much move their wretched souls and
obstinate minds, and few there were that did hearken unto this good and
wholesome counsel (so lively were the old precepts of their auncesters fixed
in their feeble spirits: and so deeply had they taken root, and were (as it
The obstinacy of the Turks.
were) engraven within their bones, that they could not be dissuaded from
them.) Most willingly therefore did they make choice, that their miserable
bodies should accompany their guilty souls to destruction, rather then they
would enjoy the exceeding clemency both of God and men. The Turks therefore,
desisting from prayers, for that the condition propounded unto them by the
Christians, seemed unto them very unreasonable, and having recourse unto a
vain and bootelesse flight, they did rather delay then avoid their torment,
by reason that the corpse du guard of armed soldiers disposed on all the ways,
did easily oppress them being amazed and dispersed. And albeit that many of
them enraged (as it were) when the hideous image of imminent death and
destruction did present it self to their eyes, did with their naked swords
make them selves a passage in some of the streets through the midst of their
enemies: yet could they not for all that, avoid the hands of the rest, and
though they ran here and there as birds shut up in a cage, and did wander
by all the cross ways of the town, having no way to escape, yet were they
overthrown by the soldiers coming upon them: or else did they murder them
selves with their own weapons. For it is said that some of them were slain
by their own hands: others getting into the Temples and sacred places to hide
them selves, were drawn out by the soldiers desirous of blood, and were made
(as it were) a sacrifice for the common liberty. Liberty was in every man's
mouth, and every where sounded the sweet name of Liberty. Many of them being
not yet for fear gotten out of their houses, but keeping themselves within
doors, did there shed their own blood, excepting such as retiring them
selves into the inner and most secret parts and corners of their houses, did
for a time beguile the soldiers notwithstanding all their wiliness and
diligence: a great number of them also had refuge unto Scanderbeg, not for that
the fear of so hideous a spectacle, had withdrawn them from their former
intention, but only to prolong (as long as they might) the course of their
unhappy lives. For this fury being appeased, and the tumult ceasing within the
town, even as Castriot was in making preparation to have them to be baptized,
the most part of them with fair entreaty and supplications did not cease to
importune him, that he would not against their wills force them thereunto: that
well they might feign themselves through the fear and horror of present death
to yield them selves to be Christians, but that they could not forget the
ancient laws and ceremonies of their Elders; that they meant not obstinately
to oppose them selves nor resist against any of his commandments, though it
were to present them with a cruel death: nevertheless, that this could not
enter into their thoughts, because that such ceremonies and traditions ought to
be used to such as are willing, and not with constraint and violence. And they
required him by the faith which he had plighted unto them, and by the revenge
which he had sufficiently of late taken of their parents and brethren: that he
would at least wise make them Messengers unto Amurath of this strange hap and
marvelous accident.

Scanderbeg his wrath together with his arms being abated and laid aside, and
seeing them all disarmed, and with their hands erected to humble themselves
before him, was easily entreated to give them both life and liberty, albeit he
did not esteem this faithless and infidel nation worthy of any favor and
compassion. But little joy had they of this benefit, for that at their
departure out of the towns, their destiny did deliver them to the indiscretion
of others outrage, and to the merciless greediness of the communalty. As for
those that were baptized (of whom there were some) besides the exceeding shows
of joy and triumph made by the towns* men for their conversion; they were
abundantly also provided of all necessaries, as of houses, victualles,
pensions, and all other serviceable commodities at the public and common
charge. Notwithstanding, it was ordained that good guard should be had of them,
till such time as the new seal of their Religion were known to have taken
root and increase within their hearts, being as yet but fresh and newly begun;
and principally for doubt least upon these alterations they should attempt some
kind of treason. Of all those which afterward did come forth of diverse holes
and secret places, some lighting upon such of the inhabitants, who were of a
more mild and courteous disposition, were kept prisoners, having promised great
sums of money for their ransom: the rest were killed upon the place.

These things thus accomplished, and all things changed and reformed within
The country about Croy reuolteth from the Turks in favor of Scanderbeg.
the town, the standards and ensigns of the Turks being either torn or
burnt wheresoever they were found, and all tokens of their remembrance being
utterly abolished and defaced: Castriot speedily dispatched some of the best
and most appara^^^t persons in the town throughout the next places, depending
of the jurisdiction of Croy, to acquaint them with all the success of his
dealings, and to make them all to take arms. But they needed neither messenger
nor solicitour: almost all of them were found ready in Arms, attending only
for some one to be their chief and leader to their resolute and courageous
stomachs. And therefore in a moment with a good and sufficient troop of
soldiers enrolled, passing from thence further on, they went forwards to
incite others to do as they had done. The Garrisons of the Turks with whom
they encountered, were all put to the sword, and when they had gathered on all
parts, such numbers of men as they thought sufficient, they took their way
back again to Croy: where Scanderbeg at the same hour, having made all his
companies to march together, by long iourney^, arrived at Dibria, where he
found Amese with an other good troop of soldiers, and all things in good
peace and quietness: For he had a good while since ^^ased and expelled from
thence the Garrison which the enemy had in that place. The old Governor of
Croy was in like case slain and all his family, without saving any one of
them, and his baggage ransacked. But now before all other matters, and ere he
pursued the conquest of the surplus of his estate; Castriot ordained two
thousand good men upon the Frontiers near to Sfetigrad, and the mountain
Moneo, as well to stop up and debar the issue of the enemies which should
be found within his province: as also for to fortify and defend the passages,
if any forces should happen to be sent thither by the Sultan; For on that side
was the way more at hand, and more frequented to come from Macedony and Thrace
into Epire. Himself with the rest of his troops, descended into base Dibria.
In this place Fortune presented unto him amongst others a worthy personage,
notable for the nobility of his blood, and for the haughtiness of his
courage* one Moses Moses Goleme
Goleme, by whom afterward Scanderbeg was aided as a principal companion,
both of his virtues and his travails in many high and difficult enterprises.
After this he visited the other places and fortresses near adjoining, the
which for that they neither were environed with walls, nor defended with any
great numbers of Turks, did give him (as you may imagine) easy access and
entry. From thenceforth all others which remained, of what age soever (as
having quitted all other care, and setting their minds on nothing but arms)
did wholly betake them selves to follow him, and called him the Protector of
their liberty. Liberty sounded in their mouths, and liberty was all their
hearts desired.

Whilst these things were thus in doing, many Turks (as I have heard) being
Scanderberg discomfiteth the Turks that make head against him in Epyr^.
rallied and assembled together out of diverse quarters, came in troop to
encounter the Christians, and to assay the hazard of fight with them: but the
victory was no less impossible to them, then it had been before to their
companions. The residue then knowing that it was bootlesse to attempt by force
to make any resistance against him, rendered themselves unto him: and casting
their arms down at his feet, they chose rather to make a trial of his
faith, then to feel the weight and puissance of his arm. To the intent
therefore, that by exercising rigor against persons disarmed, and who
submitted their necks under the yoke of his obeisance, he might not incur
the estimation of a man cruel and bloody minded, as also to draw unto him the
hearts and good will of his own subjects; by this humanity and dexterity of
his spirit, he referred them to the discretion of his soldiers, putting it in
their choice, and giving them Turks y^^lding themselves prisoners to Scanderbeg
are referred to the mercy of the soldiers, who put them to the sword.
the power either to pardon or to punish them. In vain were all prayers, and
in vain were all exclamations to persuade the courages of his men at arms,
whose ears were deaf, and would not hearken unto them: for but a very few
of them were reserved alive, and such as of whom they hoped to have great
ransomes. Scanderbeg did neither openly approve, nor in his heart did he
condemn this severity* yet it was that which he most desired, doing always
the like, to the intent he might altogether abolish the name of Turks out of
the prouice. For the residue of his affairs, because he could not be present
in all places, and for that the present occasions did require expedition and
extreme celeritie, he made a division of his troops. Some of the chiefest
young men he sent into diverse parts of the country here and there, to
dispatch that which remained: as to stir up their confederates, and to
prevent their enemies. Amese with about two hundred men was appointed to enter
within Croie: for he was certified that there were not sufficient forces to
guard the place: and yet was that to be regarded as their principal garrison.
Him self riding and posting into all quarters, sometimes on one side,
sometimes on another, and having a very careful eye to all occasions, he
employed and spent certain days for the recovery of some other places, and
to gain by his presence the amity and good affection of all parties.

There remained one only point, but of greater labor and difficulty then all
the Scanderbeg co^sulteth and provides for the recovery of the strong holds
and fortresses of Epyre from the Turks.
rest, and that was the subduing of the other towns: in the reducing of the
which to his obeisance consisted no small importance of the recovery of his
estate. B^^ for that they were all defended by good and strong garrisons of the
Sultan* it was advised that the fort ought to be enterprised with more puissant
and brauer forces: and with mature and ready deliberation. For this cause it
was concluded, that all those whom he had departed and divided into sundry
quarters, and upon diverse charges, should reenforce, and with as much speed
as might be, augment their bands with fresh supplies: and this done, they
should repair incontinently to Croy: Scanderbeg himself took his way thither
forthwith, and there continued attending their coming. Little distance of time
was there between his arrival and theirs, and the report hereof did draw
many others also into the action. For many noble and excellent Musache de
Angeline. Goique and George Stre^ses. Give Musache. Musache de Thopy the
husband of Mamisa. S^euen Cernouiche the husband of Mar^.
Captains, especially of his allies, came to seek him speedily and well
accompanied: amongst whom were Musache de Angeline (so called by the common
sort) being his Nephewe by his sister Angelina: and the two Streeses, Goique
and George brethren, his Nephews also by his sister Iella, and Gyne Musache
the husband of Vlaica: for John his father before his decease, had married all
his daughters to diverse Princes and great Lords of the country (excepting
Mamisa, who was given by Scanderbeg to Musache de Thopie, after the recovery
of his Realm, and the pacification of his estate.) Also from Steven Cernouiche
(who had espoused Mara and had by her many goodly children) he wanted not
ambassages to visit him, and to congratulate his good fortune and prosperity:
besides great succors that he sent him both of men and money. More then these
there did gather and assemble together from hour to hour, such a concourse of
people coming and resorting unto him, that they came at length to exceed the
number of 12000. men on his part. Castriot being notably encouraged by this
favor and good affection of his friends and subjects, and seeing them fully
pressed, and ready to march, he would not set forward, until he had in full
counsel deliberated upon his affairs, and that he had used some exhortation
unto his army. Thus therefore, or the like in effect, he spoke unto them.

I see not here (brave Captains and valiant soldiers) any new and unexpected
matter, The oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers.
nor more then I have heretofore in my mind coniectured, or that my hopes did
make promise of unto me, as often as I called to mind the ancient worthiness
of this Nation, and your singular deuoire toward my deceased father. For (be
it spoken without presumption) of my self I never doubted but that I should
always retain the same mind, and the self same love and affection to my
country: and that I should be always of like courage for the recovery of our
public liberty. In like manner your desires, your vows, and your wishes
were in effect together with mine jointly, but as one and the same thing. For
many times (whereof willingly and freely I do delight to make often
rehearsal) you did by all manners and means of affection and duty conuite me
unto this charge whilst I was yet abiding about Amurath. Peradventure in your
opinion I might seem to have been forgetful of my country, to have
forgotten mine own honor: and it might be, you thought me careless of our
deliverance and freedom, at such time as I sent you home to your houses
charged with sorrow, without any certain hope, without any appearance or
likelihoode of any generous or honorable thought seen or discerned in me.
Certainly (my good citizens) by that dissembled remissness and default of
mine, I provided both for your surety and mine own security: the estate of
our affairs being then of that quality and disposition, as they required
rather to be put in execution, then to be consulted on: besides that I have in
you a greater necessity rather of a bridle to restrain you, then of spurs
to prick you on to the recovery of your liberty. True it is that I concealed
from you my deliberations, but the cause why I so long forbear to make known
unto you my ready will and affection, was: not for that I either suspected
your loyalty, or that I had not sufficient knowledge of your good hearts (for
your selves were the first that entered into this dangerous course, and made me
acquainted with the secrets of your thoughts) but that which turned and
withdrew me from it, was the frailty of mortal men, and the inconstancy of
men's minds: the which, as in all other actions it is brittle, variable, and
inconsiderate: so must it be drawn with force and violence, and not guided by
any gentle entreatie and usage to seek and purchase liberty. For it is in
nothing stable and constant, neither does it observe any good order or
direction, and if there fall out any the least occasion or opportunity, which
may give any hope or plausibilitie for the purchasing thereof, or for the
attempting of it only: not a thousand swords, not a million of perils, not
manifest death and apparent hazard to loose both life and goods might have
diuerted and turned us from our purpose. But after that the matter once in
vain attempted, had made known your endeavors, either must you have endured a
most cruel punishment, or a bondage far more hard and intolerable, all hope
had been quite taken from you in time to come, and the opportunity once let
slip had been lost for ever after: so that this fact must have been
enterprised once for all, and if it had not succeeded at the first, all future
means to accomplish it had been utterly lost without any hope ever to return
again. For this cause (I will speak it freely) hardly durst I trust my self
with my own conceit of my enterprise, neither could I think my self assured
in that I had communicated it to my own thoughts: I mistrusted least my
tongue, impatient of a case so important, should discover it to the very walls
of my private chamber, witness thereof is Amese my Nephewe, my chiefest
friend and counselor at that time, and the faithful companion of my
travels, and some few besides him, whose faithful and forward assistance and
diligence did us good service in the execution of this action. For albeit we
lived together and familiarly (as it were) in one and the same course of life:
though we did eat at one and the same table, and though we did in a manner
(as it were) breath jointly with one and the same soul: nevertheless, neither
they nor any man alive did ever hear me mindful of my country, but only in
the war of Hungary: neither was there ever any man that heard me use any
speech, or to utter any one word at any time, which might argue me to be a
Christian or free man, till such time as I saw and perceived that I might
freely do it, and without all fear of danger. Well therefore might you (O
Albanians) have sought and found out some other person (as this Province was
never destitute of most excellent spirits) whom you might have made the
author of your liberty: and who might have more advanced your means and
courages thereunto: but it pleased you, and it may be, God would have it so,
that you should attend this your deliverance rather by me, though somewhat with
the latest* then to go seek out others, or by your own virtue to purchase and
obtain it. It was not any grief unto me, neither did the magnanimity of my
mind, albeit nourished to liberty, suppose the time any thing long or
tedious, to be held in so long subjection, and to have my courage kept under
by the villainous Barbarians: because I did still live in hope that you should
one day see me in the state wherein I now am. But why do I under your
patience usurp unto my self this name of a deliverer? It is not I that have
brought hither liberty unto you: but here have I found liberty, scarce had I
set my foot within your country, scarce had your ears heard the sound of my
name, but that all of you made haste to meet me; and you did in a manner
contend who should be the foremost to come unto me, no otherwise then as if you
had heard that your parents, your brethren, or your children had been revived
from death to life: and as if one had told you, that all the Gods ha^ been
arrived amongst you, you did even at the first prevent me with such a number
of good and officious regardes, and you did surcharge me with so many
demonstrations and arguments of your exceeding joy and gladness, that in my
opinion, the servitude and duty wherein I stand bounden unto you: is no less
then the liberty which I have gotten and purchased by you. It is not I that
have given you this Empire and Seigniorie: it is not I that have given you this
city, it is you that have given it unto me: it was not I that did put arms
into your hands, I found you ready in arms: I found you every where
bearing the show of liberty, in your hearts, in your countenance, in your
swords, and in your lances: and (as most loyal tutors and gardians ordained
by my father, you have put the Scepter into my hand with no less faith and
diligence, then as if you had kept and preserved it for me even till this day:
and you have brought me by your labor and carfulness into the possession of
my ancestors without any effusion of blood. Now therefore (in the name of God)
do you lead and conduct me to the recovery of the rest which is yet
remaining in the hand and possession of others. The greatest part, and in a
manner the whole work is already by you accomplished: Croy is recovered, and
the territory thereof wholly reduced under our obeisance: the Dybrians and all
the people in general are now united unto us, the name of the enemy is
banished and exiled out of the country, only the towns and strong holds do
rest unsubdued. If I consider their discommodities, how al places are either
taken by us, or besieged, and how nothing is left them but the enclosures of
their walls; I have hope of good success: but if I contemplate the
difficulty and strength of the places, and the force of the garrisons placed
in them by the Tyrant, it behooves us either to use some notable policy to
surprise them, or singular resolution and obstinacy in forcing them. But
hereof we shall better and more conveniently both consult and determine, when
we come upon the place in the face of the enemy, and our arms in hand, then
now that we are absent, and our minds altogether doubtful and unresolved.
Let us then march on and advance our ensigns speedily, let us take unto us the
courages of conquerours: fortune shall second our endeavors, which hitherto in
all our actions and in all places has singularly both accompanied and followed
us. Petrella is the place we must first set upon, not that the same is
inferior unto others in the strength and natural site thereof: but for that
(being nearer to this city) I have good hope that it will be the more
terrified by the fame and report of our good fortune which we have had at
Croie. Many are the spectacles which are presented before their eyes both of
your valor, and of their own calamity: it may happen that these things may
somewhat move and appale them, but if the conceit of these will not make them
to tremble: that which shall be wanting, assuredly our own resolution and
obstinacy must and shall supply. For this is one thing we must hold
resolutely and to build upon; That if this place be not carried and if we come
not therein to the end of our desires, we must never think to return any
more unto our houses. Let us try therefore by all means, by art, cunning,
and policy: by pains and travail, by patience, by the sword, and by gold
and silver, that by our success in this, we may find the beginning and
commencement of our good fortune: and we may make it the first good sign and
augurie of our victory. If it please God that we enter by force, we must
remove all pity and compassion of these obstinate Miscreantes, and we ought
rather to use the victory with all obstinacy and severity, for the greater
discouragement of those that shall rest unsubdued. If by composition and
without blood, we can by any means gain it, then is it requisite, that we
carry our selves toward them in all courtesy, and use them friendly and
favorably both in general and in particular: to the intent we may make
others the more tractable, and keep them from being too obstinate and
desperate.

The modesty of Scanderbeg by this Oration was principally made known, The
siege of Petrella.
and it was highly commended of all the army, neither was his advise and
counsel in any point, either changed or ill accepted. Moses with three
thousand horsemen, as vauntcurrers were sent before to Petrella, being followed
near at hand by Castriot, who led the residue of the forces. Some say that
he carried with him certain ordinance found within Croy, the sooner to
astonishe those within the town: But others do affirm, that the whole
service was enterprised and ended without any help of artillery at all. For
my part, if it be true as some say, that he reconquered all his estate within
the space of one month only: hardly can I believe that he would charge and
trouble himself with such a train of cariages, especially in the winter, when
all the ways were so hard frozen, and so full of yse, that neither horse nor
man could easily travel, but with great difficulty: though they had been
little or nothing at all laden and burdened. The army of the Albanoys being
arrived before the walls, and the companies quartered into diverse parts, the
town was quickly enuironned to the most advantage that might be devised: the
greater part of their forces were lodged in Tyranna the greater, so named by
reason of a lesser seated near Croye, for that the Tyranna the greater.
place thereabouts seemed most convenient and next at hand to encampe in. The
besiegers and the besieged were both of one mind: nevertheless Castriot
endeavored first of all by fair and courteous speeches, and by great and large
promises to sound their determination: and having made choice of one of his
own company, faithful and expert in this faculty (and whom he had brought
with him of the relics of the war of Hungary, into Epyre,) he sent him
unto the Composition offered to the garrison of Petrella.
Petrellians to offer them over and above the safety of their lives and
baggage, any other reasonable composition upon condition that they would
render up the place: and in case they would abide with him, and exchange both
their law, and their master together: or if they had rather to return to
their own Prince again, that he should promise all of them good store of
silver, besides rich gifts unto the Governor.

This soldier being of a quick spirit, and very subtell, with speeches
fit and appertinent to the purpose: finding this people already enclyning to
yield themselves, brought them to such reason as himself desired: and he
took not the beginning of his persuasion concerning Scanderbeg: but in regard
of the mishappes and great business of Amurath upon his discomfiture in
Hungary, and the conspiracy of the Christians against the Turks: And then
with a firm assurance he came to the instructions of his Captain often times
insinuating for a color into the minds of the hearers the prosperous fortune
of the garrison of Croye, and the miserable condition of the others who lay
dispersed throughout all the corners of the Province, and were left and
abandoned for food unto Wolves and dogs in the open fields. The truth of
these persuasions being in part heard, and in part seen with their own
eyes, they were soon and very easily believed, and the conditions were
accepted: that they should freely depart with their arms, bag and baggage:
as for other presents they regarded not. The Governor therefore appointed
certain to treat with Scanderbeg upon this point, Petrella yielded.
and to ratify the agreement with solemn oath. All matters being concluded
and ended, the Barbarians departed: there was a new garrison received within
Petrella, and the Prince of Albanie being mindful of his promise, after he
had honored and kindly entreated the enemies with good speeches, he furnished
them with money, horse, and victuals, and after sent Moses with certain
horsemen to conduct them to the frontiers of Epyre, for fear least they should
suffer some outrage by means of secret ambushmentes or open violence on one
side or other by his own followers, as diverse others had suffered the like
usage. Behold now in the discourse of these affairs, how the exceeding and
wonderful good fortune of this Chiefetaine does bewray it self no less then
his singular and excellent Scanderbeg most fortunate
virtue: and as God did succor him in preserving him from the trains of
Amurath, when he abode with him; In likecase I may justly auerre, that at the
very time of his settling and reestablishment in his Signiorie, he did not
only favor him, but did also fight for him. The town of Petrella, though
small in The situation of Petrella.
circuit, is notwithstanding inexpugnable by reason of her situation, both for
the nature of the place, and the height of the mountain, upon the top
whereof it is seated: besides it was abundantly provided of men, arms, and
munition. Nevertheless in the winter time (being a very hard and unfit season
for the siege of towns) it made so little resistance against him, that he
lost not in the winning thereof so much as one soldier, nor (as the common
saying is) a word wast or in vain. Herein also have we to commend his
singular patience which stood him to great purpose, and his bodily strength,
which was hardened to all travails, besides the infatigable and unwearied
vigor of his spirit, whereby he executed all offices and duties of charge,
with great promptness and celeritie. But to the matter: The fortress being
regayned, and all things necessary ordained and provided, he made not any
abode there, not so much as a day, an hour, or any moment of time: but at the
very instant trussing up his baggage, he led his forces against the other
towns so speedily, as though they had fled away before him. All places were
covered with snow, the faces of his men were even shronke with cold, their
hands frozen, their bodies benumbed and almost senseless: yet would he suffer
no man to enter into the town save only the garrison, neither would himself
set foot within it, to make others as it were ashamed by the example which
himself gave them. But one thing there is reported The properties of
Scanderbeg.
of him of far greater marvel, which I may not suffer to be forgotten, and
that is, that from the first day in which he entered into Epyre, even to the
perfect and full recovery of his estate: it was never known that he slept at
any time full two hours in a night, which may be reputed a miracle proper to
a body of some divine nature, and to a supernatural force and vigor. It may
well be that he attained to this patience of labor, and sufferance of
hardness, by a custom in often watching, by daily exercise, and by the
greatness of his forces. Some do hold (which the ancients also did excuse
in that great personage Papirius Cursor) that he was a great eater and drinker.
His use was in fight to combat with his arm bare and naked: and he took no
care either of heat or cold: a thing (it may be thought) more marvelous then
credible to all posterity. But let us now return from whence we are
digressed.

The next course taken was directly to Petralba, distant 30. miles from
Petrella, Petralba, and the description thereof.
and as much from Croy: and from Petrella to Croy was five and twenty miles.
This castle is in Emathia, upon the height of a mountain, the which besides
that it is of small entertainment, and not able to yield any great relief or
sustenance, can not be forced but by famine only. Moreover having the river of
Emathy near unto it which washes the foot of the mountain; it is the cause
that it yields unto the place no less ornament and beauty, then defense and
commodity. No sooner had the soldiers planted their ensigns before this
town, but that those which held it, did yield it up by one of their company,
whom they sent purposely to Scanderbeg: and they had the like conditions
granted and accorded unto them as had the Petrellians: and as inuiolablie were
they observed, certain of the Epyrots being assigned Petralba yielded.
them for a conuoy to their garrison at their dislodging from the town against
the violence of the country inhabitants. The town being furnished with all
things necessary, scant had they any leisure to breath themselves, but that
they marched on Stellusa and the descripion thereof.
with the like heat and fury to Stellusa: being distant from Petralba five
and twenty miles, from Petrella forty, and from Croy fifty, or thereabouts.
This little hamlet likewise, notwithstanding that it meriteth no great
commendation for her greatness, yet may it with good right be accounted of, by
reason of the natural fortification, and the pleasantnes thereof, and the
healthfulnes of the air. In the plain champion fields of Armathia, there
runs out a very high mountain seated as if it had been of purpose in the
midst of a valley, the top of the same being excellently well environed
with walls makes this castle. In this place our Epirots being arrived about
the sun setting, nothing was done for that day, but they attended the day
following. Early in the morning Castriot having sent his Heralds to the
besieged, they had nothing but words, neither was there any certain answer
given them: for the Barbarians being distracted into diverse opinions, it little
wanted but that they had fallen into a mutiny by reason of the obstinacy or
(to speak more properly) the firm resolution of the Governor; who
contradicted the others, upon the capitulation and agreement, persuading the
multitude to stand to their defense. Notwithstanding being vanquished by the
greater number, and yet not willing to accept the reasonable offers made him,
he was in the end constrained to receive a yoke far more disgratious, vile
and pitiful. For the soldiers being not able to dissuade him by words, they
Stellusa yield unto Scanderbeg by the ^ison, who ^ade their governor prisoner.
led him bound and pinioned with others of his faction unto Scanderbeg, and
contenting themselves with the same conditions as the former, they delivered
the place into his hands. Unto these more then to all the rest did the
Christians in all friendly sort use notable bounty and liberality. The
greater sort of them by reason of their crime and treachery committed against
Ottoman, would not return into their own country, but did still continue in
that place: of whom some were baptized, and the residue were left to their own
liberty and discretion to use their religion at their own choice and pleasure
not any one of them wanting maintenance and entertainment of the public and
common charge.

There remained yet vnrecouered the city of Sfetigrad, the which in the
Sclauonian Sfetigard besieged.
language signifies, the holy city. Thither therefore without any stay made
at Stellusa, the Prince of Epyre marched with his army making all the speed
that might be: this town being seated in the upper Dibria on the frontiers of
Albanie, upon an high mountain (as we have said also of the former) and it
stood aloft and very eminent as the nest of an Eagle, being well near as
great in compass as Stellusa. All Of the antiquity and original of the
chief towns of Epyre.
these places by us before mentioned had not any founders of any great
antiquity: for those which the ancient kings of Macedon and Epyre, and other
strange Princes had sometimes builded; as Meandria, Heraclia, Togla, Nicopolis,
Echina^, Leucas and certain others: they had been destroyed and razed by the
enemies of the Latins, or (as we may more fitly term them) the firebrandes
and plagues of mankind, the Goths and Gallogretians, at such time as they
invaded and overwhelmed the whole world. This was the reason that some of the
inhabitants of the country, and the particular Lords of places long time after
that being desirous to recule and reassemble in one the multitude most
miserably dispersed, and to reduce it into some form of a Province: for that
they knew it to be a matter of some difficulty to restore the relics and
ruins of those ancient towns; and if they were repaired, yet they would be
nevertheless still subject and exposed to all calamities and injuries of
enemies to come, as they had been in times past (they being for the most part
seated in the plain and open champion) they made choice therefore of the
tops of mountains for their seats and dwellings, and there did they build
these fortresses of so small and little compass: both because the site and
platform of the said mountains would not yield them any larger space or
circuit for their walls: and to the intent also they might the more easily be
The founda^^ of Croy.
defended when any enemies should come to assail them. And although that Croy
(as the capital and chief city of the realm) be far more beautiful and
larger, beyond all comparison, then all the others: nevertheless I find that
he which founded it was one named Charles, a man rich and very wealthy, of the
noble family of the Tholoyes, the which (at the same time that Scanderbeg did
enjoy the souereigntie of Epyre) had Scuria or Scodra. Tyranna, Duraz.
the Government, seigniorie, and lordshippe of Scuria or Scodra, which is a
part of the same Province sufficiently famous and notable, and lies between
Tyranna and Duraz.

As Soon as Castriot was come in sight of the enemy, after he had divided his
companies each in his quarter, and that he had set good watch and ward on all
parts of the Sfetigard summoned by Scanderbeg.
camp, he demanded parley with them of the town, and to provoke them the more
by examples, he made known and put them in mind from point to point of all
that he had done at Croie, Petrella, Petralba and Stellusa: and chiefly of his
liberality and gracious usage, and entreatie of the garrison of Stellusa: and
on the other side of the captivity of the governor of that place: whom they
should shortly see executed with others that were likewise obstinate. This
message did astonish every one of them, and above all, the captain of the
garrison: who having before his eyes the signs and marks of other men's
fortunes, durst not begin to declare and open his advise, nor yet to make
answer to the enemy, mistrusting the inconstancy of the common multitude, and
the mutable The oration of acommon soldier to the garrison of Sfetygrad
persuading them to hold good against Scanderbeg.
minds of the popular sort being for the most part nothing resolute. Wherefore
having honorably received and feasted the Herald: he addressed himself to his
soldiers with great modesty and began thus to speak unto them. How think
you valiant men and faithful soldiers? or what shall we say to this ambassade
of our enemy? Then one of the standers by (well perceiving the intent and
meaning of the Governor by his speeches) with his sword drawn, and shaking it
aloft as he held it in his hand: Captain (quoth he) seeing thou do term
us valiant and faithful: and do repute Scanderbeg for our enemy: this my
sword shall make answer for us all. What reason has any man to allege here
unto us so precisely and expressly that which has passed at Croy and at
Stellusa? do they think thereby to fear and terrify the courage of men free
and resolute? As great diversity as there is in the countenances of men, and
as different as are their visages: so great variety is there in the ability
and dexterity of their spirits. Each man is wise to himself: or each man is
foolish in his own actions. Neither the Petrellians, nor the Stellusians
received any laws of us, nor were they commanded by us: no more shall they
command or prescribe laws unto us. Let us take heed that the examples of
these slaves so base and infamous do not any way enter into our hearts so
valiant and generous. Courageous minds do highly disdain, not only in cases
that are shameful and reproachful, but even in honest actions, to imitate the
deeds of other persons: but each man lives after his own guise and
disposition. Let it be that the Governor of Stellusa should be sacrificed
before our eyes, and that his companions should be likewise massacred: what, do
you think that we also shall die in their bodies? or that our spirits shall be
extinguished in theirs? or is it likely that our blood can be spilt in the^? O
most happy rather are those bodies, and most venerable are their souls, who of
an excellent desire and affection to keep their faith and their liberty, have
equally contemned both gold, silver, the sword, and all things else which the
wretched nature and condition of mankind does either affect or is afraid of.
Return therefore messenger back again to our enemy, and carry this message
to thy General from a private soldier: tell him, That if this be his
intention, to impose upon us any terms of command, let him show us the
strength of his arm which as yet by men of courage is nothing feared nor
redoubted: it may be that if god be not for us, he may by force bring us in
subjection: but by persuasions of good words to draw us thereunto I am sure he
shall never do it. Moreover it seems in this case that your Scanderbeg is not
the man he is reported to be, namely: of a spirit gentle and courteous, ready
to pardon, and no less just to his enemies then to his own. For wherefore then
is the governor of Stellusa detained prisoner? who for his king, for his faith,
for his liberty: freely, valiantly, justly, and as became an honest man has
delivered his mind and opinion? wherefore is hereserued to be butchered by the
hands of the executioner? he has not deserved to be put to the sword nor to
suffer death: who so honorably has neglected his own safety, and sought the
hazard of death for the preservation of his liberty. The soldier was heard
with great admiration of all of them without the interruption of any person,
till he had ended his speech of his own accord and disposition. Incontinently
there began a great tumult of infinite people assembled round about him,
clattering their swords and bucklers together with great noise: and after this
sign and token followed a mighty clamor of such as did allow and approve his
discourse. The Turks Governor being the better assured and encouraged to see
his soldiers so well resolved, licenced the Christian Ambassador to depart:
and at the same instant bending all his care and study to provide for the sure
and safe keeping of the town, he commanded his soldiers to withdraw
themselves every one to his place, and where his deuoyre did call him. And
although order had been taken before in many points for the defense of the
wall: he altered notwithstanding the whole order and course thereof, and
disposed otherwise of it, either augmenting or changing things as need
required. Besides in the midst of his preparations he would ever and among
use exhortations and good encouragements: telling them, That they now gave
manifest proof and show of that whereof himself had ever The Governor of
Sfetigrade encorageth his soldiers seeing them resolute to stand to their
defense.
conceived a certain hope and assurance: that the examples of other places
which had so faintly and so cowardly yielded their necks to the yoke of the
enemy ought so much the more to increase their constancy and perseverance:
that they should think upon the great rewards and recompense prepared for them
by Amurath, if that they alone in all Epire, and in the midst of the
disloialtie and tretcherie of all others, did manfully stand to the defense of
the name, the liberty, and the empire of the Ottomans. On the other side if
want of courage or cowardice should carry them from regard of their duty,
they should have just occasion to expect from him far more rigorous and hard
entreaty then those of Petrella or Stellusa: for that the infidelity of the
others was in appearance more excusable, because they seeing themselves
besieged, and on all parts hard beset by the enemy, and in the very heart of
the enemies country, seemed to be even forced to render themselves: whereas
they, being but upon the limits and frontiers of the enemies dominions, and
being covered and protected with a place of greater strength and inpregnable,
could not allege those vain excuses and faint pretenses: especially for that
even in an instant they might have succors from their Prince, wherewith to make
their enemies forsake and raise their siege. A further comfort he gave the^ in
this also, that the winter (an unfit season to beleager any place) would make
their travels but short and of small continuance, for that he firmly believed,
when the enemies should have notice of their last resolution, they would not in
have make any attempt against them, nor be so foolish hardy as to think to
force their walls, but would retire themselves incontinently.

To these persuasions he added a deed of no less prudence and policy, and
that The governor of Sfetigrade puts all the Christians out of the town.
was (for fear of some treacherous mutiny and conspiracy) to put out of the
town all the Christians and ancient Citizens: of whom diverse had been suffered
to remain both there and in other towns by the Sultan, who had appointed the
suburbs for them to lodge in. These things thus prepared and disposed, they
within the town did resolutely attend the enemy. Whilst these things were in
doing, Scanderbeg having intelligence of the answer of the defendants, and the
artificial oration of the soldier, smiling at the conceit which he had
propounded, he ieasted at it in these terms. Behold (said he a brave soldier
if his deeds be answerable to his words: but God willing we will send him
also to keep company with those happy souls of the Stellusians. This said,
he caused the Governor and other prisoners to be brought before him, unto
whom, presenting the image of the crucifix, some were converted: Desdrot and
the residue were executed. When they came to consultation concerning Desdrot
the Governor of Stellusa executed.
the assailing of the town, there were three several opinions each differing
from other. The first was, that there ought not any attempt to be made at that
time against the city; for that all places were covered with frost and snow
in such sort that it made the mountains inaccessible, the soldier being hardly
able to keep his footing: for which cause, they held it much better to defer
the siege till the spring, by reason of the difficulties of the winter. Others
were of the mind that choice should be made of the Diversity of opinions
touching the siege of Sfetigrade.
best and most picked soldiers; that scaling ladders, artillery, and such
like instruments of assault should be provided, and that the obstinacy of the
defendants should be encountered with the like in the assailants: and that they
ought not to take any further time of breathing or delay upon the matter: after
the manner of small and silly birds, who use to attend the pleasantness and
temperature of the spring tide: that they ought in any case to beware how they
did give time to the enemy whereby they might be succored and relieved by
Amurath. But Moses (following the middle way and a mean course between both
the one and the other of these opinions) did conclude; that neither ought they
to attempt the assault of the town, nor yet to quit and abandon the siege: and
that this was to be done in an other manner and fashion then they had a duised,
and that was, that those forces (which they were to entertain and to keep in
a readiness upon the borders for other accidents and occurrencies, might also
serve and commodiously supply the necessities and wants of the camp: so as
the siege need not altogether to be broken up, but they might in the mean
time hold the enemy shut up within their hold: and so by little and little
prolong the service to a time of more opportunity, and so should they take from
them all leisure and means to take spirit and courage unto themselves. This
opinion being so indifferent was generally approved, and the execution thereof
committed unto the author thereof by Scanderbeg, who caused to come thither the
regiment of two thousand horse (which Moses left to keep the siege of
Sfetigrade.
was not far off) all well appointed and very willing to the service: and he
adioined unto them another thousand, leaving Moses with all these forces to
continue there before the fortress. The residue of the army with ensigns
displayed retired to Croie: there also a council being held, the opinions were
very different touching the sum and principal point of the whole war; the
most of them being very unwilling and greatly grieved and discontented to
quitte and leave their arms, but did perswad him to follow the victory, and
to invade the enemies country, and to win something from the Ottoman Empire.
Others did allege the time so contrary: the snow, ice, and raynie weather
so unpleasant and wearisome, that hardly could the soldiers endure them, and
therewith all the fields all parched and dried up with extreme cold so as
they would not be able to yield them any food or pasture for their horses.
Castriot assenting unto this latter opinion, to the intent they should see how
he tendered the safety and good of his soldiers, and that during the time of
this delaie he might the better intend to the fortifying of the country which
he had conquered, licensed all men to depart having first rendered thanks unto
his soldiers in this or the like language:

I know not (my companions) whether I should first or last praise and commend
in The oration of Scanderbeg unto his Chieftaines and soldiers.
you your virtue or your good fortune: this latter has been stirred up by the
former, and the former has succored and furthered the latter, and by her
industry and celerity (a thing in warfare very requisite) has made your
counsels and your endeavors all one and equal. For this cause, I have conceived
a most assured hope and presage of the future renown and glorious name of
Albanie, and of your honor and reputation. What is there wherein fortune can
hereafter refuse us? what is there but your patience will surmount and
compass? It is yet scant the thirteth day since that I (full of doubt and
uncertainty, and almost as one forgotten or unknown, by reason of my long
absence and pilgrimage) did happily arrive and set foot in this my native
country possessed with infidels and miscreants: of whom ( Sfetigrad excepted)
there is not now remaining in this province, neither the name, nor (if I may
so speak) not so much as the smell or odor. It is God to whom first and
before all we ought to render thanks, that had so blinded the eyes, and shut
up the understanding of our adversaries, causing them to deliver into our hands
the possession of so goodly and strong fortresses without any slaughter and
blooshed: next of all, your painful patience and sufferance has merited great
praise and commendations, which has despised so many discommodities presenting
themselves before you, as the menaces of the heavens, and the injury and
roughnes of the winter, and yet without turning your faces either one way or
other, till such time as your noble thoughts and desires long since conceived
in your hearts were fully satisfied and contented. I do well like and allow
your willing minds on both parties, as well those who judge it needful to
pursue our victory, as those also who think it good for a while to defer our
proceedings. For albeit there be nothing that should stay the man that is
magnanimious and valiant, but that virtue is accustomed to make her self ways
through fire and water (as the saying is) and through all places how soever
inaccessible: notwithstanding so long as no inconvenience do happen us by our
delay, you may well (without any wrong to your selves) have a care to your
bodies, and to consider that they are made of no other then a human
constitution. Retire you therefore victorious in a good and happy hour to
breath and refresh your selves: so shall you return more gallant, strong, and
lusty, in a season more temperate, to new services and expeditions: then shall
all of you have the free use and your full of wars, of labors and travels:
then shall you find a continual emploiment in arms: then shall you receive
largely the pay and wages which you have now so well deserved. For if Ottoman
sit still and do suffer us, to wage war without disturbance (as we have
begun already) then will we ouerrun, sack, burn the tirant his country, and
assay upon some of the neighbour-garrisons: if we can get to be masters of
them. But if the Sultan (which I think most likely) do proclaim war
against us, we will then advise our selves in the field by the countenance of
the enemy, how and in what manner we are to proceed, and to demean our
selves against him. Nevertheless howsoever we have occasion of service elsewhere,
it will behoue us to give the first attempt against Sfetigrad, and there to
employ and bend our first forces: For I hold it no less ignominious then
insufferable, that the infidels should continue there settled and unremoved to
the great reproach and dishonor of the Epirots. But it is necessary at this
time, that we temporise for a season, for fear least in attempting with too
great obstinacy the destruction and ruin of Sfetigrade: if the action should
fall out to be vain, and our attempt frustrate; we should retire with shame as
overcome and vanquished, and the enemy growing insolent would learn in a
small time to contemn and despise our forces: and so should we have to contend
not against men only, but even against the heavens. I have heard some ancient
Captains highly blamed, who by imprudence and want of experience in the art
military have lost goodly armies, more by the discommodities of things then by
the sword and force of the enemy. But beside all this, we have the feast of
the nativity of Christ our savior now at hand, and I am not of the mind that
any thing should be enterprised during these festiual days, nor that we ought
to deprive any of life in a time wherein we our selves have received life, and
were brought unto the light, but rather by our vows and daily prayers (I may
often repeat it) let us yield thanks unto God in all respects for our liberty,
for our estate and empire, for our wives, for our children, for our selves
recovered and freed from the bondage of our enemies. For my part (my good
friends) if there be any thing wherein I am not able to be thankful: I protest
unto you it is principally in that you have brought me these excellent gages of
so many gallant youths, and have honored me with the presence of so many
valiant and brave Captains, whose company is very agreeable and acceptable
unto me. My mind does promise it self great matters, and all great good hap
by the aid and assistance of such leaders. It is they who will give me the
means, themselves will give me the matter and occasion whereby one day I shall
be able to be thankful unto you according to the worthiness of your deserts.
At this time if there be any thing which may purchase you honor or reputation:
speak it freely, utter your thoughts and open your minds unto me. For I assure
you the acknowledgement of the greatness of your services, whereby I am bound
unto you, shall never fail nor be wanting in me.

The meaner sort of people, and some also of good quality, became so audatious
by reason of this speech, and so shamlesse, that (as if they had feared least
one of them should have stepped before the other to make their demaundes)
flocking together in great troops, and pressing near about him very rudely:
they were not ashamed to make diverse requests unto him according to their
several humors and affections, some craving to have the pay of horsemen, some
of footmen. Others desired money and horses; and some desired rents, revenues
and livings: and many who upon the change of the estate, had been spoiled of
their patrimony by the Turks to give it unto others, were importunate to be
restored unto their possessions. That which could conveniently be done and
without contention was liberally granted them: the rest which could not be
without the injury of some other, was referred till some further opportunity.
The Captains being dismissed, and Scanderbeg being entered into the town with
his own train (for that there were many which followed him, especially his
Nephews and the Princes of his blood.) The first thing that he did was, to
cause to be enrolled and admitted into the communion of the Christian faith, by
the Sacrament of holy Baptism, Amese and other of his companions Baptized.
Amese and some other of his companions, who came with him from Hungary, and a
great multitude also of Turks, which were yet remaining at Croy and at other
places: the same having been before left undone for the have which they had to
prosecute the war. The solemnity hereof being joined with the feast of
Christmas, was celebrated with great joy for many days together. The
inhabitants of the country both in public and in private did send him
according to the custom, many presents. Likewise the Princes his neighbors as
they had of late presented him with many convenient gifts fit for the wars,
so did they now give him the like of sundry sorts and kinds as fit ornaments
for the time of peace and public tranquillity: namely, rich furniture, and
other precious stuff for household: knowing well that in that estate of his
affairs, and in the time of warrelike tumults, he had brought nothing with him
but his arms.

This rest did not Castriot enjoy any time of long continuance, for even in the
chiefest The Turks in Epire assemble in arms against Moses.
time of the feast, and in their greatest mirth: behold there came news on a
sudden from Moses, how that the Turks of that province which had fled into the
places next adioining with a great troop of their confederats and no small
number of the common sort gathered together, were coming with all speed
possible to surprise him. Upon this occasion Scanderbeg himself hastened
presently away, because if it should happen that he going before should be
drawn far off by the enemy, he feared least either he should be constrained to
leave and abondon the enterprise of Sfetigrade: or if he did determine to
hazard the fight before the walls, he might be enclosed in the midst between
them and those of the town. But see now the occasion of all this tumult: these
relics of the Turks which were escaped out of the hands of our men, namely
the garriso^s of Petrella, Stellusa, and Petralba, (after that accident was
past) perceiving now by a kind of quietness and delay, that all troubles of war
did seem to be laid aside, and (as it were) asleep: and that Scanderbeg
having broken up his camp did keep his winter at Croy: and that Moses with his
troops did abide both for the guard of the frontiers and the siege of
Sfetigrad: they reallied and assembled themselves together near Alchria (a
little town under the obeisance Which is Pharsalia, famous by the overthrow of
the great T^mp^y.
of Ottoman in Macedony) and there having raised a great number of others, they
took their way with great speed directly toward Sfetigrade, pricked forward
as well with a desire of revenge, as also to abolish toward their lord and
master by some memorable act, their former default, and the ignominy of their
forepassed infidelity. Now albeit the prince of Albany did not much trouble
himself with this rumor, not believing that a number of such raskals could or
durst be so hardy as to enter within his borders: notwithstanding to the
intent he might not (at his first coming to the crown) commit any act or make
any show of negligence, nor be seen to abandon Moses in time of need, he
mounted suddenly on horseback accompanied with those who were with him at the
feast, and about one hundred horsemen of the town, and so went on to suppress
the suspicion of that danger which was the^ in growing and beginning. But the
matter fell not out to be such as needed either much to be doubted or any great
have or expedition to be made in it* For as soon as these gallants perceived
Castriot to approach, like as they did at the first set forward and advance
themselves in fear and doubt, so being as soon and easily chased away and
driven back, scant did they The Turks are chased away by the coming of
Scanderbeg.
leave any token or appearance of their tract or footsteps where they had
passed. This their folly notwithstanding procured them great mischief. For the
Duke of Albany being incensed in that they (having been the causers of this his
journey and disturbance) had by their sudden retreat robbed and deprived him
of so fit matter and occasion to purchase honor and commendation, with a
thousand horse which he took of the garrison with Moses, he made a rode over
all the country, and supposing by this damage, Scanderbeg makes a road into
the Turkish borders.
that he should draw forth the enemy and bring them to fight: he ran here and
there coursing and beating the champion and plain country: and like a mighty
flood and deluge that ouerwhelmeth all things, he destroyed, haried, and
spoiled all things and made an exceeding hauock in all places, in such sort,
that alluring and delighting the soldiers by the sweetness of prey and booty,
he largely provided and furnished them both with victuals and munition for the
residue of all the winter.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
A Murath mightily perplexed upon the revolt of Scanderbeg, and the overthrow
of his Army, concludes a peace with the Hungarians: and restores Misia to
the Despot. Scanderbeg enlarges his conquests and dominions, and preparing for
wars against the Turks, confederateth him self with his neighbors. The
princes of Epyre assemble in a general counsel and Parliament at Lissa, they
elect Scanderbeg both king of Epyre, and chief General of their forces.
Sfetigrade is yielded to Moses upon composition. Halie Bassa is sent with an
army of 40000. Turks against Scanderbeg: who meets with him, overcomes him
in a set battle, and then ouerrunneth and spoileth the Turkish Territories.
The peace concluded between Amurath and the Hungarians is broken by the
persuasions of Julian the Cardinal and Popes legate, who causes the king of
Hungary and the Christians, to enter into league against the Turks. The Navy
of the Christians seize upon the passages of the sea of Hellespont, to keep
Amurath from coming into Europe, who is busied in wars in Asia against the
king of Caramania or Cilicia. Vladislaus writes unto Scanderbeg, to join with
him in that war against Amurath. Scanderbeg marches with an Army of 30000.
to join with the Hungarians, but is hindered by the treachery of the Despot of
Misia. Amurath having corrupted certain merchants Genowaies for money to
transport his Army out of Asia, passes over into Europe, and marches against
the Christians, who encounter him near Varna. The famous battle of Varna
between Vladislaus and Amurath: wherein Vladislaus is slain, the Christians
discomfited, and Amurath obtains a bloody victory. Scanderbeg having burnt
and spoiled Misia in revenge of the Despot his infidelity, returns with his
Army into Albany.

NOw that we are come to the end of domestical matters, it is requisite that we
return to foreign affairs. When Ottoman was certified by true and certain
messages of the estate of Hungary, and how matters had passed in those
quarters, albeit Fame (which commonly is then most swift and speedy when it
brings the report of some mishappe and misaduenture) had before filled all
places with the uncertain rumor and tumult of fear and sorrow, yet when he
knew that the Bassa was defeated by the cunning and sleight of Scanderbeg, that
his* Army was discomfited, that there was scant left any one remaining: and
that the other was escaped safe and sound from the battle with Amese and others
his accomplices and adherents, and had suddenly possessed himself of Epyre;
Amurath I say, being touched to the quick, with deep and extreme grief for so
sorrowful and heavy news, was desirous by ready and diligent search and
enquiry, to be informed at large of the discourse of the whole action, and of
the revolt of the Albanois, and above all of that subtell and wily devise,
whereby he had gotten the false letters from the Secretary (for this no more
then the residue) could be long concealed from him. The marvel and
astonishment of a deed so audacious and desperate, and of a mischief, as it
fell out, so sudden and unexpected, did so bind up the use of his tongue, and
repressed his speech within him, that he was not able to speak any one word.
Notwithstanding after a while, the passion being somewhat moderated, and
coming to disgorge it self, and to break forth in words and speeches:
sometimes with threats and menaces, and sometimes with complaints and
exclamations, he did digest Amurath mightily perplexed upon the revolt of
Scanderbeg.
and swallow up with all possible and continual vehemence this his wrath and
indignation. Sometimes he would call him ungrateful Scanderbeg, sometimes
wicked and lewd Scanderbeg: then would he reproach and object unto him, that
he had now vomited forth the venom which had lain so long hidden in his
stomach, that he would long before have done the like, if he had had any
opportunity and fit occasion for a counsel so furious and execrable, but that
now he had espied the time to accomplish his wicked and unhappy enterprise with
most security and impunity: even in the midst of his most urgent affairs,
and when he saw him busied with matters of greatest weight and consequence,
whereof had ensued this his desaster and inconvenience in Hungary. Again, at
other times the subtle and cautelous tyrant, to the intent himself might be
the more pleasing, and better thought of by his subjects, and the other more
odious and hateful unto them, would openly question and demand with him self,
what reason although (said he) there be no reason for a man to do evil, should
move Scanderbeg to commit a crime so heinous and of such impiety? considering
that being with him he was become great, and not inferior to any both in
wealth and authority: and did as far as his heart could wish, enjoy the full
contentment of all things, which the covetous and insatiable mind of man could
imagine to clime and mount to, the supreme and highest degree of honor, as
well in war as in peace. That there was never any stranger which had
received so good entertainment and nouriture in his Court, neither had the
virtue of any Alien been so highly recompensed and so honorably rewarded.
Again in one and the same instant faining and dissembling to the vtmoste of
his power, and extreme coffeehouse and impatiency of grief and sorrow, he
would exalt the loialty of his princes and nobles, and would often exclaim,
and with a loud voice affirm, that this notwithstanding was a great good hap
and benefit both for him and for the Ottoman Empire, to see him self freed and
discharged from so weighty a burden as is domestical fraud and treason: that
it might be, he should have been surprised with some other poison far more
dangerous, and with some mischief of greater damage and inconvenience, if
this plague should have been suffered to grow or to continue in his house any
longer time: that nothing should now trouble his mind, and for this fact, he
doubted not but it would ask vengeance both of God and man: it being
impossible that he should suffer such a crime to remain unpunished, by which,
contrary to all right and equity, with so wicked and lewd a mind, he had
given that victory to the Christians in Hungary. For if he had had any cause
or occasion of revenge against him, or any color or pretense of just
coffeehouse, for the detayning of his patrimony from him, and the
inheritance of his fathers kingdom: what could his Army do to that, which
with all horror and cruelty he had brought to the Butchery, and had made it
neither more nor less, then as a sacrifice to the enemies? What had the
innocent blood of his subjects deserved? And in brief the poor Secretary,
whereof was he guilty that he might not escape the hands of this bloody
tormentor.

With such like discourses did the Sultan inflame the hearts of the Barbarians,
who were already of them selves sufficiently animated against him. But now
ridings being brought one still upon an other from the parts of Epyre, it did
more violently aggrauate and exasperate his sorrow at such time as it was
told him that Croie was taken by Scanderbeg, that he was possessed of the
other places and strong holds of like weight and consequence, that the
garrisons were slain and destroyed, and in brief, that the whole estate of
his ancestors was remitted and reduced under his power and government, with
the incredible favor and good liking of all the nation. Now albeit these
matters went near the heart of Ottoman, and did extremely grieve him; yet
having in a manner put all other things out of his mind, he bent and converted
all his thoughts to the war of Hungary. There was not any other matter or
subject of quarrel or enmity thought on, but that only was it which all men
did advise him to prosecute: and which both the desire of every man in
particular, and the public vows and prayers of all in general did earnestly
long and wish for. Yet did the diverse and variable opinions of the greatest
Captains, hold the mind of the old man in some doubt and suspense: some of
them who would not be persuaded there was any danger, Amurath consulteth with
his chiefetaines, whether it were more expedient to war upon Scanderbeg and the
Epirots, or upon the Hungarians.
till such time as they should see all subdued by Scanderbeg, were of this
mind; that it was best to march with all their forces against the Hungarians,
and that they ought not by faintness and cowardice to leave the event and
triumph of all the war, unto those who had vanquished and were conquerours
but in part only: and yet that neither had they had that advantage and
victory of their fellows, but only by the treason and felony of his own
followers. Furthermore that there was a great difference and no comparison to
be made between the force of one Bassa, with a few vauntcurrers of some twenty
thousand, in regard of all the puissaunce of Ottoman, and of the flower of Asia
and Europe, and the huge forces which the Sultan had for the guard of his
person, that these were not used nor accustomed to be overcome and conquered.
But others who did fear some greater ruin and mischief, were of a contrary
advise and opinion: affirming, that by how much the more the former did excuse
the misfortune of the Bassa, laying it upon the disloyalty of Scanderbeg: so
much the more was he to be blamed in regard of the small number of the
enemies; for that Huniades with less then the moity and one half of their
number, and without any blood of his soldiers, had given them so grievous a
check and discomfiture. And whereas they compared the Bassa his forces, to the
royal army, and the greatness of the imperial host which they commended so
highly: these on the contrary did allege and willed them to consider, the
greatness of the power of Vladislaus, with the renown of all Hungary and
Poland, besides the succors of the Italians guyded and conducted by Julian the
legate Apostolic, and the strength and forces of the Almaines: all which
had not as yet any thing entermedled in this war, but in very great
devotion did attend the occasion to enter into this war with their utmost
power and ability. Besides that, the Christians would not now in time of need
and extremity, leave or forsake the Despot, whose cause they had already so
favored and undertaken, till such time as they had fully enstalled and settled
him in the seat of his ancestors. And last of all, that Scanderbeg who had
newly declared him self for their enemy, was not to be despised and contemned,
that there was none of them but knew very well of what and how great spirit
and courage the man was, and with what good fortune (besides his singular
experience in the wars) he was ever accompanied. That having in a moment
extinguished the name of his adversaries, he was now reentred and repossessed
of all the estate of his father, without any charge or loss sustained: then
what would he do hereafter when he had settled and assured the affairs of
his Realm, and gained the hearts and good wills of his subjects? That it was
not to be doubted but he would stir up all Princes Christian to enter into
Arms, and would spare no travels, dangers, nor watchful labors to exhort and
wring from him daily, some part or piece of his Empire. That it would argue
great simplicity in the midst of so many enemies, both before and behind and
on all sides, and in the midst of so many forces, to look for any other,
then a very bad and most unfortunate issue. The wisest way therefore and most
expedient was, for once to yield unto Fortune, for fear least she did often
triumph over them, and to discover and lay open unto her one part of their
body, for the better covering and safety of that which was most subject and
exposed to her violence and assaults. That wars are guided rather by time,
then by force of arms, that they ought not to take it grievously to render
Misia unto the Despot, to the intent they might by that means purchase a little
leisure, and (as it were) a time of breathing from so many losses and damages
sustained by the wars. But why should they speak of rendering Misia, when
indeed it would be but lent him for a season? For at any time they might take
it back again, and with more ease and facility, then it should be yielded or
given unto them.

These considerations did greatly induce Amurath, being before in doubt and
uncertainty, Amurath resolves and concludes a peace with the Hungarians.
to allow of this advise and to do thereafter. Notwithstanding fearing to be
noted of pusillanimity and baseness of courage, if he should so soon and easily
condescend to this opinion: after he had precisely debated and discussed many
reasons and arguments both on the one part and the other; in the end he
yielded, and (as it were) by a kind of constraint subscribed to this last
conclusion. There was sent therefore an embassage to the Hungarians with offers
of Misia unto the Christians, and of truce for ten years, according as
themselves had demanded. Huniades who by reason of the weakness and infirmity
of the others, was in a manner left alone to manage all the affairs both of
peace and of war, perceiving his troops to be unfit for the wars, did not
refuse nor prolong the conditions offered by the Turks. There be some
notwithstanding who affirm, that that great lord and fauorit of Amurath who (as
we have said) was taken prisoner by Iancus, besides, the sum of 40000. crowns
agreed upon for his ran some, had advised to demand Misia of the Sultan,
assuring him that he would not refuse to grant any thing, by reason of the
discomfiture and overthrow of his Bassa. This being an especial proof
thereof, because in the preparation of his provisions for the wars, this word
had escaped from him amongst his familiars, that he would accord with the
Christians, the which he did accordingly with the ambassadors, Misia restored
to the Despot by Amurath.
whom Huniades sent unto him for the conclusion and ratificatio^ of the
agreement. Certain it is (as some say) that Amurath having had perfect notice
afterward, of the pitiful estate of our forces, it little wanted but he had
run mad for rage and anger: and he took such an extreme grief thereat, that
with the tears even trickling down his checkes, he lamented that a victory so
certain and assured, through a vain and foolish fear should escape him, and
be taken out of his hands.

Out of Albany all this while there came no new tidings, but only of certain
roades and false alarmes made upon the confines of the Turkish Empire, by
occasion whereof, Ottoman, both for the discommodity of the winter, and because
he had not yet well digested in his heart the peace of Hungary, who (as it was
reported) were daily as yet in arms, till the Despotte were fully and entirely
established in his estate, did put over the affairs of Epyre to another time
of more opportunity, and carried him self according to the time. For he was so
extremely perplexed and troubled in his thoughts, as he would daily walk up
and down by himself alone, imagining and devising from day to day upon the
variety and diversity of the causes and reasons which brought upon him, and
continued these new impediments and hinderaunces one after an other, to the
great good, welfare, and increase of the Christians affairs. The which (God be
praised) did daily grow better and better and were in good rest and happy
estate. For this is a thing most assured, that the roughness and intemperancy
of the cold and frosty weather, and the doubtful faith of the Hungarians, did
at that time yield our people great matter and cause of quiet. But the
affairs of Misia being now compounded and settled by the retrait of the
Hungarians, and the winter being past; what was it that then did hinder
Amurath, that he did not presently make show of his hatred against Scanderbeg,
and seek some notable kind of revenge upon him, in discharge of that malice,
which had so long boiled in his stomach? For before the thirtieth day of June,
there was no motion of any war against him. It may be peradventure that the
courage of the old man being abated by his loss in Hungary, he made more
reckonning and account of his case then of the loss of Epyre, or of all the
injuries received by Scanderbeg.

Castroit having taken his leave of Moses, returned from Dibria to Croie,
where, being exempted for a while from the trauelles of war (for the time
would not permit him otherwise) he spent the better part of the winter in
providing for the civil affairs of the weal public, and in ordering the
estate of particular occasions: whereupon 1443.
seeing the spring to approach and draw on, he took with him Amese, and some
few horse besides, and went to leauie certain forces, and having made a muster
and taken the field with six thousand men, he drew straight to Sfetigrade.
But what should he do there? As the place was nothing changed in difficulty,
no more was the enemy altered in obstinacy. Neither menaces nor fair words
would profit any thing. Artillery or other engines he had none, and if he
had brought any, it might be they had served somewhat to abash and terrify
them, but little or nothing would they have profited him for the recovery of the
place. On the other side to try his fortune with the manifest peril of his
men, and (as it were) with their certain and utter ruin, seemed unto him a
course of great rashness and temcrity. For this cause according to the best
counsel and opinion, whereunto the greater part also The country about
Sfetigrade spoiled and haried.
did advise him, leaving for a season all care of Sfetigrade, he marched else
where with his camp, with intent to amplify and enlarge the limittes and
borders of his dominions. But first of all he spoiled and destroyed all things
that bare fruit about the town: depriving the besieged of the benefit and
profit of all the champion, and not leaving them any thing, but the only bare
and naked enclosure of their walls. It is reported notwithstanding, that
certain of the inhabitauntes of Sfetigrade, Citizens of Sfetigrade pray
Scanderbeg not to spoil^ the country.
or of them which remained in the suburbs, came secretly unto Scanderbeg,
praying him in regard of their services past in the time of John his father,
that he would not utterly destroy all things in this order, having not deserved
it at his hands, but that he would cause to cease this spoil and havoc,
whereby in effect, they and not the enemy should be utterly deprived of all
sustenaunce and nouriture: That he had both leisure and other means sufficient
to chastise the garrison of the Turks, and to chase and disnest them out of
their hold: and that for their parts, they would most willingly watch for
some opportunity, and give aid and furtheraunce to this affair, if they saw
any hope (were it never so small) to effect it. Castroit took pleasure to
hearken unto them, and he condescended to their request. For what reason had
he to doubt either of men that were Christians, or of those who had been the
ancient subjects of his ancestors? For this cause, commanding his ensigns
to march, he turned his fury and rigor to other places.

There was in this province a goodly open and large country and circuit of
ground, maruellously pleasant, and wonderfully well peopled, with many towns
and boroughes also, very plentifully inhabited. Those of the country do call
it Moerea, Moerea won and possessed by Scanderbeg.
and it lies toward the Tribullians. Thitherwardes Scanderbeg leading his
army, did add the same to his dominion: passing beyond the bounds whereof
John his father was possessed. There was not any where an enemy to be found in
all the country: for the Turks before that time either had been expelled, or
had willingly avoided and forsaken those parts. The inhabitaunts and the
residue of the nation Albanois, having quickly lost the memory and
remembrance of Amurath, had enrolled them selves without being sought unto
under Scanderbeg: and they marched under his ensigns, and under the Eagles in
times past well known unto them. For Scanderbeg his Arms.
in his standards which were Guelles, he bore an Eagle with two heads sable.
These being the ancient arms of his family. From Mocrea passing on from place
to place, sometime showing him self gracious and full of courtesy, and
sometimes fierce and terrible, he enlarged his conquestes from day to day, and
made them far more rich and ample: and giving order and directions
continually for some one Indu(...) prude^^e of Scanderbeg in providing for the
safety and defense of his dominions.
thing or other, he would appoint guardes upon the passages, and make
provisions for the garrisons. Oftentimes coming and going to Croy, he would
visit all other places of importance, and be ever riding and coursing here and
there in and out continually: seldom or never was he idle, but he would be
present every where, and there was no place or corner but he took diligent and
special notice of, mountains, hills, forrestes, thickets, caves, dens, and
secret lurking holes. All his thoughts and devise was upon the wars, to
see before hand how he might one day with little loss of his men, make head
against an enemy so puissant and mighty. That little leisure that was left him,
was wholly spent in daily roades and invasions to spoil and wast the territory
of the Pagans. He hated nothing so much, as that his soldiers An Army not to
continue long in a place.
should corrupt them selves with idleness, having this sentence of Fabius
Maximus daily in his mouth, that it was not good for an Army to continue long
in one place, but that the often change and shifting of their place and camp,
was much more laudable, and would enable and make them far better disposed to
all the actions and services Military.

These things could not be so handled, but that Amurath must needs have
knowledge of them: for by this time there came unto him many messengers from
Pharsalia, and other parts of Macedonie: so as all parts of his palace were
filled up with outcries and clamours: many reports being brought, and importing
that all was lost and utterly desolate; that Scanderbeg having obtained the
possession of infinite places, did daily pursue his conquests with his
accustomed fierceness and cruelty. That long since both the one and the other
Dibria had willingly rendered them selves to his devotion, killing with their
proper hands the Turkish garrisons, or delivering them bound and fettered to
their new Lord and master. These marches both of the nether and upper Dibria
did of old appertain to John Castriot: but he (as has been said) being
oppressed by Amurath, and by means of the peace which he demanded, had given
him his own children in hostage, and had resigned unto him both those
provinces, which he quitted unto him upon some other conditions. Now these
curriers coming (as is said) to the court of Amurath, declared, that by means
of the revolt of the Dibrians, the Christians would soon and easily come to be
masters of Sfetigrade: the which being seated in the upper Dibria, where all
was at their devotion, did not now know from thence forward where to find or
have any thing more or less for the maintenance of the war, or for the
nouriture of his camp. That Mo^rea and many other places had made themselves a
party with them, which, although it had never until that day acknowledged the
house of Castriot for their governor, yet either through the rebellion of the
inhabitants, or for fear, or by constraint of mischiefs endured, was now
become subject unto Scanderbeg. These aduertisements did stir up and incite
the tyrant to take arms, more of necessity then of choler. Upon Amurath
leuieth an army against Scanderbeg.
this occasion having with great diligence assembled his Counsel, and the
matter fully concluded on, he commanded a puissant army to be levied: by the
which without the adventure or loss of any thing, he thought utterly to
abolish and extinguish the name of Scanderbeg, and to take vengeance of the
revolt of the Albanois, and of so many injuries which he had offered him.

Castriot in like manner being certified of Amurath his resolution, not only by
persons unknown and strangers unto him (as in such changes there do never want
men of that sort) but by some also who were his friends, of whom he had as yet
good store about Amurath, made and procured long before, and whom the change of
fortune had no whit altered or changed. He (I say) as he had showed himself of
an incomparable audacitie and confidence in exposing himself to all perils: so
did he even in the midst of them use singular prudence, sage advise, and
counsel. For considering the greatness and importance of his conceits, and
the weighty burden which he had taken upon his shoulders, and having some
doubt and mistrust in him self, that he should not be of sufficient ability
to sustain and bear it out for so long a time, nor yet be able to renew his
forces so often as the greatness of those wars would rerequire: which he
foresaw (as a true Prophet) even within the entrails of Epire, and whereof he
did but attend the coming every hour; he determined therefore to Confederacy
of Castriot purposed with his neighbors, for the resisting of the Turks
innasions.
seek out some strange and foreign succors, by means whereof he might more
surely order his own affairs, and by the aid of many might be the better
able to repel and keep off the force and violence of the tempest that did so
threaten him. First of all therefore he resolved to enter into confederacy,
and into some strict and perpetual kind of alliance with the Princes and great
Lords his neighbors, both Albanois and * Illyrians. A thing indeed very
difficult to be effected, for that commonly men are These are the Sclauonians.
naturally more prone and apt to dissension and discord, then to amity and
concord. Yet did this fall out unto him very facile and easy, as both the
issue and the discourse of the matter will make it manifest.

But for that this treaty could not commodiously be handled with every one in
particular, neither by letters, nor messengers, nor by him self in person: it
was therefore thought best, that a Diet and general assembly of all of them
should be assigned and appointed in some place within the circuit of Albany;
to the intent, that both the presence of the parties meeting together, and
their voices and opinions being reported and made known in common amongst them
all, it might be the better known by the advice of the whole counsel, what
course was most meet and expedient to be taken. In the choice of the place
also he used no less prudence and modesty: for none of all those Princes were
summoned to repair to Croie, for fear least it should be thought he would
stand too much upon his greatness, and would arrogate to him self the
pre-eminence in their assembly: as also to avoid all occasion of mistrust:
neither did he conuite them to Apollonia, Diana, Zabiach, or any other town
appertaining to the name of Albanie: to the intent he might take from them all
matter of envy, backwardness, or delay, which might have grown if they had
been drawn against their wills out of their own territories: or else for fear
that they should disdain to repair to any place belonging to a stranger:
because it might be they esteemed their own towns of as much if not of more
worthiness then those of others. As there is a kind of people, who do
prefer and prize any thing of their own, far before the like of other
men's. But there was the town* Lissa (we ordinarily call it Alessia) distant
somewhat more then two and twenty miles from Croy, Lissa or Alessia. Scodra,
at this present called Scutari.
and situated between that and* Scodra. This place was thought not unfit for
this convocation, both by reason of the conueniencie and commodity thereof, as
also in respect of the government and dominion of the Venetians, being no
less gentle and gracious, then pleasing and agreeable to their good likings:
for this town was of their appurtenances.

Thus were messengers dispatched on all parts to call them together, and to
signify A general parliament or assembly summoned of all the princes and
Estates of Epire.
unto them the days and the place wherein they should assemble. Of those which
were assigned, there was not any one that was unwilling or negligent in
coming: not one of them made any excuses or delays, neither was there any
business (as it happened) either public or particular which caused any of
them to fail or to stay away: but all of them hastened thither with exceeding
ready and very willing minds. This was an evident testimony what manner of
men they would show them selves in time to come in other the accidents and
occurrences of war. But here it shall not be amiss for the readers a little
to retire them selves, and that the gravity of this history be a while
discontinued, and my self permitted a little to wander and to digress
somewhat from my purpose: for as much as my intent is to number up (it may be
somewhat too curiously) and by roll (as it were) to register the names of those
persons, who did with their presence then honor that assembly and convocation:
or rather the dignity and reputation of Epire: to the intent the posterity
may have cause both to grieve and to marvel at the calamity of the estate of
Albanie, and at their vile and miserable condition, which shortly after came
upon them so suddenly, the image and representation of which things may serve
in time to come for their instruction. How beit that peradventure nothing ought
to be taken as ill spoken or ill done, which a man does with a good intent of
service and piety toward his country, his friends and fellow citizens:
Notwithstanding before I come to recite the names of those who assisted this
assembly, I hold it not inconvenient likewise to deliver in this discourse,
from whence the nation of the Epirots or Albanois has derived his original.

Some say that the Epirots (who are also called Albanois) did in times past
descend The original of the Albanois. This is Cumania subject to the
Tartarian. Straho. Pius 2. Papa.
of the noble and ancient people and inhabitants of Italy: who in like
manner did possess a certain portion and part of Colchida. From whence if any
do allege, that the language of Epire or Albanie is derived, it may be that
he is not deceived in this opinion; seeing that we find it written in Strabo:
that there be in that place used sixteen sundry languages: and Pope Pius the
second, a man singularly learned both in divine and human studies, and some
other modern writers, (who have followed Trogus Pompeius) are well near of
the same opinion. For Trogus Pompeius Trogus Pompeius.
affirms: that the offspring and beginning of the Albanois was from Italy,
and he assures us, that the Albanians did follow Hercules at his departure out
of Italy (after he had for a space kept those heardes and troops of cattle,
which he took from Gerion within the mount Alban:) and that they were led
thence by him into this Province, being allured thither by the fertility of the
herbage and pastures. Of these then are issued the Albaneses or Epirots, of
whom a part made their aboade Peloponnesus or Mor^a.
in Peloponnesus (which at this present is called Morea,) and part of them
seated them selves in Macedony, or rather in Albany or Epire. Now of these at
this time was Scanderbeg the chief. A prince courageous and invincible, who in
our age Scanderbeg the chief of the Princes and estates of Epire^ his deserts.
had great affairs, and kept continual wars against the infidels for the
name of Jesus Christ, and did spend almost all his life in arms, fighting for
the maintenance of the Catholic faith: and many a time did he vanquish and
discomfite in open field and plain battle, even with very small forces, many
and exceeding great armies of the Turks, at the sight and presence of whom,
the troops of the Barbarians did scarce dare to present them selves. In sum,
by him only was this province for a time retained in their obedience to the
Gospel of the Son of God.

But return we now again to the drift of our discourse. Ariamnites Thopia A
Catalogue of the Princes of Albany assembled in counsel with Scanderbeg.
Goleme, a man of singular renown and authority, both for the continual and
ancient nobility of his blood, as also for his notable practice and science
Military; and for the majesty and venerable regard of his countenance (a
thing whereof the common sort make no mean reckoning) being accompanied with a
gallant and goodly troop of men both horse and foot, prevented all others by
his great speed Ariamnites Thopia Tributarie to Amurath reuolteth ^r^ him and
cleaves to Scanderbeg.
and diligence, and was the first that arrived thither to this Diet. This man
in former times, having been ill handled by the arms of Amurath, had submitted
him self to his subjection, and had yielded to pay him such tribute as it
pleased the Turk to impose upon him. But at this time taking courage a fresh,
upon the occasion now offered: bravely and courageously he made known the
hatred and coffeehouse erst conceived in his mind, and the courage of his
heart, which he had worthily retained and preserved. And there was no man that
was more forward, or that put too his helping hand, or that did conspire
against the Barbarians with so great ardour and vehemency as he did for the
common liberty. Neither did he want any means to work the contentment of
this his desire, and to satisfy his mind in that behalf. And it seemed in
effect that his forces linckt and conjoined with the others, had been all
sufficient to restore and to revive the good fortune of Epire: them selves
alone having once been of ability in a full and entire The strength, puissance
and acts of Ariamnites. River of A^as or Vauisse. Gulf of Ambrasia.
war, to make head and to resist against the Sultan. True it is, that his
puissance, power, and seigniorie did reach from the farther side of the river
of Aoe, or AEas: (howbeit that the people of the country do give it another
name, calling it Vauissa) unto the gulf of Ambrasia, being in a manner all
alongest the sea coasts of Epire. This is that Ariamnites which has been
known by the surname of Great amongst the Macedonians and Albanians. For he
did many notable and memorable acts for the Gospel and faith of Jesus Christ
against the Turks, giving them diverse, and most shameful overthrows and
discomfitures: and as long as he lived he did not cease to persecute them. He
encountered Mahomet their sovereign Prince and Emperor in the invasion which
he made upon Albanie, and overthrew him, and plagued him most shamefully. For,
assayling him within his camp, he gained and won his ensigns which he had
within his own tent and pauillion, forcing him to fly away and to forsake
that Province with notable damage and ignominy. Andrew Th^py. Comine.
Musache. Tanuse. Tire the lesser* Epidamne o^ Duras, once Dirrachium.
Cymerians. Vl^xians. Corson. Cymerot^*
Next to him came Andrew Thopie, a man famous for his race and valor, and of
no less reverence for his age, having there with him his two sons, Comyne
and Musach, and Tanuse his nephewe: whose ancestors (as we have before
written) were the first founders of Croy and Petrella. Their forces in like
case were brave and goodly: and their Dominion was of as fair a circuit in
Epire between Tire the lesser and Epidamne, which is Duras. And besides these
places and demaines (which having lost their ancient and first names, are by
the inhabitants called Scuria, Musachiene, Cherabie, and Farca.) They were
acknowledged also for Sovereign Lords of the Cymerians and Vlixians. This
country is mountainous, and right against Corfou. It is inhabited with a
people fierce and unconquerable, if not warlike and martial, (we call them
commonly the Cymerots.) These have not commonly the assurance and defense of
any other succors by any matter, means, or art, but only the natural
strength and fortification of the places themselves. This people has ever and
with good success contemned the insolency of the Turks: and after the death
of Scanderbeg, when Albanie was subjected and subdued, with a singular liberty
and freedom of nature, they lived long time without the knowledge of any
foreign yoke: and at this time (as I understand) having voluntarily called
unto them and made choice of certain garrisons and companies of Spaniards out
of Apulia, they have betaken them selves to the obedience of one chief Lord:
and they do live in a most excellent form of policy. George the nephewe of
George Streese John and Boy Streese.
Streese, and the son of Balsee was there in company also: John and Boy his
brethren being left at home, because their young years did make them unable
for the wars, and unfit to be called to counsel. Between Croie and Lissa
lay the territory that these did enjoy, in a soil both large and rich, and
no less pleasant and delightful. From the Musachees (for so is the family
surnamed) there came The family of the Musachees.
very many; all which, as they were of one and the same disposition, and of a
like conformity of mind with Scanderbeg: so did not they hold their estate
and signiorie any way separated or divided, but jointly and together with him.
Over and besides these, there presented them selves the two magnanimous and
valiant Princes Nicholas and Paul Ducagin, each of them in arms and well
appointed: but Nicholas and Paul Ducagine. Zadr^me.
Paul was known above the rest by a certain singular observance of religion.
They were Lords of a country which the Epirotes call the upper Zadrime, on
the other side of the river of Dryne, even to the higher Misia: a region very
spacious and fertile, watered with fountains and most wholesome brooks, and
inhabited with a people most fierce and warlike. In this place are to be seen
many tokens and shows of antiquity, towns, buildings, and famous temples,
many of which are now defaced, and thrown down even with the ground, and
ruinated from the top to the very bottom. And more then that, within the
heart of this region do remain and appear certain monuments of marble, upon
which might be read the names of many Emperors both Romans and others: and
amongst them there were some marks also or testimonies that S. Paul the
Apostle had there preached the law of the Son of God unto that people.

Thither also came in like manner Luke Zachary, who afterward followed the
Le^^y or Luke Zachary.
part of Scanderbeg with the like course of felicity and good fortune, and
with a singular good will and affection did persevere therein even to the end.
This man being worthy of a greater heritage, was possessed of a reasonable
large portion of ground within the upper Zadrime, together with the town of
Daina founded by his auncesters, Dayna.
and descended unto him by right of succession. This is a pretty little town
planted upon an high mountain, as are almost all the towns of Epire: yet is
the territory of it fat and rich, of an excellent good air and healthful:
full of venison and foul, and well replenished with all kind of trees and
fruits. The pleasant river of Dryne makes his course on that part which lies
toward the West. The which The river Drine or Drin^n.
prerogatives and excellencies of that place have been celebrated by the
ancient writers, with a kind of contention, and with so great diligence and
perfection, that there is not almost left for them which come after, any
matter worthy the speaking of. Nevertheless although many things at this day
(as it falls out) have disguised and blemished the former grace and beauty
of it, yet peradventure it shall not be amiss if I also for my part do at
this time in a word or two entreat of it. The flood of Dryne (as some say)
does divide Epire from Dalmatia and Sclauonie or Illiria: and Epire divided
from Dalmatia and Slauome by the river of Dryne. The gulf of Rizique or
Catarra Acrolissa. The Island of Lassa.
is no whit inferior in greatness to the famous river of Po in Italy. It
has his source or head amongst the peoples of Macedonie toward the North,
and with a swift course does water the walls of Lissa: and then within a while
entermingling her streams with the waves of the sea, it does discharge it
self into the Adriatique sea, or gulf of Rizique, or Catarrea, joining near
to Acrolissa, where also it embraces an Island being some seven miles in
circuit, which at this present retayneth the name of Lissa; by reason that the
town of Lissa (which in ancient time was seated on the other side or bancke
of the river) having been burnt and destroyed by the Turks: and the multitude
which inhabited the same, making their retraite thither, did in this Island
make their continual abode, as in a place of greater suertie, which was the
occasion that together with them selves, they transported thither also the name
of their old town and city. Over and besides these, there was also in the
same Otherwise Peter Span.
assembly, Peter Spaniard, a Prince of happy fortune, and a most happy father
of many goodly children: for he had there with him of his sons, Alexia,
Bosdaira, Vroa, and Mirqua: each of them being of equal height and of a goodly
stature all alike, and wonderfully resembling each other, both in conditions
and natural disposition. In this company also was Lech or Luke Dusman, and
Peter, with other petty Princes Lech or Luke Dusman.
their neighbors, under whose command and obedience were the Peonians and
upper Pelagonians even unto Misia: and the Sardoicians, besides certain small
villages and fortresses near about Driuasta and Balesia. Not long after these,
thither came Dryuasta. Balesia. Steven Zernouich, George and John. Xabiac.
Falcon. Sclauonie, or of old Liburnia. The Venetians
also Steven Zernouich with George and John his sons, worthy children of so
great and honorable a person, and of so worthy a father: to him did
appertain the strong and well fortified towns of Xabiac and Falcon, with
their territories most large and spacious, lying in Sclauony or Liburnia. The
most noble and ancient common weal of the Venetians did not make any default,
but did make their appearance also: for under their Empire, besides the city of
Scodra, were many towns of great fame and renown, and a good part of Epyre.
To conclude, this great company did draw thither with them others of the most
principal amongst the youth and flower of all those quarters, who as well for
their own particular interest, as for the public and common good, did come
to offer their persons and best means against the Turks, for the honor, the
safety, and the preservation of their country.

Now come I to the Oration of Scanderbeg, the which when those (who were called
to the counsel, were gathered together in the great Church at Lissa: he began
in this manner. I would to God (fathers and princes most debonaire and
religious) Oration of Scanderbeg to the Princes of Epyre, in the assembly at
Lissa.
that the credulity and light belief of us Christians, would once draw to an
end, and that we would once wax weary of the faithlesnesse of the Ottomans, or
to speak playner, that their infidelity more then barbarous, might from
henceforth be made open and manifest unto us. For as concerning my self, being
at this day peradventure ill thought of, as the motive and occasion of these
new troubles: neither would I have disturbed the tranquillity of this estate,
nor have solicited you to expose your lives to the inconveniences of arms,
nor to the last and utmost extremity of all things: were it not, that John my
father (whom God pardon) a Prince in other things well advised, had not given
too too much credit to the fair words and speeches of this perjured and
disloyal Amurath, at that time, when under the pretense of a deadly peace he
obtained of him for pledges (as liberally as he demanded them) his own proper
children in hostage. But wherefore do I complain me of my father? This error
and this desteny is common unto all Princes Christian. What shall I say of the
Greeks, the Misiaus, and others of our faith and profession? This over great
facility of crediting and believing has without doubt ruinated and destroyed
all of them: in such sort that on the tyrants part, they have nothing at all
left them, but the repentance of their simplicity and oversight. Nevertheless
whilst I power forth these my plaints, and do in my mind carefully repeat
these cautels and treasons of Ottoman: yet withal as long a I do contemplate
and cast my thoughts upon you, and do consider your prudence, and the unity of
your minds and affections, this does greatly strengthen me, and bids me be
of a good hope, seeing that hardly or never he has subdued or destroyed any
people either nation, but* by deceit and fraud only, or by their proper over
easy belief and credence, or by their civil dissentions and domestical
hatreds. Go to now: let any man here tell me, whether Ottoman did ever by his
prowess atchieue any great conquests, and whether the innumerable provinces
and infinite realms which in our time he has gotten and purchased, have been
annexed unto his crown by force of his arms and puissance: let them account
and reckon up the number of those his triumphs and victories. Shall Epire
then, being so invincible, so flourishing in arms, so replenished with
Princes, with valiant Captains, with so many warlike and stout peoples, so
united and agreeing within themselves; shall Epire I say, only through this
our credulity be made the subject of his outrage? How greatly the Barbarian
does estimate and redoubt your virtue, I my self can give you most certain
and assured testimony: even I, who have lived with him many years both in
war and in peace. They would not even now enterprise nor undertake the war
against you, but that very necessity does constrain them to it. Now what
good or great matter can be effected or executed by a courage that is forced
and violently drawn unto it, any brave and resolute soldier will soon tell
us. But howsoever this affection and matter of so just grief, do carry me away
in speaking unto you, yet I am not ignorant, but that there be many who having
been now of a long time accustomed to a peace (though smally honorable) will be
highly aggrieued and discontented when they shall see themselves invited by me
to participate with the miseries and mischiefs of war: and they will not
stick to say; That whatsoever be the fortune and success of our arms, yet
nothing can be done without the expense and loss of their blood. In like case
me thinks I see how the mothers will be discomforted, when they shall see
their children sent to the dangers and hazardes of the wars: the wives will
be heard to lament with great grief and sorrow, for the care which they have
of their husbands safety: and the very infants left at home in their houses,
will seem to cry, for fear they should be made orphans: all men generally
will call me cruel, and will detest me (which I can not think without horror)
as a new author of wars, of perils, and of bloodshed and murder: whereas
they ought rather (be it spoken without vaunting) to name me the Occasioner and
preserver of their liberty. But neither am I so careless of the public and
common good, nor so careful of mine own private profit and interest, that I
can endure to hear so many complaints aamongst you, nor to see so many
mischiefs light upon you all in common: but that if this my counsel (most
worthy Princes and Lords) seem not good and to your liking: or if this
occasion of entering into arms be not found profitable for the weal public:
or be not held honorable by all of you, I will be ready and willing to yield
up unto Amurath (if you think it good) both Croye, and all the relics of
this unfortunate Realm and Kingdom, desiring much rather with the particular
danger of mine own life, to provide for your surety, then to reign with the
public detriment and damage of all of you. One thing only there is, the
grief whereof does greatly press me: and that is, the miserable condition of
my people, and the innocent blood of my citizens, whom my heart can not
suffer to be offered up as a sacrifice to the enemy without a chief, without a
governor: seeing their faith and loyalty presents it self daily to my
remembrance, of the which at the time of my restitution into this kingdom,
even of late they have left sufficient and good proof unto all ages that shall
succeed hereafter. But what? O immortal God! (give me leave my lords to
speak freely unto you) Is there any reason that your fellow citizen and
country man should still abide with the tirant, in the midst of so many
dangers and ever dwell in so damned a religion, as a continual fugitive from
his native country, rather then to spend the rest of his life in Epire, in the
place of his nativity, in the society of Christians, and in the midst of
you his own country men? Or is it possible that I should be in Epire, and
there to see and endure hereafter, that the seat of my ancestors, the scepter
of my father, our sepulchers, our temples, and especially (if I may so speak)
that our Gods should any longer remain under the tirannie of the circumcised
miscreants? alas, does it seem a small thing to you, that I have even until
this day seen their hands filled with the blood of my subjects: that I have
dwelt so long with a wicked and unmerciful bloudsucker, and have spent well
near all the best and most pleasant season of my age in manifest and certain
danger of my life? From henceforth let us (seeing God has so permitted it) let
us I say, be ashamed of our condition. It is a great shame and infamy for us
any longer to endure those for our masters (so do our mishaps constrain me to
call them) whom in the time of our fathers, one base and ignoble town of
Scythia could scarcely suffer for slaves and villains, so contemptible were
they at that time: and being accustomed only to rapine, theft and robbery, they
have increased even till this day, wherein they have grown so hardy, as to
threaten and menace Christendom with all kinds of extremity. Wherefore (most
magnanimous and courageous Princes, assure your country, your wives, your
children: defend them, and restore them to the true repose of a quiet liberty
and tranquillity. But if your own estate seem unto you tolerable; at
leastwise betake you to rightful and just arms, for me and in my behalf, not
for an Albanois, not for the son of a Prince, not for your kinsman: but for a
poor exile and banished person. I speak not to men that will refuse a just
and lawful war: but I would have you my masters to defend him, who^ John
Castriot (a Prince not careless of your good welfare) if he were now living,
would recommend at this present unto your valor and fidelity. And if for all
this, my calamity do not yet move you, but that you prefer an ignominious
peace, before an honorable war; I will have recourse to my own Nation, to my
own people and citizens, being resolved to submit my self quietly to the
hazard and adventure which fortune shall send me: and with those only who with
so constant and free hearts have vowed and consecrated their own lives for my
safety. But neither will you (most courteous Princes) as I think, forsake and
abandon me: for to what end are all of you here assembled in such devotion, if
it be not for the war, seeing that you cannot serve your selves of me to any
other use or purpose? You I say, will defend me, though it were even against
your wills: when you shall understand, that this land afflicted by Amurath,
shall implore and crave your aid and assistance, when you shall know that the
enemy insolent and puffed up with victory, will subvert and overthrow your
Seigniories and your liberty: and with a bloody throat, and full of rage, and
with polluted and sacrilegious hands, will run and make have furiously to suck
and swallow up your blood. But let me entreat you, not to stay and attend these
extremities: do not you make so long stay and tariance, till you see some
coming (then perhaps it will be too late) to implore your succors: but even
now rather, and presently conioyning your forces with our forces, and your
arms, with our arms: let us drive and compel the enemy speedily to take the
field, or let us be the first to rush upon him, and to invade his territories.
Then if he shall once see us united: sure and certain it is, that either he
will change his thoughts: or if he do adventure to march forward, he may well,
to his cost, loose and come short of his wretched and greedy desire of victory
and conquest. For do you think, that I in the mean time with the troops
which you shall commit unto me, will remain shut up and restrained within the
enclosures of any walls, and that as one of a faint courage and degenerating
from my ancestors, I will hide my self in some corner? or that from some high
place or tower amongst children, I will take up my stand to behold the enemy
spoiling of your fields, and suffer the destruction of your lands and livings
and such like calamities? No be you assured, that such cowardice shall never
come within my heart: the enemy shall see me daily and continually even in his
face with my ensigns, with my soldiers, to try the fortune of his assaies
and attempts; not in plain battle and open fight: but (God aiding me) by some
other better kind of policy, and it may be, with very little and small loss
of my men, I shall make the desseignes and audacitie of Amurath to turn to
smoke and to vanish away to nothing: and that from henceforth he shall have
enough to do, and be constrained to give over his quarrel, and to leave his
baggage unto you for a prey and booty; at leastwise if he love not to see his
camp (after long continuance in his enemies country, in the fields of
strangers, and in the midst of many discommodities) to be brought to that
pass, as it shall be rather in estate of an army forced and besieged, then of a
besieger and one that forces others. Up then (noble and most Catholic
Princes) let us set aside all delays, let us visit the Province, let us set
down good laws and orders of discipline, let us leauie and muster our
soldiers, and let us lead on our forces, that when the infidels come in sight,
and the sound of the trumpets do call the soldiers to the battle, we be not
then unprovided, and to seek for counsel, when there will be no time for it.
Let us make show unto the posterity, and let us make it known unto all ages
to come hereafter, that we are men worthy of a Christian Empire.

The oration of Scanderbeg being ended, all the great personages in the
assembly did generally address themselves unto him, as the author of their
freedom and reputation: and all with one accord approving his speech, with
infinite praises and commendations did exalt and extol him even to the
heavens. For this cause there was not any, who did not willingly commit unto
him all the charge and weight, and all the conduct and managing of this war,
choosing him alone as chief and superior. Every Scanderbeg chosen general
of the wars against the Turks by the Princes of Epyre.
one did consigne unto him his subjects and his arms, testifying thereby and
by his high clamours, that to him only was due the honor of this souereigntie;
the only name of who^, as of another Alexander, was able to defend that little
angle and corner of Macedony against all the assaults of the enemy. And more
then that, the perfection of his skill and science in arms and the art
military: his marvelous prudence and counsel even befitting and worthy an
Emperor: his long experience practiced in the manners and customs of the
barbarians: his divine judgment confirmed by daily use and long experience,
did inflame the hearts of them all with a certain and assured hope of victory.
But after so many goodly offers made unto him, the principal and chiefest was
this, which Aryamnites in the presence of the whole assembly, did present unto
him, for he after he had raised himself out of his seat, and with a good
grace and eloquent oration had exalted the rule and government of John the
father of Castriot, the counsels and deliberations of the son, and the happy
beginnings of his virtue and good fortune, then frankely and freely did he
offer unto him a yearly tribute: which he presented unto him in this or the
like language.

That which Amurath did exact and take of me even till this day, during the
time that I preferred an ignominious peace before a deadly and fatal war:
and whilst I Oration of Aryamnit offering him self tributarie to Scanderbeg.
did love a shameful liberty, better then the wars accompanying and
occasioning my misfortunes: the same do thou receive most valiant Prince by
the consent both of God and man; receive (I say) the gage and pledge of a good
heart, if not so great and magnificent, yet at leastwise not ingrate and
unthankful. I adiudge it and give it thee freely, for the liberty of Albanie
and mine own, for the maintenance of our estate, of our crown, our people and
our children: praying thee that from henceforth, thou would use in common
with me, my men and my forces, and if there be any other thing which either my
fortune or my virtue sufficiently tried and known, have reserved unto me from
the hands of such an enemy. And this which I do present unto thee most
redoubted Prince of the Albanois (for let viz. Amurath. Scanderbeg chosen king
of Epyre.
me be the first to call and acknowledge thee by this name) and most worthy
defender of our liberty, I do offer it thee without exception of time, both
in war and in peace.

Immediately upon this act, many others moved by a certain iealouzie, did of
their Princes of Epyre join in league to aid Scanderbeg.
own motion sesse and tax themselves, becoming tributaries unto him,
according to the quality of their power and ability. Andrewe and Tanusee his
Nephew were inferior to none of them in liberality. And by this means a
great sum of money was gathered at that instant for to defray the charges of
the war. And it may be (as the report ran in those parts, that the revenue
of Scanderbeg did amount Revenues of Scanderbeg more then 200000. crowns by
the year.
to more then two hundredth thousand crowns by the year. But be it that that
which he possessed within the Province, was of a more large compass and
circuit then any other Prince, yet it can not be gainesaide, but that he was
ouerchargeable and burdensome to his subjects in exacting upon them alone this
huge sum, especially in a time of war kindled on all parts without
ceasing, and the inhabitants (as a man may say) with one hand holding the
plough, and with the other the sword. Yet some man peradventure will allege,
That he did supply a Salt^its belonging to Scanderbeg. Campupescupi. Selite.
S. Nicholas.
great part of that charge, by the benefit of certain excellent good saltpits
which he had in the part of the country called Campupescupi, between the
mountain and the place named Selite on the one side, and S. Nicholas de la
Pierre, on the other side. The which country is very famous or rather
infamous by reason of a notable desaster and great mishappe that befell the
Roman Senate, who were once there besieged, at such time as Caesar being
Dictator, did take arms against Pompey, and his own native country. But to
our purpose: The residue of the company who were not of power and ability to
furnishe him with taxes and subsidies, did promise him the employment of their
persons liberally and freely, and their continual labor and travel. The
Venetians, because they would not derogate any thing from the majesty of
their greatness, would not tax them selves, nor be tied with the residue to
the aduauncing out of any certain and ordinary contribution: but they
promised to be ready at all times to aid and help them with victualles, and
any other kind of succors. Now after that this worthy personage had been
made thus beholding unto them by an infinite number of praises and officious
courtesies (according as all of them did strive therein, either more or less
to surmount each other) and after solemn and public prayers and processions
generally made for the better strengthening and fortifying of the league: some
of the company did accompany him to Croie, and the rest retired themselves to
their own homes. The first that was appointed to come thither Sfetygrade
yielded to Moses.
was Moses, who (having so streightened and near pressed Sfetigrade, that it
was rendered unto him by composition) had been called back with his troops
from the frontiers, excepting a few, who were left there upon certain
mountains to keep good watch: besides those whom he had put in garrison
within the town. These bands did not exceed the number of five thousand men,
for that Castriot at his coming from thence to the former assembly, had
licensed many of them to depart; by means whereof without any delay
commissions were made and dispatched and many great men sent abroad to leauy
soldiers on all parts.

Whilst these things were thus a doing within Epyre, you may not think that
the brains of Amurath also were vnbusied, or that he did forget anything
touching the subject of this war which he had enterprised with such hatred
and fierceness of courage. He had now raised an army of forty thousand
horse, Haly Bassasent with an army of 40000. against Scanderbeg.
all men of choice: and he had committed them to Haly Bassa one of his leaders,
a man as valiant of his person, as in matters of advise and counsel well tried
and approved: and who for his sufficiency had attained many high degrees and
great charges of honor in the wars: in so much that the bravery of the
troops, and the reputation of the Chieftaine, did give them an easy hope and
good assurance of a happy and fortunate success. There was no other talk to
be heard amongst the Turks, but of this army and of the war of Epyre: and
such was the opinion and conceit of all in general of this journey, that
whosoever had heard them, would have judged, that Scanderbeg had been already
taken prisoner: and that he had been even now going to suffer punishment and
execution. So do we see sometimes in the siege of a town, that the
assaylantes before it be taken, do think to have the victory without blood:
and they do often fall to contention amongst themselves about the parting and
dividing of the spoil and booty. For it is a property usual and accustomed
in the spirits of mortal men, to reckon without their host, and to promise
themselves great matters without pain or difficulty. For this cause even in
Epyre there was now nothing but disorder and confusion by reason of the
troubles which seemed to approach: for the brute of the coming of the Bassa
made all things seem greater and more fearful, then they were in truth and
in deed. A man might have seen on all sides those that dwelt in the fields,
hasting A notable description of the tumult and confusion amongst the common
people where an invasion is expected.
to save themselves in the towns, and driving their cattle before them: the
Burgesses fortifying their walls, and appointing gardes for their ports, as
if the enemy had been already discovered: the old men quaking and trembling
would put the young men in mind of their country, their wives, their
children, and of the honor of God and their religion especially: they would
cry upon them to be of good courage and hardy, and they would never cease to
inflame and animate them that they might the better do their deuoire and
duty. Neither was the weak and tender sex of women free from this public
fear and terror, but that it did embolden them to run out into the streets
amongst their armed husbands: sometimes stirring them up to virtue and
manhood, by their just and pitiful lamentations: and sometimes in extreme
care running to the temples and holy places, and making their vows, prayers,
and orizons unto God before the altars, for the preservation of their country.
And the little children also astonished with their mothers tears, would cry
out more and more with all extremity.

As for Scanderbeg none of these news, neither of the arrival of Haly, nor of
the enemies army, nor the astonishment of the common people, did any thing at
all move him: but he made a mock of the vain attempts of Amurath, and of the
foolish fear of the Albanoys. Having therefore aforehand ordered all things
throughout the province for fear least too great license and neglect of the
enemy should abate the courage of his soldiers, and divert them from the care
and regard of the war, he did so deal and persuade with them, that he enflamed
their hearts with so general a confidence, and did put them in so good a hope
of victory, that they were never seen to desire any thing more then the
coming of the Turkish general, each of them having a kind of envy and desire
to make proof of their deuoire and valor: and by the general and particular
desert of them all to leave unto their Prince a large and ample testimony of
their loyalty. In like manner in this one thing did Scanderbeg also show a
notable example of his Courage and resolute assurance of Scanderbeg.
marvelous courage and assurance, giving all the world occasion of wonder: yea
and Haly Bassa his enemy, if he had in any sort considered of the fact, I do
not doubt, but it would have made him greatly abashed. For whereas many fierce
and warrelike peoples and nations did resort unto him in great abundance from
all parts: so as he might well have made, not one, but many great and mighty
armies: he, after he had commended and magnified their good affection, would
not admit any but the choicest of them, and did retain with himself only
eight thousand horse, and seven thousand foot. The overplus both of the old
bands, and of the new increase he licensed to depart: of whom notwithstanding
he disposed some in certain places for diverse accidents and occurrences.
Every man wondered and was abashed at this devise of the Prince so hardy and
aduenturous: but my opinion is, that this his act proceeded of some doubt,
least if he should have had the disgrace to be overcome in set battle, he
should afterward want the means to relieve himself. And this was the
occasion (as I believe) that he did furnish so many fortresses with forces and
garrisons, as being willing to reserve them for a supplement and remainder of
defense in time to come, against the inconveniences of an overthrow, and by
means whereof, he might by way of surprise, extort the victory out of the
hands of the enemy, beginning perhaps to wax insolent in their prosperity.
Notwithstanding he was never heard to speak of any such matter, but he did
continually and with a cheerful countenance promise himself an assured good
fortune, and a success in all things answerable to his desire, which makes me
to think and to affirm, that this only was not the reason, why he retained at
that time so small forces. But I believe that it proceeded of a singular
confidence which remained in him: a thing commonly seen, especially in great
and excellent Confidence and fortune seldom fail great and excellent natures.
natures, who very seldom or never do find themselves abused or deceived by
fortune. For this is to be marked, yea and to be admired in Scanderbeg, that
almost continually and with very few and small forces, he obtained against the
infidels so many and often victories, as it is almost incredible. This is it,
which having oftentimes ravished and held me in suspense, has made me in this
history to deliver many adventures to the posterity, the truth whereof had not
yet sunk into my own mind and opinion. And yet (it may be) hereafter it will
not be amiss nor inconvenient to believe them: because it can not be denied,
but that some ages do bring forth strange cases and accidents, to the intent
we should have some matter to marvel at. And that this is true, we may behold
a principal example of the like valor and good fortune: if we look no
further then even in the same age, to Hunyades, who Hunyades the Despot of
Transiluania was the father of Mathias Coruinus king of Hungary.
so many times in a manner all alone, did foil and confound the puissance of
the Turks, and with a small number obtained more trophies of victory, then
many others who have been much better accompanied, and whose numbers have
exceeded. But why should we stand any longer with such curiosity upon the truth
and credit of this matter, seeing that (without singular impudency) no man can
deny these things being so fresh and late in memory, and whereof it little
wants, but that our fathers might with their eyes have been witnesses.

Scanderbeg having now enrolled and taken a general view and muster of his
soldiers, and public vows and prayers being offered unto God by every man
according to his own fancy, departed from Croy and encamped near to the
lower Dibria, where every day he heard news that the enemy approached. Thereupon
he bethought himself, that being newly made their Chieftaine and Captain, he
ought to use some speech to his new soldiers: for which cause commanding
silence, Thus he began Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers marching against
the
to speak unto them.

I would wish (my companions) that you had happened upon me as your Captain,
and that I might have enjoyed your notable and faithful service, when my
affairs had been in greater prosperity, and in a time wherein my reign had
been more happy and fortunate. For now being ashamed of the many bonds and
obligations, whereby I see my self tied unto you, I would not have invited you
to the discommodities of new wars, and to so many fresh mischieues: but
having been so well received and entertained by my Citizens, I would then have
yielded them (at my ease and leisure and with patience) that due thanks and
recompense which long before this time I had prepared my self to render unto
them: and as a Chieftaine that sees his soldiers embrued and covered with
blood, I would make no spare of my self in recompense of your labors, travels
and dangers, and for the blood of the enemy which you have heretofore shed so
valiantly. But seeing the destinies have so ordained, and that it pleases
fortune that I must discover unto you my affairs, and that I must be an
occasion rather of your pains then of your tranquillity and rest: Consider I
pray you, that it stands us upon to endure it valiantly and patiently, and to
submit our selves to whatsoever difficulties this war shall bring with it; to
the intent that one day we may live in peace and quiet. It behooves us,
willingly and with francke and ready minds to take arms, to break the
bonds of so long a servitude and bondage, and the enemy being chased from our
parts, afterward to rejoice our selves in a more happy kind of life, and
in a perdurable and lasting liberty, whereunto it is not needful that I pain
my self to animate and incense you: For that as all of you do now show your
selves affectioned to take my part: so is it most certain, that words (as the
saying is) do not increase hardiness in men that are couragions: ad hereunto
that I can say no more unto you with my weapons in my hand then you being in
arms ought to know of your own selves. The enemy (whom you have now near
you) will aduerise you thereof sufficiently: the indignity of so many
injuries: the wrath and hatred which they have conceived do admonish you of
it, and do arm you against them: the yoke of our bondage shaken off and
broken: the liberty both of our bodies and of our souls: the mortal hatred
of Amurath: the quality of the Barbarian: the cruel commandementes: the
horrible executions wherewith he does advance himself to suck up our blood:
and last of all the process of the final ruin and destruction of us all being
now past and fully concluded on: all these do inuit you to take arms against
him. If then our country (the love whereof contains all love, and for which
we ought to think, that we have never shed sufficient of our blood, if the
particular virtue of every one of us, if the honor and nobility of our
kindred do strengthen the courage of any man; let them animate you (my
friends) to betake you to arms and to sharpen your lances. You have by my
pursuit and procurement, so speedily and without the loss of one drop of
blood, recovered Croie the seat of your forefathers: Spare not now in defense
thereof to shed your blood if need be. This is the day, wherein both hope and
opportunity do present themselves unto you, for the recovery of your country
so long time lost: and for the raising of you to great and high fortune, you
have chosen me either for your companion or your Captain before any other, and
I will not be the last in any labors, in any hazards whatsoever: and if
peradventure in other things my forwardnes shall not be seconded with as good
fortune: yet will I nevertheless make known unto you the conditions, the
conceits, the wiles and policies of the enemy: with whom (it may be by the
divine ordinance) I have spent the most part of my years to my own hindrance,
and have been instructed in them to the end they might serve to aid you at
this present. It would be unpleasing unto me here to report unto you their
base and vile condition, but that hope (which makes promise of a victory
less painful) does render the soldier more resolute and deliberate. What
other thing are they but the dregs and scum of slaves and raskals gathered
together, more accustomed to theftes and robberies, then to a true war and a
just kind of fight and combat? Is it certain that this sort of men, whose
name is so famous amongst persons fearful and timorous, should be those
Turks, the slaves and fugitives of the Scythians? Original of the Turks.
whose fathers (as some say) had their dwellings beyond the Ryphean
mountains, and the Isles of Tarracont even in the heart and bosom of the
North, and in the Northern Ocean? A nation filthy, villainous, and opprobrious:
nourished in dens, secret corners, and filthy places: who not discerning the
flesh of Wolves and Vultures, do fill and satisfy their hunger upon human
abortiue bodies, and who can very hardly glorify themselves of any one battle
gotten well and honestly. It may be that they have usurped by fraud and
deceit most large and ample dominions, and that they will from time to time
daily purchase more both better and fayrer as long as matter shall be given
them whereupon to exercise their treason and infidelity. Here now me thinks
I see how Amurath betaketh himself to his wiles, sleightes, and subtelties,
when his other assayes shall not be able to prevail against you. Behold and
mark well this subtell and cautelous Ottoman, who will make you fair and
goodly promises upon the hope of others misfortunes. It seems unto him
belike, that there is not any where any kind of people, but they should be
like unto the Greeks, Bulgarians, and Misians: all which being inueigled and
blinded in their own misfortune and destruction more then was convenient,
after they had simply and in good faith yielded themselves unto him: the good
Prince did either drive them all into exile and banishment, or did deprive I*
side i^^e of Amurath to the Greeks and others.
them of their sight, or did mangle and deforme their members, and wholly
disfigure them. That which I now tell you (my friends) is to admonish you, as
those whom I esteem and set by, as those to whom I have consecrated my life
and my blood, to the intent you may glue me by this subject, ample and large
occasion, either to commend you, or to accuse you: for at this present I do
not think it needful either to praise or dispraise any man. For what
judgment can be made of a soldier, only brauing and vaunting himself within
a camp? Then will I make the censure of your deserts, when I see your swords
smoking with the blood of the Turks: when my self both as a beholder and an
encourager, will immitate your prowes, being prodigal both of life and
safety. At that time will I heap upon you all sorts of commendation and
rewards. But if any one of you do feel his courage to wax cold through
cowardice, measuring our forces by those of the enemy: if he think that those
who surmount in number, will surmount also in virtue: Let him freely depart and
dislodge from hence, I speak it in a good hour, for fear least going with us
he serve rather to make up the number then to give us aid or succor, let
him retire hence to his own home presently. Or if all of you be of that
opinion, and that this fear be common unto you in general: If neither God nor
man can make you ashamed, let us then reenforce and strenthen this our army
with some new supplies, or else let us turn our faces and retire speedily.
But he which shall redoubt and stand in fear of the (...) follow with a troop
of horse, and to cover themselves under their sides: by means whereof they
might be the better able both to safe guard themselves from the enemy, and to
endammage the Barbarians the more grievously, who mistrusted no such kind of
matter in their ordering: between the one and the other of these troops
stood George Strese, a Knight most hardy and courageous, accompanied with the
soldiers George Strese.
and all the youth of Croy round about him, having so disposed of them
purposely, that he might be both the beholder and encourager of his citizens.
After the squadron of archers followed the maine body of the infanterie:
namely, the bands of pikes and targatyers, conducted by Aidyn the brother of
Gnee Musachee. Vranocontes a sage and Aidin. Vranocontes.
expert warrior with the rest of the horsemen, led the rereward and the
supplies. This was a strong and close batallion, compounded of the flower of
the old soldiers, and best men: holding themselves firm like a bulwark for
the rallay and retraite of the other troops, before that they should be broken
or forced to recule: (the Romans named it Triarij.) The troops of footmen
that marched with him, were commanded and had in charge; that as soon as they
should see their fellows to break forth in the am buscado, and the enemy
charged behind, and entangled between the two points or wings of the army,
they should suddenly spread themselves, and opening their rancks, should give
way unto the men at arms: and that then with a new terror, they should
disorder the enemy, and with one and the same charge strike in upon them being
already wearied and sore traveled: and that then the said footmen closing and
joining themselves again in troop in their own places, should together with
the supplies stand fast, and keep the batallions from being broken or
endammaged, till such time as they might see manifest and apparent likelihood
of victory, and the enemy in full disaray and disorder. In this manner had
Scanderbeg martialled his troops, and caused them to hold close without
suffering the trumpet to give the signal of fight, till he saw the Bassa also
arranged in order of battle, and advancing forward. For he feared least that
the soldiers disbanding themselves through overmuch haste and rashness to the
encounter: and breaking their orders by reason of their too great fury and
desire to advance themselves, should bring the estate of the whole army to
some encombrance.

The General of the Turks considering the order of our battelles, advanced
forward, and by way of mockery often repeated these words: Ever, ever (quoth
he) do the greater devour the lesser, and with open throat he laughed both to
see them The battle between Scanderbeg and Haly Bassa.
so raunged, and at the foolish pomp of the Christian: marching so formally
(as he thought) to his own funerals. One of the Ottoman legions was come
forward with great hardiness before the others, but being charged speedily and
nearly by the forlorn hope of the Christians, they gave back and forsook
their place as suddenly, before that the two armies had affronted each other:
and at the very first beginning, they suffered themselves to be beaten back
even within their trenches, retyring themselves faster then a good pace. But
the Prince of Albanie misdoubting some Turkish stratageme, sent forth part of
his horsemen both to stay the furious pursuit of his soldiers, and to bring
every man into his place. The like hapened in the left wing, and therefore both
the one and the other being retired to their troops, they prepared themselves
again to the future conflict, and to come unto a full battle with both the
armies. Now were the Mahometists the more encouraged, for that a few of theirs
in a mockery (as it were) had deceived many of the Christians: wherefore when
the maine fight began, Tanuse and Moses parting between them the two wings of
the enemy, went fiercely to the encounter. And Castriot with the like fury
pricking forward cheerfully with his horse, did assail the Batallion of the
enemy that himself had made choice of. At one and the same time also was the
ambushment ready to break forth of the wood with most high and loud cries and
clamours, before that the enemy with all his forces had given in upon our
squadrons, and before that all were come equally to the medley. Many companies
of the Turks perceiving this, (especially those of the rereward,) and being
possessed with a sudden fear, leaving both the camp and the charge, betook
themselves to flight: so that they in the vowarde being surprised and enclosed
by the two wings of the Christians, did see themselves exposed to the butcherie
and slaughter of the middle legion. There was but one batallion only of the
enemy which Scanderbeg was not able to break, nor durst to set upon, so well
was the same defended and reenforced by the Barbarians, who had made it of
their greatest number of their people as a sure and safe rampire for the
safety of the whole army. There (as it was soon after known) did the Bassa
Haly, being enuironned with the stoutest and strongest forces of all his army,
maintain the event and hazard of the battle for a very long time, wavering
and uncertain. In this mean while Aydin having charged upon the middle ward
of the Turkish army, and pressing hard upon those legions, had filled all
with murder and bloudshedde: and the tumult was there more bloody and
desperate, then in any other part of the fight. For the enemy seeing that
there was no means of fasetie left him, but only by arms, with the greatest
fury that might be, forced in upon our men with their swords in point, to
the intent they might not die unrevenged. And after the hazard and unfortunate
error of war had brought some of them thither to the encounter: there came
others still running to their succors, thinking by the access of their forces
to have relieved their companions; in such sort that the more the Turks made
head thitherwardes, and the thicker that they resorted to the encounter: so
much the longer and doubtful would the resistance have been, if Vranocontes
fresh and lusty both of courage and of forces, dismarching in the same
instant, and falling in pell mell amongst them, as they were now wearied and
wavering had not ended the battle, and overthrown those that remained. That
which moved the Christian Chiefetaine to be of this mind: that his host
should invade the Infidels so late, and not to come to the aid of his men
before they were in so hard an estate, was this; for that he saw both the two
wings, and the Cornet and guard it self of the Prince on all sides beset and
busied: and having their hands full at the beginning, he would not that they
should remain altogether unfurnished and destitute of supplies and succors.
And therefore he deferred the employment of his horsemen, and made choice of
this time and occasion as most fit and proper to weaken their forces, and to
give them the check and overthrow. Hence it grew that not any one of them
almost did escape away in safety, but that they passed under the sword of
the Christians, excepting only three hundredth upon whom, lifting up their
hands for mercy: and casting away their weapons as people wearied and spent
with wounds, Castriot would not permit the extreme rigor of victory to be
used. By occasion whereof the troops of Scanderbeg, after this their goodly
exploite and military travel accomplished and ended, came with exceeding
great rejoicing and Victory of Scanderbeg of Haly Bassa and the Turks.
acclamations to the presence of their General, where they found all things
as they wished and desired. For the Croyans had wholly broken the battallion of
the Bassa, and after a wonderful slaughter did pursue the Turkish General,
who saved himself with the loss of his horse. There was nothing seen nor
heard on any side but blood and massacres with cries and lamentations of men
drawing to their end: Some took prisoners, others leaving behind them the
trunkes of the dead bodies deformed, did cut off the heads to make presents of
them to their General: many of them also fell to rifling of the baggage:
according as the minds of some men are to be egerly set on their gain and
profit. Finally throughout all the camp there was mention made of this
victory so memorable and almost incredible, even to them especially who were
overcome and vanquished: every man being abashed at the marvelous execution
in so short a time: for the fight continued from the sun rising but till the
third hour. In this battle besides four and twenty ensigns taken, and 2000
Turks prisoners, there were slain upon the place two and twenty thousand. Of
the Christians there Number of Turks 22000 slain.
died very few; and it is said that there were not missing of them but about
one hundredth and twenty: but of such as were wounded there were a far
greater number. In this manner then did our men that day obtain that notable
victory upon the miscreantes according to the expectation and hope of them all
in general: withal that in this hard encounter, nothing was forgotten which
might not only inuit, but also compel fortune to favor them in the event
and issue of the battle. There was no opportunity, place, nor good order, nor
any notable reason which might be esteemed just and necessary to draw a man
to the hazard of battle, but it was carefully and diligently observed. If we
should speak of the Captains and the soldiers; I dare well affirm, that in
this journey Lions had Lions for their leaders and conducters. A great number
of them were old soldiers, who had before times borne arms even under the
father of Scanderbeg: so as you would not have taken them for soldiers, but
for masters and teachers in the art military. In this sort did they think
now to have made an end of this war by means of the winning of this
battle: and that once they should have abated the bragges and audacitie of the
Turks.

Scanderbeg being now master of the field, held himself quiet within his
camp, the residue of that day, and all the night following. The next morning
(his courage as yet boiling through the good hap of this encounter) he busied
himself in taking order for that which remained, and especially to animate the
soldiers to an enterprise very convenient and needful, and which should be
no less delightful to themselves: to wit, the ouerrunning, and sacking of
the enemies country. And therefore Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers,
inuiting them to spoil the Turkish territorier.
he used these or the like words unto them.

Hitherto (my soldiers) have you foughten for me your prince, even till this
day, and till now have you showed and done your deuoire for your country:
from henceforward your own profession does inuit you, and your own good
fortune does summon you to continue as you have begun. Behold how on all
parts the legions of the enemy are by your virtue overthrown and
discomfited: and now may you number and recount your own prowes and valiant
deeds. It may be that secretly in your thoughts, you promise to yourselues
from me some great rewards, and some singular recompense, which should be
prepared and provided for you, for so many labors: for so much blood: for so
many travels suffered in this battle: and I protest unto you on my faith, your
expectation shall not be frustrate, so far forth as I shall find the means
and possibility. I do very well and sufficiently conceive in my mind the
commendations and praises of you all both in general and in particular. This
only is the reward that you shall expect of me (let me make my self a little
merry with you) if so be the courages of soldiers can content themselves
with praises only. Other goods have I not at this time, wherewith I may honor
your valor: but hereafter when I shall have things in abundance to dispose of,
assure your selves I will depart with them unto you as bountifully. What is
there that you can receive more pleasing and with a better courage? according
to other men's judgment and opinion, then this honor and glory, which each of
you shall carry home in triumph as a conquest achieved by his own arm and
proper virtue? Behold here near at hand the territory of the enemy, rich and
plentiful in wealth of all sorts: your gallantise and prowess has
disfurnished them, and made them bare and naked of all defense: now therefore
with good leisure and ease do you charge and load your selves with the prey
and spoil thereof, which is left and abandoned to your pleasure and
discretion. Let the fear of the enemy far and wide know you to be the
Conquerours; even you (I say) whom our native country shall presently see
retourning home cheerful, joyous, and triumphant. This will be no small
increase of benefit unto you, to come from a piece of service so excellent.
Nevertheless, to the intent it may be said, that I also in some sort have
rewarded you for this days victory, and that the one of you have no occasion
to envy the other, seeing that the virtue of you all in the fight was alike and
equal; I do here ordain and appoint, that the footmen shall take the horses
of their slain enemies, and that all of you from henceforth shall serve on
horseback as men at Arms. Now therefore (under the favor of the great God)
let every man follow me chearefully, that we may go on and reap the most
acceptable and gladsome fruits of your perfect and full deuoyre.

The soldiers who had listened all this while very attentively to his
speeches, Spoil and sack of the enemies country, permitted by Sca^derbeg to
his soldiers.
with very great signification of joy and gladness (as men ouerioyed with
hope of the prey and booty, which they did expect by spoiling of their enemies
country) did approve this his encouragement. They ran therefore every where,
here and there without discretion, without order, without conduct, being
stirred and pricked on with an assured and sudden contempt and negligence,
proceeding (as it seems) of their happy and good success. But the Prince
being well advised, and not having any affiaunce in the inconstant and fickle
favors of Fortune, he stayed the fury and violence of his soldiers, till
such time as those which he had sent to make a discovery, did bring him back
word that there was no danger. And then (the sack and pillage being permitted
them freely) the men at arms altogether puffed up with the late victory
which they had gotten, and dispersed here and there in diverse places, did cast
them selves in upon the enemies country, and carried away the goods of the
husbandmen, their persons, and their cattle. Neither did their fury spare to
show it self upon the very trees. Nothing was pardonned of what kind
soever, whereunto the fire and the sword might do any damage and displeasure,
excepting only women and children. The booty was gathered and drawn together,
and driven with such confusion, noise and debate, that a man would have
judged, there had been begun some new tumult of wars, and that the fields
had been full of men fighing and combatting. Their wounds did not withhold or
hinder any one of them (for the greedy desire of pillage had drawn thither
many of those who were wounded in the battle) but their pains and travels so
lately taken, were quite forgotten, and (as it were) clean vanished away.
Neither the labors, nor the waightinesse of their burdens, did not discourage
any one of them, no more then the excess and abundance of spoil (which
commonly causes weariness and satiety) did satisfy and content them: in so
much that the grief and sorrow of the soldiers was greater, for leaving that
which they could not bear away, then their joy and contentment of that which
they carried with them. When they had thus continued long enough in spoiling and
foraging, and that the rage of the soldiers was mitigated and appeased upon
the country of the enemy: Castriot caused to sound the retraite, and his men
being ouerloaden with the prey and booty, marched away presently with great
gladness and joy. The Captains made themselves merry at the sloth and
laziness of the soldiers: reproaching them that of brave and valiant
warriors, they were now become sheepestealers: and of defendours of the glory
and renow me of Albanie, men might see them changed into the habit and trade
of sheepeheardes. And thus scoffing sometimes at one, and sometimes at another,
with many pleasant iestes and words of mockery, each after other in this or
the like manner; what (said they) would Halie Bassa now say with the
relics of his discomfiture, if he were even now in place and did see you in
this point, dragging after you so vile and base baggage of neither worth nor
valor, but a fit reward for covetous and greedy soldiers? Would he not
blushe extremely at so vile and shameful Conquerours? And would he not
reproach his men of their faintness and cowardice, that had suffered them
selves to be surmounted and overcome by such a sort of base companions: and for
that they had yielded unto such men the honor and the glory of the combat?
Thus did the soldiers full of mirth and merriment, with diverse sportes and
songs full of joy and gladness, case and mittigate the hard travel of the
way, till such time as with high cries and clamours they saluted the guardes of
their Camp which marched on before them. The night following being past within
their Camp: Scanderbeg the next morning before day break, commanded to
trusse up the baggage, and with his host triumphaunt marched on directly
toward Croie. The multitude scattered every where throughout all the high
ways and passages, did salute and call them both generally and privately
triumphant and valiant. Every man admired the greatness of the spoils gotten
from the enemy, and hardly were the new made men at arms discerned and known
from the old. These congratulations and reioycings did endure many days, and
there were sent unto all the Princes and particular Lords of Epire, letters
crowned with laurel and certain standards, and the residue were hanged up in
their churches.

This year was famous and notable by reason of this victory: but much more
1443.
memorable was it afterward by the dolorous discomfiture of the Christians at
Varna. The which to paint it out unto you more lively, I must draw back to the
Of the wars between the Turks and the Hungarians.
defait of Carambey, whereof I entreated in the former book. You know (if you
have any knowledge in the course and usage of Arms) that one disgrace of
Fortune, and the gain of one only battle, does ever bring much disfavor and
many mishappes to the looser, and causes fresh beginnings of new enterprises
to his enemies. Even so that rude Bastanado given to Carambey at the battle of
Moraua, and the revolt of Scanderbeg falling both at once upon Amurath, did
solicit and cause the * Caramanian to move war against him: so that
preparing a puissant and mighty This is the king of Cilicia. This Pontus and
Bithinia.
Army, and therewithal inuading the Turks in * Natolia (which is called also
great Tregnyo) he constrained Amurath to pass into Asia, with the relics of
his defeated forces, to assure the estate of that country. But finding that he
should not be strong enough, unless he did wholly and altogether oppose him
self against this new enemy: besides that the success of the forepassed
overthrow at Moraua, did make him begin to bethink him self, and to redoubt
the felicity of the Christians. First of all therefore (as I have told you) he
would assure him self of the king of Hungary by a peace: the which being
concluded, and respectively sworn upon the holy Evangelists, and the
Alcaran, was fully ratified by the mediation of George the Despot of * Seruia
and Ruscia: which notwithstanding was soon after violated, by the means This
is the upper Misia, by the Turks called Segoria,
which I will now show you.

The Turkishe Ambassador being dislodged and departed from the Court of
Vladislaus: behold suddenly there arrived letters from Francis Albert a
Florentine, Cardinal of the holy siege: the contents whereof were. That the
Turk with Letters from Francis Albert Cardinal to Vladislaus king of Hungary.
innumerable companies was passed over into Asia, to fight against the King of
Caramania, having left his country in Europe unprovided and difurnished of
defense, and wholly disarmed: and that he with three score and ten Galleys
well armed and appointed, and many other great Vessels of war, having
seized on all the ports and passages, had taken from the Infidel all means
and hope any more to transport his troops and forces on this side the Sea.
And that such opportunity which then was offered, ought not to be lost and
omitted: that now this cursed and wicked nation might be either rooted out in a
manner without any fight, or at least wise chased and driven so far off,
that they should be no more heard nor spoken of. For you must note: that Julian
Caesarin Cardinal of Saint Julian Cardinal of Saint Angel.
Angel and legate of his holiness, being then near about Vladislaus at Buda,
had lately procured a new league between the Christians for the ruin and
destruction of the name of Ottoman, and had caused Pope Eugenius the fourth of
that Leauy of the Christians against the Turks.
name, the Duke of Burgoyne, the Venetians, and the Genowayes to enter into the
same, who having put in readiness and provided this army by sea, had now
seized upon that straight. At the same instaunt (as if it had been a thing
done of purpose) the Messengers of the Emperor of Greece, reported the like
news and in manner to the same effect. If these tidings were displeasing to
the legate, I leave to your opinion. For he was greatly grieved to see the
accord and agreement passed between the King of Hungary and the Turk, to the
prejudice of his practices and endeavors, by means whereof so great and mighty
forces were assembled This is Hellespont, the Arm of S. George. A Maxim of
the Romish Prelates. Cardinal Julian makes the king of Hungary to break his
faith and league with the Turks. * Cursed and unhappy.
at the sea near * Gallipolis. And he doubted least he should be taxed either
of lightness and inconstancy, or of faithlesnesse and infidelity. But he knew
so well both how to do, and to speak under color of this Maxim: * (That
faith ought not to be kept with infidelles and miscreants,) that the compact
and conditions of the peace, were broken and violated. And he absolved and
freed both the king, his nobles, and all others, who had benesworne thereunto,
from the oath which they had solemnly taken and made, so that all of them
entered chearefully and gladly into this * blessed league. The Roman legate
him self was there present, followed with a fair and goodly troop under the
Cross. Iancus Huniades that tempest of war with his Valachians came thither
likewise, and had the title to be lieuetenaunt General of the Army royal.

Upon the preparation of so high and haughty an enterprise, all were moved at
the glorious renown of Scanderbeg, and at his fresh victory gotten upon Halie
Vladislaus and the Christians do seek the aid of Scanderbeg against the
Turks.
Bassa, and they persuaded them selves that if they could join, unto this
their great preparatiue and provisions of the Hungarians, the forces of the
Albanois yet shining in the Vermilion color of the Turkish blood: this would
be an aid and supply unto them of singular advantage, and a most certain
assurance of a good and happy success to their desires. For this cause upon
good deliberation approved by all of them, and with all speed possible:
according as the apparaunce of mischief and inconvenience near and imminent
did require, letters were sent away, of which this was the tenor.

Vladislaus king of Hungary and of Poland, sends health to Scanderbeg
Letters of king Vladislaus to Scanderbeg.
Duke of the Albanois,
It may be that Gods will was, that this our late congratulation should be
deferred until this present: to the intent that we might at this time rejoice
together with you in the double success of your prosperity: not only for the
happy recovery of your own estate, but also for that by your virtue and
prudence, the same has been courageously defended. In this then do we solace
and rejoice our selves both with you, and with all Christendom: considering
that the divine clemency and your valor, has given such succors and comfort
to the public weal and estate Christian. For to speak the truth, the loss
of the nation of Albanois has been such a wound that we may continually
bewail it, as much as any one of our other mishappes and misfortunes: at that
time when John Castriot your father (whom God pardon) a Prince (as I understand
of excellent merit and desert,) being oppressed by Amurath, and taken out of
this world by the ungrateful destenies, had neither the means to leave unto
you the inheritance of his Crown and Scepter (as unto his Son, being then
under the yoke and bondage of a stranger) nor yet was able otherwise to provide
for his affairs. O that it had pleased God, that this Father being most happy
and fortunate in such a Son had been now living: no greater bliss could have
befallen him, whereby to surmount all human felicity, then to have seen you
before his death. For so do you seem unto me above all other Princes in this
world (be it spoken without displeasing of any other) the most accomplished in
all graces and perfections both of mind and body, as being divinely endowed
with a certain fatal and wonderful Fortune: by the good encounter whereof,
not only all the land of Albany may vaunt it self, to be in surety and
security: but they shall also recover their first form and beauty, the
ancient glory of their kingdom, the free liberty of their religion, and all
the rightes and privileges of the people which were lately dismembered from the
Realm of Macedon, by the unlawful robbery of the Ottomans. For (to say nothing
of those things, which from your infancy having made you continually to be
enuyed, have purchased unto you heretofore, even amongst the Barbarians, an
immortal name and glory) what can there be more magnificent then this victory,
which (as we have heard and do believe) you have obtained with singular
admiration in the utter overthrow and discomfiture of Haly Bassa, and so great
and mighty troops of the Pagans? But now o Scanderbeg, there offers it self
unto you a subject of far greater glory, under the favor and blessing of
God, who by his wonderful counsel and decree, has reserved you in these so
difficult and dangerous times for the safety and public good of
Christendom: with a most fair and fit occasion to revenge upon the Sultan,
all his wrongs and injuries both new and old: as well those done to your own
person, as those against the estate and kingdom of Albanie; and not only the
domestical and civil miseries of your own country, but the public
calamities also, and those opprobrious disgraces done against the Christian
religion now oppressed, (I will not say extinguished,) if so be that upon the
point, and in this extremity of our affairs, not yet altogether desperate and
without hope, you will succor us with your victorious Forces. Hereunto do all
the princes of Hungary, and of Poland, and all good men inuit you. Julian the
Cardinal of Saint Angel entreats you, and so many Catholic and devout
men at arms Christians, who are here with us long since ready in arms and
well appointed, no other thing do we attend then your ensigns. This will be
a sure mean at this time (if you refuse not this fit opportunity which God
now so graciously sends us) to vanquishe our common and troublesome enemy,
and wholly to determine this war: to chase and drive away the Turks, and to
dispossess them of Europe, so long time by them occupied and wrongfully
usurped. I need not then (as I take it) use any kind of persuasion unto you
in this cause and quarrel, the defense whereof does purchase us safety, light,
and liberty. Contrariwise being abandoned, I will not forehalsen that which may
come of it. We Christians O that a^^ Christiant would well payze and consider
these words.
have been too too slack and backward in doing our deuoyr to help and
succor each other. The flame has now well near consumed all of us: yet have
none in the mean time been advised or persuaded, that this fire would pass on
and come near unto them selves. What does the estate of the Greeks represent
unto us, and the condition of the Triballians, and last of all mine own
losses* What Iliade can recount unto us all the mischieues we have endured,
and those which do daily menace us? So many brave and valiant Princes the
bulwark and defense of Hungary which we do loose from time to time as well in
puissant armies consumed and brought to nothing, and with one and the same
fatal chance of war almost wholly extinguished? In such sort, that in this
Realm from hence forward, there is neither family, wife, nor matrone, exempted
from bearing a part in this grievous and lamentable calamity. All this and
worse by far do Christian Princes hear of, and yet, the miserable estate and
condition of their Allies can nothing move any one of them: but thus do they
suffer us on all parts to be exposed to the rage and fury of the common
enemies, as if we were an offering to be sacrificed to all perils and dangers;
Only Eugenius the chief Pastor of the Church, and Philip Duke of Burgundy
are to be excepted, who have not rejected nor refused the burden of our
afflicted and miserable Fortune. The one has sent hither his legate the
Cardinal of Saint Angel, with notable and puissant succors: and the Duke of
Burgoyne with his Army at sea, having adventured as far as Gallipoly, does
valiantly hinder the passage of the Turks into Europe. One other hope there is
not now far from us: and that is, the succors whereof we are so desirous;
the which we do require of you, being moved thereunto, partly by your valor
so well known and notorious, and partly also in regard of the imminent peril,
and the hazard of the common affairs, which presses us all in general. And
albeit we are not ignorant of the discommodities which may befall you in this
expedition: we pray you notwithstanding that they may not withhold and keep
you back, assuring you, that as it cannot be but to your great honor, so the
benefit of this your present desert, shall not be bestowed on persons of an
ungrate and thankelesse spirit. But that which you shall at this time begin
and undertake for our preservation and dignity: we will from henceforth and
evermore continue for your glory, and for the increase of your greatness. God
have you in his keeping.

From Bude our Capitol and chief city the fourth day of July. 1443.

By this time had Haly Bassa brought back the relics of his defeated army
unto H^ly Bassa returns to Amurath.
Amurath: howbeit that the news of his desaster oftentimes reiterated, had
made way before him. Some say that he was sharply reproved by the Ottoman, who
objected unto him by way of reproach, that it was not likely that so puissant
an army could have been almost wholly ruinated without some great and notable
cowardice, or some counsel rash and timorous. Sometimes he would exclaim and
say, that his army was betrayed* sometimes he would allege, that either it
was surprised by the negligence of the General, or that in coming to the
encounter, they had given the advantage of the place unto the enemy: whereof it
proceeded that so great a desaster and misfortune had fallen upon his people.
Now albeit Haly Bassa could not deny, but he had been ouerreached and
prevented by our ambushments, the which might have deceived any man, were he
never so polliticke, subtle, and circumspect, yet did he excuse himself
nevertheless, calling his soldiers to witness, that there was nothing in
him to be reprehended, but the variable and inconstant chance and lotte of
Arms: and that there wanted neither good order, nor discipline, nor the
advantage of place, nor the opportunity of charging at a fit and convenient
time* Finally that neither the soldiers did fail their Captain, nor the
Captain their soldiers. But if it would please his Majesty, to permit him
once more to attempt and make trial of his Fortune; he would make him to see,
that he had a devise and stratageme, by which he would bring it to pass, that
this prosperity of Scanderbeg should prove doleful and lamentable. The vain
promises of the Bassa did soon move the Sultan, who being now more animated
then ever, was willing that in any case new forces should speedily be
provided, if the other Bassaes and Councillors, especially Caly Bassa, making
him to change his advise, had not showed him: That another war of greater
difficulty and consequence did fall upon his shoulders, that the enterprise of
Epyre might with safety, either be deferred or omitted, but so could not the
tumults of Hungary, but that it behooved him carefully to attend and look unto
them.

In the midst of these affairs, the letters of King Vladislaus being brought
to Scanderbeg, were a special mean and occasion to move and induce him to
give him aid and succors. For a more honest cause and fitter occasion of
war, could not Scanderbeg calls a council of the Albanois to consult upon
the sending of succors to the king of Hungary.
have been found then was the same ministered at that time. This
notwithstanding, for that he would determine nothing without the advice of
those with whoseayde he was to serve him self upon all occasions: having
called together his chiefetaines, he would that the kings letters should be
read openly in full assembly of a general council. And there was not any one
who did disalow of that war, for that the excessive greatness of the Ottoman
Empire increasing from day today, did animate every one with the spurs of
wrath and indignation: and did solicit their minds, almost trembling and
quaking for fear of more grievous inconveniences: and did ad mouish all the
world of the unfortunate condition of the Christians, and of the former fortune
sometimes invincible of the Hungarians, the which if Amurath should once cast
to the ground, every man did propound and set before his eyes, both in public
and in private a final desolation; considering that there was no where to be
found any puissance more sufficient, or better able to sustain the feeble and
weak estate of Christendom for any long season, nor which could with
continual wars and endless hostility, repress the Turkish malice, whom the
insolency and pride of so many victories, had made to be their deadly and
extream^ enemy. Moreover, the hope of the Epirots was so augmented by the happy
success of that victory lately befallen them; that they went every where
saying and promising unto them selves, that they should find the like fortune:
especially seeing they changed not their Chief, nor their enemy, but the place
of the war only. To conclude, all of them did affirm, that it behooved them,
and they ought to adventure the loss of their lives for the gaining and
getting unto themselves, so great and puissant a king to be their friend in
this troublesome season, against the inconstancy of fortune, and so many
human accidents. Wherefore it was concluded without contradiction, that
succors should be sent him, but as touching the number of the men of war,
and the forces of those succors, they could not so soon be accorded and
agreed: and this difference continued amongst them till the dark of the
evening came upon them. Many opinions being laid down on the one side and the
other touching this point, some agreed upon eight thousand, others upon five,
and the most part offered fewer, showing that there was no reason to disfurnish
the Province of men, the war being on all sides kindled, and the enemy (it
might be) yet boiling in despite upon the confines of Macedony, and that they
ought not to think, because the Bassa had been lately beaten, that therefore
the war was ended and determined: but rather it wanted so much that the
Turkish forces were thereby weakened, or their courage diminished; that on the
contrary, he was by reason thereof much more enflamed and incensed. Some also
made a doubt, and it was long debated with great diversity of opinions, whether
Scanderbeg himself should march thither in person, or whether they should
only send aid and succors unto the king, for that without the infinite
discommodity of the proceedings and affairs of Scanderbeg, and his estate not
yet thoroughly settled and confirmed, he could not well be absent, nor leave the
care and administration of the same: that his presence (if need were) in time
of peace or of war, would be of great consequence and moment, considering
that the people of Albany would acknowledge no other sovereign to command over
the^: that al things, he being in place and presence, would succeed well, and
flourish by his advise and counsel: But he being absent, it could not be
otherwise then a case most pitiful, to see the deformity that would ensue
within the country, by the negligence and security both of the citizens, and
of others of all estates and qualities, who for grief and sorrow which they
should conceive at his departure, would suffer the vigor and liveliness of
their spirits to vanish and to relent.

The Prince of Albany, albeit he had not determined any way to alter or change
his first resolution, yet because he would not seem to disdain or to make
little reckoning of the love and good will of his subjects (whom he could not
upon the difficulties of that voyage openly contradict) nor yet to repugne
against their offer of so small numbers of soldiers, for fear least he should
seem willing to draw them on by force to a strange war, and to be the cause
of new perils and dangers unto them, he judged it no less convenient for the
common profit, then for his own in particular to be silent, and to use little
or no speech in the matter. But the vehemence and earnestness of Paul Ducagin
(whose speech was worthy and well beseeming so excellent a prince) did soon
cut off all these disputes and diversities of opinions: and did in an instant
appease all these difficulties, that so troubled their minds, thus speaking
unto them.

It may be (worthy Princes Albanois) that you attend and expect in great
devotion, Oration of ^aul Ducagin, touching the number of the succors to be
sent into Hungary.
what kind of style and speech, I do now mean to use unto you, and unto
which of your opinions I will incline and join my self. But I assure you,
there is no such matter as you think of, for that I see not that you have
laid down or expounded any thing which is correspondent to the greatness and
Majesty, either of Scanderbeg, or of the name of the Albanois. Pardon me though
I say so (for in general counselles this has ever been allowed as a special
privilege, for each man to speak freely and at liberty, and to be heard
quietly and patiently.) And therefore if it be lawful for me now to discourse
upon these your consultations of the war of Hungary: much more willingly
would I hearken unto those who would resolutely dislike of sending any succors
at all unto the King: and would rather decree and ordain (and that not
unadvisedly) that the ruin and destruction of our neighbors, and the
perilous estate of strangers were not to be preferred nor regarded before our
domestical mischieues, and our own proper necessities. For is there (I pray
you) any thing so ridiculous, as to hear you to count some upon eight, some
upon five thousand soldiers, and some upon fewer, to uphold the weight and
burden of such a war and so important, as if you were to think that a King
so puissant and mighty, would demand out of the whole country of Epyre so
small a number, in the extremity, and (as it were) the last trial of his
Fortune? Shall Scanderbeg be so meanly accompanied into the midst of the
Varnian fields, where all men in general do attend and wish for him? Shall
so many Princes and great Lords of Hungary, and of the Christian Army, see
your chief and sovereign (whose glorious renown is now dispersed and gone
into all parts before him) shall he I say be seen marching before a handful
of men, no otherwise then as one accompanied with so many thieves and robbers?
Admit (which God defend) that he should happen to be overthrown and
vanquished, well and justly might the enemy mock and jest at the mishappe of
his discomfiture, much more his own subjects, in that he would adventure to
conduct into a foreign country, and into an other man's dominions so small a
number of men as would scant be in safety within their own home and dwellings.
Contrariwise, if he should overcome and get the victory, little praise and less
profit would come of it. Some others there be, who with a devise all new and
not heard of, would that forces should be sent to the King for his succor, but
they would not that Scanderbeg should bowdge, that forsooth a regard should be
had of his Citizens, or of the unruly multitude, who would hardly be brought to
receive or admit the command of any second or inferior person. This is the
point (my masters) wherein consists all our difference: either that
absolutely (as I have said) we do refuse to send the King any succors, or
else that you change your advise and opinion. What shall we send these
triumphant succors unto the Hungarians without Scanderbeg, whose only name
will yield them more succor, then if all of us were with them and he absent?
whom they especially do inuit, and whom all of them do demand and seek
after? Let us send them then a gods name, if any be disposed to go without
him. Cannot your Citizens live one day in rest and quiet without Scanderbeg,
and will you that the soldier being in arms, should follow the adventure of
foreign service without his Captain? Do you think that our houses and our
country shall be in danger without his assistance? and shall the soldier
find him self safe and secure in a strange country and a far off, being
separated and far removed from his accustomed Chiefetaine and General? What
is then to be done? On the one side your forces do hate and abhor to go into
Hungary without their Scanderbeg: and on the other side, the love of your
country, and the desire of your fellow Citizens does restrain and withhold
you. For my part my advise is, that a speedy leauy be made as great and as
puissaunt as may be, that we lose not the occasion of this war proposed and
laid before us: and during the other affairs and businesses of the Ottoman,
let us not doubt the estate of our own country. Furthermore, who is he that
will not promise and assure him self of an undoubted victory, by the issue of
this encounter? Unless it be some one whom his timorous spirit misledde and
abused, does terrify and hinder from being resolute? As touching Scanderbeg,
there is not any one of you but will confess, that it is more easy for you to
find a man to govern you in peace, and to administer justice, then to conduct
and lead soldiers marching with their Arms. But to the intent you may not
think that in this discourse, I bring you nothing but great and glorious
words: Behold here am I, who do offer my self with five thousand men to the
war of Hungary: and (if need be) do vow and consecrate my life for the
service of Jesus Christ, principally, and next for the glory and reputation of
all of you: and for Scanderbeg his honor, name and dignity.

This round and sharp Oration of Ducagin, and the liberal offer of his pains
and labor, together with the great authority which the man had with all the
Princes of Epyre, and with Scanderbeg especially, did soon work a change and
alteration in their minds and opinions. Scanderbeg him self was the first
that approved his devise, and after he had recounted and numbered up his merits
and worthy acts in the whole course of his life before past: he said, that
there was not any one besides him in all the company, that had spoken rightly,
and for the reputation of them in general. And he did often times repeat it,
that most happy and fortunate should the estate of Albany be, if it had many
such men of like devotion. This Paul (as we have Praises and commendation of
Paul^ Ducagin.
said) was one of the most puissaunt and noblest Princes of Epire: and amongst
other his virtuous conditions, he was most singularly commended for a certain
true, unfeigned, and perfect zeal in religion, and was held in high account and
estimate amongst all men: being descended out of that honorable family, from
which very many most famous and warlike Captains had been descended: and
especially Nicholas, Nicholas son of Paul Ducagin, his valor and pro^resse.
Peneropole, ^r Persera.
son of the said Paul, who far surpassed and excelled all his forefathers
and ancestors in the honor and renown of Arms. Of this man there is yet at
this day extant and remaining in Peneropole (a town of Thrace by the
inhabitaunts called Persera) a notable monument or mark of his excellent
virtue, and of the strength of his arm (if I may so term it) immortal. And
that is the relics or pieces of an enemies target, the which in a certain
fight of late (whereof the memory is yet but new and fresh) he did with one
only blow of his Cymitary cut quite in sunder from the one side thereof to the
other; that the hand of the Barbarian holding it then in fight, was so maimed,
as from thence forward he was never able to use it any more in the wars. I
take it not altogether impertinent if I have here a little digressed from
Digression.
the intent of our history: to the intent that both so honorable a father may
be the more commended in so worthy a son, and that an act so rare and
memorable, might not utterly be forgotten, nor altogether swallowed up in the
devouring gulf of oblivion and ungrateful for getfulnesse.

The whole power and care of ordering the expedition into Hungary was
absolutely referred and committed unto Scanderbeg: that he should do and
ordain all things as him self should think to be best and most convenient
both for his own honor, and for the well fare and credit of the nation and
name of Albanie. To the intent therefore he might no longer delay the ardent
desire of Vladislaus in so urgent necessity of his affairs, before that he
published the levy or muster of any companies, he speedily dispatched away the
Kings messenger, and willing him to hasten with all speed possible, he gave him
letters to this effect.

To Vladislaus king of Hungary and of Poland, Scanderbeg Prince of the Epirots
wishes health and prosperity.
Most invincible King, your letters I have received with no less joy then
contentment: Letters of Scanderbeg in answer to Vladislaus king of Hungary.
the tenor whereof having caused publicly to be rehearsed in a full and
general assembly of my Captains and Chieftaines, there is not any one of
them but with most voluntary and liberal hearts have advised us to embrace
this so fit and oportune an occasion of so just a war by you offered unto
us. And every man does frankely and freely affirm, both openly and in
private, that nothing could have happened unto them by the Divine bounty, more
agreeable and acceptable, then that they might by some notable service testify
their grateful and thankful minds, and bind unto them so excellent a
Prince, as also to give so fit succors unto the estate of Christendom. I am
exceeding glad, and do take singular contentment in this laudable devotion and
forwardness of mine own people, both in regard of your self, and in the
behalf of the common and public cause: in that our men of war, and all
other my subjects of all estates and degrees (without any persuasion used on
my part) do show them selves so chearefully and courageously minded in defense
of the faith and Christian religion, and so well affectioned toward your
Majesty. And to speak the very truth, who is he (if he be not hateful both
to God and men) if there were no question neither of religion nor of common
danger: that would notwithstanding refuse a war so just and so lawful? and
for such a king, by whom alone we may and ought all of us to acknowledge, that
we Christians do not only reign and possess our estates, but we live, we
breath, and enjoy the liberty of our speech? Who would not willingly take
arms, and even rush into manifest and certain danger for the people of
Hungary, by whom the public estate of Christendom has been in all ages
mightily supported and defended with so many trauelles, and so much bloodshed?
Who from the very cradell (as it were) and their first beginnings, have been
continual enemies to our enemies, and have vowed them selves for the majesty
and dignity of the name and profession of Christianity? Would it had pleased
God (most mighty and redoubted Vladislaus) that it had been in my power to have
brought unto you such forces toward this honorable enterprise, as might have
been aunswerable to the greatness of my courage, and good affection. It might
then perhaps so fall out, that Europe should not any longer continue oppressed
in this ignominious estate, whereunto it is now reduced by this wicked Amurath.
Neither should the fields of Varna and Basilia so often fume and smoke with
the blood of the Hungarians: neither should all the corners and quarters of
Macedony be so filled with the blood of the Epirots: both which peoples have
been made as the only sacrifices of others sins and offenses. We are even
now all of us at the very Note.
point of extreme danger utterly like to perish, whilst every one thinks
that he is borne for him self only and alone. But why do I in vain burst
forth into these bootlesse and unprofitable complaints and lamentations?
Assuredly I do not think my own power altogether so weak and feeble,
neither do I believe (if it shall please God that our forces may once meet and
join together in so happy a war) that the name and estate of Christianity
shall have any cause to sorrow or to be agreeued in the event and issue of our
fortune. For besides those fifteen thousand soldiers, which lately
discomfited Haly Bassa on the borders of Macedon: my determination is to add
other fifteen thousand unto them: with all which forces, as soon as I may
conveniently, I will begin to march and take my journey, being ready to follow
your ensigns to all events whatsoever. So God preserve you in all prosperity.

From Croy the third of August. 1443.

These letters being dispatched away to the King, Scanderbeg applied and bent
all his mind and study for the leuying of forces. First of all, those companies
which had An army leauied by Scanderbeg for the aid of the king of Hungary.
foughten against Haly Bassa, he caused to be made strong with new supplies,
not suffering any one of them to absent him self from this voyage: And he was
fully determined not to use any idle and unprofitable persons in this journey,
but such only as should be willing and resolutely minded. Then having sent
public Commissioners throughout the Province to that effect, he had soon
raised and enrolled to the number of ten thousand more. Paul Ducagin did most
largely make proof by the effect and by his deeds, of the good mind and
affection which he had before in the assembly, made show of by his speeches.
For coming to present him self to Scanderbeg, even with the foremost, besides
his own person, he brought with him also, five thousand all chosen and picked
men, and singularly well appointed. Immedialy hereuppon all domestical matters
being set in order, and the affairs of the Province well provided for:
Castriot having taken a view and muster of his whole Army, and having disposed
of the several companies, and divided his regiments as it seemed best unto
him, he distributed and bestowed all the particular places of charge and
office, and appointed unto them fit and able Captains and officers, as if the
war of Hungary had even then been begun, in that hour and very instant.
Afterward public prayers and general processions being made for the
victory: never did the people of Epire (who were always more inclined to arms
then to religion) so importune the divine majesty with their prayers and
supplications, as they did at that time for the happy return of their
soldiers, who were then to march out of their own country. All things both
divine and humane being thus well ordered and disposed, the soldiers now drawn
from their native home, did take unto them a new kind of courage; and their
minds and imaginations were continually devising upon no other thing, neither
had they ought else before their eyes, but the war of Hungary: neither did
they carry the show and countenance of any other then of such men as had been
even lately accustomed and exercised to embrue themselves in the blood of their
enemies.

Thus with great and exceeding joy had they advanced their ensigns even to the
Scanderbeg marching with his army toward Hungary, is hindered by the Despot
of Misia.
frontiers of Misia, when that either cruel Fortune, or the immortal and
secret order and decree of the heavenly powers, or (which is most likely) the
indignity and hatefulness of the sins and wickedness of the Christians,
which seemed now to approach near to receive their deserved punishment from the
divine majesty, did raise and stir up the disloyalty and perjury of one
wretched person, to trouble and break the course of these glorious attempts:
causing both perpetual matter of lamentation to the Hungarians, and a most
memorable loss and calamity to the estate and wealth of Christendom. This was
George VVhoruich (of whom we have made so often mention) at that George Despot
of Misia his description.
time called and commonly named the Lord or Despot of Seruia: a man (if such
graces and accomplements had any way furthered his virtues and good behavior)
of corporal beauty, and of an excellent majesty and countenance most gracious
and venerable: and one that in eloquence and gravity of speech was most rare
and admirable, and not inferior to any of his time, descended of a noble and
ancient family, and very aged and well grown in years. As concerning his
faith and religion (that we may not in this also omit his impiety) he was one
that did altogether neglect and contemn it: for being a very Atheist, and
having his pernicious mind deuoyd of all piety, fear, His irreligion,
atheism and impiety.
and reverence of the Deity, he did equally and alike contemn and deride both
the precepts of Christianity, and the traditions of Mahomet. On a time (long
after the battle of Varna) when this old Prince, being at least ninety years
of age, and flying from the face and presence of Mahomet, did happen to come
into Hungary, to desire their aid and succors against the Turks, he chanced
to fall in company with a notable zealous preacher Friar John Capistran of the
order of S. Francis, unto whom (after he Friar John Capistran.
had heard him make many excellent and holy discourses touching his revolt and
apostasy from the faith of Christ, it is reported, that he made him this
answer; That sooner and more easily he could be persuaded to hang himself, then
to abjure those traditions (though he were now past ninety years of age)
which he had reciued from his forefathers: giving us thereby to understand how
dangerous a thing it is, to make a mock and jest of religion, and of the Son
of God, and to follow after perverse and false opinions, when they shall once
grow to have gotten an habit within us. For the Despot in this persuasion
retyring himself from the presence of the Friar, was heard oftentimes to
reiterate and repeat these words. That he had rather his subjects should call
him a Prince miserable and unfortunate, then an old and aged dotard. This man
then now at this time did mightily cleave unto the Turk, and favored his
quarrel against the Christians, both in regard of his daughter Gathagusina
(whom he had married unto Amurath) as also because of the hatred which he bare
unto the Hungarians, but especially to John Huniades the Despot of
Transiluania, by whose aid and assistance (as we have before declared in the
enlargement and liberty of Scanderbeg) at such time as he was succored
against the Sultan, and restored into his kingdom, he took it in ill part,
that certain towns and places of Ver^ia, which had been granted unto
Huniades in recompense of his virtue and desert, were not restored and
redeliuered unto him. For this cause understanding of the preparations made for
the war of Hungary, and of the coming of Scanderbeg, who approached near
his borders: he stopped up all the ways and passages, and debarred him from
entering within his dominions. Castriot did assay, but all in vain, by his
Ambassadors sent to the Despot, to Ambassadors sent from Scanderbeg to the
Despot of Seruia, to persuade him to grant him passage through his country.
admonish him of the wrong and injury which he offered him: and he entreated
him in friendly sort, That he might not be the first which should charge him
with ill dealing, who had given him no cause of offense and injury: that he
would not of his friend and neighbor, purchase him for his enemy, and draw
upon him self the arms both of all Hungary and Epire. That he would not
suffer and procure by his means and occasion only, so great a loss and
mischief to all Christendom, which might swallow up both himself and his
estate and Empire. For albeit in regard of his daughter, he did so cleave and
adhere unto Amurath, yet he should not thereby hope and expect for any other
then certain loss and assured damage: having had good proof and experience
both of the infidelity and perjury of his son in law, and of the great
pleasures and benefits which the Hungarians on the other part had often times
done him.

These persuasions nothing prevailing in a mind so depraved and corrupted, and
the Prince of Epire now perceiving that he was out of all hope to get passage
by any other means then by the sword, he fully resolved with him self to
take that course: notwithstanding that both it displeased him highly, and that
he held it a matter of some danger and difficulty to begin the wars so near
his own home, and to hazard his forces at that time to the travel of arms,
which he had thought to have reserved whole, fresh and sound, and to have made
proof and trial of them against the royal army of a more worthy and
stronger enemy.

Whilst the Albanian army thus incensed through discontentme^t, did spend
their Vladislaus marches with his army against the Turks.
time upon the borders of Misia in the midst of infinite inconveniences and
discommodities: and whilst the journey of Scanderbeg was delaied rather then
hindered by the disloialty of that Apostata the Despot: (for there is no doubt,
but he could at length have gotten passage, though not without some damage and
loss of his forces.) Vladislaus in the mean time, both encouraged by the
letters received from Scanderbeg, and provoked also with an assured hope and
conceit of the honor and success of future victory: or rather being drawn
on by a certain fatal necessity, whereunto he was predestinat: such was the
particular desteny of them all, and Fortune (not contented nor satisfied with
so many deadly and mortal spectacles) did now inuit these men who of late had
been preserved, and had yet scarce breathed themselves, from their forepassed
miseries, to the danger of more lamentable and fatal perils; Vladislaus I say
and the army of the Christians, having marched through Valachia, and passed
over the Danow, Valachia. Danow or the river of Danubia.
were now come to Varna, with an intent and purpose to conioyne and unite their
forces, to those which were at Sea, and so to pass on with easy iournies and
ensigns displaid into Romania. The country of Varna (which did swarm with
such numbers of enemies shortly after, and long before hand was infamous through
the ruin of many mighty armies, and was a place always as hateful and odious
even to the brauest soldiers) is a goodly champion and plain valley, situated
on the other side of the confines of Misia Description of Varna near to the
mountain Hemus. Mar Maggiore, or the great sea: once named Pontus Euxiniu^.
Galata. Macropolis.
upon the sea: called Maggiore, or the greater sea, four days journey from
Andrinople, in a straight gulf between two points or promontories, upon the
one of which is seated Galata, and upon the other Macropolis. The bottom of
that valley on the right hand is inhabited with husbandmen in several small
villages or hamlettes slenderly peopled and frequented. On the left hand where
Galata stands, is a great marshe at the foot of the hills extending forth her
still standing waters, even to the other valley near at hand, which bends
toward the Occident.

Amurath being advertised of these troubles toward, was not any whit
discouraged, Amurath marches against the Christians.
but having lively repulsed the Caramanian, and reassured his country of
Natolia, he made no doubt nor difficulty of any thing, but only how he
might transport his army over the sea, by reason that the fleet of the
bishop of Rome and the Duke of Burgundy, did take from him all hope of
passage: in such sort that Infidelity and not able avarice of the Christans
helping the Turks to pass into Europe, at the straight of Hellespont.
he made no great haste to march against the Christians, till such time as
certain Merchants Genowayes (if it be true that is reported) did free and
deliver him from that care in consideration of a great reward promised and
agreed upon to be given them. For at a certain narrow Which being of old
named Bosphorus Thracius, is about 8. miles and a half above Constantinople.
straight of the sea (between the two seas of Maggiore and Propontide,
dividing Asia from Europe) was the Turkish army transported out of Asia, they
that passed them over, taking for each man his passage a ducat. There were
numbered to be about a hundred thousand, all which were gathered and collected
out of Asia, because the Sultan had a vehement suspicion of the faith, both of
the Greeks and his other subjects within Europe. After his army was once
transported, he marched on with speed and celeritie so incredible, that within
seven days he came to pitch his tents within four miles of the Christians
camp, near to the Varna or Dionisiopolis.
city of Varna, named by the ancients, Dionisiopolis.

The sudden and unexpected news of the approach of Amurath with so great and
mighty a puissance, made the Christians to keep good watch and ward
throughout their host, and in all the quarters of their camp: every man being
commanded to make himself ready to the battle. Vladislaus in the mean time,
and the other Princes his confederates entering into council, did consult upon
the several occurrences of their affairs, debating upon many and diverse
matters which were propounded of no small weight and consequence: but the
conclusion was, that they would hazard the fortune of the field, in case that
Amurath would accept the battle. The whole charge Iancus or John Hunyades
lieutenans General of the Christian army.
of the army, and the ordering and marshalling of the several squadrons and
troops was committed to Hunyades to dispose of it as he saw cause: in the
execution whereof he made show both of his best deuoire and endeavor, and of
all the skill and experience which he had of a long time purchased by the
practice, pursuit, and managing Order observed by Hunyades in placing the
battles of the Christians at Varna.
of arms. For he so placed and ordered his army, that behind them and at
their backs, they had the mountains to defend them; the one of the flanks
was guarded with the marrish above mentioned, and the other was fortified and
defended with chariots chayned and bound together. The Turks were the first
that began the fight, the which having continued for a while; the vantgard of
the Turkish army The battle of Varna between Vladislaus king of Hungary, and
Amurath the great Turk.
was received so courageously, and pressed with such fury by the Christians,
that (as if the victory had been already gotten by them) the same was soon
disordered and put to flight, and pursued more then two miles off: in so much
that Amurath himself had been driven to shift for his own safety, if the
two Bishops of Varadia and Strigonia (who were better skilled in their
Portuisse then practiced in arms) had not disbanded them selves unadvisedly,
and forsaken the Bishops of Varadia and Strigonia by their folly, hinder the
victory of the Christians.
place assigned them, only for the chasing of the enemy on that side where
they were broken: which was the occasion that a great and fresh troop of
Turkish archers on horseback, charging in flancke on that side which they had
abandoned and left undefended, did find an easy entry in upon them: and
they greatly troubled the ranks of our footmen, with a shower and tempest (as
it were) of their shot and arrows, which they powered upon them thick and
thin. Hunyades with his Valachians running speedily thither, presently upon
his arrival changed the fortune of the fight which continued for a long time
doubtful and uncertain. Afterward (having his eye open on all parts and to
all occasions) wheresoever he saw his own forces to have the worst, he
succored the left wing: which as then also was sore encombred, and was not
able to sustain and endure the shocke of the enemy: but he notwithstanding
still vphelde and maintained them in good point. Yet would he not hinder but
that Amurath in the mean time, found the leisure and opportunity to re-ally
himself, and by the encouragement of Haly Bassa he made head with his squadron
of Ianissaries, and renewed the peril of the encounter. Hunyades was in great
doubt and fear of his young king, whose fiery and haughty courage did give him
great cause to suspect some hazard and misaduenture by his rashness and
temeritie. And indeed it fell out that the unfortunate Prince of an hardy and
invincible Vladislaus his ouergreat hardiness or rashness.
courage, had broken in upon the ranks of the Ianissaries, fighting and
beating with the men at arms, upon the troops of horse, which served for the
guard of Amurath his person. Great was the number both of men and horses which
were there laid on the ground: some of them being slain, and others having
their legs cut off or maimed. In so much, that they could not any longer
march upon the plain ground, but they were constrained to make themselves way
upon the heaps of dead bodies: each pressing and rushing upon others so
egerly and fiercely, that a man would have judged it rather a mere rage and
fury, then any ardent and vehement desire of victory, that animated them on
in this conflict. The Ianissaries stoutly sustained the force and violence of
the Hungarians which were in company with their king, yet did he himself in
the end break in amongst them, and they most politiquely received him into the
midst of their battallion, whereof it ensued; That being held either as dead,
or taken prisoner, at the same instant that the Turks were now turning their
backs, and ready to fly away: the Christians also on the other side, as
having left their king did begin to abandon the place, and in steed of
fighting, fell to plain flying. In this manner both the one party and the
other, began to give place to their enemy: in so much that each of them was
ignorant of their own good success and advantage in so sudden and variable
an inclination of their fortune.

Upon these alterations John Hunyades seeing the Christians in disaray, and
most fearfully and shamefully to forsake their ranks, he made himself way
through the midst and thickest of the press: and being come to the place
where Vladislaus then Hunyades persuades Vladislaus to retire and to prevent
an utter overthrow.
was, he showed him the disorder, the affray, and confusion of the Christians,
he cried and called unto him, he requested and entreated him to turn bridle
and to yield unto the present mischance, and not to hazard all to utter
mischief, and to the misfortune of an entire discomfiture: that there was as
yet great good hope of the victory, and that it attended and stayed for him,
considering that the loss on his side was so small and of so little account,
that it appeared in a manner, as none at all: and that therefore it were good
he did retire himself within his Chariots and trenches with his men safe and
sound as they were, ere they were altogether scattered and dispersed. For the
loss of his life alone, would not only hazard and endaunger his own realms
and dominions, but the state of all Europe, and the whole body of
Christendom. All these persuasions and reasons notwithstanding, the king still
thrusting himself most indiscreetly into the midst of his enemies, after a
sharp and furious conflict (his horse being wounded and hought) he was in the
end ouerthrown to the ground Vladislaus king of Hungary slain by the Turks.
and so slain in the company of many of his Nobles both Hungarians and
Polonians. Hunyades for a time held good, and made resistance, endeavoring and
assaying diverse times, to have rescued the kings body, but all was in vain.
For the head being cut off, and fastened upon the end of a lance: the
Christians upon sight thereof, being on all parts terrified and abashed, did
seek by maine flight to purchase the security of their own persons:
excepting certain Valachians with whom their Chief and leader Huniades his
flight and imprisonment by the Despot of Servia.
Huniades (seeing that he could not stand against the huge multitudes of the
Infidels) took part also with the rest in the retreat: Holding it no disgrace
after the decease of the king, that some should remain to revenge the
ignominy of this overthrow, and to extinguish the memory of so dishonorable
a defeat. And therefore as well as he could, he saved himself, taking his
course after the sun set toward the coasts and confines of Seruia: where he
was stayed and made prisoner, and most shamefully put in irons by the Despot,
being restrained of his liberty till such time as those towns, whereunto he
pretended a right, were first yielded and restored unto him. The Cardinal
Julian (the author and procurer of the breach of peace which had been sworn
between the Turks and the Christians) made there also his last end: howbeit
Callimachus. Julian the Cardinal his miserable end and slaughter.
some write, that he was slain by his own men through the hatred which they
bore him: for being the occasion of that calamity by the breach of faith and
perjury committed at his only instance and procurement. And that being so
slain, he was spoiled and left naked, having suffered many reproaches as he was
giving up the ghost, for his ill and wicked counsel in procuring of this
war. The two Bishops of Varadia and Strigonia drowned in the mudde.
Bishops were likewise drowned in the mud, as they fled into the next marshes.
Thus you see the event and success of this journey, so famous and memorable,
which cost the Conqueror greater loss and bloodshed, then it did to the
party conquered. Some also do report, that Amurath after he had escaped this
danger, did show himself Victory of the Turks with great loss and
bloodshed.
much more sad and pensive then he was usually accustomed: and being therefore
blamed by his servants, he made them this answer; I would be loath, quoth he,
often to gain in this manner. In that place where the battle was foughten,
and the dead body of the king found, Amurath caused a mighty pillar to be
erected, with an inscription for a monument of his victory: and at this day
are yet to be seen diverse mounts and little hills, made with the bones of those
who were there slain and buried, which does argue that the slaughter was great
and wonderful: which fell out on the day and feast of Saint Martin, the
eleventh of November, in the year of our redemption. 1443.

This battle is somewhat otherwise described by Pope Pius the second,
nevertheless we in this place have followed Callimachus, who has set it down
with a most excellent and good grace, and without any partiality. This is most
certain and apparent, that the Christians even to this day, may find good and
sufficient cause to be discontented with the Despot of Misia, for keeping the
bands and army of Scanderbeg from being present at that battle, by reason of
his faithlessenesse and disloyalty. For it could not be but the good deuoire
and prowes of so many thousands of resolute fighting men would have done much,
and the only valor of Hunyades seconded with the sufficiency and good fortune
of Scanderbeg, how could it but have wrought some notable and singular effect?
And what could have hindered them, but that they would have borne a great
stroke in the happy event and good success of that battle? What sight or
spectacle more famous and notable could any man have seen in any age, then a
battle foughten against the enemies of Christendom, and directed by two so
glorious and renowned Chieftaines? Both of them were most hardy and valiant
soldiers, Comparison of Hunyades and Scanderbeg.
and most expert and accomplished Captains, of wonderful great force and
singular strength of their bodies, and equal and alike in greatness of
courage. Howbeit more fortunate was the latter, being one that had fortune
always more favorable unto him, as appeared afterward in the whole course of
his life. Hunyades was more aged and stricken in years: Scanderbeg much younger
and less exercised at that time in arms. And albeit he had not been in so
many conflicts and foughten fields, yet had he continually good and happy
success: being as fortunate in private combats between man and man, as in the
maine fight of plain and set battelles. Both of them were very acceptable and
agreeable to the minds and good liking of their soldiers, but Scanderbeg was
of a more pleasant conceit and disposition. The one did seldom or never
exchange the service either of the Valachians or Hungarians: the other was much
delighted, and did often serve himself of the Italians in his conquests:
taking a singular pleasure in the use of their arms, and in their counsel and
advise. Huniades never knew other enemies then the Turks: Scanderbeg in the
war of Italy when he restored the liberty of the kingdom of Naples, in the
aid of Ferdinand king of Naples, did purchase to himself no less glory and
reputation, then he did by his often triumphs obtained against the barbarous
infidels.

This fame and report of the overthrow and discomfiture of the Christians,
being every where dispersed, and Scanderbeg being certified (whilst he was
yet remaining in the limits of Seruia) of the grievous calamity and defait of
the Hungarians; took on as if he would have died for very conceit and grief
of that misfortune: and having a long while bethought himself, and casting
upon many matters in his mind, he resolved at length to turn bridle, and to
take his way to his own country. Nevertheless, to the intent his just grief
might not remain altogether unrevenged, nor the mischievous wickedness of the
Despot rest unpunished; with his army all incensed Scanderbeg spoileth the
Despots country in revenge of his ^^echery. Les appanages.
and enraged, he suddenly brake in upon his country: and ouerrunning and
spoiling it in most hostile manner: he made it feel the three extremities of
sword, fire and blood: which are commonly called and accounted the maintenance
and nutriment of the wars. As he was returning into Epire, infinite numbers
of Hungarians and Polonians, who had escaped from the slaughter at Varna
(according as their flight and good fortune guided them) came to seek him in
great troops and companies. Hungarians flying from the slaughter ^^ Varna,
relieved by Scanderbeg. Ragusa.
To all of them he gave good and freindly entertainment, and (according to the
extreamitie of their misfortune and calamity) having furnished them with
provision both of money and victuals for many days: he provided them also of
shipping to carry them to Ragusa, from whence they took their journey to
their own home and dwelling place.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
AMurath incensed against Scanderbeg by the exclamations of the Despot,
resolves to war upon him: but first seeks to undermine him by treachery
and offers of peace and amity which Scanderbeg rejects. Ferisee Bassa is
sent against Scanderbeg, and is defeated: Mustapha Bassa is sent against
Scanderbeg, and is likewise overcome. The murder of Lech Zachary Prince of
Dayna in Epyre. The cause of the war between Scanderbeg and the Venetians.
Mustapha is sent again with another army into Epyre: Dayna is besieged by
Scanderbeg. The Venetians leauie an army for the relief of Dayna. The battle
of Drynon between Scanderbeg and the Venetians. Scanderbeg repayreth and
fortifieth Balese with a garrison, and makes Amese his Nephew Governor of the
fortress: Amese thinking to surprise the city of Driuasta is assailed by the
Dryuastines and put to flight.

THE army of the Hungarians being overthrown and scattered, neither did
Amurath reap any great profit or advantage 1444.
of this victory, neither did he prosecute his good fortune, which then seemed
to smyle upon him, insomuch that it seemed the success of this battle did
rather abate then increase his courage: and so many losses received one after
an other did restrain him (albeit he had the victory) from being desirous of
any further wars. And this was the cause that no question was made, nor any
thing at all done touching the affairs of Epyre, which had been expressly put
off and deferred to the intent the Turk might be eased of that care, and not
find himself charged nor disturbed with a double burden of troubles and
vexation. But the new and often aduertisements which came partly from the
Despot, and in part from the frontiers of Macedonie: did break off this their
rest and disposition to quietness, and yielding new matter of wrath and anger,
it did inflame and set on fire their courages, which were before laid asleep,
and had seemed to have forgotten and trodden under foot all former outrages and
injuries. For reports came from all parts, that the enemies forces Complaint
of the Turks of Macedonie to Amurath against Scanderbeg.
and the army of Scanderbeg had spoiled and destroyed all things, and that
there was not any thing left in the whole country unwasted, not the very
fields which had been labored and tilled, but that both houses, towns, and
all the country throughout, were either destroyed by the sword, or consumed by
fire; and that all the pesants and inhabitants were slain and murdered,
except such as their hasty and speedy flight had preserved from their fury.
That the army of the Christians (over and above diverse sudden roades and
light incursions) had now twice freely and unrevenged with ensigns displaied,
and in full troops ranged over the whole country, so charged and laden with
pillage and with the goods of the inhabitants; that with the very money which
would be made of that booty only, Castriot might well maintain and hold
wars with Ottoman for a long season: that the affairs of the Christians did
daily flourish more and more: that their husbandmen did live at ease, never
hindered nor disturbed from their labor and tillage: that they had plenty and
abundance of all things. Contrariwise, that themselves (besides the fear of
the enemy which did daily oppress them) were in great danger and doubt of an
extreme famine, which did already threaten them, and was ready and imminent
upon them by reason that they had been let and hindered by so many roades and
invasions, from the manuring and sowing of their ground.

The Despot likewise filled the Turkish court with his complaints, and
demanded Complaint of George Despot to Amurath against Scanderbeg.
the aid and succors of his son in law, affirming, that even then when the
Ottoman affairs were almost desperate, his deuoire and industry was not
wanting, but that he had repulsed and borne off their dangers with his proper
damage, and the blood of his own subjects, at that time when it was scant in
the power of the gods themselves to provide a remedy, for that mischief which
was imminent and ready to fall upon them: yet that he with the body of his
own estate and kingdom, had preserved the Turkish Empire from destruction,
and that he sitting still, had borne and sustained the whole forces of the
Epirots. And for fear least they should have joined themselves with the
Hungarians (who attended and expected them on the other side of Mysia) he had
opposed the bodies of his people, as a bulwark and rampire against Scanderbeg:
and by means thereof had drawn upon himself the violence of a long and
dangerous war, to the great and notable prejudice of his poor subjects.
That he should consider with himself in what estate the affairs of the Turk
had now been, if by his diligence (and whilst himself was busied in the
war of Hungary) he had not diuerted and kept back the troops of such an
enemy, seeing that Vladislaus alone with his own army only, had made his
victory so difficult and bloody. That now by showing himself to have
compassion of the Turkish fortune, he had drawn upon himself (besides the
hatred and ancient rancour and malice of the Hungarians) the armies of
Scanderbeg and all the residue also of his neighbors, enduring and bearing
without cause, a most injurious and undeserved punishment: being but a bad
reward and recompense, for so great and notable a benefit: that it seemed most
likely, that Scanderbeg and not Amurath did triumph of the battle of Varna
and the war of Hungary: considering the manner of his dealings, and how
that with huge and fell troops he did enterprise upon the borders and
fountains, sometimes of the one, sometimes of the other, in such sort that
naught else was to be seen, but all the shows, signs, and tokens of bloody
war, and hostility every where and in all parts of the country. In brief,
that he being seated in the midst between the Hungarians and the Epyrots,
(both of them most fierce and warrelike Nations) should not be able to stand,
or resist against their force and violence, if his son in law did not take
care and provide for his security, whom in his distressed and most dangerous
estate he had prevented with the merit of so notable and good service.

The greenness both of those in the province of Macedonie, and the fresh
remembrance of the Despot his good deserts were of great force and efficacy,
and did much move all men; and they were universally of this opinion, and did
affirm it openly, that now was the safest and the fittest time, and it was
most needful and necessary to abate and pull down the strength and puissance
of Scanderbeg: for fear lest by his roades made upon the plain country, and
by the often molestation of the towns and villages, he might seek occasion to
usurp upon Macedony, and to make himself Lord and Master of that province:
that his malicious mind and the rage and fury of his stomach, did
sufficiently show it self of late, in that he had in a manner wholly
disfurnished and disarmed his own dominions, and left them without any
defense or garrison, only to join himself to Vladislaus with his greatest
force and puissance, and with an intent thereby, to abolish and extinguish the
memory of the Turkish name and Empire: that if this his fiercenes were not
speedily repressed, there was no doubt, but he would soon solicit and procure
all the puisance and power of the Christians, to join against them. Upon these
considerations, the Sultan was fully resolved to make wars upon Scanderbeg,
and did think forthwith and War determined against Scanderbeg
speedily to have gathered his forces, and have leauied an army: but forasmuch
as the greater part of his better men had been slain and consumed in the war
of Hungary, and the misfortune of Haly Bassa did as yet continue fresh in his
remembrance, and did put him in mind of that difcomfiture: besides that he
being now old and grown in years, was desirous to pass and spend the
remainder of his life in rest and quietness; he bethought himself of a devise
and invention, not so strange and new, as vain and foolish: whereby he
supposed, that as he had with notable art and cunning, and with singular
deceit and falshoode, found good and happy success, to deceive and beguile
others; so he might likewise ouerreach and entrappe him whom by open violence
and force of arms he could not conquer, nor bring under. In my judgment it
shall seem neither strange nor unpleasant to the minds of those that shall
peruse it, if I ad in this place, the manner and style of the letters sent from
Ottoman, by which he endeavored to entise and allure the mind of Scanderbeg,
and to try him how to turn and wind him on all sides.

Amurath Ottoman, sovereign of the Turks and Emperor of the Orient: Letters
of Amurath to Scanderbeg.
to Scanderbeg his most ingrate foster son, neither wishes health, nor
sends greeting.
All the honors and benefits, wherewith I could adorn, and raise thee to
greatness in my court, so long as thou were with me, I never made spare of them,
but bestowed them bountifully upon thee (o Scanderbeg) of all men living the
most ungrateful. I want fit words and terms to speak unto thee: such is the
multitude of thy crimes and disloialties, wherewith thou have offended my
majesty, and wounded my very soul, that I know not well what kind of speech
to use unto thee, to thee I say, who were my domestical and household servant:
for neither will any rough or sharp languages mollify thy hard hearted
courage, (whose nature is so fierce and arrogant) neither do thou deserve
any gracious words or kindness of speech: who have mightily exceeded and
excelled in all kind of fiercenes and beastiallitie. And (that thou might
omit no occasion to make thee hateful and odious unto me) thou have grown to
that madness, that thou did cast aside all care of thine own benefit, and
the safety of thy citizens, in comparison of that love and affection which
thou did carry to the Hungarians, who were lately armed against me. I
could be content to let pass in silence other matters, and not to touch and
handle those wounds which thou have made, if so be my mind might be once
persuaded to forget them, or that so many deceites, or such notable examples of
an ungrateful part did deserve to be concealed: nevertheless, I hold it
necessary at length (though perhaps somewhat too late) in some sort to
admonish thee, and to lay open before thee thy ill deserts, so far least the
fury of this thy pride and arrogancy do suddenly carry thee away headlong to
ruin and destruction, together with thy unhappy and unfortunate kingdom. And
then thou would be willing to make confession of this the obstinacy and
error, at such time as thou shall not have left unto thee any help or remedy
of thy affairs, being once brought to the exigent and extremity of a most
desperate estate. We have hitherto enough and too much endured these outrages,
and too too much have thou provoked the Ottoman Empire with thy great and
intolerable injuries: and yet have I showed my self too patient in suffering
and tollerating so many wrongs and mischieues. Do thou think that thou
shall be acquitted of that thy treachery wherewith thou betraiedst my army in
Hungary? do thou imagine that thou shall go unpunished for the withdrawing
of so many towns from my obeisance in Epyre, and for so many of my garrisons
which thou have caused to be slain and murdered? do thou suppose that the
other thy misdeedes lately done and perpetrated, shall go free and vnchastized?
as the army of Haly Bassa destroyed, so many invasions and fierings of my
territories, and the tumult of the war of Hungary, which to the uttermost of
thy ability, even of late, thou did further and set forward: besides the
spoiling of my father in law his dominions, because he would not suffer thee
to have a passage through his Country? I would thou would once at the last
remember thy self most wicked wretch, and not continue any longer in expecting
what will be the end and issue of this my displeasure and just indignation. Take
heed that these slight enlargements of thy prosperity, do not so animate and
encourage thy disordinate appetite, and draw thee on with foolish desire to
that pass, that thy fortune (being hereafter made much more miserable) do
move even those that hate thee (my self especially) to the pity and
compassion of thy hard and wretched estate. If there be lest any courtesy or
humanity in thy desperate and graceless mind, remember thy self yet at the
last, of the bountiful benefits which thou have received of me, and give me
no longer occasion to repent me that I have bestowed them so unthankfully.
Although it be an unseemly and uncivil part to object unto any man the good
and liberality that has been showed him; yet is it a token of too too great
ingratitude so soon and easily to forget the merit of fore-passed benefits:
wherefore I cannot but be sorrowful for thy forrune (o Scanderbeg,) and take
pity upon thy unhappy estate. For setting apart the safety of thy soul
(whereof as a man past all hope, and utterly given over of the Physician, thou
take no care nor make any account or reckoning) not yet to speak any thing
of thy contempt of the laws of Mahomet, and of the small estimat which thou
make of this divine Prophet: was there any one thing of all those vain and
blind delights, wherein the thoughts of men do take a pleasure, which I have
not most bountifully yielded unto thee, who art now carried away with the base
and vile regard of thy poor and sorry kingdom? Had thou not plenty of
armor, horses, great and huge trains of slaves, abundance of gold, silver
and superfluity of all other things, which do commonly allure and entise all
estates and ages to affect them? Did thou ever want any fit or continual
occasions to exercise thy virtue, or to advance thee to the glory of great
estates, and places of charge, either in peace or war? or to any kind of
honors which were fit and agreeable to thy years? In sum, who, in all my
courts, was a greater favorite, and more in my grace then thy self? was there
either stranger or natural subject, who amongst my most inward and secret
friends was more pleasing and acceptable unto me? How carefully and diligently
did I provide to have thee nourished and brought (up from the time thou were
first brought unto me) in knowledge and learning, in good manners and
discipline? and how willingly and continually did I advance the forwardness
of thy virtue, which I saw to grow and increase daily? sometimes by recompenses
and rewards, sometimes by all possible means of praise and commendation? And
as for the honor and renown of arms (then the which nothing is to be
accounted or held more honorable or commendable,) therein I made thee so
glorious, that in all kind of services whatsoever, neither did I take notice
of any soldier in regard of thee, neither did I seem to set by any of my
Captains in comparison of the grace and honor which I did unto thee. For all
these my merits and good deserts, thou (o Scanderbeg) have now at length well
rewarded me: having showed thy self to be such a one, that it seems I have
not exalted the man I took thee for: but that I have norished a plague and
pestilence within mine own house and family. But be it that the love of thy
native country did wound thy soul, and solicit thee to do as thou have
done; if thou had required me to restore the same unto thee, do thou
think that I would have denied it unto thee, seeing that so often and
vndemaunded (if thou list to remember it) I did freely and voluntarily make
offer of the same unto thee? But thou notwithstanding had rather to have it
of thy self by thy own misdeedes and iniquity, then as a benefit received
from me, or as a gift proceeding from my bounty. Keep it therefore still in
the name of God: neither shall I be discontented therewithal, and I protest
unto thee (so great is my clemency toward all those that have been in any
sort familiarly known unto me) that I do now freely pardon all former faults
and offenses, not for any merit of thine own (which is just none at all) but I
do it because even in the midst of this public hatred and dislike, it
pleases me to call to mind both the manifold benefits which thou have
received from me, and that first faith and loyalty which I did once find in
thee, when thou were with me: for that of longer time and continuance was the
good service which thou did me, then the offenses wherewith thou have
wronged me. Both Croy, and the state of thy father (although thou have seized
upon them by fraud and treachery) do I permit thee to enjoy frankely; on
this condition, that thou do voluntarily resigue or restore those other towns
of Epyre, wherein thou have no right nor interest, and which do in equity
appertain unto me, who have heretofore purchased them by the fortune of
wars, and by mine own virtue. Besides that thou do presently and without
delay repossesse my father in law of all the goods of the Misians as far as
may be, and what is wanting to supply and make good with money: and that from
henceforth (during thy life) thou hold it no less crime then fellonie, to
offer any violence, either to him or to any other whom we repute to be our
friends: or by any manner of means whatsoever to grace, aid, or comfort our
enemies; in so doing, thou may for ever shun and avoid the malice and
hatred of the Turks, and so shall thou have my good grace and favor neither
more nor less, then thou have heretofore and in time past, if so be thou
had not rather (though then all in vain) to seek place for repentance,
when thou have been beaten with the rod of thine own misery, and when thine
own presumption and audatious obstinacy shall have drawn me thither in
person to take the revenge thereof in a most merciless and implacable manner.
Thou know well the puissance of my forces, and thou art not ignorant of the
force and strength of mine army. Thou have before thine eyes a notable example
of the calamity of Hungary, and therefore need not further admonishme^t.
For a conclusion, whatsoever is thy determination I would at the least that
thou write unto me. Thou may have conference with Airadin Airadin. ^. gent
for Amurath with Scanderbeg.
our agent (a man both secret and faithful) and of whom thou shall understand
the residue of that which I would not commit to writing. Farewell, if thou be
well advised:

from Andrinople the 15. of June, and of the generation of Jesus, 1444.

Scanderbeg gave no credit to these vain and frutelesse letters, but both they
and he Subjects of Scanderbeg willing to have peace with the Turks.
that sent them were equallly set at naught and neglected. Notwithstanding some
there were of opinion, that this devise of Amurath was without any fraud or
guile, and they did ascribe it to a certain kind of fear and necessity,
alleging that the Sultan had been induced to make these offers and conditions
of peace for doubt of the war of Hungary, and through the vnweldines of his
age, which was then grown very great. Moreover that the tender age of his
son Mahomet, being as yet unfit and insufficient for the charge and burden
of the Empire, did give unto the father great cause carefully to bethink
himself of the future estate of his child, measuring the forces of
Scanderbeg, by the late slaughter of Haly Bassa; and being as much feared and
terrified, by reason of the singular faith and fidelity which he saw so many
people in Albanie bear unto him, and the good will of the Christians which did
daily increase toward him: that in the mean time nevertheless, he did but
dissemble and make an outward show, whilst with a fained kind of fear, he
demanded of Scanderbeg the restitution of those towns, and a part of Epire,
and the reparation of the wrongs which had been offered to his confederates:
that he did set down so many conditions without reason or equity, to the
intent he might obtain such as were reasonable and commodious: and that there
was no doubt but he would be contented to accept of such a peace, and to yield
unto such terms of submission, as Castriot himself would set down, and
prescribe unto him, without that he would make any further question, either of
the loss of Epire, or of the wars of Misia, so that the Albanois could be
content to abstain from arms, and to assure him of peace and quietness.
Wherefore, to make peace with Ottoman upon these terms, and to conclude an
abstinence from war for a time; could not but be greatly for their honor and
advantage, and the rather, for that himself was the first, that did motion and
inuit them to a parley: that therefore it would not be otherwise, but that
many and great commodities would thereby redound to all the inhabitants of that
province: that the accidents and issues of war are very doubtful: and it
was a point of small wisdom: neither were they well advised who would
prefer troubles before rest and quietness: neither ought any man to ground the
course and success of his good fortune, upon the first beginnings of his good
hap and prosperity: that the Hungarians had more often and more happily
foughten with the Turks, then had the Albanians: yet being now overwhelmed with
their late misfortune, they might in vain frame their complaints Sentence.
and record their unspeakable damages and losses: that therefore it was far
better by some act and show of courtesy and humanity, to make a friend of an
enemy: then to incense him more and more by disdaining and refusing the peace
which he proffered them so franckly.

These discourses being thus debated in the presence of Scanderbeg (albeit in
part Scanderbeg excepteth against the messenger and peace of Amurath
they had some appearance of truth) yet did he presently impugn and contradict
them: seeming to bewail and complain against the folly of the Epirots, that
they only of all the nations of the world (to their own excessive damage)
should be the last that would take notise of the wiles and deceites of Ottoman:
that it was a strange thing, that the vain, idle, and impertinent letters of
Amurath should meet and encounter with a belief and credulity far more
vain and sottish, and should purchase any credit or faith among them: or that
the wits of his people could be so dull and senseless as to think that
Airadin (being a Spy and Intelligencer) should be reputed as one sent unto
them in the name and credit of an ambassador. Besides, admit there were no
danger nor deceit in this matter, but that all things were according as
Amurath had written, yet what lightness and inconstancy were this, to give
faith and credit to their enemy rather then to their own acts, and the estate
of their own affairs? And that the fortune of an other rather then their
own, should make them to change their counsels and determinations
concerning the peace and the wars: true it is (quoth he) that Amurath is in
the declining of his life, and that the Turks at the battle of Varna have
received a mortal and deadly blow. Besides that other accidents do inuit the
Barbarians to desire rest and quietness: but what should these things give any
occasion to the Albanians, either to abate or to loose their courage, or to
receive such conditions of peace, as an enemy whom they had vanquished should
dare to present unto them who were the vanquishers? Neither was it any thing to
be regarded that they imagined that some of those conditions might be allowed
and other some rejected: for they could not any way accept of peace but it
would be most ignominious, neither could they so warelie or circumspectly
handle the matter, but that the Sultan would soon perceive both the
fearfulness of their minds and the difference of their means: but admit
that peace were made, and let it be imagined that Amurath would sit still and
be glad of quietness, till the tumultes, now growing upon the late overthrow
of the Hungarians, were thoroughly appeased: and till such time as he had
quenched the flame, that was now beginning to be kindled: it might be till then
the Epirots should enjoy the benefit of that peace, notwithstanding
afterward there was no other likelihood, but that he would turn the whole
violence of the wars, upon their necks, and with his full forces would seek
to oppress them, when they should in vain object unto him the violating of
the articles of agreement concluded between them. Neither was the age of
Amurath so impotent and decrepit, that it would make him utterly unapt and
unable for the wars. For it was the counsel and wisdom Sentence.
of a General, which ought to be respected, not his bodily strength and
puissance: and the prudence of the leaders was a matter in all ages more
usually to be redoubted, then the promptness of the hand, or rash temeritie
and foolish hardiness in using of the sword. That in his weak and feeble
body, did remain a spirit, sound, quick and watchful to all advantages and
opportunities, and a heart full fraught with mortal hate and extreme malice.
And though that Ottoman himself would not be dealing with them, yet it could
not be but they should find enemies. He forgot not also to show them, that
small and short could be the profit of that peace which they should make with
one so old, and who was now drawing to his last end, that the fierce and hautie
courage and the restless mind of his son Mahomet would aim and attempt
greater matters: so that they should be sure of peace, when war was most for
their profit: and they should not fail of war when they would be glad of
rest and quietness, by means whereof that which they should do, should not be
for the benefit and good of the Epirotes, but for the profit and advantage of
the Turks. What reason therefore had they to desire peace, seeing that the
victory was even already in their hands, and that the enemy himself did seem
to avouch no less, but openly to confess it: wherefore then should they not
follow the prosperous wind, and pleasant gale of their good fortune, and enjoy
the occasion which was so freely offered them, whereof, if the opportunity
should once slide away or be let pass: in vain would they repent hereafter
that they had not laid better hold upon it, that it was a shame for them now to
speak of composition: when the wounds lately received in the battle of Haly
Bassa were not yet cured, that they should first recover the Seat of their
ancestors, and assure the liberty of so many peoples their Subjects: that
then they should find the opportunity to accord, either by propounding or
accepting honest and honorable conditions of peace and composition, is it
possible, that the remembrance of the discon^iture of Vladislaus should give
them so notable an impression of fear, and terror that such an accident and
chance of war should alienate the minds of the Epirotes from that war more
then the Hungarians, who had sustained that overthrow, for the report went
amongst the common people, that Huniades did burn in a vehement desire to
revenge the loss and ignominy of the battle at Varna: and that he did
secretly plot and devise the means to raise a new army.

Upon these reasons alleged, all men were wonderfully encouraged, and in this
Subjects of Scanderbeg resolved to hold wars with Amurath.
as in all other matters, they were obedient unto Scanderbeg: his people also
were very much aggreiued, and repented them that they had opened their mouths
in that matter which was not to his liking, all being unwilling that he should
have any conceit, that they in any wise, or in any matter concerning his
service would refuse his advise and counsel, which they had ever followed in
the field and in the Camp. Whereupon the Prince of Albania having first of all
called the Turkish Ambassador to his presence, he held him in a long
discourse, sometimes apart, and sometimes in full assemblies of his subjects:
by a long narration of his losses and damages, both public and private: and
complaining himself greatly of the disloialtie and perjury of Amurath. And
thus having graciously entertained and bountifully feasted him for five days,
with a cheerful and glad countenance, full of confidence and assurance, for
fear least he (which was sent for a spy) should conjecture or imagine any
kind or apprehension of fear: he led him in his own company, and showed him
all the rampires, and fortifications, and all the courts of guard of his men
of war, giving him also a sight of the form and manner of his camp, and
then returned him with an answer in writing to this effect.

George Castriot, otherwise Scanderbeg, the Champion of Jesus Christ, and
Prince of the Epirots, to Ottoman Prince of the Turks, sends health.
The time was, wherein (as thou writest) thy self did once surmount me in
Letters of Scanderbeg to Amurath.
number and multitude of benefits: but now will I vanquish thee in modesty
and temperancie of speech: for I hold nothing more base and servile, then not
to abstain (even against a deadly enemy) from lewd speches and dishonest
terms. For this cause Sentence.
I have both seen and entertained thy messenger, and have received thy message
in all good and friendly manner: and to speak the truth, thy letters have given
me cause and matter of laughter, rather then of wrath or anger: considering
that even in the beginning and entry of the preamble, thou aduenturest to tax
me of so great ingratitude and infidelity, and yet presently after seeming to
be moved with a more tender kind of affection, thou alledgest unto me, the
loss and perdition of my soul, whereas thy self being a most vehement and
obstinate defender of an inuerterate and grounded error, art wholly ignorant of
the wretched end and destiny that does attend thee: from that matter, without
observing any rightes of war, or good form of proceeding, most unadvisedly
and imprudently (I will not say impudently) as a vanquisher to one vanquished
thou do propound and set me down many conditions of peace, and so strange,
that hardly can any free ears endure to give them the hearing. Assuredly
Amurath, although so outrageous speeches might arm the most patient man living
to return the like again, yet will I impute part of them to thy aged years,
and Sentence.
to thy natural disposition, (seeing it is a property incident to old men to
be lavish of their tongues) and the residue will I attribute to thy grief and
coffeehouse, which it is very difficult and hard to moderate: but especially
I am content to suffer it, because it is no part of my meaning or deliberation
to contend with thee in vain disputes and reproaches, but by just arms and
with the courage of true enmity. Notwithstanding to what purpose, I pray thee,
o Ottoman, do thou take on so both before God and man, as though that I had
given thee and not thou to me the first offense. Do thou count this to be
infidelity, that I revolted from following of thee, being compelled thereunto
by necessity? do thou object this for a crime and reproach unto me, that I
recovered my Country by virtue and industry? But go to, let it be so, neither
do I greatly care to be held guilty of this trespass: the benefits also
showed me, which thou so at large and so orderly do reckon up, I my self
could be very well content to remember them: were it not that the knowledge
thereof does draw with it the dolorous remembrance of an infinite number of
great and grievous mischiefs and calamities, the which, if the one should be
compared and recompensed with the other, assuredly the greatness of the
deserts and merits would soon be buried and overwhelmed under a greater
heap of the mischiefs and misdeedes. But I had rather shame should make me
blushe to hear thy self (as thou do recount them,) then that I should be
driven to rehearse or to recite them. Yet one thing there is, which (who soever
knows it) cannot but wonder and greatly marvel at, and that is, how either I
could have the power to suffer and endure them, or thou the heart never to be
satiate or satisfied, in doing of so many cruelties, and in the continual and
daily practices of such mortal and deadly hatred. My fathers kingdom most
wrongfully and injuriously have thou detayned from me: my brethren have thou
caused to be murdered most cruelly: and my self (not doubting or suspecting
any such matter) did thou of late most wickedlie vow and destinate to the
death: and yet for all this do thou (O Amurath) think it strange, that my
mind, (being even then not unmindful of liberty) has sought out some
means to escape and wind it self out of so hard bondage and subjection? How
long did thou think that I would have endured thy so insolent and proud
government? Yet did I for a long time suffer many things, neither did I at any
time refuse the yoke in thy service. All my life time did I expose my self to
all perils and dangers both public and private, both of mine own
disposition willingly, and at thy commandment, to show my obedience and duty
unto thee: every day did I hear speeches dispersed concerning thee, and
amongst my friends and familiars, I heard no other talk ordinarily, then of
thy snares and trappe^ laid for me: and yet was I persuaded for a long time,
that all thy words and deeds were free both from fraud, malice, and treason,
till such time as thy wicked and blouddy counsels and devises did discover
themselves most apparauntly. Then began I for the time to dissemble also:
carrying a watchful care and regard continually upon thy sub^leties and
policies, till I might find some honest and convenient mean to enfranchise
my liberty. Thou have not thereby any cause to be agreeued or to complain,
seeing, that (as the saying is) thou art wounded with thine own weapon: yet
are these but trifles (O Amurath) in respect of those things which the hope and
desire of my heart has conceived, and does aim at. Leave off therefore
henceforth these thy sharp threats and menaces, and desist from obiecting
unto us so often the lamentable mishappe and misfortune of the Hungarians. Each
man (good Sir) has his own courage, and each one his own nature. As for us,
whatsoever fortune it shall please God to send us, we will take and bear it
patiently. In the mean while, neither will we take any consell of our enemy of
that we have to do, neither will we seek or entreat for peace from thee: but
relying upon the divine favor and clemency, we will endeavor to triumph over
thee, with a most glorious and triumphant victory.

Adieu: From our Camp the twelfth of Iulie. 1444.

Ottoman having perused the contents of Scanderbeg his letters, and learning
of Ayraden by word of mouth the rest of his cogitations and deliberations, was
nothing well pleased neither with the one nor with the other: but on the
contrary, the fierce and liberal speech of the man, and his wonderful trust
and confidence (which he knew did not proceed of nothing) did engender in him
mighty fear and terror, rather then sharpen his anger and displeasure which he
had formerly conceived: and he took it as a manifest presage and augurie of
the difficulty of the war of Albanie. Notwithstanding, that he might not
bewray unto his people any appearaunce of fear or cowardice, it is reported
that in smiling wise (oftentimes stroaking of his Amurath his scorneful and
desp^tefull speeches upon the receipt of Sca^derbeg his letters.
beard with his hand) he should utter these speeches: Thou do covet (most
unhappy and unfortunate wretch) thou do covet some memorable and famous
kind of death, and thou shall have it (believe me) thou shall have it, we our
selves will see thy obsequies performed. And without expecting thy
commandment (most mighty king of the Albanians) we will honor and reverence
thy funerals with our presence, least that hereafter being in hell, thou do
complain that thy end was ignoble and dishonorable. All this notwithstanding,
the imaginations and thoughts of the Sultan were very uncertain and irresolute
in the midst of these difficulties. For the rumors which arose daily from
the part of Huniades, and the often messages of the unfaithful Despot of
Misia, that pernicious old wretch, who was now infamous through his double
treasons, and by the envious destinies was reserved, even till that time, for
so many miseries and calamities to the Christians: these considerations (I say)
did transport and carry away his mind else where, and did hinder and trouble him
from bending all his forces, and turning the weight and burden of the whole
war upon the kingdom of Epire. Mean while nevertheless, to the intent the
late injury offered him by the contempt and refusal of his friendship and
confederacy, might not rest without some present kind of punishment: he
concluded that if he did nothing else, yet he would trouble and molest the
peace and quietness of Scanderbeg, though he were not able utterly to abolish
it. To this effect he imagined that he had a fit and convenient opportunity by
the negligence of the Christians, who (as he heard) were grown very careless
and secure, through their manifold good fortunes and happy success in the
wars, and that Scanderbeg having dismissed his army, did keep the field with
his horsemen only; who did daily and carelessly range abroad far from their
Camp, here and there dispersed and scattered for desire of prey and pillage.
Ferisey sent against Scanderbeg by Amurath.
For this cause he caused Ferisey to be sent for, who was one of his Bassaes,
a man of a stirring and fierce disposition, and of a quick and ready spirit.
To him he gave in charge nine thousand horse, all chosen and picked men, and
having heaped upon him many great and large promises, in case he returned with
victory (as he wished and desired) he commanded him to enter into Epire,
with all the speed and secrecy that might be, that his coming might be felt
before it was perceived by the enemy. The reason that made Ottoman at that time
to send no greater forces, was either for fear that delay and protracting of
time might work their damage and disadvantage, or that the rumor of his
coming being blown abroad and diuulged, might awaken the Christians, and
give them time and leisure, both to advise themselves, and to eschew the
peril* by addressing and preparing new ambushmentes, as the event afterward
made manifest, to frustrate and disappoint the trains of him that was a master
in such arts and subtelties.

But whilst that I do so confidentlie set down all these matters touching
the Variety of opinions touching Amurath his profession of a religious life.
counsels of Amurath, both concerning his manner of mannaging foreign
wars, and the administration of his estate, I doubt not but many will marvel
at this my judgment and opinion in that it is repugnant and contrary to
others. And it may be they will be inquisitiue to know, what should make me
so to differ and vary from the common opinion, seeing that it is a matter yet
fresh in memory, and many also have committed no less to writing, justifying
the same to all posterity: That Amurath in his latter days, immediately upon
the battle of Varna, meditating and lamenting, sometimes upon the miseries
and inconveniences of Princes, and sometimes upon the temeritie and
inconstancy of Fortune, after he had ordered Haly Bassa governor of Mahomet
the son of Amurath.
his domestical affairs, and appointed Halie Bassa for governor to his
eldest son Mahomet, he presently deprived himself of his Crown and Empire,
and leaving Andrinople, and the care of all public matters, and retayning
with him but a very small number* as the companions of his counsel) he
retired him self into Asia where he vowed and professed a religious and a
godly life, according to the superstition of his forefathers. Neither did he
forsake that kind of life, till such time as the Despotte of Transiluania,
namely Huniades, was come before Sophia: and that the cries and daily
exclamations of the people, did revoke him* alleging that Mahomet by reason
of his young and tender years, was not able to support and bear the heavy
burden and charge of the estate, and that the credit and authority of Halie
Bassa, was not of such force in the Camp, as might make the soldiers to obey
and respect him. Certainly I cannot but marvel from whence this erro^ should
proceed, especially in an Act happening so late, and within the time of our
remembrance. I will not adventure to condemn those grave, wise, and learned
Authors, of rashness and temeritie, nor to convince them of untruth and
falsehood: yet this one thing I dare auouche for certainetie, and maintain it
of mine own knowledge, that the letters of Amurath above written, were sent
from Andrinople, the chief seat of the Ottoman Empire, under the name and
title of Amurath, and that both Ferisey and many other Chieftaines did attempt
upon the country of Epire, by his commandment and appointment, after that
he had in vain sought for peace of Scanderbeg.

But this error proceeds not from thence, for in the order and account of
the times, will not be found any confusion or disagreement, if we should
grant that these things did pass, before that ever Amurath did give over and
renounce his Empire. But herein my mind cannot be thoroughly satisfied, to see
that the death of the Sultan should be so unadvisedly translated from Epire
into Asia. For in deed, there is nothing more contrary to the truth, and
there was never any one heard of, that durst maintain or allow the contrary,
but that the siege of Croie did make an end Amurath made his last end before
Croy
of his aged years, and all ages ensuing will give the honor of the death of
Ottoman, unto Scanderbeg, as being consumed and extinct through pure conceit
and melancholy, and through impatiencie of grief: for that he could not
prevail against Croie. But the discretion and good judgment of the Reader,
will easily find out these particularities, and the probability of the whole
truth of those matters, by the diligent computation and conference of the
times.

But return we again to Ferisey, who in great secrecy was entered into the
Frontiers Ferisey comes into Epire.
of Macedony, and did in vain promise unto him self the reward and honor of
the victory, which he had before conceived in his mind, puffed up with so
great and a vain hope. And therefore standing very carefully upon his guard,
he marched on, approaching daily nearer the enemy, in manner and countenance
rather of a Robber, then of a true and just warrior. And yet could not he
for all that prevent the news of his arrival. For Scanderbeg being admonished
of all things by the Garrisons, that were disposed in diverse and sundry
places, or (as others write) by a spy, coming from the Court of the Sultan,
suddenly (as a man that went ever furnished and appointed to all casualties
and accidents of war) taking the occasion of time and place. He first of all
seized upon a certain straight and narrow valley named The valley of Mocrea.
Mocrea, (which was the only place where the Turkishe Captain was able to
pass) and he disposed it full of soldiers, all hardy men and well resolved.
The Bassa began now to approach, and the huge thickness of the dust raised by
the treading and trampling of their horses, did evidently discover that the
enemy was near at hand. Our men keeping their stand, did attend with no less
silence the discovery of the enemy, til such time as they saw them entered into
the hollow valleys, and environed with high and craggy rocks full of woods,
and that they were entangled on all sides in the Battle of Mocrea against
Ferisey.
thick and huge forests. Then issuing out upon them with great fury and
violence, suddenly and unexpected, they presented them selves to the enemy.
There were of footmen about the number of one thousand five hundred, besides
two thousand horse at the least. But these were reserved to a further and
better piece of service. The Turks (who had enough to do, and were
sufficiently beaten with the discommodities and disaduauntages of the place)
were on all sides assailed, both before, behind, and in flank, by the
Infantery, who killed and slew them at their pleasures. They notwithstanding
not forsaking their ranckes, but defending themselves with great hardiness, as
long as there was any hope of victory, did stoutly continue in the same place,
where the enemy had first charged them. But the horses did rather hurt and
hinder then benefit or succor their masters, and were in the end the loss
and overthrow of the riders. For (being as men besieged) they received and
took more wounds by far, then they could give or inflict upon their enemies.
And yet when as all appearaunce and likelihood of escaping this danger was
clean taken from them, even then did they show themselves more valiant and
hardy then ever: and they maintained the fight with the greater obstinacy,
almost all of them keeping the selfsame place to the very death, where they had
once set footing and taken possession, whilst they were alive: Some few only
being excepted, whom either the shameful desire of life, or a more urgent
resolution taken upon the place (for they scorned to die such a kind of death,
the desire whereof was more foolish and contemptible, then honest or
commendable) did make them to humble themselves on their knees, and to lay down
their arms, which made the conquerors to save their lives and take them to
mercy. There were of them taken prisoners 760. but of those which were slain,
the number was much greater. Thus the Barbarians making have to the prey,
became themselves to be an easy prey to their Victory of Scanderbeg against
Ferisey.
enemies giving unto the Christians a joyful testimony of their misconceited
and false imagined victory. Ferisey seeing the vantgard of his own army
enclosed and surprised, and the enemy busily fleshing themselves in their
slaughter, and plying themselves upon this occasion, as having gotten a fit
subject for their glory, he turned bridell with the residue of his troops,
and being smally mindful, either of his Princes instructions, or of his own
natural fiercenes, he was utterly unwilling in so sudden and unlooked for an
accident, and in a place of such disaduauntage, to make any further trial (to
his cost perhaps) of a worser Fortune: doubting both the danger and the
number of the enemies to be greater then he supposed. He therefore turned his
back to the Christians, and in his retire he cried out aloft, that it was
more commendable in an expert Sentence.
Captain to save some, then to lose all, especially in such a place where
(even as dumb beasts) they must give their throats to the cutting. True it
is that there be some, who write, that he was slain in the fight by the hands
of Scanderbeg. But the horsemen of the Albanois, did not suffer their retraite
to be altogether without bloudshedde, but keeping continually in the tail of
them as they fled, they did kill many of them which stragled and stayed
behind, and they pressed upon them hard, pursuing them continually, till such
time as they grew to be somewhat wearyed, and deprived rather of strength,
then of will and appetite to chase and follow them. These matters being thus
dispatched, and the Turks put to flight, without any great hurt of his own
companies, Scanderbeg with all those troops which he had with him, did invade
the territory of the enemy, filling and satisfying the desires of the soldiers
with the sweet contentment of prey and pillage.

The misfortune of Ferisey was seconded with the like desaster and mishap of
Mustapha, no less unhappy and unfortunate. For the Ottoman understanding of the
rough entertainment given by the Albanois to his forces, and that their flight
was not only profitable, but more then needful, and that their fortune (in
this case after they had been enforced to take that opportunity) had deserved no
just cause of blame or reprehension, to be laid upon them: he having his mind
maruellously troubled and perplexed, and being utterly impatient of all rest
and quietness) night and day, imagined and cast with him self touching
Scanderbeg, bending all his counsels and the uttermost of his despite and
malice, how he might work his ruin and destruction. Besides, his thoughts
affected nothing more (he being utterly ignorant of his own mishap) then one
day to see the fields of Epire, where he did hope to find some matter to
execute his long wished and desired revenge of so many outrages and injuries
both of old and lately committed: in such sort, that some secret force and
operation of the heavens, did seem to draw on the fate of his old age, which
(of it own nature) was fearful faint and timorous: Sentence. Old age
naturally saint and timorous.
but the troubles which were reported to be as then imminent from the
Hungarians, did not permit and suffer him, freely as then to discharge his rage
and choler against the Epirots. The glorious old fellow with the like humor
of wrath and malice, did not for bear to reproach and menace Huniades, saying,
that this was not the first time, that the tumults and troubles of Hungary,
had saved and preserved the state of Albany: nevertheless, because he could
not suffer nor endure the blood of his soldiers so lately shed, nor that the
bodies of so many valiant warriers, should lie on the earth without any
revenge, and especially because he was persuaded that the profitable example of
the former, might keep others hereafter from the like surprise, and learn them
to be wiser: and for that the troops of Ferisey seemed to have been
vanquished, not by any prowess of the Christians, but only by the
disadvantage of the place: he committed the care of this business into the
hands of Mustapha, of whom afterward Mustapha sent against Scanderbeg with an
Army of 15000. Turks.
he did often, (but not with any great good success) serve himself in those
quarters. Him he commanded to make a supply, and to fill up the companies of
Ferisey, and to increase their numbers with a new strength of 6000. horse, he
enjoined him moreover, and expressly charged him in any case not to enter
neither more nor less into the streightes and passages of Epire, where the
enemy held him self in ambushment, and where the peril was most to be
redoubted, and that upon no occasion, nor for the hope of any good success
whatsoever, he should not hazard himself to the fight or force of the enemy:
but that without any more ado, he should only wast and spoil their borders,
and to hold him self contented with this glory, that the trees and the
fields of the Albanois, had in some sort felt the force and violence of his
victorious and conquering sword: and that their country was burnt, wasted, and
consumed by the fire. These and such like goodly admonitions, did the Sultan
give to Mustapha, as though a man could prescribe unto the hearers, what they
had to do when their armors are once put upon their backs. Notwithstanding
when the time came that this should be put in execution, the careful diligence
of the Captain did not let pass or neglect any one point of this charge which
had been given him: but as occasion served, he added to the same many good
respects, after he came to consider the nature of the country, and to have a
view of the situation of the place. For scarcely had he displaied his ensigns
within the confines of the christians, but for bearing to march on with his
Camp at large, through the open field, he first of all sent forth three
hundred horse to beat over the plain champion, and to discover far and near
all the passages, and to sound the couerts and secret places which might serve
for ambushment; enioyning them, that if they saw any likelihood of danger from
the enemy, they should speedily retire themselves to the body of their forces,
or else drawing them on by little and little, they should suffer them to press
and follow hard upon them, till they were trained near to the place appointed
for their retraite. In so doing they should be sure to deal safely, and they
might hap to entrappe the wily fox, being entised so smoothly to the snare:
both for that his forces being the weaker, they should have no cause to fear
and redoubt them, and because they had little reason to think, that albeit his
numbers were at the greatest, yet in so sudden an occasion, he should be able
to stir abroad with any great store of forces. Now when these skoutes had
well and diligently surueyed all quarters, and had upon their return made
report, that all was safe and sure; the Captain Turk retayning with himself
Mustapha enskonseth his army in the borders of Macedony.
four thousand horse, enskonsed and fortified the place (where he meant to
abide) in form of a Camp, both with large rampires and trenches, and with men
of an hardy and good courage, partly thereby to assure the pillage, and partly
to prevent and withstand all the hazards and chances of variable and
unconstant Fortune. A certain small height or mount of ground rising, and
mounting it self in manner of a little hill, did make their fort somewhat the
more defencible, and less accessible for the enemy. Having taken this order
for his camp, he placed some for secret sentinelles and watches upon the
tops of certain high mountains, with certain tokens and signals to give
notice of the coming of the enemy. This done, the rest of his horsemen he
licensed to the spoil, abandoning the country to their greedy avarice and
cruelty, which by their continual bloody roades and invasions, brought all
things to incredible ruin and destruction. But he had first given them in
charge, that whosoever did not at the first sound of the trumpet, and when the
retrait should be sounded, presently retire himself within the camp, he
should be reputed as an enemy. Now was that goodly and pleasant country
harried, spoiled, and laid wast: now were the trees and plants rooted up and
destroyed, by the rage and sword of the Barbarians: the medows and pastures did
seem (as it were) to bewail and lament: and the flames of the towns and
villages (which were openly seen fired and burning every where on all sides,
did seem to cry and call for some to work their revenge. All the seed corn in
the ground being beaten down and trodden under foot, with the trampling of
their horses, (for it was in Autumn) the innocent and harmles earth did now
make show, that it should defraud the poor and unfortunate labourer of his
pains and travel. Nothing was left free or untouched which the sword or fire
could consume or destroy: of moueables and cattels of small value, and little
reckonning which belonged to the poor people, there was good store and plenty
to be found, but of men and inhabitants very few or none: by reason that the
enemies were their next neighbors, small was the number of them that remained
in the country villages, and the most part of the^ with their wives, children,
and all their families, and with the chief and choicest of their substance,
were shifted and fled away into the next walled towns, and strong fenced
holds.

In the midst of these exploits, whilst the fierce Barbarians (injurious and
odious even to God himself) licenciously and without any great profit, does
follow and pursue this manner and kind of conquest, and whilst he spends and
consumes his time and labor in coursing up and down here and there for the
desire and couetise of gain and commodity, Castriot in the mean time, howbeit
he was somewhat with the latest informed of this invasion, with 4000. horse, and
1000. foot, was now arrived to the valley Scanderbeg marches against Mustapha,
with an army of 5000. men.
of Mocrea, and his soldiers with great joy and gladness were entered within
these valleys so well known unto them, and which were as yet wet and moisty
with the blood of the Turks. There (whilst every one of them is going up and
down, secretly viewing his old and wonted lodging, and whilst the watchful
and careful mind of their General resting in suspense and as it were in
uncertainty, is devising with him self what may betide in those places so
solitary and full of silence: behold even in that instant a certain Epirote,
a man of great courage and worthy of better fortune (being then newly escaped
from the enemy, and marked with many great wounds, with the blood yet running
down warm in great abundance, every man being abashed at the sight) came and
suddenly cast him self at the feet of Scanderbeg, imploring his aid and
help: and with a brave and cheerful countenance he encouraged The speeches
of a peasant wounded by the Turks unto Scanderbeg.
the standers by, and thus incensed them, saying; That the fields were
desolate, all things being turned topsey tur^ey by the Turks: who being
scattered and dispersed in all parts here and there about purchase and
pillage, did dream of nothing but their prey and booty: and that without any
great pain or danger, they might make all of them in particular to yield an
account and reckoning of their journey so unadvisedly undertaken. At the first
Castriot seemed to be somewhat cheared concerning his counsels and
determinations, by reason that these tidings seemed to give fit occasion and
opportunity for his affairs: but after that he had more particularly enquired
of the peasant touching the estate of all things: how the Camp of the enemy
was seated, and in what manner he carried him self: then extolling and
praising the prudence of Mustapha, he began to admire him: and from
thencefoorth he judged that it would stand him upon, from that time forward
to be better advised, and to look unto him self and his affairs more nearely
and narrowly. Hereuppon being not willing to attempt any thing rashly, calling
his army round about him, and standing in the midst so as he might well be
heard of them all, he spoke unto them in this fashion.

I was wont (my companions and copartners in Arms) to give counsel, and to
Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers, consulting with the^ upon the manner how
to assail Mustapha.
set down the course and order of our affairs: but now it stands both you
and me upon, to take counsel together touching the state of our matters, and
the manner of our proceedings against the enemy: and this every one of you
will easily acknowledge, if you do but look into the event of matters: the
which (in case where reason is not of sufficient force) is the chief master
and director. We were given to understand, that the Turks as robbers and
free-booters without any order or conduct, without any regard, did wander up
and down the fields, flying hither and thither, as men that did fear any
thing more then our coming. For this cause by my persuasion and procurement,
and under my conduct, here are you come with this honorable intent and purpose,
to invade and set upon them with your forces: it is not needful that I tell you
what new counsels and directions the happy and oportune coming of this man
has brought us: you have heard himself recount, what the enemy does, and how
they do demean themselves. One thing there is which no man can deny, if you
consider the purpose and drift of Mustapha, both in the fashion of his
encamping and in the fortification and defense thereof with men well armed and
appointed: you shall soon understand that he carries not toward you the
countenance nor mind of a robber, as (it may be) you supposed, but of a most
advised and wary enemy. For this cause in my opinion it is requisite, that you
carry yourselues more considerately with a better deliberation against your
enemies, then (it seems) you were determined. Let us leave them alone that
are abroad on foraging, lest that in offering occasion to their Captain to
issue out of his trenches, who looks for no better advantage, we do give them
the opportunity of an easy victory against us: for whilst we out of order,
dispersed, and in disarray, shall think to pursue them as they be scattered
and disordered, it is to be feared lest we (being double charged by the enemy)
be ouerthrown by the^, and without all remedy cut in pieces: it is better that
we issue forth all at once, with our whole puissance, and that we break in
upon the rampires of their fortress: the which if our valor and resolution (as
it is accustomed) shall happen to carry, or if we may put their General to
flight, or may get his head (he being slain) to present and make show thereof
to the rest of the Barbarians to appall them (which God almight for his mercy
grant us) there is no doubt, but without any danger, you shall (to your
endless honor) attain to your desire in each of these respects. For, the
residue of these free-booters (some of them being excluded and separated from
the succors of their companions, and others of them being on all sides
besieged by your forces) they will be at your mercy, either alive or dead, as
your selves shall please to dispose of them. But in any case (my good soldiers)
take you heed that the filthy avarice and desire of pillage Good and necessary
counsel in time of service. Sentence.
do not carry you away in the sacking and spoil of the camp: for many are
the examples, that with great shame and dishonor this hateful humor and
affection of covetousness has oftentimes taken away the victories out of the
hands of the victors, and has given it to the enemy, when they have been quite
overthrown and discomfited.

This counsel of the General was universally liked and allowed, and it was
put in execution and followed with the consent of all the soldiers. The troops
therefore being marshalled and ordered according to the Art and skill of arms,
they were drawn forth of the secret and close valleys into the open and plain
fields, and they did now discover themselves to the wards and scouts of the
Turks: who from the tops of the mountains, by the fires mounting up on high,
did give notice of their coming to those within the fortress. Then was heard
the sound and noise of the trumpets, to the great grief of those men of arms,
who were dispersed abroad in the champion, and were busied in spoiling and
pilling of the country. Many of them retired upon the summons, and were
received within the trenches, before that our men could get near them, and
others as they were making have to enter, were sore troubled and terrified. The
noise and cry of the enemies soldiers, sounding and fearing them, with the name
of Scanderbeg. Many (whom the sudden and speedy coming of the Albanois, did
find without at the entry of the Fort) were excluded and shut out. And being
ouercharged with the spoil and prey of the country, they found them selves
likewise charged with their enemies. On all sides was the assault given to the
trenches, and at Scanderbeg assaileth the Turks within their fort and trenches.
the first charge (in a manner) their cariages and baggage, which they had
made as a Barricado to their fort, and the Targatiers that guarded the place,
were overthrown and cast down, with an exceeding great noise and confusion,
both of those that were excluded, and of our men, who striued pell mell to
enter with them. All of them made way indifferently and alike, and all places
were full of enemies mixed together. The press was so great, and the place so
straight, that there was no use of darts nor yet of shot. The fight was more
hand to hand, and they found it more advantage to use the sword, and certain
Mases of iron (a short kind of weapon which the Turks did often use in
battle.) It was a strange kind of fight, to see the Turks fighting with their
swords in one hand, and their fatal booty in the other. So greedy is that
people of catching Covetousness naturally in the Turks.
and proling of any thing whatsoever. The Christians increasing still in fury
and fierceness, did eagerly press upon them more and more, and without
intermission, did on al parts put them to utterance, filling the whole place
with fear and slaughter, till such time as Mustapha (who kept in the safest
place of his Camp, and did perform rather the part of an encorager the^ of a
soldier) seeing no hope of safety left by arms, and being constrained to
yield to his misfortune, he shifted himself from the danger Victory of
Scanderbeg against Mustapha.
by the swiftnes of his horse, at one of the ports of his camp which was
farthest off from his enemies. Immediately hereupon the conflict began to be
more moderate and less cruel, with less slaughter and bloodshed, by reason
that some casting away their weapons did submit themselves to the Christians,
and the residue partaking in the necessity of their Captain, did shift for
their lives with quick spurring of their horses. Many (whom the earnest
desire of their profit had drawn far from their fort) misdoubting the ill
success of their companions, by the cries and noise of the enemy, which they
heard a far off, did endeavor to save themselves by flying: but there was scant
any one of the^ that escaped: for diverse great troops of archers lay in wait
upon the passages, who annoying the^ with the abundance of their arrows, did by
that means discharge their anger upon them. Some hold that the whole power of
the Turks (excepting Mustapha and a few of the principal, who were best
mounted) was slain in that battle. But in my opinion they come nighest to the
troth, who write, that there were slain about 5000. men, but a far lesser
number taken prisoners, which amounted not at the most to above 300. and the
most of the^ mightily disfigured or maimed by their many and grievous wounds:
because that the soldiers being incredibly incensed upon the sight of the
pillage gotten from their fellows, and the extreme spoil and desolation of
their country, were carried away and moved to use the greater fury and
cruelty toward them. Of the victors there were wanting but 20. horsemen, and
50. foot, who were rather ouerrun with the horses then slain by the sword of
the enemy. Thus the Albanois being now possessed of the camp, the ensigns,
the baggage, and the cariages of their enemies, they invaded also and ouerrun
their territories: where, with a prize and booty more assured and of better
certainty, they recompensed that loss and damage which had been received by
the Turks, with a greater usury and advantage.

About the same time that these things were so happily achieved against the
infidels, Lech or Luke Zachary Lord of the town of Dayna upon the river of
Drinon in Albanie.
it is reported that Lech Zachary (of whom we have before made some mention)
was unfortunately murdered by Lech Ducagin the son of Paul. This man was a
personage who made himself famous through the happy and prosperous success
of his wicked actions, yet borne of a father who was a good man, and most
virtuous. Other reason I find none of his secret hatred and malice, nor any
occasion of his conspiracy against him, but only a damnable desire of Empire
and dominion: a sweet yet mischievous Desire of dominion a disease naturally
growing in men* Sentence* Lech Zachary murdered.
malady, naturally grounded and rooted in the minds of mortal men. For these
two Princes being next neighbors each to other, and Ducagin perceiving the
other to be without issue, and having no hope of any lawful heirs, he thought
belike that the succession of his estate, would easily fall and escheate to him
that could first and soonest seize upon it: whereupon he both deprived him of
his life, and at the same instant he injuriously usurped a great part of his
signiory. Yet could he not absolutely and fully accomplish his deuillish
intent, which he had so wickedly begun and attempted. For the Daynians (who
inhabited the capital town and chief fortress of that country) by their
consent, faith and fidelity (the only mean wherein they could make show
thereof) did testify their love and affection which they bare to their Prince.
And whereas the Lady Bossa the mother of him that was slain, being very old
and aged, was not a little pensive and sorrowful in that she had suruiued her
son, they defended He means the Governor of Scutary or Scodra.
her estate with great loyalty, till such time as she (induced thereunto by the
counsel and practice of others, and by the persuasion of her friends) or
imagining that the infirmity of her aged years, and the weak spirit of a
woman was not sufficient to go through with so great a charge* especially the
state of her affairs being so troublesome and tumultuous: she conveyed her
self to* Scutary or Scodra, and resigned both her The antiquity named it
Chalcedon, afterward Scodra, now Scutarie.
self and the surplus of her estate which was left her, into the hands and
power of the common weal of Venice, casting upon them the charge and whole
burden of all the quarrels and contention which was like to ensue and grow
between them and the neighbor Princes and Seigniors about the right of her
dominions.

See now how fortune prepared her self to make Scanderbeg famous and renowned
on the one side by the arms and forces of Italy, in that she bred a jar
between him and the Venetians: and on the other side by Mystapha, who in the
presence of Amurath as an upright judge (although envious against his enemy)
with a great discourse and abundance of good words (both to cover his own
misfortune, and to excuse the fault of his companions) did highly extol the
invincible prowess of this personage, and his incomparable experience in the
Art military: oftentimes repeating that it was needful to provide other manner
of forces, and with a more mighty kind of war to Mustapha excuses his
overthrow unto Amurath.
tame his fury and fierceness: that this was not the way to sound the mind,
and to try the stirring thoughts of Scanderbeg by such rodes and invasions, and
by the spoiling and wasting of the fields: that these were means rather to
incense and animate the hearts of the Albanois (who were a nation of a brave
nature, and of a high courage:) that these ambushments and wiles of war were
not to prevail against him that was his craftsmaster in such subtilties, but
that they would always redound to their ruin and confusion: and more then
that, by the course and custom of so many daily victories, by little and little
they should engender a contempt of the name and majesty of Ottoman among the
Christians: that (in his opinion) the best way was either altogether to
abstain and give over from making war upon him, or else, to frame themselves
to follow the wars with so full resolution, that they might at once and without
any more a do, vanquish and subdue this enemy, and so make a final end and
conclusion of the war of Albany.

These reasons and allegations of the Bassa (though the Sultan did take small
pleasure in the praises of his adversary) could not seem to proceed of
pusillanimity or want of courage, seeing he had before his eyes the like
misfortunes of all those, whom he had at any time sent and employed against
Castriot. Sometimes Haly Bassa, and sometimes Ferisey (who of all others was
least faulty) did put him in mind of their calamities, more singular and
notorious, and they did excuse unto their Prince Amurath, the unfortunate virtue
of Mustapha. Wherefore he also changing his mind (a common and usual thing
Sentence. Adverse fortune makes men weary of wars.
that the crosses of Fortune and adversity does soon cause men to wax weary of
wars) concluded to give himself some rest from this toilesome exercise of
arms, and from thenceforth no more to feed the enemy with the blood of his
subjects, but determined to surcease from war, till such time as himself,
poor old man who seemed to threaten more danger with his beak then with his
talents, guided and led on by his sinister and unhappy destiny, went thither in
person to seek the end of that glory, which he vainly promised to himself, and
the fruit of that victory which he had most idly conceived Mustapha sent with
another army against Scanderbeg for the defense of the Turkish confines.
in his thoughts. Yet did he in the mean time command Mustapha to leauy new
forces and sent him again into Epire, but with express charge, not to ouerrun
nor endamage the enemies country, nor upon any occasion whatsoever to assail
Castriot, but only to guard his subjects and his frontiers from all
molestations and incursions, and without any care taken for the purchase of
conquest or victory, to contain him self within his limits, and not be drawn
forth to any service whatsoever. And surely we must needs think, that God did
wonderfully provide for the good and welfare of Castriot, in that he inspired
the mind of so mighty and redoubted an enemy, with such a thought and War
between Scanderbeg and the Venetians.
resolution, even at that time, when he was entered into a new war against the
Venetia^s.

The coming of Mustapha and the news of the massacres of the prince of Dayna,
being reported at one and the same instant to Scanderbeg, made him diversely
distracted in his thoughts and cogitations, and did greatly perplexe his
mind. Notwithstanding the Barbarian (with whom it was an ordinary matter to
be vanquished) did not so much trouble him, but the horrible accident of that
Prince his singular friend: and his end no less cruel then lamentable, did so
oppress his heart with grief, that it was thought it would go near to kill
him. Besides this, his sorrow was much aggrauated when he heard of the
determination of the Lady Bossa, and that the Venetians had undertaken her
cause, and made it their own proper quarrel: for true it was, that the
governors of the places next adjoining had fortified all of them, and
principally the town of Dayna, with strong and great garrisons. Behold here now
the occasion of their dissension, The causes of the war between Scanderbeg
and the Venetians.
and the original of the quarrel: the Prince of Epire found himself aggrieued
with the Venetians, in that they would seem to pretend any right to the state
of him that was dead, and would challenge it unto them selves, seeing that the
resignation which the mother had made unto them was of no force, concerning
those goods which her son in his life time had ordained to be left unto him:
and there was no reason, that the rash wilfulnes of the mother, should be any
lawful prejudice or make void the intent and meaning of the son. For it was
evident and apparent, that there was a former compact past between him and
Zachary, that he that was the suruiuer of them twain, should be the others
successor, and enjoy his dominions: and this their agreement was confirmed by a
solemn oath between them: what the right of law was in that case, either for
the one or the other, I leave to the lawyers to debate it, and true it may be,
that the divine power by the fortune of the war did equally divide their
controversy. But here in the mean time may also good Christianlike minds see
the fruits and effects of ambition and avarice. In this doubtful state of his
affairs, Scanderbeg being more careful now then ever, did continually keep
near the forces of Mustapha, and coursing up and down every where with a very
small numbar: (sometimes by aduenturing him self too far, and sometimes by
faining of flight, and by retiring of his colors in disorder) in vain did he
seek to provoke the wily General of the Turks to issue forth to the fight, the
which (to his cost) he had once made proof of. But now seeing that he refused
the combat, whereby he was out of all hope either of doing of any exploit, or of
any means to surprise or circumue^t him: he there left all those forces which
he had with him upon the borders of the enemy, to prevent all new occasions of
tumults, and to repress the insolency of the Turks: and himself bending all
his thoughts to the preparation of the war of Daina, with a very small company
attending him, took his journey presently toward Croy. There (knowing that the
deciding of this debate was not likely to be otherwise then by force of arms)
he speedily commanded a public levy of soldiers: and himself riding all over
the province with some of his most notable and ancientest Captains, for the
raising of men, he assembled a mighty army. And then without any delay (before
that those of Daina should have the leisure to provide The siege of Daina.
themselves of corn) he compassed their city with his forces round about,
girding them in with a strong and straight siege, and omitting nothing that was
to be done (sometimes by gentle persuasions, sometimes by rough entreaty) he
employed all his study and endeavors, to solicit them within to yield themselves
to his devotion: for he was in great doubt, least if this opportunity of
seizing upon the town did slip from him, the news thereof flying in the mean
time to Venice, would animate and stir up the Senators of that city more
earnestly to take upon them the defense thereof, and send thither fresh succors
and stronger forces out of Italy. He refrayned notwithstanding from the
spoiling of the country (which is commonly the first mischief that follows
upon the siege of any place) for doubt, lest the minds of the Danians being
more eagerly bent, should be made the more constant and resolute to continue
faithful to the enemy: neither did he assay with artilery to batter their
walls, nor to force the town by Escalados or assalts: but only debarring the
inhabitants from all manner of renewing and refreshing themselves with victuals
or munitions, he threatened them with the danger of famine, which was not far
from them, and with the discommoditie of a long and tedious siege: by means
whereof (when they should hereafter be constrained to submit themselves unto
him, then all too late imploring his mercy and compassion) they should feel
all these extremities, which the just rigor of a conqueror should impose upon
them. The The Venetians provide for the relief of Dayna against Scanderbeg.
Governors of those provinces which were subject to the Venetians, and the
Captains of the towns near adjoining being advertised of the state of the
besieged, gave notice to the Signiorie of Venice, and having commission
returned unto them with no less speed and celeritie, they leauied suddenly in
great have soldiers of all sorts, both Albanois and Italians (with all which
kind of people the next garrisons were ordinarily stuffed by the order of the
Venetians) and with these they marched on with full purpose Lech Dusman and
Peter Span against Scanderbeg.
to succor the Dainians. These troops were greatly aided and augmented by the
coming of two persons, by nation Albanois, Lech Dusman, and Peter Span or
Spaniard. These men had sworn and promised to Scanderbeg their continual
service and deuoit against the Turks, and they never failed him: but the
confederacy and amity which they had contracted for a long time before with
the Signiory of Venice (by reason that they were near neighbors to Driuasta,
and some other places of the Venetian jurisdiction, Driuasta.
besides the bond of innumerable benefits received from their estate in times
past) did now bind the^ to their assistance, and were the occasion of their
preparations to do them service. Scanderbeg was no whit abashed at the
difficulty and greatness of this war, but did receive these news with
great joy and gladness, and without any further delay divided his forces,
which exceeded the number of 14000. men: he appointed to employ against his
enemy only 7000. horse, and 2000. foot. The resisidue (having provided for
all occasions) he left to hold the siege before Dayna. The which
(notwithstanding the rumor of the enemies approach) he determined notto leave
or to abandon. Thus the undaunted Chiefrain by his singular prudence, having
separated his forces into 3. parts, did thereby occasion his adversaries,
through a vain and foolish kind of hope, to triumph over him, and to grow the
more in heart and courage against the^. For the Daynia^s seeing Castriot to be
absent, did think now that they were no longer besieged, for their courts of
guard at the ports, were not so strong as was usual, but they grew to be
neglected, the walls were not so well manned: and oftentimes might the
soldiers of the enemy without, jointly with the citizens within, have entered
into their gates which were diverse times left open. To be brief, they
growing, in a manner careless of al things, only the imminent danger of famine
did seem to perplexe them, which neither was to be conte^ned by their audacity,
nor avoided by their valor and magnanimity. Notwithstanding the honor and
reputation of their faith which they had once passed and promised, did assure
their corages, and did bind them to endure the rigor of all difficulties.
Besides the aduertisements touching their confederats (who advanced them selves
with great iourneis to mitigate these mischieues and to deliver them from this
misery) did greatly comfort their afflicted spirits, and made them to conceive
an assured hope of deliverance. Moreover persuading themselves that Castriot
was not able to make head against so great a puissance, they did look every
hour in great care and expectation to see some messenger, and to hear some
certain news of the victory (which in their opinion they did promise unto
their own fancies.) So is Sentence.
it for the most part with all men, who (the more power they do in their
minds attribute unto fortune) with so much the more devotion are they obedient
unto her.

You need not doubt but that Mustapha was exceedingly joyous of these troubles
and tumults in Epire, and by reason of the absence of Scanderbeg, his courage
which was before abated, did now begin to return and to be revived, and a
certain secret oblivion of his former misfortune, had now abolished the
remembrance thereof out of his mind. Feign would he have assailed the garrison
there left upon the borders, and willingly would he have made a sacrifice to
the just wrath of his Prince, and to his own ambition of those soldiers, whom
he supposed to be weakened by the absence of their Chieftaine, and the rest of
their companions. He had an infinite desire to be made a partner with the
Venetians in this glory and triumph over his deadly enemy: and he was more
intentive to the present advantage and opportunity, then mindful of the charge
and commandment of his Sovereign. But on the other side, the severity of
Ottoman, and the sundry examples of others, (whose disobedience had been most
grievously punished) did with hold and stay his doubtful and variable mind.
Last of all, though he were partly persuaded that the Sultan would not disallow
his resolution, grounded upon so good an opportunity, yet he took this to be
the surest way, that men should rather deem him negligent, by the command and
direction of his lord and master: then fortunate, by his own pride and
temeritie.

In the midst of all these tumults, whilst the host of the Venetians being
assembled at Scutarie, did there consume the time in the provision of things
necessary, Scanderbeg had passed over the river of Drynon with his army (which
was an evident sign of his hardiness and assurance) and preventing the
counsels of his adversaries, he marched on resolutely to encounter them even
within the bowels of their own dominions, Scanderbeg marches against the
Venetian ar^ie*
and as a man may say, upon their own dung hill. The Venetian could not endure
this brauado, but dislodging incontinently with his army, he passed on to
affront him presently: now did the cries of the soldiers, and the rebounding
sound of the drums and trumpets on either side bewray the approach and coming
of the enemy. Then did every man take a good courage to himself: and
cheerfully did they make show of their fierce and coragious stomachs. The very
eyes of the soldiers seemed to flame with fury, and on either side was heard a
mighty noise (an argument of their wrath and choler). Then were prayers,
vows, and shows of devotion in the mouths of the leaders, and also of the
soldiers, and every man showed himself a good Christian and recommended
himself unto God. Either part did hold their arms to be just and lawful, and
each did assure themselves that they were in the right, and that they had the
better cause and quarrel. The intent of every of them was only to repulse the
injury, and all of them seemed to have like reason for the war: the Prince
of Albanie, to recover the possession of the town, detained from him contrary
to all right and equity: and the others to defend and protect the^, who had
chosen them for their protectours. The former were encouraged through their
merits and deserts in so many valiant acts and exploits daily achieved upon
the Barbarians, and through the remembrance of their honor and renown lately
gotten upon Mustapha: the latter though they were well provided for all things
needful for a greater war, and though they might (not without good cause)
promise unto themselves the hope of victory, yet (if they should happen to
have the worst) they were not for all that such as would be dismayed or stoop
to the fortune of the enemy: for every man knew the unvanquished power of the
Venetians, and that they were able continually to supply new and greater forces
to maintain the quarrel, and to bring the war to a better issue: in such
sort that this enterprise of Dayna was like to be the confusion of the Duke of
Albany. Yet did the hard and miserable estate of the besieged, greatly perplex
them, because they were certified that there remained a strong power before the
city. By this time were the armies come in sight, and now did approach the
day of good or ill fortune to the one side or the other: immediately there
followed a strange and sudden silence in both armies, each of them resting
themselves with great quietness. The ensigns being fastened on the earth, the
Marshals did presently make choice of a fit place to encampe in, where both the
soldier might lodge most at his ease, and the leaders (by their often
exhortations) might confirm those which were resolute, and encourage others
who were not fully resolved. The government of the Venetian army was committed
to Daniell Iurich of Sebenca, a man of an assured experience and practice in
deeds of arms (the common people call Daniell Iurich he was Voiuada, or
governor of Scutarie.
him the Voyuada:) he hau^^g appointed every man to his place, and having
prepared all things ready to the combat, thus began to speak unto his
soldiers.

Such is the folly and temeritie of men, that they think all things to be
lawful for The oration of Iurich General of the Venetian army. Sentence.
them, when their thoughts are once tickled with the prosperous success and
increase of their fortune. Hereof it proceeds, that the mind having no power
to command it self, and being altogether impatient of her present prosperity,
and wandering sometimes here, and sometimes there, it troubles the common rest
of others, and for her own pleasure does move and procure wars: till such
time as in the end by a miserable and wretched issue, it receives the just
chastisement of her vain conceit and imagination. An example hereof (my good
friends) is here represented unto us in this our enemy, no less proud then
presumptuous: who by his unhappy audacity and his excessive fortune is now
grown to this point, that he dares to raise war upon war, and to molest
those Princes of whom (if he will consider the benefits he has received) there
is not any one thing, excepting his temeritie, but he may attribute it unto
them wholly. But the good hap of his affairs has now so perverted his senses,
that it behooves us not only at this time to take arms publicly, but in
private also to hate him mortally. Behold and turn aside your eyes to the
pitiful estate of the Dainians, to the intent the just wrath of their injury,
and the honest care of your friends, may animate your courage. You ye citizens
of Scutarie, have many of your children, many of your brethren, many of your
kinsmen, friends and allies both Sclauonians and Italians (all of them hardy
and good soldiers) enclosed and shut up within that garrison, where being
mewed up by disloialtie of the enemy, and being brought to the uttermost point
of all extremities: they have no other hope remaining, but only in your valor
and virtue. Long time have they attended you in sorrow, in suspense, in great
care and expectation: longing and looking aloft from off their walls, that
either your powers should now restore them to their liberty: or else having
lost all hope of comfort, they must be enforced shamefully to submit
themselves, and to leave their lives to the mercy of Castriot, and under the
view of his pride, who is so insolent and unmerciful in his victory, as his
like is no where to be found, as one who having bin of a long time nourished up
among the Barbarians, does excel in all barbarousnes and inhumanity. For (to
omit other matters) can there be any greater temeritie then this? can there be
any folly more notable then by so lewd an example to debar men from the
liberty of protecting of others in the right of their own goods and
possessions? And by means thereof most wickedly to purchase to him self all that he can seize upon, and under this vain pretense of I know not what
co^pact and agreement, to excuse his greedy desire of command: abrogating by
this means, and taking away from men all the rights of their liberty? His
ambitious mind is enraged that the Venetians should be preferred before him by
the Dainians: and he impugneth the voluntary mind of the mother in the
disposition of the heritage of her own son deceased: but you may see how the
malladie and infirmity of his own mind, and the vehemence of his despite
has so blinded and inueigled him, that being transported with envy, he
runs headlong to his own destruction: for he could not endure to put off the
care of this war, till such time, as (having chased away this enemy the
Turk, who is daily at his doors) he might have bin the better able to unite
all his forces and to have come with all his whole power to execute his hatred
against the Venetians: neither has he bin so well advised as to join battle
against us with any great forces, though it be in sight of the town besieged.
But he (this expert warrior) has separated his forces here and there, showing
himself therein a more upright judge to you, then to himself, and to further
your cause more then his own. And whilst that the siege of Dayna on the one
side, and the care and doubt of Mustapha on the other, does not suffer his mind
to enjoy any rest or quietness, he has reserved this army not as a fit enemy
able to encounter with you, but as a sacrifice rather to be slaughtered by you.
Wherefore seeing you are so many brave warriors, against an handful of robbers:
go to the^, and charge them valiantly and cease not till you have utterly
overthrown them. Let your valor and prowes enforce their foolish and
vaineglorious hearts, either by love or by constraint to acknowledge and
confess, that themselves are guilty of the injustice of this war, which
they have undertaken so injuriously. And these being once chastised for their
folly, you shall not need to take any further care, nor to redoubt those their
forces which are remaining before Dayna. For then, pursuing the good success
of this battle, we may at one and the same instant prevent their purpose by
going to charge them first, and they within issuing out upon their backs,
shall enclose and hedge them in on all sides, by means whereof we shall finish
and bring to an end, a most notable piece of service, and exceedingly famous.

The oration of the king of Epire was more mild and not so sharp and
inuectiue, neither was it so replenished with ill speeches tending to the
disgrace of others, but (as some say) it was near to this effect that
follows.

Whether the cause of this present war be just or not, it is not now time (my
good The oration of Scanderbeg to his army.
friends quoth he) to make any question, seeing we are come armed into the
field, nether is that now to be debated on, when we are in view of the enemy:
considering especially, that my self was the man that made you to take arms,
with whom you never yet had just cause to be agreeued, either for refusing any
war that was lawful, or for seeking any quarrels which were unlawful and
unjust. But seeing it is so; that in all humain affairs nothing does more
torment the conscience of good men, nor is more curiously respected by men of
war before they come to fight with their enemy, the^ to enquire the justice
of the quarrel, and that they may be resolved whether they shall not contend
with God, as well as men: for my part (my good citizens) I am content therefore
that if any of you do think that my motion, in the undertaking of this war, be
to be condemned of rashness or temeritie, or if you do think me to be too
greedy and desirous of new wars and troubles: I shall be well pleased I say,
neither will I hinder it, if presently you trusse up baggage, and that we
return every man to his home. For I am not he that would train you by force
to hazard your persons I know not wherefore: neither do I desire, in this
troublesome estate of my affairs and chiefest tumults of Epire, of an
obstinate mind to seek new quarrels and causes of contention with the
segniorie of Venice. If therefore my attempt and purpose be exempted and free
from blame, and the causes of this war do seem unto you just and
necessary: then is it your part also, and none but you have reason (as being
interested in the cause) to effect by your virtue and courageous perseverance,
that the happy end and event do show and testify your arms to be accompanied
with right and equity. For nothing can be more reproachful to him that is
nobly minded, neither can any thing be more repugnant to the dignity and
majesty of a Prince, then to suffer by timorousness and pusilanimitie, his
right to be usurped by an other: and to hold (as a man would say) his finger
under his girdle, when he knows his right is not to be had, but by force of
arms. There is none of you but knows the hearty amity and the inward
conversation which was ever between me and the Seignior Lech Zachary, whose
death (being no less cruel then grievous) has stirred on all parts so many
troubles, and that he and I (induced thereunto by other mutual affection) did
with one consent, set down this as a law inviolable, that which soever of us
two should first decease without issue, should be seized (by the compact and
the right of suruiuorship) of the other his heritage and dominions. Now the
Venetians have gotten his lands, and I am left heir only of his tears to
lament the iniquity of his fortune. Did not I by this agreement hazard the
renouncing of my own patrimony, if my accident (as the danger of death is
common to all men) had taken me first away out of this life? I have no reason
therefore, neither am I determined to give over the war, except (God being
against me) I be put to the worst, or that I be invested in the quiet
possession of Dayna: for none but fools can blame me for this war, whereunto
so good reason, and so honest a cause does persuade me. Let no man marvel to
see me in arms against Christians, against the Venetians, against my next
neighbors, seeing they have given me so just an occasion, and themselves have
in a manner, put the weapons into my hands. True it is, we do with a straight
siege press the town and country of our own kinsmen, of our own blood and
alliance; but yet we do it not with so ill an intention as they imagine,
neither are we lead thereunto, either upon a greedy desire of command and
Empire, or delight of murder and bloodshed: but only to wring that city out
of the hands of our adversary, and to draw the ungrateful inhabitants (at the
least) to a confession and acknowledgement of their error and obstinacy. We
are come to fight with the enemy, who has first provoked us by diverse acts of
hostility. Resolve you therefore in your courage with an assured and honest
resolution to maintain your honor and reputation. It may seem that the
souereignty of Dayna being propounded for the reward of the co^queror should
give sufficient and ample occasion to take arms: but let not (I pray you) any
such conceit enter into your thoughts, for these are commonly the baits to
allure ambitious minds, and they are entisements of the base popular and vulgar
sort. The only desire of praise and commendation is sufficient to animate and
stir on those which are valiant: and yet if you obtain this days victory, al
shall be yours without controversy. For the enemy being chased away, and the
besieged seeing their hope to be frustrate which they had in their companions,
and being pressed with extreme famine, they will soon open their gates to
receive you in as co^querors. As touching the victory, I need not say any thing
unto you, who have always accustomed to be victors: if they against who^ you
are now to make proof of your valor be a new enemy, so is it a new kind of
glory that does now attend you. Do the Venetians surpass you in number? be
it: the honor which you have purchased in so many battles, where you have
always bin the lesser number, has ever heretofore made you famous: the free
and gentle heart does disdain to overcome when every man's deuoire cannot be
seen, and where he can not purchase particular praise and commendation:
again, what advantage have they in that their number is greater then ours?
Seeing as there is amongst them diversity of languages, variety of habits, and
a different use in arms: so is there as great diversity and disagreement in
their minds and courages: and as their army is compounded of many and sundry
Nations, as Sclauonians, Italians, Albaneezes: so are they diverse in fashions,
and with a confused kind of ignorance follow under one and the same colors:
their cry and noise in the fight will be of diverse and sundry sounds, and
much less available will be the encouragements of their leaders. March on
therefore (my good soldiers) and in the very entry and beginning of the
battle, valiantly do you beat back, repulse, and disperse these enemies,
who are better disposed to the flight, then to fight: and see that you do now
renew by the honor of this days journey, the glorious renown of so many
trophies and victories which you have heretofore gotten and obtained upon the
Turks. Nevertheless I would not that you should carry your selves toward
these as against other enemies: but rather that you use more moderation and
less choler, and that being inclined to mercy and clemency, you do labor
rather to have them all prisoners, then to have them slaughtered in the
fields. In any case do you not, either through intemperate fury of war,
or the heat of your anger and indignation, pollute and defile your victorious
hands with the blood of those, who shall yield and render themselves to your
mercies. For it is not with Barbarous, fierce, and savage Nations that we have
now to deal, but with Christians, against whom we are to contend according to
the rights and laws of arms, with equity and justice, and only to repulse
injustice, and to live in rest and quietness.

The great modesty that Scanderbeg made show of in this his speech, did the
more The affection of the soldiers of Scanderbeg after his oration.
vehemently animate the minds of his soldiers, and made them the more
affectionate unto him: for that (being a matter rare and seldom seen) he did
in the same bewray himself to be both respective of their good, and no less
careful for the enemy. For this cause, flocking about their Prince, they
praised and applauded his counsel, each of them affirming: that they were
ready to make proof of their resolution, and to offer themselves to all
hazard and fortune of battle, not for the defense only, but for the increase
also and augmentation of his renown and glory: that the arms of the
Venetians were not so to be redoubted: that their opinion in attributing much
unto them, should make them in the mean while, to forget their own duty and
deuoire: that if the dishonor and ignominy, offered by the Danians, should by
their faintness and slothfulness remain unpunished, the injury would be
common to all his subjects: and that it was not for their honor now to be
discouraged, in the midst of so great broils, and at this time wherien they
were busied and surcharged with the weight and burden of a double war: that
men should not be able to do any thing worthy of honor and commendation, if
every idle consultation, should restrain and suppress the vehemency of
their courages: and if they should examine every particular with a kind of
blockish and slothful deliberation, that the hardy man and he that is
valiant ought to adventure himself, and to march on resolutely, and to bear
off all dangers with head and shoulders: and that it becomes not him to
look into matters with too much curiosity, to augment his own fear, nor by
a strict examination of things, to interpret and reveal unto men, those
mischiefs which are hidden from them: that many high and difficult affairs
have been surmounted and overcome by the fury of the resolute soldier, and
by the fierceness of his courage once stirred and enflamed: whereas a mind
free and quietly disposed would not dare to adventure upon them; that a man
ought also to rely and cast his care wholly upon God, who assisteth
continually in the war that party whose cause and quarrel is just and
rightful. And nevertheless if their safety did only depend upon their own
valor, yet the state of Albany should be sufficiently defended and protected,
only by the faith and mutual amity of her own peoples. Moreover that Amurath
was withheld and kept doing by the war of Hungary, and that they knew the
power and puissance of the Venetians to be great: but withal they were not
ignorant, that the Italians, the farther they are drawn from home, the more
slowly do they march on, and proceed the more unwillingly. These with many such
like speches were uttered confusedly amongst the whole troop of soldiers
according to every man's disposition: with this intent and purpose also, that
their Prince (hearing their devises) might take the better notice of their good
wills and affection, and might show them the better countenance: he (praising
and extolling the affection of every of them) speaking aloud unto them in
manner of jesting and merriment, smiling he told them, that nature was much to
blame in that she had not placed these noble and generous spirits of the
Albanois, in a higher and better fortune.

This done, Castriot caused his soldiers to go and refresh themselves: and
then having taken some repast, and all matters being thoroughly provided for,
about midday, with a mind cheerful and confident, he drew forth his troops
into the field. The archers and others which were lightly armed, he placed in
the front before the ensigns: Order of the army of the Albanoys.
then (with the corslets and those whose arms were more weighty) he made the
two wings, appointing unto each of them 2000. horse: to Tanusee was given the
middle battle, wherein likewise amongst the men at arms were mingled
certain foot men. As touching the rereward or for any supplies, he took no
care at all, because he had determined to make it known that he accounted the
victory sure his own: and that the enemy was much more easy to be vanquished,
then the Venetians did seem to make show of, either by the assurance of their
countenances or by their fury and forwardness at the first charge. As little
regard did he take to the garding of his camp, for he left the same all
empty, and with so few to defend it, that hardly could he have held it
against the meanest company of any thieves or robbers. This so resolute an
assurance of this Chiefetaine could not have been exempted from the blame of
temeritie, were it not that he had appointed the strength and force of his
retraite in those companies which held the siege before Dayna: for if contrary
to his expectation he had seen the enemy to have had the better, his purpose
was to retire thither to that camp, because neither the number of his
soldiers, nor the situation and nature of the place, did profit him to
fortify his own camp: yet in my judgment was this a counsel far
unworthy of the wisdom and the prudent invention of so great a Captain:
seeing that if his troops had happened to have been broken, their flight in
this manner had been much more dangerous and pernicious, then their courage and
obstinacy in the fight could have wrought their assurance. For the Venetians
being victorious and pursuing them in the tail, and the passage of the river
Drynon being made more difficult in so great an affray, and so confused a
tumult, must needs have destroyed and swallowed the most of them that
remained: wherefore the truth is, and we must needs confess, that the opinion
of his own virtue not accustomed to be vanquished, did make him to place his
hope in himself only. The Venetians Order of the army of the Venetians.
in the same manner likewise did affront their ensigns with their pykes, who
were Italians, and their wings they disposed in the same order as did the
Albanians. Daniell himself took the charge of the right wing, which he
enuironned with a strong guard, or garrison of Sclauonians, of which he had
made choice of purpose. Certain men at arms Italians were placed in the head,
and in the rereward of this battallion. Colla Humoy of Scutarie, who was the
second man, and next to the Colla Humoy.
General in this army, had the leading of the left wing, and being
accompanied with his own citizens, did make head against Moses and his
soldiers the Dybrians. Andrewe his brother and Simon Volcathagne had the
guiding of the middle Volcathagne.
battle. In brief, all the ranks were filled indifferently with soldiers of
sundry sorts, serving rather for an hinderance and impediment, then for any
defense or good assurance. The Venetians were little less then thirteen
thousand men, and The battle between the Venetians and Scanderbeg.
with this number was this battle foughten. The fight was begun by their
pykemen, who at their first encounter were repulsed by the archers: but when
they once came to approach and join near each to other, and that the use of
their arrows did serve to little purpose: the Targatyers, covering them selves
with their targets and the residue of those which were light armed, came to the
sword and fought with the enemy hand to hand. In the mean time Scanderbeg
covering the Archers with his troop of horses, and causing them a little to
retire them selves, gave them the means to use again their bows more
conveniently. The Pike men for that they were safely armed with good and strong
corselets, had adventured them selves the more hardly, and came to assault the
enemy the more cruelly, whereby they put their fellows in good hope of
victory. There began the wings to join on both sides with high and mighty
cries, which madethe very air to resound again: The Albanois exceeded the
other in number and goodness of their horse, yet was the place indifferent to
them both, and no more for the vantage of the one, then of the other: for the
place where this field was foughten, was in the midst of a goodly large
plain and champion, and near adjoining to the river of Drynon. The Venetians
being for a while equal to the enemy rather in forces then in courage, did for
a long time maintain the fight about their General with variable and
doubtful fortune, till such time as the Prince of Albanie and certain horse
with him, charging them in the midst did break through the battle, by
means whereof (many being wounded and great numbers of them being dispersed and
disordered) all hope of the victory had been taken from the Venetians, had it
not been for the Illirians: who rallying them selves on all sides, and trouping
together in gross (as the agillitie and quickness of that nation is singular)
they made head again against the enemy, and with a greater strength did
reassure the corpse du Guard of the Venetian General, valiantly keeping of the
enemy; yet, so as they seemed rather to stand upon their defense then any way
to offend their adversary. The main battles on both sides stood still all
this while and kept their ground, seeming rather to take a view then to
entermeddle in the fight, so long as the wings or points being in fight did
with doubtful event encounter each other. But as soon as Tophia saw the right
wing of the enemy hardly bestead, (he taking courage by the former example of
Scanderbeg) with a troop of his best horsemen, and part of the infanterie,
presently charged upon the midst of the left wing of the enemy, bringing them
also into a new fear and confusion. For the Illirians (who were placed in the
front to bear the shocke of the enemy,) were not able to endure the charge,
but made presently to the right wing, and there stood upon their own defense,
betraying their companions on the one side, whom they had forsaken: and on the
other side, they brought by their coming the greater difficulty unto
Scanderbeg, who was there striving and enforcing him self to break through
the corpse du Guard of the Illirians. The like also did their footmen after
their departure, for being not able to make their party good against the
Albanois horsemen; they scattered them selves here and there, and having their
best assurance in their legs, they made them the means of their safety:
which was the occasion also that the horsemen of Scutarie, (being left naked
and open to the enemy) saw them selves suddenly disabled and broken by the
Albanois: for both their leaders and many others were taken prisoners, who
being abandoned and forsaken of their footmen, and despairing of safety by
having any farther recourse to arms, did yield them selves to the disposition
of Scanderbeg his soldiers: this made the other companies also greatly to
fear, least that Scanderbeg having once broken through that battle of the
Illirians) which he had already charged, should afterward charge also the
back of the wings, and so enclosing them on all sides might press them the
more furiously.

But the success of the vanquishers fell not out according to the fearful
imagination of the vanquished (so mightily does prosperity oftentimes dull the
minds of men.) For the leaders when they saw themselves to have this advantage,
took no greater regard of any other thing, but held themselves contented, that
they could present unto their soldiers, as it were in show and triumph, their
enemies bounden and captive. Castriot likewise not regarding the common
soldiers, but disdaining as it were the blood of the inferior and private
sort, did wholly enforce himself to enterprise upon the General, but a great
and strong troop of horse did hinder him from approaching near him, and by
that means disappointed him of his purpose. The fight thus continuing on all
hands, Moses (who had charged upon the left wing of the Venetian army, where
they of Scutarie served) did draw all men to the regard and beholding of the
fight on that side. Great was their labor and their danger: for either party
showing themselves both stout and invincible, did maintain the fight egerly
and courageously; and they did so incessantly contend each to force other, as
though the fortune of the fight had depended upon them only. It seemed that
they were not very unequally matched, and in that respect they fought for a
long time with like advantage, and hardly could it be discerned whether party
had the better. But at length the strength and force of the Dybrians seeming to
be weakened with faintnes and weariness, and both themselves and their horses
being well nigh tired with continual fighting, as men vanquished willingly
they would have given over, and they were almost ready to leave the battle,
had it not been for Moses their Colonel, who sharply reprehending them, even
as they began to recuile, did sometimes blame their faintnes and weariness,
and sometimes did accuse them of fear and cowardice: and being thus in point
of being almost vanquished, he taught them how to vanquish and to be victors
over their enemies, crying out in this manner unto them.

What a shame is this (my friends?) how lewd and foul an example is this of
your Encouragement of Moses to his soldiers.
unwonted fear and timerousnesse? Is it possible that the Dibrians can forsake
their ranckes and places assigned them, as long as they be living? or can they
be content to lose their honor and glory purchased by arms, and to give it to
their enemies? where are those soldiers which discomfited the forces of Haly
Bassa? who tamed the pride of Ferisey, and abated the puissance of Mustapha?
and who with the spoils of the Turks, have enriched the houses of the
Albanois? Where is now the fiercenes of your haughty and proud courages? where
be those your looks which were so full of threats and menaces within your
camp? where be those your promises of victory and triumph? is this the way to
recover Dayna to Scanderbeg? is this the way for you to prepare your entry into
the town which you have besieged? what, did you never prove the virtue and
valor of any enemy till now? have you not found them any where else to be
stout and valiant, and did you never see the swords brandizing in any place
but here only? Behold how your fellows and companions are on all sides
victorious, and they do already in each quarter of the field, recount the
fruits of their valor and hardiness. Tanusee (having taken their Captains
and carried them bound into the camp) has either dispersed, or utterly
defeated and destroyed the middle battle of the enemy: see (I pray you) how
Scanderbeg having broken the strength and body of the Sclauonian troops, does
now pass away the time in binding them together like beasts, and taking of
them prisoners: only we here on our side have nothing but fear and terror,
and the memory of our flight, most shameful and dishonorable.

The soldiers seeing themselves so sharply reproved and rebuked by Moses,
took heart to themselves, and their courages were so enflamed with a most
ardent desire to repair their fault, that a man would have judged them not to
have been the same men, but that both horse and men had been changed even in
an instant. The conflict being then renewed, the fortune of the fight grew
likewise to be changed, and the Scutarians by little and little began to be
repulsed, yet did they for a while hold good, by means rather of their
multitude and great number, then through any hardiness or greatness of
courage. At the last Humoy coniecturing (by the former speeches of his enemy)
his brothers misfortune (the grief whereof, through very impatiency, made him
scarce able to hold his weapons) forgot his companions and went (though all
too late) to succor his brother, where striking into the midst of his
enemies: in so doing he both assured the victory to the Dibrian, and left also
unto the posterity an evident testimony, how needful and requisite it is for
a chief or General Sentence.
to keep amongst his troops: and how greatly it imports the good order and
safety of his companies to enjoy the benefit of his presence: for no sooner
was he departed from his charge, but they were suddenly dispersed on all sides,
turning their backs to the blows and fury of their enemies. Likewise on the
other side, the General of the Venetians being now forsaken and left destitute
of the strength of his corpse dugarde: yet holding still good, and keeping his
troops close and in order (more through pure shame, then for any strength or
puissance that he had:) he sustained the force of the enemy, and maintained
the fight continually. But when he once perceived that his soldiers were on
all sides put to a doubtless flight, and that all of them made default alike:
himself also setting spurs to his horse for company, (least he should be
made a partner with the others in their misfortunes) provided by speedy flight
for The victory of Scanderbeg over the Venetians.
his own safety. Scanderbeg all at leisure pursued those that were scattered
over the fields, because that the long and continual travel of his soldiers
did greatly detain and hinder them, by reason the battle had been foughten
with that obstinacy, and held out to that extreamitie, that they were hardly
able to have continued fight any longer: yet as weary as they were, they did
not for all that suffer their flight to be free and without any disturbance:
for Scanderbeg had publicly commanded, that all the ensigns should pursue
after them, and follow the chase even to the gates of Scutarie. It may be that
this great Captain being led on both with anger and with glory, did hold it a
goodly matter, that these enemies (who stood in infinite and thick numbers
upon the walls, should now see him and his army to be the conquerors. In many
places did they light upon the tail or rereward of those that fled, and a
great number of such as made the least speed, came into the hands of those
that followed them: for they were commanded not to kill any of them when they
were once come very near and within the view of the town: then making a
stand with their army in order, they continued there a long time with their
colors wauing al aloft in the wind: hereupon, the victors assembling
themselves in troops not far from their companies thus arranged, with high
cries and exceeding signs of joy; they presented their prisoners before the
eyes of the townsmen, who were wondefully sad and pensive at this misfortune
and affliction, concerning them so near, both in public, and particular. On
the one side, the grievous sight and miserable condition of their friends and
allies, did suggest unto them new pricks of war and despite; on the other
side their late loss did confound and abate their courages: and furthermore,
the care of the Captives (which stayed and withheld them, did keep them from
attempting or doing any thing against the enemy, for doubt least it should
incense the vanquishers to use the prisoners with more extreamitie.

After that Scanderbeg had permitted his soldiers (all at their pleasures) to
rejoice themselves in the honor of their victory: he caused to sound a march
(for the day was then well near spent) and every man prepared himself to the
retraite, and took their way to the siege before Dayna: but vain was the hope
and conceit of Scanderbeg, in that he thought the inhabitants would have
opened their ports and received him forthwith, as his subjects, and have
submitted themselves under the laws and conditions that it should please him
to impose upon them: for albeit the sudden discomfiture of their friends and
confederates, and the necessity of victuals, increasing daily within the
town, did redouble both the grief and the care of the Daynians, by reason
that the companies of Albanois, left before the place expressly for that
intent and purpose, had hindered them from foraging or making any other
provision: yet did they not conceive any one dishonorable thought within their
hearts, for the redemption of themselves from so many mischieues and wants
which oppressed them. But even in the midst of these extremities, providing
and disposing all things with notable constancy and singular good discretion;
they began more sparingly then they had accustomed, to share out the munition
and victuals unto the soldiers, allowing either of them so much only as
should suffice to sustain their faithful souls, and (as the saying is) might
hold body and soul together. As for the aged persons there was no order taken
for them, because it was supposed such persons should not want any means,
wherewithal to help themselves, either by the natural strength and situation
of the place, or by their fidelity which was of all other the most assured
rampire.

Now when Castriot had joined his victorious troops, to those which lay before
the town, he pained himself (but in vain) to represent unto their grieved
hearts, the motions of vain fear. With great shows and ostentation, with
many reproaches and high cries, he caused the ensigns and colors gained from
the enemy, to be showed unto them: great numbers of captives sad and
sorrowful, were led round about the town, with their eyes cast down to the
ground, for shame that they should be seen in that plight by their allies and
friends, (who stood in thick troops upon the walls, and who at so hideous a
sight did shead abundance of tears.) For there were many among the captives,
who were of kin and nearely allied to the besieged, as may be easily
perceived by that which has been before recited. Now Scanderbeg knowing that
his persuasions were of no force nor efficacy toward men so thoroughly
resolved: he began to treat with them for the yielding of the town, and with
a certain kind of confidence all assured, he demanded that the garrison of the
Venetians might be yielded into his hands: but his rash demand had a notable
answer, The liberal and free answer of the Danians to Scanderbeg.
well beseeming the virtue of frank and free citizens: telling him, that he
should desist from terrifying their ears and their eyes with such sights and
menaces: that their faith was not grounded upon so light a foundation, as that
they would measure them selves rather by a new accident of cross and perverse
fortune, then by the ancient habit of their minds and dispositions: that they
had all of them determined (if they could not otherwise do) to leave unto their
good Princes, an eternal testimony of their unfortunate faith, by the
witness of their dismembered bodies: and that neither the love nor affection
which they did bear to their own, nor the captivity of their confederates
was such, that they should hope thereby, to extort from them any such action of
piety, which might tend to their stain and ignominy, and such, as the
prisoners them selves (if they were put to the question) would not require to
be used toward them. Moreover, that they were in good hope that their
Seigniours the Venetians, would not suffer either the bonds and captivity of
the one to be perpetual, or the siege of the other to be of any long
continuance: that he should take this their example as a true proof and
ensignement, that the faith of any people ought not to Sentence.
change and turn with the wind, nor to follow the instable and unconstant
fortune of Princes.

It was a wonderful sign and token of liberality and natural clemency in
Scanderbeg, in that (seeing his reasons and demands so neglected and rejected
by the Burgesses Scanderbeg his courtesy and magnanimity to the Venetian
captives.
of Dayna, and all hope taken away to obtain the town, by reason of this
their obstinacy) yet he showed not any kind of coffeehouse (as the most
part of Princes are naturally inclined) neither had he recourse to any terms
of wrath or fury, or desire of revenge, and least of all did he exercise any
cruelty upon the prisoners, whereas he might have used them as himself had
listed: but contrariwise he commanded presently that they should be unbound,
and having graciously entreated and cheered them, he set them at liberty, and
sent them away to their own houses. It may be that this politic and sage
Captain did this of purpose, which his intent though it be not to be allowed,
yet the device and invention is much to be commended: for that being notable
any other way to subdue the walls of the Danians, he might at leastwise
vanquish them by this courtesy and humanity; and might gain those by
gracious usage, whom neither rigor nor force could any way remove from their
determination and purpose. Two only of the prisoners, men of the chiefest
Andrew Humoi, Simon Volcathagne prisoners to Scanderbeg.
mark and quality, named Andrew and Volcathagne he detained still with him,
as certain pledges of the league and amity like to ensue shortly, and as
sureties (though in vain) to prevent the fiercenes of the Scutarians. These
men were kept under good guard within the fortress of Petralba, where they were
both respectively and bountifully received and enterteined

These things being thus achieved, he had a new devise in his head to bring
the town under his subjection: to the intent therefore, the thing which he so
affectionately desired, might be brought to some good end and perfection, he
enterprised an action, whereby he might with more facility and commodity not
only further and advance the siege of Dayna, but the means of the whole war
between him and the Venetians.

There was sometimes a town named Baleze, of which as then there was nothing
Baleze.
remaining but a small show and the ruins only: it had been somewhat renowned,
not for that it was founded by any man of name or memory, but only for the
antiquity thereof: it was seated at the foot of the mount Sardonicke (which
the common people The mount Sardonikor Marra^ay. Surscod^a.
of the country call Marranay,) near about it is a certain country called
Surscodra distant from Scutarie twelve miles, from Driuasta five: and fifteen
from Dayna. Scanderbeg was determined to reedifie and repair that place which
had of old been ruinated by the Barbarians, and (as some say) by that scourge
of God Attila. This same place being fortified and defended with a good
garrison and some other forces, he was of the opinion, that he might by the
benefit thereof, more freely annoy the Venetian territory, and keep the
besieged from having any relief or succors, by reason, that the enemy should
be busied on all parts with so many occasions: for this purpose he caused it
at one inst^nt to be renewed, partly with walls, and parley Baleze reedified
and fortified by Scanderbeg.
with pallissadoes and other fortifications of timber work; and having founded
it in manner of a town, and furnished it with men: he appointed Amese his
nephew, and Marin Span or Spaniard, (a person by birth of Albanie, and a man of
approved prudence Amese and Marin Span. Governors of Baleze.
and fidelity) to have the oversight of the work, and to see it brought unto
perfection. This done, he repassed the same day over the river Drinon, to
prosecute the siege of Dayna, which for no occasion of time or other affairs,
he would suffer in no case to be intermitted.

The fortifications and walls of the new fortress being finished, and many
bulwarks being raised within it as seemed most expedient, Amese being a young
man and impatient of rest (both his own peculiar reputation, and the fresh
renown of his uncles virtue, animating his youthful mind hereunto) because he
had somewhat happily made certain rodes and light invasions upon the plain
country, he imagined that he should be as fortunate in all other matters of
greater weight and importance. And therefore he cast in his mind, with a full
resolution to surprise Driuasta, which was a town there near adjoining: this
made him that from thence forward he had Driuasta.
no other thought daily then to make ready his company, though he
disfurnished Amese purposes to surprise Driuasta.
the new fortress of the garrison, for he thought that his commendation should
by this act be the more augmented, if (before any succor were sent from his
uncle, and ere that he knew any news thereof) he might suddenly send unto him
the marks of so notable an exploit, by the spoils of the town once conquered
and subdued: and that it would be a secret argument that his uncles valor were
now in the wane, and did as it were, wax old under the walls of Dayna: so
fondly did the boiling heat of this young man's courage puff him up with hope,
vainly promising unto himself all the favors of fortune. But Marin (whose
industry Scanderbeg had made choice of, and had made equal with the other, for
the surer preservation of the new fortress, having therein joined most
unfortunately, the prudence of the one with the temeritie of the other) Marin
(I say) being an old and expert soldier, by reason of his long practice in
matters military, and being more venerable for his age: fearing, that if
openly he did withstand the wilfulness of this youth, there might grow secret
dislike and enmity between them (a most pestilent mischief in the
administration of any affairs.) For this cause he thought that he would in
the very beginning break off this enterpriese, by alienating of the devotion
of the soldiers from him secretly, and by that means would disappoint him of
his purpose: but afterward when he saw that the affections of them all in
common, and that the inordinate lycense of the soldier did incline more to the
other party, he resolved in the end to speak his mind openly and freely in
the presence of all the whole company, to the intent himself might be
discharged from that default which was likely (by another man's counsel) to
succeed unhappily: and therefore (as the speech is) in these or the like
terms, he gave him this admonition.

Certainly Amese; Scanderbeg has left thee here a greater cross unto me then
the Marin Span his speech to Amese.
Venetians our enemies* for now that we have other matters to look unto, by
reason of the heat of this war throughout all the country: I am constrained
and driven to a new strife and contention, causing some secret hate or dislike
between us, because that thou art grown to have a vehement suspicion least I
(of a desire to contradict thee or through the jealousy of thy youthful glory
and reputation,) do seem to dissuade thee from this thy enterprise. But why
do I impute any fault unto my self, seeing both God and men will sufficiently
acquit me, for that this my counsel in this case and concerning this
accident, either (being neglected) seems not to have been wanting, or (being
followed and allowed) cannot well be reprehended? The loss will surely be
thine own and no man's else, for in this action (whatsoever thy intent be) it
is not the city of Driuasta, but thy self and thy uncle, that thou go to
assail: thou do but hasten to abridge the days of thy own friends and
fellow citizens, and to bath the enemies ground with the blood of thy
soldiers. Have we to this end repaired this new town? have we fortified it
with such strong companies, and with a garrison of so many brave men, to the
end it should be so suddenly disarmed and disfurnished of her forces? and while
we foolishly seek after others, our own fortress should be left and delivered
as a prey unto our enemies, who expect and attend for nothing else? Say that
this place were not to be regarded, yet is there any of you that will think
that towns will be surprised with so small a mumber of souldieres, who would
scarcely suffice to defend them? especially the town of Driuasta, which (as it
is large and populous*) so (for in this respect we may commend our enemy it is
likewise excellently well provided both of arms and of men courageous and
valiant. If I be not deceived both you and the enemy do expect one and the
same thing. First their old men and other of the weak and unable multitude,
from the battlements of their walls, will make a jest at your foolish
preparations, and at your vain devises in seeking thus to take their city. And
then their young men, who (being fierce and lusty) do desire nothing so much as
to come to fight with you, issuing forth of the town, will force us to leave
the assault, and will chase us away with shame and ignominy, or else leaving
their ports open to receive us, suddenly and unadvised they will surprise and
set upon us, and so revenge the late loss of their companions, and the
injuries of the Scutarians. Then will other towns take courage unto them, and
those who are now overcome and vanquished, will become to grow hardy, and
nothing at all to redoubt us. Lay aside therefore (I pray thee Amese whilst
all things are well and whole) this your pernicious forwardnes and audacity:
and do not cause the reverent and honorable name ofthy uncle, by so great an
indignity to be disgraced and rent asunder, by the mouths of those that are his
adversaries and ill willers. Stay a while, and attend till that God favor
thee, in presenting thee some other matter of more abundant and greater glory,
and with greater safety and security. Then will I be the formoste man, not to
persuade thee only, but to cause thee to take arms, and will also accompany
thee. No man will be unwilling to follow those ensigns which are fortunate.
Restrain therefore the broyling heat of this thy courage (though it be hard to
be restrained) learn of thy ancients, first thy self to bear the yoke, which
thou desire to impose upon thy enemy. For youth being incapable of good
counsel, (let me speak Sentence.
freely what I think) is oftentimes as hurtful unto it self, as unto those
which are his enemies. It is rather to be drawn then to beled to any thing,
and of all the burdens that are laid upon men, the unadvised wilfulness of
youth is the most dangerous. Wars are to be managed by counsel and good
advise, and let the wisest Captain carry him self in all his actions, never so
sagely and advisedly, yet hardly and with great difficulty does Fortune answer
his deserts, or succeed accordingly.

The grave and prudent speeches of this personage, were sufficient to have
changed the mind of this young soldier. But because in the hastiness of his
own temerity, and the rashness of his own counsels, he had already ordained
and provided all things which were expedient and necessary for that
enterprise; it seemed unto him a matter of more dishonor, to give over (by
discretion) the attempt which he had undertaken, then (with misfortune) to put
the same in execution. He rejected therefore this wholesome and sound
admonition, and preferring the worst before the best, he held it less shame
and disgrace, to follow his own humor (though it were to his loss and
hindera^ce) then by reforming himself upon the admonition of an other, to take
that choice which might be for his benefit and advantage. Besides the credit
which he had purchased with the companies, and the readiness of the common
soldiers obedient to his command did animate his foolish desires, and did
withhold his doubtful ears from harkning unto any good aduertisements. To
that therefore which Marin Spaniard had persuaded so advisedly, first of all he
replied with great insolency, that his uncle had Answer of Amese to Marin Span.
left either of them with like power, commandment, and authority: that he
was not appointed there to govern himself either in peace or war, at the
liking and arbiterment of another: that he should look to his own companies:
and that for his part, it was in him to command his soldiers at his own will
and pleasure. Notwithstanding within a little while after, when his choler was
a little cooled by speaking, and that the vehement and immoderate passion of his
mind, was somewhat settled and abated, then began his tongue to be much more
modest, and his speeches grew more mild and gracious. For he told his
colleague and companion, that he would willingly approve and allow of his
opinion, were it not that the affairs of Baleze and Driuasta might both at
once be directed and ordered, and that neither of them would hinder and
disturb the other: that their forces were sufficient both to guard the one and
to carry the other: and that he did not so inconsideratly undertake this
attempt, but that he very well knew what he did: that he would surprise them of
Driuasta suddenly and unprovided: that he should find the youth of the town
out of arms, the gates unguarded, and the walls without sentinels: besides that,
there were many of the inhabitants which (if they were summoned to yield) would
gladly hearken unto him. But admit that all things do fall out more difficult
then he expected, that then he meant not to be so obstinate as to make there
any long abode, to the prejudice of his soldiers. And in saying this he took
Maryn by the hand, praying him to be of good courage, and to hopewell of his
success. Thus having recommended his affairs unto God, he displaid his
ensigns, and so marched chearefully onward. Of those which remained behind
Amese marches to surprise Driuasta
with Marin for the guard of Baleze, they were scant fully 2000, not that any
man was enforced to accompany them in that journey, but because that the
Albanois were more exercised in labor and travel, then in lying idle and at
rest: and the soldiers had no kind of war more agreeable, and familiar unto
them, then the assaulting and surprising of towns and holds.

Now albeit Amese did hasten on with all possible celerity, and did conceal
his attempt as much as might be, yet could he not prevent the news of his
coming. For the Driuastines being advertised of his approach, (as men that
could soon descry any such purpose) and at the very beginning of the war of
Dayna, did ordinarily keep and maintain great courts of guard in certain
places about their town, and a great number of me^, purposely to watch in
arms: they were notwithstanding at the first greatly astonished, and mounting
upon their walls, they made preparation of all such things as were requisite to
repulse the enemy, bringing from all parts stones and such other munitions,
which were fit to be thrown down upon them and to annoy them. But afterward
when they had a sight of the enemy, as they drew near the town, they grew
suddenly to be both better encouraged and less careful; contemning both the
smalnesse of their numbers, and their Captain all alike. Notwithstanding the
good countenance which they made, did nothing at all apall or diminish the
confidence of the young Chiefetaine, but he summoned them within the town (in
the name of Scanderbeg) with many fair offers and promises, to render the same
unto him. But being rudely repulsed and with many sharp terms rejected: (he
resting as yet in suspense and doubtful, and being withal carried away with
choler and indignation) retired himself about a mile and a half from the
town, where all in vain, according to the variable and diverse opinions of
his soldiers, he beat his brains, devising by what means he might bring the
town to reason, seeing he had no ordinance wherewithal to batter them. Thus
did he seem both to consult and to besiege the town, all at one time. In the
mean time to assure his troops from a surprise, but principally from toward
Scutarie, he placed skoutes and watches round about the place where he was
encamped.

Whilst these things were thus in doing: the Driuastines with a worthy and
very commendable care did bethink themselves, how to free their town from
the doubt of this siege, and their conclusion was (whatsoever became thereof)
to hazard the combat, before the enemy should attempt to force their walls and
rampires. The author of this their resolution was Andrew Angel, one of the
chiefest men of account within their town, noble by his own worthy acts, and
well known by the honor which he had gotten by his long practice in arms.
This man (having ranged his men in good order ofbattel at the lower gate of the
city, which lies on the west toward the plain, and the walls of the city
being well manned, and the ports strongly guarded, before that he salied forth
upon the enemies) he began to encorage them with this language.

If ever quoth he (my good soldiers) it were needless and superfluous to
encorage The Oratic^ of Andrew Angel to the Driuastines.
men that are valiant and magnanimious, now is the time: and this is the day
wherein I see your coming hither so readily and chearefully, does make show
thereof most apparently: considering that every one of you, leaving the
presence and company of his father, mother, and wife, and the embracementes of
his tender infants, does offer himself here so willingly without any
persuasions or entreaty. Now seeing our fortune by so notable a spectacle has
brought us to this, that we are driven to combat both before and for our walls,
will not you (my good companions and most loving citizens) imitate the example
of your auncesters, and maintain the welfare of your town, your country, your
houses, your temples, and your altars? To what end should I recount unto you
the manifold triu^phs which they gained upon their enemies, and which you your
selves have yet fresh in your memory? Let it suffice of a great many to recite
a few, seeing the shortness of the time will not permit any long discourse. I
remember well that I have heard it reported by my forefathers, how Barach a
Turkish Captain Driuastines their valiant exploites against their enemies.
in the reign of Amurath the first, with 20000. horsemen, inuading this our
territory in the beginning of the war, did make this demand unto our
citizens, That the keys of the town should be delivered him, upon such
conditions as he would propound unto them. But they not willing to submit them
selves upon such terms: and he falling to the burning of the country, and
destroying of the fruits with fire and sword, the people (I say) of Driuasta
came upon them in full troops as they were here and there dispersed; in such
sort that (many of them being left engaged dead in the fields, and many of
them being made prisoners) they enforced the residue to betake them selves to
flight: and having by this means obtained a notable victory, they returned
into the town rich and triumphant. What should I tell you of Steven surnamed
Herceck, Duke of Bosina, who in like manner being entered within our limits,
with an army of five and twenty thousand, under pretense of the like
expedition; first summoned the town to yield unto him: but our brave
Driuastines, by their stout and lofty refusal, put him in such rage and fury:
that he presently sent forth his troops to ouerrun the country, and make
havoc of all things? But what did our citizens? they went to encounter him
with a good company both of horse and foot, they charged him with great furye,
they brake and discomfited him, and they pursued after him in chase so
greedily, that besides a great slaughter of the enemies, and many ensigns
gained, they returned triumphant and laden with prey and booty into the town:
honoring their country by the preservation of their liberty and them selves,
in their glory and reputation. March we on therefore (my good friends) and let
our selves be the messengers to our senseless enemies, of that answer which
our town sends them with so great virtue and resolution. Let us take from
these few straglers or robbers their vain and foolish hope of winning of towns
with such weak forces and so ill accompanied. What think you of the stout
resistance of Dayna, before which Scanderbeg him self with so great an army,
has for so long a time been busied? Will not this be a wonderful touch of
reproach and infamy unto all of you, that his nephew should have a Commission
so basely to surprise us with so small forces, the which will be scant able
within a while to defend their own fortress? Behold their puissance and
strength is nothing, not able to make any resistance: their discipline is small
or none at all: and their General is a man of no experience. Whatsoever was of
any reckoning or respect in all their army, all that has Scanderbeg himself
before Dayna: as for this mignion, only his own vnpatiency ofrest and
quietness has brought him hither, and he has none with him, but the very
skumme and dregs of his camp, and a mingle mangle of the most rascal sort of
all their soldiers.

This short speech did so animate the Driuastines, that all of them at once
began to Driuastines sally forth of Driuasta against Amese.
make a noise, and with a loud voice they willed him to lead them on against
the enemy. Then began the trumpets to sound, and with great cries and clamours,
they issued forth of the town, and the others (who were upon the walls) going
and coming each in their several charges, with the like noise from aloft, did
increase the brute of the alarm. The hue and cry of this tumult coming so
suddenly and unprovided, whereas the Amesen troops doubted no such matter:
stroke great terror into their court of guard: but afterward when they
perceived so many armed men to discover themselves on all parties, and that the
Driuastines with like fury, did make right toward them (where they were
encamped) they wished Amese speedily to mount on horseback, with a troop of
those who were in best readiness, and with whom, making head directly against
the enemy, he might for a time put them to a stand, and hold them in skirmish,
til such time as the residue of the companies (who were scattered here and
there over the country) and those also who were within their trenches, (being
altogether united and arranged in order of battle) might issue forth with
their ensigns displaied into the field, and be incorporate with the residue
all in one But the sage conduct of the expert Chiefetaine on the adverse part,
troubled the untimely counsel of this young nouice, and apprentice in the art
Military: For he having divided Conflict between the Driuastines and Amese.
his troops into three parts, sent away speedily certain Italians (who were
entertained to be there in garrison continually) and part also of the horsemen
to invade the camp on the upper side thereof. The rest of his horse (being for
the most part archers and pesants) he sent to shut up the passages of their
camp, and to keep them from entering, both to hold out and exclude the one,
and to surprise and intercept the other. Himself with the third troop making
head against Amese, did at the first onset overthrow his battallion and put
them clean from all resistance: and the Chiefetaine himself being
disfurnished of his guard, and in great astonishment, was enforced to the
flight: notwithstanding, making himself way through the squadron of Archers,
he saved himself amidst the open fields with the rest of his companions. Then
began the cry to be renewed on all parts, and on the one side the discomfiture
of their captain, and on the other side the sudden approach of the enemy, did
take away from the gards all means to rally them selves together, and to renew
the fight. Finally, the forces of the enemy being reioyned and united, they
made toward the Fort, where (after long debate) the advantage fell to the
Driuastines: and all things enclining to favor them, the Amesens did abandon
the defense of their trenches, and on diverse sides flying and fighting all at
once, they retired them selves into the plain. Angel made no reckonning to
pursue them, nor to sack their camp: but thinking he had done enough in
depriving them of the victory, caused to sound a retraite, and led back his
compapany with great rejoicing into the city: But the joy of this good and
happy encounter did not long continue to the inhabitants. For Amese having
gathered his soldiers together from their flight, and thinking upon this
discomfiture (the shame whereof was greater then the loss) and seeing himself
frustrate of all hope to gain Driuasta, he Amese spoileth the country about
Driuasta.
turned the impatiency of his anger else where, not sparing any thing
whatsoever could be found, either for increase or recreation, but both the
houses were burnt and ruinated, and all sorts of trees and plants were cut down
and destroyed. Nothing was left untouched, except a few Olive trees, (the
abundance and fertility of the which, does make that town to have great
traffic, and to be much esteemed:) all these spoilings and ruins
notwithstanding, and for that Amese spoiled (a good ways off from their Ports)
the Driuastines though their hardines had once succeeded happily) yet would not
they again be drawn into the fields, fearing that if they should range abroad
too far, their return might be hindered, or they might fall into some
ambuscado, and so should they give an account for their too too great
forwardness, and their overmuch hardiness might cost some of them full
dearly.

I hold it not amiss here to lay down in some sort the description of the
town of The Town of Driuasta.
Driuasta, not much renowned neither for her foundation, nor for her antiquity,
albeit the credulous error of the inhabitaunts does most obstinately attribute
the original thereof to the Romans, alleging that they were the first
founders of the same. Herein do they most glory, in that they affirm
themselves to be a Colony of the Romans, and they do precisely maintain, that
from thence they had their descent and original. For my part, I suppose that
the humor of these men, so desirous of glory, is rather to be pardoned, then
that their opinion is any way to be credited. For neither are there any
testimonies of good authority to ratify this persuasion, neither are there any
monuments to confirm it. The like fortune also has Antibara, a town of very
good Antibara.
account in these our days within the said country, and (not without cause)
does it complain of the ungrateful silence of the ancients. Notwithstanding
the seat of Driuasta (in my judgment) seems not unworthy (if reason may
persuade us) to have a Colony there erected, both in regard of the pleasantnes
of the place, and of the abundance and commodity of all things, which may
allure men to inhabit or manure it. For the territory of that city is most
fertile and fruitful, yielding all things which man's life in reason can wish
for. On every side there are great store of springs and Situation of Driuasta.
fountains, arising and descending with a pleasant noise from the hills
adjoining, which by nature are so orderly mounted, as if they had been disposed
by artificial workmanship: and most wonderfully do they adorn and beautify
the plain country. The air (on what side soever you turn your eyes) is
exceedingly healthful, and it does season and temper all things, so as it
makes them to prosper singularly. The City is seated upon the descent of a
mountain, bending toward the South, and extending toward the plain (where
it is watered with a brook called Clire) which may more justly be termed by
the name of a river, by reason that the streams thereof do never fail, for
any drought or distemperature of the summer whatsoever. The circuit of the walls
and trenches is above two miles in compass. The fortress or castle (being
seated upon the top of a mountain) by nature and by art is most defensible: it
both commands and defends the city. From Scutarie it is distant 8. miles,
and from Motry 27. This town having been rased by the Gallo grecians in the
declining estate of the Roman Empire, was reedified and restored by Helena, a
most christian Princess descended Helena the wife of Negmana king of the
Misians.
of the blood royal of the house of France, and who was espoused to Simeon
Nemagna, king of the Misians and Sclauonians. This Lady being very devout and
virtuous, did restore (besides this) many other towns near adjoining, which
had been likewise ruinated in that country. She builded also both in Epire and
Sclauonie, many Couents, Monasteries and religious houses, and endowed them
with great livings and possessions, as is manifestly to be seen, by the
marbles engraven with such testimonies, besides other monuments and memorable
marks of her bountiful and princely deeds. But return we to our purpose.

The choler of Amese being fully discharged upon the plain country of the
Driuastines (which he had made in a manner desolate) he had no desire to return
any more to Baleze, because being ashamed of his adventure, he was loath
(after the trial of his mishap, and the proof of his imprudency and temerity)
to come in his presence, to whom he had refused to give ear, when time and
place served. And he now repented (though all too late) that he had contemned
his good counsel. He turned therefore another way, and marched with his
companies directly toward Dayna: shunning most unadvisedly the reprehension of
his fellow Marin, to endure the displeasure far more dangerous, and the
frowning countenance of his uncle, whom he had most grievously incensed. For
Scanderbeg having had tidings brought him by some, dwelling near the same
place, how all things had passed, as soon as he knew of his coming, he sent
for him to his presence, and openly in the sight of all his companies (which
was hardly digested of the young gentleman) in extreme choler he convinced
him as Scanderbeg reproves Amese for his temerity.
guilty of all the fault that had been committed. He accused him (and as his
debtor) he challenged him, demanding of him the innocent blood of his
companions, which he had caused to be shed through his folly, terming him with
a loud voice both rash and arrogant, that without any commission from him had
played so foolish a part. He objected unto him moreover, that at his departure
from Baleze, he commanded him no such matter. That he ought to have taken and
interpreted his silence, as a manifest prohibition and an apparent argument,
that his will was not to have any such proceedings. Afterward when he had
examined the soldiers which were present at that service, and was by their
report certified that the matter was altogether concluded and executed without
the advice and consent of his companion, his fury grew then to be much more
vehement, and his mind being full of wrath and indignation, he persisted in
this severity, saying: that it grieved him so much the more, because, besides
the temerity of the act, he had added a more grievous and inhumaine fault, in
destroying by a most miserable example, the fields of the citizens, and in
using cruelty with sword and fire against their trees and buildings. But Amese
as one confounded (having not any thing to answer for his excuse) replied not
a word: but stood still silent, only turning him self a little aside to his
companions: good God (quoth he) there is nothing more Speeches of Amese upon
the reproach of his uncle.
infamous then a man that is vanquished: for he must on the one side, accept to
endure the insolency and triumph of his enemies: and on the other, the
fearful countenance and wrathful visage of his friends. Hereupon the whole
companies assembling themselves about Scanderbeg, did humbly entreat him to
mitigate his wrath, and to pardon him his displeasure: alleging, that the
youth of his nephew was enough chastized, and his misfortune was sufficiently
aggrauated with the bitter speeches he had given him, and that themselves (as
well as other) were culpable of the same offense. By means of these
intercessions made by his soldiers, was their General soon entreated and
pacified: so familiar and courteous was his nature and disposition.

The end of the third Book.
THE FOVRTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
SCanderbeg leaving Amese to continue the siege before Dayna, goes him self
against Mustapha. The citizens of Scutarie raze the fort of Baleze, which is
forsaken by the Epirots. Mustapha marches against Scanderbeg. The combat of
Paul Manessey an Epirote with Caragusa a Turk. The battle of Oronichea
between Scanderbeg and Mustapha, wherein the Turks are vanquished and
Mustapha is taken prisoner. Peace concluded between the Venetians and
Scanderbeg, whereupon he breaks up his siege before Dayna. Amurath resolves
to go in person against Scanderbeg, who makes provisions to resist him. An
army of Turks sent into Epire to besiege Sfetigrade, unto whom Scanderbeg
gives an overthrow by a notable stratageme. Amurath him self comes to the
siege of Sfetigrade.

Whilst the Christians were thus stirring and troubling each other by civil
tumults, rather then by true and proper wars: and whilst Scanderbeg all
idle, did consume his time, and (as it were) wax old before the walls of
Dayna, Amurath being fully informed of all things in particular, both by
Mustapha (who had of a long time been very desirous to try the fortune of
battle) as also by the common fame and report: his brains were continually
beating and devising upon diverse counsels. One while would he commend the
opportunity, seeming so fit and excellent for the utter confusion of his
adversary: another while, he would admire at his invincible fortune and
prosperity. And here withal (which was a special point that kept his
vnresolute thoughts in ambiguity and suspense) he doubted least these enmities
of the Christians were but faint and colorable quarrels, and that their tumults
were but fained and disguised. Thus whilst this Prince in the uncertainty of
his thoughts and penury of counsel, does continue carefully discoursing and
debating of matters, still coniecturing one thing by another, by little and
little the occasion slipped out of his hands, by reason that the anger and
coffeehouse of the Venetians became to be somewhat mitigated and assuaged:
yet the often and frequent importunities and persuasions of Mustapha, (who
sought nothing but fight and wars, in hope to deface and abolishe the shame
of his former overthrow) did mightily provoke the Ottoman, and draw him finely
on to betake him self to most unfortunate and pernicious arms, wherefore the
Sultan having highly commended the affection and good will of his Bassa, he
sent unto him speedely a messenger with letters, the tenor whereof was as
follows.

The war Mustapha, which thou do so earnestly demand, now from henceforth
The letters of Amurath to Mustapha.
we do freely grant it thee: if those reports be true which are brought us
concerning the tumultes of the Venetians. Thy virtue and thy valor shall win
thee honor and reputation upon this enemy: yet see thou be well advised and
carry thy self discreetly, and let not a light belief and vain credulity
cause thee to take arms, which afterward, when thou do least think, thou
shall be enforced to lay aside with shame and dishonor. Peradventure it is
but an appearance of a counterfeit and deceiptfull war, which is now between
the Christians: and thon may be deceived by their dissembled contentions.
Look unto it, and consider this, that (as the common saying is) there is no
quarrel so short, as that of the father against the child. We (who are absent)
can not give counsel to one present, nor yet do we aproue a fond desire of
fight without good cause and inducement, which may move thee thereunto. It is
thou, that ought to have an eye, and to discuss by thy self particularly
before thou take arms, all that which after (when thou have taken arms) is to
be put in execution. Thou have good store of soldiers fresh and resolute, and
thy enemy is partly wearied with pains and travel, and partly weakened with
his many battles. The rest we refer to thy sufficiency and discretion, for
we will not hinder thee from enterprising any thing, which shall seem unto
thee to be for our honor and advantage.

After that Mustapha had obtained leave of Amurath to begin the watre,
provision being made of all things for his Camp: he conceived in him self a
wonderful courage, thinking by one only piece of service, to end and
determine all the toil and travel of the whole wars: and from thence forth
he did not (after the fashion and manner of those which deal closely and
cunningly) conceal his preparations: but openly and apparently bearing him
self both in countenance and behavior as an open enemy he, seemed to be the
man that durst and would hazard the fortune of a battle in any place where the
Albanois would offer and present it unto him. In the mean while the garrison
which was left upon the confines of Macedonie, had sent word in post have to
Castriot before Dayna, enforming him particularly of the whole case as it
stood, and making known unto him the whole estate of their affairs. Whereupon
this Prince in a good resolution (as an expert soldier, that used no less
celeritie then cunning in all his actions) presently dispatched away an other
fresh poast: by whom he charged them that in any case, they should not give the
Bassa any occasion or opportunity to come to fight with them, but retiring
their troops sometimes to the thickets and woods upon the mountains where
they might be secure of the enemy; and sometimes under color of a timorous and
fearful flight, they should abuse him, and by little and little protract the
adventure and hazard of fight: till such time as him self (being arrived
thither with his companies,) should give order for all things, what soever
should be needful to accomplish their desire and purpose: and that then they
should not fail, speedely and as soon as they perceived him to draw near, to
join them selves in one with his train and to follow him: to the intent, that
where him self should be in person, there also might be the ensigns, the
squadrons, and the whole force and strength of the Camp. This done (albeit it
grieved him greatly to see him self withdrawn from the of siege Dayna)
calling Amese (his friend and faithful companion in all dangers and perils)
unto him, he gave him in charge to have a careful eye unto the siege: and he
spoke unto the young man not only by way of counsel, but also by entreatie:
praying him not to alter any thing in his absence, nor in any wise to make any
attempt against the besieged, having been sufficiently warned and instructed by
his own former disgrace. And he willed him not to bowdge nor stir a foot
from before the walls, but so to govern him self, that they within the
town, might not either make any provision of victuals, either have any means
to refresh them selves. Hereupon (out of the army which he had there, and
which by this means was greatly diminished) he made choice of five hundred
horse, and a thousand five hundred foot of the best and most picked soldiers,
with which he purposed to strengthen the old garrison, against the new emotions
of the Turks. These soldiers which had the foil at Dryuasta, were
commanded and enforced to stay at the siege under the government of their
young Governor, which grieved them at the very hearts: for each of them
desired, and all of them in general did instantly request the Prince, that he
would permit them to make amends of their former default, by some virtuous act
of fresh mark and memory: and by the purchase of some new honor, to abolish
the remembrance of their late dishonor. Notwithstanding not any of them had
their request granted, both by reason of the present estate of his affairs,
which dissuaded him from taking all his forces with him: and also for that he
could not in this case gratify some of them without a certain discord and
coffeehouse of the residue: and because there was not any of the^ but did
esteem himself to have as much valor as any one of his companions, he took
none with him but the very chief and strength of all his army: namely the old
soldiers, and such as were best hardened, or most able to endure in arms:
for well knew this most expert Chieftaine, what difference there is, betwixt
the besieging of the walls of a town, where men lying encamped idle with
their hands in their bosoms, do only wait by time to enforce and bring a
place to reason: and the seeking in open field, near at hand, and in the face
of the enemy by the fury of fight and mortal blows, to purchase honor and
glory, not easily to be gained or without great difficulty.

Scanderbeg was scant dislodged from before Dayna, but the Scrutarians, being
fully The Scutari^s go against Baleze.
informed both of the stirring of the Turks, and of their deliberation, as also
of the departure of the Albanois, they assembled their troops with all
possible diligence, and with great provision of artillery for the seasing of
Baleze: for they confidered, that as long as the garrison of Albany was not
removed thence, nor that place cleared from their enemies, they should have
perpetual war within their own territory, and not be able to breath
themselves from their roads and invasions. Upon this occasion, neither more nor
less, then as a company of hungry wolves, almost starued for want of food,
which perceiving the negligence and absence of the sheepherds, do rush without
fear upon the fearful flock, and do disperse and dismember the poor sheep
being ill guarded: In like manner the Scrutarians, having been at all times very
vigilant and attentive, and now having intelligence of the departure of
Scanderbeg, that he was far removed, being called to another war of great
importance: suddenly with all their forces and provisions, they made have
toward Baleze, and there began the revenge of the injuries and griefs, which
they had endured: little had it wanted but the garrison had Marin Spa^ forsakes
Baleze.
been surprised, if it had with obstinacy attended the coming of the enemy.
But as soon as Marin had discovered that they went to bring the Canon
against the place: trussing up their baggage, both he and all his soldiers
conveyed themselves secretelie to Dayna, leaving nothing but their bare and
empty neast, and the naked Rampires: for the Scrutarians (who by this time had
passed and gotten over the brook of Clyre, and were not above two miles from
Baleze: where they neither saw nor encountered any thing, but a solitary and
wild country, hearing neither voice nor rumor of any persons, nor seeing any
token or appearance of watch or gardes upon the walls. This so new and
strange a case, and this great silence, seeming to them very suspicious, did
at the first show, make them fearful and full of horror: but afterward,
certain of their company being sent forth to discover the enemy, and having
brought word back, that they were departed thence: their whole army approached
the fort without any fear. The sight of the place so solitary, and the
dislodging of the garrison did mightily displease those, which were of great
and hautie courages, seeing that there was nothing but the poor walls for
them to bend their forces against, and the Town only, without any living
creature in it. Above all others, Humoy (of whom we have before spoken) was in
a great rage and choler: by reason of the excessive desire which he had by
some like match and good hap, to be revenged for his brothers captivity, (for
the truth is,) it vexed him extremely, that he could by no means obtain his
deliverance of Scanderbeg. And it may be that he went thither (as amity and
friendship does make the minds of men very vigilant) to the intent at the
surprising of this place, he might get into his hands, some pledge and
ransom of good worth, thereby to make an exchange for the person of his
brother, who was detained prisoner. On all sides did the soldiers clime and
leap over the walls, for the razing and overthrow of the which their
ordinance was not needful to do them any use or service. For the stones
cleaving but slenderly together by reason that the mortar was in a Baleze razed
by the Scutarians.
manner new and lately laid, and being beaten down with bars of iron, and
torn up without any great labor, they did easily enough tumble down of them
selves alone: in a small space therefore was all overthrown and ruinated. The
rest which was made of wood, pallizadoes, and other such like defenses, were
not long able to continue against the fire, which was put unto them, and did
altogether consume them: the soldiers cabbines and all other fortifications
likewise were trodden under foot and laid even with the ground. Thus the
Scutarians of an over hasty desire to satisfy their hatred and malicious
minds, by a dead kind of revenge, left that town most deformed and hideous
to look unto: in doing whereof they were the cause but of their own damage
and greater grief and calamity, in making it the subject of future revenge to
their enemy. There were some of the company, whose counsel was, that they
should march with their forces before Dayna, both to chase the enemy from the
siege, and to try the fortune of battle, seeing that all things seemed to
incline to them, and to promise them victory, Scanderbeg being absent from
his army. But the small number of their forces made them that they durst not
do it: besides some others there were, who would not in any case agree to
hazard and adventure any further, then the General and governor of Scutarie
had given them in charge and commandment. Wherefore they turned their ensigns
and retired their troops home toward Scutarie, without having done any thing
worthy of glory or commendation, either by the purchase of any booty or
prisoners, or by the slaughter of any of their enemies.

On the other side Maryn having brought his garrison back to Dayna, did revive
in Amese a grief to see the misfortune and shame be fallen to them in
public, and yet privately he did even smile through a kind of contentment,
which he took in his own particular mishap: in that he seemed not only and
alone, thus shamefully to be foiled and repulsed by the Dryuastines, but that
his colleague and copartner was enforced to become also a companion with him in
the like grief and misfortune: the conceit whereof made this young Prince in
the open view and hearing of his soldiers, to speak unto them in this manner.

This is well (quoth he my friends and fellows in arms.) Let us still be
pitiful, The complaint of Amese.
let us still be merciful and compassionate toward our enemies, till such
time as this foolish pity and unadvised clemency, have utterly ruinated and
confounded even our selves: let us (to our own destruction) let loose the
bands of the Scutarians, and set at liberty our prisoners, to the intent they
may afterward against us and our lives, more freely execute their outrage and
cruelty. What may my uncle think when he shall see the deformed shape of this
Town, and her walls dismantelled and overthrown by those, whom he having of
late taken prisoners in the fields and near the banks of the river Drynon,
did so courteously and graciously in the open view and sight of each man
restore to liberty, and send home free without ransom to their own
country, to the intent they should now a new take arms against him, and renew
the old fierceness and rancour of their hearts? Go too then, let us pardon the
Driuastines, let us forbear to touch or invade their territory, whilst that
we our selves do find all kind of hostility executed against our persons.
We are now come to this pass, that whilst we carry our selves with such
clemency, and are so prove to pardon our enemies, we do animate and stir up
the arms of all the world against us: and breaking the bonds, wherein other
are tied, we do bring the yoke of bondage upon our own necks: this entreatie
ought the enemy to find, when he is at our mercy: That as we ought not to
exclude all show of pity and compassion from them, so should we not be
transported so far to pity them as to be more pitiful then stands with
reason: wherein can any man find him self justly agreened with us, if we use
that which right and the law of arms does permit us? There is no man can
lawfully account or call those cruel, with whom he stands upon terms of
like enmity, and between whom there is equal contention both of life and
death.

Thus on the one side did matters pass on with complaints, and murmurings. On
The proceedings of the war, between Mustapha and Scanderbeg.
the other side Mustapha having sent forth his soldiers into the country, did
not suffer the Garrison of Scanderbeg to be at rest, but by their continual
and daily roades and invasions which they made upon them, they did more and
more terrify them. For the Albanois shunning the fight continually, did stand
upon their defense, sometimes relying upon the strength of their trenches and
fortified places, rather then upon their valor and force of arms. And
sometimes sallying forth in small troops, and faining a flight, they (by a
kind of mocking and skorning of the enemy) did entertain him and gain time
upon him. Wherefore Mustapha perceiving, that all his endeavors were in vain,
and that there was small hope to oppress the Garrison, he had no desire, to
make any attempt against their fort, and as unwilling was he to pursue them in
their flight for fear of ambuscadoes and such like policies, which were
usual and familiar with his enemy. Only with good advise he ordained and
provided good guardes and sentinelles, and employed the residue of his strength
and forces to wast and spoil the country near adjoining unto him; till such
time as being enfourmed of the coming of the Prince of Albanie, he retired
the whole strength and force of his army, and went to encampe him self within
little less then two miles of the enemy. The place which they made choice of
Oronochea.
for the battle, is called Oronochea, and is in the upper Dibria, upon a
certain fair plain, yet of no great breadth, and about six miles from
Croie. Scanderbeg with his fresh and new forces, were likewise entered into the
Camp of the Epirots, where he was no sooner arrived, but he caused
proclamation to be made by the sound of Trumpet, that no person should issue
forth nor depart thence, without especial leave and license: and immediately
he set every man a work about the fortifying of the Camp: Mustapha in the
mean while on his part not stirring nor moving any whit at all. On both sides
therefore all was quiet and peaceable: by means whereof the Albanois having
sufficiently ordered their affairs, and having strengthened their armed
forces, with strong and well defenced rampires: they began to fortify likewise
the fortress with arms, men, and soldiers: and Scanderbeg making a general
view and muster of his companies to know the number of his men, and the
certainty of his forces: the old bands were three thousand and five hundred
horse, and six hundred foot strong. For albeit Castriot had left there, little
less then five thousand men at his departure (when he went to make preparation
for the war against the Venetians:) yet afterward he drew forth a great
many of them upon diverse special reasons and good considerations: the whole
number therefore of their forces being reckoned and accounted then present,
were near The number of Scanderbegs forces against Mustapha.
about six thousand fighting men, with whom he purposed to affront the forces
of Mustapha and to hazard the fortune of that glorious triumph, and yet were
not all of them employed: for the vigilancie and circumspect providence of this
pollitique chieftaine, would not permit that his fort should remain naked and
empty without defense (what soever chance should betide him) but he ordained
300. chosen men for the Order of Scanderbeg his army against Mustapha.
guard and custody of the same. His army very advisedly and upon good
consideration did he divide into wings: the fore front of the which, co^sisted
altogether of horsemen, whom he made the chief force and strength of both the
battallions, placing in each of them a thousand and five hundred horse, for
fear and doubt least his footmen, (being unable to endure and bear the
charge of the enemies horse,) should at the first onset be disordered and
overthrown: and this was the cause that he placed but very few of them in the
back of his two wings: the greatest part of his infanterie (being reserved in
the middle battle, which was likewise covered and supported with five hundred
horse, to the intent the battle, being not troubled and disordered at the very
first encounter, on all parts, both on the one side and on the other,) the
horsemen should make head against the horse of the enemy.

Whilst the Prince of Epire with the strength and body of his army, thus
ordered and arranged, did contain his soldiers in great silence, and not
stirring his ensigns, but attending the dismarch and setting forward of the
enemy: Behold a The combat of Paul Manessey and Caragusa.
certain Turk, disbanding and seuering himself from the rest of his company,
(whose name was Caragusa) presented himself in the middle space of the field,
which lay between the two armies, and gave a sign of defiance challenging
some one of them to the combat: from thence advancing him self near to the
ranckes of the Christians, with a high and lofty voice, he called for the most
hardy and aduenturous person in all their company, to assay him self against
him body to body. At the first there was a general silence, and no man gave
him a word, but every one stood mute, as men who were, no less doubtful to
refuse the challenge for fear of shame and disgrace: then to accept the
combat, the hazard whereof was so dangerous: but Paul Manessey (who was
known to be a very ready horseman, and an excellent man at Arms) did not
any longer tolerate these brauadoes of the Barbarian against his nation and
contrymen: all the companies seeming to cast their regard upon him and to
attend no other thing, as if he especially were the man, whom this challenge
did concern, and to whom the fortune of this fight did belong and appertain:
He therefore aduauncing himself roundly and in great fierceness, with a
joyful countenance went to seek out Scanderbeg, to know his mind and good
pleasure in the matter: of whom he was both very highly commended: and his
courage and good hope very much and vehemently augmented and animated by means
of those good speeches which Scanderbeg gave him: for he willed him in a good
hour and under the true conduct of the Paul Manessey encouraged by Scanderbeg
to the combat.
great God to march on, both to purchase to himself particular praise and
commendation, besides immortal fame unto his memory: as also by the good and
fortunate encounter of this so haughty and memorable an act, to begin and lead
the way unto his companions to a glorious and happy victory, leaving a worthy
president for them to imitate, and which the whole army in general could not
but follow with great joy and gladness, upon the happy presage of his new
gained honor and reputation. Hereupon those of his own cornet flocking on all
parts round about him, began to praise, to extol and commend him, as if he
had already gotten the victory. Then he making no longer stay, (but only
whilst he was arming and furnishing him self with such things as were
necessary and ordinary for the fight) suddenly mounted on horseback, and
forthwith gallopping into the open and plain field, and addressing himself
toward the barbarian, (which there attended him) he called unto him, and with
an high voice, and words well fitting and beseeming an enemy, he willed him
to prepare and make him ready to the combat. The Turk bad him stay a little,
only to give him the hearing of a word or two, which he delivered in this
manner.

The victory between us, our valor and our fortune will decide and
determine: Speeches of Caragusa to Paul Manessey.
but as touching the laws of the victory, for that we our selves are to take
some order: If so be the destinies have ordained thee this day to have the
honor of my loss and overthrow, I will not refuse (being overcome by right of
arms) but thou shall freely dispose both of my slaughtered carcass, and of
these my spoils: in like case, if it happen that thou be vanquished and do
fall under mine hand, I will that the like right be done to me, to dispose of
thy body at my pleasure. And this let our Generals ratify and confirm, for
fear least either in the heat and fury of our fight, or after the deciding
and adiudging of the combat, some tumult and vproare do arise between our
battles, in favor of the part of one of us. Heereunto Paul gave him this
answer: That for his part he did allow of the law and condition of the
combat, Answer of Paul Manessey to Caragusa.
which he (as it seemed) fearfully did demand to be observed. For where the
spirit resolute and full of courage does once yield to the others fortune,
all the residue by order of law and good right ought to be at the pleasure of
the conqueror. That he should therefore fight securely and without fear: that
he needed not to doubt of any other enemy besides him, whose body (if it
once became ghost less under his hand) should there also remain to be
disposed of, at his free pleasure and election. And albeit himself could be
content to bequeath the unprofitable relics of his dead carcass amongst his
fellow soldiers, to bewail and lament his misfortune: that yet Scanderbeg
would not suffer that those members (which had showed themselves so faint and
sluggish in the combat as to be vanquished) should be brought back and
received into his camp.

The audatious reply of this caualier, and the slight regard and account which
he seemed to make of his life, did so appale and astonish the Barbarian, that
it made him in a manner to repent himself that ever he provoked him. Imediatly
the sum of their agreement being confirmed and ratified by the Chieftaines,
and the two combatantes left alone in the midst of the field: every man had
his eyes fixed upon them. Those who were present at that fight, being
diuersely affected with doubt and hope, did stand and abide ravished with a
marvelous care concerning the success and event of the combat: for in show
and taulenesse the two champions were near alike. Both were of a mean
stature, and of equal years and age, neither of them being of a slothful or
heavy constitution, nor yet of too youthful or ouerhot and hasty a
disposition. Each of their arms were alike: first their lances and their
shields, which were barred all over the midst with bars of steel: by their
sides they had cemitaries after the Turkish fashion, and great and heavy maces
of iron: their bodies were armed with curasses, and their heads with helmets.
Over their armor they had very rich cassockes made of silk, shining very
bright and glistering: the which, albeit they did no way profit or further
them to the victory, yet did they add a kind of grace and ornament unto them.
Both of them being thus appointed, and either of them bewraying a kind of
fierceness and cruelty both in their countenance and courage, they took the
field each opposite against other, then setting spurs to their horses, and
fetching a strong carreer (with their lances in the rest to encounter each
other) the Christian knight running at the head of the Paynim, stroke him above
and over his shield Paul Manessey kills Caragusain combat.
into the right eye, and pierced the same quite through: with which wound, he
tumbling from his saddle to the ground, the other dismounting speedily,
disarmed his dead carcass, and cut the head from his body: and thus laden
with the spoils of his slain enemy, he quickly mounted again on horseback
to return to his fellow soldiers, who breaking forth on al sides out of their
ranks where they stood embattelled, with exceeding joy and gratulations did
conduct him toward their General. Scanderbeg having received him with many
gracious speeches and infinite praises and commendations, He is rewarded by
Scanderbeg.
even there in the fields and in the presence of the whole army, did reward
him with a rich cote of arms of gold tissue, and with a great demesne and
liuelihood in token of his virtue. Then for that the time did urge him to
begin the battle and to commit the hazard of the fight to the greatness of
his fortune: he thought it good to encourage his soldiers, and thus he spoke
unto them.

If the glorious acts and deeds of arms, do any thing move the courages of
men Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers.
who are valiant and hardy: I do think (my good soldiers) that every one of
you is sufficiently animated by this excellent testimony of virtue in a
particular private person: and the rather for that it seems the heavens could
not have afforded you a more notable example before your eyes, nor have given
you a better occasion to spur and to provoke you, then this happy beginning
and these first fruits of victory, which is sufficient both to encourage you
to a more brave and settled resolution, and to abate and dismay the courage of
our enemies. Go you to therefore and pass on hardly in this path of honor,
which has been trodden out unto you: and by a commendable kind of emulation, do
you immitate the act of your fellow in arms, whose hands you may see yet
smoking with the blood of that infidel. The careful regard and diligence of
your companion has vowed it self for you, has vowed it self for the
victory: his valiant and puissant arm has offered up a sacrifice for you,
that you likewise without any bloodshed at all should follow after him in the
like, and (by the favor of God) should march over their bodies which are
dedicated to destruction by your hands, and so you may enjoy the spoils which
are promised to your valor and deserts. Let us therefore give the onset, and
charge presently upon the enemy: he was the first to challenge you out of
your ranks, let us be the first to challenge him with our whole battle. Let
us force him into the field which seems to be fatal unto him, whilst that
fear and grief have deprived him of all strength, and whilst that a general
astonishment does press the hearts and minds of their people with a most sad
and sorrowful silence.

As Soon as he had thus spoken (their bodies having been before refreshed)
about the seventh hour he caused the trumpet to sound, and in the very
instant he marched forward in battle array. Behold a notable and wonderful
kind of hardiness in this man: mark well his resolution most worthy of an
invincible virtue, and deserving to be admired of all posterity. This
Chiefetaine (the only fine soldier of his time) with so small a troop of
men, bravely disdayning the great forces and mighty puissance of his enemy,
durst in open and plain field with army against army, adventure the hazard
of so great and doubtful a battle: not seeking by the help or furtherance of
any political invention, or of any martial devise and stratageme, to
ouerreach and circumuent his enemy he had the courage and audacitie to be the
first that should forgo his trenches, and putting himself upon the field, to
give the brauado to so strong an enemy: whom (as if he had been unready or
unwilling to come on, or as one ready to fly away) he seemed to force and
compel forth to the conflict. In this manner with a marvelous clamor and
mighty cry (made by his soldiers) he now began to advance himself
toward the fort of the enemy: but that Mustapha came forth to meet and
encounter him, at first with a squadron The battle between Mustapha and
Scanderbeg.
tumultuously assembled, and afterward with all his forces. But like as in
fear and terror they did set forward, so were they as soon and easily
repulsed at the very first onset, and scarce were they all come forth of
their trenches, and placed in good order of battle, but that many of them
suddenly betaking themselves to flight, did flock back again in troops,
making have to get within their fort, most basely and cowardly seeking to fence
and warrant their lives with the strength of their fortress and rampires.
Which thing being perceived by the Turkish general, and that neither the
ensigns nor the soldiers did keep their stand, nor any order; to the intent
he might the better encourage them by the regard and example of his own
forwardnes, he cried unto them to follow him, and where they should see him to
make way, there the ensigns should follow and come after him. And therewithal
bearing himself close with his lance in the rest, he broched his horse with
his spurs, and with head and shoulders gave in upon the front of the enemy
with a full and firm resolution, either to carry away the victory unto
Amurath his lord and master, or else to sell his life dearly. Many of his
leaders and captains followed him, and a good number of his own battallion:
and the residue also being ashamed to leave their Chiefetaine in time of
need, by little and little came to join with him, and opposed themselves to
the force and violence of the Christians: so that in diverse and sundriie
places gathering and trouping together, they did mainetaine the fight to the
uttermost of their powers. Thus on all sides were the battles reenforced, and
the fight began speedily to be renewed, yet was there not any appearance of
the change and variety of fortune both to the one party and to the other (as
is commonly seen in such fights) but always and on all parts a like, were
the infidels without any hope of victory, the Christians ever surmounting them
by the continual increase and proceedings of their good fortune: so firmly had
the success of the two first champions from the very beginning, wrought and
confirmed the fortune of both the armies, and had engraven in the mind of each
man such an impression of hope or terror, that it made them either fearful or
aduenturous. Moses from his side, sometimes advancing and setting forward with
his horse, and sometimes bringing on his footmen against the Turkish ensigns,
did so disorder them, that he easily broke in upon them with great force and
violence. They on the contrary side, who were opposed against him being
vanquished, rather by a certain fatal destiny, then by any valor and prowes
of the Christians, and being scant able to shun and avoid the blows and
wounds which were given them did seem as men in bonds and already vanquished,
rather then fit to bind and vanquish others. Paul Manessey fighting in the
middle battle bestirred himself notably, leaving after him wheresoever he
went a marvelous slaughter of the circumcised. By this time were their ranks
broken on all sides, neither horsemen nor footmen continuing in fight, or
keeping their place in battle array: but all being confused and mingled one
with another, and the greater part well near, of the Turks having their
horses slain by the footmen Albanois, with their lances in their hands, came
to serve as footmen also: but on the one side, their bodies being unaccustomed
and not used to fight on foot: and on the other part the discommoditie of their
armor being great, did much endammage and hinder them. And by reason that
their own forces did more and more decrease and diminish, they imagined that
our numbers did multiply and increase; nevertheless, being blinded with
shame, they did still abide expecting and attending the success of their
General, who on the other side was as busily occupied. For he (being
accompanied or assisted with all the most notable and valiant men of his army,
and having made head against the middle battle where Scanderbeg himself
remained) did think to have repaired the form and good hap of all the rest of
the squadrons. Sometimes the presence of Paul Manessey did greatly urge them,
for that by the glorious and honorable opinion, which they had in their
champion lately slain, their fearful thoughts and cogitations, did measure
all things in their enemy, to be greater then they made show of: sometimes
again their hearts were incensed and inflamed with wrath, according as either
the deformed image of their slain champion, or the shadow of his dead body
unrevenged, did seem to appear before their eyes, and to present it self to
their remembrance. Moreover the great rewards and recompenses (which was the
greatest and chiefest inuitement to prick them forward) proposed and promised
by Mustapha to him that could kill this enemy (whom they hated grieuouslie)
did encourage his people to be the more desirous and forward to endaunger
themselves: Paul Manessey assailed by the Turks.
by means whereof, many being reallied and assembled in troops about Paul
alone, they pressed upon him to the uttermost of their powers, and as men that
cared not for any of the rest, him only did they aim and shoot at. There
was not any one of them but did strive, even with the hazard of his own life,
and with deadly wounds to purchase the precious reward of that head which was
so highly prized. But the obstinate prowess of this Cauilier, caused the fond
and foolish desire of the Turks, to turn to their own pernicious and
extreme damage. For being well guarded with a troop of such as were most
hardy and valiant, he was able enough to sustain their fury and violence,
and to contemn their vain presumptions. At length perceiving a far off,
that one of the Barbarians had disbanded himself from the rest of his troops,
and was very hot and importunate upon those of his company, he turned
himself toward him, without any word speaking: and having gotten near unto
him, he discharged so full a blow with all his strength overthwart his head,
and redoubled one or two strokes upon him, that he overthrew him headlong off
his horse, making him to take the measure of his tomb upon the hard earth.
When his champions saw him lie dead upon the ground, they began presently to
turn the bridle, neither caring to revenge his death, nor to warrant his body
from the outrage of the enemy. This made the Epirots (when they saw them to
stand as it were in a study, and certain of them flying) to press upon them
the more fiercely, and to charge them with the greater fury, giving them no
time to breath, but handled them rudely, till having them in full chase, they
left all the advantage and honor to the conquerors. Paul pursuing them still as
they fled, did gleane and take up some of them that made least speed, and with
bitter and biting terms, he thus tauntingly exclaimed upon them. Whether fly
you (said he) you Speeches of Paul Manessey to the Turks as they fled.
base companions, are you so forgetful of all good fellowship: has not
Caragusa here, neither brother, cousin, nor so much as a friend, amongst so
many of you: who in honor of his corpse (that lies here dead and disfigured)
will vouchsafe to revenge him, which is the last good you can do him, being
past all your aid and helping? Behold me: see me (I say) who do here now
call upon you, and give you the defy, whom of late your selves did first of
all provoke, in hope of a wrong conceited glory. Abide, stay a while, take
with you the bloody spoils of your companion, which so voluntarily I do
proffer unto you.

But the Turks (more mute and dombe then fishes) had mind of nothing but of
speedy fight and running away: and with an infamous kind of silence, did
neither approve nor reprove the tauntes and reproachful speeches of the enemy.
And thus within a while, having by little and little gotten the advantage and
liberty of the open field, they did quickly vanish out of sight, so as hardly
could they hear the sound or noise of those that chased them: only the
archers did trouble them with great obstinacy: as for the rest of the troops,
they abstained from pursuing them, because weariness and extremity of travel
had dulled both the force and the spirits of the The dewse of the Turks in
their ensigns.
Christians. Notwithstanding having gathered up the ensigns and half moons,
which lay every where dispersed over the field (for the Turks in their
standards and ensigns do bear this for their devise) the souldiees with
wonderful great joys making the air to resound, and with their pleasant
clamors, and rude riming songs, did even strive and contend who should carry
them to the tents of Scanderbeg. For all had gone well on that side a good
while before: and the Turks being either slain, did lie dispersed over the
field in great heaps, or being reserved (according to the right of arms)
with their hands fast pinioned behind their backs, did give evident and open
testimony of their own bad deuoire, and the clemency of their enemies.
Mustapha Mustapha General of the Turks taken prisoner.
himself with twelve others likewise of the most principal and chiefest
persons, were brought prisoners upon an Hungarian horse, in great pomp and
triumph: to the intent he might be seen of all men, making the sight to be so
much the more worthy and notable, and mitigating as it were, the misfortune of
the other prisoners. For the pernicious humor of ambition, and a pestilent
desire to purchase unto himself the greater glory, by the proof and trial
of his resolution, had carried him furiously into the squadron of Scanderbeg,
where (being enclosed and destitute of all aid and defense of his soldiers,
and of all the means, either to escape away free, or die honorably) the
unfortunate Chieftaine made choice to co^pound with the loss of al other
things, yea and of his liberty also, for the sauegard and preservation of his
life only.

I can not say certainly, whether in all the time of the war held with
Amurath, The victory of the Christians.
there were any exploit achieved more notable, or more favored by the divine
power then this: So worthily did this journey make show of every man his good
courage and desert: never was there any leader nor any soldier, nor any other
person of what degree soever, that did ever return more honorably charged with
reputation and glory, either in public, or in private. The report is, that
there were slain of the enemy 10000. And that there were taken only 82.
prisoners, and 15. standards. This happy and fortunate overthrow, cost not
the Albanois much bloodshed, for he lost (as they say) scarce 300. men. The
camp of the enemy did greatly enrich the Christian soldiers, for that the
Turks, who had soiourned certain months upon the marches and borders of the
province, had gotten together and purchased good store of pr^ie and booty:
there were also found very goodly spoils upon the^ which were slain, and a
notable number of good horses: but albeit the soldiers held themselves
reasonably well satisfied with pillage, yet for all that, was not the
wrathful and fiery courage of Scanderbeg sufficiently appeased: but that
immediately and as soon as he had refreshed his troops, that part of the day
which remained, he spent and employed it in sacking and spoiling the
territories of the enemy. And in this sort continuing the course of his late
victory, setting fire on all things both far and near: that which could not
be destroyed by the sword, was burnt and consumed by fire. Neither did the
very meanest or worst sort of the soldiers, return from thence empty and
without booty: for whersoeuer they found any thing good and worth the taking,
they forgot it not behind them. And besides, they brought away a wonderful
many of beasts and cattle: so that, what with the weariness of their
excessive travel, and what with the abundance of their booty (wherewith they
were over charged) scarcely could they get home to their camp, before an hour
within night. The residue of the night was spent in taking their rest, which
they passed very still and in great quietness, without any bonfires, without
any noise and clamors, or any other shows or tokens of their victory: and the
reason was, for that the Prince of Epyre showed him self more sad and pensive
then he was accustomed, because of the news that Baleze was overthrown and
rased. Therefore all those within the camp (who were any Scanderbeg is pensive
for the razing of Baleze.
thing discreetely and soberly disposed) framing their countenances altogether
to sadness and melancholy, did conform themselves to the same humor jointly
with him: sometimes confirming him with good and pleasing speeches, and
sometimes raging with hatred and malice against the enemy. But the agreeued
thoughts and pensive imaginations of this Prince would admit no comfort nor
accustomed rest so long and so often as he called to remembrance the outrage
and ingratitude of the Scutarians, in regard of the benefits and clemency
which they had tasted and received from him.

Scanderbeg therefore having appointed and left (according to his custom) two
thousand horse, and a thousand foot for the guard of the frontiers: the next
morning Scanderbeg spoileth the territory of the Scutarians in revenge of the
razing of Baleze.
by the break of day he departed with the residue of his forces; (taking with
him both the prisoners, and wellneare all the best and choicest of the booty,)
and so took his way to the siege of Dayna: where when he had learned by Marin
Span more certainly and particularly how all things had passed, he made no
longer abode, then whilst he renewed and repaired his troops: and then
immediately and without delay with fresh forces (which carried with them the
extreme loss and calamity of the inhabitants of Scutarie) he passed over the
river of Drynon: and dispersing his horsemen over all the country; whatsoever
he found tilled and sown in any place or quarter (for it was in the end of
autumn,) all was destroyed, wasted and spoiled: the vineyardes cut up close by
the ground, and most of their trees that bare fruit were felled down: the
pesants and rustickes themselves were not saved from slaughter, but as many of
them as were found to resist against the enemy, were put to the sword, and the
residew were sacked and evil entreated. From thence turning his fury upon the
other towns of the Venetian territory, he pursued them in such sort that
they had good cause given them, to curse that rash exploite of the Scutarians
against Baleze. Most of the inhabitants and all the forces which remained within
the country did revolt and adioine themselves and take part with Scanderbeg,
rather then they would taste of the rigor and discommoditie of such ruins and
destruction.

Thus we see that Scanderbeg did largely blame and reprehende the immoderate
choler of his Nephewe, but he could not acknowledge the infirmity of his own
passion. He detested the indiscretion of a young courage, but he could not
temperate and moderate his own anger and impaciencie. The country being thus
overcome, made desolate and brought under the dominion of a strange lord, he
now also began to grow terrible to the towns and places of chief regard.
Notwithstanding the extremity and rigor of the cold winter now beginning to
approach, and the continual falling of the rain without ceasing, did drive him
home again against his will, and made him retire into his tents to winter under
the wonted walls of Dayna. During these troubles and alterations, the
governors of the Venetian province, and the magistrates of Scutarie, being by
means hereof in marvelous distress and perplexity, (but especially in
regard of these forces which were shut up within Dayna, whom they well knew to
have been brought to the last point and extremity of want and necessity)
dispatched letters to the Senate of Venice, containing the miserable estate of
their confederates.

About the same time there arrived into the camp, certain infidels with great
and Mustapha and the other prisoners ransomed for 25000 Ducketes.
rich presents unto Scanderbeg, for the ransom of his prisoners: and they
agreed upon the payment of five and twenty thousand Duckates. Thereupon was
Mustapha and all his companions delivered: and the Turks (having been
bountifully feasted, and entertained very honorably, (as if all rancour and
enmity had been utterly forgotten and laid aside:) had guides appointed them
(such as were very skillful in all the passages of the country,) both for
their safe conueiance and better assurance on the way against the violence of
the Christians. The money levied and made by their delivery, was wholly
distributed amongst the soldiers by Scanderbeg: his desire being, that they
should be made partakers of the reward, who had been partakers of the travels
and danger of the war. All this while there was not any attempt made against
the town by reason that the rigor of the cold and frostes, did not permit
them thereunto. The defendants having abandoned the care and remembrance of al
things, The constancy of the Daynians.
save of their faith and fidelity only, did abate nothing of their former
wilfulnes and obstinacy. Many and infinite discommodities had wasted and
consumed their forces, but yet they reserved still one and the same mind and
courage, and their spirits did seem daily to wax more lively and resolute
though their bodies were greatly enfeebled and their strength much abated and
diminished. Thus did a small Hamlet stay the force and violence of a most
excellent and sovereign Chiefetaine: and he that was a conqueror invincible
in so many famous battelles, saw himself surmounted by the constancy of
that place only. Yet did not the shame hereof, nevertheless any whit deter
Scanderbeg from pursuing his attempt: but he was the more resolutely determined
to win them by famine if he could not otherwise bring them to reason. There
were at this time certain secret speeches, and uncertain rumors amongst the
common sort: that the Seigniorie of Venice was very willing A treaty of peace
between Scanderbeg and the Venetians.
and enclining to a peace, by reason whereof, Scanderbeg bare himself more
mildly and gracious toward the enemy: and in those roades and incursions
which were made thenceforth upon the country, the Albanois did discharge
their choler and malice with more gentleness and less extremity. Not many
days were past, but that news were brought of certain Ambassadors sent unto
him by the order and direction of the Senate at Venice, to entreat a new
agreement of peace and amity between them, and the time of their coming was
hourly expected. Scanderbeg therefore (according to the usage and custom of
great personages) having sent the chief of his nobility with a great train
to meet them, entertained them most honorably: and having feasted them in
very sumptuous and bountiful manner, the Conditions of peace offered to
Scanderbeg.
next day he gave them full audience to deliver their charge and commission.
The effect whereof was this, That the Prince of Epire should break up his
camp before Dayna and withdraw his forces, because it had been once received
into the guard and protection of the Venetian state: and that therefore the
sovereignty and absolute jurisdiction of that town, should fully and
peaceably rest and continue in their hands; that Scanderbeg in liew and
counterchaunge thereof should have the whole right Busegiarpeni being a part of
the Demesnes of Scutarie extending from the river Drynon toward Scutarie, and
lying more conveniently for Scanderbeg then the town of Dayna. Oration of
Scanderbeg unto the Venetian ambassadors upon the conclusion of peace between
them.
and Seigniorie in a certain country, lying upon the river of Drinon, with all
that circuit of land which was called Busegiarpeni. This condition of the peace
was no sooner propounded, but it was presently accepted by the Albanois: and
without any delaie or refusal, he held himself well contented and satisfied
with that which the Ambassadors had appointed unto him: wherefore the peace
being concluded and agreed upon, and the assurance and all things else well and
orderly dispatched; a general silence being commanded (for that this worthy
and magnanimious prince did prepare himself to make some speech unto them, and
to give them some notable show and token of his magnificence, liberality, he
thus began to say unto them.

My hearty wish and desire is, that that prince were yet living amongst us,
whose death was the beginning and first occasion, both of my just grief, and
of these wearisome wars which I have had with you: for whilst I sought to
recover from you the possession of Dayna, stained with the blood of our
Citizens, by the mishap of an unjust war: I would not at this time have seen
this province of Christians and of our friends and allies to be overwhelmed
with so many mischieues: but I would have gloried in the observation of peace
and amity inuiolably with that most honorable and worthy Senate, the
interruption and troubling whereof at this present, (happening upon so small,
and trifling a cause) my heart will not of a long time but greatly grieve at.
But this breach and debate grew upon another occasion: for your taking of arms
is to be excused, in that the disloialtie of others by their sinister and
perverse counsels, did easily estrange and alienate from me the heart and good
affection of that * Lady, and most maliciously and with a certain affectation
of flattery, did Bossa.
conceal that which was agreed between Lech and me, and were the authors that
Dayna did yield it self into your protection. It was not you therefore with
whom I found my self so much agreeued, neither did I take arms to convince
you of injustice, nor yet to impute any ambition or greedy desire of Empire
unto the Venetians, whom as yet, no age did ever hear to have enterprised or
authorized any war, that was unjust and against equity. But one thing there
was which did not a little displease me, that you had less trust and affiance
in me then was requisite: and whilst you gave care, and builded upon their
tales and reports, you thought me to be ambitious, and to be led with a desire
of trouble and contention. I therefore (seeing that right was not to be had but
by arms only, did lay hold upon this occasion of the war, which was in a
manner, cast upon me, and even as it were put into my hands. But now most
gladly do I lay aside my weapons (God himself being willing to have it so)
and more then that (if your selves had not required it) even this territory
which by the ordinance of the Senate you have given me in recompense of Dayna,
and for the confirmation of this our league and amity, holding my self well
satisfied only in the good will and francke offer of your Senate, and do
willingly embrace the good will and friendship of those liberal and
magnificent princes. As for any other thing I neither desire nor accept of: but
(if occasion serve, and need be,) all this territory which I have, my whole
estate, and my goods and substance, yea my very life, will I vow and consecrate
for you, for your children, and for the majesty Peace proclaimed between the
Venetiant and Scanderbeg.
of your Empire.

Scanderbeg having finished his speech, took order that Heralds should be
sent throughout all the Province, to publish unto the people the glad tidings
and joyful news of this peace so much desired: the siege also was broken up
and raised, and the sconces and other fortifications made during the siege were
beaten down and razed: the soldiers in all mirth and joy (laying aside all
hatred and malice both in public and in private) did friendly entertain and
welcome those of the town, and did inuit them into their tents and
pauillions. Immediately also upon this treaty Andrew and Volcathagne, were
delivered and permitted to go at large where they thought good: all other
things which had been lately taken from the Scutarians and their neighbors: as
villages, castles, fortresses and such like, they were rendered and redeliuered
to the ambassadors. The day following (after many triumphs, and many goodly
shows (as the manner is publicly had and solemnized) the Ambassadors were
dismissed, but not without many rich and sumptuous presents.

Then Scanderbeg being naturally of a lively and stirring disposition, (and
being Scanderbeg leaving the siege of Daina marches to the spoil of the
Turkish territory.
impatient of rest, and not able to endure idleness) presently he led his
troops to the Turkish frontiers: with intent to wast and spoil them, as he
was usually accustomed: where gathering in one the old garrison and the rest
of his companies, with both incorporated together, he seemed to have a good and
fair army: in such sort that a man would have thought those forces
sufficient, not only to pill and spoil the fields, but to enterprise,
undertake and execute some great and notable good piece of service, so
cheerfully and contentedly did each of them follow on, to receive the deserved
pay and stipend of their long service and warfare. For in those days the
soldiers did not expect nor demand any other wages of their General then
what they could get and purchase upon the enemy by the sword and force of
arms. Hereof it grew that the Princes (his neighbors) were wont (in way of
mirth and jest) to call The Turkish territory Scanderbegs treasury.
the territory of the enemy, Scanderbeg his treasury. Afterward parting
his host into three several troops, he entered on all sides upon the borders
of the Sultan, where he spent two whole days in ouerrunning, pilling, and
harrying of the country: the soldiers being their own pay masters for their
pains, at the cost and charges of the inhabitants: who went not scotfree
without the loss of their lives, except such as being baptized were become
Christians: and to those also they left nothing, nor showed them any other
favor, but gave them their lives and their liberty. After the fury of the
sword, followed the rage of flame and fire; which being kindled in the houses,
did deforme and disfigure all things, and burned all into ashes in such sort
that if the camp of Amurath had happened at that time to have come into Epire;
there was no hope for it to have found any victuals to have maintained them, so
much as one day, except they had carried and brought it with them. The earth
therefore being left all bare, naked and empty, with the only show and marks
of desolation: Scanderbeg caused his ensigns to march homewards, and retired
his army within his own confines. Then did he license his soldiers to
depart, and sent them home to their own houses, after he had highly praised
and commended the diligence of every one of them, excepting the number of
three thousand only; which (being the ordinary garrison appointed for the
defense of the borders) did always continue there, and never removed from that
place: himself with the residue of his citizens and his ordinary guard, did
take the way directly toward Croy.

Tidings being brought to the Venetians of the peace concluded in Epire, and of
the bounty of the Prince of Albanie, and the Ambassadors giving him high
praise and commendation: the Senate conceived exceeding joy, and an
incomparable gladness: for that their province (after so long and fierce a
war) might from thenceforth take breath and rest themselves. Then being
willing to honor the virtue and magnificence of that Prince, with some show and
argument of their thankful hearts, in a general counsel of all the citizens
and gentlemen of that estate, by a common and public Scanderbeg and
huposteritie made free of the city of Venice, and appointed governor and
lieutenant general of the Venetian territories in Epire. Amurath consulteth
with his counsel concerning the war against Scanderbeg.
consent, he and his posterity were created citizens of Venice, and enrolled
in the number of the most noble families of their city and common wealth:
besides (by the universal good liking of all the Senate) he was appointed sole
governor and lieutenant General, for their common wealth in those quarters:
and letters were forthwith sent away to that effect, with diverse very rich and
princely presents.

All this while there was nothing spoken of the Turks, neither was it heard
that they made any roads or ordinary invasions, or that they attempted any
thing upon the Epirots. For the rude discomfiture and overthrow of Mustapha had
so terrified and abated their courage, that Amurath durst not stir any
further against the Duke of Albanie, fearing by such like enterprises (as he
had formerly and usually assailed him) he should rather augment and strengthen
his forces, then be able either to break or to diminish them: seeing that so
many and so great armies, (which even till then had entered Epyre for the
invasion of Scanderbeg) were for the most part either destroyed, and left dead
upon the fields: or else shamefully discomfited and put to flight, or being
brought into servitude and captivity, did serve but as laughing slockes for
their enemies to triumph over, and a fit matter for the increase of their
glory and reputation. Supposing therefore that to be once revenged of these
disgraces it was requisite to make far greater preparations, and to march
against him with another manner of puissance, he spent whole hours and days in
diverse consultations, still prolonging the occasion of that great honor which
he had vainly conceived, and promised to himself by such a journey. But the
report of the peace made with the Venetians, and the spoiling of his Provinces,
and so many discomfitures, one happening in the neck of another, coming to
his ears, his heart being before mightily addicted and inclined to war, was
now much more incensed and more sharply pricked forward. Wherefore the old man
(being thus full of care and thoughts) before he would decree any thing for the
leuying of soldiers; caused certain who were nearest his person to be sent
for (whom they call Visiers, and are those of his privy council) to Visiers
the Councillors of the great Turk
whom, as one mad for very anger, and full of fury and choler, he discovered
in the end, the secret and long conceived hatred of his heart in these terms.

Hitherto (most worthy and trusty Councillors) we have both well nourished
and Orat on of Amurath to his councillors for the war to be undertaken
against Scanderbeg
much augmented the prosperous temeritie of this fugitive: and being occupied
with the urgent necessity of the war of Hungary, we have so long deferred
the due punishment of this our hate full enemy, that by the multitude of
outrages and contumelious abuses, he has freely and without chasticement,
incensed the majesty of the Ottoman Empire; such as neither my ears can
endure to hear reported, nor my eyes can abide the sight of. His fierce and
furious madness, (I shame to speak it) is increased so far and is grown to
that pass, that he dares with all his forces, to be aforehand with us, in
assaulting us: and openly to condemn us of faintness and want of courage.
What avails it here to recount unto you the misfortune of Haly Bassa? and
the like mischances of so many other Captains and leaders? we need go no
further to take a view and conjecture of the image of our estate, but only by
the miserable province of Macedon, which (as I understand) by continual
roades, invasions and burnings is brought to that extreamitie, that from
henceforth we have little hope left to see therein any marks or tokens that it
is our province, but filled rather and replenished with our enemies: for even
of late did he enter it with an army leauied of purpose, spending whole days
in the spoiling and dispeopling of the country. How long shall we endure the
attemptes of this wicked and seditious wretch? shall we suffer him so long till
we our selves be fettered, and that he put irons upon our own legs: it is high
time that we suppress his pernicious endeavors; for fear least by our
negligence, this fire do increase: and then all too late (which my mind
misgiueth me) we do begin to frame our complaints, and seek remedy all in
vain: considering that an enemy being once contemned and neglected, of a
small and mean beginning many times does amplify and enlarge his forces, and
lifts up his Sentence.
head to the ruin of his adversary. All things (my masters) do inuit you to
the wars,, and do seem to minister the means unto you: for if there were no
other reason to induce us thereunto, yet nevertheless, the only regard and
lamentable aspect of the miseries and calamities of our subjects, were not that
alone sufficient to solicit the courages of men brave and valiant? The daily
captiuities and imprisonments of so many our friends, the smoke of our towns
and vilages on all sides fiered and burnt (which do even call and cry in
themselves for a revenge) would they not make us even to blush for very shame
if we should suffer them? Have we so often heretofore restrained and repressed
the rage of the Hungarians? have we by continual and memorable defaits, left
Greece mourning in her own sorrows and laments? have we broken the forces of
so many mighty and redoubted potentates and brought them even to naught? and
shall we now suffer (through a timorous kind of pusillanimitie) these troubles
and tumults of Epire, to gather strength and to increase upon us? shall we yet
endure to see that province (which of late was tributarie unto us) now to stand
in contention and to brave us by arms? what? has the land of Albanie so
suddenly of late engendered another sort of Epirots? and is it possible that a
new and unaccustomed kind of enemy should issue forth unexpected against us? I
am determined once again, to make trial if this nation be so fierce and
untameable: and if the hardy and haughty courage of their obstinate and proud
Prince can be brought under the accustomed yoke of their subjection. We must
not from henceforth stand upon points of subtlety and vain policies; nor
must we any more seek to surprise this enemy by ambushments: neither does the
time now serve (by the diversity of the Leaders and Chieftaines and by
ordinary troops one after another) to fill their hateful soil with the
blood of our soldiers: for we see that one and the same kind of misfortune
does follow both our leaders and our armies: and whereas we made choice of them
to do us service, they have served to endammage rather our selves the^ our
enemies. Shall we commit another army to Haly Bassa, or Ferisey, who besides
the wounds and the deformed relics of their own forces, have brought us not
so much as one standard or ensign of the enemies? Shall we follow the
unfortunate advise and counselles of Mustapha: and minister pay unto the
Christians, and ease their charge in the maintaining of their forces: while he
is carried only with a desire to extinguish and free the infamy of his bonds
and imprisonment? We have been so often vanquished, taken prisoners, ransomed:
and in brief so often beaten and discomfited, that we have reason from
henceforth to abhor, and to be ashamed of our own estate and condition: we
must now therefore take upon us the charge of this war, with our best means
and the utter most of our endeavors. It behooves us to undertake it with such
forces, to employ so great a puissance, and to march into Epire with so mighty
an host; that the country may be scant able to contain it, nor yet to
sustain the force and violence of our army. By this means without any loss
or bloodshed, shall we purge and cleanse all the country: and by a notable
discomfiture of our enemies (being either expelled and chased quite away, or
vtterliesubdued and vanquished) we shall reestablish those towns in their
ancient form and fashion: which by the disloialtie of this fierce nation,
has been withheld from us: or if the perverse obstinacy and obdurate
stubbornness of this people (as it is likely and usual with them) upon a rash
and desperate resolution, and of an inconsiderate desire to defend their
Prince, do betake themselves to arms: we will then utterly destroy these
wretched souls (who do even long for their deserved punishment) and with a
singular revenge (which we have so long desired) we will recompense them for
the old wrongs and injuries which they have done us, both in public and in
private. It is your duties (valiant and worthy men) to undertake this war,
not as you were wont to do against the Hungarians, or other enemies: but with
a far greater wrath and indignation, as against those which are your slaves
and fugitives, and who (being most mischieuously affected against you) have now
made show of their insolent and hateful minds, which for a long time lay
close concealed and dissembled.

To this effect tended the clamor and continual speeches of this Orator, who
full Amurath resulued in person to war upon S^an lerb^^, makes preparations
to that effect.
of rage and choler, did insinuate nothing else into the ears of his people:
and they again very attentively did hearken unto him, approving this his
invention for the war of Epyre. And (being undoubtedly persuaded that it
could not but fall out answerable to the honor and dignity of his greatness)
all of them with one voice and consent did agree that preparation should be
speedily made, with all possible diligence for this journey: least, failing to
make their provisions in time and season, they might (through delay and
negligence) loose the occasion and opportunity of the spring. For the winter
beginning now to wax more mild, the tops of the mountains covered with snow,
began to show forth and to be discovered. Immediately therefore, and without
any delay, commissions were directed, and proclamations made throughout all
the Provinces and Nations under the Turkish obeisance, and throughout all the
Realms of his allies and confederates, and to such cities and towns by name,
as the Sultan thought conuenient^ that they should furnish him with so many
thousand of horse and foot to be ready with all speed, and to repair unto
him to Andrinople: for as yet had not Greece lost the feate of her noble and
famous Emperors at Constantinople, neither had she at that time cause to mourn
and lament their doleful funerals; happening afterward at such time as they
came to be buried and thrown down under the yoke and subjection of the
miscreants. The rumor of these preparations and huge provisions brought with it
great fear and terror to the neighbor nations and adjoining towns of the
Christians: who being surprised with notable astonishment, were in wonderful
great doubt, where and upon what place the Secrecy of the Turk in concealing
his counsels.
burden of this war, and the extreme puissance of so great forces would
power forth and execute their bloody effects. For hardly was any man able to
conjecture of the secret counsels of Amurath: not his own inward and most
private favorites, except certain of his counselors, in whom (as we have said)
the Ottoman had a special trust and assurance: for fear least the enemies,
being thereof advertised, might provide themselves both of counsel and means
to repulse the violence of his attemptes. This puts me in remembrance how in
that first expedition of the Turks against Scutarie, the Barbarians were
discovered and seen before our walls in a manner before we heard any thing
of their arrival. But in truth it is a policy very ordinary and usual with
this warlike nation; to give out a lying and false rumor of some vain tumult
and attempt one way; whilst they do bend their forces, and convert the whole
The policy of the Turks to oppress the Christians.
puissance of their redoubted arms another way: to the intent they may the
more easily surprise and oppress those, who (being least advised) are carried
away with a vain kind of light belief and pernicious credulity. But the fame
and suspicion of these preparations caused a general alarm and tumult on all
parts: on the one side the Hungarians mistrusting the infidelity of their
perpetual adversary, began to betake them to their arms which they had found
so unfortunate: and to raise their forces which were sore weakened by so many
discomfitures and overthrows. On the other side, the Greeks being in extreme
distress, and having their spirits dispersed and divided, by reason of their
private domestical dissentions: yet did they take a good heart and courage unto
them, for the defense and maintenance of the poor and weak relics of their
declining and decaying Empire.

Notwithstanding Amurath could not any way deceive or ouerreach Scanderbeg,
Scanderbeg makes prouisson of resistance against the Turks.
who by long practice and experience, being well acquainted with the
dissimulations of that Monarchy, had all his cunning sleightes and
disguisementes at his fingers ends. Nevertheless, some say that he had also
intelligence thereof from some who were near the Turk, and his special
fauorits, by the discovery of certain secret messengers, who albeit they could
not report it in any certainety, yet did the Albanois easily believe it. And
one principal thing that made him the rather to credit it, was the
extraordinary idleness and unaccustomed rest of Ottoman, because even to that
day, he had not sent any new forces, either to revenge the outrage done to
Mustapha, nor for the security and defense of the limits and confines of his
own country. Wherefore Castriot having laid aside the care of the private and
civil affairs of his estate, and being nothing at all dismayed nor troubled
in his mind for all that mighty and perilous tempest of war and uproar by the
enemy, with a most ready and advised resolution, he provided and accomplished
in very good order whatsoever any other Chiefetaine (were he never so prudent
and expert) could have either foreseen or executed in the like case or
accident. For he dispatched messengers out of hand with letters to all the
Princes and nations his confederates amongst the Epirots; to the intent that
both themselves might be ready in arms, and that they might arm others
likewise, disposing them in fit and convenient places for the assurance of
their towns and strong holds: both by good and strong garrisons and
fortifications, and by the provision of victuals and munitions in good store
and abundance more the^ ordinary. Because the hugenes of so great a multitude,
and so infinite numbers, did threaten all of them with like ruin and
destruction, and with desolation alike common unto all of them: for that
Ottoman seemed to imagine not his confusion and overthrow alone, but the total
subversion of the whole country of Epire. Himself (not sleeping nor being
idle) after he had dispatched Moses and many others of his chiefest nobles,
both to make a leauy and muster of men, and to provide corn sufficient for the
necessity of the time present, went from place to place, and in proper person,
to visit and ouersee all things, and sending forth daily new and often
commandments, taking not any rest neither day nor night, till he had bereft
the enemy of al fit matter and occasion, either of getting honor, or bringing
damage upon him. And the better to compass it, he caused the greater part of
the husbandmen, and the common sort of the people, who were unfit for the
field, (together with their families and all that they had) to retire
themselves into the walled towns. But all those which were men of any strength
or ability, and were of age fit to bear arms, he retained to employ them in
diverse services of the wars. Neither did he forget the garrison of Macedony:
but they, and many other great troops (assembled from all parts) and day by
day repairing to Croy, when they came to be incorporated and joined in one,
made a fair and goodly army. It remained now that he should part his
companies, and appoint them Scanderbeg orders his forces against the invasion
of the Turks.
to their several charges. First therefore he reserved for his own regiment
10000. men, of those whose service he had lately used in the war of Venice,
and at Chronichea, for with them he was assured, he might make head against the
Barbarians, according as the opportunity of the place should minister means
unto him. To the old garrison of Croy (besides the number of citizens) he added
1300. soldiers, all Epirots and men of approved valor, which made the Croians
also to furnish themselves with all sorts of armor and munitions, serving for
the defense of their walls and the repulse of the enemy, but especially it
increased their courages, and the greatness of their stomachs, which were
faithfully devoted to the preservation of their liberty. The same time therefore
that the garrison was brought into the town, was the feeble sex of women
Scanderbeg remoueth old persons, women and children out of the city.
and children drawn forth without the walls, and none suffered to stay within,
but the youth of the town only, and such as were fit for the wars. And yet
were not they interrupted nor confounded with the basest of the popular sort,
in whose hearts and courages, commonly the lively sparks of honor and of
liberty, did not enter and penetrate soon or easily. Thus did Scanderbeg with
good and grave advise and deliberation provide for the importance of his
affairs, because that city was the chiefest place, and (as it were) the key of
all his Realm, and the surest fortress to stay the courses and attempts of
the Turks: and upon which depended the whole strength, the hope and the
preservation of the residue of the state of Albany. But here might it be
doubted, whether it Question. If better that women and children should be
excluded or retained in a town besieged?
were better done, thus to take away the wives and children from the sight of
the citizens, or to have suffered them to continue there still, considering
that their presence and countenances full of grief, the sight of their tears,
and the hearing of their lamentations, the misery and fear of their servitude,
and the infamy of bonds and imprisonment threatened unto the^, are of far
greater moment and of more force, beyond al comparison to animate and to
encorage men, then the bare remembrance of them away and absent. But it may be
notwithstanding, that old and expert warriors, did hold it more expedient, and
a matter of more certainty and assurance that they should be absent. For albeit
in the eye of the regardants, this encoragement be in truth proper and
convenient in the midst of their travels and perils, to make them hazard
their lives liberally and without fear: so is it of no small force and
efficacy to make the enemy more hard and obstinate, by reason that the
unmeasurable desire of the prey (which they hope for) does drive and carry on
the soldier with a more settled resolution, and does inflame much more ardently
the corages of the Barbarians to give the charge and to pursue it: making them
to adventure more fiercely, even in despite of wounds, and to expose
themselves more furiously to the violence of the sword: whereas (on the
contrary) they go on more coldly and temperatly, when they see nothing within
the place, but the force and strength of men stout and resolute, when they
shall see upon the walls, none but such as have their hands thirsting greedily
after blood, and whose bodies are even vowed and destinate to die without all
care or regard of life.

It was a pitiful spectacle to behold this mournful multitude of the Croians,
when they were to depart the town, and to forsake their own houses and
habitations, every where was to be heard nothing but complaints and
lamentations of women. There was no house, street, nor corner of the town
exempted or free from grief and sorrow: the market place did resound with
diversity of cries, some rebuking and some blaming their friends for their
grieuing at their departure, others inuiting and procuring them to tears and
exclamations. But the most notable mark and show of the public misfortune
and doleful affliction was to be seen at the temples and in the Churches, for
there was a most marvelous concourse of people of all sorts and conditions.
Infinite were the vows and devout prayers and supplications, intermingled with
abundance A notable description of the lamentation of the Croians upon their
departure out of the city.
of tears and lamentations, which were poured forth before the Altars. And that
which made the sight of this miserable calamity to be the more hideous and
terrible, was a custom which this nation had in doing outrage to themselves,
by tearing their faces and beating their breasts most pitifully. The like
passion and vehemence of grief did appear in the grave women and ancient
matrones, who (besides the deforming of their vilages) thought it a most
pleasant thing to imitate the sorowfulnes of the others. Nothing was held
shameful, nothing was accounted too much or excessive in this accident: but
she was reputed to have deserved most praise and commendation, whose
discomfort was deemed to be most evident and apparent. There wanted not some
also, who (according to the use and nature of mortal men, though not without
singular impiety and wickedness) did exclaim upon the divine power, attributing
to God the cause of their grief and misfortune. At the length when their
sorrow (somewhat eased with their tears) began in part to be mitigated and
appeased: the mothers (addressing their speeches to their sons) with often
repetitions would command them many things, ever and among embracing them and
kissing them. Sometimes they would put them in remembrance of the good offices
and kind entreaty with which they had used them in their infancy, and of the
mutual love and affection which they had deserved in recompense of their
kindness: and sometimes would they show their aged locks, and their Venerable
white hairs. All of them were in one case and used like speeches: the wives
showing their sucking babes unto their husbands, did deplore and bewail that
from thenceforth they should remain in their dwellings in case of orphans,
and in pitiful estate of widdowhood. The aged fathers (as men confounded) and
altogether silent for very grief, and being in a wonderful great care and
perplexity for the life of their sons, durst not by speaking unto them, neither
animate nor prick forward their valiant hearts, who were of themselves
sufficiently fierce and courageous. Neither durst they dissuade them from the
travels and dangers of arms, nor from their deuoire and perseverance in their
several charges and duties, for doubt least they should be thought to prefer
their affection to their children, before the love and duty which they did owe
unto their country. But a general commandment being come from the Prince, that
the town should be discharged of this burdensome company: and that they which
were in arms, should repair every man to his charge, (telling them that in
heaping up of vain plaints, and by their private consultations, they did but
spend and trifle away the time:) hereupon began the sorrow to be renewed, their
cries and their tears began a fresh, neither more nor less, then as if they
had already seen the enemy to ransacke and spoil al things, to draw and drag
away their husbands, their fathers, and their mothers into cruel bondage: to
raze and break down their walls, and to violate, pollute, and profane their
Churches, and all holy and sacred mysteries. Hardly could the multitude be
drawn from that which they had once embraced, and every one would have
remained as the companion of his friends danger, and the partner of his
fortune: notwithstanding, seeing that the criers and other officers of the
Prince, did now press and importune them to depart, (then taking their leave
with their last kisses and embracements) all of them at length, each after
other, with sighs and groans, left the sight of that which they held most
dear: and still casting back their eyes toward the city walls, they set
forward on their way without any care or regard, where they set their foot, or
which way they went. It is said that they were transported into the towns of
Epire, that lay upon the sea side, and in other places and cities under the
obeisance of the Venetians, and other their confederats: where likewise an
innumerable multitude of husbandmen and laborers were retired, with their
cattle, beasts, and moueables, to the intent the enemy should find nothing to
prey upon, whereby he might be relieved or helped.

After that the multitude was sent away, and that this trouble and tumult
within Scanderbeg provides victuals, armor and munition for the war^.
the town was ceased, Scanderbeg spent the rest of the day in dealing with the
victuallers and merchants of corn, and other munitions, in appointing public
garners for grain, and distributing unto every soldier by the poll,
victualles to serve him for a whole year. Besides, he gave away a great
quantity of weapons, and an infinite number of targets, to the intent by this
his bounty and largess, he might prevent and assure the faith and devotion of
his soldiers: telling them (as he delivered the same) that he gave them with
intent that they should keep them continually to themselves: or (which he held
more commendable) that they should employ them against their enemies. Thus did
he ordain and take order for all things, and by sundry gifts and presents did
he bind and allure unto himself the good will and affection of every one. The
Vranocontes governor of Croy.
day following sending for Vranocontes an Epirot by birth, and by him lately
appointed governor of Croy (a man whom he highly loved and favored, both for
the merit of his ancesters, and for the proof and testimony of his own
virtue) with him he debated concerning many things: and a long time enquiring
and demanding of him, what he thought of the siege of Croy, and of the wiles
and cunning sleights of the Turks. Their conference being ended, he came forth
into the market place, and there in the midst of his armed forces, with a high
and loud voice (appealing to the faith and loialty of them all in general, and
enioyning them to be have themselves well and manfully) he recommended
Encorageme^t of Scanderbeg to the Croians, who instructs them how to demean
the^ selves against, the Turks.
unto them the protection and safety of the city, and assuring each of them
both of reward and recompense, in case they were faithful and loyal, and of
condign punishment if he found them treacherous and disloyal. He admonished
them cheerfully to be have themselves in discharge of their duties, and the
defense of the town: and that with a settled and obstinate resolution, they
should repel the enemy from approaching near them: and not to suffer
themselves in any case to have any conference or communicatio^ with the
adversary, nor to listen, or to have their ears open to any persuasions they
should use. That the Ottoman by such devises would lie in wait, and under
color of a mortal and pernicious peace, would deceive them by such illusions
and persuasions, if they did not look well to themselves, or if he found the^
any thing willing to lean unto him, or credulous to believe him. Contrariwise
if he found them coragiously affected, and their ears deaf and stopped up
against his vain flatteries and allurements: his first assaies being frustrat
and disappointed, his misfortune would make him in time to trusse up baggage,
and depart confounded and utterly ashamed; except it did so fall out, that (as
one desperate and void of hope) he were carried away with a furious desire to
see the end and ruin of his own people: and by a rash and unadvised hope (to
satisfy the malice of his wrathful courage) he would cast himself headlong
into the manifest and evident danger of destruction. That their town was so
notably defensible, and so exceedingly strong by the natural site thereof,
that the very place alone (though the citizens should in a manner sit still
with their hands bound behind them) would easily contemn and set at naught all the violence that could be attempted against The strong^ si^tuation of the city
of Croy.
it. Then what can I say more (quoth he) to admonish you? or wherefore should I
solicit or animate those any longer, whose valor and fidelity being so often
tried and approved, is well known almost throughout the whole world? in such
sort, that were it, you had never given me any proof and trial, nor left me
any testimony of your constancy, yet nevertheless I should think it greater
reason, that my citizens should deceive me, then that I should any way distrust
their fidelity.

Scanderbeg having finished these exhortations to those of Croy, he took his
leave of Scanderbeg issued from Croy to the Camp.
all the company, and issued presently out of the city. At his departure,
infinite people, and in a manner the whole city did conduct and attend him, till
he was passed without the Port: the which being shut up with all speed and
diligence, he came to the rest of his Moses joins with Scanderbeg with his
Regiment.
forces which lay encamped in a fair plain, in the open view and sight of the
town. And immediately after he had scoured the fields, he sounded to horse,
and caused his camp to march, the which had not gone far, but he met with
Moses, who came unto him accompanied with a goodly regiment of his own and
very well appointed. He was newly returned from Sfetigrade, the which being
seated upon the Turkish frontiers, Sfetigrade fortified by Moses
was cause of great doubt and care to Scanderbeg: but the Dibrian had taken
order for the fortification and defense thereof, and had assured it with all
things requisite, both with men, munition, victuals, and certain bulwarks
according as he thought needful and convenient. And he had removed out of that
place also all those, the weakness and imbecility of whose age or sex, might
work any impeachment or hinderance to the Peter Perlat gou^rn^ur of Sfetigrade.
safety of the town. The government of the place he committed to Peter Perlat,
a grave and wise captain, and one that was well experienced in arms and
martial affairs. But that which at the beginning was held to be most for the
suerty of the town, and seemed to be ordered with best advise and discretion,
did discover it self in the end by the event and issue, to be the loss and
destruction of that garrison: for that it consisted almost wholly of Dibrians:
of which our Moses had expressly made choice out of all the forces of Albany, as
of the chiefest and best soldiers among all the peoples of Epire. Scanderbeg
did like so well of his devise, that he commended him greatly, and then having
so well fortified, and so abundantly furnished this place, he delivered unto
him certain other companies (which he had there in a readiness, and were
provided for the stuffing and filling of all the fortresses within the
province) sending both him and diverse others of his Princes and chief
captains, to see all places provided for, with such forces, as should be
thought needful and necessary. So that there was not almost any, but had his
particular charge and employment; to the intent each one doing his deuoire with
all diligence, there might not ensue any danger by delay or negligence. He
himself with a small company of horse, galloped to the gates of Sfetigrade:
for he was in greater care and torment for that city only, then any man can
express or would imagine, as if by some secret inspiration, he had forseene
the misfortune that was to come upon it. Wherefore the better to strengthen the
courages of them of that garrison, and to make them acquainted, and to arm
them against the trains and cunning practices of Amurath, (which he feared and
doubted as much or more then his open forces;) he entered into the midst of the
town, where the soldiers were thickest and in greatest numbers, and there in
the presence of many of the chiefest and most notable men of mark, (who stood
round about him) he used these or the like speeches unto them.

If you would have wished (you men and citizens of Sfetigrade) for a fit
occasion to The oration of Castriot unto the citizens of Sfetigrade.
eternize your faith and fidelity, and by some memorable and singular example
to make show of your loialty, and to preserve the remembrance thereof
everlasting and perpetual: God (infinitely good and omnipotent) could not have
presented you at this time with a better nor fitter subject and opportunity then
this, that has now called you to arms, and which has caused you to take your
weapons into your hands. In the former wars we fought for victory, for glory,
for the reputation of our realm and country: but now we are to fight for the
pulique safety of the common liberty, and for the walls and preservation of this
your city and country: in defense whereof, it behooves you to strive with your
uttermost forces and endeavors, least the infinite praises and commendations, and
that excellent honor and glory, which you have happily deserved and purchased
by arms under my conduct, be now stained and blemished with great shame and
ignomy. The better and greater part of our good fortune consists in your
virtue, because the first attempt of Amurath presently upon his entry into
Epire, and the first fury of the Barbarians (my self will be the man who shall
first acquaint you with this danger) will be addressed against you and your
city: to the intent, that the surest fence and bulwark of the province being
beaten down and razed, he may the more freely lead on his forces into the
heart of the country, which by this means will be the more exposed to the
violence of his fury. The first fruits therefore of this war, does stay and
attend for you. Wherefore if there be any valor remaining in your hearts, and
if the minds of men so brave and valiant be any thing careful or mindful of
liberty, you may easily tame and abate the proud attempts of the enemy, and
you may soon ruinat, and vanquish these arrogant and haughty stomachs.
According to your carriage and behavior will the Ottoman begin to conceive
either fear and discomfort, or hope and good heart. If he find you so stout
and full of courage, as I do now see you to be furious and resolute, he will be
in doubt least he be encountered in all other places, with a greater violence
and much more forceable and dangerous. So shall you teach him to forbear and
abstain from the other cities of Epire, and to reserve himself to more easy
exploits: making him unwilling to press you with any long siege: or else (if
his age make him so wilful and so unadvisedly obstinat, as to seek to force
you) his troops (I doubt not) The strength of Sfetigrade
shall wax gray headed ere they depart. For such is the natural situation of
this place, that it need not fear nor make account of any adversary how fierce
and furious soever. Resolve your selves therefore (my good citizens:) and by
the firmnes of your determinations, and the constancy of your faith, do you
purchase unto your selves and your country this immortal victory. Upon the
success of your virtue and prowess, (I do repeat it willingly) does depend
the faith and constancy of the rest of the people of Albany. All men have their
eyes fixed upon you, either to commend you or condemn you, or to follow and
imitate your virtue. What need I use any further speeches? that which is
wanting, I had rather you (most worthy Dibrians) should meditate with your
selves, then that in aduertising you with over much care and curiosity, I
might seem by many words to have conceived some secret doubt and mistrust of
your faith and loialty.

The same time that Castriot with his forces here and there assembled from all
parts Amurath leauieth a mighty army against Scanderbeg.
of Epire, was making toward Croy, to take order for the safety and assurance
of that city: the Turkish army which had been leauied in Asia, was transported
into Europe, and by long iorneis was arrived at Andrinople, their numbers not
exceeding 40000. For whenever the Sultan had any war in Europe, the most part
of his forces were usually leauied in those quarters near the same place: both
for that the soldiers of those parts are better acquainted and accustomed with
the manners of the Christians in their wars, and also for that their
preparations may be there made more commodiously, and with greater celerity, as
being at home and in his own country.

Whilst the Ottoman forces did on all parts daily take head together, and that
Amurath Amurath consulteth with his Bassaes for the ma^er of the proceedings of
the wars against Scanderbeg.
had almost ended his great preparations, and had assembled a great and mighty
puissance, he called a counsel of his Bassaes and most expert Chiefetains,
in the which they propounded and debated upon diverse means and manners for
the commencement and beginning of the war. Some held opinion that without any
temporizing or further daliance, it were necessary to send before into Epire a
running camp of horsemen (whom they call Alcanzi or Achimzi,) and whom we may
well resemble to Alcanzi, adventurers without pay.
our adventurers, (a most cruel and brutishe kind of people, and given
extremely to robbing and stealing.) And that these, as an outrageous tempest
coming upon them suddenly, and surprising them at unawares, with notable
violence should destroy, confound, and turn all up side down: and that the
enemy (not carrying themselves very wary and circumspect) but under color of
fained fight, being deluded and deceived by these troops, should be drawn
forth to the fight, in such sort, that his majesty following near at hand (in
proper person) with the gross of his whole army, might the more easily and
entirely oppress and vanquishe them. Others were ofa contrary advise,
persuading him in any case to forbear by such means to provoke, and incite
the enemy: for fear either of giving occasion to the Christians to provide
themselves of things necessary for so long and tedious a war, or least they
themselves might run headlong first of all into their trains and
counterwayes: that the late slaughters sustained by others had sufficiently
taught them. Besides that they had intelligence (which was now every where and
commonly reported) that the whole province of Albanie, being thoroughly provided
and prepared, was already in arms, their towns strongly fortified, and their
fortresses garnished with soldiers for their defense, and with other
preparatiues in good quantity: and that all places both passages and
streightes were purposely possessed and full of soldiers: that Scanderbeg
with the residue of his troops did daily ride up and down visiting the
province, and searching and viewing the thickettes and secret corners of the
woodds and forrestes, to the intent he might once again conveniently and
according to his mind lodge in them his happy and fortunate ambushments: that
it was a most pernicious thing to imagine to prevail against so cautelous and
wary an enemy by warring in that manner: that they ought rather to take an
other course of better assurance, and which the issue and event might not yet
once again reprove and condemn, as it had done in times past. For what should
let (said they) but that all of them might miscarie under the sword of the
Albanois before that the same succors ofa camp so heavily charged should be
able to retain them. Wherefore to prevent the Christians that they should not
by the blood and slaughter of their people, presate unto them selves any good
fortune in this war, they held it better to march on with their whole army
all at once, to the intent they might at length deliver the Empire of Ottoman,
from the labor and burden of this troublesome war. Neither of these
opinions was allowed, but a third (indifferent between both) carried a way the
matter, as being more fit and commodious for the quality of that time, and
for the honor and reputation of such an enterprise. It was concluded therefore
that the third part or little less of the whole army, should advance foreward
before the residue, supposing that that number would suffice, not only to
repel, and keep the enemy from going forward (but if need were) to set upon
them: and that by their sudden coming, they should be able both to disturb
the course of the enemies affairs and purpose, and consequently to prepare a
free passage for the army royal of his Majesty.

According to this conclusion, there were immediately chosen and sent away
40000. Amurath sends part of his army before to besiege Sfetygrade.
light horsemen, whose ordinary arms were sword and target, and lance, a plate
of maile and a mace of iron. Their commission was to march on directly, the
next and shortest way toward Sfetigrade, and there to begin the siege of that
place, according as they amongst them selves should advise and deliberate.
Amurath after his counsel was ended, commanded the residue of his army to be
mustered, and to be raunged in order of battle. Infinite almost was the number
of the leaders and commanders, for The order and division of the Turk his
army. Flambur. Saniacke a Colonel of horsemen. Timariot a horseman.
Subassides a leader of horsemen.
ordinarily their trouppes are divided into diverse Regimentes, or charges,
which they call Flamburats or Saniacks, and are governments of provinces, under
whom do march the Timariots, which properly are those which have a yearly
fee or stipend allowed them. And every Flambur has under him also many
Subassides or chiefes of companies, who are of a higher regard and account, and
have a larger stipend then the Timariots: and according to their qualities are
allowed either a greater or less number of horsemen under their charge. The
foot bands likewise both of Asia and Europe have their order certain, and are
distributed into several companies under their Captains. In like manner the
auxiliary forces, or extraordinary succors (which in time of war are
commonly decreed, and sent to the Grand Seignior) were not of any mean or
small number. Besides there were a great multitude of voluntary men (as in all
expeditions commonly there is no want of such.) After all these followed about
three thousand men, all of them banqueroute and indebted, or for some misdeede
and forfeiture rased and cassierd out of the Prince his pay, with a great
number also of other youthful and lusty gallants all which live in hope and
expectation, and do seek by some notable and valiant act, either to abolish
their former disgrace and ignominy, and to be restored to their former estate
and degree: or else to deserve of their King and Emperor some new reward, or
some military pay and stipend. The tent or pauillion of the sovereign is
continually guarded by more then 7000. armed men, where of some were on
horseback and are named Spachi, Sulastari Spachi. Sulastari. Vlufagi.
Ianissari.
and Vlufagi. The others (who are called Ianissaries and may be properly
accounted of the Sultan his family) are all footeme^ and like to the
Macedonian phalange, or squadro^ of pikemen amongst the ancient Macedonians.
These were newly instituted and raised by Amurath, a most warrelike and
martial kind of men picked and chosen of purpose: and them he commonly
reserved for the last refuge in fight, and for the security and defense of his
person: and by the valor of these, both he and his successors have obtained so
many great and mighty conquests, and subdued all the leuant. Besides all these,
for the greater show and oste^tation of his forces, there marched with them a
most wonderful and marvelous multitude ofslaues and base persons unarmed:
whom he had brought together and joined to his army, to terrify rather then to
employ them against the enemy: and to the intent also that these being offered
to the sword and butchered (as a flock of sheep appointed to the slaughter)
might so weary and weaken the enemy by ouerlabouring A Turkish stratagem^.
them selves in killing of them, as they might have the better hand, and more
easily prevail against them: which is one of the greatest and most notable
stratagems that the Turks do account of amongst the whole number of their
martial policies. Two principal chiefs had the conducting of this army who^
they call Beillerbiez Beillerbey.
as a man should say Lords of Lords (one of them being the chief commander of
Asia, the other in Europe.) It would be tedious to the reader, if I should
undertake to recou^t and enroll every particular by name: it shall suffice
therefore for this matter, briefly in this place to have set down some
certainty concerning the sum and whole number of this army, wherein also
(as well as in other points) there is some variance and contradiction which may
in some sort diminish the credit and truth of the thing in the opinion of such
men as do approve nothing, but that which is sure and certain. For some The
number of the Turks forces.
there be who affirm, that the great Turk had in his camp 150000. fighting
men: namely 90000. horsemen and 60000. footeme^. Others say, he had but 120000.
in all, deducting from the horse 20000. and from the foot 10000. For my part I
hold it not much material, whether of these 2. opinions we cleave unto, and yet
in my judgment the greater number seems more likely, if we will make it
answerable to the wonderful preparations which were so long time forethought
on, and in providing: and yet true it is, that this army was not so exactly
ordered, nor the discipline thereof so straightly regarded, as it was usually
when the Turkish monarch marched into the field, and purposed to fight a
battle: where commonly the true value and virtue does lively show it self.
For all the endeavors and all the preparations did tend and were ordained for
the besieging of towns, and the battering of walls, rather the^ for any
services in the plain and open fields.

After that Scanderbeg had confirmed the courages of the Sfetygradians, and
assured Sca^derbeg visits and encourages all parts within his province.
the estate of their affairs, so far as he thought it expedient: he removed
from thence to other places of his dominion: and visiting all the province with
singular vigilancie and quickness of spirit, he did prick forward and inflame
the faithful hearts of his subjects, sometimes by commending them, sometimes by
presents and gifts, and sometimes by the shows and representation of the horror
and hugenes of the danger imminent. Moses in the mean time had fortified all
places with strong garrisons, with prouisio^s of corn, armor, and other
munitio^s sufficient, to abide any fortune and extremity of war. Wherefore the
care of all these matters being now laid aside: Scanderbeg with all speed went
to his army not far from Croy, where they were commanded to attend his
return. The Dibrian with his company did overtake him on the way, and then
joining their forces together in one, with great joy and comfort they resorted
to the Camp. Scarce had they any leisure to speak unto the soldiers, or to
the Captains, but that there came sudden and strange news: and messengers
from all parts arriving one after an other, bringing these fearful and
sorrowful tidings: That the enemy was come already, that the country was on
all sides of a light fire, and The Turks invade Epire.
that all things were in a miserable estate and confusion. They certified him
(as fear makes men credulous) and yet were they uncertain of it, that
Amurath him self was there in person, and had already filled and covered with
arms, men, and horses, both the mountains and vallyes, and the champion and
plain countries: and they instantly prayed their Prince, to provide for the
surety of his troops, and of his person especially: and not of a pernicious
and over much hardiness to attend in plain field at the first coming, the
furious violence of so puissant an enemy: that he would retire his soldiers
into some place of a notable height and inaccessible, from whence he might
behold the usage of the enemy, and so to devise and resolve upon some sure
course, which should be most for his profit and commodity.

These speeches did not much move Scanderbeg, neither could these persuasions
Scanderbeg with 5000. me^ against the enemy.
make him dislodge from that place, whereof he had once made choice to encampe
in: nevertheless when he perceived and understood that his scoutes did on all
sides return unto him with more then posting speed: and their reports did
agree all in one, save that they differed in the number and quantity of the
enemies forces, of which they coniectured diversely, (for the Turks were not
yet seen nor discovered altogether: neither were they descended all of them
into the plains: neither were their Batallions so united and ordered, that a
true and certain estimat could be made of their just numbers:) Castriot
thereupon choosing out of his whole army, 4000. horse, and 1000. foot, whom he
commanded to follow him and dislodging as secretly as he could, from thence
drew directly toward Sfetigrade, where he knew that the enemies were to
encampe themselves. It was in the dawning of the morning in the twilight, that
the soldiers had the sign given them to set forward. The day following
notwithstanding, when it was scarce the third hour of the night, they came to
encampe within seven miles of Sfetigrade, between which town and Croy, were
little less then 60. miles. There Scanderbeg having chosen a place sure and
commodious for his company, caused it to be entrenched round about, making it
by that means more strong and defensible. Afterward having distributed both
horse and foot into the several quarters of the camp, he commanded to set
the watch and to place the courts of guard, and then secretly to search out
what places were fit to serve for ambuscadoes: mean while he forbad all of
them in general to make any fires within the trenches. All things being thus
disposed and set in order, and every man being commanded to use silence: he
(taking with him Moses and Tanuese de Thopy) went to survey Scanderbeg goes to
survey the camp and countenance of the enemy.
and consider upon the form and situation of the camp and countenance of the
enemy: and with great secrecy, sometimes through the thickets of the
forrestes, sometimes by the secret passages of the valleys, he gained the
top of a certain mountain directly opposite against Sfetigrade, from the
height whereof, having diligently noted and surueyed all things by fair day
light, he took his way very quickly back again into his own Camp. The
execution hereof was not without marvelous contrariety of opinions, for seeing
the barbarians were enca^ped under the walls of the Town, and were possessed
both of the mountains adjoining and of the fields underneath them: the chief
leaders did not see any great likelihood or appearance Scanderbeg cos^lteth
upon the manner of assayling the enemy.
(without some notable loss of their men) how to execute any thing with good
success, because the danger was manifest and imminent, that so small a number
charged with so great a puissance sometimes in the plain, and sometimes in the
descent of the mountains, should easily be broken and overthrown. They
doubted also (which was a cause necessarily constraining them for that time to
abstain from all reason of fight) least the residue of the royal troops,
coming upon them suddenly and unprovided, they should be all entangled,
enclosed and shut up in the midst of them: and for the same reason they
held it as perilous to call the garrison forth to help them. It was held
therefore more expedient and a course of more certainty and safety to
separate and divide (if it were possible) by their ordinary sleightes the
power and forces of the adversary: and being once sundred and divided to draw
them into places of greatest disadvantage. Nothing was done notwithstanding for
that day, because the night (coming upon them) did prcue^t their
determination: only there were sent forth certain scoutes on all sides both far
and near, to discover the approach of Amurath, and that the enemy should lay no
ambushme^ts to entrap the^. The moitie of that night was allowed the^ to take
their rest, the residue was employed in diverse actions and affairs, for that
the Prince of Albanie (changing his first lodging) went to encampe somewhat
nearer the town, so that he was not now above 5. miles from the enemy:
supposing and hoping that (being once entised forth to fight) the nearer he was
to them the more easily they might be overthrown. Wherefore after that every
man had sufficiently rested himself and taken some repast: and all of them
being ready at hand with store of such things as were needful and requisite,
first those places which were fit for ambushments, he filled with able and
lusty men: and the thickets and bushes he environed on all sides with store of
soldiers, of which number such as served on foot, were placed in the wings
and steep of the mountains not easy to be approached, or in the thick of the
woods and bushes: himself taking his place among the horsemen, kept at the
foot and bottom of the mountains all along the plain, and in the crookes
and turnings of the valleys.

This done, he called unto him Moses and Musache de Angelina (a gentleman of
special mark, and one of the chiefest among the horsemen) who^ having exhorted
with many good and friendly speeches, he sent accompanied with 30. others (all
young men both A notable stratageme of S^a^derbeg practiced against the Turks.
hardy and courageous) willing them to allure forth the enemy out of their
trenches, and to draw them within the danger of his trains and ambuscadoes.
You must not think that Scanderbeg did forget to make choice of his company
out of the most worthy and sufficient of all his bands both the men and their
horses: besides they were disguised in the apparel and furniture of simple
soldiers, least that their military habit (being any thing rich and
sumptuous) should discover their attempt, which he had an especial desire to
keep secret. There was scant any of the soldiers but had an other horse laden
with corn, to drive before him, to the intent they should be taken for
forragers indeed, who returned from gathering it abroad. And that nothing
might be wanting for the advantage of this martial policy and to beguile the
enemy, they were enjoined to bend toward the town by such ways as were least
used and frequented, and on that side where the mountain was free, and not
guarded by the enemy: and that they should make show as though they meant that
way to enter into Sfetigrade. These leaders (being very expert and of a quick
and excellent conceit) did not omit any thing of that which was commanded
them: and the soldiers also with singular obedience and resolution did follow
the^ most chearefully, not doubting any danger that might befall them: Upon the
dawning of the day, and by that time that the stars began to grow out Moses
and others sent to draw the Turks sorth to fight.
of sight by the break of the morning, they were now come within little more
then a mile of the tents of the enemy: at such time as the Turks sentinels
having discovered them from aloft, began first by signs showed in the air,
and then by their often cries and clamors to bewray them. They nothing troubled
not abashed with their noise, did only hasten their pace somewhat faster: (for
as yet, neither needed they to fear any danger from the enemy, neither would
their flight have been to any purpose.) At the length one of the Turkish
squadro^s being wakened by the sentinels, and yet (by reason of their sleep
being in some doubt) taking their weapons in their hand, they advanced them
selves forward and began to rush upon the^, supposing them to be shepherds, or
peasants laden with corn. The Albanois disdayning the small number that came to
assault the^, prepared themselves with more courage then reason, to receive
them: notwithstanding upon their first approach, reculing a little back, they
turned their backs, faining them selves to be afraid. The Barbarians
coniecturing their fear by their flight, pursued after them with great speed
and charged them behind in most rude and furious manner. Then they all at once
stopping their horses, turned about, and making head against them (with their
swords drawn,) they went on and drew near to encounter them (as being
enforced by necessity either to incurt the last extremity of danger;) or else
by opposing their bodies and turning their faces to make resistance and to
repulse the violence with which they were so egerly pursued: for that whilst
they held on this their dissembled flight, they were in manifest danger, their
enemies horses even breathing close at their backs: yet were not the Turks
any whit abashed for all this, but covering them selves with their large
targettes, and measuring the enemy by their habit only, they approached them,
and were the first that gave the onset A shirmish between certain Turks and
Epirots.
against them. One of them borne in Asia, being of a mighty stature and
wonderful strong made, marched before his fellows with a heavy mace of iron,
the which after he had oftentimes whirled about with his right hand to give it
the more force, with a mighty cry and clamor, and with an incredible violence,
he threw it overthwart the whole troop of the Albanois: the which (being close
knit and joined together) albeit they sustained no harm thereby, yet could
they not avoid the force of the blow coming against them so violently and
rudely. For being carried with a marvelous force into the midst of the
troop, a young Dibrian took and bare the blow upon his target: and
therewithal the others following their fellow, the fight was begun each
assailing other with his Courtelax. The number of the combattants being almost
equal and their arms not much unlike, it was a very goodly and pleasant sight,
and it gave good grace unto the combat. For the Turks were no better armed
then the Christians, by reason they made such have out of their trenches, and
did in a manner contemn their eenemies. The weapons wherewith they were armed,
was but a cimitary and a shield. In one point only the Infidels had the
disadvantage, and that was, that the very choice and best men at arms, and the
flower of the youth of Albany was there in place, where as their company on the
contrary were intermingled with people of no reckoning and men of valor both
together: for that according as the skoutes had raised them confusedly and in
tumult, so did they issue forth both one and other to the fight. This was the
occasion that even in the very first fury of the encounter, their fortune did
appear to be far inferior. For the Asian (in whom consisted the strength of
the rest) being slain by the hand of Moses, the others were suprized with an
incredible fear, dispairing not only of the victory, but also of their life
and safety, if they had not speedily some succors from the camp. Wherefore by
little and little retiring themselves, in the end they began The Turks put to
flight.
to show their backs: and (with change of fortune) by a most shameful flight,
forsook the field in the which but a little before, they had so hotly and
fiercely pursued others. Albanois gave them liberty to fly where they would,
without giving them any ill words, or in show of their victory making any
cry after the vanquished, but gathering themselves soberly near unto their
captains, without any regard had, either of the bodies or of the spoils of
those which were slain, they returned to their beasts of carriage: and (as men
that desired, but to save themselves) they made have to drive them the way from
whence they came. Their audacitie and courage was greatly augmented through
fortunat success of this encounter, yet did they defer all their joy, till
such time as they had accomplished a happy conclusion of the enterprise which
they had undertaken. It chanced that one of their company well known amongst
his fellows, through his manifold good deserts in the wars, found himself to
be grievously wounded: in so much that his continual complaints, and the
impatiencie of his pain proceeding of his wound, did greatly trouble the
contentment of all the rest, and did not a little discomfort his companions:
for one of the Turks with his sword had thrust him through the left shoulder
so as he had not sufficient strength, either to carry his arms, or to guide
his own horse. Moses took great compassion of his grief, and dismounting
from horseback, he took him down with his own hands, and set him up
behind one of the soldiers, to whose charge he committed him, willing him
to have a care that he did not fall from behind him, because if he galloped
his horse, his hands were not able to sustain him: and that he should make
have with all speed possible to carry him to the Camp, to the intent before
any other alarm or tumult were raised by the enemy, he might be gotten
within the tents amongst his companions: as for the rest of his fellows,
they were all sound, and not one of them besides him, returned hurt from the
medly: Of the Circumsized there were five slain and eight wounded, few to
count of, but yet many in regard of their small number.

By that time that the horse (whereon the two soldiers were mounted) had
carried The Turks camp in a tumult upon the discomfiting of their fellows.
them quite out of sight, there was heard a marvelous cry and noise in the
Camp of Amurath: for those which had been wounded, at their return filled all
with their plaints and exclamations, and showing their deformed and
unmeasurable wounds, they set all the host of the enemy in a tumult and a
rage: especially such as were of any affinity to those that were slain.
Wherefore (not respecting any command made to the contrary) they disbanded
them selves on all sides from their ensigns without any chief, without order
and all discretion, according as their anger and desire of revenge enflamed
them: but proclamation being made over the whole army, by the commandment of
their commander, that no man should stir or bouge, every man retired: then
they arranged them selves in order of battle before his tents, there attending
his pleasure. Their General did greatly doubt the accustomed sleights and
trains of the Christians: suspecting that under pretense of forraging, some
notable deceit and guilefull policy might be lurking: and the rather, for
that the strange largeness of the wounds of his soldiers, did plainly
argue that it was not the arm of any base or rascal persons, nor the swords
of country clownes that could give such strokes and cruel blows. He
determined therefore to take out of his whole army four thousand horse, such
as were most fierce and venturous: to the intent the fewness and small number
of his people might not still cause them to return with shame and disgrace:
them he enjoined both to scatter those forragers, and to put them from their
horses: and then with diligent search to raunge throughout all the mountains,
hills, valleys, woods and secret places to discover the ambushments of the
Albanois.

Near about the time of these directions, the soldier whom the Dibrian had
sent with his hurt companion was arrived in presence of Scanderbeg, and having
delivered his charge to some of his fellows, who came to meet him, and
willing them to have a care to the curing of his wounds; himself ran up and
down in the sight of the soldiers, as one almost out of his wits: and calling
many by their names he cried with a loud voice, Arm arm, the enemy is
coming, all their camp is in arms, Alarm in the camp of Scanderbeg.
they have taken their alarm: and (pointing with his finger) he showed them
the dust, as an argument of their coming. At the first, Scanderbeg was
somewhat moved and abashed, fearing least his people had miscarried, for of all
the troop he saw but two only returned, and both of them (as it were)
shamefully flying: the one of them also half dead, embrued and polluted with
the warm blood that yet issued from his wounds: and the other by the foolish
cry and exclamation which he made, did show himself full of fear and ill
assured. But after he understood by him how all things had passed; his sorrow
being turned into laughter, and his care into boldness and confidence, he
willed his men to be al of good courage, and that every one should be in a
readiness with his horse and armor. By this time had our Sentinels (which were
placed Turks pursus Moses and hit company.
upon the height of the mountains) discovered Moses and the Turks coming
after him, over the plain champion, even ready to fall into their ambuscado,
and to be delivered to the sword of the Epirots. For at the first our men made
no great haste, but rode on, driving their beasts fair and easily, bending
their course sometimes here, sometimes there, and rather attending for them,
then flying from them: but as soon as they perceived a far off, that the
Infidelles were issued forth of their trenches: then leaving both their sackes
and their carriage, they prepared themselves to a round and speedy flight.
Wherefore having poasted over the plain in a moment, they got to a hill which
(on the North side being opposite unto a certain valley) did cover the center
and bottom thereof, where our men lay close, and covertly encamped: and before
they were overtaken with the danger, or that the enemy could press too near
upon them, they did secretly convey themselves among their fellows, both they
and their horses so spent and out of breath with their continual coursing and
travel, that it made show they had fled in good earnest. The enemy perceiving
that they were in a moment gotten out of sight, and thinking (because they were
so suddenly slipped away from the top of the mountain) that they were hidden in
the bottom of the valley. They followed directly after the^ without any fear
or consideration. But as they came near unto the place, to the intent they
might more easily enuiron and enclose them, both on the one side and on the
other, all scattered and out of order, they prepared themselves, some to gain
the top of the hill, and others by some means or other to enter into the
valley. But at their arrival notwithstanding, hearing a great neighing of many
horses, they began to be astonished, and to stand still, without speaking a
word, but using silence for a season, till such time as the noise of the horses
being more certainly discovered, and growing more sensible to be heard, did
manifestly discover the ambuscado of the enemy. Then did all things seem
greater unto them by sight of the eye, then they had imagined by the ear: and
the uncertainty of the danger being interpreted (as is usual) according to
the greatness of their fear, did easily persuade this people (thus amazed and
terrified) to betake themselves to present and speedy flight. As Turks fall
into the Ambuscado of the Epirots.
they were ready to break and make away, Scanderbeg (commanding the trumpets
speedily to sound, and putting them in a wonderful fear as not expecting any
such thing) made head against them, and went to charge the^ on the right hand,
Tanusee on the left hand; and the footmen from a loft out of those ragged and
woddy places of the mountains, where they lay in ambush descending suddenly
upon the^, all at one instant, with great fury did beat them down and
overthrow them: nevertheless they did abide, surprised rather with a kind of
admiration and astonishment, then of any certain resolution to endure the
fight. But when they saw that necessity did enforce them, and that the fury
Conflict between the Turks and the Epirots.
of the Christians did urge the^ to do their best: then setting spurs to their
horses, with singular fierceness they got possession of the mountain: where
first lifting up their lances, and casting the^ against the enemy (as if they
had bin darts) for that the vprightnes of the place, the vneuennes of the
ground, and being withal very steep, did not suffer them otherwise to help
themselves with those weapons: they kept the soldiers for a time from coming
near them. But Peic Manuel being gotten upon the hill on Peic Manuel.
the other side, with a company of footmen (of which 200. were archers, and as
many crosbowes) did soon beat them off the place and drove them down with
more then good speed. Beneath were they beset on all sides with our forces, and
above them did the intolerable violence of the shot so gaull them, that there
was scarce any free place for the miserable wretches to get forth. In this
extremity, drawing forth their Cimitaries and dividing themselves into two
troops, desperately they rushed upon their enemies, and (as men that had
closed their eyes against all perils) with a greater slaughter of their
companies they opposed themselves to the blows and swords of the enemy. But it
was no difficult matter for the greater to beat back the lesser number: and for
men fresh and sound, to put them to the retreat who were weary and sore
traveled: especially in the right side, where Scanderbeg himself with a gross
troup, both of horse and foot armed with pikes did stand in manner of a wall or
strong bulwark. This was an occasion that the Turks did altogether resolve
themselves to try the uttermost of their valor: and therefore ioining
themselves close together in one strong squadron, they gave in upon the left
side, and with an equal and desperate kind of fury, they made themselves way
with their swords, even through the midst of our battallion: and thus
purchasing themselves a passage with great loss and bloodshed, the remnant
fighting and flying al at once, provided for their own safety. Then began a
sudden confusion, and the Albanois forsaking both their ranks and the keeping
of the mountain, (every man forgetting all other matters) took care only to
pursue the vanquished, and made have to the execution, laboring by all means
possible to make the others also in their fight copartners of the like mortal
calamity and bloody slaughter. In that tumult (when they sought to issue
thorough the enemy) more were beaten down and overthrown, by their own
weight and the arms of their fellows, then by the power of the adversary.
Notwithstanding there escaped of them little less then 2000. the residue
remained behind for a gage, and their carcasses (whilst they were yet panting)
being dispoiled, were left naked upon The victory of the Epirots against 4000.
Turks before Sfetigrade.
the ground, in those very places where their destiny had laid them. Of those
that fled about 80. were taken prisoners, the residue were not pursued above
20. paces or little more, because of the sudden retreat sounded by command of
Scanderbeg, who contented himself with this victory: alleging that if he
should suffer his soldiers to fulfill their own desires to the extremity upon
their enemies, there was great danger lest he should pay dearly for this
prosperity. There were won from the barbarians 3. Ensigns or Cornets (for more
had they not brought with the^). The horses of those which were slain being
full 1000. or better, did greatly augment and enrich the booty: the residue
were killed in the fight. Of the vanquishers, were 22. only wanting, and about
15. wounded.

Thus did the Prince of Albany by a notable prey and victory reward and
recompense the loss of his corn, upon the bringing whereof into the camp of
the Turks, lying before the town, every one of the^ made great joy and
triumph, expecting hourly that these victuallers should have bin led thither
tied and bound to their appointed punishment, and to have bin offered as a
sacrifice to the unhappy ghosts of those 5. who were first slain. But when
they saw afterward contrary to their imagination, the massacre and hiddeous
show and deformity of so great and goodly a company: of pure despite and vain
indignation conceived, they made great lamentation, and through extreme sorrow
The griese and trouble of the Turkish camp upon the overthrow of their forces.
they stood for a time (as men inchaunted and amazed) not without marvelous
fear and trembling of all the army, and doubting least the Christians
animated with this prosperous adventure, should come on with the like success,
to force them within their camp. For they suspected that the numbers of our
men were much greater, and that all the Province had been in arms before them.
Their chiefest care therefore was to set a good and strong watch over all the
army, and carefully to arrange every company in order of battle, near the
tents of their several commanders, and to enuiron them round about: and
accordingly the bands were parted into their places. Their horses were kept
standing with their bridles on, as if they had bin assured that the enemy would
have visited the^ immediately. But the Albanois was otherwise determined,
neither did this victory cause him to be the more high minded, nor yet made him
any thing the more lofty: but he redoubted as much the enemy, as they stood in
fear and doubt of him: and he did look every hour that they should attempt
somewhat upon him, to abolish the dishonor of their last overthrow: and
especially for that the report ran firm and constant how the army royal was
at hand. This made Scanderbeg to look to his business more carefully, and
therefore the first thing he did, was (as soon as it grew dark night) quietly to
trusse up baggage and to depart, encamping 5. miles farther from the enemy. The
next day before sun rising, he sent Tanusee toward Croy, with 50. horsemen
and each of them a varlet, both to hasten away those forces, which he had left
there with George Streese, and to have the guiding of that conuoy which was
sent for the conueiance of the horses and other pillage lately gotten from the
enemy, into other places within the Province, where he willed they should be
transported for their more safety and security. In 7. days space was all
this ordered and dispatched, and the whole troops united and incorporated. And
yet about two days before the arrival of these supplies to the camp, there
came in sight 5000. Turks vaunt currours of the army royal: and a three
hours within night they pitched their tents before Sfetygrade. The day
following, about the shutting of the evening, thither also came Amurath
himself in person, with the rest of his army and all his carriage.

It was in the year of our redemption 1449. and the 9. year after that
Scanderbeg Amurath comes to the siege of Sfetigrade. 1449.
had recovered his estate, and upon the 14. day of May: (a time wherein the
corn beginning to grow ripe, and the meadows full of grass, did yield
abundance of food and forage to camps lying in the fields:) the Barbarians do
usually and willingly observe that season as most fit for the wars, especially
in foreign expeditions. This was it also that moved the Ottoman expressly to
forbid his soldiers to waste or spoil any thing within the enemies country,
nor to tread down their corn, to the intent when it should grow ripe and be
ready to reap, it might serve for the provision of his army. The Ottoman at
his arrival before Sfetygrade did make a glorious show and ostentation of all
his forces before the town: and this he seemed to do not without any reason,
but upon good consideration and advise, both because it is the custom of that
Nation, and to the intent he might by the sight thereof terrify the
inhabitants. First of all, the squadrons of his footmen, and the Asappy were
set in order: after them the horsemen, the Tymariots, Asappi, footme^ commanded
upon the Provinces at three ducats a month.
the Subassys, the Saniackes and other Chieftaines every one in their place
marching before him, went in this order round about the walls, making great
triumph with military cries and loud clamors, which were seconded also with the
thundering and cracking noise of the artillery and great ordinance. This done,
they went to provide their lodging, and fastening their ensigns on the ground,
pitched their tents in diverse places. The greatest part of the infanterie and
common soldiers, were encamped at the foot (...) the neighbor woods near
adjoining the town, for fear of some ambushmentes which might be laid
behind them. Afterward by a posterie gate named the Dibran, he admitted the
ambassadors into the town. The Bassa only with three soldiers Ambassadors of
Amurath admitted into Sfetygrade, deliver their message in an open council.
and two of his servants, were received in, and they were conducted through the
midst of the market place into the Church of the virgin Marie, where (the
council being appointed to be held) none but the ancients and the principal
of the town were called or assembled: for all the younger sort were excluded,
least that any mutiny should arise among them. The Turks Ambassador
pretending that it was his part to speak, because he had procured the parley:
at the very first, enforced himself by a number of flattering and entising
speeches to purchase credit with the citizens, and to gain their favor and
good liking. He began with the examples of many cities and Nations,
discoursing in all points so well and eloquently, that you could not have
reprehended him in any thing, save only (the more to terrify them) he
extolled beyond all measure and human capacity, the power and puissance of
the king his master. Perlat made him answer saying, That he had eloquently
The worthy answer of Perlat to the, Turkish Ambassador.
and excellently well pleaded this matter, had it not been to such men whose
courages were resolutely determined, and whose hearts were vowed to the
maintenance of their liberty. That all of them could be well and willingly
content to yield to his demands, if either the bootlesse threats and menaces
of Ottoman and their enemies, could prevail with their courageous hearts: or
that the command or Seigniorie of Scanderbeg were grievous and yrkesome unto
them. But neither could they charge him for his part with any misdeed or ill
desert, neither did they know wherein Amurath had benefited them, whereby they
should be drawn to prefer a stranger before a citizen, an enemy before a
friend, or an Infidel before a Christian. That the Sultan should do, assay,
and enterprise what he could by arms: that he should by the sword seek to
terrify the defendants: that he should not spare to batter their walls. In
brief, that he should first of all make a massacre of their bodies, and lay
their dead carcasses in huge heaps, to see if the inhabitants terrified and
feared with this spectacle, would then come unto him upon their knees, and
prostrate themselves at his feet, to grant them these conditions of peace and
composition. That for the present he held it a thing infamous and merely
rediculous, to abase and submit their hearts to so great an indignity: before
such time as they had seen the ensigns of the enemy to make proof of their
valor against their walls and bulwarks: before the soldiers had presented
them with any skirmish: before they saw any signs of lamentations, of wounds,
or of bloodshed among their own people: and before such time as they did
perceive, either the frame of their walls disioynted, or their town
dispoyled, and made naked of her flankers and defenses. That Amurath should do
much better to quite himself of the daily cares and unquietness of the wars,
to take his way back again to Andrinople, to raise his siege from before the
town, and to spend the residue and end of his life and aged years, quietly at
home, and not any longer to provoke and incense by his arms, a people who is
fatal unto him: and whose faith and excellent fidelity in the conservation of
their liberty, and whose singular affection and devotion to their lords both
in public and in private, he had often tried and approved with so much
bloodshed, and the ruin of his own soldiers and subjects. That he for his
part, as long as his life lasted, would never forsake or abandon the deuoire
and duty of his faith once sworn unto his Prince: nor the town which he had
committed to his custody and protection. That he held it sufficient and ample
recompense, and reputed it honor enough for him, if he did either survive to
see his country safe and preserved, or (if it should happen to come to ruin
and destruction) then should the strength of his right arm never cease to
seek the revenge of the public liberty, till such time (as keeping company
among the dead bodies of his friends) his innocent soul did pass and depart
away to the liberty of a better country.

This his answer and the assembly did finish both at once: for the great men
and magistrates of the town there present, all with one voice and with
infinite commendations, The Turk his messengers return in rain from the town.
(extolling the speech of the Governor) did generally approve it, and concluded
on it accordingly. The Turk his messengers holding it but lost time to use any
further speeches unto such deaf ears: and seeing the assembly broken up and
dissolved, they issued out of the temple: the Governor followed after them,
accompanied with those of his company. And (because it was near dinner time)
after he had feasted and entertained them daintily with great magnificence and
sumptuously, conueighing them to the town gate; he there dismissed them, and
they returned to their camp.

The assurance and gravity of the Sfetigradians, together with the prudence of
their Commander being understood by the Ottoman did not a little move him. The
like did the abundance of all good provisions marked within the town by the
Ambassadors: for it abounded in such plenty, that they had not only to
suffice for their necessity, but even with excess and superfluity. And Perlat
had caused them purposely to make show thereof throughout the streets, in the
view and sight of the Barbarians: Policy of Perlat.
to the intent that relation being made thereof afterward to the grand Senior,
it might take from him all hope to gain the town by long perseverance of the
siege or by the discommoditie of hunger and famine. The Sultan therefore being
mightily enflamed with anger and spite, that so small and vile a castle, so
paultry a hamlet, and a handful (as it were) of robbers there enclosed, should
dare to prescribe laws unto him for the war: and to take upon them to
counsel him in his affairs, and specially for that by an usual proverb (as
it were) they termed themselves fatal and unconquered: and perceiving now by
these speeches, that there was no other means and remedy for him to tame
them, but only by the rigor and extremity of arms: he caused presently to be
assembled within his own tent his Bassaes, his counselors, and all other
persons who were of any degree and reputation in war, to devise secretly with
them upon the best and fittest means to assault the place: and having heard
their several opinions propounded in the council, he debated and discoursed
long and at large concerning the same: and thereupon order was immediately taken
by his command (for the parting and distributing both to one and other) of
diverse things which seemed needful and requisite to that service. The rest of
the preparations, and the assault of the town, was put off and deferred to the
day following, because the greatest part of the day was near past and spent.

The end of the fourth Book.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
SFetigrade is battered, and assaulted by the Turks. Scanderbeg gives a
Canuazado to the Turkish camp, making a great slaughter of the Infidels.
Amurath appoints Feribassa with an army to resist the invasions of
Scanderbeg, for the safety of his camp. The battle between Feribassa and
Scanderbeg, and their private combat, wherein Feribassa is slain by
Scanderbeg, and the Turks defeated. Amurath practices the winning of
Sfetygrade by treason, which he effects by a strange accident. The garrison
of the Dibrians upon a superstitious conceit, yield the town to Amurath, who
having fortified Sfetigrade, leaves Epire, and returns to Andrinople.

THE arrival of the Turkish Emperor, and the report of his huge and mighty
army, had already filled with fear and terror all the people of Epire,
especially the Princes and Potentates next adjoining, who were in great doubt
and care least that so insolent and redoubtable an enemy (having once
swallowed up this town already besieged) should bring the others afterward
to the same estate and condition, and reduce them to the tenor of the like
calamity. Wherefore accordingly as it was resolved in their secret assemblies
and consultations, albeit they had before provided for most things requisite,
both for the stuffing of their holds with strong garrisons, and for the guard of
the streights and passages for their country: they sent notwithstanding from
all parts Ambassadors to Scanderbeg entreating him not to suffer Amurath any
longer to vex and tyrannize over the towns of Albania at his pleasure, and
with such impunitie. For if by any mishappe the proud tyrant should happen to
have his will of Sfetigrade, it was most certain that taking the same as a
happy presage of his victory, and as a bait of his fierceness and cruelty,
he would not leave till he had brought them all under the same yoke, and to
endure the like fortune: and yet they wished him in the mean while to have a
care and good regard, not to attempt alone, and with so few men the forces of
the enemy, nor so weakly accompanied to provoke them to the fight, The
Princes of Epire offer Scanderbeg their aid and furtheran e for the repulse of
the Turk.
whose camp was so unmeasurable great and mighty: because that could not be
but with the singular inconvenience and greater peril of them all in general.
They offered him likewise arms, horsemen, munition, and whatsoever else should
serve their turn, for the removing of such a flood and deluge before that it
should endanger all of them to be overwhelmed with the rage thereof. That they
thought themselves sufficiently defended and in safety, if they could at this
time free and acquit him from the greatness of that peril: upon whom did
depend both the peaceable and quiet possession of their Seigniories and empire,
and the preservation of them all in general: as also the whole strength and
assured stay of all the province, and the perpetual glory of the Albanois.

The Ambassadors thus charged with these instructions, and many other
particular testimonies of the ready and perfect good will and affections of
the confederates, took their way directly to the mountains of Sfetigrade,
where they knew that the Prince of Albanie had pitched his camp, albeit he
were at that time absent. For as soon as ever the troops of the Ottoman were
arrived in Epire; and that the brute of so great a puissance, and so new an
accident had filled the ears and minds of every man with fear and terror:
Scanderbeg (accompanied only with Tanusee, and George Scanderbeg secretly
disguised goes about visiting and comforting all the places of his province.
Streese, and ten other chosen men of his guard: and (apparelled as he was
wont) with the simple cassocke of a common soldier, had secretly conueighed
himself from his army to go and visit those towns of the province which were
nighest to the danger; and to confirm and strengthen them in their faith and
obeisance, who were any thing dismayed or discomforted, knowing well, (that in
so new and fresh a case of danger, the minds of men would be maruellously cast
down and appalled, by reason of so strange a commotion, and by the rumors
(though for the most part false) increasing daily: and that therefore he might
greatly remedy the perplexity and timerousnes of their counsels and
imaginations: and those which should in any sort staggar and be ready to fall
away, might be confirmed and reestablished in their ancient vigor and courage,
and in the accustomed constancy of their faith and loyalty. Of all this which
he had so purposed and conceived, he forgot not, nor left any thing
unaccomplished. For beginning at Croie (as the chiefest place of his realm and
his chiefest care) he sent for Vranocontes to come unto him to the city gate
with a Scanderbeg encourages Vranocontes and the Croians.
certain number of soldiers, and all the principal citizens (for he would
not that any man should enter within the town) and there he enforced himself
with a kind of superfluous care (according to the brief instance and hasty
occasion of the time) by the discourse of many things to incite them, and (as a
man might say) to spur them forward in their deuoire. But he received from
the Governor a notable answer: the recital whereof (as well beseeming and
worthy of his sound faith and loialty) I see no reason why we should omit: or
by an ungrateful kind of silence, to defraud so great and honorable a person
of his deserved praise and commendation. For at the Answer of Vranocontes to
Scanderbeg.
first blush showing himself as one full of indignation and coffeehouse for
his coming thither, he thus spoke unto him.

It had been much better at this instant (o Scanderbeg) if the Croians had
seen Amurath himself, and the show of that his glorious and excellent army
(which thou tellest us of) then to see thee here as thou art at this present:
for this is certain that as thy speech is nothing pleasing nor agreeable unto
us, neither in general nor in particular: so is thy coming at this time no
less grievous and discontenting unto us. For what could the sight or the
hearing of the enemy have done, either more to have troubled the minds of men
that are courageous, or to have worse offended the hearts of those that are
fierce and generous? We are now at that point, and such is our love and
devotion toward thee, and to the dignity of the estate of Albanie: that as
long as these troubles shall continue within this province: and as long as
Amurath shall prevail or have any authority with his armed forces in Epire:
it shall be more pleasing, and far more acceptable unto us beyond comparison,
to see the face and countenance of the enemy, then to have thy presence and
company: because thou bring us nothing but secret plaintes and doubtful
fears, as though we were enclining to a revolt, or that we were like to prove
disloyal, whereas the presence of our enemy could not but minister unto us good
and fit matter to merit praise and commendation, and might yield some notable
and worthy experience of our fidelity, and be a perpetual occasion for the
purchase of renown and glory.

Castriot knew not what to say here against, but only to purge and excuse
himself: telling him that he came not thither to use any exhortations unto
them, but only to advertise them how all things stood. And thereupon after he
had embraced the Governor, he took his leave both of him and of his
soldiers, and so passed onwardes to other places: where finding all things
according to his desire, he left them as he found them: and retyring toward
his army, he came to his camp somewhat before day, being extremely weary
through the long travel of his journey. Yet as soon as he perceived that the
Ambassadors of the league did there attend him, he had scarcely Ambassadors
from the Princes of Epire to Scanderbeg, offering him aid against the Turks.
taken time to refresh himself, but that he gave them audience in the full and
open assembly of his Captains and other the principal persons of his camp,
willing them freely to make known the sum of their Ambassade which they had
in charge. The which being declared and heard, Scanderbeg by the common advise
of all in general, both highly commended the willing minds of their Lords and
masters: and gave them great thanks for their good affections, and especially
for that they showed themselves to have, the safety and reputation both of his
person and of the country of Epire in such care and recommendation. As
touching the succors which they offered Answer of Scanderbeg to the
Ambassadors of the Albanian Princes.
him, his answer was: That they should be of good courage, that his intent was
not for that time to use any greater forces against the enemy, nor (all things
being as yet in good case) to disarme the flanks of his confederates: but he
would wish them in the mean while to be ready prepared, and to have a good eye
to the Ottoman: for that it was very difficult to discover the enterprises and
counsels of one so treacherous and disloial: that as soon as good occasion were
offered him to enterprise any thing, he would not fail speedily and beyond
their expectation, with such forces as he had to invade him: and when the
necessity of his affairs should exact it, or that the importance of a greater
danger, or the occasion of a set battle did require it: that then he would use
their aid and ready succors as far forward as his own forces. These
things thus dispatched, the tables were covered after the soldiers fashion:
and after that they had refreshed themselves, and had been honorably rewarded
with great presents: about the ninth hour of the morning they were licensed to
depart.

Whilst that matters did thus pass on by consultations: and that Scanderbeg
rather with words then deeds did seem to invade the Turkish Prince; the
other began the battery against Sfetigrade, which though it had been long
deferred, yet Sfetigrade battered by the Turks.
was it fully concluded and agreed on. He placed therefore two pieces of
artillery of exceeding greatness (for he had brought no more with him) upon a
certain high place directly against the town, where the walls were most open
and discovered. Three whole days together did the thundering of the cannon
continue; by which time having made a large and wide breach, the Sultan
imagined presently, that his ensigns the next morning would have cleared the
breach: and (by reason that it was of a great largeness) both the flanckers,
and the wall being on all sides beaten down and overthrown, he was fully
persuaded, and did in a manner promise to himself: that his soldiers might
easily enter the town: and that (notwithstanding any resistance or devise
which the defendants should use against them) they should not be able to hold
them out, but that they would get the possession of the place. Of all this,
Scanderbeg had notice the same night by his espials, and by such as were
appointed to keep the watch in several places thereabouts: and therefore
giving a near conjecture of the secret intent and purpose of Amurath: he was
at the first in some doubt and mistrust, least they within the town being
pressed with the exceeding multitudes of the assailants should not be able and
of sufficient power to repulse them: besides that the ruin of the wall on that
side, did augment this his fear and suspicion. Wherefore after he had debated
many matters in his mind, he concluded at length, that he would divert and take
upon himself some part of the peril and of their labors: and that he would
somewhat ease the besieged of their travels. About midnight therefore (taking
with Scanderbeg approaches nearer to the Turkish camp.
him victuals for one day only and no more, and leaving all the rest of the
baggage in his camp) he went to entrench himself within five miles of the
enemy, in the same place where he had last laid his ambuscado. But he sent
before him, two of the chiefest of his nobility Musache, and Gnirize de
Vladrenne (men of a notable and singular conceit and subtlety) to take a view
of the camp of the enemy, and to mark what course they would take in the
assault: he himself in the mean time abode there still without any noise,
till such time as they returned, that he might then resolve upon his
proceedings accordingly.

About the seventh hour in the morning was the return of these gentlemen to
their General: and at the same time, the Asappi and Ianissaries (men that
contemned and regarded no perils) were brought forth of their trenches: and
being armed of purpose with a notable resolution, they marched up the
mountain. The horsemen for all that they could do, were not able to get above
some three steps above the bottom and foot of the hill, by reason of the
steepness and roughness of the place: Sfetygrade assaulted.
and therefore standing there aloof, and shooting with their arrows toward
them, they did rather fear then repel the defendants at the breach, whilst
the rascal multitude and vile and baser sort of the Turks, were drawn on to
present themselves to the first fury of the Christians: to the intent that
they being tired and wearied with the killing of these slaves and raskals: and
the citizens being otherwise occupied and drawn away with escaladoes, from the
defense of the places assigned to their custody, A stratageme usual amongst
the Turks.
the others might afterward find the less resistance, and with the geater
ease make themselves masters of the rampires, which by this means might be
disfurnished of all defense. This was it that was attempted on that side where
the violence of the cannon had made the breach. But the sudden mounting of the
place being of it self naturally upright and steep rising, did easily beat
back the assailants; who at each stroke that was given them (were it never so
little) were turned vpside down by the defendants: who also had spent all the
night in repairing and fortifying of the breach, by casting up a rampire or
countermure in fashion of a platform: which they trimmed with plancks, boords,
and baskets made of osiers, and well supported and borne up with strong posts
fastened round about, and with great heaps of stones: so that the very height
and downfall of the place, did make their darts and other shot (being but
weakly thrown and delivered) either to fly staggering and without any force:
or to be beaten down backewardes upon those which pressed forward: who could
scarcely find any stay or rest, or any plain or smooth place to get themselves
footing, as they pressed to the assault, nor yet to stop and stay their bodies
as they tumbled and rolled down when they had the repulse. On the other sides
of the town, and especially toward the gates where the place was more plain
and open, and where the rising and falling of the ground did seem more easy
and pleasant for the soldiers; there the Asappi with their targets and
pauishes were placed round about in the forefront: behind them were appointed
two great and chosen squadrons of hargabussiers and crosse-bowes who with the
thick showers (as it were) of their quarrels and deadly bullets, might make
them within to quit and abandon the defense of their walls: to the intent the
Ianissaries, who followed after them, might the more easily carry the place,
and make themselves masters of the town by the help of their scaling
ladders: with the which they pressed forward so furiously, and with a
countenance so resolute and obstinate, that forgetting all care and fear both
of wounds, or yet of death: some of them whole and sound, others wounded and
may med in their approach to the walls, were now gotten up and had laid hold
upon the top of the battelments. For on that side, the walls had not felt
the devilish rage and fury of the Cannon: neither had they any other help or
receipt (as it appeared) to carry the place but only by a scalado. But
notwithstanding all this their labor and striving, by how much the higher they
were gotten from the ground in skaling of the walls, so much the less force
had they to keep their stand. For many of them being ouerborne with their
proper weight, and the burden of their own heaviness, did tumble down to
the ground with their heels vpwardes, and their ladders upon them, the same
being broken with the ouergreat weight of those that clymed on them. Others
having their fingers cut off, were enforced to forgo their hold: and so their
weapons falling first out of their hands, themselves followed after, and their
bodies tumbled likewise. But the chief and principal fury of the fight was
with stones and such like, which being cast down from alofte with exceeding
great noise and offense, did mightily both spoil and encomber the assailants,
their armor, and all other their furniture. How beit though there fell
continually innumerable with their heads downwards, yet was the number of the
assailants nothing diminished, but still there came others fresh and lusty in
the place of those which were wounded or wearied, who succeeding into their
rooms, did still maintain the assault, rushing furiously over the carcasses,
and through the blood of those that lay dead, with a greater desire of revenge,
then of any great hope to prevail: and without any apprehension or fear of
death, and with an herrible noise and tumult, they made have to seize on the
battelments, and by their overmuch hastiness and striving to mount each before
other (every one not being able to get up with the first) the one of them did
(as it fell out) hinder and hurt the other. Concerning the besieged, as they
had no want of arms and munition, so you may imagine that their force and
strength did no way fail them: besides that, the place did greatly favor them
in all points, and did seem to yield succor unto it self. Moreover they had
certain pauishes and thick plancks extended in the form of bucklers to keep
off the shot and blows of the enemy, to the intent that the soldiers
standing behind them close and in covert, might the better maintain the
defense of the places assigned them: and every man might the more frankly
employ himself to the discharge of his deuoire and duty. Many of the Turks
might have been taken alive, by reason that their ladders being exceeding long
and high, their bodies were even above the tops of the walls: and some of
them also having left their armor behind them were mounted up unarmed: because
the weight thereof would have hindered them, if they had come otherwise to the
assault. But no man had any mind or care of the living more then of the dead:
for fear least if in the heat and fury of the fight, they should have had
any desire to reserve the enemies for their Turks repulsed from the assault of
Sfetigrade.
prisoners, or to covet after gain and booty, the town might have been
foolishly lost by their negligence and avarice. This was in a manner the whole
proof of the valor and deuoire showed by the Barbarians in the first and
second assault, from the which seeing themselves repulsed with shame and
ignominy: and beginning now to perceive their bootles and vain assaies, and
their foolish desire how they ran headlong to seek their own deaths, every
man coming to consider his proper wounds, and the streams of blood which ran
down their bodies: then (their corages being somewhat abated) they began to
mitigate their furious and beastly fiercenes, their blows grew to be more
faint: and they fought not with their wonted stomach, their choler was well
cooled, and they went not so hotly on to the assault, because by little and
little their forces failed them: and (as it is commonly seen) men going
continually upwards and mounting still aloft, do wax faint and weary, and do
loose their breath in going. Notwithstanding the Bassaes and other the roial
leaders being at their backs, soliciting and encoraging them, sometimes with
good words, and sometimes with rough speeches and menaces, did enforce the^
(weary as they were) to pass on against the enemy: and if any were ouerslow
and lazy in their march, they would with blows drive and force them on,
beating them with cudgels or bastinados in most cruel manner. Whereupon thus
constrained, they went on again to the assault; and drawing on their fainting
and wearied bodies against the enemy, they came to the walls almost tired: where
they continued in fight, though to no great purpose, til by little and little
growing to be spent, they yielded up their miserable ghosts in the sight of the
Christians. Many of them (as their souls were departing from their bodies)
being dragged away by the feet, their fellows (whilst they endeavored by so
charitable a deed to convey them to their tents and to save them from the fury
of the citizens) providing for others better then for their own safety, were
themselves mortally wounded from the walls: by means whereof they tumbled and
fell upon their companions half dead and almost breathles: and were reduced to
the same, if not to a worse plight and condition. The Sfetigradians the mean
while aloft upon the walls making show by their loud clamors and pleasant jests,
that they were the victors, did with open mouth mock and deride the
assailants, which did not a little exasperate their grief, and renew the sorrow
of their mischaunce.

The Sultan himself being not able to endure this injury, nor to suffer it
without revenge, Feribassa sent with a new s^pplie to renew the assault.
sent a supply of 3000. men under the leading of Feribassa, who being one of
his most sufficient captains, was greatly renowned for the great strength and
dexterity of his body and of his mind: and he furnished him with an infinite
number of scaling ladders and other warlike engines of all sorts. Immediately
hereupon the noise grew to be appeased within the town, and their still
silence arguing a new fear and doubt, did recall the soldier to a more
difficult and harder piece of service, and to the beginning of a new labor.
Wherefore both the spirits and the eyes of all men were intentive to receive,
and to repel the assailantes, and to trouble them in their proceeding, keeping
them aloof from the walls at the beginning, with force of arrows, quarrels,
harguebusse, and all other kind of shot, whereby they might be hindered from
making their approches. But perceiving that notwithstanding al their deuoir,
they marched close on with their ensigns without all fear, and that they made
rou^dly to the walls; they threw down upon them huge pieces of timber, and
store of stones both small and great, besides artificial fires, as baskets and
fagots nointed with oil and pitch, and so set on fire: in such sort that the
Infidels being sore terrified with the fiercenes of the fire, whilst some of
them hasted to quench it, and others to avoid it, they could not present any
great number of ladders against the wall: and of those which were set up, the
most part were burnt and fired. During this contention and confused noise,
their commander himself with part of his troops, somewhat removed from
thence, having slain some of the defendantes, had raised up ladders against
that part of the wall, where fighting eagerly and incensing his soldiers with
often admonitions, he encoraged the^ to enter in on that side which was almost
naked and void of defense. There wanted not in the soldier obedience nor
readiness, nor in the common sort forwardnes or courage: but of themselves they
were sufficiently enflamed. For all of them pricked on with an exceeding fury,
and almost enraged, as if the one of them had envied the other) they did strive
to purchase the credit to be the first man that should enter: well knowing what
high fortune and rewards, (besides the crown due unto him that first got upon
the wall) were prepared for that man that could attain thereunto. But Perlat
with a good number of Dibrians, running speedily to the place, and filling it
with fresh men in stead ofthose which had bin slain, did soon disappoint both
the exhortations of the Turkishe commander, and the endeavors of the soldiers.
For bringing a whole shoure and tempest (as it were) of shot upon them, both
the assailants were by that means oppressed, and all their engines and other
provisions were broken in sunder and dispersed. Thereupon began the cry to be
renewed within the town, and the Infidels were repulsed with greater fear then
danger: for but 30. were slain of that company, and about 18. of them wounded.
Notwithstanding, they desisted not from pursuing the assault by all other
means, till such time as they heard the retrait sounded: and yet was it only a
mere obstinacy and a most wilful humor that made the^ so to persevere: and
shame rather then courage pressed them forwards on al parts: so that the
Christians had good and sufficient leisure to refresh them selves.

But the sudden coming of Scanderbeg did soon after yield them some more
advantage Scanderbeg goes to invade the camp of the Turk before Sfetigrade
to refresh them: for the approach of their friends began now to be discovered,
and the thicknes of the dust with the great noise made through the trampling of
their horses, did evidently bewray their coming to the eyes and ears of every
man. The long stay of our men (for before their arrival the assault had
continued more then 3. long hours) grew upon this occasion: because after
many opinions debated in counsel, it had been advised as the surest and safest
course, that the first onset to be given upon the enemy, should be protracted a
while: till such time as the Turks having left their tents void and empty,
should employ the forces of their whole camp against Sfetigrade, and that every
man should be busied in his particular charge and duty, supposing that then
would be the fittest time to make them yield an account of their expedition,
and to quit the assault which they had undertaken. But the provident Ottoman
was not found so negligent and sleeping, neither did this Emperor (being so
wise and polliticke) show himself faulty in so gross an oversight and
absurdity, as to make head with his chiefest strength against the town, and to
leave his back bare and open in the mean time to the mercy of the Albanois. For
the truth is, he had placed a strong and mighty court of guard about 500. paces
from the walls: in the midst whereof himself stood enuironned Amurath his
policy and great providence.
with his ordinary guard, both as a surueior and encourager of his people; and
besides he had provided a strong battallion of young men purposely picked and
chosen to the number of 15000. all horsemen, to whom he had given in charge to
course up and down, and to discover all places, and on all parts, for fear
least some stur and tumult might be raised behind them at their backs. Now
Scanderbeg having gotten within 2. miles of the enemy with 7000. good horse,
and 3000. foot, he had according to his custom, made a division of his
companies, appointing Moses to lie in an ambuscado with all his footmen, and
2000. horse, to prevent the diverse inconveniences which might fortune to
befall him. He himself with the rest of his horsemen, taking the wide and open
champion, did march on with great fury and violence against the enemy, and with
a great and notable cry before he came to the encounter, he added courage to the
besieged, and discomforted the assailants. Therewithal the Battallion royal
Conflict of Sca^derbeg with the Turks.
of the Turkish horsemen, which (as I have said before) stood there ranged to
that intent and purpose, with all speed went to meet him, and with a full
careere made head against them. The Albanois nothing abashed at their great
multitude, but keeping close in good order of battle, went to the charge with
such bravery, that at the very first onset, they beat them back and
disordered them: and many of them being entermingled in fight together, did
with their swords or cimitaries rudely and fiercely entertain each other. The
Infidels holding good for a time, by reason of their numbers only, did within a
while recuile all together, and casting away all shame by a fearful kind of
flight, by little and little did seem to confess, that the Epirots were no men
for them to deal withal. Whereof as soon as their Prince had knowledge, and
seeing that he fought on all sides with so great misfortune and bad success,
(as if God himself had been against him) he commanded presently to sound a
retrait: and pointing with his finger to the small number of the Christians, he
spoke thus unto his soldiers.

What a shame and reproach is this (quod he?) what? has so small a troop of
thieves Speeches of Amurath reproching his soldiers flying from Scanderbeg.
and robbers had the power to make and see you turn your backs? Nay, I my
self have seen it also, which (if you were men of any valor) would make you
blushe for very shame. What? have your enemies, even the Gods at their
command? and do they carry victory with them in their bosoms? and have you
nothing but your swords (and those unprofitable) and your hands dead and
without life, and your bodies feeble and subject to the sword and injuries of
your enemies? Behold how they do yet abide you and stir not a foot from you,
wherefore stay you? Can you endure that a handful of such base and infamous
persons, should present them selves as conquerors before your eyes, whom you
are able to swallow up whole both horse and arms? Revenge your own blood (my
soldiers,) and if the common reputation do any thing at all move you, revenge
the deaths of your fellows and companions, at leastwise your own private
wrongs and injuries.

Upon these his speeches and exclamations, all of them suddenly turned their
faces toward the enemy, and every man (leaving al other business) ran
confusedly on all sides: and those also which were on the mountain descended
to charge the Albanois. But the Prince of Epire would not attend them though
they were almost breathles and out of order: but retiring speedily to the place
provided for his surety, he kept the advantage which he had gotten in that
encounter, without any loss except of one only, and 3. wounded: and so came
and joined himself with Moses, holding that the only way for his safeguard from
the enemy. Of the Turks there were slain some 60. or better, of which number
(men say) that Scanderbeg slew five of them with his own hands. The Barbarians
did not pursue them far, because the Sultan doubted of some secret train or
counterwaits: and the rather, for that he had some apparaunt sign of the other
troops in the ambushment: wherefore he commanded them again to a second
retrait. It was a notable sight to see how in one and the same instant, the
Barbarians on the one part Garrison within Sfetigrade sallie out upon the
Turks.
did charge upon the Christians, and on the other part themselves were charged
at the backs by those of Sfetigrade. The Turks scoffed at Scanderbeg as he
retired from the fight, and being not able to hurt him with their swords, they
prosecuted him with taunts and villainous speeches. But Perlat on the other
side was much more troublesome and despitefull unto them, and did more
grievously importune their companions: for he not only angered the^ by the
hearing of his quips and fine girding speeches, but he vexed them also with
good store of blows at their backs both with pikes, shot, and other kind of
weapons. For as soon as he perceived, that at the only name of Scanderbeg,
they gave over the assault, and descended a pace down the mountain, he
(embracing the occasion offered him with a train of three hundredth men quick
and well armed) issued out upon them with a great clamor, and playing upon
them with his shot as thick as hail, he went on beating, killing, and chasing
them even to the foot of the mountain.

Thus was that day most unfortunate to the Ottoman and all his enterprises, for
that time fell out to be vain and unprofitable. The assault was broken off,
the enemy was not seized upon, but without any loss vanished out of sight.
The audacity of the defendantes was augmented and increased, and the most part
of the Turk his readiest and best soldiers, lay dead before the walls of
Sfetigrade, besides the incredible havoc and spoil of his munitions and
artillery, and other provisions for the assault. For the number of those which
were slain in that journey, was reckoned to be full Number of Turks slain
and hurt at the first assault of Sfetigrade.
three thousand: and more then four thousand hurt and wounded, and infinite
engines and instruments for the war, were broken in pieces and consumed with
fire. This victory cost the towns men the loss only offorty men: but of them
that were wounded the number was very great: yet was there an inestimable
quantity both of arms and other baggage found before the walls, and carried
into the town, whilst the enemy was busied in the pursuit of Scanderbeg,
which was some amends for the loss and damage they had sustained. For that
day the Turk gave no other attempt, but retiring him self from before
Sfetigrade, he spent the whole night in sorrow and sadness, silent and
melancholicke. On the other side the Prince of Epire holding him self
sufficiently contented with this good and happy success, in that this
discomfiture and repulse of the enemy, did yield some time of respite to the
besieged, he made no longer stay there, then whilst his soldiers must of
necessity to breath themselves. But he imediately after returned to his first
camp where he had left his baggage at his departure, and there his people
refreshed themselves both with sleep and victuals. The next day early, the
first thing he did, was, to send away messengers, who rode post to carry the
joyful news of the victory of Sfetigrade, both to Vranocontes, and to the
other towns and peoples under his obeisance. He him self the day following
with two hundred horse only, taking his way through the height of the
mountains, went to take a view of the demeanor and countenance of the
enemy. All things were there in quiet, and the town at good rest: by means
whereof, being returned to his tents, he soiourned there two days longer, and
the third day trussing up his baggage, he removed his camp into the upper
Dibria, and there entrenched him self in a place strongly seated and well
defended, about fifteen miles from Amurath. The principal cause that moved
him so often to remove from one place to another, Stratageme of Scanderbeg in
often removing of his camp.
was (as I take it) either for fear least the soldiers (abiding long in one
place certain) might accustom them selves to overmuch idleness: or least the
enemy might thereby take some course and occasion, either by some draught
laid, to surprise his person, or to guard him self the better from those
trains which the enemy should prepare to entrappe him.

Amurath all this while being exceedingly malcontent for the unhappy event of
this first assault, and badly digesting in his stomach the rude repulse
sustained by Sfetigrade again battered.
them of Sfetigrade: after he had now sufficiently tormented his thoughts,
with vain consultations, griefs, and complaints, once again he called
together the ministers of his rage and vengeance, charging them diligently to
consider of the site of the place, and on what side the town might be best
invaded and offended. The place being once assigned, he appointed the
ordinance to be planted against it, and then consumed three whole days in
battering the town on that side, thinking to have dismanteled it by the the
force of the Canon, but their labor was all in vain: for albeit on that part
the flankers of the wall were beaten down, and though fortifications which had
been made by hand, did tumble to the ground, yet the excellent and natural
Sfetigrade, her natural strength and situation.
strength of the place, would not suffer it to be forced, neither by any
violence or industry that could be used against it. For if it had been laid
wholly open, and no man there to defend it, yet had it not been possible but
with great difficulty, as (the saying is) by creeping both on hands and feet,
for the most nimble and active persons to approach it, much less for men armed
and carrying their furniture with them. So craggy, rough, and full of woods were
the mountains, so raggedly and uneven did they stand, sundered each from other,
with such variety of turnings and windings in and out, and so steep were their
bottoms and downefals: that they made the town being seated upon them, both
inaccessible and impregnable. And again on the other side where it seemed more
assaultable, though the wall might easily of it self have been battered, and a
breach made, yet right opposite against it, there presented it self a certain
belly of ground, swelling (as it were) or rising up with a knob in form of a
Bosse, which running out from the back of the mountain, did so fitly cover
and shadow the wall, that from the place where the enemy lay encamped, it was
not possible to plant their cannon, nor to manage their artillery in any sort
to offend them. But for that both the getting up at the first approach was
very difficult, and because the town was too near a neighbor unto them, they
did attempt it though often, yet in vain: for the besieged by their ordinary
sallies (being helped with the favor of the place, did daily hinder them of
their intent, breaking the engines all in pieces. And besides, with their
Cannon shot and other artillery from the walls, they did in great safety and
security disappoint the enemy of their purpose, and disturb the endeavors of
the assailaunts. Thus on all sides was their labor lost, and there was no
appearance or hope of any good success, which might encourage the aged Sultan
to come to the end of his desires. Yet was he resolved to pursue the siege to
the last point: and by Amurath resolves to consume the garrison of Sfetigrade
by often and light skirmishes.
often and continual skirmishes, to travel, toil, and weary out the
defendauntes without ceasing: affirming, that this was the best and likeliest
way to consume their forces, and to bring them to nothing: and that though the
first days assault had cost him dearly, yet had not the Christians made any
great good market, considering their small numbers, and that he both durst and
would make further proof of that way, though not by the venture and hazard of
a general battle, both because the enemy did by his continual and daily
invasions and canuazadoes keep him in awe: and the remembrance of his late
discomfiture and overthrow, did daily renew his sorrows. Thus were the towns
men never assailed, but only by loose and light skirmishes: and the Ottoman
forces did only watch and lie in wait for some good occasion, amiddest their
often incursions, suddenly and unprovided to surprise the city. Nevertheless
they left not with their shot cach to annoy other aloof and a far off:
neither did they intermit or give over any of the other ordinary services
accustomed and used in the siege of towns.

Little or none at all was the damage and hurt sustained all this while,
either on the one side or the other: neither was there any exploite done worthy
of memory. There was no new assault given to the walls, neither were the
scaling ladders any more used, till such time as certain Ianissaries,
secretly gotten out of their camp, did perceive that there was one place of
the town on the other side thereof, which being abandonned and undefended, the
inhabitants thought not needful to be manned, by reason both of the height
of the place, which was naturally defended, and in a manner inaccessible: and
the knoppe of the hill being severed and divided, and Turks think to surprise
Sfetigrade.
suddenly distoyned from the mountain. The matter being reported unto the
Sultan, did make him exceedingly joyful and glad: and therefore liking well
of the opportunity, he sent very many, some at one time, some at another, who by
creeping having gotten up to the top, were now a sufficient number able to
make a reasonable good troop or squadron. By good hap the governor him
self went the round at that time, to ouersee and view the rampires and
fortifications: who being speedily aduertized of the danger by the next
Sentinel, and court of guard, went presently to the place, accompanied with a
good number of chosen soldiers, and with great provision of munition both of
shot and armor. And at the first he kept himself close, regarding and
beholding the bold enterprise and adventure of the enemy: and he could not but
greatly wonder at their hardy and audacious attempt, or rather at the great
folly of this people, who durst so to hazard their lives, without all care or
fear of danger. Hereuppon to the end he might use guile for guile and (as
the saying is) cut them sops of the same loaf, and give them drink of the
same cup, he held him self still and quiet behind the rampires, marking how
every one of them was busily occupied at their work, with their ladders raised
up against the walls, and some of them already mounted, and others yet
climing toward the top. Therewithal rushing forth against them with his only
presence, he so terrified and amazed them, that leaving their armor and
weapons, and many forsaking their companions (according as each man's fear did
lead and advise him,) they began to fly before that any shot came to touch
them. Many of them as they fled to save themselves, were oppressed and beaten
down with stones: all the residue in a manner, were most miserably crushed and
bruised with falling from their ladders, tumbling down headlong from the top to
the bottom of the steep mountain: in such sort that their bodies were so
strangely battered and disfigured, that at their return to the camp, they
could not be known nor discerned by their own fellows, for that scant there
appeared any show or shape of human form to be seen in them. Of the
defendants, not any one that had any hurt or damage. And during all that time,
there was not heard in a manner, so much as one sigh within the town: for with
very good advise and consideration all the day long they would spend their time
toward the place where the battery had been made, and when the dark night
came on, then would they fill up and repair the breach, with great store of
earth, stones, and other stuff, strengthening it with fagots, posts, and such
like.

Whilst they did thus by light skirmishes and conflicts incense each other; and
that the Scanderbeg scoureth the country.
Turks did rather inflame the choler of the defendants, then any way
discourage or apall them: Scanderbeg accompanied with 2000. horse did scour
over all the country, leaving no corner nor place unvisited, to see if he could
any way find the opportunity to entrap the enemy, either as they went on
foraging, or seeking for fresh water, or (which he was in hope of and might
have happened) that he might meet with some of their companies, sent forth by
the Sultan to ouerrun, sack, and waste the country: but he was ever deceived
of his expectation, for I never heard, that either then or at any other time
during the siege of Sfetigrade, any such thing was enterprised or undertaken by
Amurath. Wherefore Scanderbeg seeing that all his draughts did turn to smoke,
and that he could find no fit matter, whereupon to discharge his choler, he
returned to his camp more agreeued then he went forth.

It was now the two and twentieth of June, about two hours after noone, that
Scanderbeg (as one that had of a long time been kept fasting from the blood
of the enemy which he so eagerly coueted) mounted again on horse back, and
taking with him Tanuse and fifty other tall soldiers, he went about his
ordinary and Scanderbeg goes to view the army and demeanor of the Turks
before Sfetygrade.
wonted task: namely to understand some news of the enemy. Now it happened as
he beheld their Camp from aloof: that he found all still without any stir or
noise, nothing being to be seen that carried any show or countenance of
enemies, but the ensigns and standards only: the men lay wallowing all along
under their tents, pell mell amongst their horses, (for it was at that time
when the Sun being in Cancer, and in the extremity of heat did burn and
broile their bodies most intollerably.) Castriot therefore seeing them in this
plight, turned his face to them in his company, and with a smiling
countenance (as the report goes) spoke unto them in this manner.

O what a goodly sight have we here my friends! See here the Emperor of the
Speeches of Scanderbeg to his soldiers touching the security of the Turkish
army.
Orient, even Amurath the terror and fear of nations: see here this army the
Conquerours of the world, who have so often adorned and beautified their
Barbarous houses with the spoils of Hungary, the treasures of Asia, and the
wealth and riches of Morea: see (I say) how they now lie buried and overwhelmed
with sleep, and overcome with sloth and grief, having been lately vanquished
by the garrison of Sfetygrade, by a Town of so small force and estimate, that
they seem to be in case rather of men besieged, then of such as besiege
others. Hardly can any mind be satisfied with this sight, to see how filthy
and unclean a show they make on all parts, resembling very beasts and
brutish creatures. O that the great Princes of Christendom were here now
present to behold them: I do not think, but do fully assure my self of it,
that jointly with me they would shed tears when they should come to measure
the indignity of their misfortune by the infamous estate, and by the vile
habit, and base show of the vanquisher. For your parts (my good soldiers)
as you cannot now behold this filthy spectacle proposed before your eyes,
without the singular disdain and contempt of these base miscreants: so (I pray
you) let the remembrance of this sight be so deeply engraven in your
stomachs, and imprinted in the very bottom of your hearts: that they may
continue still mindful of your liberty. Go to then, let us make have while
the day yet lasts, and whilst the representation of this spectacle,
remains fresh in our memory: let us return to our camp to take up our
ensigns and to arm our companions, whilst our enemies thus laid along all at
their ease, overcome with sleep and drowsinesse, do offer themselves as a prey
to our swords and do inuit us and give us such opportunity to the cutting of
their throats.

This said, he pricked forward and being fully replenished both with hope and
choler, he returned to his Camp, where without giving any respite unto his
soldiers (scarce so much as a little to refresh them selves) and causing them
to carry victualles for one day only and no more: with singular diligence he
willed the ensigns to be displaied, and commanded all the companies to
follow him with all celerity. For the guard and custody of the Camp, he left
only forty soldiers: for the residue of those that stayed behind, were but
vanlettes, and men of servile condition. A little before the Sun setting, the
earth began to be covered with a dark mist, during the which, the Princ of
Epire with a soft and easy pace was gotten near Scanderbeg his order and
policy in marching with his arm.
the Turkishe army, but he ever had some horsemen continually riding and
scouring the country before him, to survey and regard all places round about,
and after their ordinary and accustomed manner of searching (by turning and
winding, here and there on all parts, to sound every forest and dangerous
place, least there might have been laid some ambushment to surprise and
beguile him, who was his craftesmaister in such trains and artificial
sleights of policy. For this expert Chiefetaine, either was continually in
fear and doubt, or else he did purposely feign and dissemble a kind of fear
by a certain singular dexterity of his spirit, to the intent he might make
his soldiers more wary, circumspect, and advised, and the more attentive to
all accidents whatsoever. And this was the reason (as the report is) why he
was wont Saying of Scanderbeg.
commonly to have these speeches in his mouth. That many more excellent
captains and triumphant armies, have been overcome and vanquished by surprises
then in open and set battle: that he had rather fight against ten men
resolutely, and openly being provided for them, then against two upon any
uncertainty and suspicion either of place or any other inconvenience. Because
that all things whatsoever which are doubtful are more suspicious and
fearful, and upon asuddaine do seem more hard and difficult.

When Scanderbeg was come within a quarter of a league of the enemy, he made a
stand, being not minded to advance his ensigns any farther, till he had first
sent Moses with two other soldiers goes as aspie into the camp of Amurath.
two soldiers (to whom he had promised a good sum of money) to the tents
of Amurath to see and understand the doings of the enemy. Moses likewise
voluntarily took upon him with a gallant and cheerful courage jointly with
them to be an actor in the matter: for that he thought there was not any great
confidence to be reposed in their skill and sufficiency. Immediately therefore
leaving their horses (for that being on foot they might the moresafely deceive
the Turks sentinels) he being disguized in a varlets garment and a Sclauonian
sword by his side went chearefully on, and was soon out of sight, with both
the other soldiers, who followed him without any fear at all. They in the
camp when they saw that Moses did not spare to adventure himself in that
enterprise, conceived a singular hope in the matter: nevertheless they still
expected in great perplexity (by reason of the darkness of the night, which
made them somewhat both in fear and doubt) what would be the end of this
attempt, and to what service they should bedrawen, when this worthy spy should
return to make report what he had seen. Neither did the Dibrian deceive them
of their expectation, for I may justly speak it) he did not only compass all
the tre^ches and fortificatio^s of the infidels, to take a view and notice of
every thing: but he went even through their inmost courts of guard, passing and
searching the most secret places of their camp. I am not ignorant, that some
have ascribed the proof of this hardy and audacious fact unto Standerbeg, of
which for my part, nevertheless I will not rob nor deprive Moses: relying in
this matter (though there be no great certainty thereof) upon the plurality of
Scanderbeg went as spy into the Turks camp lying at the siege of Croy.
opinions which do defend it: how beit that this was not the first time that
Moses merited this commendation, neither was this peculiar to him alone. For it
cannot be denied but that even Scanderbeg did adventure himself to the like
hazard (especially during the siege of Croy, with the like courage and good
success, I will not say, counsel and good advise seeing in this case there is
not any thing in a manner governed and guided General of an army not to be
commended for aduenturing his person over hardily. A rare thing to see fortune,
and virtue in one man to be always joined together.
by reason, but by mere chance and fortune. And therefore I dare not much
commend in a General of an army that valor or virtue which is careless and
so prodigal of his life and safety. How beit fortune her self seems to
have exempted Scanderbeg from reproof and blame in this behalf: in that she
did continually so accompany and second the endeavors and heroical co^ceipts of
this worthy personage, that it was a thing very seldom seen in that age, and
it was a spectacle both rare and singular to see a happy issue and event still
joined with counsel and wisdom, and that virtue should be so atte^ded by
fortune. But we shall have occasion elsewhere to entreat of this matter: let
us now return to our camp with Moses: who being perceived a far off by the
court of guard (for the moon was then at the full and did shine all night)
they went to meet him and received him with infinite joy and gladness, and so
conveyed him to the general. Then might you see the private and common sort of
soldiers mingled pell mell with the nobles and chief commanders, all of them
running in great desire to understand what he had seen, what he had learned,
and what likehood he brought either offeare or hope. When it it was known that
all was well, and that matters stood in good case, and this joyful news being
dispersed and published to every one of them: Scanderbeg knew that the wished
hour did now approach for them to march on against the enemy: he bestirred him
self therefore on all sides, and you might have seen him sometimes there
amongst the rancks and squadrons of his armed soldiers, taking order, both
for the men and their arms. Now disposing of some in the vauntgard, and others
in the rereward, each one to his charge. And there withal he encouraged them
with many brave speeches and exhortations.

Although (said he) my good friends and companions, both the present time and
Oration of Scanderbeg to his army being to give a canuazado to the Turkish
camp.
all things in a manner round about, especially your valor and prowess so
often manifested, may summon me now to be silent: yet the novelty of the
course which we now take, and this unaccustomed fashion of fight, which now we
are to begin (it may be) will give you cause to think, that my speeches are not
needles nor impertinent considering that it behooves you now at my command to
yield some new testimony of your ancient virtue against the enemy in the
darkness of the night, and not as heretofore you were wont, in set battle open
and orderly raunged. This is the cause, that I do now freely speak unto you,
and as instantly as possibly I may, I do pray and entreat you, I do exhort
you, and I do require you, that even the night it self may show you to be
mindful of your noble courage, and to be mindful of your honor and reputation
which you have purchased and continued so many years. For now cannot I be
either a beholder or encourager of the valor or of the sloth of any of you,
only the moonlight shall be the witness of your valor, and your valor must
animate and encourage you. Notwithstanding the success and issue also of this
nights service will give an open testimony of your deuoire, and my self will be
the particular judge of your several deserts, when I shall see your
victorious hands bring me the bloody spoils of our dead enemies, their
ensigns encountered and conquered before their trenches, and the heads cut off
from the carcasses of their slaughtered bodies.

These and such like speeches did he use unto his soldiers, as it were in
jest and meriment, admonishing them notwithstanding in any case to abstain
from the pillage of their camp, least in thinking to satisfy their vile and
covetous humor, their booty might happen to prove fatal unto them, and be the
occasion of their death and destruction: that nothing could be more precious,
neither could fortune offer any thing of better value to the brave soldier
then the throat of the enemy.

This done, and having made their prayers and vows of all sorts unto God for
the obtaining of victory, about the fourth hour of the night, he caused his
ensigns to Scanderbeg gives a canuado to the Turkish camp.
march, but the clattering of their armor, and the neighing of the horses, did
discover their coming to the skoutes, before that they came to the tents of
the enemy: and they giving the alarm to their Captains, filled all parts
with disorder, tumult, and confusion. Upon this so sudden and unexpected a
noise, the tents of the Graund Seigniour himself were stricken with fear and
terror, and the old man being soon awaked, as a man amazed and destitute of
all counsel, did provide as well as he could upon so desperate an accident.
But Scanderbeg for all this, neither slacked his course nor abated his fury:
and although he perceived by this tumult, that all the camp was in an alarm,
and that the soldiers did run in and out to the gardes, and passages of the
camp, yet did he not diminish any part of his fury and fierceness formerly
conceived, but with high cries and wonderful noise, he invaded their trenches
and fortifications. The first quarter that was assailed, was where certain
soldiers of Asia lay encamped, who being by chance the first that were
encountered, had their tents and lodgings overthrown in an instant, and
themselves as they stood upon their defense being partly slain and partly put
to flight, did draw on the like fury and destruction upon others that succeeded
in their rooms. For many who had taken arms in great have and tumult, came to
make head against the enemy, but being not able to make their party good, by
reason they were unequal to our men both in number and in fierceness, they
were quickly cut in pieces, or driven to forsake the place. From thence the
Christians passing further on, they found diverse tents and pauillions void and
empty, which they caused to be fired, and the cords being cut in sunder, they
left them thus overthrown in poor estate. Thus did Scanderbeg a long time
continue victorious without any loss or bloodshed of his men, till such time
as a strong batallion of Turks being rallied and gotten close together, did
come forth and advance forward from the heart and strength (as it were) of the
Camp to repulse the shame and ignominy of this dishonor. Then began the
fight to be doubtful and ambiguous, the place was covered with dead bodies,
and dyed with much blood. For the General of the Albanois making head against
them with a troop of harguebussiers and crosbowes and all his companies of
archers, and bearing them off bravely at the first encounter when they came to
charge him: he gave them such a volley of shot both with bullet and artillery,
and he handled them so rudely, that growing at the very beginning to be
astonished, and the night redoubling their fear, they stood a while in a doubt
whether they should press forward or return backward, nevertheless trusting
to their number wherein they thought them selves the stronger (for there were
more then 14000. fighting men:) they resolved at length to try the extremity
and last hazard, neither would the Albanois in any case quit the place which he
had once set foot on: but marching still on with obstinacy and perseverance,
he prepared himself both to give and to take blows with like hardiness and
resolution. For albeit he could not pierce any further into the camp of the
enemy (because the thicknes of the press and multitude trouping close
together) did hinder them: yet would he not for any danger whatsoever give over
this occasion of so notable a victory. Wherefore joining close with the enemy,
and setting foot to foot, sword to sword, and target to target, they came to
encounter together man to man, and hand to hand, all of them taking good heed
to keep them selves from entermingling with the enemy, for fear least in this
confusion and in the dark, they should not be able, to discern their friends
from their foes. And their fight did seem in show and resemblance to be in
the nature of a particular combat, for so eger and furious was their fight,
that they seemed like mad men, and so vehement was their hatred which they bare
each other (not so much in public as in private) that every one did imagine
the enemy then before him, to have bin predestinat unto him, and therefore each
man did his best and the uttermost of his endeavors to lay hold on the bloody
spoils of his enemy.

Now did it appear on all sides how notably the late oration of Scanderbeg was
fixed and imprinted in the memories of his soldiers, and what effect his
particular precepts and instructions had wrought in their hearts: For on all
sides the Circumcized yielding up their souls, did sigh and groan under the
hands of the Christians, and their throats (as they were cut a sunder, did even
crackle and make a noise through the abundance of blood which like streams,
issued from them: so ardent a desire had every one of the Albanois to show unto
his Prince the heads separated from the carcasses) as the certain and evident
pledges of their faith which they had given him, and the assured marks of
their prowes and virtue. But our men did not long enjoy this liberty of
killing and massacring: because the Turks (seeing how their batallion was
pressed and ill entreated) did now retire on all sides, both those which were
whole, and those that were wounded, all together: and they conveyed themselves
into the most secure and safest places of their camp eue^ to the lodging of
their Prince. By this time their whole army being drawn out of the several
quarters of their camp, and orderly raunged) as the time and tumult would
permit) they made toward the place of the combat, where purposing to have done
their best against the Christians, their coming was not so furious and so
violent as it was in vain and unprofitable, for they even upon the first
flight of their enemies, being partly wearied and partly satisfied with the
slaughter, were departed. And albeit they were scant a mile from thence, yet
durst none of them be so hardy, as to follow after them for fear of
ambushments. They remained therefore and abode still in that place, till such
time as the morning light did discover the horrible butchery, and the
sorrowful object of the dead bodies of their companions, which them selves did
bewail with warm and bitter tears. It is generally agreed that there were
slain 2000. and more then 500. hurt and wounded: for two and forty of the
Christians Number of Turks slain in the canuazado.
which lay buried amongst the heaps of their dead enemies, whom afterward
being found (though their bodies were stone cold and their eyes pale (as in
dead men is usual) and though their members stiff and cold had lost their use
and ordinary functions by the departure of their happy souls) yet these
miscreants nevertheless, through a vain desire of revenge most inhumanly
tearing them in pieces, did endeavor to satisfy their rage and malice, upon the
deaf and senseless trunkes of their dead carcasses.

This mean while the Prince of Albanie had gotten ground, and being past
clean out of sight and hearing of the enemy; he caused his army to make a
stand in a certain The fair valley.
valley which the inhabitants call the fair valley, and was about five miles
from Amurath. There did he make some stay, to the intent both to breath his
companies, and to set his troops in better order by the benefit of the day
light, as also to provide for the^ that were wounded, whom visiting one by one,
he did graciously comfort, and without any respect of the dignity of his
estate, with a souldiourlike regard (as one that had been but a mean footeman)
him self did handle and look unto their wounds. All things being well and
diligently ordered and disposed, he disloged thence with his Scanderbeg
returns to his Camp.
ensigns displayed, and came to his Camp about the eleventh hour of the day
a little before noone. He had made the less speed, because the wounds of his
soldiers did much hinder him: so likewise did the extremity of the heat,
and the burdensome carriage of the preye and booty gotten from the enemy.
Besides there was a great number of prisoners both good and bad: for whatsoever
was found within the enemies tents was taken and carried away. Amongst the rest
of the pillage, there were 230. horses and seven ensigns: but the heads of
the Turks, cut from their bodies, which the soldiers held and carried in
their hands, as the notable marks of their private virtue, did singularly
grace and beautify the fight of this triumph. And Scanderbeg forgot not both
with high praises, and rich presents and rewards, to honor all of them openly
and in public. The prisoners were sent into the next towns there to abide,
till such time as they were ransomed. The ensigns with certain moueables and
rich ornaments, were sent unto the Princes his associats: the rest of the
spoils were granted and parted amongst the soldiers. After this for a while
was the camp in good Scanderbeg encampeth in Emathia.
rest and quietness, and they had leisure to repair their forces with new
supplies. The third day being past, they removed with bag and baggage, and all
their carriage into the plain country of Emathia, where they encamped.

The wrath and anger of the Turkish Emperor did so far prevail with him, that
the same being converted into rage and mere madness (both for the perverse
misfortune and slaughter of his people, and through the deformed shape and
aspect of his camp: and seeing no other mean nor matter of revenge, he
disgorged the rage and fury of his heart (yet all in vain) against the
besieged, and against the walls of their city. For Sfetygrade assaulted for 3.
days together by the Bassa of Romania.
three days together did the Bassa of Romania, with a great and puissant
preparation, enterprise upon them, and as often was he repulsed, and with
notable great loss overthrown and beaten back. By means whereof, as the
hardy and courageous fierceness of the defendants was increased more and more,
so did a vehement indignation and broyling rage more and more torment the heart
of the Sultan. And though his body were even wasted and worn out with age, yet
the exceeding vigor of his spirit (suruiuing within him) did even revive and
quicken it self a new, through the remembrance of the worthy exploites, and
the notable deeds Speeches of Amurath to his soldiers: encouraging the^ to a
new assault of Sfetygrade.
of arms which he had achieved in times past. He told his soldiers, that
the events of war are diverse, and that the unconstant humor of fortune does
not show it self in any thing whatsoever, morevnstable and variable, then in
arms and martial matters: that all difficulties by deliberate obstinacy and
continual study may be easily surmounted: that the strongest Towns and
fortresses are but weak and feeble: that rampires and all fortifications are
of no force nor of long resistance: In brief, that all things are easy to be
compassed and effected, whereunto men do frame their minds, and intend their
thoughts, and apply their continual trauelles and endeavors. With these and
such like speeches animating his people, and giving them therewithal large
promises of huge and excessive rewards (such as he had never made the like to
any since the time of his coming to the Empire) the appointed a new assault to
begin the next day following.

Nothing of all this was concealed or hidden from Scanderbeg, but daily as soon
as the Turk had decreed or determined upon anything: he was speedely
advertised of it, both by espialles which he had abroad of purpose, and also by
the discovery and relation of the Paynims themselves, of whom many did daily
fly unto him, Turks fly from Amurath to Scanderbeg.
either for that they were weary of the Turkish tyranny and dominion, and did
desire to follow that good fortune which seemed (as it were) to smile upon this
Prince favored by God him self: or (as it often happens) being drawn
thereunto through the inconstancy of their own dispositions. More then this,
the frank and liberal nature of the Epirot, and his admirable prudence did so
ravish the hearts of all such as did repair unto him: that if any of them came
unto him, with an ill and fraudulent intent, and with a purpose and resolution
to deceive him, they would soon alter their minds: so suddenly would he
vanquish them with the regard of his bounty and with this clemency and
benignity. Now Scanderbeg upon notice had of Amurath his determination, made
no longer stay but till the return of Moses, whom he had sent to levy
certain new men for the supply of those whom he had lost in the former
services. The rest of his troops in the mean time stood ready ordered and
raunged for the fight, as if they had been to charge and give battle
presently, and as if the enemy had been in sight to encounter them.

The day being come which Amurath had assigned for the assaulting of the Town,
early in the morning the ensigns being brought close under the walls, and the
alarm given, the assault began even by the break of day. On all sides where
the Town was approchable was it environed round about, and all places were
covered with armed forces. For the monarch of the Turks having published and
made it known, that this assault should be the last that he would attempt: he
labored tooth and nail, and employed and bent all his forces and puissance
against the defendants. And in the mean while to the intent he might prevent
the sudden coming Feribassa appointed with an army to resist the inuasio^s of
Scanderbeg, during the assault of Sfetygrade.
of Castriot from troubling (as he was wont) the course of his furious
dessignes and endeavors, he gave unto Feribassa that brave warrior, (at his
own instant and earnest request) an army of 12000. horse and foot, for the
encountering of so dangerous an enemy, that making head and opposing him self,
against the violence of his invasions, he might keep him still doing: so as
his other troops might not be disturbed nor withdrawn from the Town, nor the
assault discontinued. The sufficiency of this Feribassa his praises and
co^mendations.
chieftaine was great and notable: he was of a very good conceit, and advised,
and full of courage, as one whom the continual practice of deeds of arms had
brought to have the reputation of a most worthy soldier and an excellent
Captain. Having received his charge and ordered his forces, he never ceased
coursing up and down of all sides, and sending forth his scoutes to
discover even the most remote and farthest places from the camp: and in great
impatiencie both of choler and of rest, and as being grieved and discontented,
that so fair an occasion of honor and commendation, should be so long delaied
and detayned from him, he did attend and expect the enemy with a singular
desire and devotion: and did wish that he had even then been there before him.
So mightily does the immutable destiny of the heavens inuegle Sentence.
and blind our eyes, and the licentiousness of unaccustomed liberty, that it
makes us oftentimes more hardy and audatious then either in reason or
necessity is requisite. And so was it with Ferybassa, who being an unskillful
judge of his own strength and puissance, had long since determined to try
himself in private and particular combat against Scanderbeg, upon the first
opportunity that he could get in the tumult of arms, and in the fury of the
fight.

By this time was a great part of the town beaten down, and certain of their
fortifications Assault to Sfetigrade.
overthrown. The Turks likewise had filled the walls with ladders and with
all sorts of weapons: but especially with long and great hooks did they
assail and press upon them which stood upon the walls, whilst that others
(though all in vain) did not cease, by hollow caves and mines dug through
the earth, to have made themselves way into the town. There wanted not also
some who cast balls of wildefire into diverse quarters of the city, (for as
yet were not Mortyers in use, or not known at all:) but soon was the fire
quenched by the inhabitants, who without sparing their lives, did carefully
guarde and defend the walls on all sides. But the chiefest stir and whole
danger in a manner was toward the great gate, where the Mahometans by the
help of a great number of ladders, and long plankes and bordes heaped
together, had raised up (as it were) a certain tower or plotforme, by the
which many might get up at once, and having once gotten good footing, they
might afterward aid themselves both with their shot and darts, to make
the defendantes to forgo their places. The number of the enemies resorting
thither did so increase continually (as soon as they saw this matter intended)
as if they had now found the way to enter into the town. Some brought great
and long beams both to strengthen and to enlarge this new building: others
made them secret lodgings in covert close adjoining to the walls, and then
brought diverse instruments, as pick eaxes, bars of iron, and such like, to
dig and undermine the wall. They provided likewise store of arrows, darts,
stones, and other flying weapons, by which they might oppress the defendauntes
from the top of this their building. Now began the heat and fury of the
assaylelantes on each side, in the other parts of the town by little and
little to wax cold: and thither was drawn all the danger and violence of
the conflict. Besides that the tumult and horrible cry of them without did
make all things seem more fearful and terrible. Fear and despair mingled
together, had mightily seized upon the hearts of the Christians, who were very
busily occupied in the defense of this place; when they saw the matter brought
to that issue and extremity, that the enemy could neither be removed, nor yet
hindered from the obstinate pursuit of their endeavors. For by how much the
more they were repulsed and beaten down and slain, by so much the more did
their numbers still increase: and fresh men continually succeeding in their
rooms, did by heaps mount upon the walls, not giving them any time of rest
and breathing, or any intermission; in such sort that the defendants did not
only now want weapons to repel them, but their force and strength began to
fail them. Perceiving therefore that their resistance did smally avail them,
and fearing the imminent danger least the town on that side should be won
by the enemy: they sent speedily to call the Governor. But the brute and
terror running from one to an other, was already come to the ears of Perlat,
and had summoned him to make have thitherwarde: by means whereof those that
were sent to call him, found him near at hand, and coming to the place
withal possible speed and good diligence, and accompanied with a good troop
of citizens. For all the people both old and young, being as men confounded
and amazed, neither more nor less, then as if they had heard that the town
had been already taken by the Turks: yet (being in suspense, and uncertain
of the matter) they ran thither sighing and sorrowing, yet desirous to see
the issue of this lamentable sight and spectacle. The presence of this hardy
and stout Chiefetaine, did at the very first onset beat them off that were
mounted upon the wall, and certain standards of the Turks, which were found
raised upon the rampire, were quickly pulled away, and with great cry and
clamours carried into the market place, to the intent the sight of this booty
might encourage and hearten their companions, and free them from their former
care. One thing yet remained of especial importance, and that was, to break
in pieces and to beat down this massye heap of wood, and those great beams
of timber which lay so near the wall: under the covert whereof (as we have
said) the soldiers being lodged, did both undermine the foundations with
pickeaxes and iron bars, and did furnish the assaylants with diverse things
needful for the assault. Besides the enemy yet standing firm aloft upon
this tower, and pressing the defendants with a furious and eger fight, did hold
them continually in alarm, and in small security. To remove this
inconvenience, they got together many heaps of great and huge stones, which
they caused to be rouled down upon this building, casting down also withal
great quantity of oil, vinegar, and seething water, all of them boiling whot,
which they continued so long, that with the force and violence thereof, and
with the often strokes of the stones, and other things cast from aloft, both
the plankes of this tower, and the whole frame, by which the ladders were
joined and held together, began at length to be broken, and to be laid even
with the ground. In like case the other engines and instruments of the enemy,
were broken and buried under the ruins of this frame: besides more then a
hundredth common soldiers, and with them also two of their chief Captains,
were crushed to death and smothered by the deadly fall of this building. The
town being freed and delivered from this fear, the tampiors being newly
repaired, and the walls furnished and guarded with fresh soldiers (for that
there was scarce any one left either unslain or unwounded of those that were
placed there at the first) the Governor with his train went speedily from
thence to oppose himself elsewhere against other attempts of the enemy. For
by this time the like debate and conflict was risen in other places, and the
Turks did press so hard to get the advantage of the walls, that the town
seemed to be in as hard an estate, and in as great a danger as before. Within
a while after the Governor his departure, the Mahometans (which had been
repulsed and beaten back from the assault, by the fresh supply of our men that
came against them) having for a little while withdrawn themselves from the
wall: as soon as they knew that the Governor was absent (imagining that the
former heat of the Christians was somewhat abated) they began once again to
go in hand with their former work, and to undertake the task which they had
been forced to leave unfinished. Raising up therefore once again their beams
of timber against the walls, which were yet fuming with the blood of their
companions, they seemed to give the defendants a new representation of their
forepassed danger. But their last assayes were no more fortunate then the
former, by reason of the sudden arrival of Perlat, who with little labor
ouerthrewe this work but new begun: and the stuff being scarcely yet
brought together for that intent and purpose, was quickly dispersed and cast to
the ground.

In the midst of these contentions and varieties of fortune at the assault,
there presented it self another kind of fight, far more notable and more
worthy to be regarded, the which was able to have withdrawn the thoughts,
and to have stayed the hands both of the one side and the other, and to have
made them (as if all arms had been laid apart, and all choler and rancour
quite forgotten) not to pursue their attempt, but to stand still wholly
attentive to the success of their companions. Scanderbeg comes to invade the
Turkish camp
For now was the Prince of Epyre approached near with his army, and (being
come almost within six hundredth paces of the enemy) he was determined
suddenly to break in upon their camp. On the other side, Ferybassa was
ready provided to receive him with the forces which the Sultan had given him
to that purpose. For he did not think that the Albanois had any other
intention, but only by a faint and false alarm to hinder the assault that
was begun, and to make the Turkish bands to retire from the walls even in
the chiefest of their fury: wherefore to prevent him in this point, he made
toward him, and would not suffer him The battle between Scanderbeg and
Feribassa.
to pass forward, till they had debated upon the matter. Scanderbeg feigning
a kind of fear, began softly to retire drawing on the enemy (who still
followed him) some seuenscore paces farther: and then with all his forces, well
ordered to the battle, marching again forwards directly against him, he
charged him most furiously. The Turkish Captain (who had been ever desirous
of battle) did not in any sort refuse him: but having seen the small number
of the Christians, who were but nine thousand men, or little more, (for
Scanderbeg had left the residue of his troops, being but fifteen hundred at
the most, with Musache, about a mile and a quarter off for the safegarde of the
others, if any misfortune should betide them) he opposed against them all his
footmen and four thousand horse, whom he placed in the front before them:
and with these he made head against Stratageme of Feribassa to enclose
Scanderbeg.
the Albanois, and received them to the shocke. The rest of his horsemen with a
wily and fine stratageme, he caused secretly to withdraw themselves from the
body of the army, and a far off to fetch a compass about, to the intent
they might get behind the Albanois at their backs, and so, (having them
enclosed and entangled on both sides) they might shut up the passage, and
bereave them of all means and possibility to save themselves, and perhaps
also take Scanderbeg alive. But this old beaten and expert soldier did
presently discover the devise: wherefore leaving Moses to maintain the fight
of the middle battle, himself with a troop of horsemen most ready and
resolute, setting spurs to his horse, turned aside to the right hand: where
at the first sight, he stayed the course of the enemy that hastened to have
enclosed him, and afterward coming to handie strokes, and pressing rudely
upon them, he made them give ground, and in the end to change their
determination, and to look to their own safegarde. There were of the Turks
more then four thousand horse, whereas the Albanois did not fully make two
thousand. Nevertheless, for a while the hope of the victory rested
indifferent on both parties, and their courages were equal, though their
fortune were not alike, for that there fell a far greater number of the
circumcized. Musache likewise (having been called forth by some of the
Albanois) had now charged the Paynims on the left hand, and with all his forces
kept the rest of them there employed. In this manner both the armies, being
divided tripartite, did represent on the one side and the other, the form of
three sundry fightes and combats. Moses behaved him self wonderful
advisedly, and seemed to use rather policy then force against the enemy. For
neither would he give the bridle to the fury of his soldiers, nor would he
adventure them to the hazard over hastily: till such time as he perceived that
the two wings began to have some likelihoode of good success, and had made
an entrance to the victory: to the intent he might reserve the strength and
vigor of his men fresh and lusty. Till then therefore he held the ranks of
his battle firm and close joined together, and with a kind of subtlety
seemed to temporize and to prolong the fortune of the fight, till the coming
of his companions. This made Feribassa the more fierce and insolent, and to
press upon them without any intermission: and oftentimes would he use to
encourage and hearten on his soldiers with these and such like speeches.

On, on, (my good soldiers) use the favor of the gods, take the benefit of
the victory, whilst the swords of the Christians do stand (as it were)
amazed, and whilst Encouragement of Feribassa to hu soldiers in the battle
against Scanderbeg.
their forces do grow faint. Go we on to seek out these heads which are
vowed to the slaughter, and to cut in pieces their cursed bodies. See how they
faint on all sides: scarce can we discern any tokens of enmity in our
enemies, neither does their countenance, nor their voice, nor their gesture
make any show that they have a mind to stand up long against you. Or (it
may be) that they do purposely delay the combat, and attend the coming of the
night, because (as thieves and robbers) they are used to the night. It behooves
you to aid your selves with the light, and you must keep them from this
policy, and take that opportunity out of their hands, even now whilst we do
exceed them in number, and do surpass them in valor. If we stay for the
night, the lesser numbers will be equal to the greater, and the cowards will
match the most valiant and hardy. But what do I blame these, or why do I
press upon them, whose obstinacy will soon cease and vanish as the surges of
the sea, when the tempest is gone and past? We must cut off their head, and
then the blood of the other (as it is but vile and base) so is it of no force
nor resistance. Where is this wicked fugitive, the author of so many
mischiefs? I my self alone will dispatch him of his life without the hazard
of any of you, if it be my good hap to encounter him in the battle. And I
will sacrifice the blood of this savage and wild beast, (whom so many theftes
and robberies have made insolent) to the souls of our slain brethren,
friends, and kinsfolks. I have (my friends) of a long time been of this
mind, and this my desire is not of any sudden or new affection. It is long
since that my thoughts did aim at this combat: and my spirit has been ever
enflamed to seek the punishment of this wretched, unhappy runnagate. I will
once make proof whether this my sword can cut well or not, whether that body
of his be penetrable, or that it be fatal to those that encounter him. And I
will see from whence he has that corporal strength and vigor: and in what
this happy warrior (whose fortune has been of such long continuance) does
excel and surpass all others.

In this manner did the Barbarian speak unto his soldiers, and then swelling
with pride and fury (more then was befitting a General of an army) he went up
and down Feribassa chalengeth Scanderbeg to the combat.
searching and seeking amiddest the press, and casting his eyes on all sides
to see if he could find out Scanderbeg: and his mind being set on nothing
else, he made signs with his hands and with his voice, still calling and
demanding for Scanderbeg. The soldiers were nothing discontented with the
hearing of these vauntes: and albeit the prowes and valor of the Christian
Captain, did seem unto all of them to be invincible, yet did they attend
nevertheless with great devotion (as the common sort is Sentence.
desirous of novelties) to see the success of so notable a spectacle. Besides
they were in hope, that (the advantage of the fight and victory falling to the
one or the other of them) it would be an occasion that the bloudines of the
fight would be the sooner determined, and their labor would be the more
speedily at an end. Many of them notwithstanding, Ferybassa dissuaded from the
combat by his own men.
whose minds were more intentive to higher matters, and who were respective of
their honor, did diswade Ferybassa from this combat (yet with gentle
persuasions least they should seem to have imputed cowardice unto him,) and
they showed him (as well as they could,) that the trial of this combat, was no
less perilous The office of a General to consult and to command rather then
to fight.
then strange and without any president or good example: that the Generals of
armies should not in their own persons make themselves the object of a sight,
whereof they ought to be the beholders and the judges: that such contentions
were proper unto soldiers, and were the offices of particular and private
persons, that the charge of great Captains was to give counsel, and to
command rather then to fight and to handle the sword: that if occasion were,
there would be store enough of others found who would valiantly undertake this
enterprise, rather then that he by this over hardy fierceness and immoderate
desire of danger, should leave at six and seven, and commit to blind chance
and fortune the honor of the victory, which they had in a manner sure and
certain.

Ferybassa having his ears shut to all these reasons and persuasions, and
little or nothing regarding this good and wholesome counsel, with a mind and
humor quite contratie, set spurs to his horse: and being attended with a
strong squadron of horsemen, went to call for Scanderbeg, and with a loud voice
willed him to prepare himself to his defense. The king of Epyre, albeit he had
before heard almost the whole discourse Scanderbeg prepares him self to the
combat with Ferybassa.
of his adversary: yet not remitting for all that the heat and fury of the
battle already begun, but either dissembling, or in respect of his royal
dignity disdayning him, he would scarce turn his face toward him. But when
he saw the victory already enclyning unto him, and that the barbarian did so
press and importune him: then his fierceness being augmented with the new and
happy success of that advantage, he refused not the challenge: but being all
besprinckled and embrued with the blood of his enemies, he went well
accompanied to meet with Ferybassa. The fierce and austere countenance of the
Epirot, whom the Mohammedan had provoked to present himself there before him:
the wings of his own legions being then in rout and disorder, and the loss of
so many of his soldiers, might have sufficed to dissuade this rash and
temerous Turk, and to have bethought himself better. The view and pitiful
regard of his misfortune, ought to have terrified him and speedily to have
suppressed all desire of entering into combat. Nevertheless whither it were the
necessity of his destiny that did constrain him, or that the fear of shame
and infamy did restrain him, he showed not any change of his first resolution,
nor bewrayed any alteration of his courage. Now in an instant both the one part
and the other ceased from fighting, and the fury of the soldiers was stayed by
their Generals, in such sort that between both the armies, there was not heard
or perceived any noise nor any show of malice and enmity. Speeches of
Scanderbeg by his Nobles entreating him not to combat with Ferybassa
All things were still and quiet, except certain of the Lords and chief
Captains of the Albanois, who inuironning their Prince, did endeavor sometimes
by prayers and petitions, and sometimes by their importunity to entreat him:
that he would not meddle with the clamarous and railing beast: and they told
him moreover, that his head only after he were slain, did appertain to their
General, but that his slaughter belonged unto them and was their duty: that
it should redound more to his honor and more advantage the estate of Albanie
for the Ottoman to see, that the soldiers of the Epirots were to be compared
for their valor with the Captains and leaders of the Turks: and that there
was no comparison between their Generals. Besides that it was not convenient,
that so great a Prince should adventure the reputation and honor of so many
honorable exploites, and the glory and renown purchased by so many years:
in combatting with one that was but a slave and bondsman to Amurath. That it
could be no increase or augmentation of honor or fame unto Scanderbeg to
overcome this barbarian, whereas Feribassa by this act might grow more
triumphant and glorious, then by all the deeds and demerits of his life before
past. All these persuasions notwithstanding, Scanderbeg having highly commended
and extolled their singular affection and good wills toward him, whilst he was
preparing himself to the ioust: he thus replied unto them.

God defend (quoth he my friends) that as long as this hand of mine can handle
the sword, and as long as this body of mineretaineth his wonted strength and
vigor, Answer of Scanderbeg to his Nobles, dissuading him from the combat
with Feribassa.
that any of you should carry away from me the success of this adventure: the
which (whatsoever it be) I refer to him that is the giver of all victory.
Reserve therefore these your offices of good will to some other season when you
shall see me aged and stricken in years, when my limbs begin to fail, and
when I shall assure my self that my strength does decay. At this time you
ought to have a care, least whilst you show your selves too careful of my
life, you do envy my honor and reputation. And what would the enemy say if
(according to your request) I should yield you the hazard of this combat: but
that my holding back and refusing of the fight were but a mere dissimulation
of my cowardice, and a true confession of a fearful and faint heart, and that
I durst not encounter him, nor were comparable unto him. For (to answer your
objections) it is not amiss sometimes for a General of an army to undertake
a combat as well as a private soldier. That glorious combat of Alexander the
Great with Porus king of the Indians was it any diminishing to his honor and
reputation? Did our ancestors ever discommend the fight that was between
Pyrrhus and Pantachus? I will not here speak of the Marcelli, the Torquati,
and the Coruini, who with the singular glory both of themselves and their
citizens, have overcome their enemies that challenged them to the combat. These
are the hands that must undertake this hazard: for me it is that the enemy
calls with so many menaces and brauadoes: to me it is that this cruel beast
speaks. I could do little if I should refuse him in such a matter, and he
might think me very unkind if I should not satisfy his desire in so honest
and reasonable a request. He is a man of sufficient worth to feel the weight
of this my sword, whom Amurath thought so worthy to have the charge and
command of so great an armic.

This said, he sent presently one of his guard to tell the Barbarian that he
should make ready to receive him: and immediately he presented himself upon the
place assigned The combat between Scanderbeg and Feribassa.
for the conflict, being conveyed thither with many acclamations and high
clamors of his soldiers. The inequality of the combattants (the Turk not
being comparable in valor to his enemy) and his short and speedy end, (for
he was too too soon dispatched) did make the sight and spectacle less
delightful, and made the combat less notable then otherwise it might have
been. For at the first course and encounter with their lances, Feribassa being
stricken through the face into the head tumbled down to the ground, and left
both his life and his horse both at once. Scanderbeg taking Feribassa slain by
Scanderbeg.
no regard either of his body or of his spoils, but returning presently to
his company, willed them to renew the fight, and to invade the enemy a fresh.
But the infidels being enraged, would not give them the leisure: for as soon as
they saw their General laid on the ground, at the first they made toward
his corpse with their troops close and firm together, thinking to have guarded
his body from the outrage of the enemy, and to have dragged him away by the
feet. But being not able to Victory of Scanderbeg against the army of
Feribassa.
effect it by reason that the Christians suddenly coming upon them, did hinder
their attempt, they thought it better to withdraw themselves, and to carry the
news of their misfortune unto their sovereign: and therefore turning their
backs, they fled away with might and maine, which the Albanois perceiving (who
were come thither with a full resolution and good devotion to have charged
them) many of them, especially the vauntcurrers fell to the chase, till such
time as the retraite being sounded, caused them to return. Scanderbeg joyous
and glad of this victory, after he saw that all was quiet and that there was
nothing to be seen but the footesteps of the enemy, and the earth washed with
the blood of their cold carcasses, presently sent the common soldiers to
gather the pillage whilst himself with the residue of his best and brauest
soldiers arranged in order of battle, stood upon his guard for fear of some
commotion that might be made from the camp of the enemy.

This overthrow and unhappy discomfiture being first reported, and afterward
Amurath fortifieth his camp against future invasions of his enemy.
perceived by the Sultan, did so ouerwhelme his heart with grief and sorrow
intermingled with fear, that he stood mute for a long season as if he had been
in a trance: for he saw himself so frustrate of his hope and expectation, as
if all the powers of heaven had conspired against him. But the violence of his
passion by little and little leaving him, he provided by reason of this
accident, and took order for all matters so fully and in as good sort as any
General (were he never so prudent and expert) could possibly have done. First
therefore he placed soldiers on all sides, charging them diligently and
carefully to epsy the driftes and counsels of the enemy: then drawing down
certain small pieces of artillery from before the town, he planted them
toward that part of his camp where the towns men did most usually sally out
upon him, and which was most subject to the injuries and invasions of the
enemy. Moreover having augmented and restored the troops of Ferybassa with a
supply of four Number of Turks slain in the battle between Scanderbeg and
Feribassa.
thousand men (for so many had been slain in the fight between him and
Scanderbeg) he appointed them for the defense of the trenches and
fortifications of the camp, expressly charging and enioyning them, that no man
should set his foot without the trenches to oppose himself against the
Christians, till such time as they saw them entered within the camp: and that
then they should make some barricado at the place, and playing upon them with
the pieces (which were placed there of purpose) they should oppress them with
the force and violence thereof, rather then with the hazarding of their bodies
against them: supposing by this means, that both his soldiers should be the
better preserved, and that so he might happen to recompense them both for his
forepassed and future losses sustained at all times in several conflictes.
Thus did he make provision to prevent all inconveniences, so as the siege and
assaulting of the town should not be any way interrupted. Notwithstanding the
courage of the Mahometans was mightily decreased and diminished, their strength
began to fail them, and the force of their blows seemed to wax faint and
feeble, after they once saw that the fortune of the fight did succeed so
vnluckely against them, and that contrary to their hope and expectation, the
favor of the field did seem to smile upon the adverse party: and principally
for that the virtue and fortune peculiar to the prince of Epire, had gotten him
the good will and liking of many even of their own company: especially them
who measuring matters by their success and event, do variably frame and
conform their faith accordingly. For I find it recorded, that the same day of
the discomfiture of Ferybassa, more then fifty Turks left the service of
Amurath, and came and yielded themselves to the Christians. The honor of this
journey Turks flee to the Christians.
seemed to increase and (as it were) to yield a kind of nouriture to the forces
and courage of the Sfetigradians: whereof they gave a large and blooddie
testimony to the assailants: who continuing more fresh and fierce then before,
had made another assault against the town, notsuffering the besieged at any
time to breath and rest them selves, till the dark of the night so long and
earnestly desired, did separate and part them asunder, causing every man at
the sound of the trumpet, to retire to his quarter sore wearied and wellneare
tired with their extreme labor. This days journey cost Number of Turks
slain at the 2. assault of Sfetigrade.
the grand Seignior the lives of seven thousand soldiers at the least, an
evident sign of his misfortune: and more returned hurt then whole from the
assault. Of the defendants there wanted 70, besides ninety two wounded very
dangerously, by means whereof their numbers daily diminishing, many of them
grew to be troubled: fearing least at length, the town being dissurnished of
men to defend it, should be brought to that issue and extremity, as to yield
to the will and pleasure of the enemy. This made them to apply all their
study, care and endeavors more intentiuely then ever, to the repairing of their
walls, to the building and raising of their rampires, platformes and Gabions:
to the intent the souldior standing close and in covert, might the less
adventure his body to the blows and shot of the enemy. One thing
notwithstanding did greatly comfort and encourage them though they were shut up
and sorely traveled: and that was: to see their Prince continue his good
fortune and prosperity: and that the army of the infidelles was so harried,
weakened and beaten with so many slaughters and rough discomfitures, that it was
greatly diminished and empaired.

I come now to Scanderbeg and his people, whom I left making their benefit all
at pleasure of the victory which they had gotten, and gathering the spoils of
the dead bodies before that the Ottoman troops descending from the mountain,
did give over The return of Scanderbeg to his camp.
the assault. This done, he retired himself with triumph for his double
victory, to his camp, where he spent the rest of the night in singing of
songs and other sports. The booty carried away was so marvelous, that the
soldiers seemed not to care for it: but especially they had such plenty of
horses, that there was not any of the soldiers in a manner, but had some given
them. Many of them were given to the Princes near adjoining, with other rich
and costly presents purchased from the enemy. Moreover there were infinite
merchants which came purposely both from Italy and other Nations, who buying of
them for ready money, or for exchange and barter of other merchandise, did
daily rid and carry them out of the country.

The whole Province of Epyre began now to leave all fear, and to be secure
from the terror of the Turkish army, and the Ottoman grew to be little
redoubted, but rather contemned by all in general, now that they saw his
forces so beaten, broken and discomfited: and even Scanderbeg also was of the
opinion, that Amurath would of himself raise his siege from before Sfetygrade,
and trussing up his baggage, after so many calamities suffered and endured,
would depart and not make any longer stay in the country. Nevertheless, he
daily sent out spies and others to sound the counsels and secret deliberations
of the Sultan: but yet for all that he could hear no news from the camp of
the enemy. Wherefore as one that mortally hated idleness, he made Scanderbeg
goes to discover upon the enemy.
choice of 2000. horse, and taking the way of the mountains, he went abroad to
search and enquire in what estate all things stood, and he was in great
perplexity, because he could not any way learn nor conjecture, what were the
counsels and intent of the Ottoman, nor what course he was determined to take.
If he could intercept any of the foragers or vassals of the Turk so it was,
otherwise he was like to remain doubtful and in suspense as before: for
either to invade his trenches, or to come openly to fight with him was but
mere folly: neither was there any surety to be hoped for by any such course;
because he feared the number of the Turkish forces whole and united, and the
engines which lay covertly provided for the fortification of their camp: of
the which he had had advertisement by those that were come unto him from the
enemy. All this notwithstanding he coursed still up and down, sometimes
here, sometimes there to show himself to his enemies, and upon the appearance
and show of his small numbers, to draw him forth to fight, in hope of some
good and happy exploit. But all these devises did little or nothing avail him;
for that the Infidels (as if themselves had been besieged) did not stir a
foot out of their trenches and rampires: by reason that the Sultan had
pronounced the rigorous and terrible sentence of death, to be executed upon all
those who should dare to adventure without license, either to issue forth to
fight, or to make any mention of fighting with him. The Albanois seeing that
matters did not fall out to his desire and expectation, returned to his camp
full of care and coffeehouse, there to take further advise what course
Scanderbeg holds council for his proceedings against the enemy.
was most convenient, both to deliver the town that was so straightly
besieged, and to expel the enemy out of the country: considering he was not
able to use open force against him, neither would he be brought to enterprise
or adventure any thing rashly and unadvisedly. To solicit the potentates and
towns of Epire his confedederates to take arms, and with them to adventure
the fortune of the whole estate to the doubtful chance of battle, seemed a
course of little or no safety. For, put the case he were assured of the
victory, yet could not a matter of so great consequence and difficulty be
effected but with much bloodshed of infinite of his people. Amongst many
opinions propounded in council, this was laid down as the most safe and
commendable, to continue the war according to their accustomed manner, and
that be should suffer the power of the enemy, to vanish and wast away, and to
grow into contempt: till being consumed and spent by their own secret
discommodities and inconveniences, and his forces growing from day to day, to
wax more faint and to decay, he should voluntarily desist from his attempt,
and by his own losses and damages, might be driven to leave the province
which he had so unfortunately invaded: that he had not (God be praised) any
occasion to find himself aggrieued neither with the faith and loyalty of any
person, nor yet with his own good fortune: and that touching those of
Sfetigrade, there did appear so many and so notable signs and evidences of
their good perseverance, that every man might hold himself contented, and his
mind well satisfied. Besides that, the town was so well fortified and defended
of all things needful for the besieged, that they had not only good store of
necessaries for their ordinary usage, but more then enough though they should
mispend and abuse them: and therefore, what course soever the Turk should
take, either by abstaining along time from assaulting of their walls, or by
giving the same new and often assaults, it should be to the ruin and confusion
of his own people: or that whilst they should be most busily employed and
troubled about the assault, they might easily approach with an army from the
field, and so annoy or endaunger them within their camp, that both on the one
side and the other, they should reap nothing but shame and infamy even in the
face and view of Amurath.

These things did Scanderbeg allege openly and in public, making a show in
outward appearance, and carrying a countenance of great cheerfulnes and
assurance: but inwardly and in his heart, his mind was violently troubled and
perplexed with diverse cares and pensive thoughts and imaginations: and he did
divine of the counsels and practices of Amurath no otherwise then the issue and
event of matters did afterward make manifest. He was no less in doubt and
fear of the sad and silent behauior, and of the slothful and idle quietness of
Amurath, then of his arms and all his forces: and he had reason: for he knew
by long experience his natural disposition, and his subtle carriage and
demeanor. He daily considered with himself also, that gifts Scanderbeg in
great perplexity for doubt of treason in Sfetigrade.
and large rewards, were able both to assail and to peruaile against any town
or fortress. He knew that covetousness and the hunger of gold, having taken
hold in men's hearts, did make them sacrilegious and irreligious, and worse then
brute beasts and monsters. The conceit here of did easily persuade him to
doubt and fear every thing, whose mind was full of jealousy and suspicion: for
he was not ignorant, that the walls of many towns, and the bodies of many men
who had contemned all danger of sword and armor, who were unconquerable by
force, and against whom iron could not prevail, yet had been tempted and
overcome by gold and silver. This was it that brought him into an exceeding
fear, and an incredible mistrust: for his mind running and discoursing of
diverse matters, he imagined it a matter very easy and likely, that in so
great a multitude there might be found some one wretch or other of a wicked and
mischievous disposition, who being blinded and inueigled with the inordinate
desire of gain, might open his ear and be seduced to condescend to some
infamous and vile conditions of treachery and infidelity. And this care did
not torment him for Sfetigrade only, but for all the other towns likewise
within his dominions: but principally for Croie: fearing least some one of his
subjects traitorously disposed, should have secret and private intelligence
with the Ottoman, and should work him some mischief and misfortune. For this
cause taking with him in company no more then Tanusee and Musache, and about
thirty other beside them, and being disguised in the habit of a simple
soldier, he employed all his possible diligence and industry to search out
and enquire if he could hear of any thing attempted or managed to that effect.

Thus you may see how the Prince of Albanie on the one side, and the Sovereign
of the Turks on the other side, each suspecting and redoubting other, and being
tormented in their minds, had both of them their imaginations occupied with
diverse thoughts and cogitations about the uncertain issue of their affairs.
The Ottoman Amurath consulteth upon his proceedings against Sferygrade.
keeping himself close within his trenches (as we have said) did spend all
his time in discoursing and consulting upon diverse subtle plots and devises:
for knowing that neither violence, nor menaces, nor a long and tedious siege,
nor the often and continual assaults of his soldiers were sufficient to
carry the town, but that the defendants did persevere in their former
constancy: he determined therefore to try his fortune another way, albeit
there were some who counseled him to continue still in Counselors of Amurath
are in diverse opinions for his proceedings against Sfetygrade.
pressing them with his forces, and to hold on his attempts against the town.
Many also did advise him not to proceed any further against so many
difficulties, but to bend all his forces to the destruction and spoil of the
country, and to make the whole Province of Albanie to feel the extremity of
sword and fire, the two scourges of war: and to pursue the enemy, who being
grown insolent and arrogant with so many victories, did seem to contemn all
dangers, and did course here and there walking up and down the country at his
pleasure, with a handful (as it were) of rascals and beggars: or else that
leaving Sfetigrade, he should lead his army before Croit, where peradventure
they might encounter some better fortune: and (it might be) that Scanderbeg
would shut up himself within that city, by means whereof they should have
but one enemy only to make head against them. For they were easily persuaded,
that he would not commit the guard and care of this place, being of such
importance, to the faith and industry of any person but himself only. None
of these considerations could sink into the mind of the Sultan to resolve
upon: but contrariwise he rejected and contemned them, replying (and that with
good reason) that these fashions Answer of Amurath to the reasons and advise of
his Counselors.
of pilling and robbing the country, were but mockeries and childish toys:
for that the fields did scarce aford wherewithal to satisfy the appetite of
one only soldier, so carefully had Scanderbeg provided against all
inconveniences before their coming into that province. No less did he deride
the foolish discourse of those, who counseled him to pursue the Epirot:
telling them, that there was nothing more pernicious and dangerous, then of a
foolish and vain curiosity to entangle themselves in those large forests and
thick woods of Epyre, being a fit covert for wild and savage beasts, where
no man could come near them: but not for men endued with reason and
discretion: and that the enemy himself would desire no better advantage
against them. In like case, to remove his camp before Croy; he said, that were
to run into new doubts and ambiguities, and to hazard themselves to fresh
subtilties and alterations of fortune: and that it was certain they should
there find the Croians far more stout and obstinate in their defense: that
Croy had their peculiar and particular Gods as well as Sfetigrade: and do you
think (said he) that there is any appearance or likelihood of reason, for us
of a vain desire and mere fancy only, to proceed any further in making
trial of their virtue and fortune, in a matter of so great weight and
importance, which we (full little to our profit) have found to be so favorable
unto them in matters of less consequence? and in the very beginning and (as
it were) in the prime of their good fortune? shall we leave Sfetigrade
unconquered at our backs being but in their borders? and shall we plunge at
the first dash into the very heart and bottom of Albanie, and into the bowels
of their realm, and besiege Croy their capital and strongest city?

In this manner did Amurath discourse with his councillors, neglecting and
rejecting those counselles which they propounded, yet not finding any other
course which could seem more plausible and expedient: so that all things
remained still uncertain and unresolved. But this was it that most vexed him,
on the one side fear of shame and reproach, and the vehement indignation of his
mind disdaining beyond all measure to be repulsed, would not permit him to
dislodge and break up his siege. On the other side his misfortune and extreme
losses did dissuade him from making any farther attempt against the town. Thus
did Amurath hang in suspense, still doubtful and vnresolute, concealing his
discontentmentes, and dissembling his extreme Amurath seeks to corrupt those
of Sfetigrade with gifts.
dolor. Yet because he would not lie idle and do nothing at all, by little and
little he made way to find some opportunity, and he sought a farer off, to
epsy the means how to have some parley and conference with the Sfetigradians:
which in the end having compassed, he endeavored to allure and entise them with
smooth and gracious speeches, which are fit enticements for variable and
unconstant Epirotes: and (that Answer of the Citizens of Sfetigrade to the
enticements of Amurath.
which does most solicit the curious and insatiable minds of men) he assaied
by force of rich offers, great rewards, and large promises, to persuade them to
open their gates unto him, and to receive in a garrison into the town. The
Citizens gave him diverse answers, which came all to one issue and conclusion:
that they saw no cause why they should consent to exchange their faith and
fidelity, and to become corrupt and disloiall: nor to leave the love and favor
of the Prince of Epire for the yoke and servitude of a stranger: that there was
none of them all yet that could be content to make merchandise of that faith:
that they were all of them bound unto their Prince with a most strict bond, and
in a fraternity together, which they would continue whilst they had breath.
All this notwithstanding the Sultan persisted still in hope: because having
propounded such large offers, he had valued their dissoialtie at so high a
price and so excessive a rate, that it was able to have corrupted the faith,
and to have perverted the allegiance even of the most constant and best
minded. Neither was he at Amurath corrupts one of the garrison of Sfetigrade
to betray the town.
the last deceived of his opinion, for the filthy and foul desire of gain
prevailed with one of the garrison, a most wretched and desperate villain of
all men living to be abhorred: who being corrupted by the large and perilous
offers of Ottoman, did not care a button for the safety of his citizens, of
his country, nor of his friends or kinsfolks, in respect of his own
particular profit and commodity. This wretch because he would not be perceived
by the watch and Sentinels of the town, sought a fit and convenient time to
deceive them, and to confer secretly with certain spies of the grand
Seignior, with whom he bargained and concluded upon the price and reward that
should be given him for betraying the town into their hands. But fortune did
not immediately present him the means to compass his detestable and wicked
enterprise: but (the guilt of his crime, and his own conscience making him
timorous) he was doubtful to attempt any thing: least his treason happening to
be discovered, himself might be the first that by his own ruin and
destruction should incur the danger of so execrable a conspiracy. To break
down the barriers or portcallys, to force or break open the ports, and so
receive in the enemy was a matter of great difficulty, and little certentie,
because the place was so carefully guarded by the citizens. To practice with
others, and to procure unto himself consorts and companions, by whose help he
might in the nighttime raise an alarm in the town, cut the throats of the
principal persons, and oppress the citizens being in fear and astonishment,
and so to let in the Barbarians into the town, and to possess them of the
place, was a matter of as great impossibility: because he knew that there was
not any creature within the town, but had the very conceit of any such fact
in horror and detestation: and he saw even by the countenance of each of them,
that they were resolutely determined, either by a glorious victory to see
their country preserved, or if it should be lost and vanquished, to end their
lives honorably.

The city by reason it was placed upon the mountains, and seated upon the
top The cause and ground of the treason, bringing the loss of Sfetygrade.
of an exceeding high rock, was unprovided of the commodity both of fresh
springs and of the river that ran near it. They had within but one only pit
or well in the middle of the town, which long before that time had been
dug and built by the diligence of their ancestors for the common use of the
inhabitants, but principally for their necessity in time of wars that might
afterward befall them. The whole garrison (as we have before touched)
consisted of soldiers that were Dibrians, who though they were a people
subject to Scanderbeg; yet were they not natural Albanians, Description of the
Province of Dybria in Epyre.
neither in name nor in language. For this country of Dybria is divided into
two parts, separated and severed by distinction of names as well as by their
nature, for the inhabitants call the one of them High Dybria, and the other
Base Dybria. This latter is all plain champion, and the whole level thereof
is a rich and fertile ground, and yielding plenty of all things: this Dybria
is inhabited by the Albanois or Epyrots Base Dybria inhabited by Epyrots.
a hardy and warre-like Nation, by whose arms and valor Scanderbeg did both
augment and maintain his Empire, and achieved all his enterprises of greatest
difficulty: in so much as he reputed and retained them as his last and
chiefest succors and refuge in all perilous adventures of the wars against
the puissance and power of Ottoman. During his whole life time he had from
thence most valiant and excellent men as often as he thought good, who proved
no less serviceable and profitable to the estate of Albanie in all charges and
honorable degrees of sufficient Captains and commanders, then of brave and
valiant soldiers. The higher Dybria is mountanous, hilly, and full of woods,
yet very fertile and comes near to Macedonie both in neighborhood and
resemblance of manners. The Bulgarians Tribullians of Bulgarians, inhabitants
of the upper Dibria, bordering upon Macedonie. Tribullians or upper Dibrians
hold of the Greek church.
or Tribullians do inhabit it, a nation fierce and addicted to the wars, and
as dear were they unto Scanderbeg as the other, both for the merits of their
prowess, and of their singular faith and devotion. Notwithstanding, they do
use the fashions and conditions rather of strangers, then of the Epirots: and
in many of their customs they do in a manner abhor the usage and manner of the
Albanois, by reason that they do retain the ceremonies of the Greeks, and do
imitat them in many of their superstitions.

Hence did this abominable traitor take the occasion of his damnable and
wicked purpose, for he knew and was persuaded, that if the Dibrians should once
see the carcass The manner of the treason causing the loss of Sfetigrade.
of any beast, drowned in the bottom of the well within the town, they would
submit them selves to the extremest ruin and desolation, and admit any
conditions of peace were they never so unjust and dishonest, rather then they
would drink of that water. And accordingly as he imagined so it came to pass:
for the same night, this wretch having polluted the water with the carrion of a
dog which he threw into the well: the next morning the thing being perceived,
the rumor thereof was in a moment dispersed abroad from one to another over
all the town: whereupon there began a strange murmuring throughout all the
streets of the city, to enquire who should be the author of so detestable an
act: but being not to be found, the matter grew well near to a sedition. The
Dibrians being discomforted as much as was possible, did extremely grieve to
see themselves brought to that estate, exclayming that they were The notable
superstition of the Dibrians.
betrayed, and that they should shortly die as brute beasts for pure thirst
and want of drink. See the strangenes of the case, there was not so much as
any one of them who had not rather make choice to be made slave to the
Infidels, then to drink of this water. Some of them cried out a loft, that
they ought to set fire on the town and to burn it to ashes, and so by a
furious sally through the enemy to provide for their safety, or else to die
valiantly. Nevertheless of all other mischieues, they held it to be the least
to fall to composition with the enemy. By little and little therefore their
grief began to vanish, and the noise grew to be appeased on all parts. Thus
for a matter of small moment and a very trifle, was the fierceness and
courageous stomachs of the Dibrians abated, and their faith being now quite
exiled, had left and forsaken their superstitious consciences. Now had the
Infidels more easy access and liberty to repair unto them, and their ears
began more graciously to incline to conference with the enemy, and now the
soldiers in a general commotion, without all care and regard of their duty
The Dibrians are determined to surrender the town to Amurath, because their
water was polluted.
and deuoire, did prepare them selves of their own accord to go unto Amurath,
and to demand those shameful and ignominious conditions, which of late so
gloriously they had refused and rejected. The number of the citizens was much
lesser then the Dibrians, and therefore were far inferior unto them in force
and puissance: by means whereof they were not of ability either to put them to
the sword, or to expel the garrison out of the town. Besides, if they had
been able to have cleared the town of them, yet were their own numbers so few
and small, that they did not suffice to keep watch and ward upon the walls:
notwithstanding (poor men) they murmured on all sides, sometimes exclayming
against their infidelity, sometimes accusing them of foolish and blind
superstition, and charging even Scanderbeg in his absence with their
complaints, for that he had committed the care and safety of their lives, and
of their city, into the hands of such unfaithful persons. Perlat being
astonished at their scandal, and suspecting that this corruption of the water
pretended, was but a mere fiction, and only invented by some whose minds
were inclined to disloyalty, he did firmly believe, that there were some who
had intelligence with the enemy. For this cause first he prohibited them to
have any treaty or parley with the Turks without his priuity and presence: and
immediately repairing to the market place, and assembling the multitude
together, in a general convocation thus he spoke unto them.

What a Gods name! was your faith and fidelity (o you Dibrians) so lightly
grounded, Oration of Perlat governor of Sfetigrade to the Dibrians, dissuading
the^ from yielding them selves to Ottoman.
that he (whatsoever he be that was guilty of this wicked act) a vile wretch
hateful both to God and man, should have the power to corrupt your courages
and your constancy, which have bin known and tried in so many places and
conflicts, as well as he has polluted the water in your well? Out alas! it
makes me even beside my self, and I know not what to think, when I consider
your pernicious consultations, and this sudden change of all things, that so
slight and ridiculous a matter should be the occasion of so great an indignity
and coffeehouse. Do you think it more honest to betray the country of
your friends and confederates, and to deliver their wives, their children,
their dwellings, their temples with all holy and sacred mysteries, into the
hands of the Infidels, and to yield your selves to so great treachery and
infidelity, rather then to preserve the excellency of your courages, the purity
of your hearts, and the glory of your faith, which has been ever admired? and
rather then you will defile your mouths with drinking of this water, be it (as
your selves term it) filthy and polluted? I see no cause (my good friends) why
that should make you to think your selves undone, unless some devil or fiend
have bewitched and perverted your understanding. We are now come to this pass,
that being more superstitious then is convenient, we care not to reject all
regard of honesty, faith and piety: and do hold it better that the world
should account and call us traitors, then men void of scruple and not
superstitious. All men will laugh at us, the posterity will wonder at us, our
enemies themselves will detest us, when they shall understand that so sottish
and foolish a cause should make us change our faith and loialty: that our minds
should be so easily withdrawn to revolt and decline upon so vain and absurd
an occasion to such notable disloyalty and treason. Nay there is no man but
will think (I my self shall be of that mind also unless you draw me from
that error) that it is the gifts and promises of the Barbarians which have
gained and corrupted you, for the desire whereof you are now willing to pretend
this excuse, and to forge this for a color of your rebellion: by the very
object whereof (whilst you endeavor to purge your selves to the world from the
guilt of that crime) you shall confirm and make manifest, even by your own
confession in the judgment of each man, that you are faulty, and to be
condemned for this hateful and unhappy fact. For what good reason can you
yield, or what argument can you make of sufficient efficacy to persuade them,
why you should so suddenly forget all remembrance of your honest deuoire and
duty, and all the benefits which Scanderbeg has bestowed upon you? Are these
the presents which you give him (o you Dibrians?) Are these the testimonies of
your constancy? Is this all that you owe to the Sfetigradians your allies, who
have used you so kindly? I am ashamed thus to speak to men that are reputed
valiant. From henceforth let us look for no security and surety in men's
affections, no integrity, no upright and sound dealing. If mankind be grown so
careless of loialty: if they be so delicate and curious: if the faith of men
do depend upon so frivolous and vain occasions: what enemy is there so vile
and contemptible, or of so small prudence or wisdom, but he may daily find
out some invention to endammage his adversary, or that will leave any secret
trains, devises or means unsought and untried, when he shall see that his
fraud has such likelihood of good success, and may so easily be compassed?
In vain did our auncesters enclose their towns with walls: in vain did they
build towers and castles upon the tops of high rocks and mountains: and in
vain were garrisons invented for soldiers, if men be mutable and changeable
with the times, if the faith of men be chaungeable according to the inconstancy
of their occasions, if (as trees do with their leaves in winter and summer,)
so men do still put off and put on new thoughts and affections. What would
you have done (I pray) if the immoderate heat and distemperature of the season
had altered or corrupted this water? Is it not still the same water that it was?
O dangerous kind of faith! O the detestable inconstancy of men's minds! we
devise and discourse concerning the safety and liberty of this town, as if the
least and hasest thing of the world were now in question. Your duty were (o
you Dibrians) after the last drop of your blood had been shed, to have left
your bodies to be trailed by the feere half dead, out of the possession of
this place: and not voluntarily, whole and sound to resign and give over the
command of your glorious and good fortune. We our selves (if I may speak it)
do inuit the enemy, we offer them our necks, we abrogate our own liberty:
and because we will not defile our scrupulous mouths with a superstitious
kind of drink, we will not stick to pollute all laws, and all rights both
divine and human. Have you not heard how Darius that proud and delicate king
of the Persians, did not refuse to take a draught of muddy water at the hands
of a slave which had taken it up (as they fled) in the high way amongst the
dead carcasses, and under the horses feet, at such time as being overcome by
our countey man the great Alexander, he fled before him shamefully after that
memorable discomfiture? As brave and proud a Prince as he was he did not
disdain it: but after he had taken and tasted it, he swear, that he never
drunk more sauourly: and that before that time, he never knew what it was to
be thirsty. Thus did a draught of filthy water both keep him from being made
captive to his enemy, prolonged his fortune, and preserved the life of a great
and mighty King. What will you say to Caius Marius that famous General of the
Romans? how has the antiquity recorded his sufferaunce of hunger, and
thirst, at all times amiddest the extreme heat of fight, and amiddest his
greatest labors and trauelles in any service at the siege of towns or
otherwise? And to let pass the constancy of the Saguntines; what think you of
the city of Petilia amongst the Brutians in the time of Hanniball? did it not
by an example of singular regard, and almost incredible, leave a rare testimony
of their constancy and fidelity unto all posterity? And to the intent they
might observe their faith inuiolably, which they had given to the Romans, and
for the defense of their bare and sore battered walls, they made no difficulty
to live upon the flesh not only of dogs (which you abhor so greatly) but of
all kinds of four footed creatures, and with the skins of swine, with
roots, and with barks of trees? The most noble and renowned Athenian
Themistocles, to the intent his ungrateful country might not sustain the
blame of his death, drank (as it is reported) a cup of deadly poison. But
perhaps you will say that the Sfetigradians are strangers to you, and that
their city is none of your country: it was delivered to you to be defended,
and therefore it is yours (o you Dibrians:) Scanderbeg made choice of your
faith and honesty before all others, to see to the safety of this place. The
town which your Prince has committed to your charge, it behooves you to see
it safe redeliuered into his hands. Moderate therefore I beseech you, and lay
aside these your desperate opinions, and do not you attribute that to force
and necessity, which is indeed nothing else but a damnable and perverse
counsel and resolution. For tell me true, (I pray you) what will you do in
case the Ottoman will not accept of the composition to grant you your lives?
would you then refuse this drink that you imagine to be so deadly? I am
persuaded that all of you would drink it, ere you would do your selves any
outrage. But now because you are assured of your own safety, and you are not in
danger to lose any thing but your faith, you are all of you touched and
infected with one malady, and your thoughts do run a madding as men
frantic and out of your wits. So little reckonning do you make of your
faith: and of all other crimes, you hold it the least to be touched with the
crime of perjury and disloialty. I cannot (o you Dibrians) command nor
moderate my affections, I cannot abstain from tears when I call to memory our
good prince Scanderbeg. Me thinks I see how graciously he spoke unto you, with
what prayers and entreaties he recommended this town unto you at his
departure, and how even in this place he implored with too much credulity, your
deuoire and loialty. I do remember those clamors and loud cries, which all of
you made with brauadoes and magnificall promises both openly and privately.
Where are those your clamors now (o you Dibrians?) where is that fierceness of
your courages? where are those hearts which you then vowed for your country?
where is that audacity and careless contempt of life and death? I see here
still the same men and the same arms: but the habit and disposition of their
minds is clean altered. And this town being brought to a desperate point, I
see all things in a miserable estate and condition. Imagine that your Prince
stands here before you in great anguish and grief for this your notable
treason: what thoughts think you, will he, and all others entertain? what
astonishment will there be throughout all the province? what will be the estate
and condition of all Epire? seeing that from you does proceed the root of all
their misfortunes and calamities? o that you would present before your eyes,
whilst you are yet able, the indignity of this fact, and that you would
preserve your selves for your selves. Cease not to keep your allies and
confederats in the possession of their country, do not leave to defend their
liberty, and to maintain your own honor and reputation, which without any
great pain or trouble you may yet easily preserve. Regard the piteous and
grievous lamentations of these citizens, regard me, even my self, who (if you
can abide to see it) do lie prostrat at your feet. Behold how all of them do
offer their throats unto you, and I mine first of all. Behold here my naked
breast (o you Dibrians) run it through, pierce it with your swords, take
away my life it shall not grieve me: let my blood serve for drink unto you (if
such drink do please you,) and if so be you cannot by any other means neither
maintain your faith, nor defend this city.

With many such reasons and persuasions did Perlat urge them, recommending unto
them the life and liberty (if not of others) yet of themselves, and that they
should regard their proper safety: and still he was in hope to have removed
them from their strange and pernicious purpose. And in the end because he would
know whether his speeches had any efficacy or working in their scrupulous
thoughts: as soon as he had finished his Oration, he went presently toward the
Well, having almost all the communalty Perlat and the citizens of Sfetigrade,
drunk of the polluted water, to draw the Dibrians to do the like, who refuse
it.
at his heels, and in the presence of them all he drank a good draught of
that water: the like also did the most part of the inhabitants. Whereupon it
was presented likewise to certain of the captains, and chiefest persons of the
garrisons: but neither good words, nor good deeds could prevail with those
superstitious and curious stomachs.

Scarcely can I without blushing, either believe it my self or deliver it to
others for a matter of truth, that so light and ridiculous a cause should
prevail with the^ in a case so weighty and important: and I make no doubt but
that the posterity will take a greater pleasure rather to laugh at it, then to
admire and wonder at this strange accident: and if they do give any credit to
the strangenes of the case, yet will they hardly be persuaded, that so vain
and frivolous a humor could have moved them thereunto. But they will judge
rather that it was taken as a fit occasion by the soldiers, who being inclined
to treachery and infidelity, had been before corrupted by the enemy. For my
part having searched and enquired of all things with all possible diligence, I
could never find any likelihood to verify this superstition: and therefore I
need not make any difficulty to think them blame worthy, who have conceived of
them so smisterly. My reason is, for that (as I suppose) there is nothing in
the actions of mortal men so secret and hid, which could for so long a time
have bin unrevealed. And more then that, of all those who were so
superstitiously addicted, there was not any one of the^ ever known to have
yielded him self to Amurath: nor at any time was the estate of any one of them
so enriched, whereby it might be presumed or coniectured, that they had any
fraudulent intelligence or secret practicing with the Infidels. Neither is it
any marvel that the Dibrians being once intoxicated with this foolish
scrupulosity, and being fallen into so frantike a humor, did commit such an
error: seeing that they were not only given to be superstitious, but were
always and yet are reputed for Heretics. For Here^ie and superstition near
of kin each to other.
these two contagious maladies of superstition and heresy, are very near of
kin the one to the other. For these people of Dibria do use the Sclauonian
tongue, the which language being very large and ample, (as most notable authors
do testify) is dispersed and dilated into many and diverse ^ects. And that this
is true may be seen, in that some of the Sclauonians do acknowledge the unity
of the Church of Rome: as the Dalma^a^s, The Sclauoni^ tongue very large and
ample.
the Croatians, the Carnians, and the better part of the Polonians: others do
adhere unto the errors and fantasies of the Greek Church, as the Triballians
or Bulgarians, the Ruthenians, and a part of Limania. Others in the malady of
their spirits, have forged unto them selves a particular opinion, as the
Bohemians, the Morauians, and the Bosnians, who for the most part do follow
the heresy of the Manichees. But wherefore do I make mention of these
nations? seeing all Europe is at this day over whelmed with a multiplicity
o^f^rious and cursed doctrines? For, ou^ alas! within these few years, by the
contagion and infection of neighbor nations, or rather by the overmuch
negligence and slothfulness of the Prelates of the Church, and by the
pernicious carelessness of Princes and secular magistrates (if it be not the
enormities of our sins, that have set heaven against us:) al quarters and
kingdoms of Europe have suffered them selves to be polluted with a multitude of
these prodigious opinions of all sorts, which do now swarm and abound
throughout al christendom. But I have wandered too far from my matter, we will
now return to our doting and frantic Dibrians.

The Governor was instant upon them sometimes with prayers, sometimes with
promises of great gifts and rich offers, at the last, seeing all of them to be
obdurat and hardened against his fruit loss persuasions, he framed and
conformed his mind also to the exigence and necessity of the time. And having
assembled together a certain number, part of them Dibrians, and part of the
chief and principal of the citizens to deliberat upon the matter: they made a
short conclusion (for the matter would not admit any long delay) and themselves
did set down the conditions and covenants of their surrender, such as they
thought would neither be injurious unto themselves, nor disagreeable unto the
enemy. Namely, that the garrison should depart freely and in safety, with bag
and baggage, that the citizens should have free choice either to remain in
their former estate with in the town, or to depart at their pleasures.
Touching the garrison nothing was altered by the grand Seigniour, but for the
citizens he would not in any case condescend, that they should remain within
the town. All the rest was accorded and a watch appointed in the suburbs.
Immediately were the keys brought unto Amurath, Sfetigrade yielded to Amurath.
and the place was rendered up void and empty of all the inhabitants. Some of
the citizens (who were deeply affectionat to their country, and loath to depart
from the place of their nativity) did tarry still without the walls. But many
of them who could not endure to live under the Infidels, leaving and
abandonning all, went to seek out Scanderbeg. The traitor who had corrupted
the water staid within the town, and remained with the enemy, where being
known by them that practiced with him to betray the town unto the Turk, they
conveyed him presently to the tents of the Ottoman, with wonderful joy and
great gladness. You need not doubt but he had good entertainment: for the Sultan
honored him infinitely, both with good words and notable The traitor who
betrayed Sfetigrade, rewarded by the Turks.
rich presents, far exceeding the promises that had bin made unto him, in
recompense of his disloialty and treason. For first he had 50000. aspres given
him, and three roabs or suits of apparel of excellent workemanshippe and very
rich. Moreover he had so much land of inheritance and demeanes assigned him,
as the yearly revenues thereof did amount to 2000. crowns. But little joy had
the traitor of those great benefits: for albeit he were thus magnificently
rewarded with all these honors and riches in the open sight and knowledge of a
multitude of people, and albeit he did daily receive a world of favors amongst
the Barbarians: yet within a while after he was suddenly gone The end of
treason.
and vanished, and was never more seen nor heard of* The report went, that he
was secretly made away by Amurath, by some privy and deserved kind of
punishment, because he durst not repose any trust or assurance in the nature
and disposition of him, who by a filthy avarice had traitorously conspired
against his country, against his confederates, and against his own blood and
kinsfolks. Thus you may behold how this merchant was enriched by his
merchandise: and a man may see by this so worthy Treas^ loved by Princes yet
traitors hated of the^.
an example, that Princes and great men have treason in estimation, but they
abhor the traitors, and have them in detestation.

The garrison of Sfetigrade was suffered to depart free, and without hurt
through the midst of the Turkishe squadrons, which stood orderly raunged on
each side as they passed between them. How beit that Mahomet the young Prince
of the Turks a fierce and cruel youth, who (as the report goes) did then
follow the army of his father into Epire, upon a desire to see the war, and
to purchase himself reputation, did instantly and vehemently urge and entreat
Amurath, not to suffer them so to depart freely without any punishment. And he
alleged, that it was but a vain curiosity to stand Speechees of Mahomet the
young prince to his father, persuading him to violate his faith with them of
Sfetigrade.
upon the observation of his faith, and that it would be to his eternal
reproach and infamy; for that the Turks have not any doctrine more expressly
delivered in their law, nor any precept more ancient in the religion of
Mahomet, then to show themselves by all possible means mortal enemies to the
Christians: and specially to them from whom he had received so many calamities
and outrages by the slaughter of their legions, the killing of their
Chiefetaines, and the pitiful wasting and destroying of their army: that the
Sfetigradians ought to be chastised to terrify others, and were to be made an
example unto those which should come after, to teach them not to persevere in
such perverseness and obstinacy. For it is not (quoth he) the office of an
excellent General, to carry a mind mutable and chaungeable according to the
estate and fortune of the enemy, and to commiserat their tears and petitions:
that it were well done to put them all to the sword, or to keep them in irons
or straight imprisonment, till such time as they had order for their ransom.

By these speeches did this arrogant and proud Prince sufficiently bewray his
nature and disposition, declaring even in his youth and private estate, what
manner of man he would prove one day when he came to riper years, and to the
possession of the Empire. And the insolency and fiercenes of his tender years,
did already discover the filthiness of his avarice and cruelty. But the wicked
and blouddy counsel of the son could not prevail nor find any place in the
prudent thoughts of the aged father: but sharply reproouing him, it is said,
that he thus replied unto him; That nothing Answer of Amurath to the speeches
of his son Mahomet.
was more necessary and requisite amongst men, then the integrity of their
faith, the which being once violated, it was not possible that either
kingdoms, Empires, and estates or any society could stand or continue. That
every Prince of a generous and noble mind, and of high renown (if his hope
and courage do aim at honor and superiority, and to the compassing of great
matters) this faith ought to be the one or the other, either in truth and
effect, firm, sound, and inuiolate, or at leastwise in outward appearaunce.
For that is the only way and ready mean to procure and purchase the lone and
good will of all persons: whereas perjury and cruelty do subvert both
scepters and crowns, both Towns and nations: and last of all they are not
more pernicious to others then to the parties that use them: that men are
conquered and won by the beneficence and liberality of those who desire to
find them faithful and loyal, but that cruelty, hatred, and inhumanity do
little profit a Prince toward his subjects. For when they see themselves
governed and commanded by a proud and immoderat kind of puissance, they will
not long endure the yoke of such dominion: that by clemency the hearts and
affections of many are soon gained, and being once drawn to like, seldom or
never will they abhor to endure that subjection which is so gracious gentle
and tolerable. And to say the truth: wherein have the Sfetygradians offended?
or what fault have they committed against the majesty of our Empire? They have
defended their country, their wives, and their children: and if they have of
themselves both prescribed such conditions, and have as faithfully observed
them as the co^querour has reason to rest contented with the^: what can we
farther object or dema^d of them?

The Dibrians being removed out of Sfetygrade withal the other companies of
the Christians: and a new garrison of twelve thousand Ianissaries being there
established: Amurath fortifieth Sfetigrade.
Amurath bent all his care and endeavor to the repairing of the walls on that
side, where the cannon had endammaged them. In the mean time Scanderbeg being
lately returned from surueying and visiting of all the country, was newly
advertised of the misfortune of Sfetygrade, and of the infidelity of the
Dibrians. This caused him to keep close within his tent in great silence, and
full of despite and anger. Within a while came Perlat with that his infamous
and dishonored troop of soldiers. Perlat and the citizens of Sfetygrade
their coming to Scanderbeg.
Sad and pensive was their governor, but much more sorrowful were the
citizens, and the tears trickled in abundance down alongest their cheeks,
for grief and sorrow of their country now left desolat. The Dibrians likewise
through the remorse of their fault (which was so notably shameful) casting
their eyes down to the ground, Dibrians crave pardon of Sca^derbeg for yielding
Sfetygrade to the Turk.
did imitate the sadness of their companions. But when they came in presence
of their Prince, and had seen by the austerity and felnesse of his
countenance, the vehemence of the indignation, which he seemed to have
conceived in his heart; every one of them casting his arms to the ground, and
taking their girdells from their wastes, and putting them about their necks,
they fell prostrate at his feet, and with bitter tears besought him, to
pardon their grievous and shameful act. What should this Prince do that was
so merciful and gracious? To punish so many men, it was no easy matter, he
saw no other occasion of their crime, but only the superstitious credulity of
that nation: they did freely confess their fault openly in his presence with
contrition and humility almost incredible. This could not but move and appease
Scanderbeg, Speech of Scanderbeg to the Dibrians, who^ he pardons.
for his anger being pacified, he turned himself toward them, telling them,
that he gave them their lives in acknowledgement of their good deuoir, and
because they had behaved themselves valiantly in defense only of the walls of
Sfetigrade. To the citizens according to the former estate of each of them,
were lands, and possessions appointed, and to many of them he gave charges
and honorable offices in the wars: neither did he deny any request in a manner
to the Dibrians. Nevertheless, the shame of their late ignominy having so
greatly disgraced them, did not permit them to abide long at the camp, all of
them shunning the face of their companions.

The virtue and constancy of Perlat during his government of Sfetygrade, did
deserve sufficient praise and commendation both by the honorable testimony
whith Perlat his good deserts and praise for the defense of Sfetygrade.
Castriot gave him for his deserts, as also by the confirmation of the
soldiers who served under him, yet it may be, that perhaps he merited more
blame then commendation, and I might impute the fault and loss of the Town
not to the infidelity of other, but rather to his small care or over
licentious indulgence toward his soldiers: because in a season so
dangerous he ought to have taken great heed, and to have been very careful
not to suffer his soldiers to have conference and familiarity, nor to have
permitted those of the Town so ordinarily to frequent the company of the
infidelles: by means of which their daily communications (the corruption of
man is such and the desire of gold and silver so in satiable,) the soldier
Perlat co^n enmended and rewarded by Scanderbeg.
might easily be wrought to practice with the enemy. Nevertheless Scanderbeg
did publicly ratify and allow both his fidelity and all his actions, not
only in plentiful speeches and often discourses, by word of mouth, but to his
words, he added also deeds of no less value and estimation. For he
recompensed him with a great sum of money, and certain sayre horses, and
with many other ornaments and rewards which he gave unto him, albeit Perlat was
very loath to accept them. Thus was Perlat sent home to his own house with
great increase of honor and reputation. This Perlat made an Abbot.
Proto-sengeli Abbots in Epyre. Perlat his integrity of life, his eloquence and
learning.
personage being borne in Emathia was preferred to a spiritual dignity,
(which they call Proto-sengeli:) and we commonly name them Abbots: he lead a
marvelous strict and austere life, in singular continency and wonderful
integrity: he was also very learned and passing eloquent: besides, the gravity
of his years which accompanied his other virtues, did as much or more adorn
and beautify all the rest of his perfections.

These things thus concluded and finished, Scanderbeg perceiving that the
Sultan was busily employed in fortifying of Sfetygrade, and did wholly apply
his mind to that work: he took with him five thousand horse, and hasted with
all possible speed toward those parts with a purpose to interrupt and
disturb him in his endeavors. But having stayed there, the space of two days
coursing up and down, here and there through the woods, and over the high
mountains, without finding any matter worthy the speaking of: he attended
there, still watching some opportunity, in hope at the leastro surprise some of
their forragers, or some of the enemies scouts, or by some other means to
endammage the enemy: nor did the soldiers return altogether without booty.
For (as it is usual in any great army,) there were taken many men and horses
as they raunged carelessly abroad in the country.

Now after that Amurath had sufficiently repaired the walls of Sfetygrade
according Amurath determines to leave Epyre and to return to Andrynople.
to the shortness of the time: and that the place was furnished and stored
with corn and other provisions for one whole year (as though his mind did
foretell him that it was like to be besieged:) he resolutely determined and
concluded with him self to retire his forces out of Epire, and to return into
his own country. Touching the cause of his so speedy departure, many are the
fables and lies which have been commonly bruted abroad, yet without any
certainctie, whilst that each one would seem by conjectures to search out and
to set down the counsels and determinations The cause of Amurath his sudden
departure out of Epyre.
of Ottoman. Some impute his sudden discamping to the tumultes of Hungary:
others to the troubles of Greece, and some to those of Persia. Many do hold
that the losses and damages received in Albanie, and the diverse travels and
difficulties of this war did chase him so soon out of that province: with an
intent nevertheless to return thither again with more puissant and fresh
forces, and to plant his camp before Croy, because that city did seem to
require greater means, and more redoubtable forces to terrify them. For my
part I am content to approve both the one and the other of these opinions, as
having all of them some show and apparaunce of truth. Notwithstanding the last
seems most likely and probable being ratified and confirmed by the issue and
event, which is a witness infallible and without reproof: or perhaps it were
not amiss to say, that the hour and time limited and appointed to this aged
Ottoman by the destinies was not yet come, and as the Poets feign lieentiously:

The sisters had not spunne, nor fully ended
The fatal thread whereon his life depended.
But whatsoever was the cause of his return, the last of July he commanded
Amurath with his army departs out of Epire.
to truffe up bag and baggage, and that the carriages and part of his
horsemen should go on before. The next day at the sun rising (having first
in the night time fired their lodgings, and some other furniture of their
Camp) him self marched after the others, with the residue of the army who
with excessive joy did make an exceeding noise, both by their loud cries and
clamours, and by the sound of their ordinance and cannons, which they made to
roar with often shooting off at their departure. The Turkish monarch did ever
use in times past, The manner of march observed by Amurath with his camp.
and so did he then take his place in the midst of all his batallions, where
being mounted upon a white horse, and enuironned round about with his armed
Iannissaries, he needed not to be affrayed of any tumult or peril. For in the
vaungarde the Beglerbey of Asia, and in the rereward the Bassa of Romania (both
being in good order of battle) did assure and guard the middle battle in
which him self marched. They that write of this expedition do in a manner all
of them agree, that Amurath returned out of Epire with fewer men then he
brought with Number of Turks lost in the journey of Amurath into Epire.
him at his coming by thirty thousand, having lost fully so many in that
action. Besides that, a great part of his provisions for the assault, and also
many of his ensigns were spoiled and taken by the Christians, which he never
carried away again with him. But all these losses and hinderaunces did
Scanderbeg enlarge with the ignominy of a new slaughter: and he renewed the
misfortune of their estate with a fresh calamity. For upon this return of the
Sultan, the Albanois having intelligence given him where he lay encamped, that
the enemy did dislodge, he put him self on Scanderbeg pursues the army of
the Turks.
the way to pursue them with all his army, which was 8000. horse, and 3000.
foot, and lively pressing them in the rereward, without any intermission, he
held on still killing and destroying them: and he gave his soldiers good
occasion to flesh themselves, and to show the fury and eagerness of their
stomachs upon all those, who either were found to slack their pace, or by any
mischaunce and inconvenience were left behind their companies: for there was
none of them but were gleaned up, and they did dearly buy it with the loss of
their lives. The Barbarians did often make head against him with their whole
army, to sustain and repulse the violence of their pursuit. But the Albanois
ever dissembling as though he fled, did still delude them, when they were ready
to receive him: sometimes withdrawing him self into the next valleys and
hills adjoining, and then suddenly again appearing in sight: sometimes would
he charge them in front, sometimes in slanke, and sometimes in the rereward:
and thus still skirmishing with them as they went on, he plagued them with a
thousand discommodities. In this manner mocking and abusing Amurath and his
army, he continued so long in pursuing them, that for six miles together, he
never left following them close at the heels, pressing and annoying them with
innumerable injuries.

The Emperor of the Turks being extremely vexed with the shame and ignominy
Amurath leaves the Bassa of Romania to repulse the invasion of Scanderbeg.
of this abuse, and at the slaughter of his people, commanded the Bassa of
Romania to stay behind with 30000. horse, for the surety and free retraite of
the residue, charging him that if the enemy did continue to importune him, he
should either charge upon him or constrain him to the fight, or else enforce
him to betake himself to fight. Scanderbeg perceiving the enemy to change his
course, fair and easily retired his companies, and for fear of being enclosed
between the two armies, he thought it lest to leave them being so great a
multitude. Wherefore he seized upon certain valleys and passages of the
mountains, where he knew he should be safe, and that he could easily warrant
both himself and his army against the puissance of so many enemies. There for
a while did he make a stand with his forces ready raunged in order of battle,
as if he had been upon the point to go to charge upon the enemy, and to hazard
the fortune of the field with the Mohammedan: and peradventure so would he have
done (such was the hardiness and confidence of this personage,) if the
weariness of his soldiers, who were almost tired with their long and hot
pursuit of the enemy, and the inequality of their numbers being far
inferior to the Turkish forces, had not constrained this brave warrior to lay
apart that counsel which was so temerous and dangerous. Upon this occasion
therefore addressing himself to his soldiers, and seeming as if he would
excuse himself, he spoke unto them this proverb (which he used often:) I had
rather (quoth he) that this place should be noted to be famous for the A
proverb used by Sca^derbeg upon his retiring from the enemy.
flight of Scanderbeg then for his cross. For the custom of that country was
to raise a cross in that place, where any Christian, especially any man of
mark had bin slain or miscarried, and he alleged this reason to justify his
saying: because any man may abolish the infamy of his flight, by some new act
worthy of praise and commendation: but the life of a man being once gone and
past, besides that it is irreuocable and out of hope, so is it seldom without
some infamy, reproach, and obloquie of the vulgar and ignorant multitude, who
do measure all things not by reason and judgment but only by the issue and
the event.

When the Bassa of Romania saw that Scanderbeg would not move, but did abide
still The Bassa of Romania marches away after Amurath.
within his camp he likewise by little and little began to remove with his
companies, and to march away, being as willing to let alone the enemy and not
to meddle with him, but to go onwardes and to join him self with the maine
army that went before him. The like also did Scanderbeg upon the persuasion of
his soldiers, who humbly besought him not to be obstinate in pursuing and
following of those miscreants, nor to detain or hold back any longer within
the heart and bowels of Epire, that pestilent plague which was so happily rid
away, and departing out of the country. Thus near about the same time, did
Scanderbeg return to Croy, and Amurath taking his journey through Macedony,
and over the mountains of the Tribullians, came to the city of Andrinople.
Both the one and the other of them departed home sad and pensive, and as full
of melancholy as was possible, because their affairs had succeeded with such
variety of fortune. But much more discontented and full of despite was the
Turkish Emperor, both because he could not subdue his enemy the Albanois, for
whose destruction and confusion principally he came forth of his own country:
and besides, because the honor, of so small a fortress, and so mean a place
as he had gotten, did not seem unto him to be a sufficient recompense for so
many misfortunes, mischieues and calamities. Notwithstanding the care and
grief of the Christians was wonderfully comforted, in regard they were fully
persuaded, and made no doubt, that the infidels being once gone and departed,
Sfetygrade might be soon regained, and without any great difficulty recovered
out of their hands.

The end of the fifth book.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
SCanderbeg is persuaded by his nobles to marry. The frontier war between
the Turks of Sfetygrade, and the garrison of the Albanois. Scanderbeg
besieges and assaulteth Sfetygrade, but is constrained to break up his siege.
He provides for the furnishing and defense of Croy and the rest of his
dominions against the invasion of Amurath, who comes with a huge army into
Epire. Croy is besieged, battered and oftentimes assaulted. Amurath being not
able by assaults, mines, nor otherwise to force Croye, practices to win it
by corrupting of Vranocontes the Governor, who rejects him. Scanderbeg, by
sundry invasions, and canuazadoes upon the Turkishe Camp, and by the great
slaughters of the infidelles before Croy, so vexes and wearieth Amurath, that
he sends Ambassadors to Scanderbeg to desire peace, which is refused.
Amurath upon grief and melancholy of his misfortune sickneth and dies before
Croy. Mahomet son of Amurath succeeding his father in the Turkishe Empire,
raises the siege of Croy, and departs with his army out of Epire.

THe public peace and tranquillity of the whole province of Epire being now
reestablished by the departure of the Ottoman forces, and every man being freed
of their fear and care, the traffic being laid open in all the towns and
fortresses, the garrisons being dismissed, and each man returned to his wonted
trade and vocation, the king of Albany did at length also give liberty unto his
legions to rest them selves for a season, from the toiles and travels of the
wars. Nowithsta^ding he gave them in charge, that at the end of two months,
they should all of them repair again unto him, to march with him toward
Sfetigrade, to the intent they might recover that town of their confederates,
out of the hands and possession of their adversaries. He retained with him in
the mean time but two thousand horse, and one thousand foot, whom he sent as
he was accustomed, to keep upon the frontiers of Macedon, and to guard the
goods and possessions of the inhabitants in those quarters from the roades and
invasions of the Turks.

Whilst Scanderbeg did thus refresh him self from his late travels and
labors, and did within Croy employ that small time of leisure which he had
gotten, unto a new kind of exercise wherewith he was unacquainted: namely to
the administration of justice, and to matters of state: the nobles of Epire and
the Pinces his allies and near neighbors misliking, that a personage of such
rare excellency should pass his age (for he was then about forty or perhaps
more) without leaving any issue of his body lawfully Scanderbeg persuaded to
marriage by the nobles and Princes of Epire.
begotten to inherit his estate and kingdom: all of them with one accord
assembled them selves together, and came to the presence of Scanderbeg as they
had oftentimes before done the like: and they labored by all means possible
to persuade him to take a wife and to continue his name and memory by the
procreation of happy children which might lawfully succeed him in his
kingdom: alleging, that Speeches of the Princes and nobles of Epire
persuading him to marriage.
in vain had he amplified the bounds of his realm, and in vain had he
increased the estate of Epire: if he did not against the time to come likewise
see them provided of a Lord and Prince, to whom he had purchased so great
honor and glory by the immortal memory of so many famous and worthy acts:
that if he should be careless of this matter, they might well say and think:
that his intent and meaning was to have the public weal of Albanie to decay
and perish jointly with himself, and that with the body of one alone, he would
bury the memory and whole body of so flourishing an estate: that he should
hearken unto the secret prayers, and regard the careful complaints of his
subjects. For if the succession should descend to any other: the province of
Epire knew not how to suffer the dominion of any stranger: but did disdain to
have any other for their Lord and master but him only, which should leave
them some issue of his own blood, as the inheritour and image of his rare
virtue; that so long, and no longer both their good fortune and the divine
favor of God would continue and dwell amongst them, whilst the scepter and
crown of Albanie did remain in that race, and did abide in the possession of
his posterity.

Scanderbeg was of a humor clean estraunged and alienated from any such
thought, and the haughtiness of his conceiptes did aim at greater matters:
and as one that was either unmindful or careless of all other things, he
fixed not his hope nor his thoughts upon any thing, which did not seem to
exceed the common reach of all humane capacity. Wherefore as the report
goes, at the first he did with many reasons full of gravity and sententious,
vehemently impugn this advise and counsel Answer and speeches of Sca^derbeg
concerning the married life.
of his friends, exalting and commending with no frivolous proofs the simple
and unmarried life especially in Princes and great personages. And he told them:
that nothing was so burden some and insupportable to a free mind, as the
dominion of a wife: that the troubles of marriage having once made an entry into
a man's house, his body and his spirit had no longer liberty to use those
rights which do belong unto them: that fortune Marriage both troublesome, and
the hinderance of a ma^s good fortune. Scanderbeg condescendeth to take a wife.
her self (as though by marriage she were become lame) would diminish and
abridge the amplification and increase of a man's greatness, and would deprive
him of a good part of the means, which should raise him to the supreme degree
of prosperity. Notwithstanding at the last because he would not seem as one
that was given to over much austeritie, not to neglect the good zeal and
sincere affection of his friends, he condescended and granted, being loath to
refuse their advise in any thing which they should judge to be for the public
good, and for the advantage and dignity of the estate of Albanie. And he was
content to submit him self to that yoke, since they thought it so expedient,
and seeing it was so agreeable unto their minds. Nevertheless he demanded a
time of respit for the accomplishment of the matter, and desired that the same
might be deferred till such time as Sfetygrade were recovered, saying: that for
the present it could not but be greatly to his reproach, if he should now bend
his mind to the solemnities of marriage, to feasting and such like actions of
reuelling and banqueting: and in the mean while to suffer his allies and
friends to remain under the tyranny of the enemies of Christianity. The
Princes and nobles of Albanie thought them selves sufficiently satisfied in
that they had obtained thus much at his hands: and therefore they would not
importune him any further, but yielding him a thousand thanks, as if he had
done them some special grace and favor, or bestowed some singular gift upon
them: they quickly published and made it known through all the country, and the
whole Province was replenished with exceeding joy at the report thereof.

These things thus depending, there came messengers daily from the frontiers,
bringing tidings, sometimes that the lands and possessions of the Barbarians
were wasted and spoiled: and sometimes that their scouts were beaten and put to
flight. About the Frontier wars between the Turks in Sfetigrade and the
garrison of the Albanois.
same time also, the garrison of Turks within Sfetigrade were enforced to keep
close within their fortress, by the daily and continual skirmishes of our
horsemen, who using to ambush themselves in the woods near unto the town, did
suffer none to escape whom they found at any time, wandering abroad either
carelessly, or as they went on forraging, or upon any other occasion. For having
many times issued forth of the town, they were enforced still, most commonly,
to return again faster then with a good pace. True it is, that our Christians
doubting the disadvantage of the place, durst not go too near the walls to
encounter with them, but by feigned shows of flight, they did still endeavor
to draw them out into the open fields. One day amongst the rest they grew so
audatious, that 300 of them came forth and passed about a bow shot A skirmish
between the Turks of Sfetigrade and the garrison of the Albanois.
beyond the foot of the mountain, drawn thereunto with a vehement desire to
be revenged upon our men, with whom coming to the encounter with more fury
then wisdom, three and forty of them there left their lives, and 14. were
taken prisoners, the residue saved themselves by their timely departure, flying
away with a speedy gallop: and there had not any one of them escaped to carry
the news into the town, if their companions, who stayed within for the guard
of the place, had not made have to come and succor them. It was an easy
matter for the Scanderbegians in this tumult and confusion of all things to
have surprised the town, if they had either chased the^ with more feruencie,
or if they had had a greater company. The Turks being from thenceforth shut up
within their ports, were seized with such fear and terror, that they durst not
any more set foot out of the city, but held themselves close as if they had
been besieged by a handful of Christians. All this was done only by a part of
that garrison which (as we have said) was left upon the frontiers.
Notwithstanding they did it without the advice or knowledge of Scanderbeg,
neither did he give them any commission so to do: but sent thither those forces
only for the suertie of his subjects, and to repress the courses and violence
of the Painims. Nevertheless being advertised how all things had passed,
though his soldiers in so doing might seem in some sort, both to have
contemned his authority, and to neglect all order and care of martial
discipline: yet was not this sage and prudent Prince any thing disco^tented
with them, but he so liked both their counsel and their actions, that it both
gave him an occasion to hasten his business, and did incite him the more
cheerfully to the assayling of the place, in regard that the fear and
remembrance of so small a loss did make them to mew themselves up within their
walls, as men quite discouraged and out of heart. For this cause without making
any delay, before that he had proclaimed any general muster for the assembling
of his old bands, or for any leauie of new soldiers: he dispatched away to
Sfetigrade 300. horse, and 500. footmen, which he had then ready at hand to
comfort and aid their companions: to whom also he sent many gifts and
presents, to show that he approved those exploits which they had already done,
and willing them to go on and to persevere in the like, and whatsoever they
could with safety enterprise against the enemy they should not neglect it, nor
suffer them to take any rest, till such time as himself coming with greater
troops, and with all other provisions fit and necessary for a siege, might
bring the town to be at his discretion. This done he bent all his thoughts to
the gathering of new forces, so that within few days he had assembled an army
of 18000 men, of which 8000. were horsemen, and the residue did serve on foot.

His preparations being all ready, and his cariages sent away before, himself
marched Sfetigrade besieged by Scanderbeg.
after with all his host: so that the xx. day of September, he planted his
ensigns before the walls of Sfetigrade. His own person and his horsemen were
lodged no farther from the walls, then so as an harguebusse shot could not reach
them, (for the garrison of the Turks was in a manner all harguebussiers the
best that Amurath could choose.) The footmen were quartered somewhat nearer:
and to the intent the enemy should not be able to offend them with their shot,
they raised up (in manner of a Palyssado) a great quantity of rafters and
plankes, whereof he had made great provision, behind the which the footmen might
stand and remain in suertie. The Albanois were almost all of them archers: the
residue being Italians and Almaines did serve with harguebusses and crosbowes.
There were also some Sclauonians, who being more skillful in the use of the
Soldiers of several Nations serve under Scanderbeg.
sword then of the bow: upon the news of this leauie of soldiers (being
allured with the desire of prey and purchase) did come to serve with the
Albanois voluntarily and without any pay at all. There were in those days that
came daily into Epire out of all Nations to serve, and to take pay under
Scanderbeg: for that of all the Captains of Christendom, he only was still
busied and employed, and was never out of arms: but in continual service, as
the mortal and deadly enemy of the Turks and Miscreants. For this cause many
of them that were retained, being emised both with the sweetness of daily
booties and pillage, and by the pleasantness of the country, did set up their
rest to remain and dwell there for ever. But the truth is that the most part
being enriched with the spoils of the Barbarians, and grown wonderful
wealthy, did afterward return home to their own countries. There were also
some Frenchmen to the number of 50. or more, who served in that army: they
were appointed to have the managing and disposing of certain small field
pieces (for they were entertained specially for Cannoniers) with the which they
might annoy the defendants, rather then the rampires of the town. For I do not
find that there were brought thither any other greater pieces, either for
battery or to make any breach, because it seemed, that to force the city by
the scalado was most to the purpose. These things thus ordained, the chiefest
matter and of most importance rested yet behind: and that was, to provide for
the tranquillity of the whole camp, and for the more assured continuance of
the siege: namely, to shut up all the passages from the enemy: for by this
means both the besieged should be out of all hope of comfort, and the Turks
should be debarred from coming to succor or relieve them. In this service was
the old garrison employed, and there was joined unto them a supply of 800.
foot, and 1000. horse of the new leauied troops. All which forces being
divided into two parts, the one moity of the^ he sent with Streese, the other
moitie with Tanusee into diverse quarters, for the better guard of the residue
of his bands, and to detain all succors from the besieged. This was no sooner
concluded on, but it was as soon put in execution. And thereupon Scanderbeg
thought it high time to set his soldiers on work, and by giving a brave
assault unto the town, to let them know the fierceness of his fury. For you
must understand, that the seven first days after the Christians had presented
themselves before Sfetigrade, they were incessantly occupied in enclosing and
entrenching of their camp, and in building and ordering of their lodgings
(because they thought they should have wintered before the town.) And during
all that time they had not in any sort molested the besieged, neither in word
nor in deed: which made the soldiers now of all hands assemble about their
Prince, demanding every hour that they might be suffered to assail the
enemy. But Castriot being unwilling to attempt any thing by arms, til he had
first assaied al other means, he did for a time restrain the forwardness and
heat of his men, till such time as he had sounded the minds of the defendants.
He sent therefore two soldiers to carry unto them the same capitulations,
which the citizens of Sfetigrade did lately accept of Ottoman. But the Turks
made no more reckoning of his offers, then as of a Answer of the Turks within
Sfetigrade to the summons of Scanderbeg.
thing of naught: but with notable resolution, they sent him this answer,
That the place which cost them so much blood, was not to be sold for words:
that he should offer hardily the bodies of his people, yea his own head, for
the price of the redemption of that town: and that then he should well know,
whether that their faith were dependant upon the water of a well, as was that
lately of the Dibrians.

This answer was no news to Scanderbeg, neither did it come contrary to his
expectation, for he foresawe and coniectured how the Turks were affected.
Wherefore he thought good to have recourse to the sword, and he determined to
set the Christians a work as they had before desired: and he took unto him
courage not as one that would use many words, but as an enemy that would make
them feel the weight of his blows. The next morning therefore about break of
day, having caused his Suburbs of Sfetigrade assaulted and burnt by Scanderbeg.
troops to approach close under the walls, he first gave the onset upon the
suburbs, lately assigned by the Turks to the poor citizens, which he caused
to be overthrown and burnt. Many of those, who inhabited in the same, at the
first sight of the Christians ensigns, had their refuge to their ancient
friends and allies: the others dispersed here and there, and being retired
under the walls, did safeguard themselves by the favor of the same, and of the
soldiers which stood above for their defense. In like manner the buildings next
the town were without hurt, except such as the fire (being carried from one to
the other) did consume with the like confusion. The fury of the assaylauts did
not in this place proceed any further, because there were but few Turks there
abiding, but only Sfetigradians and Epirots, who although it might well be
supposed (as was apparently to be seen) that they were but badly affectioned
to our men, yet Christian charity made them to be more remiss and pitiful:
and they measured the persons by the habit and affections of their hearts in
times past, and not by the estate present.

Moses was not idle in the mean time, for perceiving them of the town to be
busied on that side in defense of the suburbs, and in quenching of the fire:
he lead against Assault by Moses to the ports of Sfetigrade.
the great gate three thousand soldiers all stout men and hardy, whom being
covered and shrouded with pauishes against the injury and force of the
assaylantes, he did animate on with all his might to force and break down the
ports. The Turks (whose number was more then sufficient both to defend so
small a place, and to yield ready supplies in all parts) came running thither
speedily from all quarters, and some of them from aloft with great store of
shot: others with great stones and long pieces of timber, did prop up and
defend the port on the inside, making them stronger then they were before: by
means whereof they caused our men to quit the work which they had vndertake^.
And thus was the issue of that attempt without any great loss of me^: for the
Christians having not then (as it chanced) brought any scaling ladders with
them, they did not long strive in assaulting of the walls, but they discharged
their choler that day both on the one side and the other, with bow shot and
harguebusse shot only. Scanderbeg having caused to sound a retreat (albeit
Moses being chafed and set in Scanderbeg causes to sound a retreat, and to
give over the assault.
a heat by little and little with the fury of that fight) did call and cry unto
his soldiers to bring their ladders and other engines for the assault:
nevertheless all of them upon the coming of their General did presently
retire, and in a manner against their wills, returned each man to his quarter.
Thus were the courages of either party at that time the more incensed and
sharpened by the proof of that small and light conflict, for that the fight
was broken off without any hope or doubt either on the one side or the other.
The residue of that day did Scanderbeg spend in diverse consultations, devising
upon Consultation of Scanderbeg for his proceedings against Sfetigrade.
the short and surest way to force Sfetigrad. For the strong situation thereof
which made it almost impregnable, and the great and puissant garrison wherewith
it was stuffed, did evidently make show, that the peril would not be small, if
they should attempt it inconsiderately or unadvisedly: and the late example of
Amurath by his ouerhardy and too peremptory experience, did cool the courages
of the Christians from being too forward in committing of themselves to the
hazard of the like inconvenience. It was concluded therefore for the more
surety, that during the days following, the enemy should be drawn forth by
small and light invasions, and with as great subtlety and wylines as might
possibly be invented, he should be entised to issue out, and to make some
sallies upon them: hoping by that means in time, either to diminish the forces
of the garrison, without any great loss of their own people, or else making
show by little and little of a dissembled and fained flight, to toll the
Infidels out from the guarde of their ports, and then suddenly at the same
instant setting upon them with great fury, they might happen to surprise the
city, during the tumult of that alarm and astonishment, if so be the
Christians did press hard upon the Turks in their flight, and did strive to
enter with them pell mell, into the town.

The execution of this counsel was no longer delaied then till the next night,
the darkness and secrecy whereof did give them the opportunity to attempt it
in such manner as shall presently be delivered. Moses was appointed to have the
leading of Moses.
300. chosen horse, to provoke forth the enemy. Zachary Groppe on the one
part Zachary Groppe.
with 500. horse, and Scanderbeg himself on the other part, with the like
number of horsemen placed themselves very close and secretly in an ambuscado.
For these companies, taking the benefit of the darkness of the night, and
creeping with as great silence An ambuscado laid for the Turks of Sfetigrade.
and secrecy as they might, by the pendant of the mountain, hid themselves in
a place very fit and convenient for an ambushment, and where the enemy would
not have any doubt thereof, even amongst the hollow and winding turnings of the
valleys, and amidst the woods next adjoining full of bushes and briars, where
the scouts of the enemy could not have any knowledge of their being. For
having partly put out, and partly covering and keeping close their fires, they
went forth on the backside of their camp. The time it self also did in some
sort aid them to the concealing of their enterprise: for all the long night,
the air being full of moist and foggie vapors, and the earth being covered
with darkness, and with obscure and thick clouds: the continual thunder
and lightning did so hinder the sight and hearing of every man, that it was an
easy matter to deceive the Turkish Sentinels. The Dybrian in the mean time
without staying till the day break, watched and pryed round about on every
side with his men, in manner of a freebooter or robber: and approaching by
degrees nearer and nearer to the walls, he wandered up and down here and
there in the sight of the townsemen, and did keep still within their danger.
They within Sfetygrade were not all of one mind and advise, nor of like
courage. Many would not be with Speeches of the Turks within Sfetigrade, being
divided in their opinions, concerning a sally to be made upon the Albanois.
held, but did exclaim and cry out: That it was necessary to issue out and
to set upon them, and that it was a shame for them to endure and suffer, that
so fair an occasion should be lost: some others held stiffely on the
contrary, That they ought to bouge nor attempt any thing without good advise
and deliberation. Whereupon there grew a great alteration and dissension
amongst them, as it is commonly seen in those men, who being naturally of a
fierce and hasty disposition are pricked on and carried away by a kind of light
incredulity only regarding the outward show and superficial appearance of
things, and never looking nor searching into the marow, depth, and substance of
matters. To such men al good and wholesome counsels do seem vile and naught:
and they do think that all good fortune is then only clean fled and escaped
Sentence.
away out of their hands, if the ordering and disposing of any affairs be
never so little deferred, or (as it were) seasoned and attempred with a little
moderation of some shortand small delay. Notwithstanding in the end the better
opinion (as the event testified) did bear it away, even those whose advise was
to be still and not to stir at all: for they without could not hear any
news nor perceive any likelihood of any salley; but the gates were kept close
shut, and none suffered to come forth, only they were saluted with harguebush
shot aloof from the walls. The Albanois sometimes in troops, and sometimes
scattered and dispersed, with their bows bent against them that stood upon the
wall, did course and gallop here and there, to the intent that they being
provoked the sooner by these brauadoes, might be entised to issue forth unto
them. But when Moses saw that he got nothing but blows, and that there was
more likelihood of further danger, then of hope to do any good upon the enemy
(for by this time two of his men were slain, and six or seven of them sore
hurt, that he could hardly carry them away) he began to retire fair and
easily from the walls: and having conceived no less indignation then shame, he
withdrew himself from the view of the enemy. Scanderbeg likewise with his
troop in as pitiful a case as the other was not long behind him, but he came
forth also from his den extremely grieved and discontented: in such sort,
that both he and his company, being thoroughly wet and (as it were) all
dropping with the rain which had fallen on them all the night: and the Dibrian
on the other side, returning with his soldiers full of anger and despite, they
gave good occasion to the enemy to laugh, and make themselves merry at them.

But the Epirot did not long endure this mockery, for he was minded to requit
them with plain and open force and by a general assault. The next day
therefore, having set Sfetygrade assaulted by the Albanois.
his companies in order of battle, and every man appointed to his charge,
about two hours before noone, he lead at the very first 10000. men against the
walls. Of the residue of his army part was left to keep the trenches, and part
was reserved in a teadinesse for a fresh and new supply, to the intent the
assault should not be interrupted. Moses first of all Moses.
with a good squadron of stout and valiant young men went to the scalado,
having conceived a good hope to carry the town. For Scanderbeg from beneath
with a great band of archers and crosbowes Italians made the defendants by
force of their shot to forsake their standings, and by that means the others
had the more liberty to mount up to the walls, in so much that many of the^
having gotten to the tops of their ladders, did now get footing upon the
rampires, and there with equal courage and fury did maintain the fight with
the Turks for the possession of the walls. The artillery, which as we have
said, was planted on the farther side of the town to beat the rampires, did not
suffer the garrison to rest on that side. For albeit the shot of these pieces
did not make any great breach, yet did the walls daily decrease in the sight of
them that fought: and the defendants by little and little did diminish and wax
less by reason that the continuance of the shot which rased the walls, did also
make away many of their me^ that stood in defense of that place. If these here
did perform the part of tall soldiers, I can assure you that the others did
behave themselves with much more fury on that side, where Zachary Zachary
Groppe.
Groppe went to the assault, with who^ were the chiefest forces and strength of
the army, and especially the Almaines who were resolute even to the death, and
knew not what it was to recuile from the enemy. These with pickaxes and bars of
iron did seek to overthrow the walls where they had bin newly reedified and
repaired. Some covered with the targets of their companions and with baskets
close joined together, did dig and undermine the foundations: others voiding
and ridding away the stones that were dug up, did make the place like unto
an arch or hollow cave. The Infidels that were aloft on the wall could not,
although they would, hinder them from the pursuit of this work. For albeit
many of our men did drop down here and there, and were slain with
harguebusse shot from the towers and flankers of the wall, yet did others
continually succeed in their places without any respect of danger, or without
any fear of death. And the others in the mean time with their crossebowes
and harguebusse shot did play upon the enemy: and they had so diligent an eye
unto them whersoeuer they saw them to stir or to present themselves in the
defense of the walls, that they kept them in such awe and subjection, as
without evident peril, they durst not abide upon the rampires: yet the
besieged laughing at the great pains and labor that the Christians took, did
purposely delay and protract the fight. For in very deed the foundation of the
wall was laid so thick and so large by the Sultan, and besides, it was
rampiered within, with such store of stones and banks of earth, that the place
was sure enough of it self, without the aid or succors of any armed forces.
Nevertheless for a while did Zachary hold on stiffely in his enterprise, to
see if he could prevail or find any entry for his men. In the end when he
saw that he lost his labor, and that it was almost an endless work, he
changed his course: and to as little purpose he determined to scale the walls,
crying unto his soldiers, To the scalado, to the scalado. The Turks
perceiving from above the new attempt of the Christians, did purposely suffer
some of them to mount even to the top of their ladders, and then saluting
them with a great volley of harguebusse shot, and with great stones which they
tumbled down upon them as thick as hayle, they did easily turn both them and
their ladders vpside down from the height of the wall to the bottom of the
valley. For on that part the ground about the wall for a very little way only
was somewhat plain and even: but on a sudden, it was environed with a mighty
great downfall of a huge depth, exceeding hollow and steep withal. Little
better entertainment had the assaylants on the other side, where Moses with
his company having reared their ladders, had diverse times raised up the
colors of the Albanois upon the rampires of the enemy: but the Pagans waxing
raging mad to see this their bravery and valor, caused a strong supply of
their companions to come thither, who held themselves continually in a
readiness to help and relieve their fellows where most need should be. And
then all of them close joined together, bestirring themselves without all fear
of death or danger, did overthrow both men and ladders topsie turuy to the
ground, killing and murdering many of them, so that in a small space they got
the advantage of the fight. And whereas they were but even now as men confounded
and vanquished, they wrested the victory out of the hands of the Christians,
with such fury and violence, that the fortune of the fight being suddenly
changed, and in an instant; it seemed that God did favor their part. Castriot
being wounded with extreme grief to see his men so ill handled, and above all
for the hurt of Moses, whom with much Moses wounded.
ado he had withdrawn from the shot of the enemy, and sent unto his tent to
have his wounds dressed: he was a little retired and gotten farther from the
wall, where being covered with the targets of two soldiers on each side one* he
invited some to stand by him and with their shot to play upon the enemy. Others
being fresh and sound, he commanded and encouraged to take again the ladders
and fiercely to terrify the besieged by renewing of the assault. Scanderbeg
himself served there that day with bow and shafts, which many of them within
the town did find to their costs. For it is reported, that it was a wonderful
thing to see how many Turks he alone did kill that day: and that he never drew
any one shaft in vain. It was no hard matter to bring the ladders, and to
raise them against the walls, but the soldiers began now to present
themselves in slender troops, and they durst not hazard themselves in
mounting up upon the walls. One of them stood looking upon another: and albeit
the great The Albanois repulsed from the assault.
promises of the Prince invited many of them to be forward: yet did the
recompense seem to be deadly and mortal, as it made none of them desirous to
adventure for it. Thus either party growing into cold blood by little and
little, they left fighting at the last, and the darkness of the night which was
equally desired both of the best and worst soldiers, did end and determine
that days service. The Albanois held themselves quiet and very still within
their camp all that night, as those whom both the ignominy of the day before
and their present misfortune did seem to inuit to take their rest with
silence: for they had lost two hundredth of their best soldiers, and of those
that were wounded there were above six hundredth, of whom there died of their
wounds shortly after more then thirty. Of the defendants, though there were a
greater number slain, and that the cries and plaints of an infinite number,
which were wounded were heard on all parts: yet the repulse of their enemies,
and the preservation of the place, made them to demean themselves in great
mirth till the next morning: passing away the night with great fires, and they
never ceased running up and down the walls and rampires, singing of songs,
and making great triumph and exceeding joy.

By this time had Ottoman intelligence of the siege of Sfetigrade, and it
grieved him Amurath proclaims a new leauie of forces to return into Epire.
at the heart, often times complaining that when he was scarce gotten to one end
of his travels, and had but newly licensed his army to depart, he should now
again be constrained to a worse war then ever, especially in the beginning
of winter: a season not so strange as unfit and inconvenient to make wars in.
Nevertheless seeing himself vanquished both with shame and with a certain
kind of necessity and predestinate fortune, which would not permit him without
ignominy and dishonor to leave his towns to the oppression and fury of his
enemy, he concluded again to revive his former preparations, and to proclaim
a new muster: and to this effect he dispatched on all parts his Saniacks,
Bassaes and Chieftaines, employing all means which he could possibly devise to
hasten his purposed journey. And the first thing that he did, was, to publish
abroad his return into Epire, perhaps doing it of purpose to give the more
countenance and authority to the matter: or for that the Christians being
astonished upon the report of this news, might be discouraged from proceeding
with their siege. For to speak the truth what I think thereof: hardly can I
be persuaded, that there is any likelihood or probability, that the Sultan in
the last point and period (as it were) of his age, and the days being at
shortest, in so intemperate a season and time of the year, would be so foolish
and unadvised as to take the field at that time in proper person; considering
especially, that the matter was not of such importance, that (if any accident
should have happened) it could have been any great prejudice unto his crown or
kingdom: but that some other rather then himself might have been sent, and
employed in that action, and have discharged it well and sufficiently for his
honor and reputation.

The Prince of Epyre being nothing at all abashed for the late slaughter of his
people, or through the disfauor of fotrune for that days service, did apply
all his wits, and employed his best diligence, from time to time to molest
and annoy them of the garrison: sometimes in the day, and otherwhiles in the
night, he would lead his troops close under the walls, and casting balls and
pots of wild fire up into the air, which fell down amongst the enemies: he
sought by these and all other means to astonish them: and sometime he would
send forth some small number of soldiers, to gather together the dead bodies,
and to drag them away, thinking by that policy to have drawn them forth to
issue out upon them. All these attemptes and cunning devises being practiced in
vain by the Albanois, he concluded to make an end of this siege, after he had
once more by one other assault tried the last and uttermost of his fortune,
howsoever the same succeeded and fell out: and he was induced to this
resolution, partly by reason of the hurt of Moses, and partly also because the
ill success of the last Scanderbeg encourages his soldiers to a new assault.
assault might seem in some sort to be excused and imputed to the sudden
coming of the night upon them, which might also promise the hope of better
fortune to such as had their minds charged with care, and did interpret things
according to their own particular affections. Wherefore the day following after
the sun rising, he caused it to be proclaimed throughout his camp by sound of
trumpet; that besides the great rewards promised in recompense of their virtue
who should enter first, he did permit them to have the pillage of the town,
and he amplified the matter with many good words, making it seem a great thing
in show and beyond all credit. Besides, he seemed to deplore and bewail the
shame and ignominy of the name of the Albanois: that so many excellent
Captains and brave soldiers, after innumerable proofs of their sufficiency
and valor, should to their singular reproach be enforced by a handful of base
and vile slaves to make so long abode, and so shamefully to spend their time
under these walls which were so shamefully lost unto the enemy. And he
demanded of them, how long they would suffer and endure this infamy: that
within their own province, and in the midst of so many towns and
fortresses, and nations of their obeisance, one vile garrison of the Barbarians
who had nothing but bare walls to defend them, and were destitute of all other
hope and comfort, should keep and hold out so long in this place, even under
their noses, and should in a manner triumph at their pusillanimitie and want of
courage? That they should hardly do any exployt of worth in a strange country
and a far off in foreign regions, if they had not the power to dislodge and
drive away these robbers who were gotten (as it were) within their doors, and
did dwell even within their very bowels.

With these and such like discourses and examinations having set a new edge on
the courage of the Albanians, and made them more eger against the Infidels, he
divided Second assault to Sfetigrade.
his companies, and having left about 600. for the guard and custody of the
camp, with the rest he pressed the town on all sides where it was
approchable. At the first they began the fight with their shot only both on the
one side and the other, each man doing his best to draw blood from his enemy.
After they had sufficiently skirmished together in that manner, and that they
began now to grow in choler: the most hardy and such as were well chafed
betook themselves to their ladders, being minded to talk with the enemy
somewhat nearer. Once or twice were they courageously repulsed by the
defendants, and they gave them not so much leisure, as to raise their ladders
to the walls: but at the last the Barbarians being surmounted by the
hardiness and obstinacy of the Christians, who no otherwise then as Lions
almost famished, do rush upon the flock without any remembrance either of
snares or other trappes that men do use to lay for them: so they, furiously
persisting in the assault without all fear of death or danger, by little and
little, did yield and give place to so extreme fury: and wanting both
strength and weapons to keep off the enemy, they retired themselves behind
the rampires in such sort, that they gave the Christians The Albanoys winning
the walls of Sfetigrade upon a surmise and fear of secret ambushments forsake
and loose the town.
good means and opportunity to have made themselves masters of the place. But
see what fear of Ambushments may do: our men who till then were so fierce and
courageous, and who in a cruel and bloody assault, showed themselves so
prodigal of their lives, and so careless of death it self which they had
continually even before their eyes: as soon as they perceived the enemy to
wax faint, and that one after another did abandon the wall, they began
presently to mistrust some policy, and having a conceit and imagination, that
some great troops of the enemy did lie close behind the rampires in some
ambuscado, and did attend there to bid them to some ill banquet: they grew more
cold and negligent in their actions, and casting their eyes about them on each
side, and carefully regarding all places near them, they did expect nothing
else, but even in a moment to be all of them destroyed: such was their vain
and foolish opinion. Herewithall had the Barbarians good leisure to bethink
themselves, and to provide for that which should be needful and necessary: and
their companions flocking thither from diverse quarters upon the rumor of that
fraie, and bringing with them great store and quantity of weapons, did revive
both their courage, and their good fortune. In this concourse many a man lost
his life, both on the one side and the other: but many more on the part of the
assailants then of the defendants: and more had been slain if the readiness
and good deuoire of Zachary had not hindered them: for he at another part of the
wall having raised up many ladders, did interrupt this their victory,
diuerting the enemy by a new onset: so that they were constrained to separate
themselves, and to sunder their forces. All this while you might have seen
Castriot with his squadrons, sometimes approaching near the wall, to terrify
them within: and sometimes doing the duty of a simple soldier, leading them
the way against their enemies; one while by prayers, another while by reproaches
he would solicit and animate them on. The archers and other shot being
placed round about the walls, did keep their stand where they were first
appointed, and still as the fury of the fight increased and continued, they
did never cease to play upon the Infidels as they marched up and down upon the
curtins. When the defendants did perceive that their numbers did decrease, and
that the Christians did increase in courage and obstinacy far beyond human
reason: they doubted what would become of it, and they feared the issue of that
days journey: wherefore to stop the course of their fury, and to gain time to
themselves, they devised this policy. They snatched up the Turkish ensigns
from the rampires, and calling to the Christians A policy of the Turks within
Sfetigrade
with a loud voice, they desired a truce and suspension of arms for a little
space, and that they might have liberty to parley with Scanderbeg. This was
granted unto them by the Albanians with the consent of their General: and both
parts being commanded to surcease from hostility, the Infidels were permitted
to speak their minds. Thereupon one of them, an ancient and grave old man
(after he had first yielded Speech of a Turk^ of Sfetigrade desiring a parley
and truce for a day.
thanks to the General and his companies, for so courteous and liberal a
grant made to their enemy) he told them that his desire was by the consent of
this company, that they might have truce granted them for that day only, to
the intent during this small time of delay, they might consult amongst
themselves upon the form of their capitulation, whereunto their whole company
was inclined with one mind and general consent: and that the next day they
would send certain deputies unto him with conditions, whereunto they would
submit and yield themselves: which if they were agreeable to him and to his
liking, they should take it as a singular and high favor: whereof
notwithstanding considering his clemency they never made any doubt nor
distrust, that if he did mislike of their offers, and would not allow of them,
that they would wholly refer themselves to his own discretion and ordinance;
and that they would not in any sort refuse nor depart from his arbiterment, and
judgment: and they were in good hope to conclude all things with him to the
good and profit of both parties. At the first Scanderbeg showed himself highly
discontented and nothing tractable to those demands of the Mahomatistes,
judging very wisely, that they sought for nothing else, but fraudulently by
these shifts to defer the assault for that day: and either to deprive him of
that advantage whereat he had them: or else in hope of succors from their
sovereign as the experience did afterward make it manifest. Answer of
Scanderbeg to the speech of the Turk demanding truce.
And therefore he enjoined them to declare presently what their intent and
meaning was: otherwise they should look for the uttermost extreamitie of a
fresh assault lively renewed and recontinued: that all time of delay was
impertinent, considering that the estate of their affairs was brought to such
necessity, and to an extreme exigent. Nevertheless at the length being
vanquished with their importunate flatteries, Scanderbeg faulty in overmuch
courtesy and facility, retireth from the assault, and accords truce to the
Turks.
and the entreatie of his own soldiers, he was content to give over the
assault. True it is that he saw, that if there were any good hope to force the
place, that this small time of delay could not deprive him of that advantage:
wherefore retyring his ensigns, and engines of assault, and his troops being
withdrawn into the camp. The rest of that day, and the night following was
spent in great rest and quietness.

The next morning, four Turks, men notably subtle and wily, being deputed to
treat upon this matter, came to speak with the Prince of Albanie; and brought
him diverse exquisite gifts and presents. The conditions whereupon they offered
to capitulate were of that nature and substance, that not only any victor, but
even men vanquished would have been loath to accept of them: and they did it
purposely to prolong the time, that whilst these should be rejected, in stead
of them they might prefer others, and after that again others: by means
whereof, the treaty might be drawn at length. And this was the sum of their
demand, That the ancient citizens being Conditions propounded by the Turks of
Sfetigrade.
restored within the town with their old privileges and immunities, both the
houses and the fields should be equally divided amongst them all: and that in
this manner they resigning and yet retaining still the town, would become his
subjects, and yield unto him perpetual fidelity and obeisance, utterly
disclaiming the name and government of Ottoman. And they required also, ten
thousand aspres in ready money to be given to their Governor. The Christians
gave them no answer, but only laughing at these demands, through pure despite
which they conceived of the same, they cried presently on all parts, To arms.
And thus with injuries and scoffs were these deceiptfull messengers dismissed
together with their guilfull and fallacious presents. The Paynims left not for
all that, but suddenly sent again the same persons to attend and know the last
resolution of the Christian General, and in case they could not otherwise
dispatch, to refer the whole to his discretion. This strange alteration in
the minds of the enemy, and their suspected liberality, though it did keep
Scanderbeg from believing them over rashly; yet nevertheless he thought it not
good to reject these means altogether: wherefore he told them plainly, that
he would not Answer of Scanderbeg to the conditions propounded by the Turks
of Sfetigrade.
change nor alter any things of his first offers made unto them, when he
summoned them at such time as their estate was not empayred, nor his camp then
endammaged: that they ought not now to think those offers grievous or
injurious, which themselves at another time had judged to be equal and
indifferent to the Sfetigradians: that they should not expect any other
composition at his hands: that if they would accept this, he was content
without any further loss to take the town into his hands, but if their drift
and purpose were, by these subtilties and disguisements of fair and cunning
speeches to gain time and to persist in their obstinate wilfulnes, that they
should not for their parts, ever after look but for all hostility and
extreme rigor: that they should al of them hold this for certain and
determined, that nothing should end this siege without the death and
destruction of them all.

Whilst the Barbarians did in this manner come and go to and fro, and that
they did thus feign and dissemble, three whole days were spent and consumed in
these emparlances, and at length the end made manifest, what was their intent
and purpose. On the one side therefore the subtlety and invention of the
defendants was discovered: on the other side news being now come of the
stirring and speedy coming of the great Turk, it did greatly grieve and
perplexe the mind of the Prince of Albanie. To quit the place besieged, the
late injury and abuse proffered by the Turks would not permit him: and to
continue there, he saw that both the doubt of the enemy, (who was reported to
be near at hand behind his back) and the importance of all his affairs,
which were of greatest consequence did dissuade him from it: Notwithstanding he
remained there a while longer, till such time as there came more certain
aduertisements of the preparation made by Amurath. But it seemed, the very
destinies did oppose themselves against his desires. For the heavens powered
forth such marvelous abundance of moistures and showers in all that time,
that the soldiers could not set their feet without their trenches, much less
could they attempt any thing against the walls. The rain being ceased,
Scanderbeg proclaimed one assault more against the town to be given the day
following: and he gave good order and direction, that all things requisite
should be made and provided in a readiness. Himself abstained from sleep all
the whole night: sometimes being busied and employed in diverse matters, which
were most needful and material: and sometimes did he walk Scanderbeg
encourages his soldiers to a new assault.
up and down his camp here and there, encouraging and exhorting his people:
often times telling them, that they must either drive the enemy clean out of
Epire, or not return any more to the camp, till they had made themselves
masters of the town: that the realm of Epire did seem disguised and
deformed: that nothing could be said or esteemed in safety and security, if
the Pagans should be suffered any longer to abide and continue within the
country. And admit that there were no peril or danger to be feared, nor any
dishonor did ensue by suffering them, yet what reason had they to endure those
outrages of their enemies? and how long would they swallow up those derisions,
and disgratious scoffs and abuses which had been offered them?

Thus the night being quickly spent in these consultations and provisions for
the intended service, the day began now to approach, before the break whereof
Scanderbeg drawing forth his troops, did lodge them all against the walls:
but the soldiers found it more painful to creep up against the hill, then
was ordinary or accustomed: Third assaul^ to Sfetigrade.
and the way was more soft and slipperie under their feet, by reason of the
great store of water wherewith the earth was washed: that it made them to draw
their ladders and other engines with great pain, and (as a man may say) to
dragge them with their teeth. Nevertheless the Christians, being lately
incensed with choler, and inflamed with anger, did not feel either the
difficulty or the painfulness of their attempt. The besieged who doubted of
no such matter, at the first did resort to the defense of the walls in small
numbers, and were somewhat negligent in their deuoire: but having quickly made
provision of all things, they hastened thither with greater forces, and
reenforcing their defense, they were of sufficient power to repulse the
assailants. From thenceforth the audacitie and forwardness of the Epirotes was
not so fierce and violent as before: and the swords and countenance of the
enemy being now near them and at hand, did inuit and persuade them to carry
themselves advisedly, and with discretion: and not with fury and rashness,
and too much hardiness of courage. Wherefore casting a careful eye to the
blows of the enemy on the one side, which fought with them aloft from the
walls, they took a conceit immediately, that there was another enemy at
their backs: and that the rumor (which had been reported of the return of
Amuarth) was not in vain, nor a tale falsely given out. The brute of this
concepit did so increase from mouth to mouth, and it took such force in their
credulous hearts, by a certain apprehension of vain fear that they seemed to
see before their eyes those preparations of the enemy, which were yet scarcely
begun: and they imagined the Sultan to be already come into Epire, who was yet
quiet and at rest at home in Andrinople. Scanderbeg though he were of an
invincible courage, yet perceiving this fear and terror of his soldiers, was
constrained to yield to the present necessity: and by reason that all things
were in a kind of horror, confusion and disorder: he caused to sound a retrait,
and to surcease from the assault.

It was scant the ninth hour of the day, but that Scanderbeg (after his men
had taken Siege of Sfetigrade ra^sed by Scanderbeg
a repast) commanded them to trusse up their baggage: having first thrown
down their trenches, and set fire on the other fortifications of their camp.
The trees and other fruits in the country had not been exempted from the wrath
and fury of the common soldier, but they had made spoil and havoc of all,
if the Prince of Albanie had not repressed their rage: telling them, that it
was to be hoped one day when it should please God to be more favorable unto
them, to recover the town, and to reestablish the same in her former estate.
And therefore without any signs or marks of an enemy left behind him, he
dislodged as secretly as he could, and took the direct way toward Croie. It
is reported that Scanderbeg lost at this siege of Sfetigrade Number of
Christians slain at the siege of Sfetigrade.
five hundredth men and more: which opinion in my judgment has more likelihood
of truth, then others who affirm, that at the time when he dislodged thence
with his army, he had not lost above sixty. A thing most absurd and far from
all reason, considering the great number of the Turks which were slain at the
former expedition, when they besieged the same place: as all men do confess
jointly and with one accord: unless perhaps we will seem to say as the
fabulous Poets have imagined of some men: that the bodies of the Christians
were less penetrable then those of the infidels.

It was on the three and twentieth day of October that (the siege of Sfetigrade
being Scanderbeg provides for* the defense of Croy and other places.
raised) Scanderbeg with his army returned to Croie, where he had scant a
minute of leisure to recreate and to refresh himself, but that he gave present
and speedy order for the enrolling of men, and made choice of Captains and
leaders, to whom he appointed their several charges according as the
consequence of his affairs, and the news lately brought unto him did require.
The town was voided of all sorts of Number of soldiers in garrison within
Croy against the siege of Amurath.
people, who for their age and sex were unfit to bear arms: and it was
stuffed with a garrison of 2000. men, of whom some were Albanois, some
Italians, some Almains, Scla^onians and Frenchmen. All which nevertheless did
agree in such unity and good accord, as better could not be imagined: the
which was in the end made manifest and apparent by the happy success and
honor which they purchased by the worthy defense of the town against Amurath*
Vranocontes as in times past, so now with the Vranocontes the Governor of
Croy, his commendation
general liking, and with a wonderful consent and allowance of all men, had
the absolute, charge, authority, and government of the place. Very hardly was
there any other to be found in the whole army more fit and worthy of this
degree, or who was more in favor, or better accepted of the soldiers. He was
a personage of singular resolution and conceit in the midst of all perils
and greatest hazards: he was ever ready in the performance of his charge, were
i^ in commanding or obeying: he always used and that with an excellent good
grace, to attribute the praise and desert of any service well affected, to the
soldiers in general, rather then by robbing others of their merits to
appropriate it unto himself. And besides all this, he had behaved him self
well and valiantly during his whole life. Both the goodly representation of his
person, and the gravity of his years did make him to be reverenced of all
men: and the ancient Nobility of his race, did greatly beautify and (as it
were) season all these good parts in him. Wherefore to confirm and continue
this good opinion conceived of him by the Albanois with so general a consent
and liking, he promised to make no spare of his pains nor vigilance, though it
were with the loss of his life in all occasions where it was needful to be
employed. To Stellusa likewise and Petralba, and other places of strength, were
sent both governors and sufficient forces to defend the^. Neither was it
forgotten to appoint a great multitude of persons in all the towns, who should
make provision of victuals and munitions from all parts. But notwithstanding
all the care, pains, and industry taken in that behalf, yet hardly could they
make provision of the same for 3. whole months, by reason both of the
continual spoil and wast made by the wars, and for their daily attendance and
emploiment in arms, which had caused the Epirots that year before to neglect
their husbandry, and not to attend to tillage. Notwithstanding the report is,
that certain marchaunts of Venice, and others of the inhabitants there in the
Venetian territories, did furnish them of victuals secretly and under hand:
because at that time (such was the ill hap of the Christians) the lords of that
Signiory were in league and amity with the Turkish Monarke. Certain Scanderbeg
aided in all his wars with supplies of money by the Venetians. Venetians in
peace and amity with the Turk.
it is, that Scanderbeg did never fail of great supplies of money from that
estate, and during his whole life, whilst he was in wars, he did atchieue and
go through them under the support and favor of the Venetians: referring unto
them the glory of his most memorable exploits and triumphs. I doubt not but
many will marvel, no less then I my self, whence it should proceed, that the
Venetian should make this peace with the Infidel, not co^prising Scanderbeg in
the same: considering that they were before so strictly associated together, by
so many bonds of friendship and amity. For my part I will not wrong that Senate,
which has ever been reputed both sage and religious, to suspect that they did
it in any other respect and consideration, but only for the good and
preservation of Greece, which seemed then to be banded and divided even within
and against it self. And therefore I leave this matter for others to give
their judgments upon it.

Provision being made of grain and other victuals within Croy, the common
garners and magazins were filled in such rate and proportion, as it was
sufficient to sustain the soldiers for one whole year. Then was there
preparation also made for supplies of all kinds of shot, both long bows and
artillery: the charge and managing whereof was continued to the Frenchmen, and
they had allowance at all times both in peace and war, for each man's pay 5.
crowns a month. And most part of the garrison within Croy were harguebussiers
and cross bows. The affairs of Croy being well settled and assured, that which
remained of the victuals, did Scanderbeg cause to be transported and divided to
other towns and places of the Province. For his own part, before he would
leauy any new forces to be retained to himself for the molesting and inuading
of the enemy, as he was accustomed, he thought it good first to go and visit
those troops* which he had lately ordained for the defense and guard of the
frontiers. And therefore he called unto him Moses and some few horsemen
besides, with whom he went both to take order, and give directions for all
things, and to send forth espials to sound out the enterprises of Amurath, that
he might be fully informed of all things in particular. There was no occasion
neither of frostes nor cold, nor the earth all covered Scanderbeg ^^^ industry
and great carfulness.
with snow, that could hinder or stay the industry and diligence of this
laborious and watchful Chiefetaine: neither the greatness or difficulty of
his affairs or determinations, nor the hard travel of his painful iourneis
could terrify him, but that every day more resolutely then other, he did
undertake all the labors that belonged to his charge, visiting and reuisiting
sometimes one place, sometimes another. And at other times would he disguise
himself, and in the habit of a sheepherd, would go even under Scanderbeg
disguiseth him self to epsy advantages upon his enemies
the walls of Sfetigrade, to espy if he could by any policy or stratageme (as
he had in times past) or by force, or by favor of secret trains and ambushmens
closely laid, seize upon that town, and get it out of the hands of the
Ottoman. By means whereof, they within had no liberty to rest themselves: but
(as if they had bin still besieged) they stirred not from their gates, neither
durst they at any time be negligent in keeping good watch and ward, and in
looking to all things, with all care as they were accustomed.

During that time that Scanderbeg was thus carefully busied about his affairs,
the espials Amurath upon the news of the siege raised at Sfetigrade refers
his journey into Epire.
being returned brought him tidings, that there was no more talk of assembling
any forces by the Sultan, but that the fury of his arms was deferred, and that
Amurath had put off the war of Epire til the next spring: for he having heard
of the departure of the christians from the siege of Sfetygrade, needed not to
be entreated (considering the season of the year) to make stay of his
preparations, which he had begun with so great heat and vehemence, but
changing his former order and decree, he had caused a new edict to be
published* That al his soldiers and captains who were appointed and enrolled
for that action of Epire, should make their repair and rende vous at Andrinople
the 15. day of March following. He had a great desire to have that voyage and
the siege of Croy to be concealed and kept close: but he could not disguise nor
convey his matters so cunningly, but that every man might assure himself that
Scanderbeg was the enemy against whom those forces should be employed. Upon
this determination of the Turkishe Monarch, the Christians likewise had leisure
for a while to breath themselves. Wherefore the garrison upon the frontiers
being diminished by the one moity, there were not left above 2000. at the most,
who building for themselves lodgings and cabins (as the fashion is of
soldiers) did provide against the injury of the weather, and winter season,
and the residue of them were dismissed and had leave to depart home. The king
Croy repaired and fortified.
of Epire with Moses and the others, being returned to Croy, did for a while
continue there, during which time, he caused certain bastils and platformes to
be added to the other fortifications of the town, and to repair the walls on
that side which lay toward Tiranne, where antiquity and continuance of time
had made the^ weak and ruinous. This done, as he was ever stirring and
impatient of rest, suddenly he set foot in stirrup, posting to this and to that
place: and being meanly apparelled, and with 10. men only in his company, he
went to the Potentates his next neighbors and allies, and to the governors of
the Venetian towns, laboring to embarke them in this war, and to put them in
mind of the imminent danger and ruin, that did threaten them even at hand, and
did hang over their heads: both admonishing and encouraging them to the
remembrance of their deuoire and duty. Nevertheless the most part of that
winter, he passed covertly in the confines of Macedony, in company of the
garrison which was there appointed. All which time, a man should scarce have
seen them of Sfetygrade, to issue forth out of their gates, for that the
nearenesse of our camp being but 15. miles off, made them to stand carefully
upon their guard, and did keep them in great fear and awe.

The cold winter being thus spent and passed over, with the new spring came new
1450.
labors and calamities, and all things grew more troublesome both in public
and in particular. There passed almost no day nor night, without some letters
or intelligence brought to Scanderbeg. Amongst the Infidelles, one while came
some to yield themselves to his service: at an other time, others remembering
their ancient familiarity, would inform him truly of the desseignes and
enterprises of Amurath: which caused many to pluck up their spirits more and
more; and to others, it gave occasion either of fear or hardines, according to
the habit and disposition of each man's heart and courage. But for that he had of
late sufficiently provided for all his towns, and nothing had bin Scanderbeg
^^^^ieth an ar(...) to make res^^ance against the ^^^asion (...)tended by
^murath.
revoked nor diminished of those prouisio^s* there was no great matter now
remaining to take order for, but only to assemble some forces in form of an
army, with which he might annoy the enemy sometimes in the open field, and
sometimes in the straights of the mountains according as the opportunity of time
and place should give him leave. That so when they should afterward beleaguer
Croy, he might be the better able to weary and annoy them, as he had oftentimes
at the siege of Sfetigrade, atempted and done the like with happy success and
good fortune. Of all his Chiefetains, Scanderbeg had not then the company or
assistance of any, but only of Tanuse, of Streese, and of the Dibrian. For the
others having been sent and employed in the like occurrences and occasions,
were divided into sundry towns and several fortresses. He sent therefore
those three with all speed to leauy men throughout all the Province: but by
reason that it was drawn dry of good and able men (the flower and youth of the
realm being distributed into diverse places and castles) they spent many days
in the mustering and leauying of those forces. And this was the cause that
Scanderbeg (as the report goes) Dalmatia or Sclauony upon the sea.
in this war, did wage many of the subjects of the Venetians, and some also
out of the next Dalmatia, or that part of Sclauony, that confineth upon the sea.

The Prince of the Turks in this mean while, had at the time prefixed,
assembled the most part of his forces, and yet he wanted many thousands to
furnish up so huge and Amurath leauieth his army and makes preparations for
his journey into Epire.
massy an army as that which he had the year last past. By reason, that either
the far distance of places, or the difficulty of the ways did hinder some of
them, either more or less. And therefore attending till such time as he saw his
numbers and preparations in all points performed, because he would loose no
time, he employed that space in the provision of other things necessary for an
action of that weight and importance, and especially for the gathering of
victuals. Albeit order had bin taken, that every soldier should furnish him
self in particular with victuals for many days provision: for he was fully
resolved, that the Christians had not left any corn upon the ground, and that
they would wast and destroy all the pasture and herbage upon the first tidings
of his approach. It were almost a thing impossible to number up all the
instruments and engines of assault which were prepared. Amongst the rest,
there were many tools and instruments of iron used by husbandmen, besides an
infinite number of bars and mattocks, and pickaxes made of iron crooked of
purpose to dig in mines, as was afterward seen by experience: for the Sultan
had bin persuaded to use this devise as a most commodious and fit mean to
carry the city of Croy, which otherwise was inexpugnable. In like manner, great
provision was made of little pieces of artillery, such as might conveniently be
carried upon camels, and other beasts of carriage. And as for great ordinance to
serve for battery, he provided great store of brass, and other rude and massy
metal, which being carried in gross, should afterward be founded and* cast
for that Number of Turks in the army of Amurath at the siege of Croy 160000.
^^n^
purpose. These things thus prepared, and his troops being fully furnished and
complete to their perfect numbers, it is generally agreed by all the
Historiographers, that his army consisted of 160000. fighting men: besides
artificers, as carpenters, masons, and all other sorts of handy crafts*men and
laborers, which are reported to have followed this camp, part of the^ upon the
purse and pay of the Ottoman, and part at their own charges for the hope and
desire of prey and purchase. All of them being persuaded, that the siege of
Croy and their abode in Epire, would endure a very long time and space, and
would prove very tedious: for by reason that there went many strange rumors
and reports of the strong situation of this city, and of the rare
fortifications thereof, as of a place impregnable, Amurath was determined not to
return again to Andrinople, till such time as he had gotten it into his hands
and possession.

About the fifth of April, as soon as all things were in a readiness, and that
the host Al^anzes or the Turkish van^currours. Sebalias Ze^renesse.
was ready to march: the vauntcurrours of Alchanzes under the leading of
Sebalias Ze^renesse (a man of great practice and judgment in actions military)
were sent into Macedony, at the same instant that the king of Epire (having all
at leisure raised his forces, and disposed good watches, wards, and skouts
throughout all the mountains and woods) did ride up and down here and there
coursing ouerall the Province, and taking order for the estate of his affairs.
By this time he had retired also his garrison from the frontiers, and had with
great diligence gathered all his troops together. All this notwithstanding I
do not find, that during this siege of Croy, he had with him self and in his
Number of Scanderbeg his army against Amurath at the siege of Croy 8000. men
only horse and foot.
own company, more then 8000. fighting men, whereof 2000. were footmen, and
the residue horsemen: neither do any of those who have historised his acts
affirm any otherwise. I do suppose that the cause of this small number
proceeded either of the scarcity of soldiers (as was lately touched) because
he was of necessity to depart, and to sever them into so many places, or it
might be, that he thought it more expedient to dally with the enemy, and to
travel him by little and little, holding him continually in alarm, and so to
reserve the chief strength of his forces to other necessities and diverse
accidents of fortune. Considering that the war was to be made in the very
center and bowels (as it were) of the Province, and that now the consequence of
his whole estate and kingdom was in question, and he was to set up his rest
upon the success of that war.

Three days before the arrival of the Mohammedan troops into Epire,
Scanderbeg Scanderbeg spoileth his own country before the coming of the
Turks army into Epire.
with his horsemen beating over all the champion country, had trampled under
foot, wasted, and spoiled, or by sword and fire had consumed and destroyed all
the corn, and whatsoever else was found fruitful upon the ground. And
afterward being advertised by message upon message of the approach of the
enemy, leaving the plain country, he retired himself upon a mountain
called Tumenista, about four miles Tumenista a mountain 4. miles from Croy.
from Croy, there to take further advise and counsel for his proceedings,
according as the time, and the course of his affairs should persuade and
induce him.

The Cauallary of the Turk holding on their march toward Epire, encountered
not with any in the way that made head against them, but passing quietly
through the Province, they did at length make their entry without any
impechment into the territory Sebalias begins the siege of Croy.
of Croy. And after they had made diligent search round about the city, what
places were most safe and secure to encampe in, and in what quarter they might
most co^modiously come to assault the town, they took their lodging at the
last in Tiranna, Tyranna. The nature of the soil and the circuit of the
territory of Croy.
and there pitched their tents and pauilions. The country thereabouts is a
fair and goodly plain of sufficient space and largeness, pleasant to the
eye, and very fertile and fruitful: yet is it more apt for tillage and to
bear corn, then for any other fruit or commodity. It extends it self from
Croy, to the town of the Parthinois. But before I proceed any further, many
reasons do induce me here briefly to touch the original Parthinia in Epire her
original.
of this town, and of the ancient estate thereof: and especially that which
the ancients have celebrated touching the same, and which is not unknown nor
hidden from the posterity. It may easily be gathered, that this town was of
good reckonning with the rest of the towns of that Province before the civil
wars of Caesar and Pompey. The ruins thereof, with many shows and particular
marks and monumentes which are Parthinia ruinated by Julius Caesar.
yet left, may yield no obscure representation of the ancient nobility of the
place, and of the reputation which it once had. For the report is, that it was
overthrown and ruinated by Julius Caesar, when he besieged Pompey and the
Roman Senate within the town of Duras. After which time it remained still in
the same case and desolation, and Duraz or Dirachin or Epidamum.
there is not yet to this day any tract or appearaunce that it was ever
restored or repared, save only that the inhabitants have in some sort endeavored
in continuance of time to renew it, so far forth as it might serve them for
their common use and necessity. As concerning the name thereof, I find not that
it had ever any other either at the first by imposition, or since by
usurpation, neither do the ancients make mention of any particular man to be
the founder thereof. And therefore we may refer the original and foundation
of it, to the first inhabitors of it: which the very name also does demonstrate
and antiquity testifies no less. And we see that the nation of the
Parthinois, was, and is ever accounted amongst the mostrenowmed peoples of
Epire. Now at this time Parthinois, or Parthins, or Praese.
by another word themselves do call it Praese: and they do not only comprehend
all those within the number of her inhabitants, who dwell within the enclosures
of her ruinous walls, but even them also who inhabit the suburbs, and all other
places adjoining with that territory: and the place is in all parts very
delectable, and well stored with all kinds of commodities. The people are a
very war like kind of nation and they are at this day numbered amongst the other
peoples of Albanie. But at this time the report of the coming of the
Barbarians, had made them all to forsake their dwellings, and with their
families and housholdes to seek refuge within the fortresses, leaving the land
naked and in a manner desert.

Sebalias having encamped his soldiers to the most advantage, and having
fitted all The manner of Sebalias enca^ping before Croy.
things so conveniently, that he might very well contemn and set at naught all
the force which the enemy should attempt against him: he now took not any
regard to any, but to them only which were within the town. He had barred and
stopped up all the passages and ways leading to the city, to the intent no
succors nor victuals should be brought unto them. The Turks had not brought
with them any other weapons, wherewith to annoy the besieged, but only their
lances and cimitaries. Besides, Sebalias had no desire, either to course over
the country, or to pil and spoil it, being made wise by the old and late
misfortune and mishaps of his companions. And the Sultan also at his departure
had expressly commanded him, and straightly forbidden him, except it were upon
an extremity, not to make any attempt upon the enemy. The same consideration
also withheld our men from seeking to fight with the Infidels, and did urge
them to remit the good success and encounter of this war to the coming of the
Turkish Scanderbeg taeketh a survey of the Turks camp before Croy. Number of
Turks, vauntcurrours under Sebalias at the siege of Croy.
Emperor. For Scanderbeg being gone with part of his people to take a view of
the camp of the Infidels, and having learned some thing touching his purpose
and counsels, to the intent he might enterprise upon him as he should see cause
and opportunity; he found their puissance to be so great (for they were 40000.
men strong, as they were the year before) and their General did carry himself
with such wonderful providence and dexterity both in the seating of his camp,
and in ordering of all other his affairs, that he retired himself unto his
Fort as secredy as he might, without attempting any thing against them.
Besides, he doubted least the Sultan should come suddenly upon him, and should
charge him when he least suspected, and so enclose and shut him up behind at
his back. He remained therefore quiet within his trenches, watching and
attending the coming of Amurath, that when he should once hane displaied all
his forces, and was planted with his whole camp before the walls, then he
might have the more advantage and commodity to inuado their tents dispersed
here and there, the multitude being in confusion and disorder, and then he
might weary them with continual onsets and invasions, especially when they had
begun to assault the town, and that the best forces of the Ottoman being
busied in diverse actions, their trenches might more fitly and conveniently be
enda^^^aged.

During these counselles and deliberations so advisedly pl^^^ed by the
Christians, the royal ensigns of the Ottoman did daily arrive more and more,
and the whole Amurath arriueth in ^pire and encampeth before Croy.
country was filled with armed soldiers. In the end of April, Amurath the
great Turk, accompanied with Mahomet his son, with the greatest of his
nobility, and the chiefest strength of his whole army, joining him self to
those forces which had already encamped before the city, came and pitched his
tents also before Croy, where his Tomb was provided and made ready for him.
There was little less then twenty days between the coming of the (...) and
the arrival of Amurath, neither ought it to seem strange unto any man. For by
reason of the great burden of the cariages of the army, and the infinite
baggage of the soldiers, and partly for the ease and pleasure of their
sovereign, being now very aged and deep stricken in years, they did not march
above 5. miles a day. Thus you have Amurath now before Croy, you may imagine
that you see his companies lying dispersed all over the fields, and the town
environed and girt in on all sides, so that there was no space, no not a foot
of ground round about the walls but it was covered with lodgings and
pauilions; insomuch Croyans their notable and assured courage and resolution.
that many of them were quartered more then 6. miles off: neither was it
possible that so excessive a multitude should otherwise be lodged in any sort
to their case and commodity. The wonderful sight of this spectacle was
sufficient to have abashed the corages of the most brave and hardy, not only of
the soldiers, but even of the captains and leaders, and to have abated the
stomach of every man not without some reason and cause of fear and terror, by
the contemplation of their own proper perilles, which might have made them
forgetful and vnrespectiue of their religion, of their country, of their faith
and fidelity, and of all bonds of duty and common honesty. Nevertheless, such
was the courage of the besieged far above the ordinary use of men, that they
were nothing altered from their first purpose and resolution, neither could the
object of so pompous and fearful a show in any sort terrrifie them, but
rather taking thereby an occasion of greater hardines and constancy, for the
maintenance of their liberty and reputation, which they had before apprehended
in their generous and noble hearts; they did measure the greatness of their
glory, and did imagine that the quality of their future triumph and honor
should be recompensed according to the hugenes and extremity of the peril then
imminent. Wherefore, you might have seen the soldiers standing upon the walls,
as gallant and resolute as was possible, every man with a certain kind of
iealosie enquiring and entermedling with the charge and duty of others, to
prepare and make all things ready against the time that the assault should be
presented: and in the night time by their fires which they kindled, by their
clamors and shouts intermingled with songs and such like signs of mirth and
gladness: they gave forth evident notice and testimony what little account and
reckoning they made of the enemy. Likewise the other towns and ^astels of
Epire, had now forgotten their wonted fear and astonishment, and they imagined
that neither the power nor the name of Ottoman was of so great force and
puissance, nor so much to be redoubted as in times past when he came against
them. For they were now so hardened and acquainted with the experience of so
many evils that the continuance and custom of perilles, had brought them to
contemn and set at naught all dangers whatsoever.

The Infidels spent 4. whole days in translating and fitting of their
lodgings, which being once ordered according to their liking, they came
flocking in great troops to the tents of their Emperor, demanding and
requesting that they might be emploid. But for that day their desire was
refused, and they commanded with a most severe charge to keep themselves still
within their camp: the cause hereof was the extraordinary rest of Scanderbeg,
which did beyond all measure augment the suspicion of the old Sultan, Croy
summoned by Amurath.
doubting least he which was a master crafts man in fine polices and
stratagems, should set him on work with some unhappy task or other. The next
day therefore he sent 2. heralds to Vranocontes to summon him, and to make him
these offers: that if he would deliver and yield up the town into his hands,
it should be lawful both for him and Condition^ and offers made by Amurath to
Vranocontes.
the garrison to depart safe with bag and baggage: and that the Governor him
self should have over and above, 200000 aspres, besides honorable
entertainment (if he could like thereof) amongst his greatest friends and
fauorits. And concerning the citizens of Croy, in case his religion did not
like them, he was content to grant them free liberty of conference, and to
enjoy all their ancient liberties and franchises, and whatsoever favor wherein
he could otherwise pleasure them. With these conditions the Heralds being
arrived near unto the Port, (for there was but one only by reason that on all
the other parts of the city, the mountain runs whole continually on without
any breach, and is not to be approached) the Governor who had word sent him of
their coming by them of the court of guard, came riding thither very well
accompanied: of whom the Heralds requested that they might be admitted to
speak with him, and to deliver that which they had in charge, but he would not
permit them to enter within the town, but only to approach so near as their
voice might be well and conveniently heard and discerned: and thereupon made a
sign unto them that they should speak their minds. It is a strange thing and
very wonderful to see the fidelity and resolution of the Croians. Scarce had
the Turks any time or space to make an end of their speech, but Messengers of
the Turk rejected by the garrison of Croy.
that the soldiers interrupting the answer of the Governor, who was
beginning liberally and stoutly to speak his mind, did generally exclaim and
cry out: that the enemy was to be answered with harguebusse shot and not with
words; adding thereunto (as the guise of soldiers is) many scoffs and
injurious terms against the messengers.

This being rehearsed and made known to the Sultan, his wrath and indignation
was Amurath prepares for the assaulting of Croy. Ordinance cast for the
battery of Croy.
more and more incensed: and the venim of his malicious heart increased
mightily. Wherefore being destitute of this hope, he set himself to make
preparations for the assaulting of the town; and first of all causing his
massy heaps of copper, brass, and such rude metal to be vnpacked, he
commanded that artillery should be cast and founded. This work was long a
doing and endured above 15. days. Of ten pieces which were made and fully
finished, there was some difference in their greatness: yet four of them were
of like The battery planted against Croy.
equal bigness: and each of them did carry a shot of 600. weight, and the
other which were lesser bare a shot of 200. weight. Four of the lesser pieces,
and two of the greatest were planted against the wall on that side that lies
to Tyranna toward the East: the others were placed right against the Port. For
on those parts only had they hope to enter the town by means of some breach
made in the walls, because the access was more easy in those places, in
respect that the walls and fortifications there were raised and builded by
handywork of men. And albeit they seemed to be most strong and substantial,
yet did they not doubt but the fury of the canon would at length leuel them
with the ground. As for all the other bulwarks and fortifications, they were
every where assured with such excellent strength, and the natural site of the
mountain did so serve in stead of a rampire, that there needed not any
workmanship of man to defend them: for if the most hardy and aduenturous men
living durst enterprise against the^, they should but lose their labor for any
hurt they could do unto them: in so much that it is thought that the wall
wherewith the town is enuironned upon the top of the mountain, was raised
there of old by the founders of the city, not for any defense or strength that
it could add unto the place, but only to give a better grace, and to beautify
the town.

The ordinance being now mounted upon the carriage, and ready planted, to the
intent Croy battered.
they might more easily and speedily be removed as occasion should require,
they spent 4. whole days in battering the walls on those 2. sides, before that
the soldiers were led to the assault, and to fight with the besieged. The
town was greatly endammaged both on the one part and the other: the rampires
were beaten down, and almost half the wall was overthrown and razed, and the
rest so shaken and torn that it seemed ready to fall with the least violence
that should be used against it. The Turks seeing so fair and wide a breach,
were in a singular good hope to carry the town: and therefore they showed
Turks make preparations for the assault of Croy.
themselves very forward to provide scaling ladders and other engines ready for
the assault. It was a wonder to see how the soldiers bestirred themselves,
laboring and striving to get together from all parts great and mighty beams
of timber, and running up and down the fields to make provision of all other
sorts of engines and devises. There was not almost any tent but with a kind of
emulation did bring forth some particular stuff or matter to set forward the
assault: and according as every one of them had a desire to out go each other,
and to bear away the reward that was propounded for him, that could first free
the wall against the enemy. The Bassaes themselves and other the chief
officers of the grand Seignior did not make any spare of their pains nor did
they stand Mahomet his industry at the siege of Croy.
idle, so desirous they were to prevent the good grace and favor of Amurath.
Mahomet was noted above the rest to use an vncessable kind of diligence, and
with a singular viuacitie of spirit, as if he had been one of the meanest
soldiers, was always about his father, and setting aside all regard of his
estate and degree, he spared no travel and pains but did busy and employ him
self in all matters with great readiness and resolution: and running
sometimes here, sometimes there, he did inflame and encourage the soldiers, as
much by the example of his own doings as by words and cheerful exhortations.
And morethen that, it is reported, that besides the reward publicly
propounded by the Sultan, he promised a 100000. aspres to him that should first
get within the town, and should fasten the Turkish colors upon the wall.

Touching the Croyans as their minds were altogether different and of another
disposition, Croyans their resolution.
so were there effects also diverse. The Paynims were grown to that pride and
fierceness of their hearts, only of a greedy desire, and an inordinate appetite
of gain and glory, which caused them rashly to undertake and hunt after that
thing whereof they never had any possession. Contrariwise the Christians had
their minds fixed upon this: that all manner of most ample and honorable rewards
were assuredly to be expected from Scanderbeg, and they did consider moreover
that the co^seruation of the realm, the safety of their country, the
security of their confederats, and in brief the welfare of all the estate of
Albany did consist and depend upon their valor and virtue. For this cause they
were animated and hartned not only with a kind of obstinate and settled
resolution and with a purpose of incredible perseverance: but they were
transported with so violent a passion of wrath and fury, that they seemed as
men almost enraged. Whereupon though the wall being thrown down and ruinated
on that side, did give them cause both of grief and terror by the deformity
of that object: yet did the greatness of their coutages nevertheless so
prevail in their resolute and stout hearts, that it did easily put away and
expel out of their minds all conceit of faintness, fear or sorrow: and they
did mutually recomfort and encourage each other. Above all, Vranocontes had a
notable good grace in exhorting and animating of the garrison, for as he went
up and down amongst them: he would oftentimes touch and take them by the
hands, he would handle their curats and lay his hands upon their stomachs,
saying.

These, these, are the bulwarks of cities and towns: these are the firm and
substantial Speech of Vranocontes, encouraging the Croyans upon the r^in^ of
their walls battered by the Turks.
rampires of walls: these be the stones that are not batterable: this is the
strongest and surest kind of lyme and mortar. What honor, what praise, what
triumph can we expect or hope for in this place, if being covered and shrouded
under these walls, our surety shall consist only in their strength and safety?
And if they shall be the only means to guard and defend us, and not rather our
persons to be the defense of them: the very cowards can do so much and the
fearful sheep will contemn the houling of the ravenous wolf, if they be
safely enclosed in a sure cote* Such honor is proper and due to the walls and
not to the generous soldier. Our Prince has not commanded is hither to be
protected and defended by this town, but the town is commended unto us, and
committed to our custody, and to be ^^fe^ded by us* True virtue is always
exercised in the greatest dangers, and ^he is noutished in things that are high
and difficult* who is not a good pilot upon the sea in time of calm weather?
Things that are firm, can continue stable of them selves, and need not the
succor and assistance of men: neither do they require the help of any human
audacity. And brave and courageous men do not esteem, but rather shun those
adventures, by the defense whereof, they shall not purchase any more honor,
then if they had not defended them at all. When a thing begins to decay, and
to fall to ruin, that is it which requires to be supported, and in such cases
it is, that virtue strives to show it self. I may say it again and again
(my good companions) that there only does shine the brightness of valiant
hearts, there do the excellent and courageous spirits discover themselves.
Wherefore these flankers and this curtin thus laid open by the battery, and
this breach made by the cannon of the enemy, let it be filled and defended with
your persons, and with your arms, let your stout and valiant bodies as of
brave and galla^t soldiers be opposed against the infidels in steed of strong
walls and fortifications: in so doing you shall give me the more certain and
assured proof of your valor and worthy behavior. Let us therefore so carry
our selves, let us so labor and endeavor in this our conflict to weaken and
diminish the forces of the Barbarians, that the tyrant may be abashed at the
valor of the Croians, and that his courage may be abated and repressed: then
will he abandon the town and raise his siege, when he shall see the first
fruits of this war entertained with the blood of so many of his subjects.

These and many other speeches to that effect did the governor use sometimes
in the Albanian language, sometimes in Italian, and sometimes also by
interpretours: disposing and preparing the minds of his soldiers to the
assault which they expected the day following, and inuiting every man both by
word and by deed, to do his duty and best deuoire. Wherefore whilst the
soldiers in their several charges here and there did diligently apply them
selves, and were the more incensed by his presence, to labor cheerfully in
their several emploiments: the night at length came upon them, during the
which nevertheless the vigilance of Vranocontes did not cease in the
continuance of all necessary preparations, till it was two hours within
night, and that which remained was spent in sleep, and in taking of their ^est.

The infidels who had in the day time set all things in a readiness, did pass
all that night in great quietness till the break of day, for the evening
before, it was concluded, that the town should be assaulted, and proclamation
was made by sound of trumper, commanding all men that before seven of the
clock in the morning (certain captains and companies having first broken
their fast) they should repair with their arms to the lodging of the Sultan.
For this cause the soldiers with great promptness and diligence, did not
fail to be there at the time appointed, being well provided of all things
accordingly. Then the most worthy and notable persons of chiefest mark and
quality being called together, the old Prince began to use some speeches unto
them in Encouragements of Amurath and Mahomet to the Turks being to assa^l^
Croy.
most vehement and ardent manner, more then the vigor and strength of his aged
and weakened spirit would well permit and conveniently suffer. Young Mahomet
likewise, being very prompt and forward both in action and in speech, did not
long keep silence, but the oration of his father being scant ended, as one
furious and full of venomous rage, he arose from his seat, and did so bitterly
inueigh against the Christians in general (besides the extremity of his
private hatred which he bare to the Epirots in particular,) that he there
bewrayed him self (as an other Ha^niball against the Romans) Mahomet his
mortal hatred to the Christians.
to be their mortal and sworn enemy, and after him all the other Chiestaines
and leaders did encourage each man his own soldiers. By that time that all
things were ready and in good order, and that the Turk had dined at his ease,
it was near noone, at which time the squadrons being drawn forth of the
trenches, did display themselves upon the plain. It might be judged an unfit
season to begin such an assault, considering the extreme heat of the summer:
nevertheless the Ottoman thought it to be the best time, because he
mistrusted, that if he should have drawn them out of the camp either in the
night, or late toward the evening, perhaps it would have given Scanderbeg the
more opportunity to rush upon them and to invade and molest his trenches, and
yet did not this his suspicion gain him any thing, neither was it altogether
in vain.

The alarm being given, and the troops (as we have said) being issued forth,
and Scanderbeg inuadeth the camp of Amurath before Croy.
marching on with a wonderful noise and sound of trumpets drums, and
clamours of the soldiers, they were now come to the walls: and the foremost of
them had scant or but newly begun the fight, when the Turkish camp was
suddenly in an vproare, and was filled with a great tumult and horrible fear
sprung up amongst them. The cause thereof was Scanderbeg, who having of a long
time watched and laid espiall to see what the Sultan would determine to do:
now with a strong troop of horsemen (the most able and best mounted of all his
army) was come to the tents of the enemy, and rushed in upon them where they
lay next and nighest unto him. The Turks which were placed there in that
quarter, did receive him at the first onset very resolutely: but perceiving by
the loss and slaughter of many of their fellows, that they could not hold out
nor stand against him: they being scattered and dispersed here and there in
that fear, had soon forsaken both their court of guard and all things else
whatsoever, if the others who were next them had not made have: and running
thither from all parts at the noise of the alarm, and making head against
the enemy, had not stayed them from flying farther. The Albanians keeping their
ranckes close, and taking the advantage of this good fortune, did charge those
that came last to encounter them more lively then Number of Turks slain by
Scanderbeg at his first invasion of their camp before Croy.
they had done the former, and having laid more then 600 Turks dead at their
feet, and made the Barbarians on that side to betake them selves to flight,
they sacked two of their tents carrying away diverse ensigns, and whatsoever
else was found within the same. This rumor being brought from hand to hand (as
the manner is) to the ears of Amurath, who was then busied in ordering his
forces to the assault, although the old man had made provision before of many
things, and did greatly affie himself in the sufficiency of those whom he had
left within the camp: nevertheless dreaming and forethinking himself of the
worst that might happen (for he was wont ever to say, that Saying of Amurath
touching Scanderbeg. Seremet sent against Scanderbeg.
nothing was sufficient to make resistance against the fierceness and fury of
this beast,) he sent Seremet one of his captains with 4000. horse for the
repulse of the Christians. Mahomet who did always burn in extreme hatred
against this Prince (though his father would have diswaded him from it) went
thither also being accompanied with the ordinary guard of his person, but
before that these forces were ready on foot, Scanderbeg perceiving that he
should not be able to make his party good against so many (as were coming
upon him) had turned bridle and provided for the surety Scanderbeg in great
hazard of his life.
of him self and his people, yet not without the extreme danger of his life.
For (as the report goes) the heat of fight had made him so far to forget him
self, that he brake in amongst his enemies where they were thickest, and he
engaged him self so far, that he was almost oppressed by them, and he was
not able (but with extreme pain) to make him self way through the multitude
that pressed upon him and sought to stop his passage, for both his own
strength, and the forces of his horse began to fail, in so much that very
hardly and difficultlie did he escape and free him self from amongst them.
And after he was with much a do gotten from them, yet did they not cease on all
parts to pursue him as long as they had any hope to overtake him, or to stay
him. In this manner did the Christian troops on the one side, and the General
on the other side by a happy retrait shift them selves out of the fight of the
Mahometistes. This tumult being pacified and appeased, the Turks returned unto
their camp, and the Sultan his son repaired to his father, extremely grieuing
Mahomet voweth and swears the destruction of Scanderbeg.
that after such a brauado and the slaughter of so many of their people, his
enemy should be escaped from him. And he there took a solemn oath before them
all, that he would never leave watching whole months, days, and nights (if
need were) but at one time or other by his ambushments and trains, he would
get this savage and wild beast to fall into his snares which he meant to lay
for him: that he wanted neither a good mind nor good means to effect it: and
he did so far assure himself of a good success, that if the other did hold on
still, and continue in this bravery and temerity, thus to assail them and to
approach to their trenches, he did not doubt but to make him to repent it.

The Prince of Epire having freed him self from the pursuit of his enemies,
took an other way, and went after his own company: who being in a marvelous
care and Scanderbeg his absence cause of great perplexity to his soldiers.
perplexity for the absence of their master, went here and there wandering up
and down, and sending forth soldiers in quest on all parts to search if they
could discover him, or could hear any news of him in any place. Many of them
also could not forbear tears lamenting and deploring the estate of Albany,
which should remain as a tender orphan, and the common weal of Epire which
should continue desolate (as it were) in widowhood by the death of so divine a
personage so barbarously murdered by the Circumcized miscrea^ts. But his safe
return (whereof they despaired) did revive their hearts, and made them joyful
both in private and public: in so much, that besides diverse songs uttered by
the common sort in token of their gladness: many of them with great devotion
performed their vows which they had made for his safety: being in a firm
belief, that by the same they had obtained of God, both his life and the
recovery of his company. His shield was so battered and cut with the swords of
his enemies, that the shape thereof was scant to be discerned: and yet was not
his body in any sort hurt or wounded.

The rareness of this accident is so marvelous, that the truth thereof may
seem incredible: notwithstanding for my part I can easily be drawn to believe
it. For admit that there were not in this Prince any corporal force, or
dexterity in arms extraordiry, more then in the common sort of men: yet
without all doubt, fortune (or to speak more properly,) the divine power and
puissance can do greater things then this, and far more strange without all
comparison. But it may be that an other matter may make this more doubtful,
and that is, that Scanderbeg in all his acts, and exploits achieved in times
past, was never known to have committed such an oversight and incongruity,
where he had any time or leisure to take any counsel or advise upon his
actions. But perhaps it is requisite, that we should grant and attribute unto
some men of a hardy and magnanimious spirit, as the Poets do: that sometimes in
the wars they are transported, with a certain fury and martial impetuosity,
so as being once chafed and enflamed, they cannot for a while after, neither
moderat nor refrain themselves at their own pleasure. For before a man draw
his sword and take weapon in hand, he knows well what he does, and he is
guided by reason which does direct him. But when thesword is once drawn, then
only does fury and choler guide him, and he does as the vehemence of his
passion does lead him. Such was that notable and renowned hardines of Horatius
Cocles amongst the Romans, by which he sustained the force of the Horatius
Cocles his strange prowes against Porsena. Leonidas his valor against the
army of Xerxes.
whole army of Porsena king of the Thuscans, whilst his company in the mean
time did cut down the bridge over Tiber at his back. And amongst the Greeks,
that of Leonidas the Lacedemonian, who with 300. men, had the hardines to
defend the straights of Thermopilae, and to keep out the innumerable
multitudes of the forces of Xerxes.

But to our purpose, the damage that our men received in this conflict was not
great: for there were slain not above ten, and as many wounded, (for the
Prince of Albanie having left behind him all his infantery, and those horsemen
who were worst mounted) had invaded the infidels with 5000. horse, all of them
chosen men, stout, and valiant: who being prompt and ready either to fly or to
fight, might easily shun the force and violence of the enemy. Wherefore having
wounded their general, they proceeded joyfully on their way and so returned to
their camp. But neither this fair Scanderbeg pensive for fear of Croy.
victory gotten upon the enemy, nor any other occasion whatsoever of mirth or
gladness could suffice to cheer the heart of Scanderbeg or to make him merry:
his thoughts were mightily troubled and surcharged, with the wonderful and
deep conceits of infinite mischiefs, and he could not be quiet till he had
some news of the success of Croy. For notwithstanding that the fidelity and
approved valor both of the governor and of the garrison, and the inexpugnable
situation, and the good estate of the place did much comfort and ease his mind
of care: yet nevertheless on the one side, the consequence of the peril, and
on the other side the incomprehensible love of his country, did enforce him
even in despite of his heart, to be affrayed: and a careful kind of mistrust
did present unto his imagination, many idle and vain discourses.

Concerning Amurath, albeit the former alarm had not made him altogether to
discontinue the assault: yet the chiefest preparations, and the best endeavors
of the soldier were for a while hindered and restrained, till such time as he
had perfect notice what was the issue and end of that service, which being made
known unto him to that effect as we have delivered, he caused forth with even
those that were most backward and negligent, and all his engines and instruments
for the assault to be bent and employed against the besieged. First of all he
caused the archers and other shot to stand round about, Assault to Croy.
so as they might annoy them which came upon the walls to defend them. The
lesser pieces also were planted so near, as they might well play upon the
defendants, whilst in the mean time the rascal sort of the most vile and
common sort of people (who were ordained of purpose to sustain and bear out
the first fury of the enemy) should draw and carry the ladders and other engines
close up to the walls. And after the^ were to follow certain brave and lusty
troops of the Ianissaries and Asappes: who upon the raising of the Ianissaries.
Asappes.
ladders were appointed to the scalado, and so to get to the top of the breach:
that coming to fight hand to hand with the defendants, they might the sooner
terrify them and gain the town more easily. This was the manner of the
assault on that part where the walls were weakest, and where the cano^ had made
the battery: as for the other parts there was little or no care to be taken of
them: for though the whole circuit of the wall had been overthrown and razed:
yet was it almost impossible, that the soldier could attempt any way on that
side to endammage them by reason of the huge height and ragged steepness of
the mountain. Yet were there certain pieces placed there also, and they
played with great ordinance upon that part of the town, both to give the more
terror to the Croians and to beat down certain private houses, which seemed
to be subject to the force of their shot. Whilst the Turks were making their
approches to the town, the defendants discharged certain volleys of shot upon
them, and did so trouble their rancks with the slaughter of many of their
people, that it might have terrified them from approaching any nearer if the
leaders of every squadron (following them close at their backs, and
soliciting them sometimes with good words and persuasions, and sometimes with
menaces and threats entermingled with the bastinado) had not pressed them to go
forward with their violent and rough usage: and more then that, this their
obstinacy seemed to be the greater, because the Mahometans with those pieces
which they had placed there of purpose, did without intermissio^ annoy them
that appeared upon the rampires, and sought to beat them from their defense:
whilst the Alchanzes (a number of slaves charged with ladders and such like
preparations) did gain Alchanzes.
the foot of the wall, the which their labor took such good success that at
length their ladders were lodged against the wall, notwithstanding all the
resistance that the Christians could make against them: and yet was it not
effected without great slaughter and bloodshed of the Infidels. Then began
the defendantes every man in his place and charge, to settle themselves more
roundly to their labor and to urge the enemy more hotely: they made no spare
of their shot both harguebusse and other, and now began their hatred more
apparently to be discovered. The clamours of the soldiers, the noise and
clattering of their armor, did resound on all sides, the sound of the drums
and trumpets continually redoubling in the air, and rebounding by the echo
and report of the vallyes near adjoining, did the more animate and encourage
the soldiers, taking away all power and possibility of hearing from them that
were in fight. But as the cause and occasion of their arms was different, so
was there as great difference in the conflict: there was little likelihood for
them to carry the place from the beginning, if some other casualtie or
mischaunce of war did not befall the assaylantes. The ladders were often
raised against the walls, and the place was forced with manhood sufficient,
but they were as soon cast to the ground, broken and torn in pieces: the men
also tumbling headlong that were mounted upon them. The remainders of that
huge multitude of the baser and common sort, were so broken and dismayed, that
they could not be made to continue there any longer, by reason that both their
spirits were surprised with an extreme fear, and their limbs (as it were)
benumbed with a kind of astonishment. Scarcely should you have seen any one
of them that was forward or willing to have gone again to the assault, though
it did little avail them to hold backewarde: for Mahomet standing at their
backs, both as the ouerseer of their demeanor, and as a severe encourager
(which perhaps was partly a cause that got him the name and report to be
accounted a most cruel Prince by all posterity) did entreat them very
roughly, and would not suffer them neither to recuile backewarde, nor so much
as once for to breath them selves. Thus poor wretches, whilst they thought to
shun and avoid the rage and fury of their adversary, they were more cruelly
plagued by the excessive rigor of their own Commanders.

These miserable and poor people thus handeled by the Infidels, are (for the
Christians subjects of the great Turks their miserable estate and piteous
condition
most part) Christians under the subjection of the great Turk: of whom it is
an ordinary use and custom with him to draw forth a wonderful great train
and multitude in all his expeditions almost wholly naked and disarmed, because
he has no trust nor affiance in them. With these does he furnish and supply
all the services of his camp, both for the provision of the water and wood,
and for the making and casting up of their trenches, rampires, and other
fortifications: and when they come to fight (if it be in the field or in the
maine battle, then are they A stratageme usual with the Turks to weary and
consume the strength of the Christians in fight.
first exposed and set out to the butcherie, to bear the force and violence of
the enemy, that they may diminish and spend their strength and forces upon
these poor and silly wretches. If any fortress or place of strength be to be
assaulted, these are made as carriage beasts to draw the artillery, to
carry the engines and other instruments to the walls: and their bodies are
made to serve them but as fit matter to fill up the ditches, and their
carcasses are used but as bridges for others to pass and travel on when they
go to the assault. And when so ever they do happen to march on slowly or
unwillingly, they do find more cruelty and inhumanitie at the hands of the
Turks their Lords and Masters, then they do of their proper and professed
enemies. Certainly it is the deadly hatred and natural enmity which they
bear against the name and profession of Christianity, that does cause them to
use this most beastly and savage cruelty, and not any want Siege of Scutarie
or Scodra by the Turks.
of other means that should constrain them thereunto. At the last unfortunate
siege of Scutarie, many of these and such like cruelties were then practiced by
the Turkish Infidels. The lamentable plaints and cries of these unhappy
creatures were made and heard to them that stood in defense of the walls:
many times would Speeches of the Christians living under the subjection of the
Turks, to the Christians their enemies at the siege of Scutarie.
they cry unto the defendants, and use humble and pitiful prayers and
entreaties that they would deal more gently with them: they excused and
protested, that they showed themselves to be their enemies not of their own
motions or ill affections, but by constraint and force, and by the cruel
command of the tyrant. That though their bodies were compelled to march and to
carry arms against them, yet their hearts and good wills were most deuote
and affectionate unto them, as those that did acknowledge one and the same God,
the same faith, the same religion: notwithstanding that they were not under the
same Princes, that this was to be imputed to the public fault and negligence
of the Christians, and to their own private misfortune and unhappy destiny.
Upon these their complaints and petitions, the citizens of Scutarie to the
uttermost of their power did spare and favor them, though in very truth, their
estate then standing as it did, they could not very easily take that
compassion of them which they gladly would have done. O most lamentable and
extreme grief, my heart is surcharged with sorrow, and my soul does even
faint within me to think upon the miserable and distressed estate of these
poor Christians. Give me leave a little, I beseech you, in this place to
exclaim against the indignity of their miseries, and pardon me though I
wander a while from my discourse.

Good God, is it possible that the great Princes and Monarchs of Christendom
An exclamation of the author upon the miserable estate of the Christians under
the Turks.
can so long endure both to hear and to see this extreme misery? And can not
this grievous and intolerable servitude of their Christian brethren, their
chains and bonds so hideous and shameful, their complaints so dolorous
(wherewith for these many ages they have filled the mountains, the valleys,
and the seas of all Christian countries,) can they not (I say) move any one to
pity or compassion? And are Christian Princes so hard and stony hearted,
that none of them will commiserat those extremities? The blood of Christians
does now flow (as it were) in streams throughout all parts of the world:
and our strength fades and decays by little and little, and no man the
whilst does or will perceive it. We are now fallen into those times (such is
the divine pleasure, or rather, such is our ingratitude and infidelity) that
the blood sanctified by Christian baptism, is now more vile and base then the
blood of brute beasts: and it will ere long come to pass (if this mischief
be suffered to increase, and to gather greater strength) that the circumcised,
setting us to sale, shall scarce be able to make a penny of thirty
Christians, but they will be bought and sold at a more base and vile price,
then were the Jews of old time, who (as ancient * Historiographers make
mention) at the destruction of Josephus. Egesippus.
Jerusalem, were sold at that rate by the Romans. But alas! what can happen
to us more fearful, or what greater extremities and calamities can befall us,
then are already inflicted upon the faithful living under the power and
tyranny of the Turks? Their miseries are come to the full period of all shame
and villainy: neither is it possible, that either they should be able to endure
any greater calamities, neither can the mortal hatred of the Infidels our
enemies imagine or devise any invention more horrible and grieuons, then they
have already done, for the plaguing of these miserable and wretched caytifes.
But forgetting this matter, let us remember to proceed with the assault of
Croy.

The most hardy and audatious of the Mahometists being either repulsed or
killed, A sally by the Croyans upon the Turks.
they of the town caused threescore of their garrison (men of good courage and
resolution) suddenly to sallie forth by a little posterne (which was on
another side of the town) whose unexpected coming brought so wonderful a
fear to the camp of the Infidels, as was beyond all imagination. They were
Launceknights and Epyrots mingled together, who serving with the harguebusse,
had with great difficulty, gotten leave of the Governor to issue forth of the
town, but they went not far from the wall, where having made a reasonable
slaughter of the enemy according to the proportion of their small number, they
retired themselves immediately with a greater desire to return again. But for
any entreatie or importunity they could use, Vranocontes would not condiscende
unto their request: nevertheless he did highly commend them for the hardiness
of the fact, and did recompense them with large rewards. At the first the
Paynims did a little recuile and give back, being abashed at their audatious
enterprise: but anon suddenly trouping together, partly of shame, and partly of
a courageous resolution, they did attend to see, if the enemy pursuing their
good fortune, would come again to visit them. But far greater was the
slaughter on that quarter which was toward Tyranna, where the breach being
more plain and spacious, did give more free access to the assaylantes. All
places there were strawed and filled with dead bodies: and the earth did seem
to mourn with the pitiful noise of the panting sighs, gaspes, and groans of
those, who yielded up their wretched ghoastes. And notwithstanding, they never
wanted encouragementes to enforce them on in their obstinacy: but the
miserable wretches were pressed and urged in a most desperare manner, by the
careless contempt of their own lives, to make a show unto the Christians of
more courage then indeed was in them. The rampires and walls of the town
were so full strewed both with shot, and also with other store of weapons,
that it argued they made no spare of them: and the arrows did fly so thick
in the air, as if it had been a cloud darkening the brightness and
clearenesse of the sun. Thus you see what was the endeavors of those Turkish
squadrons, which went first to the assault.

The day was now well spent, and it was above two hours after noone, at which
time the Sultan seeing his troops partly lying dead upon the ground, and
partly wearied with their great and long travel: and on the contrary side,
the Croyans presenting themselves more bravely upon the walls, he was at the
first in some doubt and suspense, whether it were better for him to renew the
assault with a supply of fresh forces, or to intermit and put it over to
another day, considering that both the great labor of his people taken all
that day, and the excessive heat, had so weakened the bodies of his soldiers,
that they were scant able to endure to stand for faintness and weariness. In
the end therefore he was persuaded Speeches of the Counselors of Amurath
persuading him to recontinue and renew the assault of Croy.
to continue and go forward with the assault by the importunities of his
Counselors and Chiefetaines, who showed him, that if he should now give
over the fight, and should suffer the Christians with so small loss and
bloodshed to have the advantage of that days victory, it would be an eternal
reproach and infamy unto him. And albeit they should have little or no hope to
carry the Town, yet he ought not in respect of his own honor to suffer so
many brave and valiant men their fellows and companions to die unrevenged, nor
yet to restrain the forwardness and willing minds of the others. That all
secondarie assaies were more faint and contemptible, and that they were now
better acquainted with the enemy, and were more hardened to all kind of
dangers and travels. B sides that, if he should now give them liberty to take
breath, they would have leisure also to resolve themselves with the more
confidence, and to fortify their town with stronger defenses: that it was much
better therefore with fresh and new forces to attempt against the place, and to
force them to the uttermost whilst they were yet wearied and sore traveled
with their late labor: that when the defendants should see them thus
obstinately bent and courageously resolved, either they would of themselves
abandon their defenses, or they must needs faint and perish under the burden
of so unsupportable a charge. Amurath upon these persuasions followed their
advise, and caused as great forces as before to be lead and conducted against
the walls: in so much that the tumult began to be renewed in a moment, and it
might be that fortune her self forsaking the victours, would have favored the
new attempt of the Mahometistes, if the defendants had not The assault renewed.
with as great diligence and foresight provided in like case to receive them in
as good sort and readiness, which was the occasion that fresh men being
opposed against fresh men, they did without any great pain hold good both in
the possession of the place, and in the maintenance of their honor and
reputation. The Barbarians went still onwards at brute and senseless beasts,
especially on that side that leads toward the port, and although the way by
which they should pass was so straight and narrow, that two horsemen could
hardly march in front together: yet notwithstanding they went on all on horse
back even close to the walls, and with their lances in the rest did run
against the gate, giving thereby greater occasion rather to laugh at their
foolish and sottish carelessness and contempt of their lives, then to admire or
to commend any hardiness or courage that appeared in them. Wherefore there lay
so many of them slain on all parts, and there were such heaps of dead
carkases, as it might well be said of Vranocontes, that he foreprophesied what
would be the end and issue of that assault. The Turkish Monarch being not able
to endure this hideous spectacle, caused to sound a retreat, which freed both
the walls and the defendantes from further trouble of the enemy: and there
was not any one but had forgotten the former passion of his malice and hatred,
and had lost that feruencie and desire of fight wherewith he was lately
possessed. So greatly did they of all hands desire to leave fighting, and this
stay of the assault was welcome to them all. For their continual labor and
the heat of the day, accompanied with extreme hunger and thirst, had in a
manner wholly spent them, by reason that the suddenness of the assault had
prevented many from taking any repast. The residue therefore of the day and the
night following, they consumed in refreshing themselves both with sleep and
victuals.

The same night tidings being brought to Scanderbeg of the victory of the
Croians, it gave him good cause of joy and gladness: and he presently imparted
these good news unto the Princes and peoples his next neighbors. But on the
other side, the Number of Turks slain at the first assault of Croy.
enemy was in great sorrow and coffeehouse, and was seen for many days to
be very sad and pensive, for the notable loss of that days work was very
hard to be digested, having lost in that service more then 8000. good
soldiers: but the Croians had very little loss, and without any great
slaughter to speak of. It is reported, that Amurath kept himself close shut
up within his tent for two whole days together in debating upon diverse
counsels and opinions with his Captains, and the Visirs his Counselors. But
above all others, young Mahomet showed himself to be notably vexed and
discontented: his spirit boiling with fury and choler, and his youthful
years being yet unacquainted with cross fortunes and adversities, had turned
all his passions of grief and anguish into mere rage and madness. From
thenceforth he took upon him to deal in all the affairs of the camp, and
with a careful eye viewing and reuiewing all the several companies, he showed
himself so greedy of revenge, that he spared not to labor himself
extremely both night and day, and was very watchful at all times to take the
advantage of any fit occasion: but principally he had an eye to that side where
the Albanois had lately endammaged their camp. For there he placed a strong
and puissant court of guard, and dressed many ambushments, and oftentimes would
he watch there him self whole nights in proper person, to the intent if
fortune did present him any good opportunity to oppress Scanderbeg, he might
not escape again out of his hands. But all these his devises turned to
nothing, and vanished away as the smoke by the provident and circumspect
carriage of that expert Chiefetaine the Prince of Albany, who being from day to
day informed of all things, either by such as came to render themselves unto
him, or by espials sent abroad of purpose, he held himself still and quiet in
his camp for a season, ordering and providing for the safety of his affairs,
and drawing on his enemies with delays.

Notwithstanding he could not endure to remain long idle, but being very
desirous that his enterprises should surpass all others in glory and
reputation, he advised him self of a fine stratageme, by which he purposed to
surprise the^ who were too intentive to entrap him. One night therefore
trussing up his baggage, very secretly, he removed Monticlea.
his army to a place called Monticlea, from whence he might most co^modiously
travel and disturb the enemy. He left Moses and Tanusee at Tume^ista,
accompanied with 500. horse only: and having set down a certain and prefixed
time and course, and communicated his enterprise with them, he willed them to
set upon the trenches of the enemy a little after midnight, next ensuing on the
same side where he had last invaded the^: A policy of Scanderbeg in giving a
canuazado to the Turkish camp
and that as soon as they had but given them a false alarm, and made a show
of forcing the barriers of their camp, they should suddenly and speedily make
away without giving the enemy any means to come to handiblowes with them: and
that himself in the mean time (having set all things in good order, and
leaving 200. men for the guarde of his camp) would on the other side break in
upon the tents of the enemy with the residue of his army. According to this
conclusion there was little distance of time between the alarm made by Moses
and the coming of Scanderbeg. For as soon as he perceived the sudden rumor
and terror of the alarm raised by the A canuazado by Scanderbeg to the camp
of the Turks.
Dibrian on the other side, he bare in with a full and strong carrer, and
charged them on that part where they little doubted or suspected. In this manner
was the camp of the Infidels full of doubt, fear, and confusion: some ran
here, some there, making great haste on all sides, to oppose themselves against
the violence of the Christians. One of them wakened another, crying that they
were enuironned and round beset with the enemy. But as for Moses he did
indeed put them in a fear, and that was all he did, by reason that those
soldiers which had been lately placed in that quarter by Mahomet, did easily
repulse them, especially such as were most forward. But the night hindered them
from pursuing after him, for that they suspected some ambushment, which they
had good cause to be in doubt of, and especially at that time. But the damage
that Scanderbeg wrought them cannot be recounted. For their camp was on all
parts beaten down, and foully deformed and disordered both by sword and fire,
and yet did not this invasion continue any long time, by reason of the sudden
coming and ready arrival of the Turks, whose presence in so great
multitudes did soon determine and end the conflict. For the Christians making
a retreat, durst not hazard and oppose themselves against so huge forces as
were there united, especially in a place that was so plain and even: for it
was in Tyranna where they gave this charge upon the enemy. Nevertheless when
the Christians began to retire, the Infidels had no great desire to follow
after: and if they had, it might be they should have paid well for it: for this
wary and circumspect warrior had placed all his infanterie and 8000. horse
near at hand, to the intent they should be as a guard unto him behind at his
back, and should serve against all such casualties as might befall him. Of
these companies was he received in his retreat with great joy and high cries
and clamors: and so passing forward, they spent the rest of the night in
traveling to their camp. It is reported that Scanderbeg did never do any
exploite upon his enemy with less loss and bloodshed: for he brought back
all his troops safe and sound without the loss of any one man, not leaving
unto the Barbarians aniething save wounds, tears, and lamentations, as the
testimonies of his being with them; in such sort, that this slaughter and foul
discomfiture, did make them in a manner quite to forget the calamity of their
late loss which they had had before Croy. No man durst from thencefoorth open
his mouth unto the Sultan, or to advise him to any enterprise: for this
accident having succeeded to their so notable infamy, did seem to reprove all
their counsels and deliberations both in times past, and at that present.
Wherefore they had recourse in this their general astonishment, to that wonted
policy which they had proved to be very profitable the year before at the
siege of Sfetygrade: Amurath fortifieth his camp with ordinance against the
invasions of Scanderbeg
and that was to fortify and assure their trenches on all sides with
artillery. They drew down therefore many small pieces which they had planted
against the walls, and they bestowed them in convenient places round about
their camp according as they thought best: but the greatest part they placed
in that quarter where they had of late found the greatest danger. For what for
the vehemency of the heat, and what for the encombrance of their infinite
baggage, their lodgings were divided and dispersed here and there in so great
distance one from an other, and so far off, that it was not possible to
furnish and to fortify all of them. All these their endeavors were not long
concealed from the Christians, for they wanted not both fugitives and good
espials to give them aduertisements, but they were certified continually of the
doings of the enemy, and especially of this their preparation, which they
believed to be likely by the example of the like, which they used the year
last past. Wherefore Scanderbeg also was resolved to lie still for a time, and
to hold himself contented with that advantage which he had already gained,
and to enjoy the pleasure thereof, till such time as he might find some new
opportunity for some other happy action. Besides, there was an other matter
which withdrew his thoughts, and whereof he Scanderbeg remoueth his camp to
provide for victuals.
was to have a care, and that was the scarcity and dearth of victuals, which
now began to fall very short: because there was not left in the country any
living creature of whom they could look for any relief* Wherefore to the
intent he would not be in any wants, and for that he would refresh his army in
the extreme heat of the summer: he determined to remove his camp, and to
lead his forces to a certain place of singular recreation upon a river which
the inhabitants call Isme, which lying River of Isme.
close on the sea, would furnish them of all things plentifully and in
abundance. And they of Duraz, likewise (which town was not far off) did
friendly accord to serve Duraz or Dirrachium.
him with as much corn as he would demand. True it is that the Governors and
Magistrates of the Venetian territories did succor him also, but it was so
covertly and under hand, that the Mohammedan Prince might not perceive it for
the reasons formerly alleged.

The Infidels in the mean time did nothing for many days together but batter
the town, and seek to break down the walls, in those places especially
which the Battery renewed against Croy.
inhabitants had newly repaired, and which rested yet vnbattered. For as yet
had no^ Amurath forgotten all his malice, but he had a desire once again to
adventure his soldiers to the butchery, and to make a trial of their last
fortune. Besides, to seek to force the town by mines underground, or by any
such devises he held it a matter of great labor and long delay, by reason of
the steepnes, depth, and roughnes of the place, and the high bearing tops of
the lofty rocks and mountains. o how Exclamation of the author upon the
wretched estate of the subjects to the Turk.
wretched and miserable are you which are subjected to ayoke so cruel and
unmerciful, and whom fortune has submitted under the dominion of such proud
and arrogant Princes? when they can find no other mean to fulfill their
inordinate desires: then are you (poor souls) constrained to satisfy with
your blood, and with the dismembring of your bodies, the cruel rage, the
immoderate and licencious humors of such tirants. As Soon as the wall was
beaten down on that part where the cannon could be brought to play or make any
battery, and that the breach was made fair and large; the same day did
Ottoman command and take order, that every man should make himself ready to
the assault against the next morning, and to adventure a new conflict with the
enemy: but there was scarce any of them, that either openly or privately did
show himself willing thereunto as they had been in times past. All of them did
set a good face on the matter, but very sorily and with an ill grace: for
either Turks unwilling to be drawn to a second assault of Croy.
to refuse it, or to draw backwards was not the best way or course for them.
Amurath perceiving this backewardnesse in his people, and that they were drawn
to this adventure, as it were maugre their teeth: (as the report goes) he
assembled the chief and principal persons of all his troops, who being come
to his presence, with a long discourse, he did thus reproach and object unto
them, their faintnes and cowardice.

Is it possible (quoth he) that so small a manner, and the dalliance of fortune
but a Oration of Amurath to his Chieftaines and Captains before Croy
reproching them with faintnes and cowardice.
little failing you, can so pull down your minds and abate your courages, as
it should make you for ever to despair and to abandon all hope of victory?
what if your valor and prowes be not able at the first assault to carry this
place, will you therefore be utterly discouraged? Answer me I pray you. Is
there any town so weak? is there any fortress so simple, or so base, as that
one only blow and the first attempt should be able to subdue it? He that will
dislodge such fierce beasts as these out of their dens, must of necessity use
perseverance, he must stand firm, he must be of an undaunted heart and a
courage unconquerable. Have so many puissant armies? have so many excellent
Captains, even for some frivolous cause of offense, and for some small private
quarrel, have they I say spent their time, and (as it were) waxed old in the
siege of cities and fortresses? and you that have received so many outrages, so
many indignities, and so many contumelies of disgrace by the disloialty of the
Albanians, will you now to your notable reproach, leave them unpunished, and
unrevenged? Who is he even to this day, that did ever obtain a memorable
victory, and not in some sort blouddie? Remember the battle of Varna, the
honor and glory of which victory does scarce admit any comparison. It is
impossible to tame an enemy that is fierce and haughty without some expense
and loss of blood: and all difficult things do come to a happy issue only
with extreme labors and hard travel. Upon Croy only does depend the
consequence of this whole war, which being once at your discretion, we shall be
for ever freed of our enemy in this country. For this place being gained
which is the principal fortress of all Epire, Scanderbeg will not adventure
to continue here so much as one day: wherefore pluck up your hearts (my good
friends) and away with this fear and faintnes of courage: you must make a
trial of fortune: and if you will have her to follow you, it is needful that
you do often importune her. There is no onething in the world, wherein is more
variety and uncertainty, then in wars and deeds of arms. Hold on your course
then: cease not to press the enemy, and do you even weary him with continual
assaults. If at each time you kill but half a score of the enemy, it will be
sufficient, and the town will be soon undefended. And it may be (as it
happened of late at Sfetigrade) that if our forces shall not avail, yet our
good fortune may second this our enterprise, and may lay us down some
invention and good mean to atchieue it.

This speech did revive their spirits and wrought in all of them new stomachs
and fresh courages: it caused them to banish and cast away all fear: it made
their former hatred to return before their eyes, and it stirred in them a
singular desire to purchase glory, and in all actions to show themselves very
forward. But above all, this did greatly abate the doubt which they had before
received, for that they saw their tents exempted, and their backs freed from
the sudden surprises of Scanderbeg: and by reason Stratageme of Amurath to
divert Scanderbeg from troubling his army during the assault of Croy.
they were assured, that during the fight the day following, they should not be
annoyed with any enemy, but only those before them. For besides those orders
which were already taken for all things, and not yet mentioned: this was one
which (as I will show you) was laid down for the diuerting of Scanderbeg, to
the intent he should not of all that day molest nor trouble their trenches nor
interrupt them from the assaulting of the town. Sebalias (of whom mention has
been made before) was sent toward another part of the Province, that under
color of wasting and spoiling Sebalias sent with an army to draw Scanderbeg
from Croy.
the country, he might delude the Albanois, hoping by that means to draw him
away with all his forces. In the evening therefore this Chieftaine Turk being
dislodged with a strong company of 16000. horse, and having straight
instructions from Amurath so to demean himself, that the enemy might have no
occasion nor opportunity to fight with him: he rode on his way with good
advise and deliberation. By that time that he had marched about some 20. miles,
the news of his dislodge came to the ears of the Christians, which raised a
sore murmuring amongst the soldiers according to the variety of their
fantasies which they conceived and imagined upon the departure of the
Barbarian. Notwithstanding they were all of this opinion, and one mind, that it
was best forthwith to mounton horseback, and to travel all the night in great
silence and secrecy, that they might gain all the passages of the mountains
and woods where they supposed he should pass. But the sage providence of the
Christian General, who was an enemy to all preposterous temeritie, and durst
not affie himself upon the doubtfulnes of the dark: did refer the whole to
the next morning: and then at the dawning of the day, he departed which ensigns
displaied, and held the way of the mountains, the couerts and secret places:
always having before him his vauntcurrers to discover and to beat the ways
and passages, that he might not fall into the ambushments of the Paynim.

About the same hour that Scanderbeg departed, the Sultan began the assault
against Croy: for having ordained all things (as has been said) he thought
good to Assault to Croy the second.
begin it betimes in the morning and before that the day should be any thing
spent: for fear least the assault being deferred any longer, should fall out
in the extreamitie and heat of the day. Now the absence of Castroit being
reported throughout the host, did greatly revive the courages of the Infidels:
and upon this occasion being grown more forward and furious, they did hasten
with their scaling ladders and other instruments in great store against the
walls. In like manner some there were who forgetting their late loss and
slaughter, did adventure to approach even to the port, striving to break it
open, or to force it off the hinges, and to make way for them selves through
the same by means of their mattocks and bars of iron. Toward Tyrann^ they
cast great store of wild fire into the town: and the artillery ceased not
during all the time of the assault, notwithstanding that it was not able much
to endammage the defendants, without the great hurt and loss of the
assailants. Nevertheless, the Sultan without all respect, did cause it still
to shoot off amongst both parties, and did thereby destroy some both on the one
side and on the other: for he did not think the head of a Christian dearly
bought, which cost him twenty of his own company. The defendants though they
were not altogether free from damage, yet were they in good suertie, neither
was there any hazard of the loss of the town: for (besides their other
helps) such was the natural strength and situation of the place, that it made
all the attemptes of the miscreantes to be in vain and to no purpose. And yet
notwithstanding, if at any time the defense of the place did depend upon the
valor of the defendants and the deuoire of their good diligence, they did ever
show themselves on al hands to be stout and valiant, and they gave marvelous
proofs of their faith and prowess: and still did they increase in courage, in
strength, and in good success. Of the Turks that adventured themselves to the
port, there was scarce any one that returned: on the other parts, those that
were most hardy and aduenturous, did remain dead upon the place, and an
infinite number were sore hurt and maimed: and there was not almost in any one
place but very few or none of their ladders presented against the walls.
Nevertheless Amuarth still pressed on his people with great fury on all
sides: and with a resolution of obstinacy more and more increasing, did
continually send supplies of fresh men, still renewing the assault without any
intermission: insomuch as this sight and spectacle did at one and the self
time, The Turks repulsed from the assault.
both feed his humor, and yet torment him to the heart: till in the end being
even glutted with the pitiful butcherie and murder of his people, he caused
to sound a retrait and to cease the assault, rather at the prayers and
persuasions of his Bassaes, then upon any other cause. For they entreated and
humbly besought him, that he would not so wilfully and desperately destroy and
consume his army, considering that there was no appearance or probability to
get the town in this fashion: and that it were better to reserve his forces to
work by mines into the town, as the best and only way to bring it into his
possession. But want of victuals, and the extreme famine which did now sore
pinch the army of the Barbarians, did cause this work to proceed but slowly
for a time: wherefore to recover corn and other provisions, there were sent
Commissaries with certain men to Lyssa and other places of the venetian
territories. For by reason of the peace sworn between them, the Sultan did
persuade himself that he would deny him nothing. Scanderbeg marches after
Sebalias.


Whilst these things were a doing, Scanderbeg had intelligence by his skoutes,
what course Sebalias took in his journey: who having dispersed certain
troops of horsemen all over the fields, did destroy the vines and other
things bearing fruit throughout the country. He dismarched therefore with as
great secrecy as was possible: and being arrived within a three miles off the
Barbarian: he chose out four thousand good and strong horse to charge upon him
in the open and plain fields. All his foot forces, and the residue of his
horsemen, he left with Moses, and placed them on a high hill near to the high
way, where he was in hope that the enemy should pass: and he willed him that
if he saw the Infidels to fly that way our of order and dispersed, he should
suddenly fall in upon them, and charge them most fiercely: but if he did
perceive them to hold good and to stand firm, maintaining the fight with
equal fortune and valor and without moving: that then he should speedily come
forward with his companies, and join himself to his forces: and he doubted
not, in case the enemy durst abide him, either to make him pay for it and to
buy his resistance very dear, or else to drive him to a most shameful and
dishonorable flight. For their flight he was nothing at all deceived: but for
the rest, it fell out otherwise then he expected: for Sebalias being advertised
of the coming of the Christians by the sentinels which he had set to watch of
purpose: upon a sign given had made all his forces to gather, together and to
keep near unto him: excepting some few scattered a far off, who became an
easy prey to the Albanois. And before that he had any sight of the enemy, he
poasted thence by another way, and not by that where he knew Scanderbeg was
marching. Thus was there nothing done at that time worthy the speaking: and the
rather for that Castriot kept his forces from following after them: in regard
that his footmen were not able without excessive toil and travel, to endure
so long a journey in pursuing them. Besides that, the perpetual care of Croie
did greatly restrain his forwardnes and fierecnes: and he held it more
wisdom to reserve his army in good plight for the continual wants and
necessities of the town. On the one side therefore the Turkish Chieftaine
returned to Amurath with great joy and contentment, for that he had so abused
Scanderbeg, and kept him all that day from troubling of their trenches: on the
other side the Epirot returned his camp extremely grieved, because he had lost
that opportunity, and through that perplexity of his mind which he took for
Croy, from whence he was not accustomed so far to absent himself.

The report goes, that he met with many upon the way, who gave him notice of
the Turkish Commissaries being abroad for victuals: and of the conuoy which
they had provided for the safe conduct of the same. Whereupon, disguising
himself out of hand in simple attire (an ordinary policy which he used in
the wars) and being Ambuscado of Scanderbeg whereby he surprizeth the Turk
his victuallers.
attended with a hundredth soldiers in the same habit, he followed those
victuallers by the tract where they had passed: and having learned by what way
they were to return, he put himself with his company in an ambuscado. Then
sent he two of his soldiers, men of good judgment and experience, to go to
Lyssa: willing them to get notice, and to bear good espiall upon the troops
of the enemy, and carefully to observe, whether in their return they did take
any other way, then that by which they had passed thitherwards: and if they
did, they should poast away with all speed to give him intelligence of it. But
these victuallers returning the same way they went, fell into the hands of
Scanderbeg, who having slain some of them, took the others prisoners. The
corn, the beasts and carriage horses, he conveyed to his camp, where he
distributed the booty amongst his soldiers. This done Moses returning back to
the camp besides Isme, brought thither those other troops of foot, of which
he had the leading.

Whilst Amurath did carefully and with great diligence set forward his mines
against Croy, so much the more careful was he, and never ceased to molest the
besieged Turkish camp before Croy victualled out of Macedonie.
with often and continual allarmes and skirmishes: to the intent that by
keeping them busied in the defense of their walls, they might be the less
able to discover the drift of his new devises and his secret practices: during
the which he received diverse messages, the one acquainted him with the
discomfiture of his victuallers, the taking of his corn, and how all things
else had passed: the other from Alchia brought him news of certain corn
which was coming out of Macedon. So that as the latter gave him cause of joy
and contentment, so the former did renew his wonted grief and discontentments.
But the one being partly a recompense for the other, the Turks were not much
moved at the matter, but laying aside the care of all other matters for that
instant, the soldiers applied all their care and study, that the new supply
of provisions might be brought in safety to their camp. Wherefore with the
consent of their Prince, there were appointed 20000. of the strongest and most
able men of their whole army for a conuoy of those other victuals, to the
intent those also should not be made a prey to the Christians, as the other had
lately been for default of a good and strong conuoy to safeconduct them. But
Scanderbeg was at that time sufficiently busied in conueying his booty toward
his own camp, for that he might the better avoid the enemy, and not any way
encounter with him in his return: he fetched a long compass about by diverse
by ways, and with great discommoditie and pains, he drove the beasts laden
with the prey, through the roughest and hardest streights that he could choose
within the mountains, which was an occasion of no small wearines and toil
unto him, and made him to spend long time in his return: and yet if he had
been freed from that carriage, and though all his forces had been present with
him and in a readiness: I do not think that he would for all that have been so
desirous to pursue and set upon the enemy, as to hazard himself against so
mighty and puissant a multitude. All this while was Moses in great
incertaintie and perplexity for the prince of Epire, by reason he was
certified by good espials of the departure of those troops out of the camp of
the Turks. And he was in doubt least they were prepared for his confusion:
wherefore he sent forth some light horsemen, who with all diligence and
celeritie, and with great iornies should go seek out Scanderbeg, and to
advertise him of this particular. But they had no tidings of him till he was
returned to his people, charged with the spoils of his slain enemies, and the
grain which he had taken from them. Likewise the Mahomatistes without any
let or disturbance, made a speedy return with their corn, victualles, and
other provisions to their camp By means whereof, being thus provided for the
necessary sustenance of their bodies: it made them to take a good heart
again, and to revive both in strength and courage.

All this while did they travel without ceasing in undermining of the wall:
howbeit A mine made by the Turks against Croy.
the excessive labor of the work did swallow up many of them within the earth:
notwithstanding the pioners had their several times and hours particularly
proportioned unto each of them: and the like order was also observed throughout
all the squadrons, and amongst the soldiers of every tent within the camp.
The continual labor, and the obstinate resolution of the men did easily
surmount all difficulty, and daily did they continue their skirmishes and
loose fightes before the walls, of purpose to abuse the Citizens. And albeit
there was no day passed without the death and slaughter of some of them: yet
did not they account that for any loss amongst so many thousands of fighting
men.

The Infidels did in some sort spend all that time joyfully and to their
contentment, Venetian subjects succor the Turks camp before Croy with
victuals.
by reason that over and above their store and abundance of victualles lately
arrived from Macedony: there was also a great number of merchants of the next
towns under the obeisance of the Venetians, who served them with plenty of
corn, wine, oil, and all sorts of victualles day by day into their camp:
neither was there any want of Mercerie wares, which diverse brought thither of
purpose to traffic with them: who (as the proverb is) like flies drawing
after honny, did repair and flock thither from all quarters, when they once
knew of their estate: and that their camp was in great penury of all
provisions excepting money only. All this did Scanderbeg see very well: yet
because he would not offend the subjects of his friends and confederates, nor
hinder their prinate gain in particular: he took all with great patience,
willing his people also to dissemble it as well as himself, without giving any
offense to any person either in word or in deed. For howsoever it were, he was
not ignorant, that though he had hindered this traffic between them, yet the
enemy for all that should not have wanted it from other places, by reason of
the nearenesse of Macedonie, Thrace and Seruia. And therefore he busied his
brains with greater matters, and with other affairs of more importance: how
he might by force of arms and dint of sword, and not by famine and want of
sustenance, expel this outrageous enemy out of Epyre. This made him to have
an especial care and regard of a matter which was deeply to be considered on:
and that was to increase and augment Tanusee and Moses sent by Scanderbeg to
leauie a new supply of soldiers.
his forces: for of the eight thousand men which he had leauied at the
beginning of this war, there was little less then a thousand of them
diminished and decreased: all which were either consumed in the several
services against the enemy, or by diverse other accidents and discommodities:
besides a good number who were licensed to depart, and were sent a way to
refreshe themselves in their dwellinges: such as he thought had endured
sufficient hardness, and done their good deuoire in the forepassed dangers.
The charge and commission for this matter was committed to Tanusee and to
Moses, who traversing and compassing all the province, did scarce leauie two
thousand soldiers, whereof five hundredth were horsemen, and the residue
footmen. It was no easy matter at that time to find any one man in all Epire
fit and able to bear arms, but he was already employed in some place either
of charge, or else appointed to some particular services: so well and so
carefully had Scanderbeg strengthened and assured all things, with wonderful
counsel and advise: because he would not willingly leave any angle or corner
of his realm exposed to the injury and violence of his adversaries.

During the same time that this leauie was made by Scanderbeg, the Croians
being importuned by the daily alarmes of the Infidels could not any longer
contain themselves Croyans sallie out upon the Turks.
within their walls: but often times sallying out of the town, they did with
great good hap and success encounter with them. One day above the rest,
their service was most notable, at which time there issued forth about 500 of
the garrison, and having well beaten the enemy of whom many were cut in pieces
and the residue put to flight, they were so earnest and forward in the chase,
that they pursued them even within their trenches, which made the Mahometistes
(when they saw the Christians to be so hardy and courageous, and that their
temeritie did draw them on upon this their good fortune) not to grieve very
much at their companions which lay slain, because they were in hope soon to
be revenged. But this their hope was made vain by means of Vranocontes, who
though he saw his soldiers to return with little or no damage, yet
nevertheless wisely weighing the danger and hazard of that days service, with
the politic and subtle disposition of the enemy, he would not from thence
forth any more permit them to set their foot without their ports.

But greater was the grief, and more notable was the slaughter that Scanderbeg
brought upon Amurath and his forces: for his new bands being united and
incorporated A second canuazado by Scanderbeg to the camp of the Turks before
Croy.
to the body of his whole army, and the same being divided into three parts,
one to Moses, an other to Tanusee, and the third reserved to himself; about
the shutting of the evening, he caused his Ensigns to march very secretly and
directly toward the camp of the enemy. But before he was gotten as far as
Monticlea (which was distant about two miles from their trenches) he was
discovered by the Turkish Sentinels. Great and sudden was the tumult when
they understood of his coming, but most of all where the tents lay nearest to
the danger. Wherefore nothing was omitted by the Barbarians, neither did they
leave any remedy unattempted, which the uncertainty and darkness of the
night could advise them unto either for repelling him back, or for debarring
him from entering upon them. There were gathered together in great haste and
tumult about some eight thousand men which opposed themselves against him:
which made him to pause a little, and with a softer pace and more leisure to
march forward against them. The Mahometans advanced them selves to encounter
him, and with a huge cry on all hands were the first that began the fight:
but the Christians refusing to join with them in fight, by little and little
recuiled backwardes, to the intent that drawing them farther off from their
trenches, their fury might be the more abated and diminished. Moses and Tanuse
invade the Turkish Camp.
Hereupon Moses and Tanuse having suddenly entered their rampires and barriers
on that part which was appointed them, had filled all the camp with exceeding
fear and confusion: and being entered within certain tents, and the watches
slain, they destroyed all with the fury of fire, where force of arms could
not any way endammage them. Greater was the loss and dishonor without
comparison received by them then by Scanderbeg, for that the Infidels bending
all their thoughts and endeavors to that part, Moses had the more liberty even
from the beginning, freely to do execution upon the enemy, by burning,
sacking, and killing all at pleasure, and to bring their Camp into fear and
disorder, as in all sudden actions and unexpected it is commonly used. But
this victory was of small and short continuance, for within a while after a
more strong troop of the Barbarians hastening upon them, the Christians
thought it not good to attend their coming. In one thing above the rest did
fortune greatly favor them, in that the artillery whereof they stood in so
great fear, did not at all play upon them: were it that they could not well
tell how to use it in the dark, or else that for the fear wherewith they were
surprised (as it is oftentimes seen) they had forgotten to aid themselves
with it. The day began now to appear, when as the Prince of Albany giving
place unto the enemy, did withdraw himself in the midst and chiefest
Scanderbeg retireth from the enemy.
heat of the fight, and retired about 2. miles off to a certain hill where it
was easy for any to see him, and there did he attend Moses with his squadrons:
for that was the place which at their going to the charge, was appointed for
their rende vous. As Soon as the Turks saw him there to make a stand, they
went in great have to the Sultan his pauilion, humbly entreating him to give
them leave to issue forth, and to set upon him, showing him and pointing with
their fingers at the small number of the Christians: so much Turks desire and
obtain leave of Amurath to issue out and to set upon Scanderbeg.
prevailed their prayers and importunacy, that the old man overcome with their
requests condiscended thereunto. Immediately therefore there made out 12000. men
strong and lusty 7000. horse, and 5000. foot. Upon the discovery of this great
and mighty troop, Scanderbeg at the beginning made some doubt, whether he
should stay and receive them, considering the nearnes of the whole army of the
Turks, or whither he should yield and give place unto the time: but he held
best for that time to take and choose the mid way and mean between both,
neither to fly altogether, nor yet altogether to abide: wherefore retiring
fair and easily by degrees toward the highest and roughest parts of the
mountains, he did temporize and dally away the time: relying both upon the
strength of the place, and the aid of his other troops, whom by the dust
arising in the air by reason of their marching, he did now perceive not to be
far off. The Infidels came on, with great fury even to those hills, but seeing
the difficulty of the place, and that it was very dangerous to pass further,
for that the very weight of their bodies would sufficiently load and hinder
them from getting up, they began to slack their pace. Scanderbeg would not
stir, till he certainly knew that his people did approach, yet could not his
policy be conveyed so cunningly, but the Barbarians did perceive it very
easily. For turning bridle upon the hearing of the noise of our men that were
coming on, and seeing their vauntcurrours, they were contented not to approach
any nearer, but in great have and fear casting many of their ensigns to the
ground, they made away The Turks fly.
with all speed possible. Nevertheless their great bast did not altogether
preserve them from the sword of their enemies, because that Scanderbeg his
soldiers had begun the fight with them, and with their shot playing upon them
from aloft, they had laid many of them dead upon the place. On the other side
the Dibrian hasting thitherwardes with great diligence, did take many prisoners
of those that were not able to hold way with their fellows, and the residue
had free liberty to save them selves. The success hereof being heard and seen
by Amurath, but especially the horrible aspect of that nights slaughter, and
the deformity of his Camp, did cause him to conceive such extreme grief, that
for a time it stopped up his speech, so as he was not able to speak a word,
which was the occasion that nothing was either attempted or determined all that
day against the Christians. The report is, that the next day, Scanderbeg with a
small train attending him according to his wonted use was seen by the
Barbarians to walk upon the top of the mountain which hangs over Croy, and
there Speech of Amurath touching Scanderbeg seeing him upon a mountain ever
Croy
to have some conference with Vranocontes. And that this being reported, and
his person showed unto Amurath by some of his men that pointed at him, he
blamed the folly and inconstancy of his people: and with a dogs laughter (as
the saying is) he told them, that the best way was to let alone that furious
and untamed Lion: and not from thenceforth to feed that unhappy beast with the
blood of his men, that so peradventure he might at length be brought to reason
by his own rage and proper fury, rather then by any force of arms that should
be used against him. But as it was little or no dishonor for Scanderbeg to
hear these words uttered from the mouth of his adversary, so likewise was it
to be taken as a mark of singular honor, that he had the power to draw from
him this testimony, and that he had enforced his enemy to harbor such a
conceit of him.

But to the matter. Now was the whole army of the Barbarians in great sorrow
and ignominy, and they demeaned them selves rather as men besieged, then as
those that besieged others. Besides that, to these their mishappes this also
was added which ensues, being of no less importance, and which also did
greatly increase their misfortunes. The secret working of the Mine was now come
to the knowledge of the The Mine of the Turks discovered and overthrown by
the Croians.
inhabitants: whereupon one night they issued forth of the town to see what
was done therein, and I know not how they went about it, but it was done with
such silence and secrecy, and so suddenly, that they overthrew and scattered
the most part of their work, and discovered all the doings of the enemy
without being seen or perceived by their skoutes, till such time as having
marred all their implements and provisions, they were retired to the town in
safety. I do believe well that they made choice of the dead time of the night,
when men being in their soundest sleep, do represent the very image and shape
of death. Yet some do deny that they sallied forth at all at that time, or
that they knew by any such means the enterprise of the enemy: but they suppose
that the Turks being not well able to conceal their fraudulent invention and
secret workings, the Christians did by their countenance and demeanor,
conjecture and grow into suspicion of some such intent. Whereupon as soon as
they began to grow doubtful of the matter, they presently devised how to
surprise and prevent them in their devise. And they say that they did place
certain Basins, A devise for the discovery of a Mine.
and Pannes of Brass and other metal full of water, in diverse places, for
that by the beating and sound of the blows, as they were working under ground,
the counterstroakes and rebounding noise made with the force of their strokes,
would evidently show in what place they did Mine underneath the earth. And
although they did sufficiently discern the entry of the Mine: nevertheless
fearing least they should be surprised by the conueyaunce thereof under the
earth, because it might be dug turning and winding with great uncertainty,
whereby the enemy might be brought into the town on some other side* where
they least suspected: therefore they had devised and invented this remedy for a
mischief that was so doubtful and uncertain. It may be that both the one and
the other of these assertions are true, and either of them has some likelihood
and probability; howbeit as the latter is more ingenious then the former: so in
my judgment, the truth thereof is not so likely as the other. But how soever
it be, this is one thing not doubted of nor denied by any: that though the
Croians did little or nothing fear the endeavors of the enemy, yet did they
make provision with good advise and exact deliberation for all things within
the town, whereby they might prevent and interrupt all the pretenses which the
Ottoman might devise against them. And therefore as soon as Amurath knew that
the Mine was discovered, and that the towns men did chearefully fortify
themselves with all kinds of resistaunce: he gave over the conceit of all
these fantasies, and surceased from proceeding any further in this purpose. But
had it so fallen out that his deceit had remained still hidden and concealed
from the citizens, yet notwithstanding he would in the end have discontinued
that work of his own proper motion: because that in undermining of the
ground, there were so many rocks, and strong banckes of hard stone in every
place, which did ever hinder their work, by reason of the nearenesse and
proximity of the mountain; In so much that to have cleft and pierced through
them, would have been an endless labor, and a work of inestimable
difficulty. And yet there were some who would have had him obstinately to
persevere in the same. This care then being removed, he resolved to employ his
thoughts, and to prove an other way: the devise whereof was with as little
profit as the other: and that was to see if he could by any manner of means
for money and by corruption, bring the Croians to his devotion. And he held it
not amiss to have recourse to this policy and invention, seeing neither force
nor fraud, nor menaces and threatenings, could prevail nor profit him any
thing at all.

He sent therefore to Vranocontes one of his Bassaes, a man of high degree and
An embassage sent to Vranocontes by Amurath with intent to corrupt him, and to
make him betray Croy.
great authority about his person, and one that was greatly commended for the
dexterity of his wit and judgment. Who (taking with him but two servant
only with their hands full of precious gifts, most rich presents, and
sumptuous ornaments, after the Turkishe fashion) had instructions given him,
that before he made any mention of the yielding of the town; he should offer
these presents to Vranocontes in the name of Amurath, the better thereby to
prepare his mind and disposition to the intended and decided parley. This
done, he willed him subtelly to sound and Instructions given by Amurath to his
ambassador.
search the depth of his thoughts, and to see how he was affected: and so with
large promises of gold and silver, he should practice to induce him to deliver
the place into his hands: and to show him how easy a thing it was for him, who
was the chief commander and governor of the garrison, seeing the number of
the citizens was but small and slender: and that they might be drawn either by
love or by constraint, to allow of that which the soldiers should accept and
like of: that likewise the soldiers would not contradict any thing which he
should think meet. And that he should moreover assure him, besides the offers
and presents sent unto him, both he and his people should not want any place
or degree of honor which they could desire in all his Court. The Ambassador
Turk having this charge and these instructions given him, did take his way
directly toward the town, and as he approached near to the Port, he was
stayed by the guards, till such time as the Governor was advertised of his
coming. Vranocontes being speedily sent for and arrived, the Turk delivered
the sum of his commission, and at the first as he was presenting the gifts
from Amurath, and did labor with glorious words to insinuate and work into
the favor and good liking of the Christian, thinking to allure him with his
cunning persuasions, and to get credence to his message, to the intent he might
cut him off from spending further time, and from being more tedious: It is
enough (said the Governor) and you have adorned your goodly presents with as
goodly and elegant speeches. Let us now hear the rest of the message which you
bring us from your master, so shall we Speech of Vranocontes to the
Ambassador of Amurath.
be the more ready to receive your gifts, and to accept of your largess, when
I shall once know the sum of your demand. Otherwise you may not think that
we will any way bind our selves, unto you by your courtesies, nor that we will
be in any sort tied unto you by this bond of your benefits, tending perhaps to
our infamy and reproach, unless we first see to what end you use this your
liberality so exceeding and extraordinary: for then may we either accept
safely, or reject justly your presents, when your words shall have made clear
and manifest the intent and meaning of your hearts.

The Barbarian being nothing at all abashed at the speech of the Governor,
replied thereunto immediately.

Howsoever it be (quoth he) for other matters, we have not brought you these
gifts Answer of the Turkish Ambassador to Vranocontes.
under pretense to deceive any man, for that were the way to deal with slaves
and children, and not with free and valiant persons. And although (o
Vranocontes) all things proceeding from an enemy are suspicious (as thou have
said very well and wisely) whereof we our selves also are not ignorant, yet
durst we not without blushing present our selves before thee (as the saying is)
with our hands void and empty. Neither ought thou to condemn the
gratitude of our minds, if thou be the man that thou seem to be, and as
thou art reported to be generally. Receive therefore and take in good part
these presents which shall not any way wrong thee, nor be any impediment, but
that thou may freely, and with full liberty dispose of thy affairs, and
continue thy former rightes to ordain of them as thou please. For whether
thou do refuse and reprove our requests, or other things which we have to
say unto thee: (which perhaps do as much concern thy good as ours) or whether
thou do approve and allow of these presents offered thee so franckly and so
freely, we will not in any sort object it as a reproach unto thee. For nothing
is to be held or esteemed more base, vile and servile, then so to give, as to
expect a profit and gain by the gift. We are now come unto thee (gentle and
worthy Captain) freely and of our own accord: and (I speak it from the very
bottom of my heart) we do not seek to surprise thee, neither by words nor
by gifts, whom we have so often proved to be invincible by arms and dint of
sword, and who do repute all things inferior unto thee, and to the
greatness of thy thoughts. This is the cause that Amurath loves thee, and
does admire these rare virtues in his enemy: this is the cause he does desire
(if by any means he may) to have thee near unto him. No doubt that is the
place, and to be near the presence of so great a Monarke, is far more fit and
convenient for thy merits. And there it is that the excellent magnanimity of
thy courage, and the dexterity of thy spirit, shall be able to find out the
way and means to mount to the highest and supreme degree of all glory and
good fortune: not that I condemn Scanderbeg, whom even we our selves his
enemies do glorify for the recovery of his country, for the defending of it
so often and so valiantly, yet through thy succors and assistance principally:
but thou art worthy of another manner of Prince, and of a better and higher
advancement, and not to spend thy years, and to consume thy glorious life in
this obscurity, and in this vility and baseness of estate. Moreover Scanderbeg
his good fortune will vanish away even in a moment, the Destinies have opposed
against him an enemy, who is too mighty for him to endure continually: well may
his punishment be deferred for a season, but it cannot be avoided: so extreme
and incredible an hatred has the Ottoman Prince conceived against him. Over
and above the incomparable forces which he has assembled for his destruction,
he has sworn and protested not to spare any costs or expenses, nor
trauelles, nor dangers, nor to depart out of Epire, till such time as he have
subdued him, and imposed a most deadly and mortal yoke upon his head. Now see
how the original of this mischief does begin principally with you of Croy: we
hear him every day sounding into the ears of his counselors these and the
like speeches: that he will rather shamefully abandon and forsake his Imperial
city of Andrinople, and all the dominions of his estate and Empire, before he
will quit the possession of this place: before he will leave this city
unconquered, and before his wrath shall not be fully satisfied with the
slaughter and butchery of your dismembered bodies, and there is no doubt but he
will do it, and I do tremble to foretell it. For though I be one of your
enemies (amongst infinite others,) yet am I a man and have human passions:
and therefore hardly will my eyes be able to endure or suffer so miserable a
sight and object of your pitiful and lamentable condition. Assure your selves
he will not fail to do it, if you do not change your minds* if now (taking
the benefit of his long sufferance and patience) you do not accept the safety,
the light, the liberty, and the peace which are so freely offered unto you: but
go to, say a Gods name, that this fortress so unmatchable, that these walls
so inaccessible, that your valor (which is more then all the rest) shall
preserve and defend you: but how long I pray you will this be? do you think
that the Ottoman will raise his siege and remove his Camp in the midst and
chief heat of this war? you shall see it to your cost, you shall feel it to
your grief and loss, that though his forces profit not nor prevail not,
though all his attempts and endeavors do prove vain and bootlesse, yet (I
say) you shall see still before your eyes, and you shall continually behold
before your walls these same enemies, these same tents, till such time as the
extremity and importunity offamine (which mastereth and overcomes all things)
do in the end enforce you to yield, and to submit your selves. What other hope
then have you left I pray you? whence is it that this greedy desire of perils
and dangers has seized upon your obstinat and hardened hearts? Shall
Scanderbeg supply your wants with victuals being imprisonned within these walls?
who being constrained to keep close hidden continually in these forests, or
wandering up and down the tops of the mountains, and being ouerloaden and
overwhelmed on all sides with cares and travels, is scarceable to sustain his
miserable body? Will the Venetians send or succor you with provisions, who do
daily bring and furnish us against you, with all store of sustenance and
necessaries for the war, even in excess and superfluity? Be wise therefore,
you that are so brave and valiant, be you once well advised and take your wits
unto you: behold it is your enemy that warns you, you have persisted long
enough in this obstinacy: neither your country nor your liberty ought to be so
wilfully defended, that you should oppose your selves for them against the will
and pleasure of the divine majesty. It behooves you to yield and to give place
to Fortune, and to bend your knees to the most puissant and mighty. But what
liberty is this whereof I speak unto you? the true liberty, the true rewards,
and the perpetual tranquillity of this life, is in the power of Amurath.
Provide therefore for your selves, whilst your affairs are in sound and good
estate, whilst you have yet time to determine upon it: whilst that we your
enemies do exhort you, do entreat you, and do love to entertain you, rather as
our companions and friends, with your good liking, then as our slaves and
prisoners by force and constraint.

In this manner did the Barbarian deliver his message, framing and conforming
with a singu^^^ good grace, both his countenance and his voice: and having
finished, he did attend to observe what alteration he could perceive in the
spirits and affections of the company, purposing thereupon to have taken an
occasion to treat a part and in secret with the Governor upon the residue of
his ambassade. But knowing that the affections of them all were mightily
estranged, from liking the subject of his discourse, as men that knew how to
contemn the swords of their enemies, and not their words only, and hearing
the soldiers begin to mutter, and murmr here and there, as if they had some
wrong offered them, rather then be persuaded to yield themselves, he praid the
governor to give him leave, to use a word or two unto himself alone and in
secret, which was likewise accorded unto him, for they did all much rely and
trust upon the sage wisdom and constancy of that personage: being assured,
that he would not undertake any thing, which should not be for the advantage
and majesty of the Realm of Albany, and for the profit of each of them
particularly. Then began the wily fox to declare the secret which was committed
unto him by the Sultan, covering his detestable and hateful message, with the
most affected and plausible speeches that was possible. Vranocontes Vranocontes
rejects the Turkish Ambassador and dismisseth him with threats and menaces.
foreseeing the venom of his pernicious practices, did cut him off and
interrupt him in the midst of his talk, enioyning him presently to get out
of his sight. Thus wholly confounded and ashamed did the Ambassador depart, no
man accepting of his bribes by the express commandment of the Governor:
otherwise, it is not to be doubted, but the licentiousnes and greedy desire of
the soldiers, would not have needed any entreaty to lighten those varlets of
their carriage. At such time as this trim Orator of the Turkishe Prince was
retiring himself and ready to depart, Vranocontes in recompense of his painted
and fine language did denounce unto him this sentence: straightly charging and
commanding him, that neither he, nor any other from thenceforth, should be so
hardy on the part and behalf of the Ottoman* as to repair again to the town,
or to demand any parley: protesting that if they did, they should be assured
(besides the loss of their hands, their noses, and their ears, to have their
bodies wholly and hideously deformed and tormented.

The Bassa being returned to the camp, was received of the multitude and
common sort in great confusion, for that they had long expected him with great
devotion, and they were come forth against him, being desirous to understand
the resolution of the besieged. This was in a manner the only hope whereupon they
did build for the getting of Croy, and for the finishing of their labors: but
when they perceived that the presents were not received, which they saw in the
hands of the Bassa his servants, they knew well that there was nothing done nor
concluded. Moreover after they heard it reported, with what obstinacy the
Croians had made answer, in such sort as is already declared, there was not any
one of them which conceived not in his heart, either sorrow or fear, or fury,
acording to the natural inclination of every one in particular. The aged
Amurath and the Turks agreeued at the repulse of their Ambassador, provide to
assault Croy.
Sultan above all the rest, being overcome with impatiency, had recourse again
to arms, purposing once more to force the town by an aslault, which he had
erst given over and surceased: wherein he did rather content his wrath and
choler, then any way revenge his disgrace and dishonor. He commanded therefore
to make ready the ladders, and other engines of assault against the next
morning, spending almost all the whole night in this idle and vain labor, and
in placing the artillery, not forgetting also to provide for the security and
surety of his camp, knowing how Castriot had his eye always open to devise
some means how to annoy him. For this cause he left 30000. men well appointed,
who held their horses always in a readiness and still bridled. The next morning
about Croy assaulted the th^rd time.
the day break, was the soldiers conveyed and placed near the walls, and at
the very first beginning, the roaring cannon went off both on the one side and
the other, and did seem to contend which should devour most blood, and cause
greatest mortality. But the shot of the Christians fell more fortunatly then
those of the Infidels, who were as little respective of their own people as of
their enemies. And whilst they assaied to drive our men from the defense of
their walls, they made many of their own company to forsake the fight, both by
reason of their deadly wounds, and in regard of the evident danger which they
feared. When the ordinance had done thundering, they came to the Scalado,
wherein by how much the more there did appear perfect valor, and true
courage, so much the more matter did they still find to adventure the loss of
their lives; so that in a moment, the blood was seen on all sides to run
down as it were in streams, and the earth was every where covered with
senseless and breathless bodies.

Amurath could not any longer endure to be cruel against him self,
notwithstanding Turks repulsed, from the assalt.
that he had enterprized this last attempt of a mere wilfulness and
obstinacy. Wherefore causing the fight to cease, he retired into his pauillion,
as one enraged and mad for grief and anger: where he passed the residue of
that day, his own hands doing violence and outrage to his aged and white
hairs* and pulling himself by the chin, with his eyes lifted up to the
heavens, he powered forth many injurious and blasphemous speeches, reproching
even God him self with his complaints and exclamations. And he did seem to
question with him, why he had reserved his hoarie hairs, and Amurath his ^
impatie^cie, who enraged at his ill success exclaimeth against God.
aged years to so many misfortunes and ignominies: that both the whole race of
his forepassed life, and the name of the Ottomans should be altogether so
disgraced and dishonored: and the glory of his mighty conquests achieved for
many years, should now at the last be obscured and darkened, by means of one
poor and base Castle in Epire, being in a manner but a vile and paultry
village? The Bassaes and other his familiars did labor to comfort him with
diverse discourses, recounting unto him a world of examples, both ancient and
modern, of the sudden fall and misfortune of other great and mighty Princes,
and of many strange and foraine kings and Emperors: but all was in vain,
and his crased mind would admit no comfort. Notwithstanding the day following,
the old man, albeit he were very weak and ill disposed in his body, the
vehemency of his grief having even almost spent and wasted him to nothing,
yet did he fall to counsel with certain of his Chieftaines and greatest
Peers, who as the report goes, were four in number: two Bassaes, the one of
Romania, the other of Asia, and Amurath consulteth upon his proceeding in the
siege of Croy.
two of those whom they call Vizirs or Counselors. Long time were they in
deliberating upon the sum and consequence of this war, and they were divided
into three diverse opinions. One was to continue the siege so long, till that
the extremity of famine had worn out the besieged. The second did advise him to
leave Croy, and to pursue Scanderbeg with all his forces: and by that means,
though he should not have his will of him by force of arms, yet he might
peradventure enclose and shut him up in some place where by famine he should
bemaster him. The last opinion was: that seeing they had sufficiently tried al
means, and had adventured the fortune of al hazards, it was but mere folly to
continue there any longer with shame and infamy, or upon despite and
indignation only to consume and destroy his own army: but that it were good
rather to send some Ambassador to the Albanois, which should deal and persuade
with him upon any terms to become tributary to the Ottoman. And in case he
did give ear unto it, he should demand 10000. crowns for a yearly tribute.
This opinion was allowed as the most safe: and Amurath did consider with him
self, that this would be a good and honorable color and show of victory; if
before his departure out of Epire, he might prescribe such conditions to his
enemy, and impose a yoke of such subjection upon the Province of Albanie. For
to continue the siege, they found it very inconvenient for many reasons, and
they did foresee a thousand discommodities, which the winter would bring upon
them, and that the besiegers would be sooner wearied then the besieged Moreover
the default and want of victuals, for the maintenance of so many thousands of
men for so long a times and (which was a thing of more importance) the daily
courses and invasions, which the enemy was like to make upon their Camp, were
not a little to be feared. Neither did Amurath like, or take any pleasure to
lose any more time in running and wandering up and down the mountains of
Albany after Scanderbeg: seeing it was a thing also which could not be
effected, without singular danger, and a wonderful hazard both of himself
and all his army.

The matter therefore being thus* resolved on* this Ambassade was committed to
Isup sent Ambassador from Amurath to Scanderbeg to conclude a peace with him.
the care and wisdom of a Turk, whose name was Isup, a personage of great
credit and authority with Amurath, who having bethought himself that it
might be, the sum would seem too great unto the Epyrote, he warned his
Ambassador, that if he did refuse to condescend and to submit him self to so
great a tribute, he should abate the one half of it. One thing yet remained
which seemed somewhat difficult: and that was the means how to meet with
Scanderbeg, for to go wandering up and down the province, and to seek him
without knowing in what place certain, (all the country being in arms)
seemed a matter very dangerous and of little safety: notwithstanding that the
name of an Ambassador was every where sacred and inuiolate: But Sentence.
they were eased of this care by means of certain Dibrians who were then
prisoners in the Turkish Camp. For they did covenant and undertake, if they
might have their liberty, to conduct the Barbarian safe and sound to the
presence of Castriot, which being granted them and they delivered, they lead
him the way taking their course to the Camp of the Christians. The first place
they came to was the mountain Tumenista, where finding the Prince of Epire,
they went on right toward the river of Isme upon the Sea side: but there they
missed him also: for the same night having removed with all his carriage, he
was retired into an open country, which the inhabitants call the Red plain:
whereof the Dibrians having notice by certain that The Red plain
dwelled thereabouts, they departed from thence, and within less then an hour
they came to the same place (for it was not far from the river Isme.) And
before they entered all of them into the camp, one of the guides (leaving the
Mohammedan with the others) went on before to do his duty to Scanderbeg, and to
know his pleasure concerning the Ambassador. The Dibrian being known by those
of his own squadron, and being entertained and welcomed with many salutations
and embracements, entermingled with some tears* by reason of the longing
desire which they had to see him, was speedily conducted to their Sovereign:
who having seen and welcomed the soldier, and having heard his message,
without any delay he sent Tanusee well accompanied with a good train both of
horsemen and footmen, to go and conduct the Ambassador unto him: who being
conveyed to the presence of the Prince, did not for that day deliver any thing
touching the message which he had in charge from his Master, because the night
began to approach: but being entertained with great courtesy, and feasted most
sumptuously, he passed that night within the tents of the Christians. In the
mean while Moses with a good number of horsemen being mounted on horseback,
by the commandment Scanderbeg his great care and providence to prevent the
sudden surprises of his enemies.
of Scanderbeg, was ridden forth to course up and down round about, and to
discover on all sides far and near, both in the valleys and woody places: and
the watches also were doubled in all the quarters of the camp, for fear lest
under this faint show and color, the Ottoman should attempt some exploit
against them: so that there was nothing else done almost all that night in the
camp of the Christians. As Soon as it was day, and that the chief and
principal of the Army were called and assembled together, Scanderbeg gave
audience to the Turkish Ambassador: who being formerly prepared of his oration
artificially framed and devised, thought to have persuaded those ingenious and
free spirits in some sort to condescend unto his purpose. He began therefore in
this manner.

I could wish, o Scanderbeg, that God would have given us the mind and
affection Oration of Isup to Sca^^erbeg.
long ago wherewith we now come unto thee: though perhaps more late then we
ought, being now made wise by our own harms. For then neither had we for our
parts seen so many goodly armies consumed and destroyed with one and the same
destiny, neither should thou daily behold before thy eyes, thy realm so
pitifully dismembered, nor should thou have heard so many complaints and
lamentations on all sides amongst thy subjects. But so has nature ordained
and appointed it, that it is impossible to attain to a perfect peace, or
rightful equity, without blood and the violence of arms. Let us therefore
hold our selves contented, and take in good part that which rests: let us
preserve these small relics and remainders to some better fortune.
Sufficiently has the land of Albany been overflowed with the blood of mankind
for these many years: sufficient is the deformity and desolation of this
province which was sometimes most pleasant and beautiful, and the most
flourishing seat of great and famous kings. God has given unto Amurath mighty
forces, and his puissance does in a manner exceed beyond all humane desire:
whereas thy dominions (o Scanderbeg,) if thou compare them with his, and (if I
may speak it freely,) are very small and as nothing. Nevertheless the valor
of thy people, thy virtue, and (that which exceeds all) thy great and
admirable fortune, have made them that they are not to be despised: whereof
thou have made a most glorious trial in the whole course of thy wars. And we
our selves (though thou be our enemy) have and do oftentimes both in public
and in private greatly wonder and admire it. We do well remember the proud
peoples of Hungary and Greece, that abounded so infinitely in goods and wealth,
how easily they were tamed and subdued by our weapons: but this nation of yours
only continues invincible, and is utterly impatient of our dominion. I do not
flatter thee, for I am thy enemy, and I would to God that the things which I
speak were not true. Only against you and your country (for any thing I see)
we have not made any show, that we are either valiant or fortunat: but reason
would that your prosperity (o you Albanians) ought to be held so much the more
suspicious: the end whereof (though it may happen to fall out miserable) has so
puffed up your spirits through overmuch credulity, as if you had already
embraced the perpetual possession thereof, that in the end it will be your
ruin and confusion. And yet if you set before your eyes all the
particularities of your good fortune, this lingering war has bereaved you
likewise in some sort of your strength and of your reputation. For albeit
hitherto you have held wars with us without any great loss or diminution of
your forces: yet where is Sfetigrade? where is that ample and large territory?
what is become of the multitude of manors, buildings, and rich farms, so well
planted and husbanded? where is the wonted beautiful show and aspect of all
these things? wherefore is this goodly region wasted and spoiled? where are all
those large garners and store*houses of your corn, wherewith both the towns
next adjoining, and Italy it self was wont to be stored and relieved? and to
conclude without touching any other matters, where are the noble and goodly
walls of Croy which are now so battered and deformed, that it seems, there is
scarce left any show or token of them? and the countenances of the defendants
even breathing for life, do retain no part of their former estate or of their
wonted condition. What is it (o Scanderbeg) that thou do expect further?
thou see how all things do hasten to bring upon thee a million of mischiefs
and vexations: of thy towns, some are taken and lost, some are pressed with a
strong and mighty siege. Croy the capital city of thy country, is in a manner
brought to nothing, and there remains nothing but only the obstinacy of the
people: who though they hold out for a season, yet in the end will soon be
overcome through pure want. For Amurath has resolved to augment his forces,
and to continue the siege all the winter, yea another summer: and (if need be)
many years, till such time, as if the sword cannot master them, yet famine
shall make them to stoop under his subjection. But this is no otherwise, then
in case thou be desirous of thy own misfortune, and do show thy self so
unwise as to refuse these conditions of peace with the which I am come unto
thee. Behold how the Ottoman in stead of being thy mortal enemy is content now
to accept thee as his friend and for his tributarie. He will raise his camp
from before Croy, he will lead away his ensigns out of Epyre, which he brought
hither as an enemy, never more to return again: and he holds it more
precious without bloodshed to bind this province by being stipendary unto him,
to acknowledge the greatness of the benefit, then to seek to impose upon you
an endless and most cruel servitude. Now for the greatness of such a
benefit he demands of you but a small charge and an easy burden: he is
content to take but ten thousand crowns for a yearly tribute: as for any
other thing which appertains either to you as your own, or to him as his
due, he demands none at all. Well may you (o you Albanois, and thou also o
Scanderbeg,) without any dishonor, without any damage, consent and accord in
this one point only, to the just demand of Amurath, in regard of so many of
his Towns in Epyre, and so many of his possessions, and so many goodly things,
which thou do enjoy and hold from him, not by any right of inheritance, but
only by usurpation and mere violence. Is Morea once named Peloponnesus in
Greece.
Morea any thing less noble then Epire? Is the Caramania or Cilicia.
Caramanian Prince any way inferior unto thee in nobility, in puissance, or
in richesse? let me speak it unto thee without reproof. Besides many other
peoples and nations of excellent renown and antiquity, all which do willingly
and without constraint cause their tributs to be brought daily even to
Andrynople: much more reason have thou to yield unto the like, seeing it is not
imposed upon thee by way of bondage and servitude: but rather as a more
certain bond, and a more strict obligation of thy fidelity. Examine well thy
own forces (most prudent and politic Prince,) consider all good and happy
fortune, and let not so excellent an occasion slip away at this time out of
thy hands. If thou should now reject these conditions of alliance which are
offered thee, it may be that hereafter thou will be desirous to have them
granted, when it will be all too late, at such time as the estate of thy
affairs being changed, thou shall find the countenance of the victour more
austere, and much more lofty and Imperious, but in laboring thus earnestly
and carefully to persuade thee in this matter: I do more then stands either
with the majesty of Ottoman, or the gravity of my Ambassade. Nevertheless I
will not revoke any thing which I have spoken: but rather more then that (if an
enemy may any thing prevail with you) I pray and entreat you, I require and
beseech you: that whilst it is yet time, and whilst the old man is in so good
a mind, you would have a regard and consideration both of ours and of your
own estate jointly both in one. For do not you think (if it fall out so
unhappily that this peace be not obtained) that Amurath will be more discontented
at it, then we shall have cause to be wearied and grieved with it. For
certainly therein are we all in particular interested, we only are the men
that shall smart for it, and upon whose heads the whole mischief is like to
fall: because for the fulfilling of his will and pleasure, and to satisfy the
furious appetite of his passions, we must vow our slavish bodies, and
prodigally expose and adventure our lives to all hazardes and accidents, and
with our own blood, if we can not with yours, we must satiate his wrath and
malicious mind. Every day must we be (as it were) in your bowelles: and we
must continue in shedding each of others blood: till such time as either one of
the two be glutted with doing of mischief: or that our long perseueraunce, and
a certain kind of unhappy fate and destiny does altogether devour and
consume both parties.

The Ambassador would have proceeded on forward with his speech, but that the
assembly grew into a sudden tumult and commotion: some murmured, others
rejoiced and triumphed to see, that Amurath their enemy and persecutour, was
not now able to do them any more harm, that he was wearied, and even worn out
with the toils and travels of these so long continued wars: and that he was
as one already vanquished and overcome by their valor, and they could not
forbear from laughing to hear the conditions which his Ambassador did seem
to offer, and to propound unto them with so glorious a show and ostentation of
good words. Some of them frowned and muttered, for that Amurath under a shadow
and color of peace and amity should intend cunningly to work them to submit
themselves to the yoke, in yielding their persons to be tributaries, whom being
his enemies, he was not able to subdue and conquer. And this I dare say, that
there was not any one of them, which did like better of this reconciliation
that was offered, then that the war should be still continued: nay they did not
so much as estimate it meet, that the matter should be debated by most voices
in a full and common council: so mightily are the minds Sentence.
of mortal men puffed up by the prosperous and happy success of their
affairs. Alas what is become now of the brightness and glorious renown of
that nation, of those noble and generous spirits, and of the seed of that
invincible virtue? The Epirots Magnanimity of the Epirots in the days of
Scanderbeg.
did see their estate and Empire most miserably rent and torn. Of their
towns, some were taken, others straightly besieged, the lands and patrimony
of their ancestors all covered over with men at arms, their wives and their
children removed and exiled (as it were) far from their sight, and even
languishing and pining away for very grief, and with continual fear and
lamentation: the bodies of their friends and fellows daily slain and
dismembered before their eyes, and all things flowing and drowned in blood and
cruelty: and yet did every one of them take more delight and pleasure to
remain and continue in that mean and low fortune, and to stand upon the
guard and maintenance of their liberty, with the great expense and loss of
their blood, though not without hope of good success, rather then they would
in any sort yield unto the Infidel, or to give unto their enemies the least
show or confession of faintness or cowardice. Wherefore Scanderbeg, (whose
mind also was ever undaunted and utterly unacquainted with any passion of
fear or timerousnesse, after he had appeased their murmuring and the noise
raised amongst them, he turned himself to Isup, and because he would not seem
to return him to his master the Ottoman (as it were) with disdain or in
suspense, or without any certain resolution, he made him answer in this
manner.

That which thou have propounded unto us ( Isup) at this time, is no other
thing Answer of Scanderbeg to Isup his Ambassade.
(as I now remember,) then was heretofore offered us by Ayradin: who at our
first coming to this Crown, did by letters, brought unto us in the name of
the Sultan, demand of us certain places of Epyre and all Macedonie, touching
which point the full answer given you at that time was sufficient to have
satisfied you. And I do not think my estate so much empayred nor yours in
that manner augmented, that you should with any face or show of honesty seem
at this time to offer me these conditions. As for that long discourse
recounting the loss of Sfetygrade, the battery and ruin of the walls of
Croy, the spoiling and wasting of our fields and territories, we do scarce
account that any loss at all, as long as these heads are in safety, as long
as these soldiers are in health and well disposed, and as long as our people
is in security, it will be an easy matter (believe me) to recover whatsoever is
lost, and to repair that which is destroyed, God aiding and assisting us, it
is nothing to destroy or to reedifie such things as those, all the while we
want not quick hands and good workmen (such as we have here) to undertake
them. But answer me (I pray thee) seeing thou have a delight to reckon up
our misfortunes, how dearly have you bought and paid for them continually,
with what loss and store of bloodshed have you bought Sfetygrade (albeit it
was not your prowess that carried it, but the superstition of the besieged?)
And the siege of Croy, how many of your best soldiers has it cost you? Go
to then, hold on still a Gods name to be brave in this manner, so might you
always proceed and continue in happiness. For my part I do not, nor will
not envy it, I can be well content to see your ensigns always to continue
within Epire, to suffer my towns to be besieged and assaulted, my fields to
be pilled and wasted: and whatsoever is good in Macedonie to be spoiled and
destroyed, so long as you bear such like marks and tokens of your good
fortune, and such testimonies as these be of your valor. I protest unto you, I
hold it better and more expedient for us to entreat you not to depart at all
out of Epire, then to buy your departure at so high a price as you set us. God
forbid that any age or time should see, or that any man living should ever
hear, that this province was become tributarie, as long as Scanderbeg is
alive. Assure your selves if Ottoman would restore unto me the whole and entire
possession of Macedonie, and all the patrimony of my ancestors, nay if
Amurath would divide with me, and make me copartner with him of all his Empire:
I would never suffer the name of Albanie to be stained and blemished with this
blot of disgrace and infamy. In vain therefore do thou heap up these
examples of strangers and foreign states: in vain do thou represent before
our eyes, the subjection of the Peloponnesians, and servitude of them of Asia:
for there is no example nor President whatsoever of so great weight and
efficacy, which may move a free and liberal heart to subject and submit it
self to so base, villainous and Sentence.
foul an indignity.

The Turk made no further reply being unwilling to stand any longer upon this
Amurath sickneth upon grief and melancholy.
matter: and therefore held it needelesse also to make any offer of a lesser
tribute, or to follow any further the instructions given him by the Sultan: for
he saw that the minds of them all in general did abhor to hear of any
such submission. The counsel therefore being risen, he was conducted with his
train to dine with Scanderbeg in his own lodging: and after great cheer, and
honorable entertaynement given him: Tanusee and certain horsemen did convey
him about a mile from the Camp, for fear least upon this favor showed him,
the licentiousness of the soldiers might in some sortworke some injury or
outrage unto him. Scarce was he gotten out of the sight of the Albanois, but
Scanderbeg with all his army, doubting some ambushments of the enemy, if he
should not speedely remove from thence, did march away presently to Tumenista:
where he placed gardes and scouts on all sides, with a far greater care then he
had used at any time before.

The return of Isup to Amurath, who then lay at Tyranna the lesser: as it did
greatly augment his former grief: so did the conceit thereof redouble the
violence of his disease and sickness. The danger whereof being from day to
day aggrauated, and growing more and more suspicious, it made the Bassaes to
quit almost all care of arms, and to devise upon nothing else then how to cure
and succor the old Sultan. But the malady being uncertain, and his disease
unknown unto them, they saw no better receipt nor remedy to minister unto him,
then to entertain him with store of good words, and pleasant talk and
devises. For his sickness being engendered through the impatiency of grief
and coffeehouse, did require to be lenified and mitigated with things
confortatiue, purposely applied to put away melancholy: and the cure was to be
wrought with some new and pleasant delights which might cheer up his drooping
thoughts, and revive his spirits which were so grievously perplexed. This was
the estate of their affairs for a time, during the which the Turk found him
self thus sick and out of quiet: notwithstanding he could yet for all that in
some sort give audience and speak unto his people, without much payning of
himself: and he was able to give them directions, and to provide for many
accidents which seemed then requisite and necessary: till such time as
Scanderbeg being advertised of this indisposition and crazinesse of his person,
did altogether draw out of his body that little strength and vigor which
remained, and was yet left either in his members, or in his courage, by means
of two or three invasions which he made upon his camp. At the first and second
time there was not much harm done, nor scarce any thing executed worth the
remembering: for that the promptness and vigilancie of the Turks in defending
of their trenches, did hinder and disappoint the purpose of the Epirot: besides
that, their minds were more attentively busied rather to the defense of
themselves then to the offending of the enemy. But this did more and more chafe
and incense the hardy courage of Scanderbeg, who taking the benefit of the
night, as the time most proper and natural to procure tumult, fear and
confusion, marched with all his horsemen toward Tyranna: because the place
being more plain and easy for horse to serve in, by means thereof the tents of
the Turks would be the more subject to the inuasio^ of their enemies.

It was now past midnight when the Christians being on foot, their coming was
A third canuazado by Scanderbeg to the camp of the Turks before Croy.
discovered by the noise and neighing of their horses. The darkness was
greater then was usual or accustomed, and the heavens being covered and
obscured with thick and gross clouds, did yield forth no light nor clearenes
at all, and therefore hardly could any thing be done or ordained against the
violence and fury of the Albanois. Nevertheless according to the opportunity
of the time did they provide a remedy: and the soldiers were disposed in order
according as they could best imagine by the hearing, and not having the sight
of the enemy. Neither was the quality of that season less contrary and
suspicious to the Christians also. And howbeit that ordinarily, the assailant
has more resolution and assurance, then the party that is surprised, yet did a
certain horror seize upon them, and seemed somewhat to daunt their courages, and
not any of them durst set forward or march one before another. In the midst of
this doubtfulnesse and staggaring (as it were) both on the one part and the
other: Scanderbeg taking to himself about a hundred horse of his vauntcurrors,
and seuering himself from the body of his troops, advanced forward with great
fury even to the enemies trenches, to provoke them to issue out: and having
incensed them with high cries and clamors, and casting of darts in amongst
them, he drew forth some of them from their appointed stations: who separated
themselves from their company with purpose to set upon him, and in hope to
have defeated him: but the greatest mischief lighted upon themselves, part of
them being overthrown, and the residue were glad quickly to return from
whence they came. Scanderbeg continued for a time coursing up and down here
and there, and as one that deluded and dalyed with them, he sought means to
have drawn forth some greater troop to charge him: but seeing the time to
pass away in this vain and frivolous expectation, and that the darkness of
the night by little and little bganne to wear away by the drawing on and
approach of the day: he returned to his company, and without any further
fayning or dissembling, he ordered his troops with very excellent good skill,
and divided them between Streeze and Tanusee (for Moses was left with the
infanterie at Tumenista) and having readily instructed them what they should
do, he lead them on against the enemy. The first onset was with shot, wherewith
they played one upon another, and the most of the fight was in that order: for
the Albanois was in doubt, least if the ranks should join, and be mingled
together in the dark of the night, his soldiers should be scarce able to know
their fellows from the Infidels, for which cause he would not suffer them to
press in upon the enemy: neither had they come at all to handystroakes, if it
had not been long of the Turks them selves, who presuming upon their huge
multitude, did cause a strong battallion of horse, to make out toward the
left side, and so purposed to have enclosed the Christians between them. But
Scanderbeg seeing them a little separated from the rest of their main army,
did presently withdraw him self from their trenches into the open field, and
dividing his troops also a sunder, to the intent the fight should be
maintained on both pattes, he made against them speedily, and charged them with
great fury both before and behind. At the first onset the Barbarians received
him with a brave and hardy resolution, expecting that fresh succors should
have seconded them from their camp: but the long tariance and slackenesse of
their supplies, and the decrease of their own strength, which by little and
little failed them, and the fury of the Christians increasing together with the
advantage they had gotten against them, made them at length to set spurs to
their horses, and they never thought them to run fast enough, till they had
gotten within their camp. A great number of Turks and some Christians also
left their lives in that conflict before that the Infidels betook themselves
to flight. By this time the day began to break, and the multitude of the
Infidels began to grow so great and increase so mightily, that they
constrained Streeze and Tanusee to retire. The Turkish troops would gladly
have pursued them in their retreat: but for fear to displease the Sultan,
they laid aside all desire of revenge, and busied themselves in recounting
their own losses and misfortunes. Besides that slaughter only which was made
in the fight, there happened not any disorder within their camp, neither was
there aine booty or pillage gouen, but only some small spoils which were
found upon the dead bodies: for you must note, that the fight was both
begun and ended without and not within the trenches of their camp. The great
men and Chiefetaines of the army, did very advisedly seek to conceal this
discomfiture from the Sultan, to the intent his melancholique humor might not
have any further matter for to work upon. Nevertheless they could not by any
means keep it from the knowledge of the old man, who was very jealous and
full of care, by means of the general and public murmurings and
whisperings, and the private plaintes of the common sort, which did easily
discover that which was happened, unto his mind already enclyning and addicted
to suspect the worst. For, as it is commonly seen, that none are either more
courageous or greater cowards then the popular sort, in the good or bad
success of their fortune: so did the Turks go up and down their camp,
devising and debating one with another, and saying: That the enemy would at
some one time or other, find out some good opportunity to set upon the very
tents and pauilions even of the Sultan their Lord and Sovereign.

Now was the Ottoman greatly perplexed upon the course of his proceedinges,
Turks in great perplexity upon the sickness of Amurath.
to break up his camp, to raise his siege, and to leave the war which he
had undertaken with so great courage and show of magnanimity: very shame
would not suffer ^im. Some counseled him notwithstanding to leave the greatest
part of his forces before Croy, and with them to continue the siege: and that
himself should retire and take his journey to Andrinople, and so by that
means provide for his own health and safety: for that if he did absent
himself for a while from the bloody sight of his enemies, and from the view
of those tragical spectacles and calamities: the force of his desease would by
little and little vanish away and be abolished. But his health every day
empayring and waxing worse and worse, and his breath by little and little
beginning to fail him, they then knew that the immutable decree of the heavens
was not to be revoked, neither by change of place, nor by any succors, or
human counsel or advise. Wherefore although they never ceased by sovereign
medicamentes and other remedies to seek the recovery of his health, and to
revive his decayed body (as the minds of mortal men are never destitute of
some hope,) yet had they a special regard (as a sort of mariners or sailors
who have lost their pylots) every man to his power and ability, to provide
and procure all things requisite, by which their army might be secured and
preserved. Wherefore causing their tents to be drawn closer and nearer
together, which before lay dispersed here and there, and were more subject to
the violence of the enemy, they did entrench their camp in a more straight
circuit, and within a lesser compass, garding and defending their rampires
with good and strong forces of armed soldiers. And having thus ordered the
estate of their affairs, they did attend either the death of the Sultan, and
therewithal an end of this war: or else peradventure, his health and
recovery which should minister unto them some new and fresh plots for the
strengthening and reenforcing of the siege. Scanderbeg had notice of all these
matters, and wanted not daily aduertisementes to bring this news unto him. And
many there were also amongst the Infidels, who came and rendered themselves
unto him, by whom he learned the counsels and most secret devises of the enemy.
For there was not almost any one day, but there repaired unto him a great
number seeking refuge in his camp or in his towns, especially after that it
was once publicly supposed and commonly believed, that the Sultan was drawing
near his end. For it is usually seen, that the vulgar sort do willingly
follow the fortune of that Sentence.
party which is supposed to be most secure and of greatest suertie. Now
Scanderbeg thought it not best to continue his ordinary allarmes and
invasions, but rather to refer them over, and reserve his chiefest violence
till such time as Amurath were deceased. Nevertheless he would oftentimes
walk abroad both by day and by Crayna a mountain over Croy.
night, upon the top of the mountain named Crayna: and there he would devise
upon matters with Vranocontes, or else he would be coursing up and down the
next hills and mountains diverse times with sundry troops of soldiers,
thinking either to surprise some of the Turks, as they should be employed in
the services of their camp, or else to keep them by all means possible in
continual terror and subjection.

But this intermission of arms, and the sorrowful expectation of the Turks
did Amurath his last end a mirror for great persons.
not long continue: for within three days Amurath departed out of this life,
and left behind him all worldly fortune both good and bad. A most notable and
worthy mirror for the great men of the earth, who in this world being the
mynions of fortune, are too too much puffed up with the happy gale of her
continual favors: and can not abide to strike their sails, or to veil the
bonnet to one only storm of sinister and unhappy fortune. How can it be but
those men must needs suffer shippewracke in the sea of their delitious
pleasures, and in the gulf of their own greatness? I hold it not
impertinent, if I recount unto you in this discourse the last Act of his end
and tragedy. The report goes, that when he perceived his limited hour and
appointed time to approach, as he lay upon a little low bed or pallet, he
caused himself somewhat to be raised up, and then framing his speech to his
Bassaes and chief Princes of his Court, he made Complaints and lamentations
made by Amurath at his death.
long and lamentable complaints, and powered forth his grieuances exclaiming
upon the Destinies which had so deceived him, that now the end and issue of
his last actions should be dishonorable and infamous, whereas the forepassed
course of his years had been most glorious: that the heavens should so
ordain it, that he, who had so often repressed the proud and haughty
Hungarians, who had tamed the insolency of the stately Grecians, and brought
their name in a manner to nothing: should be now constrained to yield up his
soul in dishonor and reproach under the poor walls of a little Castle, and
in the view of so contemptible an enemy. Then turning himself to his son,
he recommended him very earnestly to the faith and fidelity of his servants:
and he instructed and admonished him touching many particularities, sometimes
a part, and sometimes in the hearing of all the company. And albeit his body
even destitute of all force and strength, and the tears in abundance trickling
down his cheeks to see his child then standing before him, did even stop
up and hinder the course of his speech, yet did he often reiterate and
repeat these and the like words unto him. Let Speech and admonitious of
Amurath to his son Mahomet upon his death bed.
my example (quoth he) be a warning unto thee my son, never to contemn and
despise any enemy be he never so weak and feeble. There has not been (that
I know of) any one thing, whereof I have so much repented me in all my life
time: yea even in the other world (if there be at leastwise any part of us
remaining which has understanding after the body is extinguished) I shall
still and everlastingly repent it, that I was so negligent and inconsiderate,
as to be the father and the nourisher of a domestical enemy: whereby I have
both purchased this calamity to my self, and this perpetual blot unto the
name and Empire of the Ottomans: giving unto the whole world, and to all ages
in time to come, fit matter to talk and to make a jesting stock of this my
ignominious death, and shameful end before the walls of Croie. Even then
should this fugitive have been suppressed, when by that traiterous part which
he played in Hungary, he intruded him self into the crown and realm of
Epyre. In the first beginning, when he was but yet newly established, and that
the hearts of his people were not yet affected unto him, the wretch him self,
and the memory of his name might have been for ever extinguished without the
loss in a manner, of any of our men. Fondly and foolishly was it done to
send against him either Haly Bassa, who gave the first matter and increase to
his audacious fierceness and to the beginnings of his good fortune: or any
other of our Chiefetaines, by whose destruction or imprisonment, he has now
both grounded and supported his forces, and has assured him self of the faith
and fidelity of his subjects: and wrought him self into the credit and good
opinion of those peoples, who were his vassalles. A thing which I (having
oftentimes thought upon) could hardly have believed, that I should ever have
seen so great shame and ignominy to have befallen me, or that my Empire could
have been so torn and dismembered by this war of Epyre, were it not that
experience (as a schoolemistresse) has now taught it me, and made me to feel
it to my wonderful great loss and disadvantage. Of eight score thousand
fighting men which followed me into Epyre, and did accompany us to this place,
if you do now confer upon the remainders of our army, and do take a
diligent view and muster of those which are left, you shall find how greatly
they are abated and diminished of their first numbers. These fields were not
sufficient to entertain all our regiments, and now how many tents are
void and empty? how many horses do wander up and down without their
old masters? and how much empayred and lessened in your forces shall you
return home to Andrinople? As for this body of mine, I see the Destinies have
vowed it to the territory of Epyre. But wherefore do I impute the trauerses
and cross accidents of fortune to my own oversight and folly? Seeing the
first seeds and original of all our misfortunes has been derived from this
soil, and that this country of Epyre did even watch of set purpose to work
us this mischief? For they seeing Hungary in such confusion of tumultes and
rebellions, did incite and stir up against us the arms of Eugenius and other
Christians, whereby not only the sovereignty and royalty of the kingdom of
Epyre, but even the entire possession of our Empire, and the crown of the
Ottomans was brought in question, and came to be tried by battle, as the whole
world may evidently see by our travels and labors sustained in those famous
iournyes of Varna and Basilia. By means of which our troubles, and whilst we
had neither time, nor forces sufficient to wade through at once with so many
and weighty affairs, the power of this our enemy (as you see) grew to be
increased and enlarged. But now from henceforth, how or with what stratagemes
you are to mainetaine the wars, you are not to expect any counsel or advise
from me, who have been so greatly mistaken, and have made a wrong account of
all things which concerned my own good, and the estate of my own affairs.
Never was fortune so deceiptfull or false unto me in any of my counsels or
attemptes as in this war: and it may be that thou Mahomet my son, shall
find more favor at her hands against this enemy: and for so many honors
and dignities which God has given me, peradventure he has reserved the
tryumphe of Epyre for thee. Thou therefore (my son) shall receive both the
Scepter, and the other marks of our Empire: but principally and above all, I
leave unto thee this enemy, charging thee that thou do not leave our death
unrevenged: but that thou have this thing only and continually before thy
eyes, and in thy mind, in acknowledgement of so large and honorable a
patrimony as thou art to receive and enjoy by me. Other sacrifice then this
neither my aged trembling hands, nor my grieved departing soul do not
require nor demand of thee.

This discourse ended, his speech began to fail him, and drawing on near
Amurath his death.
toward his end, he lay about half a day as it were in an agony or
ecstasy. And then his eyes being covered with endless and eternal darkness,
he yielded up his soul to the wonderful joy and contentment of many
millions of the Christians.

The hearing of these things is a matter of no small import, and it is a world
to see the great men of the earth, how they do hold the estates and
kingdoms of this world in so high an estimation: and do prize human and
momentarie things at so great a rare. And they do persuade themselves, that it
is possible to get such a perpetuity in the possession of fortune, that it
should at no time be contrary Amurath his manifold exploites and famous acts.
or crossing unto them. What did that age yield more great then Amurath? who
of all men then lying upon the face of the earth, (be it spoken without
offense) was of more glorious and high renown then he? who had ever more
notable testimonies and tokens of worldly felicity? who did in his time
attain to more famous tryumphes then Amurath? who by the spoils of so many
mighty Kings and Princes, and by the ruin and conquest of so many proud
and lofty Nations, did restore the name of the Ottomans being in a manner
clean defaced, and did enrich the houses of the barbarous Infidels? This
Prince was he that having suppressed the fury of all domestical and civil
wars, did give the beginning and commencement unto the greatness of his
fortune by the blood and slaughter of his own natural brother. He was the
first of the Turkish Princes, that did suppress and diminish the liberty of
the madding and frantic Greeks, and establishing his Empire even in the
center of their bowels, did from thence enlarge and augment his forces:
wherewith afterward he afflicted and tormented the other Nations of
Christendom with so many miseries and calamities, that it is almost impossible
for the tongue of man to number them. This was he that first brake down and
overthrew that wall of the Greeks at the entry of Morea adjoining to the
Isthme or Snake of Corinth commonly called Hexamile, by means whereof he made
all Hexamile, a wall so called by the Greeks, which did run six miles in
length enclosing the country of Peloponnesus or Morea from the sea of AEgeuum,
lying between Greece and Asia, even to the sea of Ionia, or part of the
Mediterran sea, lying between that and Italy now called the gulf of Venice.
Europe subject to his invasions. This was he that without any lawful or just
title, but only by his valor and by the sword, did get the possession of so
many realms and cities in Asia, that overthrew and discomfited many great and
mighty armies, that overcame many puissant Kings and Princes in pitched and
set battles, and brought them under subjection: who having slainc the King of
Hungary, did more then once with his great good hap, give the chase unto
Hunyades that famous and redoubted warrior: through the conceit and
remembrance of which his glorious and haughty exploites, and by the success
of all which favors bestowed upon him by fortune: his ambitious and proud
heart did promise unto it self the superiority and conquest of all Empires
and estates Christian, and the entire dominion of the whole earth. But o how
are his thoughts now changed! o how far do those his last speeches differ
from the course of his forepassed life! being now heard to power forth such
vile and base complaints, and to lament so shamefully, even in the view of an
enemy, of whom in time past he made so small reckoning and so little estimate?
where were then become the haughty thoughts of his undaunted spirit? his
arrogant and imperious Amurath an example of the vanity and inconstancy of
worldly bliss and fortune.
voice? which so many brave Chieftaines and Leaders, so many troops and
legions, so many thousands of armed soldiers were wont to hear with fear and
trembling? Oh how the case is now altered, the man is now of another manner of
visage, of another kind of countenance, of another aspect. Where is that head
adorned with so many trophies and goodly tryumphes? where is that royal and
princely hand that swayed so many Scepters? where is the puissance, the power,
the strength of his majesty that commanded over so many kingdoms, nations,
and peoples? Behold he now lies full low upon the ground, a deformed, a
filthy, and stinking carcass: with his hands closed, his eyes shut, and his
feet stretched out, which erst so gloriously did trample and tread upon the
earth, and did triumph upon the lands which he had vanquished and subdued.
And now of so many, and so infinite riches, of so unmeasurable wealth, and so
huge treasures, of so many honors and vain glorious praises, which he enjoyed
in his life time, his frail body retains nothing, but has left all behind
him. O the imbecilitie and weak condition of man's nature! o the vain glory
of mortal creatures! o the blinded and perverted thoughts of foolish men, why
do we so glorify our selves? why are we so puffed up and exalted? why do
we so set our affections on the riches, the authority, and the pompous
vanities of this life? o how admirable is the change of all human things?
how fleeting is the glory and ostentation of mortal Empires? and how great
is the daliance of fortune, deluding and deceiving foolish men with such
vanities.

His body being embalmed with precious oyntmentes and sweet odours was Prusa
or Bursa, the place of Amurath his sepulcher. Siege of Croy raised.
pompously and honorably kept and preserved, to be afterward interred at
Bursa aunciently named Prusa, in Bithinia in the sepulcher of his ancestors.
Mahomet being immediately saluted as their Lord and Sovereign, was advised by
the greatest and chiefest persons, that the death of his father should
carefully be concealed, to the intent the report thereof might not come to the
hearing of the enemy, Afterward when it was far in the night, trussing up
their baggage, and all things provided in arcadines for their discamping, they
departed before the dawning of the day. The report is, that Amurath his age at
his death 85. years.
Amurath deceased about the midst of Autumn five months after the siege
laid before Croy. As touching his age, there is some diversity of opinions,
yet it is generally agreed, and gainesaied by none: that he had fully attained
to fourscore and five years. Nothing is more certain then that Mahomet was
highly aggrieued and displeased to leave the siege, and to abandon the war
which had brought them so great dishonor: but necessity enforced him
thereunto, and made him hasten his return to Andrinople, there to take the
inuestiture of his crown and Empire, according to the ancient custom of their
kings, as also to repress and extinguish the tumults which might happen, and
are usual to be raised upon the change and alteration of estates. Scanderbeg
at his departure did not cease to follow him, sometimes pressing upon his maine
forces, and sometimes gleaning up those that were hindmost: and so still
continued he troubling their army, till he saw them clean gone out of the
bounds and limits of his country: and then triumphing with a double occasion
of joy and gladness, both because Amurath was departed this life with shame
and infamy, and for that, the relics of the enemies forces were clean rid
out of Epire: he returned to his companies, and so took his way directly
toward Croie.

By this time was Vranocontes and the Croians issued out of the town in great
troops, Scanderbeg returns to Croy where he is received with exceeding joy.
and they went wandering up and down the fields which were yet moist with the
blood of the Turks. In all places they made some stay, and ouerseeing and
visiting all things with an incredible pleasure and delight. Scarcely could
they believe themselves in that which they had seen and searched with their
eyes, in such sort were the hearts of this people lately possessed and seized
with fear and horror: that their perplexed and doubtful spirits, could not
yet forget their former terror. The king of Albanie was received with a
marvelous concourse of people: and Vranocontes was the first that entertained
him with infinite embracements: who after he had kissed him (as the fashion is)
the others according to their degrees and callings, did likewise welcome him.
There was not any of the common people, but did testify their joy and gladness
of his coming: sometimes prostrating themselves (according to their manner) at
the feet of their Prince, and sometimes handling the skirtes of his robes and
vestiments, they would embrace and kiss them with great desire and affection.
Then began they to express and make show of their exceeding joy, with all
kinds of acclamations, melodies, and instruments of music, with ringing of
belles, with bonfiers, with feasting and banqueting, and whatsoever else which
in the comentment of their hearts they could any ways imagine or bethink
themselves. The Croians were highly commended and extolled with many praises
and good commendations both Rewards given to the citizens, soldiers and
Governor of Croy by Scanderbeg.
in public and in private, for their deuoire and duty so faithfully and
valiantly performed. The garrison likewise besides their appointed pay, had
great and large sums of money given them for a recompense with many good and
rich garments. Touching the governor, besides great store of gold and silver:
Scanderbeg gave him two coat armours of purple, and one other richly wrought
in gold, and four goodly manours for the reward and recompense of his virtue
and good service: and last of all beyond his expectation, though not
undeservedly, he honored him with a higher title, and created him Duke of
Emathia: giving him the present inuestiture and possession of that dignity.

These things thus accomplished, Scanderbeg took especial care to dispatch
away Vranocontes created Duke, of Emathia. Christian, their joy and triumph
universally upon the death of Amurath.
messengers of this victory on all sides to the Princes and peoples his
neighbors and confederates, the rumor and report whereof being dispersed
abroad, was the occasion, that infinite numbers of people daily resorted to
Croie and many being allured thither only upon the report of these news, of
the death of the Turkish Monarch, came thither (as it were) triumphing for some
strange victory, and to see some sight and spectacle not usual, nor
accustomed. The tidings hereof did soon spread itself in a manner over the
whole world: and there could nothing have happened more wished and desired, nor
more welcome to all the estates of Christendom. Hungary began to take
breath: Greece came again to take heart and courage to it self, and she
seemed to be delivered (as it were) out of bondage, and her bonds to be broken,
and rent assunder. All men had their minds and spirits lightened and erected
with hope upon the report of this good accident: and they did attend such a
change and alteration of the fortune of most kings and Princes, that they did
expect the renewing and repairing of their former estate and condition. But out
alas: how fallacious and deceitful Christians had little or no benefit by the
death of Amurath.
are the thoughts and cogitations of mortal wightes? yea more miserable are
the hopes and refuges of miserable unhappy men. It pleased God to take away
Amurath out of this life, but did he want for all that an Heir to succeed him
of less cruelty? True it is, that the bounty and divine clemency (after long
and innumerable mischieues) did harken unto the complaints and lamentations of
the Christians, and granted them to see the death and end of this tirant. But
what? did the coming of Mahomet his son unto the crown, any thing shorten
or diminish the thraldom, bondage, or servitude of the Christians? or were the
miseries of the Oriental nations any thing lessened by that accident? Oh no:
behold that great and imperial city so famous by the name and seat of the
great Constantine: (for I will not speak of Conquests achieved by the Turks
of late ages upon Christendom. Euboea. Or Lesbos.
the bounds of the Ottoman Empire, dilated and enlarged even to the farthermost
parts of Asia and Afric:) see the noble i will of Rhodes: which was of late the
nest and harbor of those worthy Knights of the cross, and the ancient
bulwark of the Christians: behold how * Nigropont,* Mitelene, Cipres, all the
Greek sea, with Hungary, Croatia, Transiluania, Seruia and Bulgaria: and (to
be breife) in a manner the moytie and half of all Europe is become Turkish, by
the victorious arms and conquestes of this Mahomet or his successors, and
posterity: all which to the great reproach of Christian Kings and Princes, do
testify, that the fortune of so fearful and terrible an enemy, is not
mortal not permutable, with the head and life of one frail and mortal man:
so mightily ha^h he incroched and intruded upon our liberty, by our own
faintness, sloth, and cowardice, which has enabled them against us, whilst
Causes of the conquests of the Turks upon the Christians.
that we sit still with our hands (as it were) folded up in our bosoms, and
as the beholders and lookers on of their tragical sports, which are presented
unto our eyes, upon this Theater of worldly miseries: and whilst our ambition,
our hatreds, our partialities do set us together by the ears amongst our
selves, how do they give occasion and opportunity to the Infidels, to advance
the greatness, the prerogative, and the majesty of that Empire, and to
increase it daily more and more? Assuredly, if our sins do hold on, and
continue as they have begun, I am greatly in doubt that they will swallow up
all of us one by one: and so, it may be, we shall make an end of our plaints
and bitter griefs, when those small relics and remainders yet left unto the
Christians shall have an end likewise, and be brought to their final and last
confusion.

But we will leave, for this time, our complaints and exclamations, and will
bear a part with others in this short joy which God has given them: for now,
as it were, by emulation, there came, thick and three fold, gratulations from
all parts unto Liberality of Christian kings and pr(...)s sending presents to
Scanderbeg to congratulate his good fortune upon the death of Amurath.
Scanderbeg, even from nations and kingdoms far removed: and the renow me of
this Prince was then grown famous above all others, in the mouths of all men.
The city of Croy was more notorious by the death of Amurath, then once was
Argos through the death of Pirrhus. To these mutual reioycings, the Princes of
Christendom did add many marks and tokens of their gratitude and liberality:
for Nicholas then Bishop of Rome, Ladislaus King of Hungary, and Philip Duke
of Burgundy, each seeming (as it were) ielous, and commendably contending who
should exceed other in bounty, did send their Ambassadors into Epyre, with
timely and necessary succors of great sums of money: knowing well that he
was exhausted and drawn dry of such like means and supplies, by reason of
the long expenses and discommodities of the wars. Alphonsus king of Arragon
was not behind any of them in contributing toward his wants: but (as one that
exceeded all others in love and good will toward Scanderbeg) being not
satisfied to show his largess and bounty, by the testimony of those ample
treasures which he sent him: he succored him also with 300000. measures of
wheat, and 100000. measures of barley, after he was informed of the necessity
of the country, both by reason of the tillage hindered by the Turks: and how
that little store of corn which had been sowed, was wasted and spoiled by the
infidels. He aided him also with great store of workmen, whom he paid out of
his own coffers, for the repairing of the walls of Croy, which he knew had
been battered and beaten down by the enemy.

^ Scanderbeg having proclaimed a solemn triumph of Tilt, Turney and other
martial sports of all sorts: by the beauty of that spectacle he did greatly
grace his victory Triumphs in Epire for the discomfiture and death of Amurath.
obtained against the Infidels. The number and the goodly show of so great an
assembly, not only of them which came to see the triumphs, but of the brave
and gallant youths that came thither, upon a desire and hope to gain the
prize propounded: did make a show and resemblance of another fair and goodly
army under the walls of Croy. And it seemed no great marvel that Amurath had
been vanquished, and discomfited by the Albanois, to them who saw so many
warlike youths, and the strength of those forces that were then with
Scanderbeg. Then did it appear that the ancient nobleness and valor of that
nation was returned into Macedonie: and those old times long since past and
gone, of Alexander and Pyrrhus, did seem to be renewed and restored again.

TO THE READER.
I See now that this volume has exceeded his just proportion: and in
continuing of it longer, it might be as tedious unto you as it has been
wearisome unto me. We will here therefore sound a retrait in the midst of
our cariere: that breathing our selves a little, we may be the better disposed
to proceed with the other following.

The end of the sixth book.
THE SEVENTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
MAhomet is crowned Emperor of the Turks. His government, manners, and person
are described. Scanderbeg at the entreatie of his subjects is married. He
fortifieth his dominions, and prepares for the wars. Mahomet entangled with
the wars of Persia seeks to have peace with Scanderbeg but is rejected.
Scanderbeg inuadeth the Turkish territories. Amese one of Mahomet his
Chieftaines is sent with an army against Scanderbeg: by whom being suddenly
surprised, in the battle of Modrissa, his army is discomfited, and the
Turkish General himself is taken prisoner. Mahomet sends another army into
Epire under the conduct of Debreas one of his Saniackes: who in the battle of
Pologue is slain by Scanderbeg, and his army likewise defeated. Mahomet
practices secretly and by rewards to corrupt Moses. Scanderbeg purposing an
expedition against the Turks, requires and obtains succors of Alphonsus
king of Naples. Belgrade in Macedonie is besieged by the Albanois. The
Belgradians desire truce of Scanderbeg, which is accorded them upon certain
conditions.

IN the former six books we have represented unto you as upon a Theater,
those two excellent and incomparable warriors Amurath and Scanderbeg, by the
success of whose arms being so variable and diverse, you may easily
contemplate how the course of fortune has a kind of declining and decaying
age, which in process of time makes her (as it were) to wax cold, and to
discontinue the largess and bounty of her wonted favors. And how soever she
does frankely and voluntarily accompany great minds and high aspiring natures,
whilst the heat of youth does stir up their blood, and inflame their
haughty courages: yet when gray hairs do by little and little approach and
bring on cold and unwieldy old age, then does fortune also seem to grow old
and wax faint and heavy, by means whereof that goodly luster and bright
beauty of their former glory does seem to be eclipsed and to vanish quite
away. Examples thereof are the ruins of those famous Monarchies of Ninus,
Cyrus, Alexander and that great Roman Emperor Augustus: besides many other
excellent Princes and Captains which even in this our own age, have been
made lively marks of fortunes inconstancy, who in their young years, having
had the sun beams of prosperity gloriously shining upon them, and fortune
having always followed them in their wars, that they seemed to have her at
command: yet in their elder years they have been forced to prove the
inconstancy of her frowns and dissauorable aspect. And truly my opinion is,
that God even of his divine providence, does use and enure men to these
casualties and accidents, because he would have the great men of this world to
know and acknowledge, that it is he only and no other, that dispenses and
disposes of prosperity and adversity: to the intent also that human and
earthly things should not seem unto foolish mortal men to have any durable
continuance or eternity: considering that there is nothing solid, stable, or
permanent here below, nor any thing under the sun, wherein may be found
perfect happiness. And if any one thing have any show and appearance of
felicity, it is so brittle, frail and unconstant, that even then when men
think to have most joy of it, and to enjoy the pleasures and profits of the
same, suddenly and immediately they see it gone and decayed: suddenly and
immediately they perceive it wasted and consumed.

Such was the end and death of Amurath, which being heard and believed at
Andrinople, did stir up diverse motions both in the affairs and minds of
men. The great men and Nobles of the city (as those which had never misliked
neither of the felicity nor government of this Prince) were very sorrowful,
and did for a long time Amurath best beloved by his subjects and most upright
to his enemies of all the Ottoman Princes.
bewail and lament the old man, partly for the common loss (for the report
is, that of all the Ottoman race, there was never any one of them better
beloved of his people, nor more just and upright to his enemies) partly also
for that they were not ignorant, that the change of the crown and dignity
royal, could not happen without infinite damages, and the ruin of many in
particular. But the stirring heads and such as were desirous of a change and
new alterations, did little grieve at this chance: but rather on the contrary
were the more in heart, and did conceive great hopes in their imaginations:
because they had of a long time wished, that Mahomet whom they knew to be a
young Prince fierce and ambitious, might come to the crown, and get the
possession of the imperial scepter. The popular and common sort (who of
themselves are naturally desirous of novelties and alterations) did entertain
these tidings Sentence.
with great joy and contentment. But above all, the Ianissaries (which are
called, the Prince his Enfants, rejoiced exceedingly: and running up and down
the streets armed, did fall to sacking and spoiling freely and without
controlment, of the goods Custom of the Ianissaries to sack the houses of the
Jews and Christians at the death of their Prince,
and houses of many persons, especially the Christians and the Jews: who are
naturally abhorred and hated of the Turks. For such is the license and
liberty, or rather the damnable custom of that people, that at the decease
and death of their sovereign, this is usually and ordinarily permitted and
granted unto them.

It was a wonderful thing to see the concourse and great resort of people of
all sorts and degrees, that flocked daily to the imperial city of Andrinople
to see the new king, and the triumphs of his coronation, which was the cause
that an incredible multitude went to meet Mahomet as he returned with his
army. The Ianissaries Mahomet crowned Emperor of the Tur^^s.
were the first that went to salute him: who having no sooner demanded then
obtained pardon for the rapine and spoil committed within the city, did
receive and convey him to the palace royal with infinite joy and gladness,
and with the public applause of all the communaltie: who with a general voice
and common consent, having declared and proclaimed him Emperor, he was
afterward crowned with great solemnity: and being furnished with the
diadem, scepter and other habits and imperial ornaments, he was placed in his
fathers throne, with many prayers and solemn vows of every man. And at the
same time were the public treasures delivered unto him: and the Bassaes and
other officers of the crown did swear unto him fealty and obedience. These
things thus accomplished, the people had a great largess both of gold and
silver in all the streets of the city: besides the liberal rewards given to
the soldiers. Thus was the ancient fashion and ceremony of this Nation in
the creating of their kings partly observed, and partly not, in this coming of
Mahomet to the crown. For the first thing that the Turkish kings do use and
accustom is, to absent their children: and to keep them out of Europe in those
Emperors of the Turks the manner of their succeeding to the crown.
Provinces of Asia which are most remote and farthest off: even as soon as they
are gotten out of their infancy. And the cause thereof as I take it is this,
for that they shall not practice and conspire against their fathers through a
cursed humor of ambition, and desire of reign and Empire, from the which,
there is scarce any age or person exempted, but has some instinct and natural
motion thereunto. Afterward when it happens that the Emperor is deceased,
or that it is thought that his death Sentence.
is not far off: the Bassaes and others, (who are of greatest power and
authority both with the people, and in the government of the estate) do send
away speedy poastes and letters to the one and other of the sons of the
Prince last deceased, according as each man is particularly affected: and they
do from point to point advertise him of all things: willing him to hasten his
coming, that he may get the possession of the crown, and seat himself in
the succession of the Empire, then ready to fall void and empty. It is a
sport to see with what contention these great men do study to surprise the
packettes and curriers of each other: whilst that every one of them labors
to get the scepter to that party, to whom he is most affected and every one
does his best and worst to beguile his companion. Now when these young Princes
are thus solicited: with what vehemency, with what fancies and affection*
they do come poasting from all parts to bear away the prize thus in question;
I leave it to your imagination. Certain it is; that he amongst them all that
can first get to the streights of Gallipolie or Hellespont: he commonly is the
man that obtains the soueraignitie of the Empire, for that the Ianissaries
coming to meet and to salute him, do afterward all at leisure, easily and
quietly put him in possession of the kingdom. The other brethren are forthwith
either banished or exiled out of all the territories and limits of their
dominions: or else are cruelly and unnaturally slain and murdered, for fear
least there should remain so me cause of civil tumults and sedition. Hence is
derived that proverb used by Proverb of Princes children.
the ancients, That more fortunately are children borne to private persons,
then to Princes. But now of all this, nothing could happen in this manner unto
Mahomet, for neither had he any brethren of sufficient age, either fit to
govern the Realm, or able to attempt or to obtain the kingdom: neither did
he return as a private person out of Asia, but with a most strong and mighty
army which he brought back out of the enemies country, where he had been
before saluted and proclaimed King and Emperor by the universal consent of all
the soldiers in general. For this cause he came peaceably and quietly to the
Empire, without any commotion, without any danger or difficulty, and with the
exceeding joy and incomparable gladness of the whole Communaltie. Now had they
forgotten the loss of their late deceased Prince, and all grief and sorrow
for his death was vanished together with his memory. The calamities and
slaughters lately received in Epyre, and the obsequies and funeralles of their
companions, were now clean worn out of mind, and there was scarce any one
by reason of this new pomp and tryumphe which did apperceiue or observe the
poor relics of their miserable defourmed army, or that did remember (by
reason they were so drowned in joy) what goodly forces, and what strong
squadrons they had sent into Epyre, in respect of those which were thence
returned, and were brought home again.

The new Monarke, whose delight was in bloodshed and cruelty, as much as any
Mahomet his cruelty and impiety.
that ever reigned, thought it good to look to his affairs, and to provide
for the security of his estate, and he had an intention to settle some of them
in good assurance, and of others to make a change and innovation. The first
deed that he did was to make diligent inquisition, if he could find any other
alive besides himself, that was descended from the loins of Amurath, upon
whom after the manner of his predecessors he might pour out the venom of his
hateful ambition. There were found two infants, the one called Tursines of the
age of eighteen months, the other was called Tursines, brother to Mahomet
drowned.
Calepin. The former was cast into the water and drowned by the express
commandment of Mahomet, who gave it in charge to Moses one of his Bassaes to
see it executed, and he without any difficulty or relenting, did easily yield
to assist so execrable a spectacle. The mother of the infant detesting the
deed, and exclaiming upon the brutishnes of the fact, with howlings and
horrible cries intermingled with continual tears and lamentations, did pour
out a thousand curses against the author of the murder being there in
presence. The tyrant to appease his mother in law, did deliver into her hands
in expiation of his Parricide, him that was the executioner: and she full of
Moses Bassa, the murderer of Tursines, murdered by the mother of the infant.
rage and extreme fury, with a knife stabbed him to the heart even in the
presence of Mahomet, and then ripping up his body, she diued and searched into
his bowels for his heart, which having found, she pulled it forth and cast it
the dogs. A most worthy and notable lesson for men of a corrupt mind, who can
be content to stain their consciences, and to prostitute them selves and their
affections, to serve the furious passions of great men and princes. As
concerning the other child named Calepin, the common report Calepin brother to
Mahomet. Caly Bassa.
is, that Caly Bassa to get the good will of Mahomet (such is the inconstancy of
mortal men who do gladly follow the fortune of the most puissant) did present
the infant unto him being then but of the age of six months: and the only joy
and delight of his mother the widow of Amurath, who in his second marriage with
this woman the Sponderbeg Prince of Penderacia.
daughter of one Sponderbeg, the noble Prince of Penderacia, had begotten this
young infant, and had committed him to the custody of this Bassa, and
reco^mended him to his especial care, at such time as he drew near his end.
Mahomet being informed by women of good knowledge, that he was of the lineage of
his father, caused him speedily to be strangled, and then with great
magnificence celebrated his obsequies at Bursa, by this Calepin or one in his
stead strangled by Mahomet.
means consecrating the first fruits and beginnings of his cruel Empire with
the blood of his own brethren. How beit others write, that Caly Bassa did
prefer another child in stead of Calepin, who was still nourished and brought
up in Constantinople, amongst the Greeks, and that afterward in the
shipwreck and ruins of that noble city, he with some others being left alive
was conveyed thence, and that in the end, during the Papacy of Calixtus the
third, he was entertained at Rome in the Vatican, where being instructed in the
true religion, and regenerat in holy baptism, he went after that to the court
of the Emperor Frederick in Almaine: of whom being received according to the
honor due unto so great a Prince, he spent the rest of his days in Austriche.
You see what diversity there is between writers in this behalf:
notwithstanding in my judgment it has no great likelihood or probability,
that Amurath should be able to beget children, when he was past four score
year of age, unless perhaps this age of ours also have received that rare
gift and bounty of nature, which the ancients have observed in Masinissa and
Cato the eldest. Howsoever it be, it is not much material, only I could wish
that truth might have place: for in writing of an History, I would not
willingly set down any untruth, nor yet reprehend others over rashly. For
such is the law and rule of Histories, that many fables do fall out oftentimes
to be entermingled with true reports, which must straightly be sifted and
examined, that in proceeding Histories how to be written.
with the matter, truth and untruth may be discerned, no otherwise then as they
which are to drink of a brook, will purge and clarify the water from all mud
and filthiness. But to the purpose.

Mahomet pursuing his blouddy beginnings, as one that would not omit any thing
of his former furious proceedings, did daily devise and suborne new slanders
and accusations Mahomet his tyranny and mischievous manners.
against the greatest persons of his Court, and his fathers servants: and under
color of calling them to an account, some of them he caused to be put to
death, and of others he would procure the goods and offices to be confiscated,
in such sort, that within a very small time (according as before his coming to
the Crown he had secretly plotted and purposed in his conceits) he became
terrible and more to be redoubted, then is fitting for a king, and he grew
odious and hateful almost to all his subjects. He altered and changed in a
manner all the statutes and ordinances of his auncesters, and all the laws and
constitutions both civil and military: sometimes reforming and correcting
them, sometimes adding of new unto them, he surcharged and burdened his people
with new imposts and subsidies: and he bental his endeavors more then any other
of his predecessors to amplify and augment the numbers of the Ianissaries, and
of his men at arms, and to enrich and increase his treasures. For amongst many
of his other wicked conditions, the humor of avarice and covetousness had that
command over him, that the mean and simple order both of his diet and
apparel, was reproachfully Mahomet his notable vices and virtues.
objected unto him as a vice: and it was supposed that his excessive sparinesse
and abstinency, proceeded only of a miserable and covetous humor. All men do
attribute unto him a certain liveliness and viuacity of spirit, even more
then human, a heart covetous and greedily thirsting after glory, and not
unlike to that of the great Alexander. And it is most certain, (as we have
partly before touched) he did excel all men living in cruelty, using (as the
saying is) a rod of iron, both against his subjects, and against strangers,
and he showed himself to have as little care of the blood and life of his own
people, as of his foes and most mortal enemies: in such sort, that upon every
slight and trifling occasion, he would put to death even those little boys and
laddes, Seraill, a place where the Turk uses to keep his concubines.
whom he loved voluptuously, and which he kept within his * Serayl for the
fulfilling of his beastly pleasure. On the contrary, he was a most francke and
liberal rewarder of those men, who were of a quick and ready spirit, and
such as were of valor and great courage, and of them which did serve him
faithfully and loyally. For perjury there was never any man more notorious, for
he never kept faith nor promise with any persons whatsoever. Moreover many have
been of the opinion, that he did not believe in the law of Mahomet their own
Prophet, no more then in the Gospel of Christ. For albeit he was born, bred,
and instructed by his mother, who was the daughter of George Despot of Seruia,
and professed the Christian religion, and taught him the Pater noster, Creed,
and Aue Maria, yet when he came to ripe years, and that he betook Mahomet a
notable Atheist worshippeth good Fortune only as God.
himself to the embracing of the Mohammedan profession, he did so little cleave
either to the one or to the other, that he lived a mere Atheist, and
acknowledged, served, nor adored any other Deity, but that alone which he
called good Fortune. He did maruellously honor and esteem those, which were
skillful in any Art or mystery whatsoever, and he took great care that his
victories and conquestes might be written by learned men, and those that were
of judgment: he delighted infinitely in reading John Maria of Vicentia slave
to Mustapha eldest son of Mahomet.
of the Histories of the ancients, he was very skillful and learned in the
Greek, Persian, and Arabian tongues, he made great shows of love and
kindness unto John Maria of Vicentia, the slave of his eldest son Mustapha,
because he would have had him to write in the Turkey and Itatian tongs, the
famous victory which he obtained against Vsuntassan king of the Persians. He
gave great rewards unto Gentill Gentill Belin a Painter of Venice.
Belin a Painter of Venice, whom he caused purposely to come from thence to
Constantinople, because he would have his picture drawn as lively and
naturally as he could by his art possibly: and because he should paint out the
habites and fashions of the Occidentall nations. Moreover he was a curious
obseruer of the Stars and Planets, according to the course and motion of the
which, he ruled and directed all his actions. Besides, he had in his mind even
with his cruelty, some impression and show of justice and severity, in so much
that during his reign, all the passages and high ways were free, open, and
safe for travelers, and the name of thieves and robbers was wholly
extinguished and abolished. A great warrior he was, strong and valiant of his
person, hardened and enured to endure watchings and travels with notable
patience: happy and fortunate in most of his actions: and (to speak in a word)
he was even a king of Fortune, which made him worthy of the Empire of
Constantinople. As touching the form and feature of his visage, and the making
of his body, he was of a Description of Mahomet.
mean, or rather of a short stature, which notwithstanding did contain within
a great heart, and full of magnanimity. He was pale of face and of a sallow
complexion correspondent unto his courage: his look and aspect was frowning,
fierce, and terrible, his eye brows hollow, and his nose so high and crooked,
that the point thereof seemed to touch his lips. His shoulders were large and
square, and all the members and lineamentes of his body, were strong set and
very well made, and with such strength, and vigor in his arms, that (at such
time as Scanderbeg lived with Amurath his father, amongst all the youths of the
Court, he would yield and give place to none but to him only in drawing the bow
or in wrestling.

It may be that I have busied my self about Mahomet more then needed,
considering that my purpose was not to describe his life nor his manners, but
the life of Scanderbeg only. Nevertheless I thought it not amiss herein to
seek the pleasing and contentment of all men. For as my desire is that these
memorialles such as they are, should not be unpleasing to the posterity: so do
I suppose also, that the readers of the same at this present will not be
wearied, by seeing (as it were) in a table the outward and inward habit of so
accomplished and perfect a warrior* who (though he were an enemy) yet was a
most puissaunt, a most fortunate, and a most renowned Prince. Besides also that
a good part of the praise and commendation of our Epirot, does consist in the
comparing and resembling of these two together. For by how much more we do
sometimes justly condemn, and sometimes justly extol the former, by so much
does the valor and felicity of the other shine forth and appear more glorious.

Whilst the spirits of the Turks were attentively contemplating upon their
new Croy repaired and n^w fortified by Scanderbeg.
Monarch, and that he was busily occupied in the care of his private and
domestical affairs, the King of Epire the mean while did employ both his
time and diligence in repairing the ruins of Croy. He did altogether renew the
old fortifications which were partly ruinous with antiquity and length of time,
and partly razed and beaten down by force of the Cannon: and he added others
unto them of a better form and proportion, and of more surety and security,
then those which were used by the ancient simplicity when this thundering of
Ordinance was not in use, and this diuelishe invention of the Cannon did not
yet amaze and terrify strong and defenced A digression and exclamation of the
author against the invention of Ordinance.
towns: but that all exploites and deeds of arms did only and ordinarily
consist in the stout stomachs and strength of hardy soldiers, and in the
arms, valor, and prowess of valiant men. O that it had pleased God, that
the inuentor and first author of this Art so famous and notorious had never
been known, and that our age had never brought forth such an invention. It
may be we should have seen many more Hectors, more Epaminondaes, more
Scipioes, more Rolandes. The yielding of towns and holds would not have been
so ready, and the courages of people would not so soon have been forced or
withdrawn from fidelity and loyalty, to the breach of their faith, and to
perjury. If the ancient ages and forepassed times had been acquainted with
such artificial sleightes and inventions, we should not at this day have had
the name nor memorial continued, either of their Captains so highly renowned,
or of their soldiers so greatly commended. Achilles had not borne away the
honor of the death of Hector, nor AEneas of Turnus, nor Cossus of Voluminous,
but some base Groom, and some abject and vile companion. The ten years
siege of Troy would neither have drawn against that city the arms and the
eyes of the whole world: neither would it have ministered fit and worthy matter
for so many excellent wits from age to age, to historize upon the acts and
accidents of that war. We should not have admired that long obstinacy of the
Tarentines. We should have madelesse reckoning of the constancy both of the
Saguntines, and the Numantines. Antiquity would not have talked of Petilia in
Calabria: and the obscure town of Cassilin, would not so often have scorned
and contemned the fury of Hanniball, that brave Chiefetaine of the
Carthaginians. Wherefore, as the noble wits and quick conceipted spirits of
our time, have on the one side given us good matter to write of, by reason of
this and such like rare and ingenious inventions: so on the other side by
means of this invention, much more beyond all comparison have they deprived
the Historiographer of all good occasion, to employ his pen any more in
writing. For now from henceforth will not true valor be able to show it self:
to no purpose is it for soldiers to use the Art of fighting, and to practice
the skill of weapons: and in vain is it to learn to handle the sword, the
buckler, and such like, or to practice any other kind of fight hand to hand.
And what then? forsooth they use now to fight aloof, and to make wars a
far off, and field services consist most in loose and light skirmishes. But
return we from whence we have digressed. Amongst other fortifications newly
made in the town of Croy, at the gate of the town Scanderbeg caused a great
and strong tower to be builded: the walls whereof, from the bottom upward,
went not straight and even upright, but were raised a slope and bending in
manner of a counterscarfe, to the intent the Cannon should be the less able to
play upon it. The other parts and quarters also of the town, both within and
without were repaired and fortified without any intermission, by the aduisement
and directions of good and skillfull Enginers.

In the mean time, whilst these were in doing: the Princes and nobles his
nearest 1451. Persuasions used by the nobles of Epire to draw Scanderbeg to
marriage.
kinsmen, did importune Scanderbeg without ceasing, and did show the vehement
desire which each man had to see him married, and to have children descended of
him. Especially now at this time, when all things (as they said) were exempted
from fear and mistrust: and now that all dangers were over gone and past, and
that the enemies were withdrawn from all care of Arms, both by reason of
their late misfortune, and by the motions and tumults which do usually
accompany the change of a new King at his first coming to the Crown: that he
ought not to frustrate the hearty wishes and desires of so many peoples his
subjects and confederates of this joy and comfort, especially in such a season
(for it was in the month of May, when all things did seem to rejoice and
flourish) and which did inuit him thereunto, with promise of nothing but joy,
mirth, and gladness. That therefore he should suffer him self once to be
entreated and persuaded by his people, who would take more pleasure and
contentment in this only, then in all his victories obtained against Amurath.
Albeit the Prince of Albany were unwilling to enter into this band, yet
weighing all matters and circumstances with judgment and sound advise, it
seemed unto him more expedient and for his honor to consent thereunto, then to
hold off and to vary from his former promise which he had made unto them the
year last past, at the instant and earnest request of all his subjects. For
this cause he condescended unto their desire, and committed the care of the
whole matter to the judgment and wisdom of Musache Thopie, his sisters
son, and some two or three others, to whom he imparted his mind in that
behalf. At that time Ariamnites Ariamnites Comminat.
Comminat (of whom has been before spoken) did excel all the Princes and
Lords of Epire, both in puissaunce and largeness of dominions, as also in
noblesse and antiquity of blood, he had one daughter named Doniqua, worthy (no
doubt of such Doniqua the wife of Scanderbeg.
afather,) and the true Idea and Image of all perfection of beauty, (which is
one not of the least excellencesse, and a thing not meanly respected in
women.) Wherefore Scanderbeg took no care for any other match, nor Ariamnit
for any other husband for his daughter. The conditions and couenaunts of the
marriage were as soon and easily agreed on and dispatched, as they were thought
upon and devised: Scanderbeg referring it to the discretion of the father, to
determine of his daughters dowry, and as it liked him to ordain and nominate
it, so was it freely and voluntarily accepted. Nevertheless it was
correspondent and aunswerable to dignity, both of him which gave it, and of the
person also which received it. The espousals were presently celebrated and
solemnized, and without any delay at all. Great were the triumphs and public
reioycings of all the Province at this marriage, and the Marriage of Scanderbeg.
Bride was as speedily brought home with a Princely train, and most royally
accompanied, by all the neighbor Princes, and almost all the nobility of the
country, who did honor the feast with great pomp and incomparable
magnificence. Such as could not be present did honor them with their
Ambassadors, and most sumptuous presents. All in general did rejoice at this
straight knot of affinity, between these two the most puissaunt Princes of
Albany, which gave them some appearance and probability of hope, that in time
to come their forces being united would preserve and defend the province
against all invasions and perils of the war whatsoever. The Seigniours of the
estate of Venice did testify both by an ambassade, as also by rich presents
sent him out of their common treasure, the great good liking and contentment,
which that Senate received by this marriage. And in like manner, all other
Princes and Potentates, did largely express the like affection, and the
singular good will which they bare him in this public cause of joy and
gladness, as they had done before in the times of his greatest troubles and
dangers: for (as the common saying is) those are the two seasons wherein true
amity and friendship does make show and trial of itself. That which was
sent from the king of Arragon was Sentence.
in all and every part so singular and magnificall, that Scanderbeg (as the
report goes) would not have accepted it, if his nearest and most familiar
friends, and the instant prayers and entreaties of the Spanish Ambassadors,
had not vehemently importuned him thereunto. In lieu and recompense whereof,
after he had accepted them, he sent back unto the King other presents of no
less value and estimation, as horses, slaves, and other riches and treasures
which he had taken as the spoils of his enemies the Barbarians. In this manner
was this great feast solemnized with no less pomp and magnificence then
reputation and renown. For besides that already spoken of, the tourneys,
iustes, triumphs, and other spectacles of diverse sorts having prizes and
rewards of excellent value appointed for those that should best deserve them,
did stir up the courages of the young gallants on all parts, who showing
themselves covetous of glory, and flocking thither to those triumphs, did by
their presence greatly augment the beauty of that assembly.

Mahomet was not ignorant of any of these things, nor of the fortifications of
Croy, and it is thought, that he would willingly have troubled the joy of our
Albanois, but being partly retained with his domestical occasions (as new
kingdoms commonly do engender new infirmities and new disorders) and partly
also being intentive to the heaping of great sums of money, and to the
enriching of his treasures, he was constrained for a season to forbear from
any such enterprise. Notwithstanding in the midst of his threats and menaces
(as he was very talkatiue and free of his speeches) he called his marriage the
unhappy and short joy of that unfortunate Saying of Mahomet touching the marriage
of Scanderbeg.
couple, saying: that it should not be long ere he would sauce their new
contentments with deadly tears and lamentations.

One thing there was which Scanderbeg had not yet done, and which of a long The
progress of Scanderbeg with his Queen to visit all his kingdom.
time he had no leisure to put in execution, by reason of his continual lets
and hinderaunces of the wars: and that was to visit all the frontiers,
towns, and passages of his Realm, which at this time he accomplished: having
with him in company his new spouse and a good troop of horsemen: and he spent
many days in that recreation. In all places where he passed, the people by
great flocks in a certain kind of emulation, did enforce them selves every
man according to his degree, to receive him into their towns with magnificall
and royal entertainment: and with a thousand sorts of goodly shows and
spectacles, and or rich presents, according to the uttermost of their power
and abilities, they did gratify both him and his princess. There was not any
one, but was most graciously accepted, without any show of dislike, or any
token of disdain: all of them were received with a cheerful countenance and
like courtesy, not only those which came full handed, but even they also, who
wanting means to show and testify their good wills, did present him with
their good hearts, and the prodigal bounty of their affections. The King
holding on his course in this progress, did visit every particular place,
even to the entry of Macedony, and to the very farthest limits and borders of
his country. When he came into the lower Dibria, he observed one place above
the rest, by which the Barbarians had ever used and accustomed to make their
invasions upon Albanie, and by sudden roades and foragings to wast and
destroy at their pleasures, the goods of the inhabitaunts, and to surprise and
oppress them at unawares. For albeit there were many other ways and passages
into the Province, yet this same only was (as it were) the most commodious,
and on that side more then any other, did the Christians also use to invade and
harrie the fields and territories of the enemies. In this place therefore he
determined (during that little time of rest which he enjoyed, and whilst the
troubles of arms ceased) to deprive the Turks of this opportunity of annoying
of his people, and to provide for the preservation and safety of his subjects.

This was a mountain which they of the country call Modrissa, very ragged,
Mountain of Modrissa.
and of a great height: from the which the frontiers of the Infidels may be
very well discovered a great way off. On the top of this mountain, he
resolved to build a fortress, and to fortify it with good store of
soldiers, such as being prompt and vigilant, should (by shooting off their
artillery) advertise the inhabitants at all times of the coming and arrival
of the Turks: and to the intent also that the near neighborhood of that Fort
should serve for a place of refuge unto his people, whenever they should be
driven upon any necessity to fly from the enemy: a thing which he had long
before conceived in his thoughts, and many times assayed to put in execution,
but was always compelled to leave undone, by reason of the daily and
continual troubles of the wars. For this cause without making any long
delay, Fortress at Modrissabuilded by Scanderbeg.
and for that him self would not long dwell in delights, nor would not have
the hearts of his soldiers to be corrupted and effeminated, neither to continue
drowned in idleness, ease, and dissolution, he returned speedily toward Croy,
the reparations whereof were by this time brought to good perfection. There did
he take up a good number of Masons, Carpenters, and most part of the workmen
and laborers of the city, and about a four thousand soldiers, to the intent,
that if the enemy should go about to disturb them, they should find
sufficient forces to repulse them* and should not be able to annoy or hinder
them in their work. With that company he went to Modrissa, where setting them
in hand with this fort, he followed it so diligently, that it was begun and
ended without any let or disturbaunce of the Mahometans. For albeit the Turkish
Monarch were impatient of revenge, and did at that time labor very diligently
to leauy a great and puissant army against Scanderbeg, yet being mindful of the
foul discomfitures and overthrows formerly received by the Albanois, and
being partly terrified with the rumor of a most dangerous war, intended
against him by the Persians, setting aside all other matters, and neglecting
(as it were) all other occasion, he bent his whole thoughts on that side to
see, what would be the end and issue of those tumults. For this time therefore
did these troubles and disturbances divert the Turkish arms from the Epirots,
and they enjoyed yet a while longer the benefit of the death of Amurath.

Notwithstanding the happy success and good fortune of Scanderbeg, and the
daily grieuances of the subjects of Mahomet, who complained unto him that they
were continually overrun, harried and pilled by the ordinary roades and
incursions of the Epirotes, did not a little trouble and perplexe the Sultan:
yet at the first he did but somewhat ease his stomach (though in vain) with
many menaces and outrageous speeches against Scanderbeg being absent:
afterward having recourse to flatteries and fair speeches, he assayed to
treat with him for some accord to be had of pacification and peace between
them. To this end he sent over an Ambassade unto Ambassadors sent with
conditions of peace by Mahomet to Scanderbeg.
Croy, offering him to make peace with him, so that he would yield him self
tributarie, according to the conditions which Amurath had before propounded
unto him. Of all this matter, and of the cunning dissimulation of the Ottoman,
and of the war raised by the Persians, the Prince of Albanie was duly
informed, by the secret intelligence of certain great and noble men his
friends about Mahomet. By means whereof, the Ambassours being arrived, they
were soon refused, and their demaundes utterly rejected, returning with this
answer for a full resolution. That hardly could he be content to accept any
conditions of peace of the tyrant, Answer of Scanderbeg to the Ambassadors of
Mahomet.
were they never so honest and tolerable: much less these, which were so
intolerable and injurious. That he was entered into Epire only to this end,
to shake off his yoke from that Province, and to abolish, as much as in him
lay, the hateful name of bondage and servitude: and not to impose new griefs
upon them. That this was the only fruit and benefit which he did reap of
his trauelles and hazards sustained, to see his country one day freed and
delivered from Turkish tyranny and subjection. That if he had had any desire
or devotion to have amity and friendship with him, he would then have
yielded to submit him self to those terms of slavery and thraldom, when the
power and puissaunce in a manner of all Europe and of Asia, was even in the
very heart and bowelles of his kingdom: when the bloody Amurath did beard
him to his face, and was in arms against him; and was desirous to have had him
yield to these conditions. That it should suffice them to think what they had
suffered in times past, even to that day: the remembrance whereof should give
him just cause of grief and sorrow at all times. That it was not now with the
Epirotes as in times past, but that matters were quite changed, and the men
clean altered from that they were wont to be: and they had little reason to
hope to bring them to this point. Well they might do it by constraint offorce
and open violence: but to think by good words and entising speeches to
persuade and inuit them to so infamous and base an act, they were foully
mistaken and deceived.

This Ambassador being dismissed with this answer, and his offers being
utterly The fortress of Modrissa finished and furnished.
rejected: Castriot did altogether apply him self to his work lately begun,
leaving his enemies for a while to take their rest. By this time was the
fortress of Modrissa in a good forwardness, by reason that the lyme, stones
and other stuff was prepared and made ready for the building long before
hand. In less then six months was it enclosed and compassed with walls, and
fitted with other edifices and particular houses and lodgings for the
soldiers: the overplus that remained was followed and enlarged afterward
from time to time. The place being sure and strong by nature, needed not any
ditches or rampires to strengthen it: and therefore provision was made only of
men, arms, munition, and other provisions. There were brought thither also
from Croy, certain pieces of great ordinance: which being delivered to them of
the Fort, they were admonished how to use them, and to what end: as has been
before declared.

These things thus done: Scanderbeg led the Albanians into the enemies
country, Territories and Dominions of the Turks invaded and spoiled by
Scanderbeg.
where finding the places void of defense, they made a hand of all that they
found, harrying and spoiling all things, and not sparing to afflict the Turkish
dominions with what soever mischiefs and discommodities the fury and rage of
the wars could possibly imagine. From thence some of them retired with their
Chiefetaine toward Croy laden with prey and booty: but the better part was
left upon the frontiers (as had been ever used) in garrison. For, albeit the
raising of the fortress of Modrissa did greatly assure and safeguard the plain
country: yet were not the ordinary forces retired from the frontiers, because
the place where they were appointed was distant about fourteen miles or more
from Modrissa. Besides that the soldiers of the garrison were not left for
that end, and to the same effect as those of the new Fortress: but
principally for the repulse of the violence of the Turks, and to guard the
Province against the incursions and pillages of the Painims. And if it did
happen that the Turks did come upon them with such force and puissance, as
they were not able to make head against them, then were they to retire and save
them selves, either in the tops and safe passages of the mountains, or else
in the inner parts of the country. Scanderbeg after he was arrived at Croy,
being desirous to take the benefit of the time, whilst the Sultan was busied
in other affairs, and by some notable act to amplify the bounds of his
Realm, he called together his Nobles, and the principal persons of the city
of Croy, with the most part of his troops and companies: and having a long
time devised with them upon the proceedings of the wars, and what course was
best to be taken: at the last, because he would sound Oration of Scanderbeg to
his subjects, persuading the^ to proceed with their conquests upon the Turks.
the intents and meaning of their thoughts, and prove how they were affected,
he began thus to speak unto them.

Worthy Peers and brave Epirotes, now that we have sufficiently filled and
gorged our selves with feasting and banqueting, and with all kind of
licentious ease and liberty: we have no reason any longer to leave our arms,
and to let our wonted virtue lie (as it were) a sleep and forgotten: we have
kept holy day long enough: we have feasted and triumphed sufficiently for the
victory had against Amurath: we have spent a whole year, partly in
recreation, partly in repairing of our towns, or building of new places, and
we have not so much as once visited the enemy. It is now high time to awake,
and to give some new proof of your wonted valor, even now whilst Mahomet
has his hands full with the Persians, and that God has given you the means
and opportunity, without any effusion of blood to reestablish the ancient
honor and reputation of Albanie, and to revive those ancient times so greatly
desired: whilst that the enemy his power is now somewhat weakened and
repressed, and whilst he is otherwise occupied and entangled in diverse
wearisome and tedious troubles, not knowing what to do, nor what course to
take: for these two, are the only and principal seasons for the good and
happy dispatch of Two only times to dispatch great exploites against an
enemy: when he is weakened, or other where employed and occupied.
great exploites. This therefore is the time, this is the hour, that inuiteth
you to seek out the enemy, and not always to lie still and idle, and to
expect when he will come to assail you. Behold how Sfetigrade looks after
you, and calls for your aid. Does the ill success of the last years siege
terrify you? I assure you I would be loath to lead you, where I should think
the mischief to be so great, or the peril so evident: but no we the great
number of your victories, the death of Amurath, the present occupation of our
adversary, has greatly diminished these difficulties: besides that you shall
not want store of artillery, and such like engines and instruments of assault.
The opportunity of the time, and the countenance of the enemy, shall
instruct us what is further to be done. For my part, I can promise you nothing
without expense and loss of blood: without vehement and earnest labor: of
which notwithstanding, the valiant man, the courageous soldier has scarce
any feeling or perseueraunce: even then when he is most painefully occupied,
and in the action: much less will he be afraid or in doubt of it, before he
comes to prove the difficulty of it. Yet if Sfetigrade be so odious and
displeasing unto you, there are other places and fortresses of the enemy not
far off, which may recompense your losses sustained at Sfetigrade, and may
content and satisfy your desires. There is Belgrade as near or nearer then
Sfetigrade, and not unworthy neither of our trauelles, nor of our blood, if we
have any desire either of honor, or of recompense. I have reason (my good
companions) to be ashamed more then any, that I should spend one year during
my reign amongst you idly and doing nothing, and yet to see and suffer the
houses of our auncesters, the towns of our confederates, the noble marks of
the estate and Empire of the Albanians, so shamefully to be subjected and
enthralled under the Infidelles. Wherefore that this time of ley sure and
opportunity which is left us, do not slip out of our hands, let us follow
and imitate the Persians: let us embrace the good fortune which God seems to
have offered us. In so doing, we shall enlarge our dominions: we shall augment
our franchises and liberties: We shall revenge our losses, our grieves, and
injuries: and (which above all is to be preferred) we shall keep the youth of
our Realm from sloth and idleness. Neither has the Bishop of Rome, nor our
good friend the king Alphonsus, nor so many devout and Catholic Princes,
aided and succored us with their treasures and other supplies, to the intent
we should keep us still idle within doors: that we should dwell in pleasures and
delights, and grow corrupted and effeminate: but rather that we should betake
our selves to arms, and make proof and trial of our valor in the midst of
all perils and dangers, and that even in despite of death it self we should
perform the duty and deuoyre of men valiant and courageous, and of most brave
and resolute soldiers.

This encouragement of the king of Epire seemed not greatly to like the
auditors: for they did not applaude it with a sudden and universal cry and
consent (as they were wont:) but with a kind of muttering noise, interrupted
(as it were) by times, and by stoppes, they did signify sufficiently, that the
minds of the soldiers were not conformable, but rather different from his
desire. Notwithstanding though there were few or none which did commend or
allow of his advise: yet being ashamed openly to contradict it, they stood
still one looking upon another: and none of them durst open his mouth to reply
unto him, for fear of being noted for a greater coward or more dastardly
minded then the rest of his companions. Then Vranocontes seeing all of them so
still and silent, arising out of his seat, and addressing his speech to
Scanderbeg: It is not (quoth he) most provident and prudent Prince, either
timerousnesse or want Answer of Vranocontes to the oration of Sca^derbeg: in
the name of all the Epirots.
of courage, or the experience of our late success at Sfetigrade which causes
us at this time with blushing cheeks to disallow and dislikethy counsel: but
(give me leave to be the first who may freely confess unto thee the cause of
this our backwardness): it is the time and season of the year, wherein
ordinarily consists the best part of military services: it is I say, the
time only which does advise and admonish us not to hearken unto thee. Thou
see that the Autumn is now well near spent, scarcely shall we be able to
levy any forces, scarcely shall we put in order other things requisite for the
siege, and we shall hardly make our approches to the walls, but that the
unseasonableness Winter wars most discommodious and hurtful.
of the winter will assault us with infinite inconveniences and discommodities,
both the heavens and the earth will make war against us, the showers and rain
continually falling, the frosts, Ice and snow, will both hinder, offend, and
encomber our soldiers, and will defend and protect the enemy. For as this
season is of it self unfit and discommodious for all occasions: so is it most
contrary, and to the singular disadvantage of those that come to be encamped,
and lie at the siege of towns. And there is great ods and inequality between
the damages and inconveniences which it brings to the besiegers, in regard
of those annoyances which it lays upon the besieged. For these being retired
within their walls, and under the succor and covert of their bastils and
defenses, will be able with pleasure to affront us, and having abundance of all
necessaries, they may (as it were) with the one hand hold their weapons and
arms ready to defend them sclues, whilst with the other they do repair and
renew their forces and their rampiets. And what shall we do the whilst? Only
we have the advantage of our corages prodigal and careless of our own
safeties, and obstinately addicted to assail and force the enemy. For to
speak of any artillery, it is not unknown unto us, both at the siege of
Sfetigrade, and at other places, how little good it does and will do, especially
in this unseasonable time of winter, and against places so defencible and
strong by nature, seated upon rocks and mountains which are vnbatterable and
impregnable. I conclude therefore, that it behooves us with all our power and
endeavors to shun and avoid these vain attempts, and this wilful loss and
destruction of our soldiers: and it behooves Sentence. Time and seasen to be
attended by men of valor and wisdom.
men of valor and wisdom to attend a convenient time and season, as good and
skilful sailers use to do, when they are to make their voyage. Neither will
this delay any thing diminish or abate our courages, nor will it add any
stomach to our enemies. Touching the war of the Persians (if I may speak
what I think of it) for my part I do repose little or no trust therein at this
time: for either will the report of all those skirmishes and commotions vanish
away to smoke and come to nothing: or else it is like that the Persians will
defer and put off their arms till some other time of better opportunity. All
this notwithstanding (most valiant Prince the mirror of magnanimity) we will
not hinder thy determinations; but if thou do think, that thine own
opinion and conceit in this point, be more for the benefit and advantage of
the Estate, and for the public and common reputation, we will march on with a
good will, and will cheerfully follow thy ensigns, wheresoever it shall
please thee to lead us: we will frame and fit our tongues and our speeches,
our hands and our actions, yea the very times and seasons to serve only at
thy good will and pleasure, and as it shall seem good unto thee. In thy
company the snow shall be pleasant, the showers shall seem sweet, the winter
shall be thought mild, and all things shall be gracious, acceptable and
pleasing unto us: no travels, no difficulties, no hazardes, nor any kind of
dangers shall grieve or discontent us, so long as thou art our leader and
commander: so long as we may enjoy the happy presence of thy virtues, and may
follow the greatness of thy fortunes.

Scanderbeg perceiving how his subjects were affected, and the rather for that
they spoke nothing but what was true and certain, he suffered himself soon
and easily to be persuaded by them, according to that courtesy and bounty of
his good nature, wherewith he did ever draw the affections of the co^munalty to
love and honor him. Wherefore the Counsel being broken up, the assembly
dismissed, and the soldiers licensed to Donique the wife of Scanderbeg passes
the Summer at Petralba.
depart, he permitted every man to retire to his own home. At the beginning of
the summer he had left the Queen at Petralba, as afterward also in the same
season of the year he used always during his life to do the like: to the intent
that during the extreme heat of summer, and till the end of Autumn, she might
remain there for her more solace and recreation: and the rest of the year she
usually spent at Croy, except it were at such times as the Turks came into
Epire, or that the country was troubled with any immoderate forces, and
extraordinary puissance of the enemy. For then when it stood upon the Colchina
a city of the Venetia^s upon the sea or gulf of Venice in Dalmatia.
hazard of his whole estate, he transported her with all her household, and the
most precious things of all her furniture and moueables unto Colchina a sea
town of the Venetians, or to some other such like place far removed and out
of the way. Now that he had dismissed his army, he him self with Amese, and
very small train, went to the Queen to Petralba. Under this castle was a
plain of singular beauty and very Description of the conntrey about Petralba.
pleasant, both for the admirable recreation which the very nature of the
place did affoorde, as also by reason of the notable diligence of the
inhabitants, who had been very curious and industrious in trimming and
husbanding of the soil. For it wanted not any fruits, vines, plants, or
trees, nor any thing in the world which might seem either to adorn and
beautify the country, or to make it blessed and happy. In this place during
that quarter of the year did the Queen make her abode, accompanied with her
Ladies, maids, and officers. On all sides was the plain enuironned with wood
and thickets, and with many narrow straights and valleys in a manner
inaccessible: amongst the which Scanderbeg held continual watch and ward,
keeping a great number of soldiers to guard and defend the place: which was
also singularly well provided and furnished, with arms, men, victuals, and
other munitions for all occurrences and accidents of Fortune whatsoever Having
made but small stay at Petralba, he removed with his Queen back again to
Croy, where also he had no long rest. For (as Vranocontes most sagely and
wisely had prognosticated) news came within a while, and the report increased
daily: that the Persian was retired, the tumults of that war appeased, and all
sturs and commotions pacified: and that the Turkish Monarch being freed from
this fear, did mind to bend his forces against the Albanians.

Scanderbeg was greatly troubled with these tidings, nevertheless he told his
subjects Mahomet prepares an army against Scanderbeg. Sentence.
openly, that in this case it was requisite to use arms and good counsel, and
not choler and indignation. Howbeit he was in good hope, that the enemy would
not march in a season so contrary and discommodious. Yet did he presently mount
on horse back, and taking with him not above fifty horse, he left Croy his
chief city, and drew toward the frontiers where Moses lay in garrison:
there to take some more certain counsel and advise for the manner of his
proceedings. When he came thither, he found that to be true in effect which had
been reported unto him at Croy. For this Scanderbeg leuieth an army to
withstand the Turks.
cause having levied and mustered in great have about 5000. men, he retired
with them into the lower Dibria, where he was wont to encampe and to winter his
army, aduertising Moses and others not to stir nor attempt any thing, till
they saw him approach with his troops. Scarce did there pass ten days between
these preparations and the coming of the Turks: the which being discovered by
them of the garrison in the new fortress at Modrissa, and being mindful of
the instructions given them by their Sovereign, they signified the same
accordingly by the shot of the Canon. This signal was received first by the
paizants and inhabitants of the country, and afterward by Scanderbeg, in so
good time, that trussing up baggage in the night, with as much silence as was
possible, he made toward the enemy. Moses was not then present at that
service: for by reason that the infidels did take their way far off from the
place where he lay, he would not leave those passages unguarded which were
committed to his charge, for fear lest the Painim, being either victorious or
vanquished, should find that passage unfurnished and without resistance. The
self same night did the Barbarian use incredible celeritie and diligence in
his journey: they were about twelve An army of twelve thousand Turks inuadeth
Epire
thousand fighting men and no more, all on horseback, chosen and well
appointed, both to give a charge bravely, and to bear a shocke as resolutely:
and Mahomet thought it not good to use any greater troops in this expedition.
Our Christian forces were in a manner equally parted, their numbers both of
horsemen and footmen being near alike. The night was now almost spent, and
the day ready to break, when Am^sa general of the Turkish army against
Scanderbeg.
as Scanderbeg being informed by his discouerers of the way that Amesa took
(for so was the General Turk named) and being favored by the silence of the
night, he seized upon a part of the mountain of Modrissa, having a purpose to
surprise the enemy: who being ignorant of this stratageme, had now passed the
mountain of Mocrea, and being entered the valley that lay between that and the
mount Modrissa, Mount Mocrea.
were even ready to get up the hill, to the intent that (passing from thence
farther into the heart of the Province, he might the better ouer-reach
Scanderbeg, and destroy the plain country. Part of his people were now
gotten to the place, and being entangled amongst the craggie rocks, and the
steep descents of the mountain, their horses were even out of breath with
mounting to the top. Others likewise followed close after them: and many of
them were as yet scarce passed the valley, when Amesa and the Turks army
surprised at Modrissa, by Scanderbeg.
as the General of the Christians (giving the signal of the fight) with a
great cry and a terrible noise, no otherwise then as a mighty stream, did
fall suddenly upon them from above, overthrowing and beating them down, being
already wearied and well near tired, both them and their horses. The first
that made head against them were the footmen, whom Scanderbeg employed in the
beginning of the service, by reason of the situation and quality of the place:
doubting lest if his horsemen should have charged, the fall of the hill, with
the force of their own violence, might have borne them on with more extremity
then he was willing, and so being carried headlong down the mountain, they
might have wrought their own ruin and destruction. The principal praise
therefore, and the chief commendation of this victory appertained to the
footmen. The Turks which were gotten up to the top, casting away their
lances, defended them selves with their cimitaries; but by reason that their
horses could not get any good and sure footing, their blows were uncertain,
and their force was to little purpose. The Christians covering themselves with
their Targets, did first kill and overthrow their horses, and then all at
pleasure had their wills of the riders: many of whom perceiving this strange
and unaccustomed kind of danger, dismounted from their horses, and either
fought on foot, or sought to save themselves by retyring into the valley
toward their companions, and to reserve themselves to a more sure exploit,
and to a safer kind of service. Amese the Christian, being accompanied with a
strong and mighty troop of horse was sent by his Uncle to the other side of
the mountain, where the descent was more facile and easy: and there began
an other fight in the streightes and most narrow passages of the valley. In
this mean while was it fair day light, by which time the surplus and rest of
the horsemen (who were of Scanderbeg his battallion) having first repulsed the
enemy, began to make into the plain. Of the footmen some pursued the
enemy, others kept at the foot of the mountain, from whence with their bows
and arrows, they spent good store of shot upon them whom they saw broken and
out of order. On the one side where the way seemed more free and open for the
enemy, Castroit did fiercely press upon them close at their backs: on the
other side Amese the Christian had shut in, and (as it were) besieged Amese the
Turkish General, who (seeing not any likelihoode Amese General of the
Turks, taken prisoner by Amese the Nephew of Scanderbeg.
nor appearance either of victory or of safety) was oftentimes importuned and
urged by the Albanois to render himself: which at length to his great grief,
he was contented to yield unto: and laying aside his arms, he gave him his
faith to be true prisoner. In like manner, infinite others yielding to their
ill fortune, did by their captivity, give an end to their wounds, and
determined the conflict. The victory Victory of Scanderbeg against Amese at
Modrissa.
being assured, the soldiers fell to make booty of their baggage. All their
Ensigns and Standards were gained, and seven thousand men were counted dead
upon the place. The most part of their horses were either slain or maimed: and
yet did this victory cost the Christians little blood or none at all: for they
lost not in the fight Number both of Turks and Christians slain in the fight
at Modrissa.
above 30* persons at the most. Amese the Turkish General (according to the
right of the law of arms) was granted to Amese the Christian by his Uncle,
who willed him to lead him amongst other prisoners to Croy, with some part of
the spoils gotten upon the enemy, especially the standards: the residue were
liberally granted and divided amongst the soldiers.

The King of Epyre having continued certain days in that place, to ouerrunne
the frontiers of the Infidels, to dismiss his soldiers, to visit, order and
dispose of all things, returned to Croy against the feast of Christmas. At his
arrival, all the multitude both old and young pell mell, in great and huge
troops flocked together to receive him, and they met him without the gate with
many acclamations and popular applauses, much more great, and far exceeding
beyond all comparison, all that had been used and accustomed. For it was a
common speech and talk amongst them, that God had now given them a manifest
sign and pledge of their good fortune, and that they should prevail as well
against the new Monarch, as against his predecessor: also that they were
assured under the conduct of their Prince, to have like fortune and good hap
against the son, as they had of late against the father. So fond and vain
are the imaginations Sentence.
and judgments of the ignorant and rude communaltie, that by one only accident
(be it never so mean) and according as the success of the first beginnings
does more or less please them, so do they measure and interpret the second,
the middle, and the last events of worldly actions: especially if their own
desires and affections, and the promises of fortune do concur, and do seem
to join and agree in one. The Turks prisoners feasted by Scanderbeg.


During the solemnity of this public triumph and feasting, both in respect
of the time which was festival, and of their affairs, which had succeeded so
fortunate, Scanderbeg commanded the prisoners to be enlarged, and that Amese
should be brought unto him: whom after he had welcomed and received with great
humanity, he honored and feasted most magnificently, to the intent he should
be pertaker of their joy and triumph for that victory, whereof himself had
partly been the giver and the occasion. But first of all, the Mohammedan did
request him, that he would vouchsafe to license some one of the captives to go
to Andrinople, and to advertise his friends of his estate and condition, and to
bring his ransom. For it may be (said he) that they which are escaped from the
slaughter, do know nothing of my misfortune and adventure: but may think me
to be slain amongst the rest. This being accorded as he demanded, and the
price of all their ransomes being concluded and agreed upon at 13000. crowns:
two of them were presently dispatched and sent away to deal for the delivery
of their companions, and they were accompanied with one of the Christians, till
such time as he had conducted them safe out of the country. Thus you see what
passed this year in Epyre, and what were the chiefest tumults of that time.

Whilst that matters stood upon these terms, the news of this discomfiture
1452.
was come to the ears of Mahomet, who seeing the relics of his army without
a General, without ensigns, and without arms, I leave it to you to be
imagined, whether the sight thereof did not procure grief and sorrow both in
public and in private. The Sultan did enquire particularly of the encounter,
and he was desirous to hear the discourse of the whole manner and order of the
fight: which being told him, though he were even enraged for pure despite and
anger, yet he fell from the conceit and remembrance of that misfortune, to
feasting, reuelling and banqueting, striving and enforcing himself to the
uttermost of his power, to obscure the praise and deserts of the Albanois, and
to color, excuse, and hide his own misfortune. But if the calamity of his
Mahomet insensed against Amese, in unwilling to pay his ransom.
army upon the view and hearing of their mischance, did in any sort trouble
this covetous and miserable minded Prince, you may be sure that the message
sent by Amese did much more move him and eagerly incense him. By means
whereof, sometimes imputing unto him the disgrace of that overthrow, in that he
had so foolishly lost his people, by trayning them in the night time rashly and
inconsideratly into those streights and steep mountains: and sometimes
accusing him of cowardice, treason and disloialty, he would willingly have
refused to disburse any thing toward their ransom, (so subtle and ingenious
is the humor of avarice, to keep together the riches which it has Sentence.
gathered:) if that the principal persons of the court, and the kinsmen and
friends of the prisoners had not persuaded him to the contrary. For what with
their good Persuasions used by Amese his friend^ and the Turks cour^i^rs, to
Mahomet in his behalf.
and sufficient reasons, and what with their humble prayers and entreaties,
they appeased the Sultan, showing him, that Amese in the whole course of his
life before past, could not justly be blamed nor suspected of the like error or
default. Moreover that he alone was not fallen into this misfortune, but many
brave and valiant soldiers besides him: and that therefore the case of their
companions ought not to be neglected and unregarded. Many other reasons did
they allege, in so much, that the money being soon procured and delivered
unto the messengers, together with many precious gifts and presents, which
they sent privately to Scanderbeg: it was quickly brought and paid in Epyre.
The most part of that sum Scanderbeg willed to be delivered to his Nephew,
the residue was partly divided and shared amongst the soldiers, and partly
sent unto Moses to be distributed amongst them of his garrison. Liberality of
Amuse the Nephew of Scanderbeg.
The Nephew of Scanderbeg showed himself no less liberal then his Uncle. For
reserving to himself very little or nothing of that which was given him, he
gave it in common, and parted it both amongst friends and welwillers, and to
those that were partners with him in his perils. Their ransomes being thus
paid, the Turks were licensed to depart at their pleasures. Amese was very
sorry to leave the King of Albanie, and (the saying is) that before his
departure, he did a long while, in secret Amese and the other Turks prisoners
ransommed.
devise with Scanderbeg upon the nature and disposition of Mahomet, and of the
manner of maintayning the war against him. At their going thence there were
many presents bestowed upon them, and victuals provided to serve them for
many days, besides a good conuoy, which did bring them safe and sound into
their own limits and confines.

Before such time as Amese arrived at Andrinople, there was begun to be made
Debreas appointed with a new army against Scanderbeg.
a new leauie of other forces, and the old companies were supplied with fresh
men in the place of those which were lost. He that had the leading of them was
named Debreas, a man of notable courage, and one that by his experience and
long practice in arms, had attained to the degree and dignity of a Saniacke.
But he had labored too ambitiously with the Ottoman to grant him this
commission, enforcing himself with Debreas his ambition and glorious
ostentation.
many glorious promises to animate the Sultan more and more, and to put him in
a full hope and persuasion of an assured victory. For he referred all things
to the conceit of his own wit, and to the sufficiency of his own wisdom,
attributing little or nothing unto fortune, notwithstanding that she does bear
a great stroke in all human actions, and especially in deeds of arms.
Nevertheless he promised the Sultan not to hazard all his forces at one blow,
nor to commit them to the adventure of one entire battle, but that he would by
some good entry and beginning make himself way to an assured victory.
Besides, he took no great care nor was desirous of any greater forces, then
such as Amese his predecessor had lately had before him: induced thereunto
through a kind of emulation and desire of glory: to the intent it might be
said, that he had reestablished the good fortune of the Turkish Empire with the
like numbers, and (as it were) with the same soldiers. As it is commonly
seen, that the man which is Sentence.
hardy and resolute thinks nothing impossible whereunto his mind is
affectioned.

Now was not Debreas the only man that had thus desired to be employed by the
Sultan, but there were many others, who of themselves and their own motion,
did sue to have the honor of that difficult and hard service: for by how much
the more Ambition and envy of the Turks against Scanderbeg.
the name of Scanderbeg did grow glorious amongst the Barbarians, and the
greater report and renown that ran of his invincible fortune: so much the
greater was the resort and concourse of all such as thought any thing well of
their own valor and worthiness: each of them greedily desiring to have the
credit of that journey, as men that did affect and aspire to the greatest
offices and highest dignities. Besides, the ambition of these men was much
augmented and pricked forward by the liberality of the Turkish Monarche
published and spread abroad, who had lately proclaimed and decreed a wonderful
great reward and recompense to him that could vanquish the Albanois. But after
that Amese upon his return was seen and heard to Amese commending the virtue
of Scanderbeg discourageth the Turks.
utter his opinion and conceit of Scanderbeg and his fortune, those their
haughty desires were much changed and abated. For by a continual, yet true
commendation, he did so extol the virtue of the Christian Prince and his
companies, as it little wanted, but that Debreas had changed his opinion, and
that the Sultan had not broken the voyage. Nevertheless because he would not
derogate from the majesty of his Empire, he thought it better to increase and
strenthen his army, then either to mistrust the diligence and deuoire of his
Saniacke, before he had made proof and trial of him: or to leave the
discomfiture of Amese, and the late injuries of his people unrevenged.
Wherefore there was added to the troops before leauied a new supply of 3000.
horse. Thus whilst that Amese discharging the duty of a friend, and
gratifying his late host, did exalt the honor of Scanderbeg, and did publish
his rare virtues, he was in a manner injurious unto him, or rather he was the
author and occasioner of his greater praise and of his more honorable victory.

All things being in a readiness, and the companies ready to march, there
fell such great store of rain, continuing for many days together, that it did
for a while hinder Debreas marches into Epyre with an army of 15000. men.
the forwardness of the soldiers. Put the foul weather being ceased, and the
season of the year being likewise grown more mild and pleasant, by the
coming on of the spring, they took their journey with all speed and
celeritie: the same reason and consideration drew Scanderbeg likewise into his
camp, there to deliberate with his Chieftaines, and to provide for the
ordering of his affairs, which the roughness of the winter had caused him to
defer and put off, till the time fell out more fit and gracious to his
purpose. This was the occasion, that at the same time when both the
preparations, and the coming of the enemy were noysed in the country, he was
Scanderbeg leauteth an army of 7000. men against Debreas.
with Moses amongst the Dibrians, wherefore he assembled speedily, and in a
small time to the number of 7000. men or somewhat more.

It ought not to seem strange, neither should any man marvel, that the
Christians were so suddenly and readily armed and provided, nor that they
gathered an army The order taken by Scanderbeg for the sudden arming of his
subjects and speedy raising of an army.
with such incredible speed and celeritie. For the King of Epyre of his own
mere and proper motion, without the desert or merit of any man's service, had
given the better part of his ordinary revenues, especially of his demaines, to
certain of the greatest and chiefest men of the country, upon condition,
that whenever there happened any necessity of war, they should presently
find him a certain number of men at their costs and charges, according to each
man's state and quality: with whom, themselves also in person should make their
speedy repair unto him, and so to receive such directions, and to be employed
in such services, as it should please him to command and appoint. These men
therefore were always ready in arms, and well appointed, expecting nothing
but the will and pleasure of their Chiefetaine. Besides there was a certain
number of the inhabitants, and especially of the husbandmen, who by a certain
usage and custom of the country, were bound to accompany them wheresoever
they marched without any consideration of pay or wages: and commonly, the
only desire of prey and pillage did furnish him with more men then he him
self would have demanded. Hereof it appears, how Scanderbeg could
continually repair so many and so often armies, considering that his rents
and customs were not so great, nor were not sufficient for any long time to
entertain his soldiers. Add herewithall, that if neither the custom of the
country, nor their greedy desire of prey, had not been such as it was, yet
the regard of the common peril, the consideration of their Prince his
dexterity and good fortune, might easily have allured and persuaded them, and
was sufficient to have drawn them into arms. As for the stipendarie succors
and mercenarie soldiers which he hired for his money, the chief burden and
importance of that charge, was borne for the most part by the Bishops of
Rome, the King of Naples, and other Catholic Christian Princes, who failed
not from time to time to furnish him with money and treasure, which (as the
saying is) are the synewes of the wars.

Debreas having passed over the greatest part of Bulgarie, or the country of
the Tryballians, was gotten as far as Pologue, which is a place and part of
Bulgarie, Pologue.
under the obeisance of the great Turk, and not far from the confines of
Epyre. Hereof Castriot being certainly informed at full, commanded speedily
to mount on Scanderbeg marches with 6000. men against Debreas
horse back, choosing out of all the company six thousand horse: for the
matter requiring so great haste, he could not conveniently use the aid of his
footmen. The residue he sent away with the old garrison of Moses, having
first taken order for such things as seemed necessary: but before he began
to march with his troops he had sent the Dybrian with ten horsemen to take
notice, and to discover the coming and purpose of the enemy. The rest of the
squadrons followed after fair and easily. The General of the Turks was
encamped in the The description of the country about Pologue. Scopia a chief
town in Macedonie.
fields of Pologue, tarrying for the breaking of the day. The plain was
bounded on the one side with the mountain of Mocrea, on the other side with
the town of Scopia (which was belonging to the Turks) and it was enclosed
likewise with two other mountains of a notable height called by a general
name, the mountains of Pologue. Moses had good leisure to survey all things
(for the Moon being at full, did shine very bright) and he brought back
certain and perfect notice of every thing to the general of the Christians,
who taking the advantage of this singular benefit of the night, commanded his
companies to hasten their pace. They were no sooner departed from Mocrea, and
scarce entered within the plain, but the heavens were suddenly changed even in
an instant: and at the first there fell a sweet shower, which did but gently
wet the battallions, but the Army of Scanderbeg stricken with fear by the
terror of a sudden tempest
rain increasing by little and little, there followed a great tempest of thunder
and lightning with a mighty storm and violent winds. Hereupon did the
Ensigns make a stand, and a certain horror and fear began to possess the
companies: in such sort, that they stood gazing one upon another very sad
and pensive, as if some sinister token and presage of ill fortune had befallen
them. Scanderbeg making but a jest of this their timerousnesse and vain fear,
went to the head of the battle and pushed forward the Standard Bearer with his
hand, telling him, that he was but an ill prognosticator unto himself: and he
said with a loud voice: that it behooved them upon Speech of Scanderbeg to his
soldiers encouraging them not to be amazed at the tempest.
such an opportunity to take the advantage of the time, and to charge the
enemy: that this was no other but the casualtie and inconstancy of the spring
time, and new season of the year, namely of the month of March: and that
before they should be able to come to handie-stroakes with the enemy, they
should see the air would wax clear, and as calm and pleasant as before.
Whereupon the soldiers being recomforted, and interpreting it to be a sign of
their own good fortune, they did both mutually encourage one another, and they
put their leaders likewise in a better hope and comfort. By this time the
weather being cleared (as Scanderbeg had foretold) the brightness of the
moone-light increasing with her course, and the neerenesse of their troops did
now discover the approach of the Albanois, which hastened on each man's fortune
either good or bad. The enemy at the first being astonished and unresolved,
stood a while in suspense, whether they should fight, or fly: or whether it
were best to temporize. The darkness of the night did much augment their
terror, and the audacitie of the Christians whom they saw to be advanced so
far without their confines and from their own dwellings. On the contrary,
this seemed to encourage them, and to increase their hardiness, in that they
knew they were to fight not in the enemies country where they might be in
fear of ambushments and surprises. But the principal point that made them to
cast away all fear, was the multitude and valor of their troops, which was
enough even to make the veriest cowards to be ashamed to think of flight.
Wherefore in the end Debreas giving a sign to begin the fight, willed them
to go to the charge, and calling to mind his own great and large promises
made to the Ottoman, and the instructions given him, he animated his soldiers,
and coursing up and down now here now there, thus did he incense and egg
them on more fiercely against the enemy.

On, on, brave soldiers (quoth he) now is the time come that you shall be
fully Oration of Debreas encouraging his soldiers to the battle.
revenged of your wrongs, and repair the honor which heretofore we have lost:
now may you avenge you of your imprisonment, of the loss of your fellows, and
your own blood. See how these Champions of the night do hasten against you:
see how they come bringing (as it were) bonds and fetters to manacle your
hands. They think they shall encounter here with their courteous host Amese:
they are persuaded that they shall be favored by the valleys of Mocrea, and
the thickets of Modrissa, and these dens and starting holes which are the
ordinary refuges of thieves and robbers. Behold with what security and suertie
the battle is offered unto you, even in a manner at home, and at your own
doors. If your selves will, they cannot stand against you, neither for valor
nor for number: and you can not desire a place more fit and convenient to fight
on horseback. For my part either will I loose my life together with you, and
here will I rest, if not fortunate, yet free amongst the dead bodies of my
dearest companions, or else by your prowes and virtue I will so carry and
demean my self, as the severe judgment of our Prince shall have no cause to
reprove us. Go to then my good friends, let every man be of good courage, none
did desire this voyage so earnestly as we, none did accept the journey with
more joy and gladness. If we be conquerors, none can expect greater glory nor
greater rewards then are prepared for us: if we be vanquished, as great will
be the frowns, the scorns and the reproof which will be laid upon us.

Thus saying he sent forth a certain number of soldiers in manner of forlorn
hope, to skirmish with the Christians, and to keep them play, that whilst
they did stop and hinder their fury and violence, himself in the mean time
might take some sure course upon the hazard of his whole forces in the maine
fight: and then afterward by little and little he came to try the fortune of
the field. Scanderbeg on the other side thus spoke unto his men.

How now my soldiers? what a shame is this? Have they that were of late your
Oration of Scanderbeg encouraging his soldiers to the battle against Debreas.
prisoners taken arms now again? Have they the courage to oppose themselves
against you that were their masters? See these infamous relics of the camp
of Amese, they complain and they cry out against you, that you were but bad
banquetters. For it is the fashion at great banquets, and it is the duty of
right banquetters to leave nothing behind them: behold here I see other store
also of fresh and new forces with their new General: what other thing is it,
then a new matter and object of greater glory? down with them, overthrow
them as you were wont, you brave Albanois. Let not our faintness and
slothfulness cast us out of the possession of ou^ wonted good fortune: let not
our adversaries have any occasion to say by our present misfortune, that it was
Modrissa, and the valleys of Mocrea, and not we that did of late vanquish them:
let the plain and open fields, give plain and apparent proof of your
valiant hearts and undaunted valor.

In this manner admonishing and encouraging his companies, he took especial
care that his soldiers should keep themselves firm in good ^rray and order
of battle, to the intent the ranckes might not be confounded and intermingled,
but might The battle of Pologue.
be discerned and distinguished from the enemy. And he had this reason
especially, for that the smaller number being once disordered, might easily be
forced and overthrown by the greater. And because he durst not rely too much
upon the strength of those loose troops which he had made out to encounter and
to begin the fight with the Barbarians: he caused Moses and Amese with a
strong squadron of chosen men, to make head against the enemy which was
coming to give the onset upon him: doubting least if at the beginning of the
battle they in the forefront should happen to be repulsed, both his own
people might be the more troubled and terrified, and the enemy the better
hartened and encouraged. As for the rest of his squadrons, he kept them close
and excellently well ordered in great silence. In like case, the Infidel
either doubting the obscurity of the night, or conforming his counsels to the
renour and demeanor of the Christians, stirred not at all: but with his
battle close arraunged and in good array, he held himself quiet as a beholder
of the fight. Thus the conflict between the vauntcurrours on the one side and
the other did seem to represent (as it were) a pleasant combat: and the two
armies on both parts did carefully attend in great doubt the event and hazard
of the battle, which it behooved them shortly to undertake. But the Dibrian did
soon cut off this spectacle and their expectation: for like a violent storm
rushing in upon the midst of them that fought, with Moses puts to flight
the Turks that began the flight.
the destruction and slaughter of a great many, he did easily put the rest to
flight, and with the exceeding vehemency of his fury, having forgotten
himself, he had without all doubt pursued them even into the midst of their
maine battallion, if that Amese calling back his soldiers had not refrayned
his fury, and with good words as well as deeds had not caused him to retire
their ensigns.

Certain it is and not to be denied: that Moses was a brave man, hardy and
valiant Moses his immoderate fury in the heat of fight.
of his person, and a most excellent Captain fit to have the command of any
forces: yet when he was once embrued with the blood of his enemies, and that
(as the saying is) his blood was once hot: his impatiencie did so master him,
that he was not able Speech of Scanderbeg to Moses reprehending his overmuch
hardines.
any longer to rule and moderate himself. Wherefore it is reported that
Scanderbeg did sharply reprehend him: admonishing him to temper his hardiness
and audacitie with more moderation and modesty, and to use his victory more
advisedly: that well it might be tolerable in a private soldier to be so
audacious and hardy: but in a leader which has the charge and command of
men, it is a fault no less pernicious then reproueable, and a very bad
president and ill ensample.

But the rare qualities and excellent deserts of this worthy personage do
inuit me, by the way to touch a word or two concerning his original. This
Moses (who was Moses his original and descent or pedigree.
called the Dibrian) by reason that he dwelt, and did possess a goodly and
large territory and inheritance amongst the Dibrians, by another surname was
called Goleme Ariamnites by nation an Epirot: descended and borne in the city
of Valmes in Epire: Valmes a city in Epire.
Musache being his father and Roislaua his mother. This Musache had two
brethren to wit Ariamnites Goleme or Comniat father in law to Scanderbeg (of
whom has been before entreated.) And Vladienne Goleme de Ariamnites, who begot
Musache, surnamed Goleme de Ariamnit: otherwise Musache de Angeline, so called
by reason of his mother the sister of Scanderbeg: and thus much briefly for
the descent of Moses. But to our purpose.

The rest of the troops Albanois stood a while at a stay, and without moving
eitheir forward or backward, admiring the extreme hardines of the Chieftaine.
But on the contrary, the enemies were stricken with an exceeding fear, and
began thereupon to conceive a certain and general resolution to fly away, and
to leave fighting: notwithstanding thinking that the Christians by reason of
the darkness of the night would not stir any farther, nor enterprise any
thing, but defer the maine fight till the break of the day, they stirred not
at all, but held good and stood firm for a while, and the rather for that
besides the shame and ignominy, they judged that their flight in the
uncertainty of the dark would be far more perilous and full of hazard.
Likewise the Albanois was not a little perplexed in his thoughts, but had
diverse imaginations in his mind: being in doubt whether he should attend the
daylight or else should press forward this his good fortune, which to men of
war, is very light and inconstant. For herein he found him self deceived of
his hope, in that he thought to have surprised them at unawares, and found them
out of order, as he had of late overtaken the Amezans: and yet for all that,
seeing he had ouerthrown and beaten back their first troops, he was in hope
that they would not abide him but be gone, and so pursuing them at their
backs, he might obtain the victory without any loss or bloodshed of his
own men. Now therefore when he perceived them to set a good countenance on the
matter, and yet nevertheless to be (as it were) in a mammering, and ready to
turn their backs: without any more delay, he sounded a charge and gave the
onset upon them most furiously both before and behind: saying unto his
soldiers. Speech of Scanderbeg encouraging his soldiers to give the charge
upon Debreas.


Come on (my friends) let us use the victory whilst these fellows are thus
amazed, and whilst their wounds are yet fresh and bleeding: let us prevent the
enemy of their flight, which they are now devising and debating, how to take
their most advantage, and how to get away free and safe out of our sight.

Debreas his troops endured the shocke at the first very coldly: which made
him to repair to their fore ranckes, where he animated and exhorted them to
behave them selves manfully and to stand firm both with good words, and by the
example of his own virtue and valor: insomuch that now they began to receive
the Christians to the encounter with a good resolution, and made them to hold
bridle, and stopped them in their pace. But whilst they were thus combatting
together, and that each of the armies were in doubt to be confounded and
entangled one within another, the fight as yet was not very mortal, till such
time as one of the Musaches was sent with part of the horsemen from the left
wing to charge the enemy upon that side, where first of all their ranks
began to break and be disordered. Scanderbeg pressing continually upon them
in the forefront, did beat up and down the press having a vehement desire to
encounter with the General of the Turks, and he had enjoined some of Policy
of Scanderbeg in battle to aim at the destruction of the General of his
enemies. Saying of Scanderbeg touching the cutting off of the General of the
enemies.
his people with promises of good rewards to carry a good eye upon Debreas.
The report is, that it was a property peculiar and usual with him in all
battles and encounters, to lay the first and principal plot of his victory
against his enemies by giving the onset upon their General, and by his death
and destruction: for he was wont commonly to say, That the head was first to be
cut off, and then that the rest of the body would tumble after it all alone:
that he knew not any kind of creature in the whole world, which could survive
after the head thereof was once taken away.

But the brave and sudden charge given by Musache, did somewhat hinder the
purpose of Scanderbeg, for that Debreas leaving the head of the battle where
he as then kept, did suddenly make toward that side: that repulsing the
enemy and redressing the ranks again in good order which Musache had
disordered, he might cause them to temporize yet a while, and to bear off the
violence of their enemies, till such time as it grew to be day. The soldiers
in the vauntgard no sooner perceived their General to be absent, but they
began presently to wax more faint and flacke in fighting, suffering
themselves with little violence to be beaten back even into the midst of
their other battallions. Moses, to the intent he might win honor by so
glorious an action, brake in very furiously amongst the thickest of them, A
hardy act of Moses.
and snatching an Ensign out of the hands of one of the Barbarians, he throw
it to his companions that followed him. This accident made them to redouble
their fierceness against the enemy, and did with a kind of iealouzie so
incense and set spurs to their courages, that they came trouping thither on
all sides as men that bravely despised all danger, and fear of death. Then
began the slaughter and chiefest fear amongst the Infidels: then might you
have seen many a Moses: then might you have seen how the Turks by heaps and
companies forsook and lost their Standards: There was no more question or
contention who should keep the field: but every man thought it best to shift
for himself by running away. The misfortune that followed Debreas made him
forgetful of all good discipline and martial order, and deprived him of all
good counsel. For without all delay (as a man distracted with fury and fear)
he came poasting thitherwards: where, as he was carefully busied in rallying of
his squadrons, and seeking to renew the battle: Scanderbeg who had ever carried
an eye toward him, came upon him, and with his lance in the rest charged
him, and with the point thereof ran him clean through a little above the breast
even Debreas slain by Scanderbeg.
under the chinne: and he endeavoring to avoid the blow by bending aside his
head, received the staff wholly into his body: and he made an end both of his
life and of this battle. Being fallen from his horse his people covered him
with their bodies, as long as they thought him to be living, still looking that
he should remount again to horseback: but perceiving his body lie dead
without a soul, and that there was not now any man left which could vpbraid
them for flying away: they turned bridle immediately, and abandoned speedily
both their standards, their cariages, their Victory of Scanderbeg against the
army of Debreas.
companions and their enemies: and they held him to be most accursed, that in
flying was the hindermost. Those soldiers that served under Amese in the last
journey at Modrissa, having still in mind that adventure, as they fought very
warily and careful of their lives: so were they the foremost and most
fortunate in their flight: the which being made more certain by reason of the
daylight, so was it the more cruel and caused the greater bloodshed and
slaughter. For Musache on the one side, and Moses on the other pursuing and
pressing close upon them at their heels, did kill and cut off more of them in
the chase, then were slain in the field during the fight: and some of them
also were taken alive. Much more large and ample no doubt had this victory
been, at least in respect of them which were wounded, if the Christians had
been seconded with any Archers or Harguebuzziers: but more then their lances,
targets, and courtlaxes they had no other weapons to use upon the enemy. At
the length when they were gotten a good way within the Turkish confines, and
that the chase now seemed to be more dangerous to them that followed, then to
those which Sentence.
fled, Scanderbeg left pursuing of them, and gathered together his troops, who
were maruellously glad and joyful: and so he retired with his prisoners
without any loss Number of Turks stain in the battle of Pologue Victory not
bought but given to the Christians.
or damage, having not any one of his men either slain or wounded. Thus you
see by the strange success of this battle, how fortune disposes of the
purposes of men, and does sometimes favor them beyond all reason and
consideration. The Turks lost 4120 men: and therefore the Christians might
well say (as they might usually) that this victory was not bought but given.

The booty by order of the Prince, being brought forth in the common and open
sight of them all was equally divided amongst the soldiers: to the intent
that they which had continued the fury of the fight, by following the chase
upon the enemy, Debreas his horse and armor given to Moses by Scanderbeg in
honor of his valor and virtue.
without any care of sacking their camp, or spoiling of the dead, might not
sustain any loss or disadvantage. To Moses he gave with his own hand the
horse and armor of Debreas, with an honorable testimony likewise of his
great deserts and commendations. As for the rest, every one had a share, and
fared the better for this journey, and some of them had prisoners given unto
them. Amongst others, Musache his fortune was, to have a young Turk to his
prisoner, whose physiognomy and good countenance showed him to be both of
nobility and of courage. But between the master and the prisoner, there arose
forthwith a pleasant controversy, which gave occasion of laughter to all the
standers by, and I will impart the same unto you. The young man having some
speech with Musache concerning his ransom, demanded of him, what sum would
content him: in the end they agreed upon 200. crowns, A pleasant question
between Musache and a Turk his prisoner.
which the Turk presently taking out of a little bag paid, and told out unto
him: and afterward desiring leave to depart, the Epirot began to smile:
telling him, that he must seek elsewhere for some other money to make up his
ransom: that it was no reason he should think to pay him with his own money:
that all that coin, and what else soever was taken with him, did of right
belong unto him, and was in one and the same case and condition with his body,
and that a prisoner taken in the war, could not reserve nor challenge any thing
as his own. The Turk sometimes with reasons, and sometimes with entreatie
desired him to let him go. But (to make short) the matter was brought before
Scanderbeg, who purposely commanded both the one and the other of them to
allege what they could in defense of their right: and afterward turning him
to his people, he used these words.

Truly (said he) here is a pretty controversy, both of these plead for that
which Speech of Scanderbeg deciding a controversy between Musache and the
Turk his prisoner
is mine: the money Musache which we knew not of, we did not bestow upon thee:
nor you (sir youth) ought not to abuse us with this wile, who do well know,
that even the life wherewith thou breathest, is but borrowed, and depends on
our mercy: so far is it that thou can pretend any right to be reserved to
thy self in any thing. Notwithstanding there is no reason that I should be
judge in mine own cause: but who will not judge rightly in a matter of
liberty? and who will not set aside all rigor and rightes of war in favor
of a prisoner? To thee therefore Musache, we give of our own free motion all
that this prisoner has about him: and do thou as franckly and freely give him
his liberty: or rather, the duty of nature, on this condition, that if ever
hereafter he fall again into thy hand, thou shall dispose of him fully and
freely at thine own pleasure and discretion.

Thus this young Turk being very glad and exceeding joyful, that he had
gotten his liberty: and having also both his horse and his arms franckly
given him by Scanderbeg, departed, highly commending without ceasing, this his
bounty and liberality, praying unto God heartily to prosper both the King and
the estate of Albanie. The Christians trussing up their baggage, toward the
evening did retire thence into Dibria, where during the time of their abode,
(as it is commonly seen that when any enterprise succeeds happily unto men,
it lifts up their minds to affect Sentence.
greater matters,) the Albanois began to make a motion in a general council
touching their proceeding in the wars, and for the assaulting and winning of
some towns from the enemy. But in the end it was concluded for the best and
most expedient, that they should stay a while to see what the Turkish Monarch
would do after this discomfiture of his forces, least they should happen
incontinently to undertake an action, either with too much hastiness and
temeritie, or more dangerous then would easily be effected. Two months
therefore were limited for the discovering of that matter, and there were
espials dispersed throughout all parts: notwithstanding that there was no want
of fugitives both from Andrinople and other places, which came daily to yield
themselves to the Albanois. These things thus passed, Moses retired himself to
his garrison upon the frontiers: and Scanderbeg with Amese and the rest of his
Princes and Nobles, took his journey toward Croy.

In this mean time, the army of the Barbarians which had been broken and
overthrown, Mahomet and his Nobles greatly troubled and vexed at the
discomfiture of Debreas.
was returned and come to the presence of Mahomet, who though he saw them in a
most miserable plight, and distressed in all respects, yet took no pity nor
compassion of their estate. For first of all, both the Sultan and all the great
persons of his Court, were greatly troubled and agreeued at the flight of so
many sufficient and able men, saying openly and aloud, that they were people
enough to have restored the fortune of any battle, had it been never so
desperate and out of hope. Afterward, when as the great Turk came to enquire
of the particulars, where and in what place the battle had been fought, and
against what troops and numbers of the enemy: then was he much more enflamed
with rage and choler then before, commanding them out of his sight,
reproaching and blaming them incessantly, and exclaming against and detesting
their faintness, sloth, and cowardice. Moreover, the misfortune and mishappe
of Debreas caused those of his condition and calling, rather to be glad then to
grieve thereat: were it either because they did envy the reputation of his
valor and virtue: or that they did hate his audacious presumption. Mahomet
himself was exceedingly abashed at the success of this miracle, and was not
altogether free and exempted from fear. He could not be persuaded that
Scanderbeg with so small a company, durst enterprise to enter so far upon
his frontiers, and even in the open plains of Pologue to encounter with
Debreas. Notwithstanding finding that their testimonies did agree in all parts,
and that there was no difference nor disagreement in their tales; he durst not
call in question the truth of their reports. Touching the principal point,
which was, how to be revenged: he wanted not flatterers of all sorts, Sentence.
(an ordinary plague attending great Princes, and which does puff them up
with vanity) who by a certain reproachful and artificial interpretation, did
obscure and Spetches and persuasions of Mahomet his flatterers animating* him
against Scanderbeg
detract from the honor and deserts of the Christians, offering both their
persons and their lives to serve against them, and undertaking and promising,
that they would ouerreach and go beyond the Epirot, were he never so cunning
and well practiced in sleights and policies: that every place was not as
Modrissa: that the stars would not favor him in all places: that he should
not find every one to be an Amese, nor a Debreas, especially when that
Scanderbeg should see himself beset and assailed with such a troublesome Hydra
having so many heads: and that of each one which was cut off and overcome,
there should still arise another monster who would never cease to seek to
devour him. And were it that he were (as a man may say) even in the arms of
his Jesus: yet should he not be always in safety and security.

Mahomet did gladly give care to the good affection of his people, and he would
Mahomet deuiseth to corrupt some of Scanderbeg his subjects.
not openly gainesay nor contradict any one of them, that offered themselves so
willingly to these dangers: but the crafty Fox had another matter hammering
in his head: his brains were beating and devising upon another kind of
revenge, which might be wrought with less bloodshed and loss of his people:
namely, how he might oppress and confound this his adversary by some civil
and domestical war, and by stirring up against him the arms and ambushments
of some of his own subjects. For he knew, that where force of arms would not
prevail, there policy and other Sentence.
sleights of war ought to supply their defects. A course which he himself
had oftentimes put in practice with happy and good success against many
others, by following the tract which his father Amurath had trodden before him,
at such time as he impatronized himself upon the empire of Greece. And (such
are the ticklings and enticementes of men's desires, especially when they seek
for Empires and dominions) he easily promised unto himself and was persuaded,
that he should find some of the most inward and familiar friends of Scanderbeg,
who would be wrought and allured to be the authors and executioners of his
wicked practice: wherein he was not altogether deceived.

At that time there were many about Scanderbeg who were of great account and
authority with him, both in the administration of the estate, as also in the
wars. But as Moses did excel them all in the practice and experience of
arms, so was he in the highest degree of favor and reputation with his
Prince: and Scanderbeg loved and esteemed him above all the rest. This made the
Ottoman to have a desire to practice Mahomet seeks to undermine the faith of
Moses.
and work with this personage, and by the greatness of his fair and large
promises, to make a conquest of the fortress of his constancy, faith and
loialtie. One thing there was which he did hope would greatly further the
conuciance of this matter: and that was, because it was told him, that the
lands and possessions of Moses did bound and butte upon his confines,
especially toward Sfetigrade: supposing that this near neighborhood would
give him the more easy and ready access to have some speech and conference
with him: and that the whole matter might be handled the more conveniently and
the more secretly. Wherefore touching any further provisions to be made for the
wars, and to those vain offers and vaunts made by his Courtiers: he feigned
that upon some good considerations he would defer the revenge of his wrongs
and outrages in Epire, till another time and season, and then having
communicated this secret with one or two of his most private and faithful
Councillors, he wrote unto the Governor of Sfetigrade in a most cunning and
subtle manner, and the saying is, that he did the like to the Governor of
Alchria. But it is not much material whether he writ to them both or not: yet
I believe, that this web was weaued and this practice was begun, continued
and ended in one of those places only: neither was it wrought for all that
without great danger and difficulty: and the reason which makes me to think
so, is the quality of the case, and also for that the letters sent to Alchria
(if there were any) did never sort to any purpose and effect.

The Governor of Sfetigrade having received the letters which were sent unto
him, did peruse them very secretly, and he had a great desire to execute the
commandment of his sovereign as effectually as he might: for that by the
accomplishing of his will and pleasure, he was sure to become great, and to be
highly rewarded. The substance of the letters in regard of Moses was to this
effect: That he should deal Letters of Mahomet to the governor of Sfetigrade
willing him to practice with Moses to revolt from Scanderbeg.
with him in the name of Mahomet, and to put it to his choice, whether he would
accept of money, or else have preferment and advancement of estate and livings,
either with the Turks in the court of the Emperor, or (if he had rather) in
the realm of Albanie, upon this condition: That he should make away
Scanderbeg, or by some means cause him to be made away: or at the least by
leaving of his service to follow the arms and party of Ottoman. Many other
good speeches were added in the letters fit to persuade and induce him
thereunto, by which it was easy to be discerned what was further to be done in
the matter: albeit there was not any mention at all made of Moses. And it was
referred to the power and discretion of the governor to deal as the time and
the place should give him opportunity, and as he should judge to be most for
the profit and dignity of his majesty. The Barbarian forgot nothing of that
was enjoined him, but used singular dexterity, diligence, and discretion in
inuiting Moses to confer with him. And the better to attain thereunto, he
imparted this matter to a Christian one of his own household servants, and by
Nation an Albanois: putting him in hope, that it should be the mean to enrich
both him and his house for ever, if he could bring the Dibrian to this point to
have some speech and conference with him. This fellow therefore did the
governor send toward Moses. The night seemed to be the fittest time for the
effecting of this matter, during the A messenger sent to Moses from the
Governor of Sfetigrade to practice with him for his revolt.
which, this Epyrot taking his journey, and being skillful of all the places and
passages of the country, he never lost his way, but came directly to the place
where he found Moses with his garrison in the frontiers of the Province. The
Dibrian presently upon the coming of this messenger from the enemy, gave him
convenient opportunity to speak unto him, and withdrew him apart from all
other company; who before that he came to break with him any thing touching
his message or the cause of his coming, at the very first entreated him to
take the pains to come to Sfetygrade. Whereupon seeing him to refuse so to
do, and that he did in a manner laugh at the impudency of the Infidels, he
changed his course, and falling to flattering, and fair speeches, he made him
attentive to his talk: then entering into the matter, he discovered to him in
some sort the intention and mind of the Sultan. Moses gladly gave ear unto
him, and with a wonderful liking (such is the variety of men especially of
them that follow arms) he swallowed up the cunning the close bait of his own
praises: namely, when the messenger told him, that the great Turk did so
highly honor and esteem of him, that he thought him only of all the flower of
Epire, worthy to be solicited both by letters and by speeches. Reason would he
should rather have blushed for shame, to see him self only amongst so many
others (as a man forlorn and of a desperate hope) to be chosen and selected as
a fit instrument and occasion of so detestable and felonious an act, and of a
crime so hateful, vile and treacherous. But such is our corrupt desire of
earthly honors, and so ambitious are our thoughts, aspiring to glory and
Sentence.
Empire, that it makes us altogether to forget our selves and our duties.
Nevertheless for that time did Moses show him self both by his speeches, and
by his countenance to be such a one, that the subtle messenger could not tell
what to make of him, or whether he did approve or reprove that which had been
propounded unto him. Yet did this minister of Satan sufficiently conjecture of
the meaning and thoughts of the man, and therefore not detayning him with any
further discourse, but promising to return unto him again shortly, he took
his leave and returned to the Governor. It is commonly reported, that when
Moses was demanded by some of his soldiers, what communication had passed
between them, he answered, that it was a spy of the parts near about
Sfetigrade, which came to give him certain aduertisements, and that he was in
good hope by his aid and assistance to do the king good service and greatly
to further his attempts and purposes. The soldiers did easily believe what he
said, as not mistrusting any thing. Besides that, the habit and attire, and
the speech of the messenger being a Christian did seem to persuade and import
no less. And what reason had they but to credit Moses, whose faith and
fidelity had been so notably known and testified, and into whose hands the
whole estate of his Prince had been so often put and committed? especially in
the war of Dayna, when that Mustapha on the one side, and the Venetians on
the other side, did seek to have gotten the estate of Epire from him?
Notwithstanding the Dibrian was noted ever afterward to be very sad and
pensive, more then he was wont or usually accustomed: which proceeded (as I
suppose) of the remorse of conscience that seemed to touch him with a deep
consideration of the fact, being so weighty, difficult, and important. He was
mightily distracted and perplexed in his mind, sometimes his heart was touched
with the thoughts and remembrance of the courtesy and humanity of his prince,
who deserved no such unkind and wicked part, and with the greatness of the
authority and pre-eminence which he had about Scanderbeg, wherewith any other
besides him would have held him self highly contented, sometimes again he
considered the excessive greatness and rewards offered him by Mahomet,
especially the crown and scepter presented unto him, a thing so much desired
and affected of miserable mortal men, and so sweet a thing doethe think it to
sit aloft, and to be preferred above other men. But Sentence.
in the midst of these ^^^^ meditations, and in this variety of his thoughts
and cogitations, he did with great devotion attend the return of his espiall:
a manifest argument that his heart was corrupted. O most impious and wicked
ears, that could so easily be drawn and allured to hearken so long unto so
mischievous a message! O most ingrate and unthankful Moses, whose inconstancy
could cause thee to violat thy faith and loyalty, and to conspire against thy
country, against thy Prince, against thy friends and companions, against thy
religion, against thy own dignity and honor, and against the security of thy
own estate, upon a vain hope of some idle conceited good hap, and of a thing
merely doubtful and uncertain?

Whilst the Dibrian did remain thus perplexed and turmoiled with the
uncertainty of his own thoughts, behold our gentle messenger is again
returned, plentifully furnished and provided, not only with words far more
sweet and plausible, but with Moses perverted and corrupted to become a
traitor to Scanderbeg.
rich gifts and sumptuous presents: yet I do not find that Moses did accept
of any of them, but that only his mind was now thoroughly possessed with a
disposition enclining to infidelity and treason. Notwithstanding the answer
which he made to the messenger, did sufficiently discover the malady of his
mind: for he willed him to Speech of Moses to the Turkish messenger.
come no more into his presence, that he did most humbly thank the Sultan for
his great favor, and good will, and promised him so to carry and demean
himself, that from thenceforward he should not find him to be his enemy. Thus
whilst that Scanderbeg being ignorant of the counsels of Mahomet, does send
abroad espials on all sides, to sound and search out his determinations, the
Infidelles are plotting and devising how to work him a greater mischief, and
to ouerwhelme him with a danger far more pernicious.

It has been before touched, how that both Scanderbeg and his subjects, did
delay Scanderbeg determines to have the aid of Italians in the wars.
and put off the war, and the besieging of towns for a season, to a time
then prefixed and appointed: which being now expired, and no news of any
motions or tumults heard of from Andrinople, but that all things were in good
rest and quietness; the king of Albany bethought and devised with him self
what expedition were best to be undertaken, and what things were requisite to
have it well and orderly executed. To this end he was resolved (if he might) to
aid him self with the succors of the Italians, considering, that though his
subjects were excellent in fighting of maine battles, and in combatting hand to
hand in the plain field: yet did he not think them to be fit or sufficient
for the assaulting of holds, and the forcing of towns, and such like
services. Alphonsus King of Sicily and Naples (of whom mention has been often
made) did keep his Court continually at Naples, which was not far distant
from thence. And for as much as not only Scanderbeg, but in a manner all
Christendom, did use this Prince with a kind of familiarity, he took care to
use the help of no other, but of him only; assuring him self, that of all
the Princes and Potentates Christian, he should not find any more willing nor
more ready to aid and assist him. For this cause before he would proclaim
any leauy or muster of men within his Province, he caused two good and strong
ships to be rigged, trimmed, and made ready: which being richly furnished and
fraughted with many excellent and sumptuous presents, he sent with two of the
greatest and noblest persons of his kingdom unto Alphonsus with letters
written in most familiar and pleasant manner. Some afffrme, that because he
would find him the more ready to send him succors, he did require Alphonsus
by this Ambassade, to receive him into his safeguard and protection: but the
Epistle ensuing speaks not a word of any such matter, neither do I dare to
auerre it for truth. The tenor of those letters were as follows.

To the most noble and victorious Prince Alphonsus king of Arragon, Naples, and
Sicilie: Scanderbeg king of the Epirots sends health and prosperity.
Our soldiers (most Catholic King) know how to fight with men only in the
field: but for the assaulting of walls and holds, they are utterly ignorant.
You Letters of Scanderbeg to Alphonsus king of Naples etc.
Italians (as I hear) are very skillfull in that kind of service, and you
love it well: this is the cause that we at this time have need of your good
aid, which we desire you to impart unto us. The Infidelles are possessed of
certain of our towns in Epire: and I have for a long time had a singular
desire to pluck this thorn (if God be so pleased) out of my foot, but the
continual impedimentes and hinderaunces of the wars, having ever withheld
me, I have not been able to this day to bring it to any good pass. Wherefore
to the intent I might accomplish my desire, I have made choice of this
opportunity: being most fit both in regard of the season now present, as also of
the ley sure and rest which Mahomet has permitted us, whose fury we have now
repressed in two several combattes and battelles. You may guess by few words
what it is that we have need of, all other things are in a readiness, only
we stay for succors and aid from you, which (if it shall please your Majesty)
you may send unto us: namely Harguebushiers and Crossebowes, such as are
skillful to fight aloof, and to trouble the enemy a far off: for of other
soldiers, our dominions are sufficiently well furnished. But o how happy may
I account Naples and Sicily which are governed by such a king as my Alphonsus,
from whence as out of a treasury, a man may have choice of all presidentes and
examples of virtue. If we have need of your people either in peace or in war:
both our estate has been furthered by your laws, and our wars have been
maintained by your arms. For my part, I do so highly esteem of your love and
good will, and the memory of your exceeding great benefits does remain so
sacred and inviolable in my mind, that many times I wish (though perhaps
therein I ouershoot my self) that your fortune and estate were such, as you
might have occasion to try and prove, rather then to purchase and tie your
friends unto you. For so should I be able by some certain and evident proof
to testify my devotion and ready service, and the entire affections of my
unfeigned love toward you.


The Ambassadors having had their dispatch with these letters, Scanderbeg made
a Scanderbeg visits his garrison with Moses
journey into Dibria, where the garrison then lay, and had in his company Amese
his nephew, Musache his brother in law, and some other of his Lords and
nobles, with whom he purposed there to consult upon the estate of his affairs,
and to take some order for the leauying of an army. Being arrived there, he
demanded of Moses, whether he had learned any news that concerned the estate,
being so near and continual a neighbor to the enemy? His answer was: That
he heard of none, but (quoth he) I Speeches and dissimulation of Moses to
Scanderbeg.
have had conference of late with a man of Sfetigrade, to see if there could be
found any way or mean to get that place from the enemy, but he has protested
and sworn unto me with great oaths, that it is so carefully guarded, and so
circumspectly governed with watch and ward day and night, and it is so
abundantly furnished and provided of al necessaries, that it is not possible
by any means to obtain it. For the Dibrian was in great fear and doubt, least
that Scanderbeg should enterprise the recovery of Sfetigrade, and by that
means he should not be able to keep his promise made to the Sultan, wherefore
his chiefest care was so to persuade with Scanderbeg, that he might turn his
mind wholly to the siege of Belgrade.

Mahomet having heard what had passed between Moses and the man of Sfetigrade,
was much troubled in his mind, considering he had no assurance by any pledge
or gage of the faith of Moses. Notwithstanding being then pressed with other
cares more urgent concerning Greece, which at that time called him to arms, he
surceased for a time the expedition of Epire, because he could not conveniently
go thither him self in person, nor yet send any great forces sufficient to
atchieue and compass a matter of that importance. On the other side to provoke
the enemy or rather to feed him still with light invasions and running Camps,
he held it to be a course neither correspondent Mahomet wileth the governor of
Sfetigrade to hold on his practice with Moses.
to his greatness, nor yet for his advantage or profit. Wherefore without any
more ado sending other letters unto the Governor, he willed him to have in
mind what he had given him in charge, and both commending his diligence, and
spurring him on in his good deuoire, he encouraged him to persevere as he had
begun, and to entertain the Christian with his wonted persuasions, not
troubling him self with any thing else for that time touching the war of
Albany.

Whilst matters stood thus in rest and quietness, Alphonsus received both the
Ambassade Succors sent by Alphonsus king of Naples to Scanderbeg.
and the letters of Scanderbeg very honorably, and with all speed caused men
to be leauied according as the have of the time would permit. There were
mustered to the number of 1000. footmen, 500. harguebussiers, and the rest
crossebowes. The king would willingly have increased the number, but that the
Ambassadors showed him that those would suffice, because the places which were
to be besieged were but of a small circuit and compass: besides that the
Province of Epire was well stored with good and expert archers. Nevertheless
in stead of greater forces, they desired him to furnish them with certain
engines of assault, as artillery and bars of iron, all which were granted
unto them, and he appointed them also certain Cannoniers for the service of
the ordinance. The king Alphonsus also not contented with these offices of
amity, did add thereunto a great quantity of corn, and a huge sum of money,
to defray the charge of the war, providing also two other vessels richly
furnished and appointed: In the which the soldiers being embarked upon the
Adriaticke sea, or the gulf of Venice, Gilbert Ortafan a knight of Naples, sent
by Alphonsus to the aid of Scanderbeg.
(where the passage was not above 60. miles over) he recommended them to God
and to the winds. Within a while after, he sent a new supply by Gilbert
Ortafan a knight of great valor and experience, by whom also he sent letters
unto Scanderbeg: wherein first he rendered him thanks for the excellent gifts
and presents which had been sent him. Then highly praising and commending him
for the confidence and good opinion Answer of Alphonsus king of Naples to the
leeters of Scanderbeg.
which he had of his affairs, he exhorted him to use him as his own, and
with officious terms of great amity, he endeavored to increase that opinion in
him. And withal most bountifully and liberally did he proffer and promise him,
that all his best means should be ever ready to do him pleasure. As for the
soldiers sent unto him, merely he made him this answer: That the Italians
were expert and very skillful not only in combatting with men upon the walls of
strong holds and defenced towns, but with Ladies and Gentlewomen in their
private chambers: That the Albanois ought therefore to be careful and to look
well unto it, least that they whom they had invited to fight with their enemies
a far off, should be found to enter combat near home, and at hand within
their own houses.

Our Italians being carried with a good and prosperous gale of wind which blew
at South, had a pleasant passage, and in few days arrived in Epire. The
soldiers being set on shore with their baggage, arms, and furniture, went
presently to Croy, whilst the Prince of Albany was yet in Dibria about the
mustering of his soldiers, (which was well near finished) and watching
carefully to hear, if there were news of any new motions or stirrings from
the parts of Turkey. All things being ready provided and nothing left undone
that was necessary, he returned with his army toward Croy, there to join with
the Italian forces, of whose coming he was well assured, and to make provision
of some other necessaries requisite for the service that was intended. Moses
was left at Dibria with the garrison which consisted of 1000. horse, and as
many footmen, though Scanderbeg were very unwilling thereunto, and would
gladly have had his company in that voyage, having many times invited him to go
with him to that service, and offering to appoint some other in his place for
the keeping of the borders: were i^ that he doubted of some future mischief,
as oftentimes the dexterity Moses seeks by excuses to exempt himself from
going to the siege of Belgrade.
of our spirits does cause us (though we know not why nor wherefore) to
foresee things to come. Many others also entreated and persuaded with him, to
go with them to the siege of Belgrade, but he being too precise and scrupulous
in his faith and promise unlawfully given to an Infidel, did by shifts and
excuses cunningly exempt himself from that service, telling them that it was
not convenient, that that quarter of the country should be left to the mercy
of the Barbarian: for Belgrade being situated on the other side of the
country, was distant from Dibria more then one hundred and forty miles,) and
that no man could more faithfully and carefully guard his lands and possessions
then him self. That if they had gone to besiege Sfetigrade which was near
hand, he would have borne them company: that it was not more discontenting to
any then to him self, that he could not be at the siege, where he knew both
himself might purchase honor, and his soldiers might find great profit and
benefit: that he was of the opinion, that he should have enough to do, and
that Mahomet would not lie idle, but as soon as he should hear that Belgrade
were besieged, he would perhaps invade that part of the country, and renew the
war upon the Albanois, purposely to withdraw and divert their camp from
before Belgrade. There was none but did allow of these his reasons: and his
treacherous counsel was generally approved of those who were ignorant of the
secret thoughts of his heart. In so much as he had authority given him to
increase the garrison, according to the exigence of the affairs and the
necessity of the time.

The king of Epire returning toward Croy, the Italian bands sent unto him by
Alphonsus Neapolitan Ambassade and succors entertained and feasted at Croy by
Scanderbeg.
went to meet him on the way, and receiving him with great joy and triumph,
they conveyed him into the city, the residue of the army being willed to encamp
without the walls. The Ambassadors having delivered the effect of their
charge, did consigne the money which they had brought into his hands, together
with the kings letters: which being openly read in the public assembly, gave
occasion of laughter unto all the audience. Castriot with a long Oration
magnified the liberality of the King of Naples, and his singular amity and
friendship toward the people of Albanie: and afterward gave order that
the strange companies should be entertained each according to the estate of
his degree and calling, and that they should be welcomed and feasted with
public banquets and triumphs, whilst that the commanders and chief officers
of the army did take order for the mounting of the artillery and for the
providing of cariages and other necessary instruments. All things being in a
readiness, Scanderbeg issued forth into the field, the whole multitude
conueying him to his Camp, where first of all having taken a general view and
muster of his army, and public prayers and processions being solemnly
performed before their departure, for a prosperous and happy return, and for
the victory: so as the soldiers being now ready to march, only attending the
stroke of the drum and the sound of the trumpet, Scanderbeg spoke unto them
in this manner.

This is now the eleventh year of our continual trauelles (my good
soldiers) Oration of Scanderbeg to his army being to march to the siege of
Belgrade.
which we have sustained for the recovery and possession of our country of
Epire, and for the fear and dwellings of our auncesters which were lost unto
the Barbarians, rather by a certain kind of fatal necessity, then by any
default or want of courage either in them or us. The time is now come that we
must employ our whole power and endeavors to di^nest these Infidels, and to
expel them wholly out of our country, and with no less glory to impose the
yoke upon the necks of our enemies, then we have already by the divine clemency
and your unspeakable prowess, shaken it off from our own shoulders. If the
life and the death of Amurath have heretofore given you a large and ample
subject of glory: you have now a fitter occasion and a more noble matter to
purchase honor. And it may be that his son is reserved for your greater
glory. You have had even of late some pledge and experience of your good
fortune, and the tyrant gave you some proof and trial thereof, whilst that
with the one hand (as it were) holding the funerals of his father, with the
other he demanded peace of you, yet under a certain color and honest show of
tribute. The which we having denied him, he would with a strong hand have
enforced and exacted of us, sending hither certain of his captains and
soldiers as Collectors of that his tribute, throughout all this Province. But
the valleys of Mocrea, and the fields of Pologue, can testify that they had
but ill payment, and that they made but a bad audit. The consideration hereof
ought to spur us on to follow and pursue that which remains yet undone.
Amongst the rest the town of Belgrade does seem to promise us no less good
success: in the siege whereof, we will continue as long as your selves shall
think convenient: in such sort that if either the fortune of the war, or the
obstinacy of the defendants, do protract and draw it out at length, we are not
determined to continue there longer then till the end of Autumn. Howbeit I am
in good hope, that we shall not be enforced to stay there to the end of that
season, considering both your accustomed valor, the flower of so many goodly
troops, such great store of engines, and pieces for battery, wherewith the
King of Sicily has most bountifully furnished us. Besides you know that
Belgrade is a town of Christians, peopled with our own kinsmen and friends,
and that Amurath after the death of Theodore Corona the last Lord of that
Theodore Corona, Lord of Belgrade in Bulgary.
city, did traitorously seize and possess him self of the same. This place is
yet full of her ancient citizens, who do only attend to be freed and delivered
out of the servitude of those Infidels. I am much deceived if they do not
greatly further and favor our atte^pts, whereby the enemy shall be assailed
both within and without. Go to therefore (my good friends and companions in
arms) march on a Gods name resolutely and courageously, succor them that
attend in expectation of your virtue: at leastwise spare not to enforce both
them and the residue, if you find them perverse and obstinate.

With the end of this Oration, there began a great cry and clamor of all the
army with exceeding joy and gladness: then began the companies to set forward,
but Scanderbeg Tanusee sent to begin the siege of Belgrade.
commanded them to stand, and that every man should keep him self still in
his quarter: for neither had he as yet sent forth any vauntcurrours (as he was
accustomed) to discover the country: nor the Marshalles were not yet departed
to choose a place for their camp to lodge in. Tanusee had commission to this
effect, who being accompanied with three thousand good horse departed
immediately without any further delay, endeavoring by his diligence to prevent
the enemy. Then Scanderbeg sending his baggage and cariages before, did follow
after with his maine army. The fame and report of this enterprise was already
gotten to Belgrade, and the citizens were thoroughly informed of every thing in
particular, which was the cause that the Christians, were deprived of all
means to do them any damage, either by secret ambushme^ts, or by open force
and violence: for the peisants were retired into the strong holds with the
chiefest of their corn and other provisions, and having left nothing in the
fields (for it was in the heart of summer) they had laid up all in garners
within the walls, insomuch that the soldiers (naturally addicted to covetousness
and desire of pillage, and not finding any matter fit to prey upon, or to make
boot of) would not have abstained from ouerrunning all the country, and from
destroying and burning al with sword and fire, if Tanusee had not hindered and
withheld them: telling them, that he had no such charge nor commission given
him by the general. Wherefore keeping good watch and ward on all sides, he
lodged his troops quietly and without any disturbance under the walls, without
doing any outrage or injury to the inhabitants, either in word or deed. Neither
did they in like manner in any sort hinder or contradict their approach, but
Belgrade besieged.
held themselves still and quiet within the town, without any stur or motion
made against them: yet did they in the mean time carefully provide for all
things within the city, disposing their courts of guard and sentinels, and
appointing each man to his place.

The garrison of Turks within Belgrade was very strong, consisting of a
thousand Number of Turks in the garrison of Belgrade.
men at the least: the common people being Christians were more in number by a
third part, yet altogether unfit and unapt to bear arms. For as touching the
weaker sex of women and children, they took no great care to suffer them to
remain and abide within the town: but concerning the citizens, there was
great difference and disagreement of opinions amongst the soldiers, whether
they should permit them to continue there still, or to put them forth. Some
suspicion they had of their faith and fidelity, by reason that their
ceremonies and religion was different from the Turkish Turks within Belgrade
are doubtful of the faith of the Citizens.
profession. Notwithstanding this greatly diminished that suspicion, in that
they had been suffered so long within the city, and had been friendly and
courteously used by the Ottoman, and none of them had been ever touched or
suspected with any show or token of treason. Besides that, they saw in their
own hands (as it were) certain and assured pledges of their faith: even
their wives, their children, their parents, and all their fortunes and
possessions. The consideration of these contrary respects, did make them in a
doubt what to do and to determine of them. The Governor being willing to
retain them within the town, and yet to have some more assured gage of their
faith, who were but as strangers unto them: that he might make all sure: and
that fighting with the enemy, he need not to doubt any civil or domestical
rebellion, Con^etence between the Governor and Citizens of Belgrade upon the
suspicion conceived of their ^^ faith by the^ of the garrison.
caused certain of the chiefest and most ancient of the Christians to come
unto him, with whom, after he had taken them aside, he reasoned and discoursed
a long time in close and covert terms, touching this war and siege begun by
the Albanois: and in the end discovering unto them the deliberation of the
soldiers, he aduertized them, that the matter could not be passed over without
some sedition, if the minds of the garrison were not satisfied with some sure
bond of their faith and fidelity. That he for his part did never make any
doubt of their truth and good deuoire, nor at that present had any mistrust
thereof, nor had less hope in their arms, then in himself and those of the
garrison. That nevertheless it was his duty to admit and hearken to the
plaints of the others, and to do them reason in their demands, whom it
especially concerned, and to whom it principally appertained to bethink them
selves how they might be assured to have but one only enemy. The Belgradians
began to complain and to find themselves agreeued, that this wrong should be
done them, who had never committed Answer of the citizens of Belgrade to the
speeches of the Governor.
any act, whereby the Turks should either seek to bring them into further
servitude, or should take occasion to conceive that evil opinion of them: that
they knew no reason whence this their mistrust should proceed, but only
because they were Christians, and of the race of the Albanois: But therein they
did them apparaunt and great wrong, to think that they did esteem of their
safety more under others: considering that they could not possibly hope f^^
more liberty, nor a more frank and free permission of their ceremonies and
religion, then Mahomet even to that day had graciously granted unto them. That
all other pretenses were but vain and frivolous, by which they were charged to
love and to esteem better of Scanderbeg, for that the town of Belgrade was
never any part of his dominion nor under his subjection. And that the
Belgradians did disdain the rule and government of the Castriots: insomuch
that they would endure any other indignity, rather then to be brought under his
command and authority: that they had then had some appearance and likelihood of
truth to be afraid of their faith, if there had been left alive any of the
issue of Theodore, who might have presented himself to the communalty, which
commonly is desirous of their ancient estate and condition: but now that he
was dead and gone, all the alliance and society of the Albanois was together
with him dead and extinguished: and that ever since his death they had
constantly and with singular good affection, accepted and endured the Empire of
the Ottomans: to whom they had vowed and consecrated their country, their
liberty, their wives and children, with their bodies, goods, and livings.
Other gages or better assurances they had not to give them, or to bind their
faith more strictly and assuredly to them of the garrison, then that which they
had already given unto Amurath. Citizens of Belgrade give hostages to the
Turks for assurance of their faith.


The Barbarian being more intentive to observe their countenances, then the
outward show of their words, did receive their protestation with great joy
and contentment. Nevertheless he carried him self, and framed his speeches
with such cunning and dexterity, that before they departed from his company,
they promised him a good number of hostages: which being delivered, were put in
sure and safe keeping, within the castle or fortress where the Turks only
commanded. Willingly he would have transported them to Andrinople, the better to
be assured of them, but he was not able so to do, by reason that the siege laid
about the town, did hinder him from the same. Matters being thus settled and
pacified within Belgrade, and all suspicion being now extinguished, the
companies, the watches, the ports being reuisited, and every part and place
of the town being surueyed, and a strong Court of guard being appointed upon
the market place to serve against all necessities and sudden occurrences
whatsoever, the Governor was desirous to encourage and hearten both the
citizens and the soldiers: and to the intent he might quicken, and stir up
their minds to behave themelsues faithfully and valiantly, he used these or the
like speeches.

If there be any thing at this present, which a Captain ought to speak unto
his Oration of the Governor of Belgrade to his people being besieged.
soldiers: or if by my speeches (o Belgradians) you were to have your courages
confirmed and stregthened: the enemy now planted before your eyes, has
prevented me of all such speeches and persuasions. For there is no exhortation
more effectual, no spurs are more sharp, even to the greatest cowardes,
then the danger it self which is threatened by the enemy: neither is it
their guise to inuit or allure, to persuade and exhort, to encourage and
confirm the minds of men, as Captains use to do unto their soldiers, and
as I do unto you. But they do press and constrain you to arms, they hold
their naked swords to your throats, they bring cords and irons to bind and
mannacle you, if you show your selves faint hearted and negligent. Me thinks
I see now insolent and proud Scanderbeg, cruel and bloody Scanderbeg: me
thinks I hear him summoning you to bondage and thraldom. Stop your ears, I
conjure you in the name of God, stop your ears: hearken not unto his speeches,
which tend to nothing but your shame and infamy. Valiant men use not to
answer with their mouths and with their lips, but with their weapons, and
with their hands ready armed. We have not put on arms to be forced with
words, we have not shu^^nd rammed up our gates, to open them again as men
amazed or astonished. Let our enemies then make way for themselves, if their
fortune so serve them. For our parts, we are not to fear it, no more then
that the heavens are like presently to fall upon us. Was it possible, that
Sfetigrade (being seated even in the very midst of our enemies, and being
furnished with lesser numbers) was able to deride the Brauadoes of the
Albanois, and to maintain the immortal name of the Ottomans in Epire? Nay
(let the virtue even of our enemies, serve you for an example) was it possible
that Croy should be able so cheerefullie, and so audaciously, to hold out and
make resistance against the puissance of all Asia and Europe? Could she (her
walls being overthrown, her fortifications being raised) only by her notable
perseueraunce and constancy merit the perpetual and everlasting title of
glory? and shall we in the abundance of all things, and having so near an
hope of aid and succors from Andrinople: shall we (I say) be afraied at the
sight of a handful of base companions? Shall not we dare to look upon them
without terror of astonishment, who are no other then an infamous troop of
thieves and freebooters?

This short Oration did so chafe the hearts of the soldiers, that besides
infinite vaunts and brauadoes (as is usual in such cases) some of them flocked
together about the Governor, and with great instance besought him to grant
them leave to sally forth, and to set upon the enemy: but he refused to yield
unto their demand, by reason he was advertised that Scanderbeg did approach,
between whose arrival and these accidents, Scanderbeg before Belgrade.
there was little or no great space. It was about the tenth hour, that the
troops of the Albanois did appear before the town, and did encampe them
selves close together in a large plain under the walls. First they took
their repast all at their ease, and then afterward they parted their
companies, each having their several quarter appointed Number of Scanderbeg
his army before Belgrade.
them. The numbers of Scanderbeg his army, was 15000. men, 8000. horse, 7000.
foot. They were placed round about over the plain, and upon the mountain,
the which being not very high nor steep, did serve as well for the horsemen to
encampe in, as the footmen. And for this cause was the artillery planted there
also in diverse places fit and convenient, to make a battery against the walls.
By that time that all things were ordained in a readiness, the night ouertooke
them, the audacity and fierceness of the besieged was much abated, by the
terrible show and aspect of our people, and especially by the view of those
pieces and engines prepared for the battering and assaulting of the town.

Immediately upon the break of day, the ordinance began to thunder most
furiously, and the Curtin in some places began to be dismanteled, and the
Flankers to Belgrade battered.
be razed: whereupon the defendants both falling to consultation, and yet
laboring the whilst to repair the breaches, were for a time divided into
contrary opinions, being in doubt whether it were best to demand a Parley or
not, before that the enemy should come to the scaling of the walls, and that
the fury of the assault should bebegunne. For they were sore affrayed, lest
they should not be able to maintain the place: and if in the middle and heat
of the fight they should intend it, that then the soldiers being carried away
with the hope of victory, would not be persuaded to yield unto it. But the
Governor would not in any case consent thereunto: telling them, That the
peril as yet was not so great, and that they should at all times find
opportunity enough to take that course so vile and ignominious: whereupon they
were satisfied, and surceased that motion. The next day likewise passed in the
same manner, for that the breach was not yet assaultable, nor sufficient to
receive the soldiers, and Scanderbeg caused the battery to continue still
with great fury. And after two days were spent in that sort, and that the
ditches were now filled up with the ruins of the wall: he withdrewe his
ordinance from that side where the town was made least defensible, and for
that it was now time to use the fury of his soldiers, he appointed the next
day to give an assault, and to make a trial of their valor, commanding them
to be ready by the break of the next morning: which was done accordingly. As
the ensigns were ready displayed, and that the soldiers with great cries
and clamours began to march in good order and resolution, certain Belgradians
demand a truce
of the town came forth suddenly and met them: who being conducted to the
presence of the Prince, required to have truce; which was soon and easily
granted them. Afterward demanding what their composition should be, if they
did yield them selves: Such (quoth Scanderbeg) as is due to men that do yield:
to wit, their lives saved, and free liberty to depart with their armor, bag
and baggage: as for the rest, it did belong to the victours. The two messengers
being returned, and their answer openly reported, the defendants were
generally sad and sorrowful, that so hard conditions should be imposed upon
them, all things being as yet sound and in good estate: whereas if their case
had been desperate, and the town forced to the uttermost, even they that were
in a manner vanquished, might easily obtain such an agreement. The garrison
were pensive and sore grieved: fear and despite made them to have many
motions and conceits in their minds. The Christians said never a word,
notwithstanding that by the articles propounded for their composition, they
saw they should be deprived both of their goods and their houses. True it is,
that they were in a good hope, that if the place came into the hands of the
Christians, they should obtain of the King of Albanie what soever they would
demand. And therefore they made no show how they were affected, either on
the one side or the other, nor what they thought of the conditions, for fear
lest they should renew and revive the suspicion that had been before conceived
of them. Being demanded of the Governor what their opinion was, they refused
to show their minds, giving him Governor of Belgrade consulteth with the
citizens upon the conditions offered by Scanderbeg. Answer of the citizens of
Belgrade to the Governor.
only this answer: That they did expect from him not interrogatories, but
commandments: that whatsoever he should judge to be for the honor and profit
of all in general, that would they maintain and ratify, both armed and
disarmed. A great part of that day was spent in consultations: at last it was
concluded, that they should demand a truce and abstinence from arms for one
whole month, during which time if there came no succors, that then they would
submit them selves to the conditions and offers which were propounded. They
were in hope that Mahomet would not endure this shame and infamy, but would
either be there himself in person, or else would send some succors with all
speed. For before the coming of Tanusee, they had aduertized him of the
preparations made against them. Thus by this policy and device they did hope
to preserve their liberty and their town without any bloodshed or loss at
all. And if the Christian did deny to condescend to this agreement, that then
each man should be resolute, and prepare him self with a good courage to the
defense of their walls, and to use their uttermost obstinacy against so
obstinate an enemy. The messengers being sent back with these capitulations to
the camp of the Christians, Scanderbeg made no other account of these
demaundes, but reputed them worthy to be laughed at, willing them either to be
better advised, and that with speed, or else to prepare them selves to the
extremity of a general assault. In the end when he saw that they were so
fully and firmly determined, as they would not abate so much as five days of
the delay and respite which they demanded, he grew into greater choler: but
the night coming upon them, did put off the conclusion thereof for that
instant. Scanderbeg calling a Counsel to consult and deliberate upon the
matter, some of his chief Lords and eldest Captains were of opinion: That
Speeches of some of the Nobles and Captains of Scanderbeg: persuading him to
accept the offers of the Belgradians.
he should not altogether reject these demaundes, but that he should sound the
besieged even to the last point, whether they would abridge any part of that
time. They alleged the difficulties that would impeach them from carrying of
the place: for that the top of the mountain (whereon the city was seated)
did not for the most part admit and give any easy access unto those that
should labor to clime the same: and that the great stony rocks naturally
arising in many places round about the town, and being wrought by art into the
circuit of the walls, and so serving for a fortification to the town in many
places, would easily scorn all the force and violence of their ordinance, and
make them of no power nor virtue: in regard whereof it might be an occasion
that the siege might be of long continuance. They alleged moreover, that how
soever it fell out, and whether the truce were either granted or denied to the
defendaunts, yet they believed that the Sultan would not fail, to aid and to
send them succors: that the danger would be much greater and more to be
feared, if he should come and find them wearied and sore labored, whereas if
he came not at all, or that he did foreslow his coming, they might then
obtain the town without any bloodshed, and without any loss or hazard of
their people: or in case he did come in good time to their rescue, yet they
might then take their choice both of the time and the occasion, according as it
should offer it self: that all things would fall out conveniently and to his
advantage in the fight, and would be to the furtherance of his victory, and to
the greatness of his glory. That he had with as small forces as those then
present, given a memorable overthrow to Haly Bassa. Moreover, that Mahomet in
regard of his covetous desire and insatiable ambition to the Empire of
Constantinople, had clean forgotten the war of Epire. And they supposed that
the Belgradians did demand this time of truce, for the delivery of their town,
to no other end and purpose, but only because the king of Turks should not
blame them for yielding it up so hastily and shamefully, and to the intent,
when they should be cast out of their dwellings, and spoiled of all their
substance, they might be thought worthy both of pardon and compassion.
Scanderbeg smiling at these their allegations, replied unto them in this manner.

I see (quoth he) that the Albanians are glutted with so many victories, that
they are Answer of Scanderbeg to the perswasio^s of his Chiefetaines, touching
the granting of truce to the Belgradians
now become delicate and effeminate: and that as the frosts and cold of the
last winter were unpleasing unto them, so the heat of the Summer does now
annoy them. They have need to be visited with some misaduenture (God grant
that it happen not unto them) to chastise them for their sloth and negligence.
Besides, who will not condemn us of over much credulity? If we remember, the
like fraud was practiced against us heretofore by them of Sfetigrade, and they
deluded us in the same manner. What think you is then to be done, when the
prefixed time of the truce being expired, you shall find either their deceit
secretly hidden to be discovered: or that their minds shall be altered and
changed? We shall then abide hard penance for our light credulity, and in
vain shall we repent the loss of the time past: and we shall be constrained
in the mean time to depend wholly upon the pleasure and faith of our enemies.
And how soever there be many things alleged touching the difficulty of the
siege, and the occupations of the Sultan, yet ought not we for all that to
defer that which the vrgency of our affairs does require to be done. And if
it happen that whilst we are busied in forcing of the town, there do appear
any likelihood ofstirs from Andrinople, we have forces sufficient both to
defend our selves, and to secure us from their attempts. Besides that, Dibria
also is sufficiently assured with the garrison which Moses has in a readiness
upon those frontiers.

After the matter had been long debated and discussed to and fro,
notwithstanding Truce for sixteen days granted to the^ of Belgrade.
any thing that had been said to the contrary, Scanderbeg was content in the
end to subscribe to the opinion of the greatest number. As touching the time,
there was some difference between them and the infidels, many matters being
argued and disputed on both parts: but in the end they agreed upon a truce
for sixteen days. The capitulation being thus accorded and concluded,
Scanderbeg took not more care of any thing, then to set good watch and ward
on all sides. And therefore over and above the ordinary scoutes disposed and
ordained by Tanusee, he chose out five and twenty watchful and diligent
soldiers, whom he appointed to keep upon the top of a certain mountain not
far from the camp, for the more surety of his troops* to the intent, that
the enemy being discovered by them a far off, and notice thereof given to
the camp, by fires and lights held up aloft in the air, themselves also
should immediately give the alarm, retiring speedily into the camp. By means
whereof the soldier being certified, and having warning of the coming of the
enemy, should have some time to arm them selves, and to put them selves in a
readiness to fight. Furthermore, because his companies should encampe more at
their ease, and by lying at large might recreat them selves from the parching
and vehement heat of the sun: he him self with Amese and certain of his
Nobles, lodged upon the mountain next the town, retaining for his regiment
three thousand horse and a thousand foot: and he disposed all things with
singular providence and discretion, planting certain pieces of ordinance right
opposite over against Belgrade, which were always kept in a readiness, for
fear lest they of the town should make any sallie and invade him on a
sudden. Musache and Tanusee with the rest of the army were commanded to
encampe in the plain underneath him, for their greater ^ase and commodity.
The soldiers also were willed to abstain from arms, and to rest them selves
from all actions of hostility, till such time as the days of truce limited to
the inhabitants, were fully ended and expired.

The end of the seventh book.
THE EIGHT BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
Mahomet having undertaken the conquest of Constantinople, and marching against
it with a mighty army, upon the news of the siege of Belgrade stays his
journey, and sends Sebalias to relieve Belgrade: who surprizeth the army of
the Christians, and raises the siege. Scanderbeg makes head against him. The
battle of Belgrade between Scanderbeg and Sebalias. The particular combat of
Scanderbeg with Acmath and Barach two Turks, who having vowed his destruction
to Mahomet, are both slain by Scanderbeg. Sebalias and the Turks are put to
the retire. Scanderbeg withdraws his army into the confines of Epyre. Moses
reuolteth from Scanderbeg to Mahomet. Sebalias returns to Andrinople. Tanusee
sent by Scanderbeg to bury the Christians slain at Belgrade, spoileth and
destroieth all the country. Scanderbeg is visited with Ambassadors from diverse
Princes to comfort him upon his misfortunes. Moses is sent by Mahomet with an
army against Scanderbeg. Constantinople is besieged by Mahomet. The description
of the city and manner of the siege. The negligence and covetousness of the
Greeks and the simplicity of Constantine the Emperor, causes their own
ruin and destruction. Mahomet having diuersely forced the city all in vain,
at length by the strange cowardice of John Justinian Lieutenant General to the
Emperor, and the faintness of the Greeks wins it by an assault. The
Emperor is smothered and trodden to death. The horrible excess and cruelty of
the Turks in the sack of Constantinople, and the barbarous cruelty of
Mahomet against the Christian prisoners. The town of Pera near Constantinople
yields voluntarily to Mahomet, who with singular perjury, uses them with
all kinds of cruelty.

IT is usually seen, that when there happens any news of great importance,
the fame thereof, like a running, Poast flies all about more swift then the
wind: so was the siege of Belgrade every where noysed and blown abroad, and
the tidings thereof came to the ears of Mahomet, at such time as he was not
far from Romania, marching with ensigns displayed to the conquest of the
Grecian Empire, and Mahomet going to the conquest of Constantinople is stayed
upon the nowes of Belgrade.
to seek the ruin of the Emperor of Greece, and the destruction and
desolation of the people of God. The haughty and generous courage of this
young Prince, did aspire to the dominion of the whole world: the bounds of
his ambition did exceed far beyond the succession of his fathers Empire,
and he sought to surmount the glory of all his ancestors. For casting his
thoughts to higher enterprises, he was resolved to reduce within the number of
his conquests, the proud and triumphant city of Constantinople: and he held
it to be a great blot and stain to his honor to entitle himself Emperor of
Greece, and not to have the possession of the Imperial seat and capital city
of that Empire. Besides, he considered this with himself, that by enterprising
an exploite of so high regard, he should make his memory immortal over the
whole earth, and that all the Nations and peoples of the world, would be
stricken with the terror of his wonderful acts, in that he being but in the
prime and entrance of his youth, should be able to make a conquest of a town
so puissant, and to purchase to himself a name so glorious and renowned. And
he was the more enflamed in this his desire and affection, because his
predecessors having oftentimes attempted the winning of that town, had always
been repulsed with some disgrace and loss of honor and reputation.

As Soon therefore as the news of Belgrade was come unto his ears, he was
extremely grieved and perplexed, and he complained with infinite plaints and
lamentations, that fortune should so cross and disturb his attempts, as to
take out of his hands the joy, benefit, and advantage of a glory so excellent
and incomparable. The very conceit and grief whereof dryuing him into rage and
choler, made him to exclaim Speech and exclamation of Mahomet upon the news
of the siege of Belgrade.
and to burst out into these speeches. Unhappy and unfortunate Epyre, which
do always bring some sinister and unlucky misfortune to the hinderance of
our affairs and proceedings. Whereupon surceasing for that time to proceed
any further against the Greeks, he bent all his care and imagination only to
the relief of Belgrade. Howbeit that some of his Bassaes persuaded him in any
case not to interrupt or break off so goodly and honorable a journey, nor to
leave off all those royal and princely preparations for the hazard and danger
of one only baggage and paultry town of Epire. But Mahomet replied and told
them, saying: That his ancestors never taught him Speech of Mahomet to his
Bassaes persuading him not to leave his voyage of Constantinople for Belgrade.
that lesson, to abandon and forsake the defense of his own against the
injuries of his enemies, whilst of an ambitious mind he sought that which
belonged to other men. That for his part he reputed all conquests and each
victory vile and dishonorable, and that glory to be base, and of no moment nor
estimat, which should be defiled or stained with the least touch of ignominy.
Can it be good or commendable (quoth he) for a Prince to amplify and enlarge
his Empire with the one hand, and to diminish and lessen it with the other? how
shall I believe, that any of my people can fight with quiet and settled minds
in Romania, as long as their fancies and imaginations are carried away with
thinking, that a vile and lewd fugitive is triumphing the whilst over
Macedony, and is tearing, rending, and spoiling the bodies of their fellows and
companions? True it may be, that upon the Greeks we may purchase us great
honor, and greater spoils and booty: but the loss of Belgrade will be more
to our detriment and disadvantage then we can reap profit by the conquest of
the whole Leuant. It behooves Monarchs and great conquerors to be careful of
their fame and reputation, and (as good and excellent tutors and protectors) to
preserve it unspotted and unblameable, both toward them which are alive
present, and to the posterity that are to succeed hereafter. Moreover
Constantinople cannot fly from us, but Belgrade being once gotten out of the
power and alleagance of the Ottomans, will not without great difficulty be
recovered. It stands us upon first to quench this fire within our own doors,
for fear least being neglected, it grow more strong and violent, and spread
farther abroad: and the fury of a people so proud and insolent, is not to be
left unpunished and unsubdued. The city of Croie may serve for a sufficient
testimony to teach us, the which continues and remains as yet in good
estate and condition, lifting up her head above all the cities of Epyre: and
gloriously vaunting and boasting of the wounds and calamities which she gave
us, and which we have suffered to rest unrevenged, to the great reproach of the
name of the Ottomans.

But his Bassaes showing him that Belgrade was strongly and excellently well
fortified, that it was abundantly provided of all necessaries for defense: and
that for the more security, he might send thither such fresh succors, as it
should be impossible for the enemy to win it, and that the voyage of Romania
needed not in the mean while to be interrupted: All this would not any whit
persuade him, nor turn his obstinate mind from the war of Epyre. For the
siege of Belgrade and the only shame thereof had swallowed up all his
thoughts and imaginations, Turks their wonderful care to preserve their
conquests
and his head was always devising upon the same. And to speak the truth, I
dare assure you, that there is not any Nation nor kind of men under the
heavens more diligent and careful in preserving of their conquestes, and in
keeping the countries which they have gotten from their enemies, then are the
Turks. For they hold it a most notable injury, and eternal shame and
infamy, that their enemies should take from them one foot of ground, whereof
they are the owners: or should innouate, alter, or change any thing upon
their possessions. It shall not be impertinent in this place to recount an
accident which is as yet fresh in memory, during the reign of the last
Baiazeth. The Hungarians had erected near to the river An act of Baiazeth the
second upon the river of Danowe or Danubius in Hungary.
of Danowe a tower of wood serving to diverse uses and private commodities,
rather then to any purpose of service for the wars: a work in truth that
was not worth the speaking of. Baiazeth being advertised thereof, could not
moderate his passions, but to his extreme charges and expenses, he assembled
forthwith a mighty army, only and of purpose to overthrow and beat down
this edifice. And he held it not sufficient to commit the execution thereof to
his Lieutenants, but he would needs be there in proper person, wasting and
destroying the whole country adjoining. The Hungarians thought it not best to
oppose themselves against his fury, but gave place unto him, and made a mock
of so foolish and outrageous a part: and so little did they grieve at the
damage offered them, that they wished him many such victories. Now whether
this diligence in the Turks be either to be commended or discommended, this is
most certain, that the event of things does apparently make show of it. But we
for our parts do imagine that there is no cause of fear until such Note.
The delays and security of Christians
time as the fire be gotten into our own houses, and that the flame have
embraced even our bed-chambers. Hence it proceeds, that whilst we prepare
water against tomorrow for the quenching of the fire, we are prevented in the
instant: being burnt up presently and consumed out of hand.

The great Turk taking that course which the importance of those affairs did
Sebalias sent against Scanderbeg with an army of 40000 horse.
require, amongst all his servants made choice of Sebalias, a Captain more
politic and subtle, then aduenturous and hardy: and who more then once had
tried himself against Scanderbeg. In regard whereof he made him General of
this journey into Epyre, and gave him the command of 40000. horse, all chosen
men and well appointed: so that they made a goodly army, very strong both for
their number and for their valor. Mahomet calling Sebalias unto him before his
departure, held him with a long discourse, using not only exhortations and
persuasions, but with many prayers expressed in most urgent and earnest
terms, he entreated him, that he would employ all his diligence, industry,
courage, and vigilancie, and the best and most sufficient means he was
possibly able in that service, to bring that war to a good end, and to rescue
his subjects, promising him great riches, honors, and advancement even in the
Mahomet conspireth the death of Scanderbeg.
highest degree that he could bestow upon him, and as far as himself would
wish and desire: especially if he could bring him either the head of Scanderbeg
cut from his shoulders, or his person alive into his presence. I do find also
that this matter should be plotted in another fashion, and that two soldiers,
the strongest and most aduenturous of the whole army, named Acmath and Barach,
should of their own proper Acmath and Barach promise Mahomet to kill
Scanderbeg.
motion present themselves to Mahomet, and should bargain with him for a huge
sum of money: and that he did condescend to give them a far greater reward
then they demanded, so that they would (accordingly as they offered) contriue
the death and destruction of Scanderbeg. Behold how precious and excellent was
his life and person to be esteemed, which was so highly prised and valued even
by one so miserably and couetously addicted.

Sebalias being ready furnished and provided, as one that was more forward
with Sebalias mercheth toward Epyre.
his hand then with his tongue, to put in execution the commandment and
charge given him by his sovereign: and supposing it needful to make haste,
if he would bring his matters to any good pass: he caused his soldiers with
all speed possible to mount on horse back, and when they demanded whither he
would lead them, he told them into Epyre. For the Sultan himself was not
more tormented in his mind, then Sebalias was perplexed and troubled with
thinking upon Belgrade: day and night, sleeping and waking, incessantly and in
all places, was that town before his eyes. And because he was in great fear
and doubt, least they within the town should not hold out till his coming:
having a desire to put them in good courage and hope, by the expectation of
speedy aid and succors: he had no sooner gotten his dispatch from the
Sultan, but he determined to send away speedily a Poast with letters to them
that were besieged. But the chiefest care and difficulty was how to get a man
fit and able to undertake the enterprise, and that durst expose himself to the
hazard A Poast sent by Sebalias to carry news of succors to the Belgradians.
of so great and manifest a peril. And yet the large promises which he made
were sufficient not only to have invited and allured, but in a manner to have
enforced the heart of any man to adventure it. In the end, they found one a
very quick and light fellow, who being presently mounted upon the swiftest
horse in all the army, spurred away with all speed, sparing neither by day
nor by night, no travail nor pains, nor for any extreamitie of the heat, so
as in three days or little more he came to a town under the obeisance of the
Turks, named Gyrocastra, being about Gyrocastra.
some six score and five miles from Belgrade. The Turks have no ordinary and
set Poastes in Turkey, but in stead of them, and because upon such
occurrences, their Curriers (whom they call Vlach) shall not be unprovided of
horses, the Sultans Vlach Poasts of Turkey.
have established and laid down this order: that in running on their journey,
they may dismount as many men as they meet with on the way without any
exception: and so by often changing of their horse, they make way with
incredible speed and diligence. This messenger being arrived at Gyrocastra,
and having communicated his business to the Magistrates of that place, by
their counsel and advise stayed there that day till it grew to night: then
leaving there his horse, and changing his attire (the better to deceive the
scoutes of the Christians) in the dark of the night, he took his journey on
foot, and at the length, he got near the town on that side where Scanderbeg
himself lay encamped. For the tents of the two Thopies, and the rest which
lay in the open plain, stood farther off, so as they could not perceive him.
Both the one and the other of them were easily deceived, for that the messenger
(having very advisedly shunned the tents of the Christians, and taken the
other side of the mountain, where the way was more covert, and the passage
more hard and difficult, had so secretly and closely conveyed himself even to
the foot of the town wall, that he was scarcely discerned by the Sentinelles
of the town. Unto whom, after that he had by whisteling and calling unto them,
made himself known by his speech, he was suddenly drawn up with a cord let
down from the wall, and so conveyed into the town. As he went on to
Belgradians advertised of succors coming to relieve them.
seek out the Governor, the common people in a great confusion came running
about him on all sides, and in great doubt and suspense began to enquire of
him, and to learn what good news he had brought: for the end of the truce was
now near at hand, and the time approached wherein they were to avoid the
town. The Governor having caused the common people to depart, and calling the
messenger unto him, he questioned with him in secret, very few being present:
after he had received and perused the letter, he gave credit to that which the
messenger reported: by means whereof the Captains of the garrison consulting
together, did conclude and determine if need were, to stand resolutely in
defense of the place, till the coming of Sebalias to relieve them: and when
the daylight should appear, they appointed that these tidings should be
published and made known to them of the town, and it was accordingly imparted
unto all of them, not with a loud voice or open proclamation, but by the mouth
of the Governor himself, first in the market place, and after from one to
another, with an express charge and commandment to keep it secret, that
they without might not be advertised of it. For they had a great desire both to
deceive and delude them by the means of this truce taken for the rendering of
the town, as also to see them suddenly surprised and oppressed ^re they were
aware: and yet whilst they studied by their close and cunning silence to
deceive the Christians, they bewrayed the matter by another occasion.

The inhabitants and garrison of Belgrade were in some doubt, least that their
Belgradians repair their breach contrary to their agreement.
succors would not come timely enough and before the truce were expyred: by
means whereof either they should be driven to defend them selves, or else to
forgo and forsake the town. For this cause they began to repair their
walls and bastilles, where they had been battered and beaten with the
artillery. The General of the Christians perceiving this, and misdoubting
some fraud, entered into great choler, and was in a mind to have assaulted
them: nevertheless for that the time of the truce was to expire within a three
days, he pacified himself, and was content Message of Scanderbeg to the
Belgradians willing the^ to desist from repairing of their town^.
to send one unto them to reprove them, and to let them know, that they did
violate and infringe the agreement and covenants passed between them, by
innouating and altering things from their former estate: an evident sign of
some treason secretly intended and imagined. That they should surcease
therefore from their work, or otherwise if they came afterward to endure the
rigor and extreamitie of their enemies, they should impute it, not to any
breach of faith in them, but to their own default and deserts. The inhabitants
in outward show and appearance seemed to obey it, and did forbear from doing
any thing, that their enemies could either see or perceive: notwithstanding
they continued night and day by all other means, as to carry earth, to
strengthen the walls, to lay together great heaps of stones, and other
provisions fit to throw upon their enemies: all which they did close behind
their rampires. O of what power, force, and efficacy is hope, so to Sentence.
alter and change the minds of mortal men, and to make them so variable and
inconstant? O how little and small a thing can make them change their
thoughts and cogitations? Of late this people when their estate was whole and
sound, were most cowardly discouraged and amazed, being stricken with fear and
terror at the only view of the enemy: and now their walls being battered,
razed, and beaten down, their bulwarks being overthrown, and their defenses
laid open and discovered, they do prepare to make resistance against an
enemy, whom they are like to find more fiercely and cruelly incensed, and
ready by the sword most justly to revenge and to demand reason for their
faith and promise violated. Nevertheless still did they continue running up
and down the walls, getting to the tops of their houses and into all the
towers and highest places of the town to see, if they could discover the aid
and succors which they expected and desired so earnestly: or if they could
perceive any dust of their horses, or hear any noise of their coming by the
people of the country. Their eyes were clearer sighted then ordinary,
whatsoever sound they heard, whatsoever object presented it self to their
senses, they thought it to be Sebalias, and that it had been their gods
coming to their succors: so easy a matter Sentence.
is it for a man to persuade himself of that, whereof he has any hope that it
is like to come to pass.

That which gave cause of hope to them of Belgrade, was an occasion of fear
and suspicion to the Christians: they regarded no less carefully then the
others, the tops and highest places of the mountains where their scoutes
were placed, to see if they could discern any advertisement by boughs and
branches of trees, or by fires or any other sign given them to arm
themselves, and to prepare to horseback, it being a thing not possible to
keep them continually sadled, nor themselves always in arms, by reason of
the violent and extreme heat, which did make their bodies very faint
Christians before Belgrade surprised by the Turks.
and feeble. But the Ensigns of the enemy were in sight, and their cries and
clamors were heard amongst them before that they had any notice or warning
given them by there scoutes of their approach and coming. Not much unlike unto a
company of seafaring men and sailors, who being embarked and becalmed upon the
maine seas, whilst the Master and Pilots do look up to the flagge or streams
to see what wind An excellent comparison.
does blow, to the intent they may fit their tackling, and make ready their
sails: suddenly in the mean time being overtaken with an outrageous and
horrible tempest, (whereof there appears not any precedent signs either by
dark clouds, or the roaring of the seas, nor any other such celestial
threats and tokens) by reason whereof they are suddenly oppressed, not fearing
any such matter: their sails are rent and torn, their mastes blown
ouerborde, their gables and anchors are lost, and they (not able to work,
whilst they are busied on all sides to attend their charges and several
duties) are constrained in the end with the violence of the tempest, to give
over and to leave all to the mercy of the wind and weather, and of fortune,
and to have a care only of their own safety: so did it now fall out with the
Christians lying before Belgrade. For they having their eyes always regarding
the tops of the mountains to see some sign given them from their Sentinels,
had the sword of the enemy over their heads, before they discerned or
perceived any such matter. It is a wonderful Coming of Sebalias why concealed
from Scanderbeg.
thing to imagine how so great preparations, and the sudden approach of the
Infidels could be so concealed, that even the very stones and rivers (as a man
may say) did not reveal it. In all the wars that Scanderbeg had made, he was
never without spies, fugitives, letters, or some such secret aduertisements of
his friends, save only at this instant, when he had most need of them. But
it may be, that the preparations for the war of Greece being begun, and
continuing so long, was the cause he was so deceived: by reason that Mahomet
having his great army in a readiness for another journey, did on a sudden employ
part of those forces, and that with singular diligence, secrecy, and celerity,
so as no report nor espials could easily prevent their coming; as they might
have done, if an army had been leauied and raised purposely for this journey.
Besides, letters and messengers have not always free liberty of passage. And
as for the watches and scoutes which were placed upon the mountains purposely
for the discovering of the approach of the enemy: and upon whom principally
did depend the safety of the Christian army before Belgrade: they never gave
them any sign nor token of their coming, nor it was never known what became
of them. Scouts of the Albanois surprised by the enemy.
There is great variety and diversity of opinions concerning those scoutes:
some say they were corrupted by the Turk: others affirm, that they were
surprised, and put to the sword by the vauntcurrers of the Barbarians, who
found them very negligently walking up and down, about the fresh and most
delectable places of the mountains, taking their pleasure and recreation: by
means whereof they could not give any sign to the camp, as it was concluded.
For my part I know not well what to think of it. Touching their infidelity, I
suppose it was not a thing so easy to be compassed: for albeit it were a
matter which amongst a few might soon have been contrived; yet amongst so
many it was very difficult, and in a manner incredible: in like case, that
they should be slain it is as unlikely: for neither were their dead bodies
ever seen or heard of after that: nor any relics, marks, or appearance of
them: and therefore some do affirm, and it is most likely, that they were
taken alive by the enemy. Howsoever it was, the other watches which were
appointed to watch else where, could not discover the enemy till they were
come very near them: and yet as soon as they could, they gave them some
warning. By means whereof, they had a very little and short time to make
ready their companies, and to put themselves in order for to fight with the
enemy. Neither was it possible that Scanderbeg should send any scoutes farther
off, to beat the ways, and to discover the passages, or to provide better for
the safety of his camp (as he was wont) because all the whole country round
about being for the enemy, they might easily have been entrapped by some
secret ambushments, or openly distressed by the force of the inhabitants. And
it may be, that his misfortune and destiny, did not permit him to devise and
invent any better remedy against that mischief which hanged over his head.
For we see it is a common and usual course with fortune to oppose herself as
a stepdame Sentence.
against the enterprises of great personages: and being not able to suffer the
continuance of their good hap, nor willing that it should be perdurable: she
does often interrupt the course of their best and most glorious actions. But
let us proceed with the scope of our history.

These five and twenty men which were ordained to watch upon the mountain,
either by treason or by negligence (as has been ^aied) caused great mischief
to the whole army. For Musache (who lay encamped next to that side where the
enemy did approach and was to sustain the first brunt and onset that should
be given) would hardly be persuaded that the Turks were at hand:
notwithstanding that the Musache de Thopie brother in law to Scanderbeg,
surprised in his quarter by the Turks.
watch did continue the alarm, and did in a manner show him the dust raised
by the trampling of their horses. Some say that he was found sleeping in his
tent: others say that he was playing at dice with one of the Gentlemen of the
Kings privy chamber, and that the Turks coming upon him unprovided, did
bereave him of all means of hope to mount on horseback, and enforced him on
foot to seek to save himself by flying toward the mountain. But the most
common opinion is: that he had some time and Ieisure (though very little) to
put on his armor, and to mount on horseback: and that he lost his life
fighting valiantly even in the foremost ranckes of his company: and that upon
his death the residue began to fly. For as soon as the standards of the
Infidels and their vauntcurrers began to appear in sight, Musache having
ordered his troops, as well as the shortness of the time would give him leave,
was at the first in some doubt, whether he should stand and abide the charge,
or betake himself to flight toward the maine strength and body of the army.
But because the enemy was now so near, that he thought his flight would
cause the greater slaughter of his company: besides, for that he took not the
enemy to be so strong as he afterward found them: and being unwilling also
to loose his life with dishonor by any default in himself, or to abandon and
forsake his Prince, and the others who were lodged on the mountain: he settled
himself to receive the enemy; and therefore courageously he endured the
charge, and stoutly opposed himself against their fury and violence. For a
time he held good, neither his courage failing him, nor his forces: and he was
resolute, not to loose his life without a brave revenge of himself and his
company. In the end perceiving by the slaughter of his companions, that his
flanckes lay open to the enemy, and that his virtue and perseverance was in
vain and unprofitable, he did assay many times by traversing and coursing up
and down the field, to save himself and the rest of his men by making
toward the mountain, for other place of refuge there was none thereabouts,
where he might if not avoid, yet at least wise delay the extreamitie of the
danger. But the enemy having shut up all the ways by which he might safely
make a retrait, and he being enclosed on all sides as in a park, with the
inestimable multitude of his enemies: and seeing that both his life and honor
did now hang in the balance of chance and casualtie: with a desperate
resolution, turning his valor and prowess into rage and fury, he terrified
the enemy with the wonderful astonishment of his hardines and audacitie,
Musache his death and glorious end.
and even in the midst of them fighting valiantly, he left his life worthy of
eternal praise and commendation, for the many worthy services done to his
Prince and country. Tanusee Thopie on the other side, albeit he werein no
less distress, yet having a compassion at the mishap of his uncle, he seemed
to forget all other occasions; and as a man transported with outrage and fury,
did enforce himself many times, by charging valiantly upon the enemy, to open
him a free way and passage. But in the end knowing all his endeavors to be in
vain, and that there now remained no other point of charity to be showed
toward him, unless he would bear him company in the like unhappy end; he
thought it best to forbear fighting: to the intent he might save the rest
which were left, and having gathered them near about him, he persuaded them to
secure themselves by flying. The like did Tanusee Gynache, and the residue,
howbeit that their flight did abate little or nothing of their danger, nor of
the slaughter. For the Turks being dispersed here and there, and divided into
several bands and squadrons, some of them did continue enuironing of Musache
and his company, as long as there remained any of them living: and others
pursuing after those that fled, did never give over the advantage which they
had gotten, but followed it to the singular and extreme damage of the
Christians. He that should have seen this disorder would have thought, that
that good fortune which had ever heretofore seconded the Albanois, had now left
and forsaken them, to follow the part of the Infidels. Scanderbeg (whose tents
were somewhat further removed from this bickering) was oftentimes about to have
descended into the plain, with a full determination to do his best and last
endeavors for the ayding and succouring of his people, or by his own death to
make the victory of Sebalias much more noble and glorious. But being earnestly
and instantly entreated by his Nobles, not to enterprise any thing but upon
advantage, nor to expose himself unadvisedly to a death inevitable: he g^ashed
with his teeth, and with his mouth all bloody, he was clean out of patience:
and stirring up and down on all sides, he tormented and vexed himself with
extreme grief and coffeehouse. For this one thing which is reported of
him, is not to be omitted, that whenever he was upon the point ready to
charge the enemy, and likewise in the heat and fury of the fight: besides
other strange signs A strange quality in Scanderbeg.
of change and alteration in his countenance, his nether lip would commonly
cleave a sunder, and yield forth great abundance of blood: a thing oftentimes
marked and observed in him, not only in his martial actions and exploites,
but even in his civil affairs, whenever his choler did abound, and that
his anger did exceed more then ordinary.

The General of the Painims (having cut in pieces the bands of Musache
together with their Captain) followed the chase after Tanusee, and the rest
which discamped with him: of whom he overthrew a great number that never
recovered: and he left behind him his rereward, the same being but weakly and
simply guarded, Sebalias his i^discretion and oversight.
whereby you may conjecture, that he made but small account of our troops that
were encamped upon the mountain. Peradventure he did it because he saw them
enclosed: and he thought, after the victory of the plain field was once fully
assured, that he should be able with ease to intercept and cut them off: or
it may be, for that the heat and fury of the fight, and the have which he
made to follow the chase, did make him to forget them. But it was the occasion
that he lost the opportunity of seeing the final end of his adversary, and
of obtaining a full and absolute triumph for that days journey.

When the King of Albanie saw that there was little or no danger behind from
Scanderbeg descends down the hill into the plain against Sebalias.
the rereward of the enemies army, he drew forth his squadrons with singular
good advise and judgment: and descended down into the plain, according as
the present trouble and confusion would give him leave, placing his infanterie
in the midst, and enuironning them with his horsemen. All this while did not
they of the town make any sally forth upon the Christians, neither whilst
they fought, nor at their departure: which is a thing much to be wondered at,
considering that the besieged did plainly see what a notable advantage their
fellows had gotten against their enemies, and that all things were safe and
sure on their part. It seemed they stood in fear (as it is often seen) of
those who were no less affraied of them. Notwithstanding at such time as
Scanderbeg did depart, the gates were speedily set open, and the multitude
ran forth to sack the camp of the Christians, before that the soldiers
Belgradians sack the camp of the Christians.
(who had purchased the victory) could come to join with them in the same.
They took away at their pleasure, whatsoever they thought good, but especially
the Artillery, which they carried into the town, with a notable cry and
clamor testifying their exceeding great joy.

Scanderbeg without any care taken for the body of Musache, at this time
especially, Scanderbeg charge upon the Turks who are in chase of the
Christians.
wherein he had more need of revenge then of succors, put himself with great
fury in the tail of those who had the Christians in chase, both beating and
hewing them at their backs, and crying instantly to those that fled, that they
should turn and make head against their enemies, and take the benefit of the
new succors which he brought them: without the which it is most sure and
certain they had been but in bad taking. Herewithall, those Cornets of Turks
which were left behind for the rereward, and they also which had been at the
killing of Musache and his troops, letting alone their companions: and our men
which were together fighting, did scatter themselves all over the field in
diverse quarters; wholly applying themselves, to gather the spoils and prey of
the dead bodies, which was an occasion that Scanderbeg was greatly eased and
recomforted, having the fitter opportunity both to terrify the Infidels, and
to stop the flight of his own people. For as soon as Sebalias perceived that
Scanderbeg did press upon his back, and did hinder the course and honor of
his victory, he caused his Cornets to turn, and to wheel about, and went
speedily and roundly to encounter him, not without some loss both given and
taken on both parties. After a while he withdrewe himself aside, causing his
army to retire and to recuile a little, till he had renewed the ranckes of his
battle, and that he had gathered together his soldiers that were dispersed
and disordered. In like manner, Scanderbeg was not very importunate upon him
whilst he thus temporized and delayed the fight: but he employed his thoughts
likewise in the reallying of his forces, and reuniting them together in one.
But the Barbarian could not long endure to suffer him, for though his own
battallions were sore traveled and wearied, and were not as yet fully
reordered and redressed: yet did he begin to press upon him, and he gave a
fresh charge and onset upon our men: and (as it were) in disdain and
mockery, he threatened and vpbraided them: telling them, that now was the end
Speech of Sebalias deriding and reproching the Chr^stians.
come of the insolency and pride of the Albanian: and that he should now
receive the condign punishment of his rebellion: and he often repeated these
and the like speches, saying: that he would utterly confound and destroy this
handful of Christians both men and horses. And in very deed their numbers
was much decreased: for besides those which were slain under the conduct of
Tanusee, and in the chase as they fled before the enemy,, there were more then
three thousand slain with Musache, of which two thousand were footmen and the
rest horsemen. Nevertheless Scanderbeg (not unlike a good and hardy pylot,
who having gathered together the remnants of his shipwarcke, and having
scarcely repaired the bottom of his vessel, does yet cheerfully prepare
himself with more courage then hope, to abide the extremity of a new
tempest): does animate and encourage his soldiers to try the fortune of a
fresh combat: calling and crying unto them with a furious terrible voice.

Follow me (my friends) follow me your companion in arms, not to the conflict,
Speeches of Scanderbeg encouraging his soldiers against Sebalias.
but to the slaughter of these cursed dogs and miscreants: and then sharply
blaming and reproving them, he called each of them after other by their names,
saying: what cowardice is this that possesses you? what strange fear has
seized upon you? shall we leave the noble bodies of so many of our brethren,
friends and kinsemen, here lying without revenge? will all of you yield up
your ghoasts unrevenged? you have not here any other then your wonted and old
enemy, even that enemy I say, whom you were wont to make the ordinary
subject of your honor and reputation.

In the midst of these and the like speeches, (pressed forward with
constraint and The battle of Belgrade between Sebalias and Scanderbeg.
necessity, which did inuit him to leave and commit all to the pleasure of
fortune) he cast himself as a man forlorn and desperate into the midst and
thickest of the enemies squadrons, confirming by an assured proof, and beyond
all human reason, that saying of Homer: That amongst all other virtues,
magnanimity of courage, is often Sentence of Homer.
accompanied with a kind of fury and supernatural violence. Thus did
Scanderbeg fill all places wheresoever he came with blood and terror, sometimes
beating down those that fled from him, and sometimes those which did
withstand him: as a warrior, that was invincible and most fortunate. But if
ever his valor did show it self, it was at this time, when he far passed
and excelled all his former deeds and haughty exploits. The rest of his
troops likewise taking example by his valor, and being transported with rage
and despair, did break in upon the enemy, and rushed upon their weapons, as
men blinded and hardened against all perils, and followed their General
through all hazards and dangers.

But the sudden accident and mishappe of George Thopie, brother to Tanusee, did
George Thopie his misfortune.
put the residue in a great fear and astonishment: for he being thrown to the
ground and almost overwhelmed with the shot of the enemy, our men had much a
do to free him out of their hands, and to set him on horse back. The
infanterie of the Albanois could better save themselves from the violence of
their enemies then from their horses: for in many places they made way over
their bellies, as they lay overthrown upon the ground, and so did put them to
great scath and mischief. By means whereof (as there is nothing that does more
awaken the spirits of a man, or that does make Sentence.
him more apt to devise and subtillize a thousand fine inventions then does
necessity) they did advise themselves of this policy: to seize upon all the
horses of those which were slain, and which they could possibly come by,
both of their fellows and of the Paynims: and speedily they mounted upon them
with singular agilitie. This was the cause that very many of them were
preserved, and it did greatly strengthen the rest of the army, for that their
forces were by this means in a manner redoubled.

By this time had Scanderbeg broken and disordered a strong troop of the
enemies horse, and had pressed in even to the standard and corpse du guard of the
Turkish General: endeavoring (according to his wonted custom in most battles)
to have made the beginning of his victory by their Chieftains death, and so to
have enforced them to yield him the honor of that journey. But even then at
that instant those two soldiers who (as we have said) had sworn his death to
the Sultan, did advance themselves in that front of the fight, and with their
swords ready drawn did receive him to the combat. At that very time, and in
the same place, Musache de Angeline desiring to succor Musache de Angeline
wounded.
and aid his Uncle, received a sore wound upon his right shoulder: and the
rest of the Epirots likewise being but few against many, were so plied and
kept doing on all hands, both in front and in flancke, and at their backs,
and that so fiercely and so roundly, that they had no leisure to look after
their chief commander, who by means thereof being now left alone against two
(as it were) by a fatal kind of chance and destiny, did cause each man to
turn and bend their eyes to himwardes. For the two Mahometans both with their
hands and with their voice putting back and making their companions to retire,
would needs by themselves alone carry away the Combat of Acmath and Barach
with Scanderbeg.
honor of the death of the Prince of Albanie: and they thought to reserve to
themselves only the prize propounded and promised them by the Ottoman. But it
is a common saying: That, the fool is greatly deceived of that he thinks.
These two A prouer be.
Infidels did continue a while coasting and coursing up and down round about
him now here, now there, on every side, to take him at some advantage. In the
end each of them setting spurs to their horses, and with a careless contempt
of their own death and danger, they came upon him bravely and with a full
cariere charged this fierce enemy whom they hated most deadly and odiously.
The notorious valor and notable prowes of Scanderbeg, so often tried and
approved, did greatly comfort the careful hearts of the Albanois, as one whom
they had often received victorious and triumphant, not of two only, but of
more enemies all at once. Notwithstanding, Sentence.
as fear makes men to cast many doubts; so the bravery of the enemies, and
their audacious defy given to the Prince of Epire, did make many of them to
suspect the issue of the combat. Wherefore immediately they advanced forward
with their squadrons, and whilst matters stood yet in good case and entire,
they enforced themselves to their uttermost power to second their King against
his enemies. But he in the mean time bearing up close to both of them, did
reach a full blow to the head of Barach slain by Scanderbeg.
Barach, and lighting upon his face did cut him over the eyes, and cleft his
head almost in twain. The other after many blows past between them, and no
blood drawn on neither party, let his sword fall out of his hand, and
immediately the Turk being very active, pressed close to him with his horse,
and clasping both his arms about his neck, and forsaking his stirruppes and
his horse, with the whole weight of his body, he hanged upon the shoulder of
Scanderbeg, thinking to have forced him, and to have pulled him to the ground
together with himself, The Infidels desirous to aid their companion gave in
presently, and enuironned the Epirot Prince on all sides. But their labor was
in vain: for Scanderbeg having cut off the head from his body as it did hang
upon him, freed himself from the burden Acmath slain by Scanderbeg.
of his enemy. You may be sure, that this act did notably increase the
courage of the Christians, and made them to follow desperately after their
General, beating down great numbers of the Barbarians: who now began to
shrink, committing a great and mighty slaughter amongst them. These
beginnings and first-fruites of victory, did minister occasion of much sorrow
unto the Infidels and unto the Christians of great joy and comfort: and it was
taken as a good sign and happy token of the return of their good fortune.
But the strength of their bodies, and the daylight also failing both the one
and the other all alike, they were enforced for that time, to give place unto
the night. Sebalias was the first that made show either of his fear that he
durst not, or of his weariness that he could not endure the fight Sebalias
with his army retireth first from the battle.
any longer. Whereupon all his companies, by the commandment of their
Captains, made close up to their colors, and so retired themselves to the
mountain, before that the darkness of the night should overtake them in the
field. The Prince of Epyre being far spent with labor and travel, and full
of grief and sorrow insupportable, did the like also with his army, seizing
upon an other mountain distant about two miles from the enemy. There did he
stay till it was two hours within night: at which time he dislodged very
secretly, neither him self nor his Retrait of Scanderbeg
soldiers having had any refreshing at all, either of sleep or victuals. For
(poor souls) neither had they any thing to eat, neither had they any desire
thereunto, by reason of the extreme grief and anguish of their hearts, which
took from them all care both of meat and drink.

The Bassa for that night did not enter into the town, but having store of
victualles brought him by the Burgesses of Belgrade: he lodged his army,
partly in the mountains, and partly in the suburbs. And placing good and
strong courts of guard and Sentinelles on all sides, he celebrated his victory
with great joy and triumph. For he was persuaded that the Christians would have
stayed there the rest of the night: and that the next morning fresh and
fasting, as men that were not used to be beaten, and that would seek to
repair their honor lost: they would have adventured themselves to a second
battle. Wherefore having set all things in a readiness and in good order: by
the break of day he descended into the plain, sending forth many companies
to skirmish with the Christians, and to draw them forth to the fight: for
although about two hours in the night he had heard a noise, and did discern
some signs, that might signify their departure, yet he did believe, that they
were removed only to some other place, where they might either rest more
securely, or more commodiously dress some ambuscado to entrappe him and his
army. And this also was the cause that he durst not send forth his forces to
ouerrunne and spoil the country, doubting least he might thereby disgrace the
honor of this victory, it being a thing very unusual with the Turks to
have such a hand of the Epyrots: and besides the inconstancy of fortune being
an ordinary chance in the wars more then in any other thing whatsoever. He
was not therefore much discontented either with the flight of the Christians,
or because he had lost the opportunity of fight with them again: belike he
was induced thereunto by an exceeding iealouzie of this advantage so
unaccustomed, and of the good fortune which had befallen him, being desirous
not to loose it after he had once gotten it. And the Sebalias his want of
courage in not pursuing the victory against the Albanois.
former days journey did seem to testify no less, because that he being the
first that sounded the retrait, did therein bewray, that either he confessed
himself to be wearied and faint hearted, as having the worst: or else that he
was unwilling to renew the fight: and that he had no great desire to meddle any
more with the enemy. For I make no doubt if Sebalias had the courage to have
pressed hard and roundly upon the (...), he might that day have ended the war
of Epire: by reason that there was ^^^^ or ^^ disaduauntage to the one more
then to the other: either in respect of then extreme ^^^^nesse, or of the
discommodity of the time: but rather if any were, the (...) had the advantage
by the great ods of their numbers, which being all h(...) exceeded and
surpassed the power of the Epirots, who if they could have found any benefit
or hope of safety by flying, there is no doubt but they would have fled away
roundly at the first. But because the Infantery of the Albanois found that by
fighting ^^^^antly, they had most certainety and hope to escape, and they were
loath to acknowledge o^ makeshew in what extremity and mischief they were,
especially to such an enemy whom they knew to be most insolent, and would be
puffed up with prosperity* therefore their corages began to be revived and
increased, and the Turks contra^^wise grew to be abated, till at length the
benefit and opportunity of the night did stay the course of their proceedings;
and did help forward the preservation and estate of their affairs, which was
^ar^^ in a case so unfortunate and desperate. And it may be that the goodness
of God had provided and ordained that matters should so fall out in that
manner: to the intent the honor and reputation of so many fair exploits should
not be obscured, nor the subject of their future glory should not be cut off
nor prevented, nor that the S^^p^^^ of Epire should come to decay and
confusion, before such time (in a manner) as it were fully raised and
established.

The Barbarians finding their enemies to be departed, and that all places round
about Turks their barbarous cruelty upon the dead bodies of the Christians.
were clear and free from them, and that the country remained at their
disposition, who were now masters of the field, most insolently they laid
hands upon the dead bodies of the Christians, and converted the residue of
their choler and despite against their s^^sl^sse members, which they were not
able to execute upon them during their lives. Many were found yet breathing and
gasping for life, especially those who being trodden under foot by the horses,
and having their legs and lims bruised and broken, did lie upon the ground in
pitiful plight, not able to help themselves either by flying or fighting* of
whom some of them, having their hands cut off were left languishing most
miserably. The report is, that many of them being grievously wounded, torn,
and mangled, and having bin beaten down with the maces of the Turks, and left
for dead, did afterward in the night secretly convey them selves out of the
field into other places near adjoining of more surety: from whence after that
the danger was past, they came sat to Croy. There were slain in that fight of
the Christians, about 5000. men, Number of Christians slain at the battle of
Belgrade.
3000. foot, and the rest horsemen: of the Neapolitan succors, there were few
or none that escaped: for the greatest part of the^ being with Musache,
incurred the same fortune and adventure that he had, only some few squadrons of
them had Scanderbeg kept and reserved with himself in the mountain, whose
harguebusses and other weapons in that ^odainnesse of the charge were to small
purpose, and did in a manner little or no service: and some also of the Albanois
which were found di^armed or sadling of their horses, were oppressed by the
Infidels: of prisoners they had about fourscore. But the most Number of
Christians taken prisoners as Belgrade.
hideous and horrible sight of all the rest, was to see these bruit beasts the
Barbarians who had nothing in them appertaining to men but the shape only; upon
a desire which they had to reserve some mark of their pr^uat virtue and
valor, they went up and down amongst the dead bodies yet panting ^^
breathing, and after they had despoiled them, Turks cut off the heads of the
slain Christians to carry with them in triumph^.
and left them stark naked, they cut off their heads according to their
accustomed guise and fashion. And in as much as the length of their journey,
and the intemperatnes of the heat, did make them to putrify and st^^ke, when
they found the carriage of them to be loathsome, they did flea them, and
re^^^uing the skins only, which retained the show and form of their vis^ge,
they (...) them with straw and so carried them. This barbarous (...)elty was
ex^^^^ed upon many of them especially those whose cou(...) and aspect, or their
names having made the^ better known the(...) did cause them to be held worthy
of this outrage and ^^ious vsage^ and not only was the head of ^^^s^che
appointed to (...)y and dishonor, but his body also being dismembered and cut in
quarters* was dispersed in diverse places over the country, as if they had
been the quarters of some notable th^^^es or infamous traitors. The trunks
likewise of the resi^ue were drawn aside into the vallies^rid places
adjoining, being left for a prey to beasts and birds to the intent their stench
should not infect the inhabi^^^^. To make short, they might do what they listed
and without contradiction of any person, for that Castriot was far enough
from them.

Standerbeg being more perplexed and efflicted with the grief of this
misfortune, Scanderbeg re^^eth his army with new supplies.
the destitute of hope to be revenged, had filled up the relics of his army
with a new supply of fresh soldiers, and had shut up and fortified certain
passages in the woods and thicken of the mountains, for fear least the Turk,
pursuing the victory, should enter farther into the country. He was often in
the mind, and gladly would he have undertaken some new and desperate adventure
to have avenged himself upon the enemy and to make further proof of his
fortune, which commonly does smile and fawn again upon them, whom the has
cast down headlong from the ^^^ of her wheel, and has Sentence.
made to taste the extremity of her wrath and anger* so forward are we sometimes
to hasten our own danger: but partly the unmeasurable force^ and fierceness
of the enemy, and the confidence of his late victory, and partly the length of
the journey, and the wounds of his soldiers yet grieuing them, did detain
him from attempting any such action. The brute of this discomfiture did
speedily fill all the country near Diverse reports and rumors of the battle
of Belgrade.
adjoining, and all Epire with the fame thereof: and proceeding on more and
more, it caused great grief and infinite plaints in all places. For some
reported that all the army was dicomfited, and the king himself slain*
whether it were that they so coniectured, or that the common sort did of
themselves so report, as it is the nature of the popular and vulgar sort,
willingly to oary news of some notable leasings, though it be never so
dolorous: others building belike upon the same reason, did give out, that the
whole army was defeated, but that Scanderbeg himself alone, after long and
wonderful fight, was escaped safe by the favor and swiftnes of his horse. The
most likely report, and that which came nighest to the truth was that a great
number of the Epirots were slain, and that Scanderbeg had showed such
incredible proof of a rare and divine body, and of an invincible valor, that
by the virtue of his own prowess only, he had broken the forces of the
enemies, and abated their corages, and had wholly berest them of the honor of
the battle, and that he was retired safe and sound near to Croy with the
remainder of his army. Notwithstanding in all places was to be heard nothing
but lamentations, cries, and exclamations: the ancient mat^ones and all their
families continuing in tears and extreme sorrow: and albeit they had not as
yet any certainety, why they should be discomforted or dismayed, yet did they
in grief and mourning, attend and expect their funerals, as if they had seen
them even then before their eyes.

Hitherto and till this present, the happy and continual good success of the
affairs of Scanderbeg, had held in suspense the infidelity of Moses, and the
rebellion erst conceived and concealed in his mind: but now upon this
misfortune of the battle of Belgrade, and asso^^e as the calamity of the
Christians was known and published, his disloialty became also to be
disclosed* for then taking hold on that occasion so long and Moses his re^^lt
from Scanderbeg.
so greatly desired, most impio^sly he conu^^^ed his arms against his native
country, friends and kindred: beginning even then to break in pieces, and to
scatter the remnants of the shipwreck, to the repairing whereof, himself
before time had put to his helping hand, and which many times he had defended
and preserved. And because the fact being odious in it self would seem much
the more dishouest, if he should rebel alone without any companions, he
thought he would procure some to join with him, as his accomplices and
copartners, persuading himself, that the more there were found guilty and
partakers of his treason, the more should he both lessen his own disgrace and
infamy, and it would be a mean also that he should present him self to the
Ottoman with the greater countenance, credit and authority, who perhaps would
disdain him, and not make any great account of him, if he should come alone as
a mean fugitive and ill accompanied. For this cause he plotted with him self
how to seduce some of his most inward and nearest friends and familiars, such
as he thought fittest for that purpose. To the^ he began with a good
countenance first to deplore the estate of Scanderbeg and the desolation of
Epire, then cunningly did he insinuat and make known unto them how the Turkish
monark did bear him great good love and liking, what offers he had made him to
draw him to revolt: and with great store of good words did he entise them to
take his part, and to embarke themselves in this conspiracy. He laid open unto
them by Speeches of Moses to some of his friends persuading the^ to consort
with him in his revolt from Scanderbeg.
the discourse of diverse matters, that the fortune of Epire being now altered
and changed, they should be constrained, if they did reject the benefit of the
time present, to submit themselves ere long to all miseries and indignities.
And what reason have we (quod he) to continue and live ever under the fortune
of Scanderbeg? to what purpose should we employ our labor and spend our lives
to amplify and enlarge the glory of another? seeing the great Monarke of the
Ottoman Empire, will elsewhere bestow upon us great honor, and will give us
good assurance to make us great, and to advance us to high authority. In the
end with many false and slanderous accusations inueighing against Scanderbeg,
he alienated them from their allegiance, and allured them to bear a part with
him in his rebellion. It may be that he would have solicited many more to
revolt with him, and that he would have drawn the common people also to the
devotion of the Sultan: but the name of Castriot, and the gracious manner of
the government was so deeply fixed in the hearts and minds of all men, that it
would have been more easy for him (as the saying is) to separat the shadow
from the body, then to abolish or to extirpat the love and good liking of
Scanderbeg, which was so rooted in the affections of the communalty: for he
well knew that their faith was not subject to any change or variation of
fortune, and that their loyalty would never fail nor perish, but with the
loss and end of their bodies and lives. And therefore the Dibrian being in
doubt that he should not only lose his labor, but he might also endanger his
own life and safety, he durst not attempt any such matter: but holding himself
contented with those conspirators which he had already gained: after he had
provided all things in a readiness, Moses his departure to the enemy.
and appointed the hour for their departure, in the dead of the night he lead
them to Sfetigrade there to take letters and a safe conduct from the governor,
to the intent he might pass free throughout the dominions of the Paynims, and
so travel forwards to the Court of the Ottoman. The Governor received him
lovingly, granting him whatsoever he asked, both letters and armed soldiers to
convey him safely on his journey.

Sebalias remained a few days at Belgrade, till such time as he had repaired
certain Belgrade repaired and revictualled by Sebalias.
bulwarks, and had fortified the walls with earth and fagots, in such places as
the enemies ordinance had battered them. The shortness of the time would not
permit him to fortify with stone and such solid matter, because he had not
leisure enough to provide them, yet did he take order for it before his
departure, and amongst other provisions, he procured the place to be furnished
with great store and quantity of grain, victuals and other provisions, for
that he had added to the old garrison more then 700. men all approved and
expert soldiers. The artillery that was won from the Christians was left to
the town, except certain little pieces, as harguebusses and crossebowes, which
he reserved with the other spoils of the dead bodies to beautify the pomp of
his triumph, and to present them to the king. Belgrade being abundantly
provided and defended, the Christian hostages redeliuered to the citizens, and
they also highly praised and commended: he took his leave of them (who were
both fearful and sorrowful for his departure) and with great joy and
contentment he took his journey to Andrinople: yet had he also just occasion of
grief and sorrow to moderat and abate his exceeding joy (albeit to men who
were not accustomed to be victorious, nothing seemed so excellent and glorious
as this victory.) For on his part also there fell little less then 3000.
Number of Turks slain at the battle of Belgrade.
at the battle before Belgrade: and those two gallants, whose blood made some
amends for the funerals of Musache, might be well reckoned for a good
recompense of their joy conceived by so bloody a victory. Before their
departure the Turks caused diverse pits to be dug (as is the manner amongst
soldiers) wherein all those that had been slain of their side were interred:
for fear least the Christians (returning to take the number of those which
they had lost, and to bury them which were slain) should seek in some sort
to be revenged, by tearing and deforming the dead carcasses of their enemies.
But now I come again to our fugitive.

The morning after the departure of the Dibrian, as soon as he was found
lacking, you may easily conjecture, what tumult, stir and astonishment did
arise amongst the Garrison of Dibria troubled at the departure of Moses.
companies of the garrison: and how greatly they were grieved, especially those
that were his nearest and most familiar friends. They sought him up and down
here and there in great care and perplexity. Some thought that he was seeretly
gone to espy and discover upon the enemy, and that he was either dead or
taken: or if not so, that then he would return speedily. But many being of a
deep conceit and judgment, and giving a conjecture by the former
consultations and secret assemblies of the day last past, wherein he and others
had drawn themselves aside in counsel, they did mistrust that which was
indeed: and their opinion was reputed the more likely and probable, because
they which were suspected with him, were not to be seen at all. This was the
occasion that the Dibrians, but above all the soldiers of the garrison were
in great fear and astonishment, because they saw the enemies to be victorious
and yet remaining in Epire, and themselves destitute of a head and commander.
And their grief was exceeding great, to see that their Prince should be
deceived by them, whom he would least of all have mistrusted. Nevertheless,
according to the time, by public consent, and most voices of the soldiers,
they provided themselves of a Chiefetaine, and of all things else that seemed
requisite for the time present.

Amongst the most noble and chiefest young men of the country, there were two
Demetrius and Nicholas brethren of the family of the Berissians.
brethren Demetrius and Nicholas, highly commended and honored for the
greatness of their ancient house and family of the Berissians, and they had been
much and often noted to have done the king of Epire good and faithful service,
by many valiant deeds of arms, and in diverse notable adventures. These two
understanding the misfortune of their army, and the hard issue of the siege of
Belgrade, and having notice likewise of the revolt of Moses, made with all
speed toward the garrison in the frontiers of the kingdom, doubting least
that either the fear of that sudden accident, or the licentiousness of the
soldiers, should cause them to disband themselves: and so the passages of the
Province might be left naked without any defense or custody, especially for
that the report went: that Sebalias Mahomet his lieutenaunt was yet abiding in
the country. First of all therefore with good advise and ready debiberation,
and with no less diligence, they made a leauy of some new forces, and
strengthened the garrison, heartening and animating them both by words and by
deeds, willing them to be of a good courage, and to testify their good
affections toward Scanderbeg, by showing themselves his good friends, and
their willing devotion to do him service, and with a singular compassion of
their Prince his misfortune, they detested and abhorred the infidelity of
Moses, telling them, that they doubted greatly, and it was likely he had
conveyed himself from thence to help to bring in the Infidel, and that it
would not be long ^re he would come thither. All this was easily believed, and
therefore the soldiers were retired into a place of more strength, and all
things were settled well and in good order, as if they had expected the enemy
presently. These matters being thus established, Demetrius leaving his brother
with the garrison, and being accompanied with certain Gentlemen Dibrians,
took his way toward Scanderbeg, making very long and painful iourneis to
advertise him of the estate of the Dibrians.

In the mean time, certain spies (which had been purposely sent abroad, and
dispersed over the plain country) did bring certain news, that Sebalias was
departed from Belgrade, and gone away quite out of Epire: Howbeit for all that,
the Prince of Epire either for shame or for grief of his late calamity, being
unwilling to behold so unpleasing a spectacle, had no mind at all to visit
that place so odious unto him, by means of that unfortunate battle, and where
he should come but to the fresh view of his misfortunes, and to the renewing of
his grief and sorrow: neither had he any care or desire to see those who were
now dead, whom he could not preserve and save when they were alive. Yet because
his soldiers, and the kinsmen of those which were slain, Speech of the
soldiers of Scanderbeg desiring that their fellows slain at Belgrade may be
buried. Sentence.
did murmr and exclaim, saying: That there was no reason their bodies being
so lately slain, should be defrauded of their sepulture, nor be left to the
savage and bruit beasts to prey and tire upon: and for that he would not seem
to give them any just cause of offense or coffeehouse, he condiscended unto
their demand, telling them: that it was a vain and frivolous kind of honor
(though very grateful and acceptable) to stand so precisely upon the burial
and funerals of the dead. So notably does the exceeding vehemence of men's
passions make them many times to forget themselves, and to decline from al
reason and understanding. Nevertheless because that those which should be sent
to perform that duty of Christian charity unto others, might not draw on a
farther mischief and damage upon themselves, and by their own destruction
increase rather then solemnize their obsequies, if they should go thither
either weak in number or in confusion, and without order: he made choice
therefore of 7000. the Tanusee sent with an army to bury the Christians slain
at Belgrade.
best and most able men of all his bands, that they might be the better able to
assure them selves in their voyage against all the enterprises of the
miscreants, and to oppose them selves against any sallies of the Belgradians.
Tanusee made great suite and entreaty to have the conduct and charge of this
company, which being granted him accordingly, he took great care for all
things that concerned this journey, and especially for the body of his good
friend Musache. Wherefore with great speed he took his leave of the king, and
without any colors, standards, or other warlike ornaments, he made have away
toward Belgrade.

Scanderbeg being now returned toward Croy, the multitude came forth to meet
him without the gate: and albeit they had many times before, and by diverse
messengers hard the news of the misfortune of Belgrade: especially by those
soldiers whom (being wounded in the fight) Scanderbeg had sent away presently
upon the loss of the battle: yet nevertheless it was some comfort unto these
poor and unhappy souls, to enquire more fully and at large of all things in
particular, by such as were last returned from the Camp: and the rather for
that many false tales and contrary reports had bin given out (as is usual): or
they had an imagination belike, that the presence of their Prince should have
revived, and redeliuered unto them those which were dead and gone. The wives,
the men, the old and young all alike would pull the Captains and the
soldiers, without any respect of persons, some by the hand, others by the
cassocks: and with a pitiful complaining voice would redemaund of them their
brethren, their husbands, and their children: whom they accounted and held as
their most precious and dearest pledges. Others would in a manner constrain and
compel them, even against their wills, to tell them that which in the end
caused their grief, and their greater sorrow and coffeehouse. Some there
were also who having heard comfortable news which they neither hoped nor
looked for: yet fearing least they should offend the troubled minds of others
with their new joy, they concealed their contentment, and conformed them selves
in outward show to do as others did, deploring the common and particular
misfortune of every one both in public and in private. And there was not any
of them (excepting such as saw their friends there present and in ^ight, that
had any full and hearty contentment: by reason that this second journey to
Belgrade made for the burial of the dead, did keep them in continual fear,
yielding new cause of care and grief.

Demetrius with the rest of the Gentlemen of Dibria his companions, having
overtaken Scanderbeg upon the way in his retrait from Belgrade, and even as he
was upon entering into Croy, at their coming to his presence, did first begin
(as it were) condoling Speeches of Demetrius and others to Scanderbeg
comforting him upon his misfortune.
his misfortune, to complain upon the unchangeableness and uncertainty of
worldly matters, and the variation of Fortune: which (said they) is so variable
and inconstant, that she will not suffer the prosperous and happy estate,
especially of great men, to be perpetual or of any long continuance, but that
ordinarily she does interrupt the course of their best and noblest enterprises
which they think to put in execution: and though by the law of her instability,
she does subject even the greatest Monarchs and conquerors to the trial and
experience of her crosses and trauerses, especially in deeds of arms, and in
the wars: yet he for his part was greatly bounden to praise the divine
clemency, that he was so well quit and discharged ofso dangerous a mischief:
Fortune is nothing but a fancy.
and that he ought to take this alteration valiauntly and courageously, not as
sent unto him by fortune (which in truth is nothing but a mere fancy) but
from God himself for the good and welfare of Epire, as being needful and
necessary to arm and harden the Epirots against the danger, or rather
insolency of their continual prosperity. The which for the most part does make
the noble and generous spirits to grow in Sentence.
contempt of their enemies, to neglect all care of discipline of arms, and in
the end brings them to ruin and destruction. In this manner did they frame
and hold on their discourse, their speeches being sometimes intermingled with
tears, and so fitted to sorrow and mourning, that it seemed they alone did
bear the grief of his misfortune. After Departure of Moses made known unto
Scanderbeg.
all this they fell to comforting of him, and carrying their countenance with a
singular assurance, they came at length to the fact of Moses, and concluding
their talk with that matter, they did principally insist vpno this point, that
it was to be feared least he were gone to Sebalias, to certify him of the
estate of the realm, and to draw him to Epire.

At the first Scanderbeg stood as one astonished, and was in a manner beside
himself, remaining a good while without sense or perseueraunce. After a while
as one that did more desire to enquire further of matters, then to believe any
thing that was told him, he spent some time in questioning with them. How
mightily this good Prince was afflicted, and how deeply he found himself
offended by this injury, they may easily imagine who have received an unkindness
of their friend, from whom any wrong is more intolerable and more hard to be
endured, then from one of whom a Sentence.
man expects not any gracious nor good usage: and so did Scanderbeg conceive
more grief at this fault and treachery of his friend, then at the discomfiture
and calamity sustained at Belgrade. Notwithstanding with a princely voice (as
he was accustomed) he said openly and aloud, so as he might easily be heard:
That he did pardon Moses Speech of Scanderbeg of the revolt of Moses.
with all his heart, because such was the misfortune which had alienated him
from him, as might have made the most constant man living, to have varied in
his faith, and to have fallen away from him. In so much also, that when the
messengers and other the standers by did accuse him, that he had long since
forethought and conceived this rebellion in his mind, saying and alleging,
that that only was the reason why he dissuaded the journey of Sfetigrade, and
did absent him self from the siege of Belgrade, the better to put his
mischievous practice in execution (so prone are men to judge and Sentence.
interpret all things by their events.) Scanderbeg (as growing in choler)
commanded them to leave those speeches: and speaking out aloud, he used these
words; O that it were the good will and pleasure of God, that all treason and
sinister fortune were gone with Moses out of Epire. As for that suspicion which
was conceived with some likelihood, that he should bring in the Turks into the
country, that point did not much trouble him, because he was credibly
informed, that he was departed out of all the frontiers of Albany, and was
posting on with all speed toward Andrinople Nevertheless because the matter was
of importance, and it behooved him to take away this terror out Scanderbeg
^isiteth the garrison of Dibria.
of the timorous minds of his subjects: and it was needful to co^firmethe
province which stood in some doubt by reason of this unaccustomed accident and
unusual calamity: he would scarce tarry at Croy that night, but the next morning
by the break of day, he took his iourny into Dibria, being accompanied with
Amese and a good troup of horsemen.

By this time was Tanusee come to Belgrade, where being discovered by the
citizens, they began to be in as great a fear as before, and they ran speedily
to the walls, every man hasting to his charge, and to his place that was
appointed him: for many thought that he Tanusee before Belgrade.
was come to begin a new siege, and they did not imagine the true occasion of
his coming: but the smalnesse of his numbers, and the confused manner of his
marching being more nearly discovered and perceived, they were soon freed from
that sudden fear. The Epirots coming to the place where the bodies of the
Christians their companio^s lay so mangled and deformed, they could not
refrain from many grievous and bitter tears, at the sight ofso horrible and
piteous a spectacle. And that (which more augmented their grief and sorrow) was
by reason of certain women, who dwelling not far off, followed thither after
Tanusee (as the report goes) to search for some of their friends. But it was
almost impossible or very difficult for them to bestow their tears upon the
right bodies, or to honor the corpses ofthose which they intended. For they
were a company of disguised trunks and carcasses, all naked, many without
heads, others disfigured, and their faces so corrupted, that they had not only
lost their peculiar shape and figure, and were impossible to be known: but
they retained in a manner no show nor resemblance of humane creatures. Besides
that many of them had their flesh gnawen to the bones by the wild beasts and
ravens. Yet poor souls, did they bemoane every body which they found,
taking them for their friends, and neither could the stench, nor the corruption
separat these people from the bodies which they so ardently desired. But to
make short: their eyes having had their fill of looking, and their grief being
somewhat eased and satisfied by the abundance of their tears, Christians slain
at Belgrade buried by Tanusee and the Epirots.
they were enforced by Tanusee to dig up many little pits, and therein to
butie them, the earth whereof being again cast upon them, did make a show
ofso many little hills, or mountainets. Wherefore the earth being put to
earth, and the funerals fully ended, their sorrow and lamentation likewise
ceased and had an end. Scanderbeg could not have made choice of a fitter man
to see this office executed, then Tanusee Thopie: for when he had performed the
obsequies with as great affection as was possible, and had discharged the
deuoire of his amity and friendship to his friends and companions: because he
would not have it thought, that he was come thither to that only intent, and
so should return mocked and scorned by the enemy, he sought out some fit
matter whereupon to display his rage and choler, and to leave them some subject
and occasion likewise of grief and lamentation. For this cause he sent abroad
his soldiers over all the fields lying within view and sight of Belgrade, who
made notable Tanusee spoyleth ^^ burns all the country about Belgrade
havoc of all things with sword and fire: not sparing either trees, vines, or
any thing else: and giving the citizens a most lamentable spectacle through the
spoil and desolation of all the country round about them. And not content
therewithal, he proceeded yet further: for passing on even close to the walls
(which he might well do without any great danger) he omitted not to do them any
damage, mischief, and displeasure, which his wrath and fury could inflict
upon them. Some have affirmed, and many do confirm no less, that the garrison
issued out, and made a brave sally forth Sally made by the Belgradia^s upon
Tanusee and the Epirots, who repulsed them.
upon them: and partly with their ordinance, and partly with the adventure of
their persons, did seek to beat them from the walls, having first set fire
on their suburbs, and that after a long, sharp, and bloody skirmish (wherein
the Christians had the better) they were beaten back within their gates.
Whereupon because Tanusee stood in doubt lest the next garrisons of the Turkish
frontiers might come upon him, and suddenly oppress him, he would not give
any further attempt against them: but with a million of curses and
execrations, he left and abandoned those unfortunate places, which were so
infamous by the ruin and slaughter of the Christians.

Scanderbeg at his being in Dibria held many counsels and great assemblies,
wherein he consulted with the most grave and ancient persons of that country:
endeavoring above all things to sift and search out if there were any other
conspirators or consorts of Moses yet remaining in the province, or any secret
sparks or tract of his treason left behind him. And besides all privy and
secret means used to enquire of it, there was public proclamation made with
sound of trumpet, promising a great sum of money to those that could and
should detect any such conspirators. But there was not found so much as any
show of suspicion of any such matter. And therefore the Dibrians were highly
commended for their loyalty, and the assured constancy of their faith.
Besides that, he bestowed great and bountiful rewards amongst them, to continue
them in their good deuoire and duty. Moses his goods, and such pensions and
offices wherewith Moses his goods and livings seized and confiscated.
Scanderbeg had before honored and advanced him, were confiscated and seized to
the kings coffers, and resumed into his hands: many of which he bestowed upon
particular persons. The Gouernorship of the country and garrison of Dibria was
retained still in the kings hands, and bestowed upon no man, but was kept void
for a season by the good liking and consent of all*men, especially of the
soldiers. The affairs of the Dibrians being thus ordered and put in good
assurance with a good and strong garrison, he returned thence to Croy, where
Tanusee was also then arrived with his army, the which he having resigned into
the hands of the Prince, he retired himself in extreme grief and sorrow to his
own house, where at his return, the lamentations, sighs, and sorrows began
afresh to berenewed amongst the friends and kinsmen of Musache, every body
grieuing and mourning for his mischance. And Mamisa Mamiza the wife of Musache
celebrateth the obsequies of her husband.
the widow of the deceased, having called together (according to the custom of
that nation) many Ladies, Gentle women and grave matrons, did celebrate the
obsequies of her husband: longtime mourning and bewailing his death, and never
ceasing day nor night with abundance of tears, to lament the loss of him which
she held most dear unto her.

Scanderbeg having dismissed his own army, did determine also to send away
those Neapolitans which were left alive after the battle of Belgrade: and
together with them Ambassade sent to Alphonsus king of Naples* and the Italian
succors returned home.
an Ambassade to the king Alphonsus, to certify him of the truth of his
misfortune, and to excuse himself. Accordingly as soon as they were in case to
travel, he courteously thanked them of their pains and company, and so
embarked them for Italy: which done, he took his journey into the country
appertaining to Musache, toward his sister, both to mitigate their public
and private sorrow, and in this time of affliction and discouragement, to
advise upon the affairs of his estate. Tanusee was appointed to be Tutour and
Guardian of the person and goods of his nephews: who did continually carry him
self with such love, sincerity, care, and diligence, that greater could not
have been found in a kind and natural father. The honor, title, and dignity,
with the Signiorie of the country, did remain in the mother, who Mamisa her
praises and perfections.
managed that Estate* and governed the people with such moderation and
dexterity of spirit, that there was never seen greater concord and unity
among the inhabitants of the Province; then was during the time of her
government: which is a thing seldom seen, by reason that the common sort
ordinarily being mutinous and disobedient, are hardly restrained within the
limits of their duty and allegiance. Sentence.
But herein especially was the sovereign prudence and singular judgment of
this Lady to be admired: that (as it is generally confessed) Scanderbeg did
oftentimes use her as a most faithful consort, and associat in the manadging
of the affairs of the estate, and was much and usually advised and counseled
by her. She would never yield to any second marriage, but even to the last
gasp of her life, she honored the memory of her beloved spouse, not without
a singular commendation of her continency and chastity: wherein she continued
and perseuered most devoutly, induced thereunto (it may be) not only in regard
of her own natural gravity and modesty, but because she being a woman of an
excellent and noble mind, did esteem the loss of her husband to be
irreparable. For (not to speak any thing of his other virtues* which are
Musache his praises and virtues.
most ordinary and proper to men, and whereof he gave sufficient testimony by
his glorious end) he was even by nature so lovely and amiable, of so fine and
pleasing a behavior, and of so sweet a conversation, that no creature living
knew better, no^ with greater facility then he, how to insinuat himself into
the affections of men, and to purchase their good love and liking. Besides the
beauty and comeliness of his person wherewith he was notably graced, and which
is the proper object that women do affect, and the elegancy of his goodly and
tall stature, did fit singularly well to the perfections of his mind. But
whilst we have our eyes thus fastened, and our minds too too carefully busied
in contemplation of our Christians, and do tediously pursue the plaintes and
griefs of them in particular: we do not listen to the sound of Sebalias his
trumpets, which do summon us to hearken unto him, and who is now complaining
that we have over long delayed to give him the merit of his due and deserved
triumph.

The news of his good success in Epire was gotten before him to Andrinople,
and the manifold reports which ran of his victory did in some sort draw the
Turkish monarke to believe I know not what. For this unexpected good fortune,
till then unusual and unaccustomed, did withhold him from believing the full
truth of that which was reported. The coming of Moses was the first object of
the others triumph, and an Moses comes to Andrinople.
accident that made them all break forth into an exceeding joy: for he arrived
at the Sultans Court certain days before the other, for that the way from
Belgrade was more difficult to him that drew an army after him, and who was
enforced to march more leasurely and easily. The Sultan learned by him the
estate of all things more fully and certainly, giving credit to his speeches,
and taking more pleasure and contentment in his presence, and to see him
alienated from his Prince, then by the report of any victory that could be
brought unto him. He did not remember nor consider, that as the adversity and
mishap of Epire had drawn him thither: so the same being ceased, and the
fortune of Albanie restored, might in like manner carry him away again.
Sebalias at his return was received with the singular joy and public
acclamations of all the people: who showed themselves more joyous of this
journey, then of all the noble conquests Sebalias his triumph and return to
Andrinople.
erst obtained by their sovereign. The captives with their hands bound behind
them, and the ensigns of the Christians were first presented unto the Ottoman.
After that the rest of the spoils, with the other warlike instruments were
brought in sight, together with the heads of those that were slain: the which
being sold with the straw within the^ for their weight in gold, were thrown up
and down the streets, the children playing with them as at footbal. The poor
Italians which were prisoners, were set to sale, and many of them sold to such
as would give most. Some few of them, who Christians prisoners to the Turks
put to extreme torments.
were very old and aged, together with all the Epirots, were either fastened
upon sharp piles or posts, and so gored to death, or else were lifted up aloft
into the air with hooks of iron, and so in the midst of their torments, had
this only comfort left them, that they died Martyrs for the name of him that
died for us, praising and commending the glorious end of their companions
slain at Belgrade, and detesting (but all too late) their own base cowardice
and infamous desire of life, that could endure to see themselves reserved to be
thus tormented and scorned by such miscreants. But the cruelty and hateful
villainy which they showed upon the Albanians, did far exceed that which was
used to the others: and there was scarce any one of them saved from the
barbarous handling of the enemy. And they did it, either in respect of the
hatred and despite which they bare to that nation, or else for that the Turks
do seldom or never use to sell any Epirots for slaves. For they are of
opinion, that there is no nation, nor any slaves of Turks their opinion of the
Epirots.
what quality soever, so unfit to be sold as the Epirots and the Hungarians,
for that they are held to be men unmeet for service, as being proud, lofty
and imperious, and such as will never come to be good Turks or Musulmans in
the Arabian tongue signifies, faithful toward God. Speech and censure of
Mahomet touching the battle of Belgrade. Scanderbeg his body reputed
inviolable.
Musulmans.

When Mahomet heard the report of the chiualry and haughty exploits of
Scanderbeg, showed in the battle of Belgrade, he was stricken with so
incredible an admiration and extreme grief, that he went away, saying, that his
host was vanquished, and that the Epirots were the vanquishers: and that the
reputation and name of Scanderbeg would be more augme^ted and renowned by this
only battle, then by any other thing done all his life time. For in very truth
all men did attribute unto him a kind of supernatural excellency, saying:
that his body was even by a fatal kind of destiny inviolable, and not subject
to the sword, nor to any other humane force or violence.

Notwithstanding the virtue of Sebalias had his due and deserved honor. And
being largely rewarded, he was for a long time the only man, that was talked
of amongst the common people: as being the first that had made it known that
Scanderbeg was not invincible. Moses also was not left behind, but was much
made of, and highly commended, Moses honorably entertained by the Turk.
and a great and honorable pension was assigned him for his entertainment. True
it is, that when he demanded certain forces of the Sultan to invade
Scanderbeg, Mahomet would not condescend unto it, but excused him self upon
the nearenesse of winter then approaching. And that might very well be the cause
of his refusal: but I believe he did it also upon a conceit, as wise Judges
use to do amongst the Christians, who will not willingly believe a Jew that is
newly baptized: and therefore neither would he enterprise any thing under the
conduct of Moses, nor yet would he employ any other man, but was resolved for a
time to set aside all care, and wholly to abstain from the war of Epire.

The Ambassadors Albanois returning from Naples laden with rich gifts after
Ambassadors sent to Scanderbeg from the king of Naples and others to comfort
him for his loss before Belgrade.
the accustomed manner, were accompanied with other Ambassadors from the king
Alphonsus: who being admitted to the presence of Scanderbeg, with a long and
eloquent oration, did endeavor to mitigate the bitterness of his grief and
passion, covering his loss under the common casualty and chance of war, and
with the ebbing and flowing of worldly affairs: saying, that the continual
train of arms did often bring with it such like accidents. And in conclusion,
they offered him in the name of their Sentence.
Prince, full and ample succors and supplies of whatsoever he should need. The
king of Epire having rewarded them with great presents, as one that did even
contend to surmount the magnificence of the Spaniard, did honorably send them
away with this answer* That he never had any doubt of his good love and
singular affection, both Answer of Scanderbeg to the Neapolitan Ambassadors.
in regard of the public cause of religion, as also for his own particular^*
the same having been testified by infinite acts of his bounty and magnificence
worthy of perpetual remembrance* for the which he did give most hearty thanks,
with protestation to use his aid and succors as his own, when soever and as
often as occasion should require. The like messages came unto him also from
other Princes and States of Italy, and from diverse great Seigniors and
peoples his next neighbors, with the Speech of other Ambassadors to
Scanderbeg, touching his loss at Belgrade.
like offers and demonstrations of love and friendship* and they persuaded him,
that his late loss ought not any way to abate his courage, nor cause him to
exceed in sorrow and coffeehouse: and they assured him, that most of the
Princes and States of Christendom would not make spare of any labor and
travel, of any costs and expenses, nor of any dangers or hazards whatsoever
for his safety, and for the maintenance of his crown and dignity. It was a
strange matter to Scanderbeg to see the news of his discomfiture so published
and spread abroad, and then did he begin to have a more clear and perfect
knowledge of his disgrace, and the blemish of his reputation, then he had
before, whilst the wounds of his soldiers and the loss of his men, were yet
green and fresh in remembrance. Wherefore with an undaunted courage, he did
openly make Answer of Scanderbeg to the other Ambassadors*
known unto them, that they should not think the estate of Epire to be such
as they imagined, or that they wanted sufficient forces to recover their good
fortune: but rather that they were able to surmount their former exploites, and
to purchase themselves now greater honor upon the enemy then ever: and with
this answer they departed, highly contented and well satisfied.

The winter following he spent partly at Groy, and partly in Dibria and other
places of the province: the garrison of Dibria he diminished, and reduced to
the ancient numbers of 2000. horse, and 1000* foot: setting good and strong
watches, and ordaining many spies purposely dispersed abroad to discover the
attempts of the Infidels, who all this dead time of the year were not any way
molested with the roades or invasions of the Christians. For all the country
for a good way round about had been harried and wasted, so that to give in any
further upon the enemies country, neither the quality of the time and
dicommodity of the cold weather would permit: nor was Scanderbeg willing to
suffer them: for his mind devised upon greater matters and of more importance,
and he reserved the mortal hatred of his mind to some more notable kind of
vengeance: by means whereof the coldness of that season did pass away in
great tranquillity and quietness.

Now was the new Spring come on, and both the earth began to be embellished
1453.
and beautified with the green grass, and all things growing fresh and gay,
and the Moses urges Mahomet to employ him against Scanderbeg.
sweetness of the air made every thing pleasant and delightful. Then Moses*
as a continual spur in the eyes and ears of the Turkish Emperor, did
importune and egg him on without ceasing, and was instant and urgent upon him
to begin the war, and to bend his forces against his own nation. Mahomet who
had his chief hope and expectation upon him, and the time also serving him
very well, did not in any thing gainsay his desire: for his mind did long
before tend to the same end. And you must imagine, that all th^^ dead line of
the winter season (which was about six months) whilst Moses remained with
him in Court, he did most carefully sound and examine every particular of his
actions and behavior: in such sort, that he had noted in him great signs and
evident demonstrations of constancy and fidelity, and of a mind wholly
alienated from Scanderbeg. Besides, the better to put himself in the good grace
and liking of the Sultan, he had by many evident testimonies and tokens, given
him proof of his sufficiency and virtue, as much as was possible in that time
of peace and intermission of arms, and he made great show of his strength,
valor, and resolution: inso much (as it is reported, and as afterward Moses
affirmed it openly) that Mahomet demanded of him, whether Scanderbeg had many
such men about him as himself: and Speeches between Mahomet and Moses.
he answered most modestly, that he had infinite such: And thereupon the Sultan
highly commended the modesty of his speech. Then Moses (as it is commonly
seen, that when shame keeps us from praising our selves openly, we do
secretly and indirectly Sentence.
as it were, by circumstance attribute to our selves that which we detract from
the reputation and honor of another) descending by little and little and by
degrees from talking of others to Scanderbeg, did seek to diminishe his
reputation, and to lessen the opinion of his deserts: and after a long
discourse, he made a promise unto Mahomet, that if it pleased him to repose
that trust in him only, he would prove him self in that war body to body
against Scanderbeg, and would adventure the hazard of a particular combat: and
that he would not desire any greater numbers to work his overthrow and
confusion, then an army of fifteen thousand horsemen only; so that himself
might have the choosing, the ordering and disposing of them.

The Ottoman as he was soon and easily entreated to grant him the charge and
Moses sent with an army of 15. thousand horse against Scanderbeg.
command of this army: so did he refer the whole care thereof to his
judgment and discretion, and gave him the reins to do as he thought best. The
soldiers which were pressed to go in that voyage for Albanie, did infinitely
misdoubt the weakness and feeble strength of so small a company:
nevertheless the wonderful confidence and brave resolution of their new
General did enforce them to hope well, and to conceive some good opinion
touching the happy success of that journey. Besides the great credit and
authority of Moses with his own nation, and his strong alliance within the
country, was a matter worthy to be thought upon, and did greatly encorage all
of them, and did put them in hope, that they should find great aid by them of
the country, which the Dibrian also had assured to the Sultan. And it may be,
that he himself was persuaded no less: for he gave out, that he had had
conference with some of the most ancient and principal persons of the
province, and that many of his confederates and intelligencers did keep
themselves close and in secret, and did rest at his devotion: and that
suddenly, as soon as they should see his troops within the country, they
would be ready to come and join with him: and bringing a good number of
lusty and able youths, they would take arms and bend their force against
Scanderbeg. Thus all things being thoroughly prepared, and he in a readiness to
take his journey, about the three and twentieth of February, in the year
1453. he departed from Andrinople, displaying his unhappy ensigns in the
sight, and within the proper bowels of his own native country.

We will leave the ingrate and unkind Moses bending his traitorous arms
against Epire, and in the mean time altering our discourse, to yield you the
more contentment by this history, let me entreat you to give me leave to dwell
a while with that fierce and haughty minded Prince young Mahomet, who calls
upon me to accompany Mahomet his voia^e against Constantinople
him in his journey to Constantinople, which he having for a long time delayed
and deferred, yet meant not to break off nor to give over for altogether. You
have read (if you remember it) in the beginning of this book with what
egernesse and vehemency his aspyring and his ambitious heart, did affect to
see the Imperial Diadem of Greece set upon his own head: nevertheless, the
jealousy which he had to defend and rescue one little place in Epyre, had made
a stay of his goodly progress and glorious enterprise. But now upon the
notable victory of Sebalias, thinking that his mortal enemy was so
overthrown as he should never be able to rise again, he grew into such a
confidence of his prosperity, that he doubted not to proceed with his former
voyage, and with full sails to follow his good fortune, which now seemed to
fawn on him with a merry and pleasant gale of wind: as we see it is an
ordinary thing, that if some one of our actions be seconded with Sentence.
good hap, it hardens and encourages us to undertake other matters far
more difficult.

The Turkish Monarche, having commanded a general and speedy leauie of
Mahomet marches to the siege of Constantinople.
soldiers both horse and foot throughout all his Dominions, and that in more
extraordinary and excessive numbers then had been heard of in many ages, used
an extreme kind of diligence, and all possible celeritie in the raising of
that army, pretending that those preparations were for an other war, because
the Princes of Christendom should not have him in any mistrust or suspicion.
Moreover having prepared an infinite number of vessels and ships both for
fight and for carriage of necessary provisions (for this man of all the
Ottomans was the first that used shipping or men of war at sea) he departed
from Andrinople near about the same time that Moses took his journey for
Epyre: and with long and continual iourneyes both day and night he took the
way of Romania both by sea and by land, with an incredible train of
artillery, engines, and other provisions of assault. Mahomet violateth the
peace with the Emperor of Greece and inuadeth his Empire without preclamation
or denouncing of wars.
He made but a jest at those ancient ceremonies and solemn observations used
by his predecessors and other Princes to denounce and proclaim wars before
they made any invasion upon their neighbors. For violating the faith and
promise which he had formerly sworn, and breaking the oath and peace which he
had vowed most religiously to observe, with the Emperor of Constantinople: he
suddenly ouerranne and invaded all the plain country, and upon the nineteenth
day of April, he planted his camp before that noble and famous city, having
in less then three days straightly girt it in, and besieged it round on all
sides. His army exceeded four hundredth thousand men, most part of which were
collected and gathered out of the Constantinople besieged with an army of
400000 men.
Nations near adjoining, such as yet retained and held the name and
profession of Christians: namely, from Greece, Sclauony and Valachia, and from
amongst the Dardanians or Rascians: the Triballians or Seruians, and the
Misians or Bulgarians. Diversity of Nations both Christians and others serving
under the Turk at the siege of Constantinople.
There were very few of them natural Turks, but with those former Nations
out of Europe were mingled other troops out of Asia, both from Bithinia called
Natolia, and from Gallatia, Lidia, or Briquia, and Cilicia which is the
country of the King of Caramania. In this manner did these Miscreants,
Infidels, and Barbarians serve themselves with our own forces, and the peoples
of our own profession and alliance: augmenting and increasing their estate
with the aid and help of them only who were the most warrelike and stoutest
Nations of all their camp, and by whom they did principally work the ruin of
that Empire, and the destruction of the Christians.

Concerning the city it self, and the means of their defense: the whole
forces of the garrison (setting aside the multitude which ordinarily is more
hurtful then Numbers of the garrison in Constantinople against the Turks.
fit or apt to bear arms) did not amount to above 9000. soldiers, of which
6000. were Greeks of all sorts both good and bad. And the other 3000. were
partly Venetians and partly Genowayes. True it is, that for the better strength
and suertie of the city (if the majesty and reverence of the sacred Imperial
name, could have done any thing to the furtherance thereof) the Emperor
himself Constantine Paleologus Constantine Paleologus Emperor of
Constantinople
was there in person. But over and above this outward glory, and external
show of his presence, I do not find (and the subject of this discourse will
declare it) that his being there did any great good, to the preservation of
the place. The great searcitie and want of munition, powder, arms, corn,
treasure to pay the soldiers, Negligence of the Emperor of Constantinople
and such like provisions did sufficiently testify, and make proof of no
less then I speak. For he did of a long time before discern and know of the
great preparations of the Turk, and he foresawe the terror of this tempest
that menaced the state of Greece, yet did he proceed but very coldly in making
his provisions. Only he had recourse by Ambassadors to Pope Nicholas the
fifth, to the Emperor Emperor of Constantinople craves aid of Christian
Princes but in vain.
Frederick the third, to Charles the seventh King of France, and to other
Kings and Potentates of Christendom, to induce and persuade with them to send
him succors, and to show them the imminent peril and approaching decay and
ruin of so noble and aunclent an Empire, the loss whereof could not but
redound to the perpetual shame and infamy of the whole name of the
Christians: and finally he acquainted them with the extreme misery which they
were like to encurre, falling into the cruel and unmerciful hands of a
Nation most fierce and Barbarous, and more thirsting after the blood of human
creatures and Christians, then after wine or any other liquor whatsoever: and
in conclusion with abundance of tears and lamentations did his Ambassadors
labor to move them to some compassion and commiseration of their pitiful
estate. But all their travels were in vain, and (which I abhor to speak)
they found the ears of all those Princes to be so Carelessness of Christian
Princes of the danger and loss of Constantinople
deaf, and their eyes so blinded, nay rather their minds so senseless, as
they could not foresee, that if the Empire of Greece came once to decay and
confusion, it would cause all the residue of Europe in time to come to be
buried and over whelmed in the like ruin and destruction, to the manifest and
inevitable abolishing of the Christian religion. But shall we think that they
were ignorant hereof? nay rather I am of the opinion that they knew it
sufficiently: but being occupied and distracted with their private hatreds and
quarrels, and with the care of their own particular commodities, their hearts
were obdurate and hardened, and they did neglect the universal good and
public welfare of all in general. For behold and mark what was the occasion
that withheld them. Italy was drawn dry of money and treasure, by means of
the Schism in the Papacy, and by the factions of the two famelies of the
Vrsins and the Colonnezes: Almaine was vexed and rent with civil wars, and
the greatest part of France was in the subjection and welneere wholly possessed
by the English: and in brief, all Europe (according to their accustomed
manner) was divided into sects and partialities.

But that you may the better perceive both with what diligence and industry
the Turks labored to carry and conquer this goodly City, and to reduce it
under the Dominion of the Ottoman Empire: and how the defendants also did
diversely demean themselves, who labored and endeavored still to retain it in
the power and devotion of the Christians, I hold it expedient here to deliver
and represent unto you the true description and situation of the place. The
description and situation of Constantinople


Constantinople (which the ancients called Byzance) is situated upon the mouth
or entry of the straight of Gallipoly, on that part where Asia is adjoining to
Europe, each of them being separated from other by a very straight arm of the
sea of Hellespont, which (extending it self into a gulf opening with two
points or horns) lies Gulf of Hellespont described
full East and West, and so makes a goodly haven of two leagues and a half in
length, and about a mile in breadth, where it is largest, and not above half
so broad where it is narrowest. On the sides thereof it is full of nookes,
secret turnings, and by places, in regard whereof it is called the horn: for
that the seven hills which do advance themselves within the town, do make
the gulf to run with many branches, as it were the head of a Heart.
Between this gulf and the sea of Propontide, The sea of Propontide.
there runs out into the sea a mountain not very high, like unto a
Cherronesse or half Isle, the length whereof lying East and West is little
less then two short leagues. The ridge of this mountain holds still on
bending toward, and opposite against the mouth of the sea Propontide: but to
the North it has seven other small mountains or little hills adjoining, of
which four of them do strike into this gulf, and the greatest of the four is
washed with the waves of the sea of Bosphore, Sea of Bosphore or of Thrace.
and represents the base of a triangle. For the town and the demie Isle are
in form and fashion triangular. The two points or promontories of this
mountain (the one of them toward the Occident regarding the sea of
Propontide, and called Hebdomi: the Hebdomi. Chrisoceras.
other called Chrisoceras bending to the Northwards) do guard the entry and
mouth of the harbor from the violence of the winds. From the which entry, if
you draw a direct line to the seventh mountainet lying more hidden and not so
open as the others, and which does likewise cover the Port against the Western
winds, you shall include the moorish plain of Pera within the bosom (as it
were) of that winding circuit The moorish plain of Pera.
which makes that continual ridge or back of the demi Isle before mentioned.
The length of the haven (as we have said) is about two leagues and a half,
within the most inward recuyle whereof the rivers of Cidrus and Barbisa do
discharge themselves. Rivers of Cydrus and Barbisa.
The entry of the haven is very straight and narrow, for that on the side of
Barbisa (where is seated the town of Pera, sometimes founded by the Genowayes,
and now by the Turks Pera or Galata. Promontory of Metopique and Cyglobia.
Promontory of Damalique. Thrace.
named Galata) there is a promontorie called Metopique and Cyglobia, lying
against the South, and another promontorie also toward Asia, which ietteth out
even to the midst of the mouth of the straight of Gallipolis, and is named
Damalique. On the Occident where the demi Isle or Cherronesse does join to the
firm land of Thrace, there it does divide and separate the haven from the sea
of Propontide by means of a little cut of land, which is some 50. pace in
breadth, till it come to touch with the seventh hill: which being the inmost
angle of the town toward the maine land (as it goes still on) waxes
greater and greater, and increases more and more in largeness and wideness.
Upon this demi Isle or Cherronesse, is seated the noble and famous city of
Constantine, Constantinople seated upon the demi Isle or point of land lying
between the gulf and the sea of Prepontide. Phare a tower or lantern at the
entry of the haven. Circuit of Constantinople 4. leagues and a half which is
13. miles and a half.
and right against it upon the otherside of the bank of the gulf is the town
of Galatha or Pera: the length whereof also butteth upon four points of the
land within the turnings and windings of the haven. The closest and narrowest
part of the Port is closed with a great, strong, and massye chain of iron
running from a high tower on the promontorie of Chrisocer as called Phare, to
the promontorie of Metopique, where is likewise an other tower. Toward the
firm land the city is environed with a great and strong wall, and with a
vawmure, whereunto is adjoined a very wide and deep ditch. All the rest of the
town being washed with the saltwater, has but one only wall, yet very
strong, and flanked with infinite towers against all assaults and forces, that
may be addressed against them by sea-wards. The middle part of the city is a
little mountaynous and hilly, the circuit of it (accounting three miles to a
French league) contains about four leagues and a half. In this form and
largeness it was in times past builded and reedified by the great Constantine
Emperor of the Roman Monarchy, of whom also it had the name of
Constantinople.

Now that I have laid down and given you a view of the situation of the
city, whose sins and offenses (as it is to be thought) made a separation
between God and it: It follows that I now discover unto you, what order the
Turk observed in the siege thereof both by sea and land: how he disposed his
bands and companies about it: in what manner he planted his Ordinance and
placed his battery, and how he ordered his Navy and sea forces.

After the place had been well viewed, the Turks did soon make their
approches The manner of the siege of Constantinople.
to the walls, by reason the defendants, made but mean resistance, and the
assailants being covered with baskets of Osier, with long plankes and boordes,
with targets, pauizes, and such like did march in safety against the rampires
with so good order and discretion, that they would have made even the most
resolute and expert soldiers to be abashed and appalled. The Ordinance and
such like engines of battery being planted in three several places, did
begin to batter the walls as furiously as was possible: especially toward
Calegarie, where was placed a Cannon of such unmeasurable Calegarie.
greatness, that for the removing thereof from place to place scant 50. yoke
of Oxen did suffice: and the bullet thereof did contain eleven handbreathes in
compass. Through the violence and devilish force of this horrible engine, the
wall (though Constantinople battered.
it were very large and strongly builded) yet was not able to make resistance:
but it fell out that this piece brake, and Mahomet commanded that another
should be cast greater then the former. But it was not so soon ended by means
of the favor and policy of Calybassa, who was a great friend to a Nobleman a
Christian Calybassa a friend to the Christians.
Baron within the city, and one of the Counselors to the Emperor.
Nevertheless the battery was continued with great store of other artillery,
and they ceased not to weary the defendantes day and night: and daily did they
kill some, either more or less with harguebusses, arrows, slings, and diverse
other kinds of shot. For the Infidels did imagine, that the defendants were
but few in number, and that they could not long continue and hold out, nor be
able to endure the labor and travel of the siege. And the better to press
them to extremity, and to have his will of them by force of arms, he labored
with all diligence to dig and cast up trenches, to the intent the soldiers
might with less pains and danger safegarde themselves from the enemy, and
have the freer access to the foot of the wall. Moreover because he would by
the advantage of the higher place or ground, more easily present the ladders to
the walls, and be able to carry the town, he caused a long and high bank of
earth, equal to the town wall to be cast up round about that part of the
city: and this was not all, for he caused also many towers of wood to be
raised up near to the rampires, from the which (having caused them to be
covered with cowhides) he filled the ditch with earth and other stuff,
thinking to leauell and make plain the way, and to have the more easy access
into the town. And besides he had an innumerable company of logges of wood,
of ladders mounted upon wheels, and chariots raised in form of castles, and
such like engines as the Romans themselves could scarce have found and made
the like against the Carthaginians: and because that monstrous piece of
Ordinance which was newly cast, could do little or no hurt at all against
Calegarie, by reason of the notable and strong fortification of the place, it
was planted near the port S. Roman against the tower Battatinea, which being
beaten The Port S. Roman. The tower Battatinea.
down to the ground, did with his ruins fill up the ditch, and made it even
with the height of the plain ground, insomuch that the breach was plain and
even for the Infidels to have entered it, but that there was speedy order taken
for repairing the same, and it was made stronger then before. Whereat the great
Turk greatly maruelling, said: That it was not the work nor invention of the
Greeks but of the Latins, who were better practiced, and more expert and
industrious in points of fortification then the Greeks. Thus you see what was
done toward the firm land.

Toward the Sea on that side which regards Pera, the Sultan besieged it
with a fleet of 250. sail, whereof the greatest part were Foistes, and some
part gallyes, of which some were with two, some with three oars on a bank.
Besides there were a great number of Frigates laden with men and shot, rather
for a show and terror unto them then otherwise. These lay at ancker in the
maine a good way off, on one side of the haven toward the sea of Propontide:
for they durst not come near for fear of the Christians, but lying dispersed,
and sometimes say ling up and down the sea, they did still furnish their camp
at land with wood, stones, and such like necessaries. The port (as I have told
you) was shut up with a great chain: and besides it was guarded with 7. great
ships or carracks of the Genowayes, and three of Creete or Candia, all of them
strongly bound and well chained together the one close to the other, so as the
Turkish A stratageme or wonderful enterprise of the Turks at Constantinople
(by the counsel of a Christian traitor Renegado) to get into the haven.
Navy could not possibly enter into the harbor. But what did the Sultan
(think you) to get into the haven? by the counsel and advise of a traiterous
wretch a Christian Renegado, he commanded that a certain number of his galleys
should be drawn up out of the sea to the mountain, and then let down again
on the other side into the haven. The Pyoners and other laborers of the camp
being set about the work, and having far and wide on all sides made plain
the descent of the mountain, both on the one side and the other of the
promontory of Metopique, with strength and force of hands they drew up the
galleys, conueying the^ upon rollers more the^ 8. miles in length, and having
brought them to the top of the mountain, by little and little they let them
slide fair and Turks get into the haven of Constantinople
easily down into the haven. Now imagine you whether this new and strange
spectacle, did not astonish and amaze the Christians. They sought by all means
possible to sink them with force of great stones, or to set them on fire, but
in vain did they attempt it, and those vessels were the occasion of great care
and trouble unto them: for that they being enforced by that means to quit the
defense of the port, necessity did constrain them to look to the defense of
the walls toward the sea side, and to diminish their gardes on the other side
toward the land. For the town was daily assaulted on that side to the seaward
with a power of 70000. men, by the help also of another devise which the
Turks invented as ingeniously and with no less hardines, the same more
terrifying the Christians then the former: the manner whereof you shall hear also.

He builded a bridge more then 3. miles in length, from the bank or shore
besides Stratageme of the Turks in building a miraculous bridge over the sea of
Pera at Constantinople.
Pera right against the town, the which traversing or running over the sea was
supported with hogsheads, pypes, and other wine vessels being fastened and held
together underneath with great beams and posts of timber chained together, to
the intent his army might march freely, and approach near to the wall. I
mitating therein the greatness of Xerxes who passed his army in like manner
over the sea of Bosphore out of Asia into Thrace. He raised up also innumerable
towers surmounting the height of the walls, from the tops of the which, being
well furnished with all kinds of arms and provisions for assault, the city
was incessantly traveled and sore wearied.

I have figured forth unto you the terrible apprests and preparations of the
Turkish Monarch, by which he sought the ruin and destruction of this imperial
city. It now rests that I show you the order and provision of them within
the town, for the defense of the place against the assaylants.

The Christians growing daily more provident and expert, did help themselves
with Constantinople ill furnished with provisions
such pieces of artillery as they had, having but small store allowed them,
neither had they any great provision of powder and saltpeeter: as little also
was their store of arms and weapons, and much less were they provided of
victuals. That a^de which they had was with muskets and such like small shot,
with which they could not much grieve nor annoy the enemy, by reason of the
discommoditie of the place, the same being covered with trenches, and little
walls dry made, and cast up of purpose. Of their great Ordinance (as the
report goes) they could have little or no use at all, for fear of shaking
down their own walls; yet sometimes now and then, they did discharge some of
them upon the enemy, and did beat down both men, tents, and pauilions,
together with their Pauisados, Gabions, and other muniments and defenses. The
brave and furious sallyes of the youth of the city, did cause the Turks often
both to fear and to admire them: and ever the assailants had the worst and
sustained great Courage and valor of the garrison within Constantinople.
loss in all encounters. For the walls being kept well, guarded and assured
with valiant and resolute soldiers: every one striued to do his best, and to
give some notable proof and testimony of his valor and prowes.

It happened about that time, that a certain Genoway named John Justinian, one
of the chief of Genoway, both for his nobility and great account, as also for
his wealth and riches, did scour the seas, and did roaue up and down seeking
his fortune upon John Justinian a Genoway made Lieutenant General for the
Emperor within Constantinople.
that coast with two good and strong ships of war, and about 400. fighting
men. This man (as it fell out) lying at an anchor in the port of
Constantinople, when the town was upon the point to be besieged, and
considering with himself (as became a man of courage) that he was in one and
the same estate with the meanest of the inhabitants: and that the preservation
of the city did import him no less, then the residue of the citizens: he
undertook together with them the defense thereof with singular courage and
magnanimity, with so notable and evident a proof and show of his sufficiency
and valor, both in repulsing of the enemy, and for his notable promptness
and expedition in repayring the breaches and ruins made by the Canon, that he
carried away without any contradiction the honor and praise for a while, of the
safety and preservation of the Grecian Empire. In regard whereof he had this
prerogative, to be chosen and allowed for the chief commander within the
town, and he had the title and name of Lieutenant General under the Emperor.
As Soon as he had this authority committed unto him, he caused the soldiers to
be disposed and The order and forces of the Christians in the defense of
Constantinople. Port S. Roman defended by Justinian. Maurice Catanee at the
Port Fountain The golden gate. Paulus Troilus and Antony de Bouchardes.
Miliandre.
to be distributed here and there in diverse places according to the several
occurrences of the time, and as the attempts of the Barbarians did require. He
was assisted by the Emperor himself followed with a train of 300. Genowayes,
and a great number of Greek soldiers purposely chosen to defend that part of
the walls and rampires which lay near S. Roman, where the peril and danger was
most likely and apparent. Maurice Catanee a Genoway also, being a brave and
valiant Chieftaine, was placed between the Port of the fountain and the golden
gate, with 200. crosbowes Italians, and some Greeks intermixed with them: who
with great fury did maintain the fight against a castle made of wood, which
being covered over with Ox hides, the Turks had raised against that side of
the town. Paulus Troilus, and Antonie his brother surnamed Bouchardes, did
sustain the assault on the side of Miliandre, where the town began first of
all to waver. In that place did they continue in arms day and night, and
making no spare of their blood, they showed themselves hardy and courageous,
sometimes with pykes, one while with fire works, and another while with their
crosbowes, demaning themselves with such stoutnesse, strength, and bravery,
that their very enemies did admire them. With no less valor did Theodore
Caristin behave Theodore Caristin. Theophilus Paleologus.
himself, who being a Greek borne, and grown very aged, was a notable good
archer. Likewise Theophilus Paleologus an honorable Gentleman of Greece,
excellently well seen both in letters and in arms, and a near kinseman unto
the Emperor: and with them John le Grand or the great, a German borne, (of
John le Grand.
whom more shall be said hereafter:) these three did defend and reenforce the
breach of Calegarie, after it had been battered and beaten down by the Turkish
artillery. Contaren a noble and famous gentleman descended of the Contarens,
one of the most Breach of Calegarie. Contaren.
noble families amongst the Venetians, was lodged between the golden gate and
the towers, near adjoining even as far as to the sea: and did with singular
resolution, endure and sustain the force of the infidels on that side. The
other Greeks in like manner which were placed here and there on other parts of
the town walls, did bravely adventure and hazard their lives, to the intent
they might show some worthy token The palace imperial. Hierome Mynot. The
tower of Hippodrome. The sea port. Chirluc. Hierome the Italian. Leonard
Longa^ke. Chsiliport. The towers Aueniades. Gabriell Treuisan Governor of the
venetian foistes.
and testimony, that they were nothing inferior to the Latins. The care and
custody of the imperial palace was committed unto Jerome Minot, Baily of the
Venetians. The tower seated before the Hippodrome toward the East, was given
in charge to the Consul of the Catalans. Chirluc had the defense of the port
toward the sea and of all the sea coast. Jerome the Italian, Leonard Langask a
Genoway, and many others had the keeping of the Chsiliport, and of the towers
which they call Aueniades. The Priests, Muncks, and other religious persons,
being likewise distributed throughout the walls, did make show by their hardy
and settled looks that they could do something else besides praying upon their
beads, and singing and saying of mass. Gabriell Treuisan Governor of the
Venetian foistes being accompanied with Some say 400 The tower of Farrafin. The
port imperial. Anthony Diede General of the Galleys. Demetrius. Nicolus
Gullelle.
40. other Venetians did manfully defend the tower of Farrafin by the port
Imperial. Anthony Diede General of the galleys seeming to be faint hearted
and but badly resolved, did show himself more careful to keep aboard, and to
save his vessels, then to defend the haven which he had in charge.

Demetrius the father in law of N. Paleologus, and Nicolas the son in law of
Gullelle had the charge of a conduct and great squadron of armed men being
always in a readiness for the succors and relief of them upon the walls,
upon any accident or occasion that should be requisite. To make short, all of
them did show themselves so cheerful and courageous, as though they would
first have been torn in pieces rather then they would have fallen into the
hands of the circumcized Infidels. And forasmuch as neither the breach, nor the
ruins of the walls, nor the thundering noise nor violence of the ordinance,
nor the strength, force, nor huge puissance of the enemy could now terrify
nor astonish them: it seemed that they were fully resolved to abide all
extreamities, as if this had been the day and time, wherein they should
purchase unto themselves eternal renown and immortal fame. But what
Sentence. Courage bootlesse without good means of defense.
avails it for men that are besieged to be courageous and resolute, if they
want good order and provision for victuals, money and munition? Nevertheless,
because all color of excuse should be taken from the inhabitants, by which
they might pretend the neglect of their duties: and least they should be
discomforted more by fear of famine in time to come, then by the terror of the
present danger: there was commandment given, that the bread and other
victuals should be distributed, and shared by equal proportion amongst the
several housholdes and families. But there were some of the inhabitants so
greedily addicted to the infamous desire of gain, or rather of the blood of
their Christian brethren, that they concealed their corn: and others again
Covetousness of the Greeks in Constantinople.
raised the prises of their grain. This villainous and wretched humor of
avarice, was the occasion not only of many great mischiefs, but also of the
confusion of the whole estate and policy. The Emperor showed himself too
remiss and gentle, and did not with sufficient severity chastise and punish
their disobedience: by means whereof, every man did as he listed: and (as the
proverb is) they were like a company of rattes in the corne-stacke. If the
Emperor were at any time angered and discontented, he was soon appeased with
the flattering words and smooth speeches of his Courtiers, who did not stick
in a manner to mock and scorn him to his face, whilst himself in the mean
time made semblance, as if he did not see it.

A little before this time it happened that fortune presented unto the besieged
some show and appearance, that she would supply them with relief and succors.
For such Sentence.
is her unconstant and dissembling nature, that she faigneth sometimes to
favor them whom she purposes to ruinate and cast down headlong into extreme
misery. So fell it out with the inhabitants of Constantinople: Three great
ships of Genoway laden with armor, soldiers and corn, were come from*
Chios in the company of one Chios an Island in the mediterranean sea.
other ship which belonged to the Emperor, and was laden with wheat of
Sicilia. These being discovered to be near the city by the army of the
Infidels which kept watch toward the sea: and the alarm being given with
sound of trumpets and other instruments, they were presently assailed by the
Turks, especially the vessel A fight at sea between the Turks and the
Christians.
imperial, as being more notable then the others: both the townes-men from the
city on the one side, and the Monarch of the Turks from the top of the
mountain of Galatha on the other side beholding the fight and combat between
them. The galleys bearing up close unto them did first set upon that ship
which belonged to the Emperor, insomuch as there grew a hot and cruel fight
both on the one side and the other. Maurice Catanee (before named) was general
Commander of those vessels, who in that battle showed his excellent skill
and experience in sea service, and did give evident testimony of his singular
valor and prowes. He was seconded by Dominick Dominicke de Nouara. Baptista
Fellizan.
of Nouara, and Baptista Fellizan a Genoway also: both of which showed
themselves no less expert pilots then well practiced in deeds of arms. On the
other side the infidelles having in hope and conceit already devoured this
notable prey and booty, and accounting it sure their own, did enforce
themselves to carry away the victory, beating still and furiously with their
Ordinance and with great store of small shot, upon the imperial vessel, which
defended her self very bravely by the courageous deuoire of Flectanella her
patron. The oars of the Galleys flew in shiuers, and it was Flectanella.
a horror to hear the rattling of the hatches, and other great pieces of the
shipbordes which flew about, besides the woeful cries and howlings of the
Turks as they gave up the ghost. Their Sovereign perceiving from the
mountain, how his army was ill bestead, was in such rage and passion as if he
would have run mad for anger: he cursed and blasphemed, he rent his
clothes and tore his garments, the Pagans they lamented, and all his host was
in amazement and confusion. What should we say more? The broyle was renewed, and
the fight grew more fierce and terrible, still the Infidels had the worst, and
such was the success of the fight, that a great number of Turks being slain
and drowned, they were scant able for want of men to recover the shore with
their shipping. The besieged did learn by some of those Victory of the
Christians in a sea fight against the Turks before Constantinople
which fled whom they took prisoners, and by their own espials, that the
Turks had received a griuous overthrow and discomfiture, and that they had
lost more then 10000. of their men. The fleet wherewith they assailed the
Christian vessels was very near of 200* sails, part of them being of two, and
part of three oars on a bank. The Turkish king was greatly confounded, and
his forces were reputed of little or small puissance: for that so many galleys
united and consorted together, were not able to take nor overcome only three
vessels of the Christians. Thus the next night following, did the ships enter
into the harbor without any hurt or damage, having not so much as one man
slain, but only some of them hurt and wounded.

Mahomet being highly displeased, and grievously incensed against Baltogle his
Admiral, did depose him from his charge and office, confiscated all his goods,
and Baltogle Admiral to Mahomet in disgrace for loss of the battle at sea.
would scarce have pardoned him his life, had not his Bassaes and chief
Siegniours vehemently entreated for him. In this his choler and rage he
determined with cannon shot from the top of the mountain of Pera toward the
East, to sink those vessels that lay in the road or mouth of the harbor: or
at leastwise to make them leave and forgo the chain. Wherefore having caused
his artillery to be bracht, he did endeavor to break and to batter them in
pieces, being aided thereunto by a Cannonier Covetousness and treachery of a
Christian Cannonier.
a Christian, who for that he had been denied a certain pension which he
demanded, was of late revolted to the Turks. It chanced (I know not with what
destiny) that at the very first shot he sunk the ship wherein the
Captain himself was, which was an occasion that the others for fear of the
like misfortune did retire them selves under the covert of the walls of Pera.
Besides those vessels there lying* in the port, there were also three
galleyasses of Venice and two galliots for their security: which the Emperor
by earnest entreatie, and for a great sum of money, had caused Discord
between the Genowayes and the Venetians at Constantinople.
to stay for the defense of Constantinople during the space of six months.
Within a while after, there fell some debate and difference between the
Genowaies and the Venetians: the one reproaching the other, that they had made
default at this last service and expedition: but the Venetians having liberty
granted them to depart, was a cause that this discord was soon appeased.

The extremities and difficulties of the Greeks daily increasing, and the
Paynims growing more and more audacious and obstinate: the defendants took
counsel, and determined upon some course, to fire those Turkish foistes which
had been conveyed Ieames Cocqu^ a venetian and other Christians drowned.
into the haven. Order being given by Justinian how the matter should be put in
execution: Ieames Cocqu^ a Venetian being too covetous of glory, did rashly
go in hand with the action, and prevented the time wherein the matter was to
be wrought: by means whereof, the Barbarians perceiving their intent, did
anticipate the enterprise, sinking with their ordinance certain vessels of
the Greeks, and drowning many of the Christians: some of them also being taken
prisoners, as they thought to save themselves by swimming to the shore, were
the next day beheaded by the Prisoners Christians beheaded by Mahomet.
Sentence.
Turks in the sight of the Citizens. The defendants being mightily incensed,
and waxing more cruel with this Turkish inhumanitie, did give them drink (as
the saying is) of the same cup. For, causing certain Turks their prisoners
to be brought forth, they put them to death openly upon the rampires of the
city: and so the desire of vengeance pricked on with wrath and cruelty, did
exasperate the hearts of both parties.

But this mortal enemy of the Cross of Christ, to the intent he might not
leave any martial devise unattempted that might make him Master of the town,
did now bend all his endeavors to win it secretly by stealth and subtlety,
and by mines conveyed closely under the ground, continuing nevertheless daily
and hourly the unpleasant Mines made by the Turks against Constantinople, and
disappointed by the countermynes of the defendants. John le Grand
harmony and roaring noise of his cannons and bombards. By this time had they
undermined with great silence and secrecy the rampire of the vawmure, and now
began to make their preparations for blowing up of the mine. But John le Grand
an Almaine soldier, well practiced and experienced in that art (whom
Justinian had made Captain of a company, and who did him great service, aid
and comfort during the siege) by his singular industry and provident
foresight, did discover the danger: whereupon suddenly was there made a strong
and brave sally out of the town, purposely to make proof and trial of the
matter: which being found to be most sure and certain, did greatly trouble
them within, till such time as they saw themselves exempted and freed from this
fear, by the remedy of counter-mines which they made to disappoint the
purpose of the enemy.

The Sultan perceiving that the virtue and forwardness of the Christians did
cause Dissimulation of Mahomet purposing to deceive the Christians under color
of a peace.
all his attempts to turn to smoke, began now to fall to his wonted byas of
cunning and dissembling. He feigned him to repent that he had undertaken this
enterprise, falsely giving out, that he had done it by the persuasion of the
Hungarians: he sent therefore an Herald of arms to the Emperor to treat with
him upon some appointment of peace. But his fraud was soon perceived, in that
he would not condescend, that a fortress which he had raised toward the sea
of Propontide, should be razed and thrown down, nor that they should quietly
repair the ruins and breaches of their walls, and of the towers and
bulwarks about the city. But that which most troubled the defendants was,
that they could not have any trust nor affiance in the word nor faith of the
Sultan, who was never known at any time to have observed his faith Perjury
and singular infidelity of Mahomet.
or oath with any creature living; much less was it likely, that he would
hold it to his enemy. The worst of all, was the small number of the
defendants which gave them cause of extreme grief and sorrow, for they were
in all about a 9000. men or little above, as I have told you. But what is one
in comparison of a 1000. For when the defendants were disposed and ordered in
their places upon the walls each beside other, they did scant suffice to
furnish the walls where the enemy had enuironned them both by sea and by
land. The poor Emperor in great confusion and perplexity, with the tears
standing in his eyes, did go from door to door, and from house to house,
imploring and entreating the citizens with his hands joined together, that they
would aid him with their treasure and wealth, only for the waging of more
soldiers, and for the hyring of strange and foreign succors. But (o
monstrous impiety, o wretched avarice of the Greek Nation!) they protested
and swore with most execrable oaths, that they had not wherewithal to hire
any, that they were drawn dry of money by reason of the scarcetie and misery
of the time: and yet aftewardes Avarice and impiety of the Greeks incredible
and cause of their own ruin.
there was found such abundance of treasure within the city, that it seemed
they reserved it to enrich their enemies, who were even glutted with the
exceeding riches which they found hidden there by the citizens. Howbeit some
few of them of their voluntary motion did contribute somewhat unto him: but
these were very few, and it did him little pleasure: yea more then this what
did the Greek Emperor? He had recourse from the citizens, to his Barons, the
great Seigniours and chiefest nobles of the Empire: but they gave him counsel
in any case not to molest any man in this public extreamitie and combustion:
but rather to take the relics and other sacred things and iewelles of the
churches, and to serve his need with them. Whereupon he commanded that the
vessels and vtensiles of gold and silver which had been consecrated to the use
of the holy temples, should be coined into current and ready money, to be
divided among the soldiers, pyoners, and other persons appointed for the
repairing of the fortifications of the town. For the also being wholly
attentive to their private profit and commodity, and not to the good and
welfare of the estate public, would not labor nor do any service, except they
were satisfied and contented of their pay. Constantinople newly battered and
three breaches made.


Mahomet seeing that his offers of peace were refused, and being without hope
of carrying the place, by any other means then by the blood and slaughter of
his people: reenforced the siege and fight on all sides, causing the battery
to be recontinued with more fury then before, till such time as he had made
three fair and large breaches, An assault proclaimed by Mahomet to
Constantinople
by which he might with ease enter with his troops, and free the walls of the
defendants. Then he caused it to be proclaimed by sound of trumpet throughout
his camp, that every man should be in a readiness with his arms the next
morning very early, to give a general assault: and he abandoned the town to
the pillage and discretion of the soldiers for three days together, upon
condition that they did within that term enter it, and make themselves
Masters of the place. It was the six and Cowardice of the Greeks of
Constantinople
twentieth day of April when this cry was published, the fear whereof caused
many of the Greeks to withdraw and convey themselves away: faigning that either
they had some necessary buisinesse to be done in the fields, or some other
occasion to absent themselves. Some pretended that they were unable and unfit
to serve, others alleged their poverty, saying: that it stood them upon to
go get some bread to relieve themselves, and when some more zealous then
others, did reprove them for their cowardice, and did show them that now not
only their private estate was endangered, but that the estate of all
Christendom, and the common defense of all the Christians in Europe did depend
upon their valor, manhood and resolution, they made this answer: What have we
to do (said they) with the wars whilst our famelies are ready to starve
and to die with pure hunger and famine? so that it was a very hard matter to
get them to the walls, or to make them to abide there in defense of the place.
This was the occasion that the assailants taking heart and courage when they
saw the small resistaunce that was made in some places, durst adventure to
approach Courage and audacitie of the Turks preparing themselves to the
assault of Constantinople.
near the walls, and with crookes to pull down the hogsheades, pipes, and
other vessels which the defendants had provided there in a readiness to make
them barricadoes for the more surety of their walls: but by how much the
more the townes-men were discomforted by that proclamation, so much the greater
was the joy and triumph made by these miscreants throughout all the quarters of
their camp. Every man made provision of necessaries to furnish himself against
the next days service, which they desired and expected with such greediness
and devotion, that he was not held for a good man, who did not by his very
countenance, and by his gesture, bewray the heat and forwardness of a brave
mind and courageous. Of their whole army, there was not a man who of all that
day would either eat or drink. Such is the nature and disposition of men,
that when matters do fall out to their desire Sentence.
and contentment, their bodies are fully satisfied, and their appetite or
stomach is quite taken from them. But some say, that this their abstinence was
enjoined them by the ceremony of their religion. The day being spent, and the
night come on, as soon as it was starre-light, they fell to feasting one
another with great cheer and notable banquets: drinking and carousing together
for the most part of the night. This done they retired themselves every man to
his quarter to take their rest, with many loving embracements, kisses and
mutual fare-welles given to each other, as if they should never have met
again. You see now how the adversaries prepared themselves to the ruin and
desolation of the most noble and proud city of the Orient.

In the mean while, they within the town having heard of this public cry
and Citizens of Constantinople their discomfortable and miserable estate.
proclamation of the great Turk, and considering the great preparations that
were made for the assault, ordained a public and solemn procession: the
Priests and religious persons with all reverence and devotion had recourse
unto their relics, to the image of the crucifixe and of the blessed virgin,
with devout prayers, himnes, and songs: their eyes sheading abundance of
tears: their hearts sighing and groaning Catholic devotion of the
Constantinopolitanes.
for the miseries and mischiefs both present and imminent upon them. The
common people both rich and poor, men and women; young and old, followed
after the Clergy, imploring the favor and protection of the divine majesty.
Thus did they go about the town, enuironning it on all quarters, visiting all
the holy places, and afflicting their bodies with fasting, discipline and
continual orizons: and when night was come they retired every man to their
several places assigned for their defense.

During these passions of public sorrow and lamentation, the Governor of the
town John Justinian (having a watchful eye and good care to all matters as
one that did diligently observe all fortunes) took order for the speedy
repairing of the breaches and other places of least assurance, and for the
furnishing of them with artillery: demanding of Chirluc (who was of chiefest
authority amongst the citizens) that he should deliver him out of the common
store of the city certain ordinance to be employed against the Infidelles,
which Chirluc having refused and denied him, Justinian Grudge and hatred
between Justinian and Chirluc: and the Greeks and Latins.
enflamed with extreme wrath and anger used these words unto him. Traitor that
thou art: what should hinder me that I run thee not through with my sword? From
that time forward Chirluc disdaining, that he should be so outraged and
reproached by a Latin, did bear himself very coldly in the discharge of his
duty. And the Greeks in general had secretly conceived a great disdain and
envy, that the Italians should have the chief command of them, and should
have the chief honor of the preservation Ambition of the Greeks.
of the city. Nevertheless the General by the advice and counsel of Maurice
Catanee, John de Carret, Paul de Bouchardes, John de Fornares, Thomas des
Sauuages, Ladisse Gattalusse, John Illyric, and many other Greeks (who showed
themselves true seruitours to God and their country, did take order for the
strengthening of the companies, and the fortifying of the rampires: in such
sort, that the Sultan himself greatly commending his providence and diligence,
used these words of him. O that I had Speech of Mahomet in commendation of John
Justinian.
that Captain near about me, that I might honor him according to his
worthiness and sufficiency: and he did by many means and devises assay to
allure him unto his service. But that loyal and generous heart of his, would
never be corrupted nor drawn to yield unto his enticements.

The walls of Constantinople were of as wonderful great height and thicknes,
as of Negligence of the Greeks in furnishing, fortifying and defending the
walls of Constantinople.
any town whatsoever: but partly by the antiquity of the time which had in a
manner wasted, them being old and ruinous, and partly by the negligence of the
Greeks which made no great account and reckoning of it, they were for the most
part empaired and disfurnished of their battlements, bulwarks and other
defenses. As touching the vawmure, it was very strong and in good estate as
might be, and it was well fortified with all things requisite for the guarding
and keeping of it: and accordingly the Greeks founding all the suertie of their
fortress upon the strength thereof, had lodged all their fighting men between
the chief wall and the vawmure. It was a work and enterprise of no small
importance to cover and furnish the vawmure with men sufficient: and therefore
many wise and expert men of good and sound judgment, finding fault and blaming
them, did tell them, that they ought not to quit and abandon the chief and
maine wall which was high and strong made: for that by the favor and benefit of
the same being duly regarded and furnished, they might very well have
maintained and defended the other wall, and so have drawn out the siege at
length. But if the Emperor for his part did make any default by reason of his
negligence and pusillanimitie which I will not speak of: much more were they
to be blamed, who had the chief managing and government of the estate, namely,
Emanuell Gregare (who was a little before but a very beggar and base fellow,)
and one Neophit a Monk Emanuell Gregare, Neophit a monk, two pillars and
pollers of the state of Constantinople.
of Rhodes: two most notable pillars and not pillours of the common wealth.
These two being ordained as tutors or protectours of the estate, and having
received huge sums of money, either of such as died intestate, and whose
goods were to come to the public treasury, or by the testaments of diverse
particular persons (who bequeathed great sums of money to be employed to the
reparations and maintenance of the walls and fortifications: they did defraud
the common wealth of the same and converted it to their private profit and
commodity. Leaving within a while after to the Infidels and Barbarians, the
inheritance and possession of all their infamous and ill gotten treasure, which
amounted to more then 70000. crowns. By the mischievous Constantinople lost by
the covetousness of thieves and traitors her own citizens.
and wicked covetousness therefore of these thieves and sacrilegious
traitors, did that noble city come to ruin and destruction. Seeing then that
all the actions and deeds of the Greeks, were continually foolish and
blameworthy, it is no marvel if so worthy a monument and famous a bulwark of
the estate of Christendom, founded by so many good Emperors, did now fall to
be the prey and reward of thieves and robbers. Feign would they have remedied
this mischief afterward, but then it was all too late: for they wanted two
of the most necessary and principal things to effect it: to wit, time and
money, both which they might have remedied with great ease and facility, if
they had intended it either with opportunity or any importunity at such time as
they saw the burden of the wars even ready to fall and light upon their
shoulders. But the malice or the negligence of that people, did put off and
defer all things from time to time, and from day to day, till it came to
ruin and destruction. Now by reason that the Greeks did put their whole trust
and confidence in their utter ditches and the vawmure: when those were once
lost, and that they were forced to retire within the maine wall, which before
they neglected, they were not able in the end neither to man it nor to defend
it. Much more wisely and prouidently did the Jews, who did not employ nor
adventure their whole strength and forces upon the utter walls of Jerusalem
when it was besieged by Titus and Vespasian: but they made the one wall still
to mainetaine the other, and the first being lost they retired to the second,
and from the second to the third: and so by means of their fortifications, Two
years by Josephus.
they prolonged the siege four years against the Romans.

But return we to our History. Whilst the Turks were preparing them selves
so busily to a general assault, there sprang a rumor in their Camp, upon the
report of some espials, that there was on the one side an army and fleet of
the Christians at sea coming to the aid and relief of Constantinople: and
that on the other side, that tempest of war John Huniades was marching down
toward the river of * Danowe to give battle unto the Sultan, or to make him
raise his siege. This rumor Or Danubius.
troubled and terrified the Mahometists, causing them to murmr against their
chief Turks murmur against Mahomet for continuing so long at the siege of
Constantinople.
and sovereign: saying, that it was but rashly and vainly done to continue
and make any longer abode under those invincible and impregnable walls (for it
was now two and fifty days since the siege began) and they were in great
distrust of their own forces, albeit they were inestimable, and they dispaired
utterly of all good fortune and of victory. Upon these difficulties, Caly
Bassa the most ancient and sagest counselor of the Sultan, a man of notable
experience in the wars, and one that greatly Caly Bassa counsels Mahomet
to raise the siege from Constantinople.
favored the Christians (though in secret) and had continually dissuaded the
Ottoman from persisting in this enterprise: in a solemn assembly which was now
called purposely to consult upon this point, he told the Sultan: That it could
not but be very perilous and dangerous for him to urge the city of
Constantinople any longer, the same being of notable strength and abundantly
provided of all things for the war, and furnished with good store of
soldiers hardy and resolute either by death or life to defend their liberty:
That his auncesters in times past had often, but in vain assaied to conquer
it, and were ever repulsed: And which was most worthy to be considered, that
he was not to make any doubt, but that all the Princes and Potentates of
Europe, especially the Venetians and the Genowayes his next neighbors, being
advertised of the necessity and extremity of the town, would presently come
with a brave and strong power to succor it: That he ought to beware how he did
incense them and make those his enemies, who were able in other places either
greatly to endammage them, or greatly to profit and pleasure them. Thy
puissaunce (most redoubted Prince quod he) is incomparable, and thou shall
better augment and enlarge it by the peace then by the war, whereof the
events and success are always Sentence.
doubtful and uncertain, and full of inconstancy and mutabilitie. Calybassa
had scarce ended his persuasions, but Zagan second Counselor of the Turk: a
man that was both younger in years, of a more hot and fiery courage, and
one that was emulous of Calybassa, and the mortal enemy of the Christians,
interrupting his speeches, thus alleged to the contrary.

The Ottoman forces (quoth he) are so mighty, and are so seconded with good
fortune, The Oration of Zagan cou^selling Mahomet to continue the siege and to
assault Constantinople.
and they are generally in so good estimate and reputation, that all the world
stands in awe and is afraied of their power and greatness: so that to doubt
of any impediments from Europe, or to hope for any other then a fortunate and
glorious issue, were in a manner a crime of manifest treason against the
majesty of the Ottoman Empire. Why then should the Sultan leave this siege
upon any uncertain news and reports? or upon fained tales and surmizes of
vain possibilities? who knows not that the Latins are far unable to
furnishe them with any succors? The Genowayes are in discord and civil
garboiles: the Venetians have enough to do to defend them selves against the
Duke of Milan: as for other Princes farther off, it is well known they are all
by the ears amongst them selves, each consuming other with their civil
wars.

The Eunuch, who was the third vizir to the Sultan confirmed the speeches used
by Zagan: and Thuraca the Saniacke of Romania durst not take part with Caly
Bassa, Thuraca Saniacke of Romania.
but encouraged Mahomet more and more to continue the siege, whereunto of
himself he was vehemently inclined: in so much that the inferior Chiefetaines
and leaders did all with one consent and voice exclaim, saying: It behooves
the Monarch Speech of the Turks captains calling for war.
and sovereign of the Turks both to purpose and to put in execution things
high, hard, and difficult: for by such actions only do men purchase honor
and immortal glory. Mahomet being greatly animated and egged on by their
persuasions, answered thus unto them: Well then my friends (quoth he) you will
that we shall try Answer of Mahomet to his counselors and captains persuading
him to hold on his siege.
our fortune, and it likes me exceedingly well. For what was the puissance of
the great Alexander? was it incomparable? nay was it not far inferior to our
forces? was that army of his (wherewith he conquered the whole world) more to
be feared and redoubted then this of ours here before Constantinople? Which of
our predecessors, either father, grandfather, or great-grandfather, did ever
besiege this place so well accompanied with armed forces, so well provided with
warlike weapons, engines, or other preparations, as we now are? Go to then
Zagan, make ready our companies, let our troops be set in order for the
assaulting of the town, and to the intent that they of Pera may not (during
the assault) either hinder us behind at our backs, or give them of
Constantinople any succors, let their town be enclosed and beset on all sides.

Caly the chief Bassa to the Sultan seeing this conclusion, did secretly
advertise the Caly Bassa aduertiseth the Greek Emperor of the purpose of the
Turks.
Greek Emperor of the same, persuading him nevertheless not to be dismayed
nor discomforted by the temerity and folly of this young Prince so insolent and
so furious: that he should not fear their menaces, who were themselves
fearful and timorous, howsoever they made show and semblance to the contrary.
Only he wished them to keep good and careful watch, and to behave themselves
stoutly and constantly in sustaining the assault. The Emperor, whilst the
Turks were preparing against the morrow to assail the town, did on his part
also call an assembly of the Senate and principal Barons, and chief citizens,
with all the Captains and commanders of the general companies both Denizens
and strangers, to whom being all together, he began to use these or such like
speeches.

Most noble Lords, most worthy captains, and most christian soldiers, you see
the Oration of the Emperor of Constantinople to his nobles, captains, and
soldiers before the assault to encorage them.
hour now approaching, wherein the city is to be assaulted by our enemies: you
know the dangers that do always accompany an assault. Of all military actions
and martial services, either in field or fortress, there is none more
terrible, none more fearful, bloody or cruel, then to maintain a breach
against resolute and hardy assailantes, it being an ordinary thing in that
case, for men to stand and fight up to the knees in blood, death and wounds
attending them on all sides: yet must you not recule, nor be discouraged, when
you shall see your Captains, your kinsmen or your friends, dying and yielding
up their ghosts at your feet: but persisting resolutely and with undaunted
hearts, you must hold out against the enemy as long as any one of you is left
alive. If any of you have that mistrust of your selves, that you cannot find
in your hearts to abide the sight of the slaughter, withdraw your selves a Gods
name to some other part of the walls, that you may be there employed about
some other needful occasions, wherein also your service shall be very
acceptable: for all men cannot be equally and alike resolute. You have had
sufficient trial of the fury and forces of your adversaries for these 52.
days wherein you have been besieged, and you have no reason now at this
present to be more terrified or astonished, then you have bin heretofore, for
they are the same men still that you have found them in the former fights. You
are not now to fight for a petty village: for some small castle of little price
or reckoning, and wherein you have little or nothing to loose: but you fight for
the church of God and his holy religion: for the honor and safety of the sacred
Empire: for your own native town and country, the chief, principal, and
Imperial city of the world: wherein your wives, your children, your parents,
your friends, and all your chiefest and dearest treasures, do come running
under the shelter of your arms both behind and before you, and on all sides,
imploring your virtue, your valor, and extremest resolution for their defense
and safety, which without your deuoire will be utterly lost and destroyed, and
even in a moment come to ruin and confusion. What a desolation should we se if
these barbarous miscreants, so covetous and thirsty of the blood of Christians,
who have sworn to put all to the sword, should come and strew your
faire*streets, and fill up your sumptuous houses with dead bodies and
carcasses? how lamentable a spectacle would it be to see so many wives,
maidens, and young infants violated? the beautiful temples builded by the piety
and devotion of the Christians our forefathers now to be polluted, burned, and
destroyed? The only way to avoid these mischifes is to go against these hell
hounds resolutely: to oppose our selves against them manfully, and to set aside
all fear of danger, and all care and respect of death, which though we could
shun for the time present, yet in the end will it be sure to make an end of us
all without exception.

Immediately upon this exhortation, the whole assembly with a settled and fierce
countenance, Assault to Constantinople by the Turks.
did vow and promise that they would all die before they would do otherwise:
and so encoraging each other, they followed their General to the several
places where it pleased him to appoint them: and there with good deliberation
did they attend the time of the assault. It was not long ere they heard the
Infidels preparing their artillery and other engines, and drawing of their
chariots with their castles or turrets upon them with their ladders upon
wheels, their towers of wood, and such like instruments for the assault: and
in an instant the Turkish army to the seaward did enuiron the Port and the walls
on that side: for you must note that presently after midnight, the Turks upon a
hope and greedines of the prey, being impatient to stay and attend the breaking
of the day, did present them selves in arms before the walls, and began the
fight whilst it was yet dark, continuing the same even till it was day: But
they were so plied with stones and shot from aloft, that they were not able in
the obscurity of the night, to keep themselves out of the danger of the
defendants, so that fighting still with great disadvantage, they carried away
nothing but shame and infamy, with the loss of infinite of their brauest and
fiercest soldiers. The light of the day having chased away the starlight:
Mahomet himself came forth with the strength of his army, and after he had
given the signal to begin the assault, he commanded that Constantinople and
Pera should be attempted both together and at one instant, because the Greeks
should not succor each other: himself also appointed every Colonel with his
regiment to a certain space and quantity of the wall, to the intent that every
one of them being to fight severally, and in the place particularly assigned
unto him, both the valor and prowess of them that deserved and did best,
should be more apparent and manifest, and by the emulation of praise and glory
they might the more animate each other in the conflict. With the like counsel
and advise were the companies of the sea army distributed in order, with an
express charge and commandment, that every one should make his approach in the
quarter appointed unto him at one and the same time. In this manner the
soldiers being disposed and marshalled both on the one side and the other, the
air resounding with the noise of trumpets, drums, and cornets, to incense them
that fought, the fury of the assault began to increase, and to be renewed still
more and more, continuing with great abundance of blood and cruelty. The
Pagans bending their bodies, and shrinking in their heads, did cover them
selves with their targets and pauishes, and so marching on roundly presented
their ladders to the walls, and with an exceeding audacity striued to get up,
and to mount upon the rampires which had been newly mended and repaired. The
defendants received them as coragiously, bestowing upon them great heaps and
plenty of stones, pots, bals, and lances of wild fire, scalding oil,
seething water, and such like: pouring down also upon them a whole shower of
shot, darts, and arrows, and never ceasing to ouerturne the ladders, and to
tumble the^ from the top down to the bottom. In the mean time they which
presented themselves to the breach with the pikes in their hands, were likewise
valiauntly resisted by others, who pressing bravely forward and rushing upon
them, did not strike in vain: but beating down innumerable Infidels, some
slain, some maimed, they scattered that battalion: having given them such
entertainment, that many being left dead upon the place Turks repulsed from the
assault.
were made sure for ever aduenturing themselves again in the like hazard: and
the residue of the Turks (as men that could do no good, and whose former heat
was well cooled) did now seem to desire to be dispensed withal, that they
might not for that day return any more to so bad a banquet, and they began to
retire themselves the same way they came. Then Mahomet enraged with ire and
madness went to meet and to encourage them, and he called sometimes to one,
sometimes to another by their names, especially such as were men of mark and
chiefest estimate. Some he constrained by menaces, others he persuaded by
promises, and did so much prevail, that he made Assault renewed at
Constantinople by persuasions of Mahomet to the Turks.
them to take part again, and thereuppon they reenforced the assault: then
might you have seen some climing upon their fellows backs, other creeping up
like cats, and making themselves way up to the walls: against the pikes of their
enemies, many also marching close together and in troops under the couerture of
their targets, and bearing down their heads, having gained the foot of the
wall, did mount to the tops of their ladders: and then with the one hand they
labored to lay hold upon the enemies weapons, and with the other grasping close
by the battlements, they striued to get aloft upon the walls, and there to have
raised the Turkish ensigns. But the promptnes, vigor, and hardines of the
defendants, did far exceed the atte^pts of the assailants, still beating them
down and overthrowing them in infinite numbers with pikes, stones, and other
weapons, and with casting of boiling pitch upon them. It was a brave sight to
see how John Industry and virtue of John Justinian.
Justinian with his sword in his hand, and accompanied with a squadron of armed
men, now here, now there, did with might and maine bear in upon the enemy,
where as he saw them thickest, still overthrowing and dispersing them where
soever he came. One while would he redress and confirm the rancks where he
saw them to fail or to move: another while with a watchful eye and speedy
pace, would he give and send succors where they needed, and both with the
valor of his hand, as well as with the eloquence of his speech, he encouraged
them on all parts both to do well and to hope well. The presence of the Turkish
Monarch did no less further the obstinacy and resolution of his people, both
by often exhortations and continual supplies of new and fresh troops who
succeeded cheerfully in the places of those which were either slain or
repulsed, not suffering the defendants to have any leisure to rest or to breath
themselves, although they performed their deuoire and duty beyond all reason
and human power: yet by reason that their numbers were so small, it could not
be but they should at length be driven to the last point and exigent of all
extremity. Nevertheless they still showed them selves in countenance and
outward appearance resolute and deliberate, and that they feared no peril
whatsoever. In this estate did they mainetaine themselves continually stout and
unvanquished, not suffering the assailantes to glory or to boast themselves of
any advantage against the town, until such time as their Chieftaine and
governor Justinian (by the permission of the cruel destinies which now
began to contrary this miserable and wretched city) in the heat and fury of
the fight, and where the wall was most endangered, whilst he opposed him self
most stoutly against the enemy, with a company of brave and gallant men,
prodigal and careless of their lives, most unhappily received a wound behind
under the arm hole, being shot with an arrow by one of the defendants
standing within upon the walls.

Behold now a strange case and a wonderful: He which of late by the only terror
of John Justinian wounded and faints, forsaking his charge
his name did appall his enemies, and did add a courage and confidence unto the
Christians: he which showed himself as a second Mars, and with his arm all
bloody even to the elbow, did fly like a tempest amongst the Turkish
squadrons, preparing the victory for the Greeks, now alas only 3. or 4. drops
of blood distilling from his own body, did put him quite out of heart, and as
one utterly forlorn he fainted and gave over, forgetting al his former glory,
the remembrance of his duty, and the safety both of himself and his country.
For perceiving his wound to bleed much, he withdrew him self secretly out of
the press, and removed from the place without speaking ever a word, going into
the town to have his wound dressed, being unwilling (as himself afterward
confessed) to have a surgeon called thither: for fear least his soldiers, who
were then fighting with great fury in that place, should be partakers of his
fear, and so be discoraged by his mishap. Thus whilst he thought to avoid
one inconvenience he tumbled into a greater mischief. The Emperor hearing of
his departure, and supposing that his absence would be the loss of the town,
as his presence had been the preservation Emperor of Greece his oversight.
of the same, did commit a second disorder worse then the former: for without
leaving any man of mark or reckoning to supply his office, or to command in
his place, he went himself in person and followed after him to call him back
again, endeavoring to cause him to return. But Justinian more deaf then a
Haddocke, and obstinate beyond all reason, or rather transported with extreme
fear, could not be entreated by any prayers or persuasions to tarry and
abide: but causing the gate of the city to be opened for him, he promised that
as soon as his wound was dressed he would return incontinent. All the gates
and ports of the city by which men should pass through from the vawmure into
the town, were closed and barred up, because all ways, and hope of retrait
being taken from the soldiers, every man should determine either to vanquish
the enemy or to die with honor. But what followed upon The Christians
discomforted and out of heart upon the departure of their General.
this accident? The Christians which were at the breach, as soon as they had
lost the sight of their General, began to loose courage likewise and to be out
of heart. Then might you have seen some of them make have to retire, and to
withdraw them selves out of the press: others began to fight more slowly and
lasily, and at last all in general beginning to faint and to despair, betook
them selves to a shameful and ignominious flight. Whither do you fly you
poor and senseless wretches? does your safety now consist in your heels?
what, does your resolution depend only upon one man so frail and mortal? If
your walls be lost have you any other by which you may be covered and
protected? or will you return again into the wombes of your mothers there to
hide you from your enemies? Are you ignorant, or have you forgotten it, that
these barbarous miscreants are so merciless and cruel, that they have no
respect of sex nor age: and that their fashion is to devour and swallow up all
sorts and degrees of persons in one and the same gulf of unspeakable
mischief without all pity and compassion.

The Colonels and Captains of the Turks seeing the countenance of the
Christians; as soon as they perceived them to faint and waver, they encouraged
their soldiers, and with high clamours animated them on to scale the walls,
which were in a manner quite forsaken and abandonned. Then the Infidelles (who
had already devoured in hope the rich promises of the Sultan, and were greedy
of revenge for the loss of their brethren, friends and fellows, that lay
slain before their eyes Constantinople taken by the Turks.
in the ditches of the town:) they began to press forward in good and close
array, and with greater feruency and violence then at any time before. Some of
them forced through the breaches, others by their scaling ladders got speedily
to the top of the rampires, and in a moment made them selves masters both of
the second or uttermost wall, and of the rampires and bulwarks thereof,
chasing thence the Greek soldiers: who being now quite discomfited sought to
save them selves by flying into the town, through that gate which was lately
opened to Justinian.

In this disarray and foul confusion, the Emperor also forgot him self and
his duty, which was to have held good, and to have died with his arms in his
hands. But he because he would not fall alive into the hands of the
Infidelles, turned his back likewise most shamefully, and holding company with
the rest that fled, as he Emperor of Constantinople smoothered in a throng by
his own subjects, flying from the Turks.
striued to enter in at the city gate in the midst of the press and throng,
being regarded no more then a private person, he was borne down forcibly to
the ground, trodden and trampled under foot, and so most miserably smoothered.
It is a strange thing and worthy to be observed, that in so great a fear and
confusion, amongst so great a multitude of soldiers and valiant men, only
two were found and no more, who contemning the present peril and all fear of
death, did stoutly oppose their bodies as a bulwark for the defense and for
the safety of their country: and preferring religion before life, and an
honorable renown before their private safety, did even vow and consecrate
them selves to the death, fighting valiantly even to the last gasp. The death
and honorable end of Theophilus Paleologus and John of Sclauony.
The one of them was Theophilus Paleologus the Emperors kinseman: the other
was John of Sclauony, a man otherwise of a mean and servile condition, but in
his end noble and honorable. These two reputing it an extreme shame and
disgrace to fly away, did for a great while all alone sustain the fury and
violence of the Barbarians, and having slain many with their own hands, in
the end being oppressed with the multitude, and rather tired then vanquished,
they did yield up their glorious souls unto God, amongst the heaps of the
dead bodies of their enemies. Justinian who during this time had conveyed
himself to Pera, went from thence by sea to the Isle of Chios, where falling
sick, either by means of his wound, or for grief and sorrow, Death of John
Justinian.
within few days after departed out of this life, having most shamefully lost
the fruit and benefit of that incomparable glory, which he might easily have
purchased. For without all doubt most happy and fortunate had he been, if he
had continued his first resolution to die valiantly and honorably upon the
walls of Constantinople.

The Turks having won the Vawmure, chased the Christians toward the town:
and entering the port, pell mell together with them, they slew of Greeks and
Latins about an eight hundredth within the gate. From the body of the Emperor
(being found and known by of his coat armor) they did cut off the head, and
fastened it upon a pike, carrying and showing it up and down for a token and
sign of victory, whilst others in the mean time having gotten to the top,
and gained the chief and maine wall of the City, with shot, arrows, stones,
and such like, chased thence the citizens: who hearing the alarm at the gate
ran thitherwards, thinking to have shut it, and to have made a Barricado to
keep the enemy from entering. But the gate being already won, and the
walls now void of defense, the infidels became masters of the town,
exceedingly triumphing, both for the conquest of the place, and for the
infinite riches and treasures which they found there inestimable. The fury and
the victory of the soldiers was soon and easily to be discerned by the cries
and howlings of those whom at the first entry they beat down to the ground,
killing and cutting in pieces all those whom they encountered with arms on
their backs or weapon in hand. After the fury and heat of the slaughter was
somewhat appeased, they gave them selves on all parts to prey and pillage,
ransacking the town Constantinople sacked with all horrible excess of
villainy for three days together.
of all things with extreme rapine and greediness: and after the sack was
ended what Iliads are able to recount the particulars of the infinite
disorders, excess, villainies, and enormities, which that barbarous, impious,
and infamous people, addicted to all voluptuousness, avarice and cruelty, did
dare to exercise upon the wretched and miserable inhabitants? O how pitifully
and horribly were they forced and violated, no sex nor age being spared or
pardoned! they confounded and intermingled murders with whoredoms, and
whoredoms with murders, greedily seeking to satisfy their brutish and
insatiable humor of lechery, whereunto that nation of all others is extremely
and mightily given over and inclined. They shamed not to put in irons as well
the old men who were decrepit for age, as the young lads and tender maidens
whom the fortune of the town had reserved alive: whom also being coupled and
chained together, they drove before them with great despite and derision. And
if by chance there happened any maiden, woman, or young boy, any thing
beautiful and comely to look on: every man striued who should have them to
abuse them in most villainous and shameful manner: which was an occasion also,
that many times they would like brute beasts one kill another. The like also
would they do when they lighted upon any booty that was of great value, were
it either sacred or profane: for so many would set hand on it together, that
oftentimes they would murder each other for the same. And by reason that their
army was compound of diverse nations, differing in language and in manners,
there was no kind of villainy or impiety (how hateful and enormious soever
it were) but it was suffered to the ruin and extreme desolation of this
miserable city. The Temple of Saint Sophie (whose like was never seen,
builded by the Emperor Justinian) being spoiled of all her ornaments and
sumptuous riches, which were innumerable, both of gold, silver, and other
precious vessels: and being contaminated and polluted with all kind of
filthiness and villainy possible to be imagined, became now an infamous
Burdella or stews, for unclean persons and Sodomites, and a stable for
horses, as other churches and holy places in like manner were converted to like
profane uses. The bones and honored relics of the Saints, were cast forth,
and thrown about the streets and public places, to be trodden under foot,
not by men only, but even by the dogs, hogs, and such like. The images of
the crucifixe and of the Saints, were either trailed through the dirt, or
broken in pieces with axes and hatchets. The rare and exquisite libraries how
little were they respected and regarded by those brute and unreasonable beasts
the enemies of all sciences and good learning? What notable and extreme
torments did they inflict upon the servants of private particular men, to
constrain them to reveal and disclose their masters goods and hidden
treasures? The report is, that they drew forth from under the earth in
diverse places an inestimable quantity of gold and silver, and other jewels of
exceeding great price, which the unfortunate and unhappy citizens, for fear
of the siege, had hidden under ground: which abundance and superfluity of
wealth, had it pleased God, that they had bestowed and employed in munitions,
and upon other necessities for the defense of the town, they might perhaps
have saved both their lives and goods, and the liberty of their country. But
in them was that saying then verified; That covetous men do not Sentence.
possess their own gold and riches, but their gold and riches does possess
them.

The sack of the city having continued for three whole days together, there
was nothing now left, nor remaining in the town (which of late was most
fortunate, happy and rich) but a most hideous show and sight of all
barbarousnesse and inhumanitie, suffering an indigne and lamentable servitude
of her citizens: who to Number of Christians prisoners taken at the loss of
Constantinople.
the number of three score thousand, being bound and manacled, were drawn and
carried out of the city, into the camp and tents of the Barbarians. It is
reported for a certainty, that Mahomet having made a magnificall and sumptuous
banquet to his Bassaes and Captains, every man being full of wine and
dainties, and him self (it may be) little better then drunken, caused all the
prisoners to be brought before him, and as if he had a desire to glut the
hearts and eyes of his guestes with the innocent Cruelty of Mahomet more then
barbarous
blood of the Christians, and as a man may say, to mix his wine with blood, he
commanded, that the principal and chiefest persons, who were of greatest
estimate and calling, should have their bodies divided and sawed a sunder in
the midst whilst they were yet alive, taking a singular delight and pleasure
at this inhumane spectacle and extreme cruelty. Some of the chief Officers
and special friends of the Emperor Constantine (which remained yet alive)
being called also before him, he reproved and blamed very sharply, for that
they did not persuade their Master either to demand peace, or to deliver the
town into his hands: and thereupon he put them likewise to the sword, as he
had done the others. Chirluck above mentioned, Chirluck his notabl^ infidelity
and treachery.
having determined to currie favor with the tyrant, did impute all the fault,
and laid the whole blame thereof upon the Peratines and the Venetians, who (as
he said) did aid and furnish the Emperor Constantine with men, money,
munition, and counsel: and that Constantine for the love of them did maintain
the war against him. Moreover, the wicked wretch, who had ever sought
advancement by lies and sinister practices, did accuse Caly Bassa to be a
friend to the Greeks, and that he had often written to the Emperor,
comforting him, and encouraging him to The death of Caly Bassa betrayed and
bewrayed by Chirluck, and executed by Mahomet.
hold out: and to prove his words true, he showed forth the letters unto the
Sultan, which he had reserved expressly and of purpose. The Emperor of the
Turks being more feloniously incensed then before, did resolve utterly to
destroy Pera: and ordained that Caly Bassa, being deprived of his authority,
and of all his goods, and being fast bound and fettered, should for a while be
put in safe keeping, and shut up within a certain tower at Constantinople:
from whence within few days after he was conveyed to Andrinople, and there
executed, to the public grief and sorrow of all the Turkish host. But the
disloyal and traiterous Greek did not escape the due punishment of his malice
and infidelity: for having first lost his two eldest sons in the war, the
third being slain before his eyes by the command of Mahomet, and The death
and deserved punishment of Chirlucke.
the fourth being reserved to the abominable lusts of the profane tyrant,
the father was enjoined and enforced to hang and strangle him self with his
own hands.

With no less cruelty did the Turkish Sultan use the forainers and strangers
which The death of many noblemen prisoners to the Turk and executed.
were taken upon the loss of the city. The Hierome Minot. Contaren and other
Gentlemen of Venice twice ransomed Cardinal of Rome the popes Legate prisoner
and ransomed.
Bailiffe or Governor of the Venetians with his son and other Nobles of his
company were beheaded. Likewise the Consul of the Caraconensians or Catalans
with his two sons had the like end: and Contarin a Venetian Gentleman, of the
family of the Contarines, with six other Gentlemen Venetians besides him, who
had before agreed and paid their ransom, yet had drunk also of the same cup,
if they had not paid seven thousand Ducats more once again for their
redemption. Isidore Ruthenian Cardinal of the sea of Rome, who had before been
sent Legate a Latere from the Pope Nicholas the fifth, having disguised him
self, fell into the hands of a simple soldier, and by means of a great sum
of aspres which he paid him, he escaped and got him liberty.

The inhabitants of Pera seeing the desolation of Constantinople, laid aside
their arms, and without attending any summons from the Sultan, they came
forth of Pera voluntarily yields to the Turks.
the town, and bringing their keys with them, they laid them down at the
tyrants feet: who having received them to mercy, with sufficient shows of
grace and favor: and shortly after having caused his army to enter the town,
against all faith Perjury and infidelity of Mahomet to the Peratines.
and public honesty, he caused it to be sacked, the rampires to be
dismanteled and broken down: and afflicting them with a thousand mischiefs
and calamities, he caused their children to be sold for slaves, their matrones
to be defloured, the old men to be enchained, the young men to be murthred
without any regard or difference had of age, sex or condition: not sparing
their temples, palaces, nor other edifices The words of the oracle are (...)
Name of Constantine fat all to Constantinople. Helen the mother of Great
Constantine daughter of Coilus king of great Britain. Exhortation of the
Author to all Christians.
and buildings. Thus we see that the very same happened to the noble city of
Constantinople, which was once foretold and prophesied by the oracle to the
Macedonians: namely: That the name of Constantyn was fatal to that town, and
that during the reign of Constantyn, it should find her best and worst
fortune. For as Constantyn the great the son of* Helen, was the first that
founded that Empire, and did adorn and enrich that Imperial city: so this
Constantyn the son of another Helen, also was the last Emperor, after that
this Empire had endured eleven hundredth twenty and one years.

This city that was the Queen and Lady of all the towns in the world, having
received and endured so many mischiefs and calamities by the cruel and
villainous hands of these thieves and brigandes, it stands us upon to be
moved by their examples: to the intent we may more narrowly advise our selves
of the plagues that do hang over the heads of other peoples and cities, and
that standing in awe of the rigorous and severe judgments of God, we be the
more allured and stirred up to his service and obedience: and having our
recourse unto him with continual prayers, and daily sighs and gronings of our
souls, we should entreat his divine clemency, that it would please him to
preserve his Church and his people, and to moderate the pains and punishments
inflicted upon them. And let us not only meditate upon the example of their
punishment, but let us remember also what were the sins and crimes of the
Greek nation, and of their Emperors in those days. Let us consider their
great excess and usurpations, their hateful discordes and civil wars,
wherewith they rent and tore in sunder that famous Monarchy: so shall we be
incited by the sorrowful and lamentable end of that Empire, to live more
modestly and soberly, to nourish and entertain concord and amity: chasing and
repelling far from us, all distrust, ambition, covetousness, and the desire
of vengeance, or any other thing unlawful, whereby the common peace and
tranquillity should be troubled or disturbed: for fear least that either being
dismembered or consumed by a mutual and intestine butchery amongst our selves,
we fall into the same misfortune and calamity which is befalne and happened
unto the Greeks.

The end of the eight Book.
THE NINTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
MOses with an army of Turks enters into Epire, and is encountered by
Scanderbeg. The private combat of Ahimaz a Turk with Zachary Groppe an Epirot.
Moses having challenged Scanderbeg to a particular combat dares not abide
him. The battle of Oronichea between Moses and Scanderbeg, wherein the Turks
are overthrown and Moses put to flight, who at his return to Constantinople
being in great disgrace with Mahomet, posteth secretly into Epire, and
submitting himself to Scanderbeg, is freely pardoned. Amese the nephew of
Scanderbeg reuolteth from his uncle and flies to Mahomet with his wife and
children Isaac Bassa accompanied with Amese, is sent by Mahomet with an army
against Scanderbeg, who having leauied a power to receive them, retireth with
his forces and gives place unto them. Isaac marching freely over the
country, proclaims Amese king of Epire. Scanderbeg having by his fained
flight brought the Turks into security, suddenly sets upon their Camp. The
famous battle of Pharsalia: wherein Isaac Bassa is put to flight, with a
notable slaughter of the Turks, and Amese is taken prisoner, being sent to
Naples by his uncle, there to be kept in prison. Mahomet being encombred with
great wars seeks to have peace with Scanderbeg, which being refused, he
sends Hamur and Synam with two strong armies to defend his frontiers. And
Scanderbeg likewise fortifieth the borders of Epire. The frontier war between
the Turks and the Epirots. Hamur makes a new motion of peace unto Scanderbeg.
Alphonsus king of Naples dies, and Ferdinand his base son succeeds him in
that kingdom, unto whom Scanderbeg sends an Ambassade. Amese is brought
back into Epire, and is restored to the grace and favor of his uncle, by whom
being licenced to go again to Mahomet to practice the delivery of his wife
and children, at his return to Constantinople, he is there poisoned by the
Turk.

IN the sacred Scriptures it is written, that Zedechias and the other Jews
carried away captive unto Babylon, did mock and deride the Prophet Jeremy when
he for told them of the captivity and destruction of Jerusalem. We read also
that if Cassandra had bin believed by Pryam her father, Troy had not Prophecies
foretelling the ruin of Empires and estates.
been burned by the Greeks, nor reduced so miserably into dust and ashes. If
the Romans had given credit to the prophecies of the Sibils, their monarchy
had not been ruinated and trodden under foot. But in very truth, this is an
infallible rule, and undoubtedly to be believed: that Empires, Realms and
Kingdoms have their undoubted age limited, neither more nor less, then as
mortal men have their birth and beginning, their increase, their continuance,
and their declining. For albeit such prophecies, Empires and ^ kingdoms have
their time and age limited.
admonitions and divine revelations have and do ordinarily forerun and preceed
the ruin of Monarchies and Empires: yet so it is, that when their prefixed
time is come, it behooves them to fall and come to nothing, maugre all the
counsels and endeavors Predictions of the ruin and destruction of
Constantinople.
which humane wisdom can devise. The Greeks do affirm, that diverse
personages and men famous for the holiness of their conversation and learning,
did for many ages long before divine and prophecy of this horrible tempest,
which should swallow up and consume the Empire of the Orient. Amongst others,
one Leon surnamed the sage (as they say) made a certain table, which being
hidden in ancient times, was found within the Monastery of S. George in
Constantinople, containing therein certain little squadrons or scutcheons, within
the which were several letters, that distinguished the Leon the sage his table
of the Emperors of Constantinople.
order and succession of the Emperors of Constantinople: and so many quadrants
only were contained in the table, as would comprehend all the Emperors from
Constantine the great the first founder of that Empire, til the last end and
desolation of the same: and that all the said quadrangles were filled with
several caracters, but only that wherein the last Emperor was to be placed.
They deliver also that there was another, a devout Morsena his prophecy of
Constantinople.
man called Morsena, who prophesied, that a certain people or nation, being
excellent archers should arise against Constantinople, who seizing upon her
noble port or haven, should utterly exterminate and expel the Greeks out of
that imperial City. And last of all, they add the prophecies of Sibilla
Erithrea, who foreshewed likewise Sibilla Erithrea.
the ruin of the Greeks. But howsoever it be, the final issue and event of
that unfortunate City has made it manifest, that the Great Constantine was
ill advised, when he transported and translated the Imperial seat, and all
the ornaments thereof, from the city of Rome to that place. For albeit it
cannot be denied, but that Constantinople was Constantine the Great ill advised
in translating the seat of the Empire from Rome to Constantinople.
a place very fit and agreeable for the greatness of that Empire, yet
nevertheless the Heavens and the destinies would not permit, that the same
should continue still to be the siege of the Roman Empire. For as every
region and all particular towns, have their fatal and inevitable necessity
and their particular manners, rites and conditions: so cannot those things be
translated elsewhere from their natural seat without notable inconvenience:
notwithstanding that they be the same persons, and though they do retain
their wonted laws and customs. For that the instruments and celestial
constellations of another climate do ordinarily change and alter the humors and
affections of the persons that do there dwell and inhabit: whose manners
jointly with the destinies, do in the end cause the alterations which happen
in them, which was manifestly seen by the transportation of the Roman
Monarchy to the Greeks, and Asiatickes. For from thenceforth their Emperors,
their soldiers, their legions, and armed forces being chosen and furnished out
of those countries, it came to pass that being divided into factions and
partiallities, by the natural ambition and inconstancy of that nation: and
being grown effeminate by the soft, nice, and tender delicacies of the Orient,
they were not able after a while to repulse the incursions and often invasions
of the Barbarians. And Rome it self in the mean time and all Italy (whom God
had determined to punish) wanting a chief head and supreme commander amongst
them, and not retaining, but by little and little neglecting and loosing their
ancient military discipline, and that martial rigor and severity, which was
necessarily to be observed amongst soldiers and men professing arms, they
became a prey unto strange nations. Wherefore we may well say, that it is
happened unto this Empire, as unto a beautiful and goodly tree, which in her
own natural soil does bring fourth pleasant and good fruit, but being
removed and planted in a strange ground, in the end by little and little it
becomes barren and withered.

I doubt not Gentlemen, but both your eyes and your ears have been wearied and
^loyed to see and understand the large discourse and recital which I have made
of those dolourous and lamentable misfortunes befallen to your Christian
brethren. I will cease therefore to speak any further of this sorrowful
subject, and will follow the tract of our Moses, whom (me thinks) I hear
calling to me and complaining himself worthily, for that I have suffered him
to stay so long in the heat and ardour of his rebellion, which leads him on
against his natural Prince and native country, to the intent we may see what
will be the end and fortune of that his journey.

The season and time of the year, which now began to grow more mild and
Scanderbeg prepares to receive Moses in Epire.
temperate, the frequent and often renewed aduertisements, and the rumor
published and spread abroad concerning the approach of Moses into Epyre did
perwade the king to have his forces in a readiness. Wherefore with a notable
good courage and resolution, he attended the coming of this new enemy,
howbeit with a more mild affection and less hatred, then he used toward
others that came in arms against him. He could not yet let it sink into his
mind, that the Dybrian did bear him any hatred, or did carry the mind of an
enemy toward him, or that so slight, or rather no occasion, should cause so
sudden and great a change of his faith and fidelity, which had been notably
tried and approved in so many battelles and for so many years. He thought
rather that it might be, he used this as a cunning stratageme and policy, to
leave some testimony to the posterity of his great renown, and for the
confusion and grievous ruin of the Miscreants. And although it were so that he
marched as an open and apparent enemy against his country, yet was he in good
hope, that the sight of his native soil, and the presence of his ancient
friends and fellow citizens would by little and little draw him to a more
charitable and friendly respect, and so abolish all his enmity and sinister
affections erst conceived against his Prince or country. But howsoever it was
he had his army in good order, and in a readiness against all hazards and
events: being fully resolved, either with arms in hand to understand the mind
and intention of his friend, or with a most sharp and settled courage and
indignation to fight with him as his open enemy. Neither did he greatly care
to proceed against him with any policies and stratagemes to surprise him upon
the way, because he knew well that his troops were not excessive great, nor
much exceeded his own forces, but that both in number and valor they were
sufficient to receive him, and to hazard the fortune of the field with him. And
it may be also that he held it no easy matter, nor of small danger to allure
or draw him into his snares, who was an old and expert arts master in such
sleights and subtilties, and such an enemy as had been familiarly acquainted
with his manner of government and proceedings in martial services.

This then was the occasion, that Moses entered free and without any disturbance
Moses enters into the lower Dibria to Oronichea or the fields of Pharsalia.
into the lower Dybria and encamped in Epyre near to the plain of Oronichea,
which has been so famous for so many great and notable victories, especially
through the defaite of Mustapha: yet did not he attempt any thing either by
procuring the inhabitants to revolt unto him, or to spoil and waste the
country in any cruel and hostile manner. For he was advertised, that the
King of Epyre did approach, and having a desire and determination to begin
the war with a private and single combat between himself and Scanderbeg
body to body: he thought it more meet and convenient to proceed with open
force in plain and set bartell, then by trifling skirmishes, or by roades and
invasions to waste, spoil, and sack the Province. Scanderbeg made no long
delay, but meeting with him even in the open and plain champion, he made
ready his forces to the conflict. Immediately began a great murmuring in the
army, and the soldiers in a certain disdain and despite to see him, could
hardly be restrained under their ensigns, but that they would forthwith have
charged upon the enemy. Even as a kind and natural father when he sees his
own son standing and behauing him self insolently before him (whom a
damnable desire of rule, and a wild youthful disposition, impatient An
elegant comparison.
of the yoke has drawn into arms against him) is then laden and surcharged
with care and grief, and every moment does temporize and seek delays,
marching forward but slowly, and seeks first (though in vain) by sweet
words and persuasions to convert and dissuade him from his obstinate and
disobedient course, deferring as long as he can, the punishment of him whom he
loves so dearly, and is loath to triumph in the lamentable victory of his
own blood and bowels: even so the King of Epyre pressed on with love and
piety, did look upon Moses then in arms, and furiously raging against him,
did judge diuersely of his mind and affection. Willingly he would have
demanded a word, and have had some speech with him, and he would gladly have
sounded the nature and disposition of his old friend, wherewith he had been
so familiarly acquainted; or else he would have treated with him by
Ambassadors and friendly counsels: But neither the Majesty of his royal
estate and dignity, nor the rigor and severity of arms, nor the fury and
insolency of the soldiers (who were now ready to skirmish and to begin the
fight) would permit and suffer him to do any of these things, whilst they
were more desirous, that his fault should rest between God and his own
conscience, rather then the enemy should think they stood in any doubt or
fear of him. But Moses his mind ran on no such matter: his thoughts tended
to another end: for he preparing himself to put that in performance, which he
had erst promised to the Turkish Monarche was in a mind presently to have
given the onset upon the enemy, had not the prompt audacitie and hardiness of
Ahimaz a private soldier, interrupted Ahimaz.
and deferred for a while that his purpose and enterprise: for this Turk
addressing him self toward the Dybrian said,

Give me leave worthy General, first to lead thee the way, which the Gods
Speech of Ahimaz to Moses, desiring leave to fight a combat.
themselves have laid open for thee to attain unto this present glory. It
seems unto me (I know not how) an unfit thing, and nothing agreeable unto the
right use of arms, that we should come abruptly to try the fortune of all our
forces in a pitched and maine battle, and not to begin the fight by some
small and light attempt.

The desire of this soldier was soon approved, and he was permitted to arm
himself for the combat, and withal to send a trumpet to the King of Epyre, to
understand his pleasure, if he would consent that before the beginning of the
fight, both the one part and the other should make trial in this manner of
their valor and good fortune. The trumpet being seen to approach, Scanderbeg
did imagine (according as he wished) that the Dybrian would have drunk water
with his wine: but when he understood the sum of his message, the name and
regard of Moses began by little and little to vanish out of his remembrance:
nevertheless that which he demanded was accorded unto him. But some of the
Epyrots (as the report goes) made this answer: That if the Turks would, they
were and would be ready by a private and particular combat of some few
persons, to exempt the two armies from the peril and hazard of a set field.
Thus at the same time, that the Trumpet on the one side did retire with his
answer to the Turkish army, on the other side one of the Epirot horsemen,
Zachary Groppe being followed with the clamours of those of his own company
came forth very courageously and in very great haste presented him Zachary
Groppe desires leave to fight the combat with Ahimaz.
self to his Prince, desiring him to give him the honor and preferment of
this combat. Scanderbeg received him very courteously, and with very good
speeches highly commended and magnified his virtue. His companions that helped
to arm him prayed unto God to give him, not more strength and valor, nor more
hardiness or courage, but only the fortune and good hap of Manessey. He
made choice of no other then his ordinary and usual weapons: only he wore
upon his armor certain rich ornaments as is the guise of soldiers. The
Paynim who was in nothing inferior to his adversary, was the first that took
the field, imagining that there scant durst any man come to encounter him:
but as soon as he saw the party (with whom he should have to deal) to come
into the field thoroughly armed, and with his lance upon his thigh marching
right toward him, he addressed him self unto him, and cried all aloft: Soft
and fair, soft and fair (quoth he) noble Speeches between Ahimaz and
Zachary Groppe before their combat.
Knight, we shall have time enough to seek our own misfortune. And
therewithal he entreated him, that they might talk together, and having
enquired the name and the degree or estate of the Epyrot, he began to
propound certain conditions not much unlike those which once were propounded
and scorned by Paul Manessey, in the like action. Whereunto Zachary,
interrupting his speeches as vain and frivolous, replied, That he could wish
with all his heart, that he had more and better means to content his desire:
and (if it were his fortune) to make his victory the more glorious. This
said, each of them turned about and withdrewe themselves apart, and being gone
so far, that the full course of their horses might make Combat between
Ahimaz and Zachary Groppe.
their strokes the more violent, setting spurs to their horses, and giving
them the reins, they took their carreer each against other with their lances
in the rest. Neither of them failed in their course, notwithstanding their
strokes were in vain, for that their lances piercing into their targets,
which were covered with bars of steel, did fly in pieces without any hurt
done unto their bodies: yet they holding on their carreer, encountered together
with their bodies so rudely, that both horse and men tumbled to the ground. The
two champions yet whole and unwounded, speedily got up upon their feet, and
leaving their horses, with their swords drawn did affront each other, and
began a fierce and cruel conflict. Fortune would that the sight of this
combat should be diuersely enriched and beautified, imparting her favor
equally unto them. For having continued a long time in fight, and no blood
drawn on neither side, their swords fell out of both their hands: it might
be long of the crookedness and heaviness of their Cimitaries, which are
fittest for horsemen, and less easy for them that fight on foot: or
peradventure it was by reason of weariness, or for lack of aduisement, and
through their overmuch heat and hastiness in fighting. Having lost their
swords, they did cast away their targets also, and (as two strong and mighty
wrastlers unarmed) with their bare hands, they fastened each on others body,
doing their best and worst by wrestling to overthrow each other. The two
hoastes stood and beheld them, with equal and like measure both of hope and
fear. After they had thus a long time wrastled and tugged together, resting
themselves now and then among: and neither of them able to move or to force,
and throw each other to the ground, they came at length to the last proof of
their force and strength, and lifting up one the other from the earth, they
tumbled and fell both of them together, the Turk underneath with his belly
vpwardes, and the Epirot full upon him, who very quickly and nimbly setting
hand on his dagger, stabbed him with it into the throat. Ahimaz by little and
little began to wax faint, and his hands leaving their hold, the
vanquisher (having freed himself from him) with great joy and triumph and with
infinite acclamations Victory of Zachary Gr^ppe against Ahemaz who is stain.
of the Albanians, got up upon his feet, and laying hold upon his sword which
lay near him, he did cut off the head of his enemy, yet gasping and drawing
of breath. And being thus laden with that and his other spoils, he went his
way fair and easily toward his fellows who were coming to meet him. For
you must understand that both their horses at the beginning of the combat, were
gotten and fled to the camp of the Christians, which the common sort
interpreted as a good token of their victory and good fortune. Zachary had no
less recompense and rewards given him by Scanderbeg, then Manessey had before
for the like desert; but the praises and commendations given him by the whole
army far exceeded, because both the difficulty and the variety of the combat
did seem to amplify the merit of the champion, and did more adorn and
beautify the honor of the victory.

This good hap having given unto the Christians an assurance and entry to the
entier favor of fortune, and having put Moses in a marvelous anguish and
grief of heart (notwithstanding that his troops being terrified with the ill
success of their companion did dissuade him by all means possible) yet he
giving the spurs to his Moses challenges Scanderbeg to the combat.
horse, and galopping over the field (as yet smoking with the blood of the
Turks) went apart toward Scanderbeg, and with a high voice challenged him to
the combat. The suddenness and strangeness of the act did astonish and amaze
all the Epyrots, and they did with a kind of horror, detest the novelty and
rareness of so wicked and insolent an action: insomuch as they stood still as
men stricken mute or dumb with that accident. As yet was not all love and
piety quite banished and exiled out of the heart of the king of Albany: but
standing for a time in doubt and mammering with himself, he was loath to defile
his hands with the blood of his old friend and familiar: but the other
perseuering in his importunate defiance, and withal vpbraiding him in most
injurious and despightfull manner, it made him to forget all right and equity,
insomuch as being filled with wrath and anger, though his Nobles did enforce
themselves to have retained him, and would have taken upon them this revenge,
yet would he not be persuaded, but made toward the Dibrian who stayed for him.
Moses as soon as he Moses flies from the presence of Scanderbeg coming to
combat with him.
saw him coming, suddenly turning about, gallopped toward his company, and
was so ashamed that he durst not abide nor speak a word unto him, but causing
his whole army presently to set forward, he made them ready to the battle. The
Prince of Albany in the mean time returned to his forces, who were nothing
discontented with this adieu between them: and especially the Turks for their
parts were very glad of it, knowing well the great and manifest inequality
that was between the two parties. He that should compare the bravery of the
challenge made by the defiant with the shamefulnesse of his flight, would
think that either Moses being ashamed of his promise made to the Sultan, was
willing to be acquitted of it as of an ill debt, and that being terrified with
the present danger, it made him to turn his back: or else that he did it of
a foolish and rash presumption, thinking that Scanderbeg would not have stirred
out of his place to meet him, and himself confessed no less afterward at
such time as he returned into Albany. But for my part I am rather of this
mind, that God, even that great God which has established the kings of the
earth in their Sentence.
thrones, has imprinted in their countenances certain characters of his
divinity, which makes them venerable and terrible above other men. And so
Moses who had never seen his King in choler and displeasure with him, could
not then bear nor endure the majesty of his angry visage: so that herein he
verified the old and common proverb: namely, when the eye sees that it never
saw, the heart thinks A Proverb.
that which it never thought.

Immediately upon this retrait, the Albanois began to make forwards, sending
forth on all parts such cries and clamors as are usually heard in armies that
are victorious. Scanderbeg albeit both the strength and resolution of his
forces (which were to the number of 6000. horse and 4000. foot) and so many
good signs and auguries Number of Scanderbeg his forces against Moses.
did manifestly foreshew his certain and assured victory: yet did he not omit
any thing notwithstanding, that might serve to the obtaining of the same: were
it either for his perfect and exquisite art and cunning in setting and
ordering of his battles, or in encouraging of his soldiers: for being returned
from that vain defy given him by Moses, he used these speeches unto them.

You have great reason (my good soldiers) to assure your selves this day of
the Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers encouraging them in the battle
against Moses.
victory over your enemies, in that God has sent you these manifest presages
of his assistaunce in these their two Champions: of whom the one with the
loss of his head, and the other by his most shameful flight, has given you
an assured pledge of your good and happy success. For my part I could have
been content to have employed the strength and fury of my arms else where, if
the insolency and infidelity of this rebel would have permitted me. But
seeing he (as one transported from all reason and honesty) does seem to
contemn and despise the friendship and kindness which has been showed
him, and does confound all rightes both divine and human: what charity
rests now to be extended unto him, but that you fight valiantly for your
country, for your wives, for your children, and for your Prince, who is borne
and dedicated only for your liberty and tranquillity: of the which this
wretch and miserable fugitive seeks to deprive you: endeavoring to bring you
into the bondage and thrauldome which you have heretofore endured? Many other
speeches and persuasions did he use unto them, which were both begun and
ended with a great noise and cry amongst the soldiers, and they went on
presently against the enemy, who made no less haste to encounter with them.

The host of the Albanois was divided into two wings, whereof Musache de Ange
Order of Scanderbeg his b^tt^ls against Moses.
line had the charge of the one, and Giurize de Vladienne, had the leading of
the other. Scanderbeg left not his wonted and ordinary place in the middle
battle between the wings, which was reenforced and strengthened with a good
squadron of pykes and holbards, and certain Italian horsemen. In the head of
the wings had he distributed his archers, crosbowes, and such of his people as
served with shot. And thus was both the Cauallerie and the Infanterie disposed
as well in the battallions of the vauntgard ordained for the first charge and
onset, as also in the rerewarde, and last supplies, which were ordained for the
seconding of the fight. Moses made one only Order of Moses his battle against
Scanderbeg.
front of his horsemen, of whom he placed in the head of the battle about a
four thousand for the first charge and encounter of the enemy. The like
number did he ordain at their backs, in which place also he had bestowed,
with especial choice, many of his stoutest and most resolute soldiers, both
to stay the former, if they should either be affraied, or happen to fly before
their enemies, as also to aid them if they should be hard bestead, and to
repress the fury of the enemy: by means whereof the rerewarde (which him
self commanded, and held near at hand) might have the more leisure to
prepare themselves either to assail and charge upon the enemy, or else (if
need were) to remedy any disorder: and if any misfortune should befall them,
to provide for himself with more suertie and security. The Dybrian was
enuironned for the most part with Epyrots, and he had purposely assured and
flanked him self with them: both because (the language and the manners of that
Nation being most familiar unto him) he might the more commodiously be
counseled by them, as also aid them upon any occasion. To many of them also
he had given the charge of companies, and other degrees of command in this
battle, without any dislike or contradiction of the Turks, because he had
absolute and full power from the Sultan to dispose of all matters to his own
liking.

The forefronts of both the armies being come with great fury to
handystroakes, The battle of Oronichea, between Moses and Scanderbeg.
the Christians did press and bear in upon the Infidels with such strength
and violence, that they in the forefront of the enemies vowarde were soon
beaten back and repulsed: insomuch that their Ensigns also being forced to
retire, many of them in the middle battle were so terrified with this chance,
that (notwithstanding the cries of their fellows who recalled them from their
flight) yet for all that, quitting their ranks, they began to forsake the
place, by means of a number of our harguebussiers: who being advanced very
aduenturously, had so stricken them, both horse and man, with fear and
terror, that diverse of them were overthrown and beaten down, and the
residue had little list and less resolution to abide there any longer. The
Dibrian stood not still at any time, but bestirring himself with notable
industry on all sides, sometimes here, sometimes there, with a brave courage,
and without all regard of death or danger, did animate and encourage his
soldiers both by words and by deeds: and by his presence did reestablish and
strengthen the battle in diverse places. As yet was not the second battle
fully overthrown and disordered, by reason of those forces which (as we said
before) were placed behind for a supply to second and support them.
Notwithstanding the continual and often charges given upon them by the Prince
of Albanie, did in the end make them faint both in courage and in strength,
and in despite of all their resistance the Albanois with their swords in their
hands did make themselves way through them even to the rerewarde, there to
carry away the honor and last consequence of the whole battle. Moses seeing
that, did speedily set forward with his own Cornet: and being attended with a
strong battallion of all the brauest men and best mounted, he came to that same
place, endeavoring to reenforce and to reassure them. And true it is, that by
his coming, the Christians found the victory somewhat more bloody, but of
never the less assurance and certainty: For that the other squadrons of the
Epyrots following close after their fellows, and even at the back of
Scanderbeg, and the two wings (which stood in a readiness round about them)
did in a manner besiege and hemme in the Paynims on all sides. As long as Moses
held good, there was no regard had of them that fled, but for a while his abode
made the Christians to keep together, by reason that he endured their charge
with great courage, and would not for a long time give over, notwithstanding
the great slaughter and butcherie that was made of his people. When he saw
Scanderbeg coming against him, he durst not abide nor tarry to encounter him,
but shunned his presence with all his power, and would not come to the combat
with him: only he did hearten on and press forward against him the strength
of all his forces and troops as many as he could possibly, thinking without
any hazard of his person to have brought him to his last end, by whose safety
the estate of Albanie could never come to ruin. On all sides did the
Christians press upon the Infidels both in flank and in front, and they never
thought of coming to their general, till such time as they had both wholly
overthrown the enemies vauntgard, and broken their maine battle, and gotten
many of their colors and ensigns, together with the slaughter of diverse
Leaders and Captains, whose heads being fastened upon the points of lances
and pikes by some of the soldiers, did wonderfully augment (as the fashion is)
the fear and terror of the rest. For all this was not Moses seen to make any
show, or to have any mind of flight, notwithstanding that both his sides were
left all open, being altogether disarmed and disfurnished of people, and that
the fortune of the fight was now grown utterly irreparable and desperate. Yet
nevertheless still rallying and gathering about him those forces which were
scattered and dispersed, and with reproaches and rebukes obiecting their
cowardice unto them, he renewed and continued the fury of the fight, giving
unto his adversaries fresh occasion both of travel and of danger, and making
the issue of the battle to be long and doubtful. The King of Albanie
wondering at the obstinacy, or rather fury Saying of Scanderbeg concerning
the obst^^ ^y of Moses in the battle of Oronichea.
of this warrior, did openly protest, that he thought that Moses would not
have fought so egerly, neither for his country, in case he had seen it in
danger to be ruinated, nor for his proper children, if he should have seen
them before his eyes drawn into servitude and bondage. But Scanderbeg being
accompanied with Amese, Tanusee, and the two Streezes his Nephews, did again
make toward him with great fury and violence: and some of the Epyrots calling
him by name, did will him to stay and expect the crown of Epyre which was
prepared for him: but neither the brauadoes, nor the force of them that charged
him, could any thing daunt or astonish the noble courage of the Dybrian. For
now at the last being strengthened and backed with the reregarde of his army
which stood near him, he did with singular valor both receive the charge and
repulse the violence of the Albanois. Here now it happened, that one of the
Turks (whose dexterity was nothing inferior to his hardiness and virtue)
seeing Scanderbeg to press directly forwards, and to make toward him, setting
spurs to his horse, and with his lance bearing full upon him, he Scanderbeg
felled upon his horse croupper by a Turk whom he kills.
did encounter him so rudely, that he bare and overthrew him backwardes upon
the crouper of his horse: and the Infidelles supposing he had been dead, did
with a huge cry and exclamation testify the triumph and joy they conceived of
that accident. It was an occasion also, that both the flight of the Barbarians
was deferred for a while, and that the butchery and slaughter of the others was
far greater then otherwise it would have been: for their courages now
beginning to be revived, and they coming to take heart again, the Barbarian
whose hand had once been fortunate against the person of Scanderbeg, did now
once again demand and urge him to the combat, as though it had been a
conquest only due and allotted unto him. But our peerless Chieftaine being
settled within his saddle, and having recovered his stirrups, and the conceit
of this unwonted disgrace making the blood to arise in his face, he would not
suffer that any other but himself should take the revenge thereof: And
therefore Victory of Scanderbeg against Moses and the Turks
enraged with anger, he made toward his enemy, assailed him most furiously,
and followed him so hard, that having given him many cruel and mortal wounds,
and him self not hurt at all, in the end the Infidel fell down dead at his
feet. The Turk being thus overthrown and slain, Scanderbeg passed on, and
with an high voice calling for Moses, he addressed and bent all his fury
against him, who (I doubt not) would have abidden and stood to him, if not for
any hope of the victory, yet at leastwise Moses his flight.
for his honor and reputation: if both the daylight and his company had not
quite forsaken him whilst himself was earnestly busied in fighting. But his
people flying, he was enforced to do the like: and the soldiers which had
followed him into Epire as their General, did now accompany him in his flight
also. The Epirots, especially such as were young and lusty, left not to follow
the chase, and to make after him for the space of a mile and more, in hope to
have taken him either alive or dead, whereof they knew Scanderbeg was very
desirous. Many of the enemies which were found hindmost were put to the sword,
but as for Moses he escaped safe and sound: and being very skifull in the
ways and passages, yet tired and ouerwearied with extreme travel and hunger,
he got to a place of suertie together with the infamous relics of his army
which exceeded not above four thousand men at the most. There resting and
refreshing himself he attended the daylight. Of the Epirots there were not
wanting Number of Turks left alive at the battle of Oronichea.
fully one hundredth, and about a four score hurt: who notwithstanding their
wounds, and the darkness of the night, did fall to sacking of the Turkish
tents, and to gather the spoils of them which were slain. Amongst all the
prisoners there was but one only of any special mark and reckoning, and he
being grievously wounded, had yielded himself to Zachary Groppe: only this
Turk was saved from the sword, and was afterward ransommed at a dear rate.
As for the others (were it either without the knowledge, or with the command of
Scanderbeg) they were all of them ordained to diverse torments, being made the
subject of revenge, so to satisfy the fury of the soldiers, who were not yet
appeased for the cruelty showed by the Turks at Belgrade, so that this
execution of these Infidels, did in some sort pay the interest of their former
losses and injuries.

The victory thus obtained, and the baggage, both their own and that of the
enemies, being gathered together and trussed up, the army retired to their
first lodgings, Triumph of Scanderbeg and the Epirots for the victory against
Moses and the Turks.
where the ordinary garrison was established: there did not they make any long
stay, but Scanderbeg in great triumph the fourth of April, took his journey
toward Croy. Now began the old dolor and grief to be quite forgotten, and
extinguished by this new joy and gladness: the time it self (which is the
best medicine for such maladies) having by little and little mitigated the
violence and extremity of that passion. Now were the spirits and minds of all
men refreshed and recomforted, Sentence.
by reason of this happy and gladsome victory, the celebration whereof was
solemnized among the Dibrians with longer feastings, and with more universal
sports and games, then had been used at any time for the triumph of any good
success obtained against their enemies: for they did esteem the ignominy to
be now purged and taken away, which the fault and offense of another might
seem to have drawn upon their whole country, and that they had now given
certain and evident gages and tokens of their faith and fidelity, which was
in some sort suspected to their Prince. In like manner there was sent a solemn
Ambassade unto Naples with many notable Ambassadors from Scanderbeg to
Alphonsus king of Naples.
and worthy presents, which were as signs and marks of their new
prosperity: and might testify to the contentment and joy of his friend the
king Alphonsus, that the dishonor of Belgrade, and the domestical treason of
Moses was now revenged and recompensed. This Ambassade was honorably
entertained, and within a while Plombin in Thuscane besieged by Alphonsus in
his war with the Florentines.
after returned home again from the King of Naples laden with most rich and
honorable presents: notwithstanding that (by means of the late war with the
Florentines and by the siege of Plombyn which had been in vain attempted)
Alphonsus himself was in a manner drawn dry both of men and money.

In this mean season, Moses and his companions having wandered somefew days up
and down upon the marches of Albanie, knew not what way to take, nor what
course to resolve upon. For the shame of his discomfiture did put him in fear
to approach or to repair to Constantinople, or to present him self unto the
Sultan: besides to attempt or enterprise any thing further against the King of
Epyre, either for the abolishing, or for the excusing the blemish and disgrace
of his misfortune: the small numbers of his men, and their abated courages
would not permit him Notwithstanding as his own mind was haughty and
courageous, so did he hope to gain them also to condescend and agree to his
devise: and his conclusion was, that he would prove all means to draw them to
his mind, and to persuade them to that course. The argument which he took to
induce them unto it was upon this: That oftentimes things which are most
desperate being hazarded with a settled resolution, do come in the end to be
more fortunate then those that are done with best advise and consideration:
that unto men vanquished there remains no other hope of safety then by
victory: and Speeches of Moses persuading the Turk his soldiers to make some
new attempt upon the Epirots.
that it is the duty of martial men, either by a triumphant and glorious
life, or by a memorable death to seek the abolishing of so great ignominy and
dishonor. And to this purpose did he use many speeches to the like effect:
promising them moreover that by reason of his great practice and skill in the
ways, places, and passages of the country, he would conduct and lead them
without any danger both by day and by night (which themselves should think
best) even to the camp of their enemies: and the rather for that (as he gave
them to understand) the army of the Epirots was retired back to Croy, and
that the garrison left upon the frontiers was not comparable unto them neither
in number nor yet in valor. But how is it possible to persuade them who are in
a maze and terror? By the cries which they made, and the clashing of arms and
weapons, they showed how they did mislike the counsel of Moses, and immediately
they began to take their way toward Greece. Needful it was for the Dibrian to
hold his peace and to be silent, and to frame himself to the will and pleasure
of them all: the conceit whereof made him so sad and pensive, as one that had
been now drawn to punishment and execution. Thus this unfortunate and unhappy
man was enforced once again by his ill fortune (which did accompany him) with
many grievous and secret sighs and groans, to abandon the sweet soil of his
native country, which he had once before forsaken by his over vain and
wilful disloialtie.

Between the time of the departure of Moses from the Sultan, and his return
back again to Constantinople, there passed almost two Months, during which
space, for that there was no certain report nor tidings brought unto the
Ottoman of that which Mahomet his imaginations of Moses success in his journey.
had happened: his long stay was an occasion, that he thought things to be in
another case then indeed they were. He was distracted into diverse and sundry
opinions, sometimes imagining that Moses was beaten and discomfited: sometimes
that his army was betrayed and sold by him unto Scanderbeg. One while he would
imagine (as his desire was) that Moses was come to combat body to body with
Scanderbeg: But then he doubted least he being slain by the Prince of Albanie
his forces should incur the same misfortune, or at the least be brought in
bondage and thraldom to his enemy: another while he would think otherwise:
and (as every man does flatter Sentence.
himself in believing that which he either hops or fears,) so would
Mahomet persuade and sooth himself in this conceit, that Moses was victorious
in the combat: that the desire of spoiling the country, and of reducing the
province under his command and obedience, did draw him on to prosecute his
victory, to follow his good fortune, and to prepare unto himself the crown
and scepter of Epyre, which had been promised him. But now the arrival of
Moses, showing all things to be far otherwise then he pretended or expected,
and the shameful spectacle of those relics of his army which were returned,
did breed a most grievous coffeehouse and offense both in the heart of the
Sultan himself, who was even mad for anger, and in Moses at his return out of
Epire to Constable antinople is in public disgrace amongst the Turks.
the eyes of every private and particular person: insomuch that Moses was
generally condemned and reproved: all men reproaching and accusing him, that he
had either by his faithlesnesse and infidelity, or by his rashness and
temeritie destroyed all the flower of Greece, and in a moment had erected and
restored the courages of their enemies, who were erst in dismay and confusion
upon the calamity of Belgrade. The Dibrian himself being both ashamed and
mindful of his misfortune, as also of his Moses justified by his soldiers.
flight, could not endure to come in the sight of men, nor to hear the
slanders and reproaches which were spoken of him. How be it the good and
favorable reports of his soldiers, (who therein did shift the blame from
themselves also) did make him well thought of by very many: for they did
openly give out and maintain it, that he had done the duty and deuoire, and
had performed the part both of a wise and prudent Chieftaine, and of a valiant
and hardy soldier, in the battle against Scanderbeg: and that there was
never any man that did strive with more obstinacy and courage to renew and
restore the fortune of the fight declining to the worst. And whereas they
reproched him for not performing his own challenge and defy given to
Scanderbeg; that they imputed to the invincible virtue and valor of
Scanderbeg, and to the daily hazard and chance of wars: such and so great was
the favor and good opinion, which this worthy personage had gotten in the
hearts and minds of his soldiers the Turks, by reason of his exceeding
courtesy, and the popular facility which was in him: but Turks use to honor
virtue and valor ^^en in their enemies.
much more by means of his rare valor and virtue in the field, and by his
excellent deserts showed in the wars: the which kind of perfections and good
qualities, the Turks do usually love and cherish above all other things, even
in their very enemies: insomuch that if the doubtful chance and hazard of
war (as it oftentimes falls out) do deliver them any prisoner that is a man
of valor and virtue, they do commonly relent toward him from their natural
and accustomed cruelty, and do intermit some part of their furious and
bloody disposition, which ordinarily does reign and abound in them: but to
such as are cowards and faint-hearted, they do always show themselves most
severe and extreme: for they say that such men, seem to be borne only for
their bellies, and to consume victuals: and therefore they hold them unworthy
to live, affirming that it is expedient, that they should be destroyed and made
away.

All the persuasions and excuses used to the Turkish tirant, could not by any
means Moses in the displeasure of Mahomet and in danger to lose his life.
mitigate and mollify his hardened and obstinat heart, but that he could and
would by some mean or other have wrought the revenge of his losses, and of his
anger upon the poor Dibrian, whom the consideration of his own misfortune did
sufficiently torment. He would never harken unto his submission, and nothing
could satisfy him but that the venim and malice of this furious and outrageous
Prince, would have Mahomet his Nobles and friends entreat him in the behalf of
Moses.
lighted upon the head, and seized upon the life of Moses (although there was
nothing in him to be reprehended but his fortune) if so be that the
intercession of some of the most special and inward friends of the tirant, had
not moderated the outrage of his passions: telling him, that the bad and ill
usage of this stranger, would alienat all others from his service, and detain
them from having refuge or recourse to his Majesty. Thus Moses having obtained
pardon of the Sultan his displeasure, though with much ado, and all process and
proceedings against him being now disanulled, yet did he nevertheless continue
in that contempt and base account and so much disdained: that from thenceforth
there was scarce any care or order taken for his maintenance. Notwithstanding,
wisely and with a good countenance, he dissembled all these indignities and
disgraces, casting and discoursing diverse thoughts and imaginations in his
heart: he took little or no sleep or refreshing: but being now come to be the
just and impartial judge of his own errors, he began to consider and
measure, on the one side the greatness of the danger and peril, and on the
other the reproach and infamy which he had purchased, to be esteemed as a
rebel and a traitor. Thus was he distracted not knowing what to do, nor what
counsel to take, nor what would become of him. For so is it commonly seen,
that none is perfect in this world: and it behooves Sentence.
for the most part, those which are the most wise and sagest persons, that once
in their lives they do commit some one fault or other. In the end after many
long and unprofitable discourses, this was his resolution, and this laudable
desire entered into his heart: to leave and forsake the Infidel, who knew not
how to esteem nor judge of the actions of men otherwise then by the issue and
event of things, and not by the intent of the parties that do them. He
determined therefore, to return again to his native country, to yield
himself into the hands of his Prince, and to submit himself to the mercy of
Scanderbeg, whom he had so highly offended: hoping that by this his repentance
he should abolish, if not the note, yet at least the pain and punishment which
he had most worthily deserved, and in so doing, he should avenge himself also
of the ungrateful Ottoman: and a special reason that induced him thereunto
was, that he was assured, that the clemency and courtesy of his Prince did
far exceed the badnesse of his merits and misdeedes. By this conclusion
having quieted and settled his mind, he did daily devise with himself, how he
might escape and get away. The night (as it fell out) was the fittest time for
his purpose, and therefore dislodging in the edge of an evening, so as the
watch could not perceive his departure: he made one whole and continual
journey both of that night and the next day following, not resting in any
place, nor suffering his horses to breath themselves, till such time as being
entered into that part of the country of Thrace which confineth upon Macedonie,
Moses returns into Epire
he passed on the rest of his way with more pleasure and ease both for his
body and for his mind. Thus within few days being entered into Epyre, he took
the next and shortest way possible to the garrison where he was wont to
command, purposing to go from thence and to prostrate himself at the feet
of Scanderbeg. As Soon as the Dibrians perceived him to be come, their hearts
seemed to relent even at the very sight of him: in such sort, that immediately
there began to be revived in them the desire of their former conversation with
their ancient and wonted Captain. They grew into utter forgetfulness and
oblivion, how he had perverted all rightes both divine and human, in being
disloiall to his country, to his citizens, and to his proper blood and
kindred. They could not welcome him without abundance of tears, and so with
infinite salutations and embracements, they consumed and spent the greatest
part of that day: and then being given to understand by them, that the King was
not far from thence, he changed his determination of going to Croy, and went
presently to seek out his Sovereign. A great number of the garrison did
accompany him, to the intent he might be the better graced in presenting
himself before his presence, and might the more easily obtain his pardon. The
evening was now near Moses comes to Scanderbeg and prostrat craves pardon
of his rebellion.
at hand, when as he (according to the usage and fashion of that Nation)
putting his girdle about his neck, did hold on his way till that he came
where as Scanderbeg then was, whom he found walking before his tents. Presently
upon the sight of the King, in extreme grief and sorrow he fell upon his
knees, and prostrated himself at the feet of his Prince, the tears trickling
down his cheeks, and in most humble manner, he besought his Majesty to
forgive him his offense, and to grant him pardon, not for the respect of any
his forepassed merits, but only in regard of his mere bounty and royal
clemency: protesting and vowing, that if it would please him to remit his
fault, and to grant him his life, he would most willingly consecrate and
expose the same from henceforth for the increase and honor of his Realm, and
for the liberty of his country. They which accompanied him did not fail to
entreat for him. Scanderbeg took him very graciously by the hand, and caused
him to arise, Moses reconciled to Scanderbeg.
and without any difficulty or delay did freely pardon him, and received him to
his grace and mercy: and after many embracements and friendly salutations, he
fell into speech with him, devising and conferring most friendly of certain
particularities and enterprises of the Turk: testifying sufficiently by the
manner of his behavior, that his heart was thoroughly reconciled unto him, and
was free from all passion of rancour, malice and mistrust.

I do not think it any strange matter in Scanderbeg, that he received Moses
to his mercy: but that he should so readily and with such facility be drawn
to pardon Clemency and rare humanity of Scanderbeg.
him, who had showed such notable hatred, had vomited forth so many injuries
and had attempted so notorious a mischief against his Prince: that he should
no sooner have a sight of him or hear him speak: but he should so bountifully
and with such assured commiseration and clemency rather divine then human,
receive him into his good liking and former amity: and even then also when the
grief conceived for the death of those (who were lately slain) was yet
scarcely forgotten, nor the wounds of the hurt yet thoroughly cured: this is a
matter so rare and strange that it cannot be thought nor imagined without great
wonder and admiration. And besides all this: even at that very time, and
within few days upon his return, he took special care and gave order, that
his goods, which had been confiscated and Moses restored to his former livings,
offices and dignity.
divided amongst particular persons, should be restored unto him, together
with all his lands and offices: whereat the people took great pleasure and
contentment. Thus by this mild and moderate demeanor, this courteous Prince
did purchase both unto himself eternal praise and commendation, and to the
other, a general abolishment of his reproach and infamy: and all remembrance
of offense was quite and clean extinguished out of the hearts of the people
of Albanie. For the Province Joy and triu^ph of the Epirots for the return and
restitution of Moses.
imitating the modesty of their King, did seem as willing to bury all their
griefs in oblivion, and they made show thereof by bonfires, and such like
tokens of triumph which they publicly demeaned for the restitution of their
Moses: Whereunto the King also added a perpetual edict and decree: enioyning
and commanding all his subjects, that from thenceforwardes no man living
should make any speeches or mention of that offense. Wherein he verified that
saying of the Poet.

It is often seen, that facile clemency
of such as mildly use their victory,
Has caused many to find commodity,
by being vanquished by their enemy.
Now if Epyre and the Albanois on the one side did triumph for joy of the
Mahomet discontented at the departure of Moses.
reconciliation of their Moses, Mahomet on the other side had lost all
patience, when he understood that he was returned into his country. With
notable inuectiues he accused him, not so much for the mishappe of his
overthrow, as of pure and manifest treason, imagining as a consequence of this
accident, that his flight and rebellion which he had so simply believed, was
even from the beginning one of the stratagemes and policies of Scanderbeg. He
took counsel therefore concerning his proceedings in the war of Epyre, and
how he might be revenged. But amongst many opinions there debated, that only
prevailed, by which he was advised to abstain altogether from arms for that
year: supposing it necessary to attend some fit occasion and opportunity,
or to employ all the forces and power of the Ottoman Empire for the reducing of
this Nation to order and reason. Which opinion was received so much the more
willingly, for that there was some rumor and report of troubles and tumultes
toward from out of Asia, and from the Persians. Nevertheless a garrison was
sent to be upon the borders, yet not such as was of sufficient strength and
puissance, either to repress the roades or brauadoes of our men, which they
made ordinarily upon the country, or to serve the turn and needful occasions
of the Sfetigradians and other places near adjoining. The King of Epire
likewise having learned the deliberation of the Sultan, both by the
aduertisementes of Moses, and by his own intelligencers, did for a time
dismiss all thought and care of the wars, save that upon the news of the
coming of this garrison, he assembled a running Camp, and for some few days
kept himself close in ambushments upon the borders. But the Barbarians
passing no farther then Alchria, made all that expedition to turn to nothing:
and therefore having provided for diverse affairs of consequence, and having
left Moses in that place, he retired with the Queen to a country on the sea
coasts commonly called Redona, there to recreat him Redona.
self for the residue of the summer, where he passed most part of the Autumn
in hunting and such like exercises of pleasure.

I cannot but in this place acknowledge in him that which the famous captain
Scipio Continency of Scanderbeg.
the African was wont to require in all excellent chieftaines and generals of
armies, and that was his notable continency toward womankind, which was
admirable, as well in regard of his own wife, as of others likewise: for he
would commonly say: Saing of Scanderbeg touching incontinency in soldiers.
that nothing was a greater enemy, nor more pernicious to the strength and
vigor both of the body and the mind, then the immoderat company of women, and
that it behooved soldiers by continual travail and labor, by daily watching,
by sleeping upon the ground to tame their bodies, and to subdue and keep under
those immoderat passions and whot affections of luxuriousnes: thus by such kind
of speeches and by his own example, he would use to repress and restrain the
soldiers from visiting their houses too often and with overmuch curiosity.
This one thing is most memorable also in Scanderbeg, Discipline observed by
Sca^derbeg in his Camp.
that there was never seen in his Camp any whores, or such like baggage, or
trugs (as they now term them:) but he observed amongst his soldiers a
certain and severe kind of discipline, according to the usage and custom of
the ancients, and he retained them in a wonderful and reverent regard of
religion, both in words and in deeds. And it may be that this was it that
increased and maintained so long time this estate of Albany in so great glory
and felicity: neither is it unlikely but that God being by those means drawn
to favor and bless them, did so sharpen both the swords and the spirits of
the Albanois.

During the time of this rest from arms, Moses had his mind set on nothing so
much, as to seek out some invention, and by some notable enterprise, both to
repair his own honor, and with one and the same mean to be revenged upon
the ingratitude of the Sultan. An evident example, that we ought not altogether
to despair of the amendment of men when we see them in any ill course, but
rather that Sentence.
we receive them kindly to grace and favor. For Moses having augmented the
garrison, and the numbers of his bands being doubled, he did daily exercise him
self in sacking of the country, thinking to have drawn forth the Turks to
encounter with him: sometimes in the day would he make out with a small
company, sometimes in the night and in secret with greater forces: and
continually would he light upon some one or other, putting them to the sword
whom he found either as spies, or going on foraging, or upon such like
services, but the Mahometans not dating nor venturing to come abroad to any
purpose, nothing was done worthy the remembrance.

As Moses on the one side did all his deuoire and employed his best means to
abolish and wash away the infamy of his former misdeedes: so on the other side
(I know not how) it came to pass, that some devil and wicked spirit, or
rather the misfortune of Scanderbeg, or the inevitable force of the destinies,
did raise up Amese to Rebellion of Amese against Scanderbeg.
be the inheritour and successor of the like wickedness no less damnable and
mischievous. There are many things in this place which do deprive me of all
desire to proceed any further in this discourse, for that the remembrance of
these domestical and civil affairs, and of the ingratitude of men, is not
only unpleasing and grievous unto me, but I do even abhor to write of them,
and the rather for that I could never find any certain cause of his flight.
Every man has his opinion, and the most part of the reports which go upon
it, are without any ground or foundation of truth. For this cause I will
imitate the Painters, who as they use with their Penciles to shadow things, so
will I cover and conceal this in silence as a thing both superfluous in this
History, and little pleasing to the readers. For omitting the jealousy which he
conceived at the kind entertainment and reconciliation of Moses, I do think
for my part, that there was no other cause nor occasion of his revolt, out that
only which (as we have said) was practiced to corrupt Moses: to wit: The
working and solicitations of the Turkish officers near adjoining, and of
their agents interposing and dealing between them: for you must suppose, that
this was no hard matter for the Infidel to do, but that he might many and
often times by secret messengers communicate and treat with Amese: for he was
possessed of a goodly country, fair and large in the confines of the Turk,
by the liberality and bounty of his uncle: who thought it not good nor
convenient to retain him longer in Court, without any patrimony or means to
mainetaine his estate. There was another respect also which did incite the
Ottoman who (as we have said before) was now occupied and busied in the
affairs of Asia, to practice with Amese and to gain him unto him: because
being of the blood royal, and near unto the Crown, and withal knowing him
to be in credit and favor with the people, he was persuaded, that they would
gladly yield to submit them selves to his dominion, much rather then to Moses,
if they were once pressed with any the least peril and danger that might be.
These ouertures and fair hopes being presented to the thoughts and
imaginations of Amese, by persons purposely appointed to insinuate the same
unto him, did find ready and easy entrance into his young and tender heart.
Thus we see, that the mad and frantic desire of rule and Empire, does make
men not only Sentence.
faithless and disloiall, but also over credulous and light of belief.

Now Amese being made wary and advised, as one whom the misfortune of another
had sufficiently warned, and sufficiently instructed in all points, because he
would Amese goes to Mahomet with his wife and children.
not go nor present him self to the Ottoman with the peril of his life, or
with any show or shadow of suspicion: he took and led away with him both his
wife and his children, as those that should answer for his true and plain
meaning, and should acquit him from the suspect of any crime: and he delivered
them unto the Infidel, as the sure and certain gages of his faith and
fidelity. His departure bred marvelous tumult and astonishment throughout all
the Province: every man thought it very strange, and was inquisitiue after the
cause and motive of this his rebellion, considering that besides his near
kindred, he was continually held and reputed by Scanderbeg, as the companion
and consort of his Empire and royalty. This accident being reported to his
uncle, he took it very impatiently, and with his friends and familiars, he
began to complain and bemoane his hard fortune. Must this (said he) Speech
of Scanderbeg touching the rebellion of Amese.
needs fall out to make up the measure of my travels and sorrows, that I must
be assaulted with domestical and civil wars? Am I so odious, or is my
country so ungrateful unto me? or is it the honor of this Crown and
scepter, that is so desired and held so precious: but Amese (it seems) did
bear envy to Moses, well, if God, if the right and law of nations, and if your
virtue do not deceive me, he shall yet have greater cause then ever to envy him.

The winter season being now begun, and the fields being naked and bare of
gra^^e or other fruits, did put Scanderbeg in hope, that he should for a time
be freede from the preparations and trouble of the enemy: and there was good
and apparaunt occasion to induce him to be of that mind, and to believe that
Amese would attend and stay for the spring of the year, for the setting
abroach of his new plots and enterprises. For this cause he retired with all
his train to Croy, not taking any care for the leauying of any forces or
other preparations of the war: and there he spent and consumed the winter,
oftentimes visiting the garrison of the Dibrians, and preparing him self by
his espials and ordinary gardes to be in a readiness for the travels and
dangers that were shortly to ensue.

The sight of Amese did not so much move the Turkish Monarch, as did
afterward the speech which he used unto him: for the valor and sufficiency
of this personage caused him to have him in admiration, after he had once
heard him Description of Amese his person and qualities.
speak, and that he knew his prudence and wisdom by the gravity of his
discourse and sound reasons. For as touching his stature, it was so small and
so vnsightlie, that at the first appearaunce it could not yield any show of
those secret and rare perfections of his mind: but in recompense of that
defect of his person, he had an heart extreme haughty, and he was of so
quick and sharp a conceit, and of so delicate and subtle a spirit as none
could be more. Of all men he was most impatient, and could least away with ease
and idleness: and (which in men covetous and desirous of Empire are the
principal and chiefest parts to get them honor, and the good grace of
every man) his liberality and courtesy were no whit inferior to his other
virtues. What so ever he got either by the purchase of his own virtue and
valor and by the fortune of the wars, or by the beneficence and bounty of
his uncle, he did wholly depart and distribute it amongst his soldiers and
his friends: he was very officious and serviceable to all men, very familiar
and easy to be acquainted with, and (as occasion did require) he could
dissemble singularly, and with excellent good skill and cunning. By these
qualities had he gained so great authority and good liking in the hearts of
all men, that next to Scanderbeg I do not know any one man that was so
beloved, and reverenced both of the people and of the soldiers: in so much
that some have affirmed, that there wanted not diverse of the most private and
inward friends of his uncle, who did often admonish him to take good care and
regard to a mind that was so stirring and suspicious. But as he would not be
persuaded to credit any such conceit, so did he make little or no account
thereof. Notwithstanding in process of time, when his flight and rebellion
came to be known and manifested, he was sooner drawn to believe the report
thereof in him, then he was before of Moses, and he then began to call to mind
the natural disposition of the man, which had been better observed and marked
by others then by himself. But to our purpose.

Amese being admitted to the presence of Mahomet, did not fill his ears with
idle and insolent promises and vaunts as Moses had done: but coloring the
cause of his revolt and repair to the Sultan with one only reason, to the
intent his speeches might not be accounted either vain and inconstant, or
fained and dissembled, he began in this manner to speak unto him.

Thrice happy and invincible Monarch, if it be lawful for us to recall to
memory Oration of Amese to Mahomet.
the errors and injuries which we have in times past committed against thy
Majesty: it might well and rightly be said, that we are now come to receive
the worthy and deserved punishment of our offenses, rather then the hope and
expectation of any honors and dignities. For wherein could we have trespassed
and offended more grieuouslie against the Empire of Ottoman, then we did in
that action of ours heretofore executed in the war of Hungary? at that time,
when with equal and no less infidelity we both betrayed thy army in the
battle of Morana, and when we took Epire, by deceit and fraud out of thy
hands? the true original and fountain of so many mischiefs and calamities?
of all which enterprises and practices I do confess that I was a partner and
consort. For it behooves me now, being in the presence of your Majesty, not to
stand upon the defense and justification of my doings, but only to plead my
contrition and repentance: but I hold it a vain thing to stand in any fear
or doubt before so prudent and gracious a Prince, considering that my age at
that time, and my youth inclining to his own misfortune, and my mind being
but badly stayed in her deliberations and counsels, did then perhaps deceive
and beguile me. I was then lead to believe my uncle, and did suffer my self
simply to be persuaded of many things, and being entised with a desire of rule
and government (a disease properly incident to that age) through too much
credulity forsaking thy service, I followed him and the hope of his fair
promises: but as my understanding increased with my years, I soon began to
discern the secret disloialty of my uncle, and that this my revolt from the
Ottoman obeisance, was more pernicious to me then to any other. By my labors
and by my aid, has Scanderbeg recovered and amplified his estate. Long did I
stay and attend to see, if he would offer me any part or portion of the
possessions which were mine own inheritance, descending unto me (if not from
my auncesters) yet in the right of my father: and I did look that he should
have yielded me some recompense and reward for so many trauelles and perils
which I had endured. Within a while after he got himself a wife, and begat a
new heir and a new successor to his Crown: and as concerning that little
which he did for me, the very shame of the world did drive him to do it: for
perceiving that he could not with any honesty suffer me still to remain and
to continue within his Court as a private person, he assigned me out a little
corner of Epire, the most vilest and worst place of the country, where
(whilst he usurped all the rest unto him self) I should have spent and
consumed my days in obscurity and base account. I had much a do to moderate
my self, my heart being not able to digest the ignominy: nevertheless the
quality of the time, and the natural pride and arrogancy of the man, did
enforce me to conceal and dissemble all things, for fear least under pretense
and color of some suspicion, he might suddenly circumuent and surprise me, as
he did of late George Streeze his sisters son, whom with suborned accusations
of supposed crimes, he despoyled well near of all his livings and dominions.
Willingly would I (most worthy Ottoman) have had recourse unto thy Majesty,
and I would gladly have forsaken and abandonned my ingrate uncle, and the
infamy of his Empire: but the remembrance of our former rebellion, and of our
so many outrages, done against the Crown and dignity of Ottoman, did terrify
and detain me until this present time: wherein by the divine permission,
following the assurance of thy faith and promises, I am now come unto thee
glad and joyous. Thou had no sooner given me any sign and token, thou
had no sooner called and invited me, but that speedily and with all
diligence, I conformed me to thy will, and I came running unto thee, to whom my
mind had so long time been affectioned. I did not defer and put off my coming,
neither did I stay till some misfortune might befall to Scanderbeg, or that thy
good fortune were increased, as did Moses lately: so that thou have no cause to
think or to conjecture, that either fear, or the doubt of any iminent
danger, did make me to have a regard rather to my own good, then the
fulfilling of thy commandments. And in truth, (most noble Mahomet) I have not
left any matter of suspicion either for thee to distrust my fidelity, or in my
country of Epire, whereby I should desire to return thither hereafter: behold
here the assured bonds of my advised and settled determinations, and the
perpetual gages of my faith and fidelity, even my wife and my children. Behold
(O Mahomet) all the goods that nature has granted unto me: whatsoever it be
wherein I can take any pleasure or delight during my life, even that which is
most dear and precious in the eyes of mortal men, thou have it here presented
unto thee. I have brought unto thee those precious jewels, which if they were
in the hands of enemies, I should labor to free them: even such a pledge as
may make any faith (howsoever doubtful and suspicious) to be most firmly tied
and bound in all assured loialty: all other things (save them) I have left
behind me, because in my hasty and secret flight, I could not possibly make
provision of any other carriage or necessaries. And albeit I might all at
leisure and in security have trussed up and brought my baggage with me: what
honor had it been for me to bring unto the presence of so puissaunt and rich
a Monarch, the ordures and dregs (as it were) of my former estate and fortune?
The greatest and the only thing which I can present unto thee is my faith and
loialty, which in truth is the uttermost that my ability can afford: of the
which if thou require any further, or more certain assurance, I submit my
self wholly to any other order whatsoever your Majesty shall ordain. I am not
come hither to give or to prescribe laws, but to take laws and to be
commanded: I will not promise with fifteen thousand men to overthrow thy
adversary, and to tame the pride of the Albanois: the misfortune of Haly Bassa,
and of so many other brave and valiant Chiefetaines, and the fresh and rare
(though most bloody) victory of Sebalias, may serve for an example, to teach
and learn me, how I promise any thing beyond my power and ability. But this I
protest unto thee (most puissant Ottoman) that thou shall not want in me any
readiness or willingness of my best service and fidelity. As for other
matters, either concerning the event of these affairs, or the revenge of thy
injuries or outrages, thou have no reason, as the Lord and master of his
slave: a most expert and approved warrior of an unskillful and simple
soldier: to expect or look for any counsel, or to think that I am to give
any advise or direction.

This Oration of Amese could not seem to the Ottoman to be dissembled or
disguised, both for that he propounded many things true and apparaunt, as also
because his faith did manifest it self sufficiently in that he had brought
with him his wife and children. Some say that she was abused and deceived by
her husband, and against her will drawn out of Epire: others (as it is most
likely also) do affirm, that she yielded her self voluntarily to be the
companion of his flight and fortune, having been secretly informed by him, that
the Crown of Albanie was promised him by the Sultan. So we see, that ambition
is common both to the one and the other Sentence.
sex indifferently.

The tyrant did very well accept, and did greatly approve the deliberation of
Amese, and did assign him an exceeding great and honorable pension. As for
the means and manner of proceeding with the wars, there was no speech nor
talk had at that time: for that such matters (according to the wonted custom)
were appointed and debated in full council and assembly of the Bassaes: for
the late calamity and rude discomfiture received by Mahomet before Belgrade in
Hungary, once called Belgrade in Hungary: alias Alba Graeca: or Taururum
commonly called Greiche^ Wissemburg.
Alba Greca or Taururum, had greatly weakened the spirits, and abated the
courages of the Barbarians: for in that battle had Mahomet himself been
grievously wounded and put to flight by Huniades, with the loss of 40000. men,
besides all his artillery, baggage and munition, which he was constrained to
leave there behind him, for the gages of his rashness and temerity: and in very
truth such and so grievous was that overthrow, Battle of Belgrade in Hungary
wherein Mahomet was wounded and overthrown by Huniades.
that Mahomet did never show himself so pensive and sorrowful for any damage
or loss that he ever received: his mind being continually both night and day
disquieted, on the one side with an extreme desire of revenge: and on the
other side being perplexed and mightily troubled for fear of the like fortune,
which had once befalne him so unhappily. Wherefore the affairs of Hungary being
soon intermitted and given over by a common and general advise, it was
concluded and agreed, that the revenge Counsel of Mahomet and his nobles for
the war against Scanderbeg.
of that dishonor should be taken upon Epire, and the rather for that they
could not at one and the self sametime conveniently intend both the one and
the other expedition. Besides Amese had told them, that they were not to think
upon any attempt against the Hungarians with mean preparations, but with great
and strong forces: for that the fiercenes and valor of that people, did
require a stately and royal kind of puissance: and them selves also were not
willing no^ thought it convenient, that the advantage of this occasion, offered
them by means of Amese his presence, should be delaied or deferred. For these
causes ( Amese being appointed to go as a companion, and in a manner as a guide
and director in the journey) there was a public commission granted forth for
the leuying of an army of 50000. horsemen: and the Sultan would not have
refused to yield to the gathering of a greater puissance, if the same had been
demanded; so greatly did he affect the revenge both of his own injuries and
his subjects, desiring in some sort once to determine and to bring to an end
these difficulties and troublesome tumults of Albanie.

The spring being spent in these preparations, the heat of summer began now to
1456.
come on, by which time all things being in a readiness, the king of Turks
instigated and incessantly urged on by Amese, who (as some say) was created a
Saniacke, did dispatch Amese created a Saniacke by Mahomet. Isaac Bassa and
Amese sent with an army of 50000. horse against Scanderbeg. Amese captain over
5000. horse.
away his army, encouraged with great promises, and well instructed with good
precepts and directions. Isaac the Bassa of Romania had the honor to be
General of those forces without any dislike or coffeehouse of the Christian
fugitive, who notwithstanding (because he should not be seen altogether
without any degree of honor or authority in the army) had the charge of five
thousand horsemen.

The Epirots were little pleased or contented at the news of these mighty
preparations, but especially the Dibrians: for the soldiers in those parts
had diverse conceits and imaginations (as it is ordinarily seen in such
cases) what means might be used either to receive or to repulse the enemy,
whether by ambushmentes, or in the plain and open field, and in some place
purposely appointed: or whether this war should be decided by delaying and
temporizing, and by observing of opportunities and aduauntages. One thing there
was that did more astonish them then all the rest, and that was: that though
the rumor and report of the coming of the enemy did increase daily, yet on
their parts, they saw not any leauie nor muster of any army yet begun, nor no
remedy prepared against a mischief so imminent, and a danger that was so
near hastening upon them. For, to say the truth, this rumor at the first
did not greatly move Scanderbeg, for that especially he could not be
persuaded, that Mahomet bending all his hatred and malice against Epire, would
let pass in silence, or forget the shame and dishonor of so great and foul
an overthrow as he had lately received in Hungary. Nevertheless he made
all possible and diligent means by his intelligencers and espialles dispersed
here and there on all parts, to learn the certainety of all the attemptes and
actions of the enemy, as well as the tumult and confusion of those new troubles
and commotions would permit him, to the intent he might shape him self some
new course in his counsels and proceedings: But upon the many aduertisements
brought him, and especially upon the coming of certain fugitives when this
doubt began to be discovered, and that he was certified both of the numbers and
of the quality of the army that came against him: and that his nephew also
was there in person, with express commandment to the Bassa to crown and
inuest him King of Albanie: he did not any further prolong the raising of his
forces, which he had forborne till then to assemble and gather together.
Council called by Scanderbeg for the resisting of Isaac, Amese and the Turkish
army.
He called therefore a council of the Princes his confederates, and of the
chief and principal of the country, and certain Dibrians, to deliberate and
take the advice of every man upon this matter. All of them repaired into the
lower Dibria into the same place where their camp was wont to lie: thither
also came Moses with some of the principal of his garrison, to understand the
resolution and conclusion of the council. There was a great number of
voluntary men which came thither out of diverse countries, and a multitude of
young and lusty persons drawn thither only for the desire of prey and
booty: by means whereof, even in an instant, he had gotten together a
sufficient, fair and goodly army, and (it may be) nothing inferior to that
of the enemy, if you regard their valor though far unequal in respect of
their numbers. You should not have heard of any thing amongst the soldiers but
brauadoes and vaunts. Each man conceiving in his hope the honor and spoils of
the enemy, and magnifiing their own prowes and fidelity, and promising unto
themselves wonders, did think it long that they did not encounter with the
enemy, who (said they) ought to be prevented and to be assaulted before he
should be able to come within their borders. Neither the numbers ofso many
thousands, nor the redoubted name or renown of the Bassa could terrify or
astonish them. They had forgotten Sebalias and the wounds and slaughter
received before Belgrade, so greatly were the haughty courages of our
Albanians increased by the fresh victory obtained against Moses, and the new
desaster of Mahomet in Hungary: and the latter Belgrade made them forget the
former. Yet did they all rely upon the counsel and directions of their
Prince: who judging that this forwardnes of his soldiers was in some sort to
be repressed, he began to cast his eyes down to the ground, and so dissembling
by his countenance part of that which he carried concealed in his thoughts, as
if he had bin devising and imagining upon some high matters and of great
importance, he propounded unto them all in general the sum and substance of
his deliberation: acquainting them also with the means which he meant to use
against the enemy, and with the consequence and greatness of the peril,
speaking unto them in these or the like terms.

Amongst all other things which the divine wisdom has left unto mortal men
Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers being ready to march against Isaac Bassa
and Amese. Nature of hope and of fear or distrust.
in the strange variety and diversity of worldly actions, to afflict and
torment their minds: these two (most worthy Albanois) are the most
principal, to wit: hope and fear: the former is more plausible, and befalls
commonly to minds that are high and haughty (I will not say) vainly addicted:
the other is more prudent and less given to blood and cruelty. For albeit she
do in some sort prolong and protract the desires of men, yet does she
nevertheless season them, and is as it were an excellent good medicine to cure
many infirmities within them. Hence it is that those ancient Captains were
wont more usually to be victours who feared and misdoubted all things, then
those who never doubted nor feared any thing. Hence also it proceeded, that
Saying of Hanniball touching Fabius Maximus and Terentius Varro.
the great Carthaginian termed Quintus Fabius his most grievous and dangerous
enemy, who to his own Citizens seemed slothful and timorous: saying that
Terentius Varro was more dangerous to his own country, the State and people
of Rome, then he was to his enemies. But why do I attribute that strange and
dishonest surname of fear to that thing, which more properly does merit the
name of counsel and sage advise: for my part I care not how you name it: this
is certain, and cannot be contradicted, that from it only is derived all the
ancient discipline, and the severity Martial discipline derived from fear or
distrust.
of martial government, invented and practiced by our forefathers. She it is
that does nourish and entertain hope, and she never does any thing but it
comes to a good and happy end. She carries her eyes before her, behind her,
and on all sides, and with equal balance she does poize and measure things
present with things future and to come hereafter. You may now guess what my
meaning is by this my speech, which is very fit and prope^ for this time, and
to correct and chastise your overmuch forwardnes. I thought it good (my
fellows and companions in arms) first to discourse with you, and to sound
your affections before I would innouate any thing in the considerations of this
war, to the intent that I might either frame my self to your opinions, or (as
your discretion hitherto has been) you might conform your selves to my
judgment and discretion. You have heard of late, and your ears are full of the
daily rumors and reports touching the stirs and tumults of the wars which
are daily prepared and addressed against us. Behold the Bassa of Romania who
with the flower of all Europe, and with the strength and puissance of the
Ottoman Empire does now knock even at our gates: and yet my courage would
serve (as ever hitherto it has done) and I durst adventure and hazard the
battle against him: neither do I doubt but you have the advantage.
Notwithstanding against so mighty an enemy, whose forces are so huge and
immoderate, it behooves us rather to use prudence and good counsel, then the
wonted fury and fierceness of your courages. The notable and famous defait of
Haly Dassa, so many famous and memorable triumphs and victories obtained even
till this time, your resolution gotten and testified by so many goodly exploits
succeeding so happily, do persuade and assure us, that we have both the courage
and the power to meet and affront the Turkish forces in open field: but the
unstable and unconstant chaunges and alterations of the wars, and the
natural disposition of fortune so unknown and uncertain, will make men who
are sage and wise, to forget and to misdoubt all these matters. To overcome
always was never particular nor proper to any Sentence.
man, nor was it ever hereditarie to any person. New actions and attempts do
daily demand new counsels and directions: Albeit yesterday you did overcome as
conquerours, yet cannot you assure your selves to day that you shall have the
spoil of your enemies, or the ransomming of their prisoners. Victory is like
a traveler or passenger Similitude.
upon the way: she turns and windeth hither and thither, not having any
certain dwelling or abiding place. Howbeit that virtue and prudent counsel
bethe principal means both to purchase and to retain her: yet nevertheless
oftentimes it falls out that when you have sagely and advisedly guided and
conducted all things, yet will fortune, the chance of war, and certain
casual accidents challenge a great part and portion of the victory.

In the end and conclusion of his oration, he laid open unto them the
inconveniences Scanderbeg deuiseth with his soldiers for the manner of his
proceeding against Isaac Bassa and the Turkish forces.
that do usually and infallibly accompany a battle, be it either gained or
lost: and that therefore it was requisite to intrappe the enemy by trains and
ambushes, and not in the plain and open fields: yet so as this must be done
with judgment and discretion, and that they must be surprised when as they
least dreamed and thought upon it, when in full hope and joy of victore, their
hearts were carried and transported with overmuch license and liberty, and
that they did neither fear nor misdoubt any slight or subtilties, which as
then he said could not be done, because they had been before enstructed and
learned to beware by others mishaps, and the examples of their own fellows:
and besides for that they had Amese his wicked nephew, the domestical plague
of his own native country, who would instruct the Infidels to foresee and
avoid the policies which himself at other times had learned and practiced in
the school of his uncles experience. Notwithstanding in the mean while,
because he would take away all matter and opportunity from the enemy of
exercising any cruelty, or to obtain any victory upon his subjects, his
opinion was, that all the people and inhabitants of the plain country should
retire themselves into the fortresses and strong holds: which also should be
assured with sufficient garrisons, against all accidents and chances
whatsoever. For (quoth he) who knows the secret deliberatio^s of Mahomet? It
may be, that himself in person does follow after the Bassa, pricked on with the
desire which he has had of a long time to work some notable and singular
revenge against us: and therefore it is good to fear and doubt all things, to
the intent we need not be in fear nor doubt of any thing.

This oration of Scanderbeg being pronounced with the great silence of the
whole assembly, Tanuse and Vranocontes who had earnestly intended to his
speeches, did arise out of their places, and with infinite praises did
publicly approve the same, saying, Speech of Tanusee and Vranocontes touching
the oration of Scanderbeg.
that Scanderbeg had so exactly discoursed of this matter in every part, and
that his divine spirit and admirable prudence had so well comprehended and
conceived all points: that nothing was wanting to be consulted on, or to be
put in execution, which concerned the common and particular good of them all.
Hereupon the former heat and forwardness of the common soldiers began to be
mitigated, and their Answer of Scanderbeg to his soldiers being inquisitiue
what course ^^ would take against the Turks.
audacitie grew into a wary and profitable kind offeare. Some of them could
not be contented, but they would needs entreat and humbly require their king,
to show them by what course and means he meant to overcome and repel the
enemy: But Scanderbeg smiling answered, that it ought to suffice them, if they
did rely and put their trust in him, and that himself would incur one and
the same fortune together with them, and that if he should promise and assure
them of any thing, it would be to small purpose in this case, where fortune
might usurp unto her self so great power and privilege.

Immediately hereuppon Scanderbeg having taken order for the parting of the
Scanderbeg fortifieth and furnishes his country with all necessary
provisions against the coming of Isaac Bassa and the Turks.
Province, and the distributing of the several charges and offices: the
Siegniours and chief Captains, by the appointment and command of their
General did sever and betake themselves into several parts and places of the
country: sometimes disposing and bestowing the garrisons which had been
delivered them, into the fortresses and strong holds, and sometimes conueying
thither victuals and other munitions to furnish all of them, both one and
other. This was the occasion that there was some delay made, and the rather
also for that the harvest was not yet thoroughly inned, nor the corn clean
carried out of the fields: and the rumor every day growing more and more that
the Barbarians approached, (for that the case required haste and quick
dispatch) the soldiers as well as the husbandmen were employed in that
business: and they conveyed all their corn partly in the sheaffe, and partly
threshed out, into the towns and castelles, to have it safe and sure from the
hands of the enemy. By this means, they were well and sufficiently provided
both of men and victualles for many months. Scanderbeg having left Moses to
command over the residue of the army, went to Croie, and stayed there some
three days taking order for diverse matters and urgent affairs: especially
for the remoouing of the Queen and her household from Petralba. From thence
returning to Dibrya, he began to go in hand with his business, and with a
watchful eye and diligent care prepared himself for the receiving of his
nephew, whom he determined to entertain and use as a mortal and Isaac and
Amese with the Turkish army enter into Albanie.
mere enemy.

By this time had the host of the infidels cut over the greatest part of
Macedonie, and were now entered upon the confines of Albanie, and having sent
forth their vant^urrours before them, they did warily discover the country
far and wide on all hands, to the intent they might not fall into the usual
and accustomed ambushments of Scanderbeg. And the report is that for that only
consideration Amese would never suffer them to march by night: affirming, that
his uncle would never be so foolish, as to encounter or stay for so mighty and
puissant an enemy either in the day time, or in the open and champion country:
but would assay rather by the favor and benefit of the dark night to put in
practice his accustomed stratagemes, and those subtle traynes which were most
usual and familiar with him in martial exploites. But Scanderbeg on the other
side, although he had long before hand provided all things in a readiness for
his retrait, if need should require it: yet would he not by any means
dislodge, till he had true and perfect intelligence, that the Turks were come
very near him, and that he might in a manner perceive the dust of their
Scanderbeg retireth from the Turks.
horses: and then trussing up baggage, he speedily discamped and forsook that
place, in such sort, that they which followed and came on behind him might
very well discern him, as he marched on before them. The Turk would not
follow after, nor put himself in pursuit of him, by reason of the difficulty
and roughness of the way, and for fear of ambushes. Only he sent certain
horse after him, giving them in charge to trouble and molest him as much as
they could possibly, and to learn, what course and way he held, and whither
he went. Wherefore the army of the Infidelles being entered into the upper
Dybria by the way of Alchria, they did march on still with a fair and easy
pace: continually discovering and searching far and wide on all sides. When
the coast was found to be clear and safe from the enemy, the Turkishe
company with exceeding great joy did disperse themselves abroad over all the
country. But as this kind and manner of victory, so easily gotten, was very
pleasing and gracious unto the soldiers, now waxing insolent through
security: so did it no less grieve them afterward, for that they could not
find nor meet with any pillage in the fields, nor light upon any fit matter
to satisfy their covetous minds and inordinate appetites. Thus held they on
their march till it was about an hour before noone: and then both because they
would stay for the return of their vauntcurrours, and also for that they would
rest and refresh them selves of their long iourneis, and the extreme heat of
the weather, they began to make a stand, and went to lodge them selves near
to Oronichea in the same Dibria, near adjoining to the same place, where our
men at other times had used to encampe Oronichea in the upper Dibria.
them selves. There pitching their tents, they spent the time in council and
consultation, till such time as their vauntcurrours returned unto them:
abstaynig in the mean while both from meat and drink, or any other kinds of
refreshing. For before their dislodging in the morning, they had taken a
sufficient repast, by the advice of their General, for fear least if by some
chance and casualty that morning, they should have been driven or enforced to
fight, and that the hazard of the battle should have protracted the conflict,
as many times it does: they might not be enforced also to fight with hunger as
well as with their enemies. All this while did the soldiers take great
delight curiously to survey the place where, our men had of late encamped, and
they walked up and down on all sides, yet not without some suspicion of
danger: in so much that they neither durst disarme them selves, nor yet leave
their watch and ward: but the most part kept continually near to their
standards and guidons all on horseback. And thus for two hours at the least
did they patiently abide, keeping good watch and ward, till such time as they
which had been sent abroad for the discovery, being returned again, did
bring report of that which they had seen and learned: namely, that the Epirot
and his troops did draw down toward the sea coasts on that side whereas
the City of Lissa lay: The city of Alexium or Lissa
and being demanded what numbers they were, they answered, that they were
seant sufficient to make up a good and perfect * Legion. Howbeit the truth was,
that A legion contains 6000.
the army of the Albanois did amount to more then eleven thousand fighting
men, whereof six thousand were horsemen, and the rest footmen. But the error
of the Turkish scouts (as I suppose) grew of this: that our men being in
Dibria, had sent all their infanterie with their cariages, to pass on fair
and easily before: fearing lest if they should have expected the enemies
coming any thing near at hand, and so should have been driven to march in
have, they would not have been able to have made such speed, as to have gotten
time enough into some sure place of safety: and after the footmen (as I have
said) marched the horsemen, even in the sight almost of the Turkish army. So
you see the occasion why the foot forces of the Epirots were not discerned by
the vantcurrors of the Turks.

It may be, that some perhaps more curious obseruers of matters then others,
will demand upon what reason, or what commodity Scanderbeg could find in this
advise and conceit of his, in not giving place to his adversary, till he saw
him even close at his back? and why he made his retrait rather toward Lissa,
then to any other part of the country? But I will, if I may, satisfy these
men with the same reason that persuaded me: and my opinion herein is nothing
repugnant unto those men, whose faith and diligence I have most followed in the
continuance of this history. Besides, the effect and success of things being
curiously conferred together, may sufficiently manifest the truth thereof. The
dissembled and counterfeit fear of Scanderbeg did evidently Stratageme of
Scanderbeg in retiring from the Turks.
declare, that his first stratageme in staying for the coming of the enemy so
near him, was to make a show, that he meant to fight, and to hazard the
fortune of the field in a maine battle: but that, seeing the infinite
multitude of his enemies, and the present danger and extremity of the peril
considered, did seem to put him in such fear and terror, as if he had been
enforced to give back, and to change his mind and resolution: to the intent
that by his show of flight, he might make the Barbarians more confident and
hardy, and with more looseness and licentiousnes to scatter abroad, and to
disband themselves from their standards, which he could not by any means have
wrought without great suspicion, if the flight of the one and the coming of the
other had been more distant and farther off. Moreover, he directed his course
and show of flight rather toward Lissa then to any other place, because that
way seemed to be chosen as the fittest and safest for men who made show of
fear: whereas otherwise if he had put him self in the other way amongst the
thick forests and wooddie valleys, it was to be doubted, that he should have
made less show offeare, and have given greater cause of suspicion and
conjecture to the enemy pursuing him, of some secret ambushments laid and
disposed to entrap them. Besides it is to be believed, that he had an intent
and purpose, by this fair show and policy (which the issue also did after
make manifest) to deceive and ouerreach his enemy: upon whom being carried away
with credulity, and straggling loosely abroad, he purposed to give the onset on
that side, which neither the footsteps of them that fled, nor the manner of the
place to which they fled, did any way make to be suspected. For we should do
Scanderbeg great wrong, to think or to confess, that so sage and advised a
Chiefetaine would have made choice of this course, only upon a vain and light
consideration, without any especial conceit and Isaac Bassa demands Amese
his opinion concerning the flight of Scanderbeg.
purpose. Hereof was Amese an infallible witness, who albeit he were of a very
subtle and searching spirit, and had a sharp and quick insight in all
matters, yet could he not keep himself from the trains of this old warrior:
for when the Bassa (being somewhat doubtful and troubled in his mind upon the
sleights and subtleties of Scanderbeg, did demand of Amese what he thought to
be the cause of this his so extraordinary and continual flight, the like
whereof he had never used?

My uncle (quoth Amese) did expect and attend for the forces of Moses: and
therefore Answer and censure of Amese touching the flight of Sca^derbeg.
having suddenly assembled only a running camp, according to his wonted manner,
he did feed him self with his wonted hope of victory, till such time as seeing
him self deceived in his foolish imaginations, and that he can not abide in
safety within his own dominions, nor be able to oppose him self against such
huge and puissant forces, he is fled toward Lissa to get aid and succors of
his neighbors the Venetians.

This reason of Amese seeming very likely and probable, was allowed and held
for good, no man speaking or alleging any thing to the contrary. Howbeit to
those that shall with wisdom and advised deliberation examine matters
according to the rule of reason, this interpretation made by Amese of his
uncles actions, can not but seem very rash and temerous, if not vain and
foolish. And to prove that Scanderbeg did not think any thing of so small a
troop as that whereof Moses had the command, nor did any whit fear the
greatness of the danger, this only point does sufficiently confirm it:
because that all things in the country of Dibria were disposed in as good
order, as if the Turkish Monarke him self had been expected there in person.
There was nothing at all, neither cattle nor any other thing of worth or value
left in the whole country: and was not that a peremptory argument of some
notable fear, and of a counsel most advised, and of a sound deliberation:
save only to such men whom either fortune, or rather the immutable will of
God, having predestined some mortal and deadly chance, had deprived of all
sense and understanding, as of the principal part of their strength and
puissance? But I will not any longer blame this credulity and light belief of
our enemies, seeing it ministered occasion to our Christians of so notable and
famous a victory, and of immortal renown and glory.

The Bassa perceiving that by the flight of the Epirots, all hope and occasion
was taken from him to purchase any honor by deeds of arms in that journey,
after dinner was ended, he assembled the chief Captains and commanders of
the army to consult and deliberate upon their occasions. In this Counsel it
was propounded and debated, Council held by Isaac Bassa and the Turks for
their proceedings against Scanderbeg.
whether the camp should stir for that day or not, and by what way, manner,
and means they should pursue the enemy: whether it were best to continue in
that place, and there to abide till such time as they might have some certain
news of his attempts and practices, and what the enemy intended to do. Amese
and some others were of opinion, that they should not stir for that day, but
stay there till the next morning: notwithstanding the plurality of voices
carried away the matter, and the worst opinion prevailed against the better: for
they alleged, that the return of Scanderbeg, after he had prepared and gotten
new succors, would scarce be performed in four days: that they ought to take
the benefit of the time and the occasion: that it behooved them to march
forward chearefully and roundly in sacking and harrying the residue of the
province in their passage, and not to stay till ( Scanderbeg having reenforced
and augmented his troops, the inhabitants of the country might in the mean
time (upon the fear and terror of the report) fly into the strong holds, and
forsaking and leaving their houses, graunges, and sheepe-cotes void and empty
of all prey and booty, might by that means make their victory uncertain, and
their voyage without all profit and commodity. Wherefore the trumpet sounding
speedily to horse, no man showed him self backward in executing the
commandment of their General: but all of them (testifying by their high
cries and clamours, that they did approve the new decree and conclusion of the
Council) in a moment trussed up their baggage and with Ensigns displaied
began to march forward. Amese likewise was not much discontented with this
their resolution, but being of a cherefull and good courage against all
casualties and occurrences, he imagined there would be little or no danger for
a day or two, of any alarmes, or attemptes made by Scanderbeg: howbeit, that
in matters of warrefare, those counsels which Providence and circumspection
of Amese in the wars.
did forecast and doubt most dangers, and which were most wary and politic,
did continually more please and like him then any others, because even in the
least error and oversight, there consisted no small weight and importance. And
therefore he admonished the Bassa to proceed in these affairs prudently and
with good order and direction, for fear least by the immoderate covetousness
of the soldiers, their prey and booty might not only turn to their infamy,
but might also prove lamentable unto his people. All these things therefore
were carefully regarded, the battallions and squadrons were wisely ordered and
divided into diverse parts, with a straight and express charge and
commandment, that no man upon pain of death should disranke nor disbande
him self out of the battle where he had his place assigned him, without the
special leave and license of the General, albeit they should happen to see
all the wealth and riches of Epyre before their eyes: for that where time
should serve, they should have free liberty to take whatsoever they could
seize upon. The soldiers for that time showed themselves very conformable
and obedient in that which was commanded them, till such time as their
covetous fingers (itching at the fair show of the goodly things forbidden
them) did find fit matter whereupon to seize and to lay hold. But before the
departure of the army, the Bassa having made his prayers to God, that he would
vouchsafe to grant him the grace to be able to tame the insolency of the
Albanois, and to obtain the honor of all those trophies and victories
befallen to Scanderbeg for so many years together, he called Amese unto him,
who was then ordering and Amese proclaimed king of Epyre by Isaac Bassa and the
Turkish army.
disposing of his regiment: and after he had openly graced him with many
goodly praises and commendations, he caused him by the voices of the soldiers
to be proclaimed king of Epyre: and with a long and superfluous inuectiue,
detesting and disgracing Scanderbeg and all his worthy deeds and notable
exploites. Amese refused not this good fortune, but from thence forward he
showed himself prompt and cherfull in all his doing: dispatching his affairs
with singular diligence, and currying the favor and good will of the people
both in deeds and in words.

These things thus done, the host of the Barbarians (having sent forth their
vantcurrours to discover and beat over the plain country) did now begin to
march forward: part of their baggage being put before in the vaward, and part
following in the rereward of their army. The way which they took was (by the
conduct and direction of Amese) to that part of Epyre which lies to the
Eastward of Croy, and was distant from thence about 80. miles: the which for
that it was least furnished with forces, did seem to be more easily exposed to
prey and pillage: besides they had an intention also, that as their troops
should approach nearer unto the walls (if occasion did so serve) they might all
under one make themselves Lords of the town. Nevertheless by reason of the
continual and vehement heat, they went not far that day, neither did they
find upon the fields, any the least recompense of their pain and travel:
so wild and wast did the country appear on all parts, as if it had been a
mere and solitary desert. This made the Mohammedan to redouble his fear and
suspicion, besides that the ambition of the man did mightily trouble and
torment him, least that the Christian either by his absence, or by his
continual delays refusing the fight, should constrain him to return unto
Constantinople without any purchase or increase of honor and reputation. For
there was no kind of booty to be found at all (which ordinarily, is esteemed
to be a part of the victory) neither had they any ready means without
artillery, to get them any honor by the besieging of any towns. As for the
wasting and spoiling of the corn, fruits and trees: the burning and fireing of
towns, and such like calamities, being the ordinary appendants of the wars,
they are commonly and oftentimes reserved to the last and extreme rigor: for
that in very deed, they do seem rather to testify and to declare a certain
rage and fury, then any benefit or commodity of revenge. Besides, they had
some hope also (such as it was) to come to fight with Scanderbeg, and to bring
the Province under their subjection, if so be he durst present himself to the
combat. And these (it may be) were the especial causes and considerations,
that detained and withheld them from such acts of hostility.

The heat of the sun growing by little and little to be abated, by reason of
her declyning toward the West, the sweet and pleasant shade yielded great
refreshing to the bodies of the soldiers, who were sore wearied, and well
near spent with extreamitie of heat, of hard travel, and long iournyes. To
the intent therefore they might take the benefit of so sweet a refreshing,
they doubled their way and began to ride a good round trot. But the Bassa
commanded them to make a stand, not daring to pass on any further, by reason
that the night approached and drew near. In the mean time him self in person
with part of his army encamped on an high mountain which lay aloft on the
left hand, after he had first caused Amese and certain horsemen to take a
view of the conueniencie and situation of the place. The residue of his army
was lodged all alongest the valley, and in other places in as great safety as
might be: and there was ordained good watch and ward, several courts of
guard being placed both in the plain and upon the mountains round about,
especially on that side that lay toward Lissa, and which they most suspected.
In this place, the night being thus spent and consumed, the next day by the
common advise and consent of them all, they purposed to take their journey into
* Emathia. Or Pharsalia.


Here has it been auerred by some writers, that certain Peysants of the
country Peysants of Albany surprised by the Turks.
of Albanie were surprised as they descended undiscreetly out of the forests
next adjoining: and being put to torments, for fear of death they did reveal
many of Scanderbeg his secrets* For you must note, that there be in Epyre
many mountains full of such huge thickets, so wooddie, and so difficult of
access, that the people of the country do hold them selves in more safety
in those places, then in the best and strongest fortresses: and there is no
power nor puissance of the enemy (be it never so great) that can drive them to
forsake those places. Some also have added this moreover, that certain
fugitives came the same night to yield themselves unto Scanderbeg: and that
certain Scoutes or Espyals of the Espials or Scouts of the Turks surprised by
the Albanois.
Turks, falling into the hands of the Christian courts of guard, were put to
the sword, excepting one only: who being by good hap saved alive and brought
before the King (who was then preparing for his journey against the next
morning) did inform him of many things particularly concerning the purpose of
the enemy: by means whereof it may be easily imagined, and not without show
of credit, that he was a principal mean and author of the victory of the
Christians which followed soon after. For my part it shall suffice, that
without either approving it for a truth, or reproouing it as fabulous, I have
simply made recital of it. And therefore referring the truth thereof to be
judged by others, I will betake my self to the prosecuting of those affairs,
which having been for a while intermitted upon the coming and arrival of the
Turks, do now revoke and call us back to consider of them.

You have heard how the flight of Scanderbeg toward the town of Lissa, was
not such as the adverse party had imagined: but having now gotten far out
of the sight of the enemy, he went unto those parts of the country which
lay upon the frontiers of Albanie, where were many and diverse passages into
the Province by which the enemy might easily be surprised. There did he abide
for that day, attending the setting of the Sun: and then leaving there his
Ensigns, and being accompanied with a very few horsemen, he went up to the
tops of certain mountains, from whence he might well discover all the
plain country about * Emathia. Then calling to remembrance the speeches of
his Or Pharsalia.
prisoners before mentioned, he disposed and bestowed certain Scoutes upon
the Scouts placed upon the mountains by Scanderbeg to observe the passing of
the Turkish army.
tops and edges of the mountains, who having little streamers or penons
(according as the manner is) were admonished and charged to hold them up
aloft, that they might be seen wauing in the air, and that toward the same
side where they should see the enemy encamped, they should throw down those
penons from the top to the bottom. Other signal then this they had not at
that time, neither by fires, nor other watches for the night. True it is, that
the most worthy, and in a manner, the best soldiers were appointed to stand
Scout in that place, amongst whom was Peic Manuell, a Gentleman of no less
wisdom and policy, Peic Manuell.
then of hardiness and good resolution in deeds of arms: because that the
weight and consequence of their whole affairs did consist in the diligence and
trust of these Sentinels. This done, he returned in the dead of the night into
his camp, Ambuscado dressed by Scanderbeg against Isaac Bassa and the Turks.
where having past the most part of the same in rest and silence, he dislodged
very secretly without any noise, and he had not ridden far with all his
forces, but that he put himself in ambuscado in the bottom of a certain
valley very near unto that watch which we last spoke of: determining not to
depart, or to remove from thence before he had deliberated and taken counsel
for his proceedings, and that he might take his directions, by the sign and
token which should be made unto him by those streamers.

It was scant fair day break, but that the Bassa drew his troops forth of
the camp, having a purpose and determination by preventing the heat of the
day to enter into the plains of Emathia, where (as he understood) was
remaining some booty that would be abandoned to the prey of the soldiers. Not
pawsing therefore upon Isaac Bassa with the Turkish army in the plain fields
of Pharsalia.
the matter, he began to march forward very early, whilst the leaves and
grass of the fields were yet moist with the dew of the morning: and troade
with their feet, greedy of prey and pillage, upon those fields that are even
yet famous through the blood and slaughter of the ancient Romans. But to the
intent that a case and accident so marvelous, and so shortly after ensuing
might not be without some presage, there be many who do affirm, that the
General his standard bearer, having Signs and tokens prognosticating the
great slaughter in the future battle between the Turks and the Christians.
stumbled at the ruins of an old wall (as there are many such in those
quarters which do bound the lands and possessions of private persons) both
horse and man with the standard also fell so rudely to the ground, that his
companions were constrained to take him up half dead, and to help him again
to horseback. Notwithstanding they made not any account of the matter, but
only took it as a warning to the residue to look better to their feet, and
to eschew that place. And it may be, that we also ought to make as little
account and reckoning of such signs and tokens, rather then to follow the
vanity of such fond conjectures in this accident: seeing that both the
liberty of man's free will, leading and guyding him in such actions, and the
good doctrine and instructions of Christian religion do seem to argue and
teach us the contrary. But yet one other thing there is, wherein I know not
how I should gainesay it, or dissent from others who have affirmed, that the
Vultures, and Ravens, and such like fowls which use to frequent and hunt after
carrion and dead carcasses, did fly in such abundance into those places, (as
it were foreshewing the great effusion of blood that was likely shortly to
ensue) that the very heavens seemed in a manner to be darkened with their huge
numbers. Besides, there was an other very strange and wonderful sign (which
I had almost forgotten) and which I see no reason why it should be neglected
or nor regarded, and that was, that in the end of the spring that self same
year, (as it is reported by them that saw it) the heavens did rain down
blood upon the earth Of which signs, there is not any of them that proceeded
from the act of any man or earthly creature: neither was it in the power of
man's counsel or prudence, to foresee, or to prevent the effect of those
accidents.

Many are the influences which did descend down from the heavens by certain
Discourse of the author upon celestial signs and prognostications of future
accidents.
secret and unknown causes of things, and it is often seen, that sundry both
good and evil chances are manifested unto us by the operation of the stars
and the celestial bodies, the which whilst we do disdain to observe, we
do refer them to mere accidents and casualtie, and we do not use either
the service and ministry of our own prudence, nor the industry of our own
counselles to purchase unto us the favor and blessing of the divine bounty,
nor to turn away the anger and threatenings of the heavens. For what reason
have we to think, that this extraordinary flight of so many birds and
fowls of the air, or those shewers of blood, which fell from the heavens
should denote or foreshewe the ruin and destruction of the Infidels rather
then of our own friends the Christians? were it not perhaps, that by the
sage advise and counsel, and by the temporizing of the Christian Chiefetaine,
and dexterity of his good invention: The stars were (as it were) forced, and
this notable victory was in a manner purchased from the Sentence.
heavens* For as the saying is, The wise man has Dominion over the stars and
celestial bodies: and for my part I do assuredly believe, that the hunger of
those Sapiens dominabitur astris.
Vultures, might very well have been deluded, and the earth might sufficiently
have been satisfied with that blood only which fell from the heavens, if the
obstinate and wilful prudence of men had not drawn down upon them selves
the violent influence of the destinies. The truth whereof appears in this:
for that if we ourselves have not any virtue nor puissance, if we can
challenge unto our selves no right nor interrest in our earthly actions, but
that these presages must of necessity be followed with such inevitable
effects: then what should it profit or avail to command or admonish men to
take arms and to have recourse to the just defense of wars, if our
resistance should be vain and bootlesse? Or to what end should we surcharge
mankind with the denunciation of long griefs and lamentations only to make
their eyes the beholders or feelers of that mischief which shall never befall
nor come upon them? assuredly much more cheerfully and comfortably should we
leave this world, and depart out of this life, if that hope did entertain and
feed our hearts even to the last gasp: and it would make our death and last
end more pleasing and less terrible unto us. Howbeit that it is a common
proverb and usual in the mouths of all men, That mischieues foreseen, do
least harm and offense: the which (it may be) Sentence.
we will grant to be true in those kinds of mischiefs, which are wont to
dispose and prepare the mind of man, and not to discorage or dismay them. For
there is no thought nor cogitation more deadly and pernicious, then that which
ministers unto men equal abundance of tears, and like rage of passions in
the time both of life and of death.

But whilst I busy my self I know not how to play the part of a Philosopher,
I fear me I do digress from the office and duty of an Historiographer.
Return we therefore to our discourse where it was discontinued.

The entry of the Paynims within the plain country of Pharsalia, was
quickly manifested and made known to the inhabitants by the sound of the
artillery, in the fortresses next adjoining: giving thereby an advertisement
to some of the people, who were issued out with their beasts to feed them in
the fields. Upon this signal and token given them, you may imagine that there
was none of them, but made haste speedily to avoid so great and imminent a
danger: and it is to be supposed, that some of them which were dispersed and
scattered farthest off, did make so great haste to free themselves from the
enemy, that they left part of their beasts for a prey and booty unto them,
not being well able upon such an extreamitie (wherein they were) to use
convenient speed, to save and preserve them from their violence and fury. At
the same instant likewise, the streamers which were placed for a token upon the
mountains, did give Scanderbeg occasion to dislodge Scanderbeg coasteth the
army of the Turks with his forces c^nertly amongst the mountains.
with his camp, who with good reason and judgment, coniecturing which way the
Barbarian took, calling back his scoutes, and arraunging his companies in
good order, he dismarched secretly by the couerts of the valleys, and the
secret passages of the mountains, still following the Bassa a far off
without being apperceiued, till such time as he thought that he had gotten
near enough unto him. Then also putting him self again in an ambush with all
his forces, and attending till it were night, he rested him self near unto a
certain hill, named by the inhabitants, Tumenistiola: after that he had first
sent forth some to stand scoutes, and Scanderbeg puts himself in an
ambuscado near the mountain Tumenistiola.
had set the watch, ordering all things in good and convenient sort. The
Mahometans in this mean while were not idle, but they spent and employed, not
only the morning, but the whole course of their march all that day in
ouerrunning, spoiling, and ransacking of the plain country, being grown to a
certain contempt and licentiousness which by little and little was engendered
amongst their troops, because they saw no body to resist or to encounter them
in the way. All this did Scanderbeg discern full well, but his deliberation
was not to pursue after them with so small forces, they being scattered and
dispersed in a plain that was so large and spacious, nor yet was he minded to
give the onset upon them in such sort as he might any way endaunger his forces
in the fight, but he did rather desire that their audacitie and licentiousness
should still increase and grow more and more. In that manner therefore having
followed them all that night, he forbear to touch, or in any sort to meddle
with their camp, by reason of the difficulties of the places, being not able,
but with great trouble, to carry his troops in the dark through those thick
and huge forrestes and woods: as also because he aimed at a certain draught
and policy of war, which he had of long time before conceived in his
thoughts, by means of certain drums, trumpets, and clarions (whereof shall
be said more hereafter) and by which he did reserve himself to a strange and
miraculous kind of combat. For this cause the Infidels being suffered to rest
in quiet, they spent that night in diverse pleasures and pastimes: and even
Amese also took a great joy and contentment to see himself carried and
attended (though somewhat too soon for his honor) thorough the camp, with
diverse songs of joy and meriment amongst the common soldiers, as if he had
already obtained the sovereignty and peaceable possession of the estate of
Albanie. Not that their minds were wholly freed from all fear or suspicion,

But rather (such is the desire of mortal men) that it draws with it most
commonly Sentence.
a kind of credulity, and makes us to believe that things will fall out
according to our own desire and expectation. So did that leisure and
quietness of three days continuance (wherein they were without any
disturbance of their enemies) cause the Barbarians to frame and conceive unto
themselves a vain license in their own conceits and imaginations, as if they
had been already possessed of the victory. Negligence and security of the
Turkish army.
Thence it proceeded, that all things more and more enclining to negligence,
the watches were less carefully regarded, insomuch as they placed not any
scoutes nor court of guard, but only on that side where they feared most
danger, namely from the way and coast bending toward Lissa.

The darkness of the night being now chased away by the coming of the day
light, the Turks were providing and preparing themselves to follow on their
roads and excursions: and therefore by the break of day displaying their
Ensigns, they fell to spoiling and robbing that part of the country which
remained as yet vnspoiled, filling it with all kinds of outrage and beastly
cruelty: and their host with their Isaac and the Turks encampe between the
river of Mathia and the waters of Albulae.
baggage also removed to a certain plain lying between the river of Mathia
and those waters which the inhabitants name Albulae: placing their gardes and
Sentinels toward Lissa only, where they doubted and imagined the greatest
danger. At the foot of the mountain Tumenista, which has his aspect to the
West, toward the open champion were placed certain horsemen to assure that
passage. As for their camp, it was excellently well fortified: for the one
half of their army remained there still for the guard and defense thereof:
and I find that the Bassa himself, and many of the chiefest and most
principal persons of the army did continue and abide there with the camp,
whilst that Amese (as being more skillful and better practiced in those
marches) had the conduct of those forces that went abroad to forage and prey
Suffades.
the country, with the which all at random he ran up even to the Suffades
(as they term them) and to the seacoasts. The husbandman and the peysant had
not withdrawn and conveyed away all from the fury, spoil, and covetousness
of the Barbarians, because they did not think that the King would have
suffered them so long to use that license and liberty, and to have been vnmet
withal. True it is, that he might at that time have done some worthy and
notable exploit, whilst their forces were so divided a sunder, if he had
roundly invaded their camp: but he was not yet come so near them, neither
could it so conveniently have been done, but that the forces which were
harrying and ouerrunning the country, upon the noise of the alarm might have
been called home, and so they might easily have enclosed the Albanois between
both their powers. But hunger and the heat of the day having now caused them
to return to their camp, the booty was divided amongst the soldiers:
howbeit, it was but of little or small value, and did rather sharpen their
appetites, then satisfy or content them. By this time were our men also drawn
together, and being gotten up to the tops of the mountains, they were seized
of the advantage of the place: whereupon with their arms now ready in their
hands, they did prepare themselves to call the Mahometans to an account of
their voyage and journey which they had taken.

If you had seen how Scanderbeg was busied and did bestirre himself, you
might An ellegant and excellent comparison.
aptly have compared him to one, who expecting at his house some great company
of guests, and being to make them some magnificent and sumptuous banquet, with
most exquisite dainties and viandes prepared more then ordinary, dares not to
trust his servants, nor yet to refer the care thereof either to his friends,
or to his wife, but will see it done with his own hands: ordaining, fitting,
and disposing all things most carefully: and with a doubtful countenance
casts his eyes upon all the dishes, and upon all parts of the table,
especially if by reason of the mean estate of the man, the preparation be more
sparye then is convenient for the number of his guestes: and setting out all
things to the best show, with a skillful and diligent hand, he does so amplify
and increase them, as they may at the least satisfy and fill their eyes, if
not the hands and bellies of the banquetters. In like manner the King of Epyre
coursing and galloping up and down the hills and mountains near adjoining,
stayed not long in any one place, but he places Moses in one quarter, and
Tanusee in another: the Streezes on this side, and others on that side: and
appointing unto every man his particular charge and office, he admonishes and
instructs them: and not trusting in the sufficiency and capacity of any of
them in a case of that consequence, and in that importance of his affairs;
sometimes he goes before, sometimes he follows after: and to be breife, he
makes his hands and his eyes the witnesses of all that is done. He vieweth
and reuieweth all his troops, he examineth if all be well, and still is he
devising and casting, how to dispose and order all things to the best. And to
the intent that the terrible object which he provided for his enemies might the
more astonish and confound them: he used this slight and invention which I
will show you.

To every squadron he assigned a great number of trumpettes, drums and such
Stratageme of Scanderbeg.
like instruments of war, more then is ordinarily he used any troops, the
which he had expressly provided of purpose. After this he ordered his army both
horse and foot according to the commodity of the place, and the quantity of
his forces. He reserved for his own regiment the most part of his army to
wit, 4000. horse, and the like number of footmen, with the which he went
without delay, and seized upon Tumenista.

The Bassa his army, namely they which were wearied with their long and
tedious Security and negligence of the Turks.
incursions in harrying and preying of the country in the morning, at their
return were laid all along, and did rest themselves here and there over the
large plain, having left their horses feeding without either saddles or
bridles: besides that, few or none kept near their ensigns or any good order.
Some lay in the shadow and made merry with that which they had purchased:
others having fed at full, lay wallowing on the grass and slept without all
fear or suspicion. Some passing away the time in plays and sportes of all
sorts and usual amongst soldiers, did joyfully beguile their eyes of
sleep, and the extreme heat of summer: albeit they were scarce able to hold
up their heads for weariness and want of sleep: for then was the worst time
both of the year and of the day, by reason of the extreme heat of the month
of July, and the height of the sun which was not then past the midst of the
heaven, which made their watches and courts of guard also to be as negligent in
the other parts of the camp. For amongst them likewise, every man was bent to
take his ease and to spend away the time in mirth. No man had his arms nor his
horse in a readiness: but the most part having cast away all fear and doubt of
the enemy, had laid aside also the care and consideration of all good order
and martial discipline.

The Bassa himself with the great men and Commanders of the army, and Amese
Consultation of Isaac Bassa and the Turkish Chieftains for their proceedings
against Scanderbeg.
their Counselor (whom the business especially concerned above the rest) being
in consultation within their tents, were in a marvelous care and perplexity,
what course they should resolve upon at their next remove from thence, and on
what side they should find any new subject of honor and commendation. The
counsel was divided into two diverse opinions: one was, that they should
ouerrunne all the Province with sword and fire, and so make the ruins and
spoils of the country to remain as the marks of their victory: the other
(which was propounded by Amese,) was, that they should march right toward
Croy to sound the wills of the inhabitants whether they would submit themselves
to the nephue of Scanderbeg and accept of his government: and that they should
terrify them by threats and menaces in case they did refuse to harken unto
them: as that they should see the total ruin and destruction of Albanie, and
a perpetual siege before their walls, and that in the end they should be
enforced to endure the yoke of a most miserable and shameful servitude and
bondage: That they should not build upon the slow succors of Scanderbeg, nor
trust to their fond counselles, who should persuade them to attend and depend
upon the hope and expectation of his long lingering presence. This latter advise
was approved as the most certain and best opinion, and the other was in no
part followed: only they made some stay for a while, and thought it not yet
best to remove their camp till such time as the feruentnesse of the heat, and
the weariness of their bodies were somewhat abated and refreshed. But
Scanderbeg did not any longer temporize: for having both satisfied and
instructed his eyes from the top of Tumenista, he animated and disposed his
Scanderbeg marches to fight with Isaac Bassa and the Turkish army.
soldiers, telling them what order they should observe and keep: how they
should by their invasions terrify their enemies, and on what side they should
charge and press upon them. But first of all beholding that court of guard of
those Turks which lay at the foot of the mountain, some of them sleeping
soundly, other keeping but slender watch and ward, himself descended in great
silence by the other side of the mountain with eight men only, and had the
cutting of all their throats, leaving A court of guard of the Turks cut in
pieces by Scanderbeg.
them there to keep an everlasting watch, one of them only being excepted,
whom the swiftness of his horse, and his flight saved from the like slaughter.
By this means the other troops of the Christians (after that this court of
guard was dispatched) began to descend upon the plain unknown to the enemy.
He that was escaped, went running in the mean while with all poasting speed
toward his fellows, and with a fearful cry, he filled all the host of
the Barbarians, giving them the alarm, and telling them: that Scanderbeg was
there: that the guard was cut in pieces, and that all the forces of the
Christians were coming, and were even at hand. Hardly would the Turks have
believed these news, if his fear had not given them sufficient likelihood
thereof through the death of his companions. For neither did they fear any
danger on that side, neither did they doubt of the so sudden coming of the
enemy. But Amese was not of that mind: for he was easily persuaded of the
truth of this alarm: and therefore hasting speedily and readily to his
troops, he enforced them quickly to mount on horseback, and encouraged them
to the uttermost of his power. Many of them were wakened, partly by the noise
of the enemies coming upon the^, and partly by their companions, who caused
them to leave sleeping. For now that Scanderbeg saw his ambushments to be
discovered, he commanded his infanterie presently to follow him with as great
speed and celeritie as was possible: and immediately as the enemy was
preparing to receive him, he charged and gave the onset upon them most
furiously with the huge clamours and horrible cries of his soldiers, the same
being augmented and increased with the brimme noise of the drums, Scanderbeg
surprizeth the Turkish camp by a sudden invasion.
trumpets and tamborins which were purposely placed on all sides to annoy and
terrify the enemy by the conceit and imagination of a great and mighty
army: and also to give aduertisements to the other bands that lay close
embusked in the mountains. Amese being seconded with his own regiment of
horsemen, and with certain others who had been appointed for the guard of the
camp, was the first that made head against the Christians, and did most
stoutly sustain the first charge. Many also came thither on foot, having no
leisure in so great have and extremity, to saddle and make ready their
horses. The tumult and the terror was wonderful in all parts of the camp,
and the Turks stood as men mightily amazed and astonished: so great and
extreme was the fear which seized upon them at the very sight and name of
Scanderbeg. The Bassa stood firm within his camp and would not move a foot,
till such time as he saw all his squadrons in order and good array, and that
his flanckes were well defended with treble forces of the choicest horsemen
well armed and appointed. But during these preparations, it seemed that the
heaven and earth were confounded by reason of this new and unexpected alarm,
and with the strange clamours and diverse sounds of the ambushments now
discovered. On every side did the mountains and next valleys resound with the
noise, sometimes of the men, sometimes of the trumpets, drums and clarions:
and sometimes with the marvelous sound of infinite harguebusses, which did
incredibly augment the fear and terror both in the hearts and in the eyes of
the Turks: who esteeming themselves as men lost and utterly undone, did think
that the power and puissance of all Epyre, Sclauonie, and their confederates,
had been assembled and conspired together to their destruction. And therefore
they began to fly on all hands before that ever Moses with his troops alone
could get down into the plain from the mountains: and yet did not their
flight seem sure and safe enough unto them, by reason that all the ways and
passages were in a manner shut up and taken from them. Besides, even their
horses being frayed in diverse places, did either shake off their headstals, or
break their bridles, and being thus feared, did escape out of the hands of
those who were making them ready. Nevertheless Amese mistrusting the
stratagemes and the politic inventions Amese encourages the Turks against
the Epirots.
of his uncle, did soon and easily comprehend this his cunning and subtlety.
And therefore he cried out unto his company on all sides: that they should not
in any case be affraied of these false alarmes: that these devises were for the
most part the only hope and refuge of such as had but weak and small forces:
that they should quietly attend and sustain their enemies, without any
misdoubt of these vain clamours, and that the iangling noise of their
trumpets, and other such brazen instruments, and the echoes and outcries of
their fearful voices, were but frutelesse and idle shows purposely doubled
and augmented to put them in fear and terror. With these persuasions he drew
many of them out of every company, yet in a great doubt and mammering, being
unresolved, whether it were best to fly or to hold good against the enemy.
For neither did the one seem to be honest in the presence of their Captain,
and things being yet in good estate: neither were they of sufficient strength
to resist against their enemies, their courages being dismayed and abated in so
sudden an astonishment: insomuch, that it would have required a long time to
have confirmed them in a good resolution, and to have put them in full heart
and courage again.

All this notwithstanding the Bassa being no less resolute then Amese, caused
his The battle of Pharsalia between Isaac Bassa and Scanderbeg.
Ensigns to march on and entered the combat with notable resolution. As he was
aduauncing himself to the aid and succors of Amese, in hope if he met with
Scanderbeg to oppress him: Moses and the residue of the Christians following
close at their backs, were now come upon the open plain, and held him short
from proceeding any further. Nevertheless the Dibrian caused his men to make a
stand and to hold bridle, staying till Tanusee and Piec Manuell (who had the
charge and command of a squadron of archers and harguebussiers) were advanced
and came forward as far forth as himself. They being now drawn and united
all together, the battle began to grow rough and furious on all sides, and
the horsemen from all parts did rush violently upon their enemies. The footmen
for their parts also wrought wonders; and the harguebussiers played upon the
troops of the Paynims where they saw them thickest not bestowing any of their
shot in vain. Whereupon the Bassa being hardly pressed and annoied with the
mortal shot of those bullettes, was constrained to give backewardes: and being
repulsed and driven to retire within his trenches, he saw his squadrons
disordered and out of rank. Then our footmen casting their bows away at
their backs, and leaving their harguebusses, began very nimbly and lightly
to come to handie blows and to use their swords, still following and pressing
hard upon the Turks in wounding and killing of those which were next unto
them, and whom they found scattered and out of order. Great was the slaughter
and butcherie throughout all the companies, and much blood was shed both of
them that fled, and of them also that fought. But he that had seen how
Scanderbeg and his troops did bestirre themselves on their parts, would have
wondered and admired at the sight and spectacle of so many mischieues, and
mortal misfortunes that represented themselves on that side of the field. For
it was another manner of slaughter that was made there then in any other part
of the battle, by reason that their forces and power being the greatest, might
the more easily work the greater effects. Besides that, the Infidels on that
side were surprised more suddenly, and almost all of them were found disarmed
and unprovided, lying sleeping along upon their bellies: by means whereof
their enemies might the more freely pass over their bodies being the more
subject to their fury and violence: and they might make themselves the better
way by their swords. Here also did the footmen abandon the use of their
arrows and harguebusses, and having only either swords, darts or pikes in
their hands: sometimes they did wound those which fled, behind and at their
backs: and sometimes did run their horses through the bellies, overthrowing
those that were mounted upon them. All the hardiness and audacitie, or the
fear and flight of the Turks on that side did wholly depend upon the
resolution of the Christian fugitive, who with a countenance more and more
assured, made head against the Albanois: and one while by his voice, another
while by the dexterity and valor of his valiant deeds and prowes, he would
advertise Amese encourages the Turks in the battle.
and will his troops to hold good, and only for a little while to endure with
patience, til such time as the first fury and violence of the Albanois were
broken, saying that afterward he would undoubtedly deliver them an easy and
unbloody victory: that the small numbers of the Christians had nothing to hope
on but the fury of their first charge and onset, the which being once past and
cooled, their forces also and their courage would soon faint and fail, and
come to nothing. This did he as long as he could prolong the conflict, hoping
that the other hands which were dispersed over the champion would rally
themselves and renew the combat. But his expectation of those succors grew
still more and more to be vain and frustrate: for many of them were surprised
and taken up by the way, and the rest by the extreamitie of their fear were
advised to betake themselves to flight. In such sort, that the number was not
great of Amese his companies put to ^light by Scanderbeg.
those Turks that presented themselves to the encounter of a just and full
battle: but the most part of them were murdered and like a many of hogs,
had their throats cut by the Albanois. Moses embracing and laying hold upon
this occasion, and so goodly an opportunity, and having an earnest affection
and desire to repair and recover his former honor, would not suffer the Bassa
to take any breath: but crying with a loud voice, (as he was a man very fierce
and vehement) at every blow given with his sword, and at every motion and cast
of his eyes. Speech of Moses encouraging his soldiers to the battle against
Isaas Bassa.


Here, here (quoth he) my companions: cheerfully let us charge, and bravely
let us break in upon these dogs and barbarous Miscreants: let not this
glorious show of their great and huge battles, let not these magnificall names
of Bassaes astonish nor amaze you. These are no other then the infamous
relics of the overthrow of Belgrade in Hungary: they are all ouervehelmed
and buried in fear, in sleep and in drunkenness. Press upon these their
bootlesse and unprofitable gardes, follow on and pursue them bravely and
courageously, satisfy your hands with their blood, that you may satiate your
hearts afterward with the rich spoils and booty of your enemies.

If these speeches and persuasions had the power to chafe and incense the
courages of the Christians, much more were they encouraged by the consideration
of that precious recompense which they saw provided for them by means of the
victory, and which they had in a manner already gotten. Notwithstanding there
were some squadrons of Turks, who being more mindful of the honuor and duty
of good soldiers, then of the safety of their lives: being assembled together
in gross, and a good band also of others on foot, could not in any case be
broken by their enemies. The fight standing upon these terms, Scanderbeg had
sent certain horsemen after his nephew to pursue and follow him, straightly
charging and enioyning them in any case not to kill him: who having taken him
alive, and the victory being made sure on that side of the field, he hastened
with a thousand footmen or thereaboutes, and some few horsemen to that place
where the Bassa stood upon his defense. For, Amese taken prisoner.
the residue of his troops after they had gotten the victory, would not be
drawn from following the chase as long as the flight continued. But on the
other side also, the resistaunce of the Turks was clean broken and ceased by
the promptness and valor of certain Harguebussiers whom Moses had led
thither. And the General of the Infidels with all the rest had quite forsaken
and abandoned their camp. All those which were found on foot (excepting such
as by good hap had Victory of Scanderbeg. against Isaac Bassa and the Turks
in the battle of Pharsalia.
found either their own or some other men's horses and so did escape) were
either slain or made prisoners, Scanderbeg (as long as he saw any
possibility or likelihood that the enemy might again join or reenforce
themselves) did follow and pursue hard after the Bassa: but he saved himself
by the favor and swiftness of his horse who carried him clear away out of the
sight of them that had him in chase. Those which accompanied him in his flight,
had not so good fortune as himself, but a Messeit a Saniacke taken prisoner.
good number of them were taken prisoners: and amongst others a Saniacke
called Messeit. Neither the Dibrian nor any other of the Christians had never
any mind nor care of profit and commodity as long as the chase endured, and
whilst they had the means and power to kill and to follow in execution of
the enemy. On all sides there were bound and fettered great troops of those
who yielded themselves, and had thrown down their arms.

This battle, (or howsoever you list to term it) continued until such time
as the night coming upon them, did find them to be both Conquerours, and to
have the victory. Neither the excessive weariness of the soldiers, nor the
darkness of the night approaching and coming on, could not withhold their
hands from laboring to reap the accustomed prize and reward of their
victory. The carcasses of the dead yet hot and trembling were despoyled, and
many were even then also put to the sword. There were gotten from the enemy
twenty fair and goodly ensigns or standards. Of prisoners there were about
five thousand: the horses and other moueables of all fortes were given to the
soldiers as the recompense of their long labors and trauelles, and they were
so many that they could Number of Turks slain in the battle of Pharsalia.
hardly be valued. Touching the number of those which were slain, the reports
are diverse: they which do reckon with the most, do account 30000. and they
which do reckon with the least, do yield to 20000. Of the Christians there
were wanting abone a sixty or little less, as is generally agreed ^o all
parts.

It is not to be denied, but that this so notable a victory* and which cost ^^
little bloodshed, did far exceed and subfaste all humane sense and reason: yet
ought not the strangenes of the thing to be offensive to the ears of the
readers: for if we will look into the infinite examples of antiquity which
are equally to be marked as being of the like quality, be they either Romans,
Greeks, or strangers: this ou^ accident cannot want either says or credit.
There were found many tents and pauilions in their enemies camp ready dressed
^^ appointed, which for that night were not at all removed, but were generally
assigned to the use of the victors, to the end they might safeguard their bodies
which were fore wearied and we^ with blood and swet, from the unwholesome air of
the night and making within them good and great swet, they served them as fit
and convenient places to feast and triumph in for the public joy of that
victory till the next morning. O the pleasant sport of unconstant fortune* o
the ridiculous estate of humane affairs* Scanderbeg is now Lord and Master of
the lodgings of the Bassa the General of the Infidels: and the rest of the
Epirots likewise do enjoy and possess the tents and commodities which were
not prepared nor provided for them. In many places they found cloth, and
napkins ready laid, and the victualles set upon the tables; wherewith they
were merry and made good cheer at their own pleasures. Thus was the common
and usual proverb verified. That there is a great distance between the cup
and the lip. Many horses were found there also ready saddled and brideled,
as though they had stayed and attended for their masters to mount upon their
backs, but they saw them lying dead at their feet. But this notable
spectacle of this new accident and event, and an evident testimony of the
mutabilitie and inconstancy of fortune, was Amese the King his nephewe. Of
late he being a King of three or four days continuance, Amese brought
prisoner to Scanderbeg
with singular arrogancy and insolency, did ouerrunne all the fields of
Emathia, and was attended up and down the Turkish camp with the hands and
voices of the common soldiers: but now behold how with his hands bound
behind him, with out any words speaking, and his countenance cast down, he is
led toward his uncle, to be made a spectacle, to the eyes of the common
soldiers: who being victorious against him, were assembled to contemplate and
look upon him, inuiting them all to commiserate his mishap: and some of them
to lament and bewail his hard for me.

The next morning, Scanderbeg fearing least so many dead carcasses heaped up
together, especially in that hot season, might with stench infect the air, he
did use toward them the last work of charity which could be showed toward
enemies, burying the masters and horse^ (altogether in many pitte^ dug up
of purpose. There was a great number found dead upon the shoares and banckes of
the next river, and of the waters of Albulae, according as their fear and
flight had carried them. The fields of Emathia (which had been of old times of
antiquity much renowned for many great and notable battles) were made much
more famous by this journey and by this great slaughter of the Turks. The
greatest part of the day was employed in burying and enterring of the dead
bodies: so that by this means, the resort of so many birds and fowls to that
place (as is before mentioned) fell out to very little or no purpose at all.
These things thus accomplished, the Albanians took their way toward Croie:
for having gotten such good store of pillage and sped so well, they took no
great care of forraging: besides that, the territory of the enemy was a good
way off; and many of them also (as you may guess) were not escaped scotfree and
unwounded from this long fight and conflict.

At their disloding from thence, there were two soldiers of one squadron or
company A quarrel between two private soldiers, for sharing of their booty.
who fell to some words, and were an occasion that the departure of the King of
Albany was somewhat hindered. These two at the beginning of the battle, had
agreed to join together in the Fortune of that days journey, and whatsoever
booty was gotten by either of them, should be divided and shared equally
between them. After which, having plied themselves well in there business, and
having made a good hand, when they came to make partition, they fell to some
difference and altercation upon the matter: and (as is usual in such cases)
from thence to injurious and reproachful speeches of the one against the
other: so that in the end coming to try the matter by the sword, they were
ready to cut each the others throat, for the deciding of their controversy,
and to know who should be the master of that which was the cause of their
debate. Scanderbeg being advertised hereof, caused both of them to be called
before him: and demanding of them if they had dined, they told him, yea: then
smiling (as Speech of Scanderbeg to two soldiers quarrelling together.
he was a man given to be merry, and one that delighted in jesting) Bacchus
(quoth he) has made you enemies: and I will that Bacchus and not Mars, nor any
other of the Gods shall make you friends. And after he had secretly reprehended
and rebuked them, he sent them away, commanding them to go and drink
together: and he willed Vranocontes to make an end of the contention between
them, and to see that each had his right and share of the booty equally and
alike.

As the Albanois were now marching toward Croy, there met with them a
multitude of the country inhabitants, and others who had hidden themselves in
the next forests till the end of the fight, besides the citizens of Croy also:
all which with a wonderful Triumph of Scanderbeg for the overthrow of Amese
and the Turks in the battle of Pharsalia.
joy, with high cries and sounds of instruments went with them on to Croy, so
as a man could hardly have seen a more goodly triumph: nor a more pompous
show: so gloriously and triumphantly did they march into the town. For
Scanderbeg (to make the sight the more beautiful and notable) caused all his
army to follow after the multitude, well and orderly arraunged in battle
array, and so to pass on even into the suburbs. There was not any one of them
(were he never so base and mean) but had at the least one horse gotten from
the enemy, and laden with infinite spoils, which they caused to march before
the^. Moreover the prisoners being bound and tied together by two and two, in a
long train went before the King, and did greatly augment the pomp and show of
the triumph: and many of them, for the better acknowledgement and confession of
the victory unto their enemies, were made to carry the ensigns and standards
which had been gotten from them. Likewise the pauilions, tents, and canapies of
the Turkish General being of purple color, and making a goodly show and
ostentation, were carried by some of the soldiers of the Albanians, who bare
them aloft, openly displaied, and spread abroad of purpose, as if they had been
ready dressed and prepared for the General: which gave no small grace and
ornament to the rest. Amese had most earnestly and humbly entreated his uncle
not to lead him to Croy in this infamous and miserable estate of a slave and
captive: and therefore he was suffered to go at liberty, and in another manner
of order then as a prisoner, marching side by side with the Saniacke that was
captive also. To conclude, at their entry into the city gate, the companies
were dismissed and licensed to depart: the soldiers were sent away joyful
and glad to their own homes, after that the prey and booty, both prisoners and
all the rest, had been equally divided and parted between them, as largely as
they could expect or demand. The ensigns and other things which served for
public show and ornament, and fell as due to Scanderbeg, were carried with
great demonstration of joy into the city. The Saniacke and Amese were put under
safe custody, till such time as they should be otherwise disposed of.

I mean not to speak any thing of the great feastings and solemnities which
were used by the Albanians, for the celebrating of this victory, and which for
many days together they never intermitted. For it is now time that I convert
both my mind and my matter to strange and foreign nations: and to consider
what joy they conceived upon the report of this victory. The fame and renown
thereof being dispersed into all the regions near adjoining, and even into the
heart and midst of Italy and other countries of the Christians, it seemed
little inferior unto that which had been formerly reported of the victory
gotten against Amurath before Croy, and it was held to be comparable to any
other exploit were it never so happy and fortunate: the admiration thereof did
even ravish every man, and they could not cease to wonder at the rareness of
the matter, when they heard the discourse of the singular sufficiency, and of
the notable dexterity of spirit of this prime and peerless Chiefetaine: and
even to this day is the memory of this notable victory preserved in those
parts: for whereas the inhabitants of that Province have a use and custom
(according to the laudable manner and usage of the old and ancient ages in
times past) to sing songs and sonnets in their solemn banquets and public
feasts, containing a rehearsal of the most famous and noble deeds of their
auncesters, and of the worthy personages of that country; this victory
especially (as one of the most notable, and more excellent then all others)
has been inserted amongst the rest, and it is more often and commonly used in
their songs and ballads then any other whatsoever. Infinite were the presents
that were sent unto Scanderbeg, infinite were the feasts and banke^s which were
every where frequented: and infinite were the congratulations which were used
from all parts, according as that nation has ever in such cases used and
accustomed. This present victory seemed to have annihilated and entinguished
the memory of all those losses and discomfitures which the Turks had
sustained, under Haly Bassa and Mustapba: yea all the honors and commendations
purchased by their old and later acts, were now no more talked of in regard of
this last exploit. The calamity of Belgrade seemed now fully and sufficiently
revenged: and this revenge had sufficiently refreshed and discharged every man
his mind, from all sorrow, grief, and sadness. The only pleasure and whole
delight of all men both strangers and others, was to walk and wander up and
down those victorious fields, and often to visit and survey the grounds which
did seem yet to carry a froath with the blood of the Mahometanes: their only
solace and recreation was to enquire of every particularity, where such an
ambuscado was laid in covert, and on which side the enemy was surprised and
assailed? even Mahomet himself was no less amassed and marvelled at the
strangenes of this victory: for by a shameful confession of his own fear,
within a while after, he did allow the honor of this journey, unto his enemy:
for when he saw his forces so broken and dispersed, and had learned by the
Bassa the order of the battle, and the occasion of his overthrow, (although
perhaps there were many points wherein both the General and all the host did
deserve worthily to be blamed) yet without any manner of reproof given them, or
in any sort inueighing against them: he swallowed up in silence (contrary to
his wonted manner) the grief and bitterness of his sorrow and coffeehouse. It
behooued him now to think upon the redeeming of the prisoners, especially of
the Saniake, whose imprisonment vexed and grieved him extremely, and made him
greatly ashamed, in regard of his degree and the greatness of his merits. He
concluded therefore to take order Mahomet makes means for the ransoming of
Messeit his Saniacke and other prisoners.
for his deliverance, and some other of the chiefest and most especial
persons: as for the rest he made no reckoning of them. Wherefore the money was
made ready and provided, partly by the friends and kinsemen of the prisoners,
and partly out of the coffers of the Sultan, as the custom and manner is. The
only thing they stayed on was. That Scanderbeg should set down the sum of
their ransom, and that some messenger should be sent from Epire, which might
bring a safe conduct for them who were to deal in this matter. Scanderbeg at
the request of the Saniacke (who nominated two of his most faithful and trusty
servants to that office) dismissed them to go unto the Sultan, and to procure
some order for their delivery: the sum demanded was fifteen thousand
Crowns for the Saniacke his own person, and about forty thousand for the
others, which was soon agreed unto and granted accordingly.

Before that this Ambassade was to pass into Epire, Ottoman being destitute of
all Consultation of Mahomet with his Bassaes touching the war of Epire.
good counsel, and being rather broken then chastised with so many and so
great losses, did in vain torment his mind perplexed with so many cares, and
the sundry opinions of his Bassaes did diversely distract him, not knowing what
course to take. Some advised him wholly and altogether to abstain from the
war of Albany, till such time as the tyrant being free and discharged from
all other troubles and disturbances, might himself go in person with his best
forces, and the whole strength of his Empire, for the final subversion of the
Albanois. For by reason of his late misfortune in Hungary, and the tumults
newly raised in Misia, he had but bad means then to undertake or effect any
such matter. Others not misliking nor reproving the former opinion, did
persuade him to send a strong garrison to the confines of Macedony, which might
be enjoined not to enterprise any thing upon the enemy, neither of their own
voluntary motion, nor yet by any provocation of their adversaries, but only to
have a care to the safety and security of the frontiers. Many also (upon the
former reasons of the wars wherewith the Sultan was encombred) thought it not
amiss (and they had reason) if that a truce for certain years were demanded
of Scanderbeg: during the which, the Ottoman Empire might breath it self from
so many mischiefs, and till such time as they might find some better
opportunity, to bring this fierce and unruly enemy under the yoke of subjection:
for the second opinion seemed not to be allowable, because in the midst of so
many ambushments, and against such stirring spirits as the Albanians were,
there was no safety for any weak and small garrison: and to send thither any
strong and puissant forces amiddest so many new accidents, and in such
commotions and troubles of the wars, could not be done conveniently without a
thousand discommodities. This council being the most profitable, albeit smally
honorable, and in some sort too too base and servile, was best allowed by the
greater part of the assembly. Mahomet for his part though this counsel did not
a little displease him, who had always abhorred to make show of such base and
vile humor, yet because he could not well compass all matters, nor settle his
affairs, having so many enemies conspired against him, and his estate being in
a manner rent a sunder and distracted, with so many great occasions, his proud
and haughty courage did not think any thing what soever to be either shameful
or infamous, or to his dishonor. Hereupon he caused one Mahomet seeks to have
truce with Scanderbeg.
of those to be called before him, who was to carry the ransom of their
companions, and to him he opened the whole secrets of his conceits: enioyning
him expressly to deal with the Saniacke in his name, and to will him to take
upon him the charge and managing of this matter, and to confer with Scanderbeg
upon the same. He sent also particular letters unto the Saniack (which
afterward came into the hands of the Christians) wherein he wrote unto him:
that in seeking the amity of the Albanois, and in the treating of the peace
between them, he should have a special care and good regard to the reputation
and dignity of his Majesty: for fear, least if he should show himself too
affectionat or too humble in the purchasing of the same, the enemy might grow
too proud and insolent, and fall to disdain both the demander and his demands
equally and alike. The messenger went on his journey more glad and cheerful for
this his commission; then for the redemption of his own person, and of his
companions: for he was fully persuaded, that now for a time this thorn would
be drawn out of their feet, and that the Turks being in rest and quietness on
those parts, should a little breath and refresh themselves, from so many travels
which they had endured. But his expectation was frustrat, and Mahomet found
himself much deceived of his hope: as at other times both he and his father
Amurath had bin the like. For when as Messeit (in counting of the money brought
for their ransom, did interpose and propound many speeches unto Scanderbeg
according to the intent and instructions of his Lord and master: the Albanois
took the money very willingly, but as touching those motions and ouertures
propounded for the peace between them, he showed himself so unwilling, that
cutting off his talk, he would not suffer him to proceed with his speeches,
but gave him this answer.

I have not (said he) so often heretofore even in the worst and hardest times
of my adversity, Answer of Scanderbeg to Messeit refusing to have truce with
Mahomet.
refused the conditions of the peace which you then demanded, to the intent I
would now agree unto the^ in my prosperity: neither has this my good fortune
(such as it is) so deprived me of the knowledge of man's estate and frail
condition, or of the instability of human nature, that I do dare to promise
unto my self, the continual and permanent possession of the same: or that I do
assure my self, that I will always so insolently disdain your amity. It may
well be, that Fortune may put on her false mask and visage, and may make us in
time petitioners unto you for a peace perhaps far more shameful and
ignominious. Notwithstanding whatsoever it be that the secret original and
occasion of matters, and the unknown order of the destinies, may bring upon a
man: yet are not we determined at this time in any point to alter our minds,
or to detract any thing from our former resolution. We do repute al kind of
amity with you most shameful and ignominious, as long as we see so many
outrages and injuries offered on all sides unto the Christians: as long as we
see so many wounds, and so much blood lately and newly shed, wherewith both all
Greece and the fields of Hungary are now overflowed. Shall we recompense the
late loss of Morea with such a peace? shall we with a most base and cowardly
truce, shame and disgrace that notable victory, and the late glory of the
Hungarians before Belgrade? let Mahomet as long as he will seek for peace, as
for us we will purchase our quietness by the sword: and having once gotten and
attained it, we will by the sword likewise seek to maintain it: and the
rather for that it is not only your excessive injuries, or your notorious
disloialty, but a certain natural disposition that has made us your enemies,
and the hatred (wherewith the one of us is armed and hardened against the other)
is perpetual and immortal. For my part I am your enemy, even by birth and by
nativity, and the enmity which I bear you is hereditary: my desire is not so
much to get me honor and reputation upon you, as to seek the just deserved
revenge of the blood of my friends which you have shed, and of the bondage both
of my self and my people the Albanians: and I am fully resolved, never to make
an end of these my travels, till such time as I have either restored my
citizens to their ancient estate, or rendered this my life unto you, to who^ it
is so hateful.

All this could not make the Saniacke to desist from his pursuit: but putting
him in mind, of the variable succes of wars, and withal repeating unto him
many accidents of diverse ages and times past, as fit examples to that purpose
and effect, he told him, that if he did take so great a pleasure, and were so
desirous of war: he might after the truce was once expired, return to arms,
and that he could never want occasion to revive the wars: that he demanded only
truce for ten years, during the which time the forces and courages of the
Albanians might be greatly repaired, and might be the better able to attain to
a more notable revenge, and to purchase themselves new honor and reputation.
Scanderbeg by little and little suffered himself to be persuaded, and he began
somewhat to relent from his first obstinacy, seeming to hearken more willingy to
the demands of the Saniacke Nevertheless he would not in any case yield to any
abstinency of arms, not so much as for a month only: except that both
Sfetigrade and Belgrade might be Meisset Saniacke and other Turks prisoners
ransomed.
yielded unto him for a recompense. Thus without any thing concluded, did
Messeit and his companions return to their own country: howbeit he had truce
granted till such time only as he had acquainted the Turkish Monarch with the
conditions propounded by Scanderbeg in case the peace proceeded. There were
many other Turks permitted to depart in the company of the Saniacke (besides
those 40. which were ransomed:) unto whom the king of Epire did freely, and of
the magnanimity of his own mind, grant their liberty, suffering them without
ransom to return into their country: the rest also which remained, were
delivered out of prison: some of them becoming Scanderbeg sends presents and
ambassades to most christian princes persuading them to concord and to take
arms against the Turks.
Christians and being baptized, did plant themselves to dwell in Epire: the
residue were dipersed abroad for presents in a manner to all the kings of
christendom: to the kings of France and Spain, besides those slaves was sent
a great quantity of horses and other spoils of all sorts: and to other Princes
were sent other the like presents. The city of Rome as it had bin filled with
the renown of this victory, so was it replenished with many of the trophies
and ornaments of the same. Thus did Scanderbeg determine to the uttermost of
his power to bind unto him by his courtesy almost the whole world. Together
with these gifts and presents did he send solemn ambassades, who had given
them in charge to exhort all Princes Christian to concord and amity, and
earnestly to pray them, that they would now at the length awake out of their
long and dead sleep, and that they would chase away that mist of darkness
wherewith they had bin so blinded: and consider more advisedly, the imminent
ruin which was threatened to the Christian liberty and religion: that they
would at the last seek to redeem it from the miserable and wretched yoke and
servitude of the Infidels and Mahometans, otherwise they should be well
assured, that the plague which by little and little did grow within their bowels,
would in the end pierce into their hearts. Scanderbeg sent also (which I may
not omit) diverse presents unto his great friend Alphonsus, which were so
magnificent, that they carried the show of a very beautiful and goodly triumph.
Amese his nephew was sent also together with these presents unto Naples, where
he was kept in a most straight and close prison, for the Sultan took no care
for his deliverance: and if he had made any such motion, I do assure my self,
that all the gold of the world would not have redeemed him, for he was
condemned to perpetual imprisonment.

The mind and last resolution of the king of Epire, touching the treaty of the
peace between them being related unto Mahomet: he esteemed so slightly of the
matter, that he would not vouchsafe him any answer: such was the haughtines
and fiercenes of his mind, notwithstanding, that he were hard pressed on all
sides with infinite affairs of great importance, both from the parts of
Hungary, and by daily diets and assemblies which he knew very well were
continually gathered against him throghout all christendom, by the procurement
and earnest means of the Popes holiness. He provided therefore a most strong
and puissant garrison to be sent into Epire, for the surety of his Hamur and
Synam sent with two sundry garrisons to defend the Turkish frontiers against
the Albanois.
country, according to that which (as we lately told you) had bin before
decreed in his private and secret council. Hamur and Synam had the charge of
this commission, both of them being expert and polliticke warriors, and each of
them had 10000. horse, and 4000. foot: which number was judged to be
sufficient both to weary out the forces of Epire, and to have terrified even a
most stout and puissant enemy: notwithstanding each of them was expressly
forbidden to attempt any thing against him, whatsoever occasion and opportunity
were offered them, only he recommended unto them, and gave them in charge to
look to the defense of those limits which were assigned unto the^.

The whole summer being spent in this manner, both on the one side and the
other, it was now about the midst of Autumn: at which time these troops
being dislodged from Constantinople, the report thereof prevented their
coming, and was brought to the ears of Scanderbeg, who was ignorant of all
this practice, for that he relied upon the word of the Saniack, and he did
expect some answer from the Sultan, whether he would either accept or reject
the sum of his demands: for this cause departing from Croie with all speed
possible, he went presently into Dibria, where having leauied new forces, and
renewed his old companies, he attended the adversary with great devotion, who
staid not long but that they came within 10. miles of the Albanois, where they
encamped: but did not in any sort enter upon their confines. Scanderbeg stirred
not at all, but hearing that the Infidels approached, he presently ordered his
troops ready to the fight, and so kept himself quiet within his camp. For the
common bruit which ran upon the coming of these forces, did give them out to
be so great and puissant, that it made him Hamur and Synam with their forces
encamped near Alchria in Macedony.
to imagine, that the enemy would come and seek him out in that same place,
and would not stick to assault him in his camp. And afterward having notice
by his espials and skouts, placed upon the mountains, that they were encamped
under Alchria, and that al their carriage were disposed in that place: he
supposed that the morning next following after they had refreshed their bands,
they would make toward him, and offer to give him battle: wherefore in the
dark of the night, and in great silence and secrecy, he filled certain woddy
places, and valleys near adjoining with armed men, thinking to have enclosed
them in the midst of his forces, and so to have surprised them, if they had
come forward according as he expected. Two days and 2. nights did he expect
them in this manner: but he could neither have a sight of the enemy, nor yet
hear any news or tidings of them. Wherefore Scanderbeg being impatient of all
delays, determined the day following to go and visit them, and to provoke them
forth to fight: but word was brought him, that the host of the Infidels being
divided into two parts, Hamur did abide still at Alchria, and that Sinam with
the residue of the army, did take the champion plain fields of Pologue toward
Mocrea, where was the common entry into the lower Synam marches with half the
Turkish forces toward Mocrea and the lower Dibria.
Dibria and Modrissa. For Alchria where Hamur did make his abode, was adjoining
to the upper Dibria and to Sfetigrade. Thus with notable advise, they lay close
upon both the Provinces of Dibria: to the intent they might hold the Albanians
in continual alarums, both on the one side and the other. Between these two
garrisons or armies, there was 30. miles at the least: for so much is it from
Modrissa to Sfetigrade. Wherefore the king of Epire having drawn together his
ambushments that lay here and there dispersed, and having joined all his forces
in one camp, determined to leauy a new supply for the strengthening of his
bands, to the intent he might the more conveniently part them into several
quarters, and so provide for the preventing of all perils on either side. All
things being sufficiently prepared, and his troops being quickly augmented with
1500. footmen, newly leauied (for it was not possible so suddenly and readily
to leauie horsemen) he divided them as speedily, though not into like and equal
numbers: Tanuse, and one of the Streezes Scanderbeg his nephews, and Peic
Manuell, with the third part of those forces were appointed to have the custody
of the lower Dibria: and in case they found Synam any thing earnestly inclined
to the spoil of the country, that they should make head against him, and
repress his attempts: for on that side was the danger much lesser, and the
entrance into the confines of the Albanians was the more difficult, by reason
that the places were not so accessible, but (being naturally strong and
defenced) were entermingled with the valleys of Mocrea, and with many rough and
ragged mountains, each severed and divided within themselves, yet so entangled
and combined, that although they were reckonned and comprehended within the
lower Dibria, did they distinguish nevertheless the realm of Albany from the
territories of the miscreants. Notwithanding, both Tanuse and his company were
straightly charged, that they should not in any case scatter them selves, nor
be drawn out of those limittes which Tanusee with others appointed for the
defense of the lower Dibria against Sinam
were prescribed them, nor that they should not in any sort adventure upon the
enemy, but only in the defense of their own safety. The rest of the army did
Scanderbeg retain to himself in the upper Dibria, having also Moses in his
company. Wherefore having thus reserved the better part of his forces, and
especially his horsemen, and considering that the passages there were more free
and open for the enemy to enter on that side into Albanie, he determined (if
he could) to draw forth the Infidel to hazard the fortune of the field, and to
adventure the chance of a set battle. And he made no long Scanderbeg marches
against Hamur purposing to draw him to the fight.
delay, nor dwelt not upon those dumpish conceits of his imaginations: but
(because winter approached, which is an enemy to warlike exploits) before the
daylight of the next morning did appear, he departed from his camp, having
with him 1000. horse, and took his way directly toward Alchria. Before his
departure he very warily conveyed a good number of soldiers into certain
thick woods and other dangerous places, for fear of being enclosed between
Sfetigrade and the camp of the enemy. Having marched on for a while in the
dark of the night, and placed his men here and there in ambushments near the
town, he went back again to his camp: and not resting him self any thing
at all (for that now it was about the dawning of the day) he commanded his
companies to march, and to carry with them victuals only for one days
provision. As for the cariages and their tents, they were not at all removed,
but he left a strong troop of good soldiers for their safeguard and defense.
The whole morning was in a manner spent in these preparations and in marching:
so that he came at length within a mile of his ambuscado. By that was it time
to take their repasts, and it behooved him to devise upon some new mean how to
begin the fight, and to draw forth the enemy. This was an easy matter for men
that had been long practiced in that faculty, and yet nevertheless it
required great wisdom and good advise. Moses desired to have the honor of that
employment, and it was not denied him: and in very truth amongst all the
Albanians hardly could a man have chosen any other more fit or expert to entise
forth the enemy, and to surprise him. Scanderbeg gave unto him 600 horse,
doubting least if he should go more meanly accompanied, the policy might be the
more easily discovered. But altogether in vain was this his enterprise: for
Moses having spent the greater part of the day in fruitless skirmishes,
returned again to Scanderbeg, whom he found at his wits end, and not knowing
what course to take against the enemy: for to set upon the Painim within his
trenches with his whole forces, both the discommodity of the place, and the
town being above him, which commanded over the place, under the succor
whereof, Hamur had entrenched himself, did certainly assure him that he could
not do it without evident danger. Nothwithstanding having lead his forces to a
hill near adjoining, he staid there until night, and then he made a sign to
his ambushments, that they should retire to the body of his army: the morning
following he displaied his ensigns in the field, and by light invasions, he
wasted all the country on that side: thinking by the indignity of that
miserable sight, to have moved the enemy to make forth of his trenches, but the
Pagan continuing in his wonted patience, and disdaining the defense of a thing
of so small value, and which might be so perilous unto him, kept himself still
within his camp: notwithstanding I have heard, that immediately after the
havoc made by the Albanians, and even as they were Messenger sent from Hamur
to Scanderbeg.
ready to trusse up their baggage, there came an Herald from Hamur to
Scanderbeg, to acquaint him with the intent and meaning of the Ottoman: and
besides to pray and entreat him, that he would not weary both him self and his
enemies with this unprofitable kind of revenge, by which he did destroy rather
that which was his own, then what was belonging unto others: and considering
that no man made any means, nor had any intent to hinder him, but that they
did leave all unto him to use it at his own will and pleasure: whereupon the
king of Albany is said to have returned him Answer of Scanderbeg to the message
of Hamur.
this answer: that well might they for a time delay and put off their
misfortune, but they should not be able altogether to avoid it: for that he was
resolutely determined to spare for no dangers nor mishaps, but he would in the
end bring and enforce them to the combat. In this manner did they depart a
sunder, for the coldness of the winter now beginning to approach, it was
thought requisite that these determinations should be deferred to another
season. Wherefore Moses being appointed with his ordinary bands to have the
custody and defense of the province, and the most part of the army being
licenced to depart, Scanderbeg in the mean time with a small company went to
visit the lower Dibria, which was then under the command of Tanusee. There
likewise did he not forget to put in practice the like sleights and policies,
in hope to have entrapped Synam: but all his cunning and devises vanished away
to nothing: wherefore leaving there one of the Streezes with a very small
company, Scanderbeg him self took his journey toward Croy.

During this winter was Moses very troublesome unto the Mahometists, and he
continually disquieted them with his daily alarums: notwithstanding it was more
in show then in substance, and therefore Scanderbeg willed both him and those of
the garrison of Modrissa to desist from pursuing any such further atte^pts, for
that they lost both their time and their labor. Moreover it is reported, that
those of Mahomet his garrison, as they had before in times past, so did they
now again vehemently pray the Christians, that they would not with such
obstinacy seek to purchase unto themselves an enemy, who would not be drawn to
have any hostility with them: insomuch that neither condescending nor according
any thing to their desire, nor yet much contradicting their requests, matters
were protracted and drawn on till the coming of the new year. The spring
being now come, Scanderbeg reassembled his forces, and lead them against 1457.
the Barbarians, hoping by his daily skirmishes, to draw them forth to fight.
One day amongst the rest he had a desire, being entered with great bravery upon
the country of Alchria, to force and give an onset upon the camp of the enemy,
but he was soon repulsed without any great labor, both by the lively
resistance of the Infidels, as also by the situation and advantage of the
place, which of it self was very strong, and hardly to be approached. The
Epirot, how beit for that time he was disappointed of his hope, yet being no
whit discoraged, determined to augment his troops, that so he might be the
better able to effect his desire, but he made no great have to put it in
execution, both because the glory and profit would be very small that would
grow by that attempt, as also for that it could not be compassed without great
peril and manifest danger: nevertheless he maintained the enterprise, only
to the intent that the soldier being kept still exercised in arms (as it were
in their particular trade and profession) should not wax ^lothfull, and be
spoiled with idleness.

Thus whilst that the wars went coldly on, both on the one side and the
other, Hamur conferreth with Scanderbeg, and persuades him to peace.
Hamur supposing that it would not only be for the great profit and public
good of the province, but that it would purchase himself in particular great
honor and reputation with the Sultan, if he could by his dexterity dissuade
Scanderbeg from the pursuit of arms: he procured from him, by means of one
of his people, license to come and speak with him. Hereupon purposely he went
to Dibria, carrying with him very rich presents, where Scanderbeg at that time
did soiourne with his camp. After mutual greeting and salutations past
between them, he took occasion to begin his speeches upon the great benefits
and commodities which ensue of peace, and upon that concerning which he had
before time treated with him* and so by a long circuit of words he endeavored to
alter his mind, and to persuade him to yield to his request. Afterward giving
him to understand the particular desire which he had to be in his good grace
and favor: he came to the end and conclusion of his speech, wherein he
oftentimes repeated and sounded it in his ears: how goodly and pleasant a
thing it would be to see those two great and puissant Princes conjoined and
united in amity and concord. Scanderbeg would not with discurtesie reject the
gifts of the Barbarian, but accepting them very graciously, did return him
other in counter change of no less value. And as touching that which he
propounded unto him concerning the league of peace with his Master, he made
him this answer, as it were in choler and coffeehouse.

So suspected (quoth he) is the faith, and so captious and deceiptfull is the
demeanor Answer of Scanderbeg to the speeches of Hamur persuading him to peace.
of Mahomet toward us, that we can hardly digest and endure any speeches of
his friendship and amity. It is not long since that we had an Ambassade from
him, by which we understood the sum of his demands: and we returned him
again with such conditions as we thought meet and convenient for the honor and
profit of the estate of Albany: whereupon we expected his answer (for as
touching other matters he was at liberty to follow his own will and
pleasure:) but whilst that we rested in this expectation, and that the treaty
remained in suspense on either party, and though we in the mean time had
laid aside our arms: yet did he so despise and contemn us, that he thought
us unworthy of any answer, which he ought not to have done to his mortal enemy.
Wherefore touching this motion of peace which thou have propounded, we are not
minded to hear any further speeches: but as concerning thy self in
particular, if there be any thing wherein we make any offers of courtesy to our
enemy in the midst of our common rancor and hostility, there shall be no
default nor goodwill wanting, so far forth as thy deserts shall require it.
As touching the surceasing from arms, and giving over the ordinary rodes and
excursions of our soldiers, I can promise thee nothing, neither will I tie my
self to any thing: for I cannot be drawn to like of any appointment: but
seeing that I my self have been so disdained, as greatly do I disdain to
grant it. And albeit our vehement and ardent desire of revenge, in regard of
thy own honest and good carriage, may be somewhat abated and mitigated, yet
assure thy self, that our public hatred and enmity shall be in no part
diminished. And if peradventure either the variety of times or of fortune, do
make us that we show not our selves so favorable in this case: yet (it may be)
that this our private friendship shall not be altogether unprofitable, but that
it may fall both to thy benefit and honor.

Hamur, after he had kissed the hand of him that was both his friend and his
enemy, retired himself to his company, being neither altogether contented nor
yet discontented with this answer. Si^^m in like manner within a while after
presented himself with the like flatteries before Sca^derbeg, at such time as
he understood of his being in those quarters: and he found him not more
obstinate, then did his companion: for both the common people, and the most
part of the Albanian soldiers enclining to the peace which had been so long
demanded, did show that they would not make it very strange nor difficult to
accord and agree unto it. Wherefore their minds growing by degrees to like of
ease and quietness, the garrisons were in some sort lessened and diminished:
in such sort, that that Summer was spent and passed over without any troubles
or tumults, or rather in great sloth and idleness.

About this time happened the sorrowful and unhappy death of Alphonsus king of
The death of Alpho^sus king of Naples.
Naples, the report whereof being brought to Scanderbeg (who was then busily
employed in civil matters concerning his estate, and in other affairs of the
prouince^) it did so sequester and withdraw him from all occasions both
public and private, and it did so wound his heart with such extreme sorrow
and deep grief, that (having lost all remembrance of his late victory, and
letting pass all care and regard of his enemies) for many days together in
great discomfort he mourned for the loss of his dearest and best friend. And
to speak the truth, this king was not unworthy to be lamented with the long
and continual plaints and tears of the Epirots and other his confederates,
but even the whole world might well deplore his death. And how beit the clear
testimony of his heroycall virtues has been published and highly The praise
and commendation of Alphonsus king of Naples.
advanced by so many worthy and excellent personages, yet might it be imputed
unto me for a great fault and oversight, if I should not by the way (as it
were) in a word or two touch it. It may well be said: that when this Prince
died, there departed the only and best Mecaenas that then lived. For all
degrees and qualities of persons, both learned and martial, as well scholars as
soldiers were left desolate and destitute of their best patron, and had just
cause to be sad and sorrowful for his loss. With him was extinguished the just
and true reward both of letters and of arms, and the true ornament of all
commendable exercises. There was not his like seen for many ages before: nor
(be it spoken without the displeasure of the posterity) was there ever any one
since him that was so upright an estimator of the virtues and merits of other
men. And it is no small matter to be wondered at, that being a Prince of so rare
and incomparable courtesy, affability, clemency and liberality, yet no one
Prince of his time did leave so great riches and treasures behind him. Good
cause therefore had Scanderbeg to bewail and lament the loss of so trusty and
puissant a friend: from whom (if we respect either his ability, or his
willingness) he might at all times and upon all occasions have drawn any
thing, both for his honor, and for his profit, as out of a plentiful treasury
and storehouse prepared for his own private and particular use. One thing
only there was, which did in some sort comfort him, and assuaged the
bitterness of his grief that was that he saw himself deprived ofso good a
friend, by the extremity and course of his aged years, and not by any rigorous
or injurious right of nature, or by other casualty. That piety and duty which
rested on his part to be performed in this behalf, he dispatched it presently
with all prudence and celeritie, sending away with all speed his Ambassadors
Ambassidors sent by Sca^derbeg to Ferdina^d king of Naples upon the decease of
his father Alphonsus
unto Ferdinand his son: both to deplore the accident of the king his father,
as also to congratulate him (as the manner is) of his new crown and dignity:
and by the remembrance of his fathers benefits, and of the friendship and
amity which he bare to the estate of Albanie: to renew and increase this
alliance and confederacy between them. This ambassade was also accompanied and
furnished with most sumptuous presents, as he had always used and accustomed:
and they had express charge and order to bring back Amese with them, who had
never ceased to practice and make means by the authority and favor of his
friends, and the commiseration of his own misfortune, that he might be
reconciled and restored to the favor and good grace of his uncle. He was as
yet prisoner under sure and safe custody: and albeit in this change of the
affairs of Naples, and in this new greatness of Ferdinand, there were many
and great alterations: and that in this new and public time of joy, the
prisons were set open, and most of the prisoners set at liberty, yet to the
intent that Scanderbeg might not have cause to find himself aggrieued, if he
should have been freed, there was especial care and order taken to keep him
still in ward, as a certain and sure pledge of his uncles just anger. This
Ambassade was received and entertained with great honor and good cheer, such
as the tumult and stirs of that new kingdom would permit: for so it was in
very truth, that all things were then in trouble and disorder: and the peace of
all Italy was broken and disturbed by the decease of the late king Alphonsus.

Amese being brought back into Epire, was again committed to prison, and
carefully Amese returned into Epire: and reconciled to his uncles favor.
kept in sure and safe custody by the order of his uncle, though not so
straightly as before: and that severity and rancour which yet remained, began
by little and little to be assuaged, by the daily lamentations, tears and
petitions of his nephew: in such sort that within a while after of a fatherly
love and tender affection, he gave him both his life and liberty, and restored
him to his former estate and dignities. Then Amese bethinking himself of the
gages which he had left with Mahomet, was in great fear and doubt that if he
should take the benefit of his uncles liberality, it might fall out evil with
his wife and children. For this cause, after he had with great reverence and
humility yielded thanks unto the king for his great bounty and singular
favor, he spoke unto him in this manner.

Sir, it has pleased you only in respect of your own patience and clemency
without Speech of Amesa to Scanderbeg upon his delivery out of prison.
any particular merits or deserts of mine, to have a regard of my safety, and
to grant me my life: it is reason therefore that I also have some care to the
life and welfare of others: for fear least if my over careful desire to
maintain my own safety and estate do make me to embrace your liberality, it
may cause me to loose them by your beneficence and bounty, which I have
heretofore too carelessly lost by mine own disloyalty. My poor and guiltless
wife is abiding with the Sultan, my tender infants and innocent children are
there likewise: as yet are they safe and alive, and so long will Mahomet suffer
them to live, as he shall think me to be your prisoner. But if the cruel
tyrant shall once perceive, that by giving me my life and liberty, you have
estranged me from him, and that I am retired to your obeissance, the rigorous
and severe creditor, will presently either tear them in pieces, or will make
sale of those gages of my faith and promise, and their innocent blood shall
bear the pain of their fathers fault. It behooves me therefore (if your
Majesty think it good) that with some device I delude the Ottoman, to the
intent that I may preserve those my pledges, and till such time as I may find
some good opportunity to free them for altogether. This night will I fly out
of the town, as though without your knowledge I had broken prison, and so will
I return unto Mahomet. There, partly by detracting and slaundering of their
actions, and partly by hearing them detracted by others in the presence of that
credulous Prince (as I was wont to do when I was in favor with him) I will
bring him into a persuasion by my dissimulation and faigning: that I am as much
or more deuote to his service now at this present then I was at anytime
heretofore: to the intent that all matter of mistrust being taken out of his
mind (if he have conceived any during the time of my imprisonment, and by
reason of my long abode with you, I may be the better able in the end to get
away with all my family. It is in you much to further this my invention, if you
will make show openly, that you are highly discontented at my flight, and do
impute the fault to them, unto whose charge and custody you had committed me.
In the mean time, you may be fully assured, and I humbly beseech and entreat
you so to think of me, that during all that time which I shall be there
expecting the hour of my escape, you shall have me to be a faithful espiall
and intelligencer, to advertise you of all things which the tyrant shall
consult or determine upon. He shall not imagine any thing, he shall make no
preparation that shall come to my knowledge, but you shall have present and
speedy notice of it.

Scanderbeg did easily accord to his request: telling him that seeing he had
granted Answer of Scanderbeg to the speech of Amese.
him his life, and all other things which might serve thereunto, either for an
ornament, or to his contentment: that he should not any way hinder him to use
it to his best profit and aduauntauge: that he would in the name of God take
it and employ it to the preservation of him self, and those also who might
lawfully claim and challenge him to be their debtour, both for their lives and
also for their liberty. Go thy ways therefore (quoth he) take thy time and do
as thou see cause, and onec at the length correct thine own folly whilst
thou have time and leisure so to do. We do give credit to thy speeches, and do
allow of thy enterprise. If thou do give any faith or credit to the
Barbarian, or do continue and soiorne any long time in his company: thou
shall neither hurt nor deceive any body but thy self only: for thou must
think that thou shall bring both thy self and thine into extreme danger both
of body and of soul. At what time soever thou returnest, thou cannest not do
any thing more to our liking and contentment, and thou shall be always kindly
and heartily welcome.

All things being conveyed and accomplished according to the plot which they
had laid: Amese by the means of his uncle, was soon shifted both out of
prison and our of Croy. The next morning his flight being published and spread
abroad, the negligence of his keepers was reproved with some sharp and hard
words. At his coming to Constantinople, he did soon and easily persuade the
Sultan what he listed. Notwithstanding he was not fully and wholly restored to
his former estate, honors and pensions, which had been at the first bestowed
upon him: the default whereof was not because his faith was in any sort
suspected, but for that such was the iniquity and defect of his fortune. As
concerning his return again into Epire, all his promises fell to be vain,
and sorted to no effect, were it that he took no care, or made no account of
it, o^ that he wanted the means and opportunity to convey himself away from
thence. Whatsoever was the cause thereof, the report is that within few
months after he died at Constantinople, leaving there behind him both his
wife and his children. Many do hold that Mahomet caused him to be poisoned,
being not able Amese poisonned by the Turk at Constantinople.
to suffer and endure him in his sight, whom he held to be the author of his
memorable desaster and misfortune in Emathia. Thus when he least suspected and
mistrusted, there did he find the vengeance and punishment of his treason.
Such was the end of this personage, worthy no doubt to have his name made
immortal, if the greatness of his mind, which was so greedy of reign and
Empire, had been by nature seasoned and tempered with some more moderation of
spirit. But he that would be the chief and above all others, and could not
endure the gracious and gentle yoke of his uncle, it happened unto him as to
those of whom Plato speaks: who shunning the smoke and shadow of servitude,
do fall into the very flame and raging fire of bondage.

All this while did Hamur and Synam continue in quiet, not being in any sort
molested by Scanderbeg, unless that the licenciousnesse of the soldiers might
sometimes perhaps, without his leave and license, innouatand make some change
and alteration. He himself riding up and down the country, sometimes amongst
the Dibrians, and sometimes in other places of the Province, did erect many
buildings, and enlarged many things to the benefit and ornament of the
Province, especially in Emathia: where many goodly marks of antiquity lay
defaced and overthrown. The Ottoman in the mean time ceased not by the hands
of Hamur, and Synam still to solicit and to set forward the matter which he
had so many times assaied: for the idleness and long rest of the Christians,
did put him in a certain and assured hope, that he should attain to the end
of his desires: but he could never effect any thing touching the general
truce which he so desired: how beit that Scanderbeg did observe his private
amity with the people of the Ottoman, by means whereof the minds of all men
being by little and little allured with the sweetness of rest and quietness,
the hatred and enmity on both parts began to grow more moderate, and all the
effects of a public and general peace, the bare name and title thereof
only excepted came to have their full force and operation.

The end of the ninth Book.
THE TENTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
THE war between Mahomet Emperor of the Turks and Vsuncassan king of
Persia. The original, continuance, the variable accidents and success of the
war of Naples between the families of Arragon and Aniow, with the descent
and acts of the kings, of Naples to the time of Ferdinand the son of
Alphonsus. John the son of Rene Duke of Aniow warring upon Ferdinand king of
Naples, is aided by the Count Picenin and the subjects of Ferdinand who rebel
against him. Ferdinand aided by the Pope and the Duke of Milan his
confederates, and being overthrown in two battles is besieged within Barletta.
An Ambassade is sent from Ferdinand and his confederates to Scanderbeg praying
his aid against the Duke of Aniow. Scanderbeg making truce with Mahomet
passes with an army by sea into Italy, and raises the siege of Barletta.
The army of the Pope and the Duke of Milan join with Scanderbeg. The battle
of Segian between Picenin and Scanderbeg, wherein the army of John Duke of
Aniow being discomfited, he flies out of Italy into France. Ferdinand is
restored to his kingdom and reconciled to his subjects by Scanderbeg, who
having been highly honored by the Pope and the Princes of Italy, and royally
feasted by Ferdinand, has certain towns in Apulia given unto him and his
heirs, and that done he returns again with his army into Epyre.

IT is most evident and apparent, that the changes and alterations which do
occasion the ruins and grievous accidents of Empires and estates by seditions
or wars either civil or foreign, do not happen in this world by any fatal
kind of destiny: especially, if they be such as they fall together in diverse
and sundry places, or near about one and the sametime. For we see that such
changes do never chance, but that first some frantique humors, and inordinate
desires in the spirits of great personages do always preceed and go before
them: and they are the ordinary means to stir up the authors of such
accidents to move or to provoke needless and unnecessary wars. Whereby you may
see, that the judgment perverted, and the furious passions of Princes are the
first and next punishments of their sins and offenses, and the original causes
of their ruin and miserable end. For when God (being angered at their
iniquities) does draw some men to the just execution of their deserved
punishment, he does deprive them of their senses, and he does so bind and shut
up their eyes, that they do inconsideratly cast themselves headlong into the
gulf of their own perdition which they have drawn upon themselves for want
of good advise and counsel. For the reasonable part of their mind, and the
natural understanding being troubled and distracted by that inueglement and
blindness laid upon them, does produce erroneous counsels: and their mad and
outrageous affections do carry and transport them out of the bounds of reason,
and make them cruel and insatiable, even without any respect of their own
lives and welfare. Hence it is that rancours, partialities and distrusts do
proceed and have their original: and then of these do arise wars both civil
and foreign, in the which men being drowned and overwhelmed, they find
themselves plagued and afflicted with notable mischiefs and calamities, or
with perpetual ruin and endless destruction.

Now seeing the forepassed ages of antiquity have often felt the like
reuolutions of estates and governments in the body of the Christian
commonwealth (by means whereof the Turks and Mahumetists have appropriated unto
themselves the Empire of Constantinople, and have gotten firm footing in their
Signiorie, increasing it excessiuely only with the relics of the estate of
the Christians) we ought therefore to acknowledge and confess, that all those
chaunges have happened by the secret and immutable decree of God for the
punishment of our sins and impieties. For in stead of reforming our selves by
his divine admonitions, and making profit of those examples, which he from time
to time has sent us, not only the Kings and Potentates secular and temporal:
but even those also who were the chief Prelates, and had the rule and
government of the Church, would never be drawn to consider of the same, but
neglecting their own duties, suffered themselves to be carried away by fond and
foolish desires, and by the unreasonable ambition of their corrupt humors,
stirring up troubles and lamentable tragedies both by Schisms and dissentions
amongst themselves, and by mutual hatreds and divisions amongst the peoples of
all estates christian: by means whereof, they have let slip out of their hands,
and utterly lost (which I cannot but deplore and lament) the most excellent and
fittest occasion that could ever have happened, to tame the pride and
insolency of the Painims with ease and facility: and to abolish both the law
and memory of the Turks out of Europe. The order of the times, and the course
of this my history do admonish me to make some mention, and to discourse of
this matter.

You have heard how Mahomet being beaten in one year with a double misfortune
in Hungary and in Epyre, was brought to this exigent and necessity to demand
peace War between Mahomet king of Turks and the Persians. Vsuncassan king
of Cappadocia and Armenia. Malaoncre or Demire king of Persia. Gampsa Sultan of
the Parthians. Despina daughter of John Co^nenes Emperor of Trapezond.
Ambassade of Vsuncassan to Mahomet.
or at least a long truce, of one who was but a mean and petty Prince of
Albany, to the intent he might breath himself a little from so many mischiefs
and grievous losses, and to reestablish his estate which was sore shaken and
encombred. On the other side you are to know, that in a manner at one and the
same time, Vsuncassan (descended of the Assumbeians of the Turkish race) and
king of Cappadocia, Armenia, and other Provinces near adjoining, having lately
slain in battle Malaoncre, or (as others will) Demire king of the Persians, a
Prince issued from the ancient stock of Gampsa great Sultan of the Parthians:
and having usurped his Realm and Seepter, did join himself in marriage with
Despina the daughter of John Comnenes Emperor of Trapezond, and the cause why
these two Monarchs did so contract alliance together, was to be the better
able to prevail against Mahomet king of the Turks.

This new and gallant Conqueror Vsuncassan being puffed up with the wind of his
prosperous fortune, and with the forementioned crosses and adversities of
Mahomet, did send unto him an ambassade with most rich and sumptuous presents,
selected out of the huge treasures of the Persians, for a show and ostentation
of the glory of his victory, praying him that he would abstain from
molesting of Trapezond and Cappadocia, in regard they appertained unto him as
the right and dowry of his wife: (for even lately before had the governor of
Amasia ouerrunne and sacked Cappadocia, and did make even Trapezond it self to
stand in fear of the alarm.) The Turkish Monarche taking it very scornefully
and in ill part, that one (as he thought) inferior unto him, should seem to
give and prescribe laws unto him, and (as it were) brave him in his fresh and
late received calamity: and therewithal the felicity and reputation of this
young Prince being very displeasing unto him, he prepared with extreme speed
and diligence, a mighty army, making provisions for the war both by sea and
land against him, and transported it into Asia: and having caused one part of
his navy and sea forces to go before right to Pontus and Sinope toward
Trapezond, himself followed after with incredible celeritie, and as if he had
wings to fly withal, he went clean through Asia with all his forces, and
presented himself (beyond the opinion and expectation of all the Mahomet
broken and defeated in two several battles by Vsuncassan
world) even to the view of Vsuncassan, by whom he was bravely received,
roughly and ill handled, and greatly weakened in two most fierce and cruel
battles. The one of which was fought by his Lieutenant Amurath Bassa a Greek
(descended of the blood of the late Emperors of Constantinople, and who lost
his life in that battle) upon the banks of the river of Euphrates: the second
by Mahomet himself in proper person, in which he was repulsed and beaten back,
and pursued even into the trenches of his camp. Battle of Toccara between
Mahomet and Vsuncassan.
Howbeit in the third battle foughten at Arsengua or (as some say) at Tabenda
now named Toccara in the fields of Anserina, he revenged his former losses,
breaking the course of the good fortune and precedent victory of his
adversaries, by the help of his artillery, whereof he had infinite store,
causing it to play upon his enemies even at the instant that they were to begin
the fight, and to give the onset. For the horses of the Persians being
terrified and dispersed with the unusual noise and thundering of the ordinance,
Vsuncassan overthrown in battle. Zeinalda eldest son of Vsuncassan slain.
did constrain Vsuncassan to yield to his misfortune, and to loose the honor
of the field, and being put to the retrait, he left his eldest son Zeinalda
dead upon the place. Now come I to my matter, and I say, that Mahomet being
reduced to terms of some extremity, and his affairs standing but in an
evil case by these cruel overthrows which did in a manner shake his estate
and Empire, might at this time have been beaten down without ever being able
to rise again, if Italy and the other Provinces of Christendom would have
given ear and harkened to the continual prayers and admonitions of the
Christians by their civil dissentions have occasioned the greatness of the
Turkish Empire.
Hungarians, the Greeks, and the Albanians. But they contrariwise being more
deaf then had docks, did pursue their private quarrels, and mutual hatreds
and contentions, and (which was much worse) not contented to nourish the fire
of domestical and civil wars, they drew strangers to be partakers of their
wars, and to bear a part in the subject of their passions: for they implored
the aid and succors of the Albanois in favor of Ferdinand the bastard son of
Alphonsus (who had appointed him to be his heir to the Realm of Naples)
against the house of Aniow, to whom in right that kingdom Kingdom of Naples an
example of the variety and inconstancy of fortune. Neapolitans their humor
and disposition. 1458. Ferdinand bastard son of Alphonsus succeeds unto the
kingdom of Naples.
appertained. And in very truth that Province or people of Naples has served
in all ages and times of antiquity, for a notable example of the variety of
human things, and of the inconstancy of fortune. For finding the yoke of
them that commanded over them to be smally gracious or pleasing unto them:
they were never contented, and (as Publius Sulpitius well said of them) they
did never live in quiet, except then only when they had none from whom they
might revolt, or against whom they might rebel. The manner thereof behold by
that which follows.

Upon the decease and death of Alphonsus King of Naples, (whereof we have
already spoken) Fernand or Ferdinand his natural son, though illegitimate,
did enter upon the crown, and was seized of the Realm by the order of the
last will and testament of his father, and by the dispensation of Pope Eugenius
the fourth, which was confirmed also by Nicholas the fifth. But Calixtus the
fourth within a while after understanding Calixtus 4. claims the kingdom of
Naples by Escheate.
of his death, the tenth day following by an express Bull pronounced the
crown of Naples to be void and escheated to the Sea of Rome, forbidding
Ferdinand under the pain of excommunication, any way to intermeddle with the
administration and government thereof: absoluing also all the Princes and Nobles
of the kingdom from acknowledging any duty or allegiance unto him. Ferdinand
having gotten the copy of his deprivation, did appeal from the Pope to the
next general Council: but Eugenius being taken away with a sick nesse only of
some three or four days continuance Peter Jews Borgias Nephew to Pope
Eugenius competitor of the crown of Naples against Ferdinand. John Duke of
Calabria.
(even at the instant that he had stirred up Peter Jews Borgias his Nephew, to
be a competitor to the Realm of Naples) it was the occasion that Ferdinand
found some remedy against the troubles that were prepared against him.
Notwithstanding this death of the Pope did not extinguish all tumults within
that kingdom: for John surnamed Duke of Calabria, the son of Rene Duke of
Aniow was then (as it fell out) at Genes in Italy, and the faction of the house
of Aniow did stand waiting but for some opportunity being ready to take arms,
and to begin some tumult upon the least occasion that should be offered:
notwithstanding that Frances Sforce Duke of Milan (who Frances Sforce Duke of
Milan
took part with the Arragonois) did by an ambassade sent unto the Princes and
Nobles of Naples, encourage and exhort them to persevere in their fidelity and
devotion to their new Prince, and had retained them for the most part either by
love or by force in their duty and allegiance.

But because the original of this war, and the subject of so many hatreds
and enmities which have both given cause of increase to the power of the
Ottomans, and did keep the States of Italy for a time in suspense, and held the
greatest Princes of Christendom for many years in care and perplexity, shall
not remain unknown unto us: it shall be needful for us to have recourse unto
the times that were before, and in continuing the discourse thereof from those
days to this present, we must in some sort repeat the matter (as it were by
way of an Epitome) from the first original of those troubles.

Charles the 2. king of Naples, Sicily, and Jerusalem, nephew to the French
king S. Charles the second king of Naples, and Mary his wife their issue.
Charles Martell king of Hungary.
Jews, and his wife the Lady Mary, daughter of Stephen king of Hungary, had 9.
male children borne in wedlock between them. Of those 9. we find that four
had issue, and of them we are now to entreat. The first was Charles surnamed
Martell, the other three, Robert, Jews, and Philip: Martell the eldest son
succeeded by the right of his mother to the kingdom of Hungary, but he died
before his father, leaving Carolobert, or (as the Italians in one word
corruptly do call him) Caronumbert: his son and successor in Hungary.
Charles the 2. being departed this life in the year 1309. Carolobert Carolobert
king of Hungary.
pretending a claim to the crown of Naples, as descended unto him by the right
of his father, did stand in contention for the same with his Uncle Robert, who
alleged on the other side, that because Martell the father of Carolobert, and
his elder brother was never seized of that kingdom, therefore the same was to
descend unto him immediately by the death of his father. This great and famous
question being debated and vehemently argued amongst the Lawiers of that age,
(to know which of them ought to succeed in the realms and dominions simply
descending) either the Uncle or the son of the elder brother, who never was
king: it was in the end decided by Pope Clement the 6, who gave sentence for
Robert and adjudged that he should succeed into the kingdom and crown of
Naples. And Baldus of Perusa a famous Lawier in that age, says, that the
Baldus a famous Ciuilian of Perusa.
reason which moved the Pope to give that judgment, was inregard of the
public and common commodity, and in respect of the great good merits and
admirable wisdom of the said Robert; and he ordered the kingdom of Hungary
to the Nephew.

Carolobert then king of Hungary had two sons, Jews king of Hungary and
Andrew or Andreas, and Robert who was crowned king of Naples, Sicily, and
Jerusalem begot Jews 3. son of Charles the second king of Hungary Duke of
Duras. Philip 4 son of Charles Prince of Tarentum.
Charles surnamed without land, who likewise dying before his father, left 3.
daughters Ione, Mary, and Margaret. Now Jews the third son of Charles the 2.
was Duke of Duras, and had issue Charles of Duras hereafter mentioned. The
fourth son of the said Charles was Philip Prince of Tarentum in Italy, and he
had issue a son named Jews who succeeded his father in that principality. Now
Robert king of Naples approaching near his end in the year 1342. did ordain by
testament that Ione the eldest daughter of his son Charles should inherit his
crown and kingdom of Naples, on condition she did espouse her self to Andrew
his Cousin the son of Carolobert. This young Princess Ione Queen of Naples
married with Andrew younger some of the king of Hungary. Auersa.
being thus made Queen upon the condition before mentioned, did marry with the
said Andrew, with whom being upon a time at Auersa, she sent unto him in the
night time, praying him to come unto her, pretending that she had matters of
importance to impart unto him: who coming to her in great haste, was there
taken and hanged up at an iron grate with a lace or girdle of silk and gold
wrought by the Andrew the husband of Ione Queen of Naples murdered by his
wife. Second marriage of Ione Queen of Naples.
hands of the Queen herself. The occasion of this murder (as many pretend)
was for that this young Prince (albeit he were of a youthful and lusty
constitution) yet could not satisfy the insatiable lust and appetite of his
wife: besides that she was incensed thereunto by reason of the conspiracies of
those of her blood and kindred, who did aspire to the sovereignty and crown of
Naples. But whatsoever was the cause thereof, she took immediately to her
husband (or as some say) for her paramour, Jews Prince of Tarent above
mentioned, her cousin german. This crime and horrible fact of Queen Ione, did
seem unto al men so odious and execrable, that she made the good renowm and
memory of Robert her grandfather, to be now very ill reputed and badly thought
of, and the Jews king of Hungary comes with an army against Ione Queen of
Naples for revenge of his brothers death.
report of her detestable behavior was speedily published and spread abroad
in all places. The Pope himself began to take the matter in hand, and persuaded
with Jews king of Hungary to undertake the revenge of his brothers death, and
so drew him into the Realm of Naples with a most puissant and mighty army,
in the year 1348. notwithstanding the often letters of Queen Ione wherein she
excused and purged her self of this misdeede and the murder of his brother.

At the coming and arrival of the Hungarian king into Italy, the sudden
taking Sulmo.
of Sulmo did so terrify the rest, that they presently submitted themselves to
his devotion, insomuch that the Queen having her Tarentine in her company,
fled into Proence, leaving in her place Charles of Duras to have the command
and government of her kingdom, who being also vanquished and taken in
battle, was by the sentence Charles of Duras overcome in battle, taken and
beheaded by the king of Hungary.
of the king of Hungary beheaded, as being privy and party to the death of
Andrew. Of this Charles there was a son left, likewise named Charles of
Duras. The Hungarian by this means in less then three months had gotten the
possession of the Realm of Naples, and having left a strong garrison of
Hungarians within the country, he retired himself into his own kingdom,
carrying away with him that young Prince of Duras. Hereupon the Pope being urged
and pressed with the daily and continual pursuit and entreatie of the Queen,
took the care of her affairs into his own hands: sending into Italy Guy of
Limoges, Cardinal of Port being his Nephew, who knew so well how to handle and
convey his matters, that he brought both parties to an accord upon these
conditions, that Ione should be restored to her realm and title of Queen of
Naples: and as for the Tarentine, that he should only enjoy the name of Prince
of Tarentum: and moreover, that after her decease, all her right and interest
in her kingdom should remain to the king of Hungary and his successors. Thus
Ione being reestablished, within a while after, she knew so well how to handle
her matters, and so to practice with Pope Clement, that in the year 1352. he
crowned Jews the Tarentine Prince, King of Naples: and yet so that he procured
also the King of Hungary, to confirm the peace with both of them which had
been formerly concluded between them. In recompense whereof the Queen
granted unto the Pope by way of contract and sale, the city of Auignyon,
which was part of her patrimony Auignion purchased to the Sea of Rome by Pope
Clemens.
and inheritance, but so as all that money which was due unto the Church for
the yearly fee and service of the kingdom of Naples, from the time that she
came to the crown, was allowed and deducted in the bargain between them.
About a three years after, the Tarentine dyed, being wasted and consumed away
by the excessive use, and overmuch companying with the Queen. But she stayed
not long without Third marriage of Ione of Naples.
a companion, for she coupled her self in marriage with James of Arragon, the
infant of Maiorque: who was reputed the most gentle and courteous Prince living
in that age. Him did she retain with her, not in the title of King, but only
as Duke of Calabria. Within a few months after, this Prince also died, the
Queen causing him to loose his head, for that (as some say) he was somewhat
too amorous with another woman besides the Queen. Yet there be some who
affirm, that she did only divorce Fourth marriage of Ione Queen of Naples.
her self from him joining her self in the fourth marriage with Otho Duke of
Brunswicke descended of the noble family of Saxony, who at that time warring
in Italy was in the pay of the Church, in the year 1376. and with him she
lived in solace and great pleasure: during which time, it happened that Pope
Gregory the second dyed in the year 1378. This Pope brought back the Court
and siege of the Papacy, unto Rome after seventy four years, that Clement
the fifth had transported it to Auignyon, to the great grief and prejudice of
the Romans, whereof immediately proceeded that great Schism in the Church,
upon the which our history does in some sort depend. And to the intent the
matter may be the more apparent, it shall be necessary that I set down the
motive and first occasion of that Schism.

The chief and principal men of Rome did secretly desire and entreat the
Cardinals The motive and occasion of the Scisme in the Church of Rome.
which were assembled in the Conclaue for the election of the Pope, that they
would at their request choose one that was a Roman, or at the least an
Italian, to the intent the Court might be stayed, and not removed from Rome.
The people with high voices and mighty clamors, cried out in all the streets
and places of the city, that they would have one of their own nation: by
means whereof, those reverent Prelates, fearing the tumult or the violence of
some sudden outrage, did agree with one mind and consent to elect an Italian,
with an intent afterward (when time and place should serve) and that the
stirs of the popular sort were appeased, to proceed to a free election of
some other who should be taken and acknowledged for true Pope indeed. They
therefore being entered into the Conclaue, and the commotion and insolent
demeanor of the common people continuing and increasing, and being ready to
break open the doors upon them, they made choice of one Bartholomew of
Naples, Archbishop of Barie: upon the tenth of April in the year above
mentioned, and they named him Urban the sixth. Some write that they chose him
upon these conditions Urban the 6. created Pope.
expressly, that notwithstanding that election, whenever he should be warned
thereunto by them, that he should renounce and resign the name and dignity of
Pope, and that they bound him thereunto with a straight and solemn oath, which
he promised and swore to perform. The election being accomplished, the
College of Cardinals wrote their letters unto the Potentates, and Catholic
Princes of Christendom, that the same was holily and lawfully done, and
themselves for a time did acknowledge it to be so. Within a while after,
eighteen Cardinals, or (as some say) fewer (of which the most part were French
men) obtained leave and license of the Pope (who then lay at Tyuoly) under
pretense of the extreme heat of the month of July, that they might leave and
be absent from the Court for a season. Hereupon by several ways, they took
their journey and met all together, first at Anagni, and from thence at Fondi,
to the intent they might proceed in the election of a new Pope, and this they
did by the intelligence and practice of the Queen of Naples, who under hand
had offered free liberty and security within her dominions to conclude and go
through with this election: her reason was, because she perceiving her self
not to be as yet thoroughly assured of the Hungarians, did desire to have a
Frenchman made Pope, and such a one as might be at her devotion. In the end,
when Urban and they could not, or would not be brought to any good nor friendly
accord: they caused him to be cited to appear at Fondi, and there they
debated and handled the matter by certain acts and proceedings in law, only
(in a manner) at the direction and pleasure of Master Nicholas of Naples, who
at that time was a most famous Lawier, and M. Nicholas of Naples.
one of the Queens Counselors, and a most mortal and deadly enemy to Urban.
On the other side the Pope caused them to be cited, and in the end did
excommunicate them for contumacie: and in the end, both parties caring but
little the one for the other: the Cardinals pretending that the Sea was void,
in September following at Fondi did make a new election, observing therein all
the usual and accustomed solemnities: and they declared for Pope, the
Cardinal of Geneua, named Clement the seventh, and immediately they made it
known unto all Kings and Princes Christian that they should account Clement
for the true Pope and not Urban. To Urban did cleave and adioyne themselves all
Italy, Almaine, Hungary, and England, with many other Princes and Estates of
Europe, and he kept his seat at Rome: Clement removed his seat Clement the
seventh made Antipope.
to Auignion, and to him did adhere the Realms of France and of Spain. Thus
you see the first motive and occasion of this Schism and division in the
Church, by the which (continuing above forty years) both the whole estate of
Christendom was greatly prejudiced, and the insolency and power of the Turks
was mightily augmented. The Cause of the enmity between Pope Urban and
Master Nicolas of Naples.


But to the intent you may both the better conceive that which has been
already declared, and be instructed of that which is yet behind: I hold it
expedient not to conceal the cause of the enmity which grew betwixt Pope
Urban and that lawyer above mentioned. This Master Nicholas was an excellent
advocate: and in many causes and process which Urban had had in the Court of
Rome before his advancement to the papacy: he was for the most part retained
with the adverse parties against Urban, as it often falls out to such as
exercise the office of advocates. Urban being afterward become Pope: diverse
Kings and great Princes (as the manner is) sent their Ambassadors from all
parts to congratulate the holiness of his advancement to the papacy, and to
swear obedience unto him. The Queen of Naples was not one of the last: but
she sent unto him Master Nicholas. The Pope (according to the usual custom)
made a great and sumptuous banquet for all of them: at the which every
Disgrace offered by Pope Urban to M. Nicolas Ambassador for the Queen of
Naples.
one having taken his place, and the Ambassador of the Queen being seated in
one of the most honorable and highest places, as representing the person of
his Queen: Urban commanded the usher of the hall to displace him and to set
him lower with some disgrace to the honor and reputation of this Ambassador.
He wisely dissembling the injury and his coffeehouse, took it very
patiently: and at his departure from the feast being in the company of a
certain Cardinal his friend, who Speech of M. Nicholas touching the disgrace
done him by the Pope.
was offended likewise at this disgrace offered him: and used some speeches to
comfort him, willing him to attend and stay his time. Master Nicolas then made
him this answer: tush (quoth he) I have two souls, the one of them I have
vowed to God only: the other I will give to him that is willing to have it: and
from thenceforth he persuaded with the Queen (who of her self was
sufficiently unconstant) to become the extreme enemy of Pope Urban: and
Master Nicolas, was the chief Counselor and principal procurer of the
proceeding of the election of Pope Clement. Thus you may see how great and
wa^ghtie a matter it is, to outrage or injury any man of a haughty spirit and
of a great courage.

Urban having made peace with the Florentines, Perusians and others that had
rebelled Ione queen of Naples deprived of her realm by Pope Urban.
against Gregory the eleventh his predecessor: bent and employed all his
endeavors and devises, how to revenge himself upon the Queen of Naples:
insomuch as by a solemn judgment he deprived her of her realm and Kingdom:
in regard of many crimes and offenses, and especially for that she had
favored and maintained the Schism, and had yielded her obedience to Pope
Clement. Hereuppon he invested Charles of Duras, with the Kingdom and crown
of Naples, and he wrote his letters unto the King of Hungary (with whom the
said Charles Charles of Duras invested with the crown of Naples by Pope Urban.
was then abiding) That he should send him unto him, and that he would crown
him, and put him in possession of that Kingdom. On the other part Clement the
Antipope, not thinking himself safe enough at Aniow, for fear of the army of
the Romans which had already taken the field: he speedily sent a message
unto the Queen, willing her to send him certain forces, and a good and
sufficient conuoy to conduct and bring him safe unto Naples: but the
Neapolitans being advertised of his coming, betook themselves to their arms,
and with great tumult they told the Queen plainly, that they meant not to be
troubled with two Popes at once, not to enter into the war upon that cause
and quarrel. She therefore and Clement retired to the castle, where having
fortified themselves for certain days, and in the end finding that it would
not be for their benefit to soiorne or stay any Ione Queen of Naples and Pope
Clement fly to Auignion.
longer in Naples, the Queen caused three galleys to be trimmed and made
ready; in two of the which she embarked Clement and his Cardinals, and her
self getting abord the third: and with a prosperous gale of wind, having put
to sea, in few days arrived safe unto Auignion.

Clement being visited in great honor and reverence by the French men, and
(the process of the two Popes being seen and examined by the parliament of
Paris) he was pronounced to be the true and lawful Pope, and Urban was
denounced to be no Pope but a Scismatique: in such sort that both the kings of
France and of Arragon did so take and acknowledge him, and did yield him their
obeissance and sovereign honor. In like manner the Queen Ione being roially
entertained and honored, did receive great and rich gifts, but principally of
Jews Duke of Aniow, the second son of John king of France, whereupon she
seeing her self to be a sole woman and without any issue, and more then that,
being truly informed of the practices and enterprises of Charles of Duras and
the Bishop of Rome (who did daily multiply and increase in strength and
puissance) she did adopt the said Prince for her Jews the first Duke of
Aniow, adopted by Queen Ione.
son: and ordained him to be the heir and inheritour of her kingdom, giving
the same expressly unto him after her decease: and Clement by his authority
did approve and allow the donation made by the Queen, and in the year 1379.
there were made letters Pattentes and authentical Charters to that effect.
This was the first ground and foundation of the rights, which the second
descent of the house of Aniow did for a long time pretend unto the realm of
Naples. These things being fully Ione returns to Naples.
established and concluded, Ione returned to Naples, whilst that Urban in the
mean time, persisting continually in his deprivation of the Queen, and the
inuestiture of Charles of Duras, did earnestly and vehemently solicit the
King of Hungary both by letters and by agents to set forward that enterprise,
and he pressed him so much the more, for that Charles being then with a great
and puissant army Treuisa.
of Hungarians upon the confines of Treuisa against the Venetians, by the
direction of the Hungarian King, who was confederate with the Genowaies and the
Siegniour of Padua against the state of Venice: he was already in a manner at
the end of the journey. Charles being fully informed and very well acquainted
with the intent and pleasure of the King, and very desirous to revenge the
death of his uncle, but much more greedy and desirous of so rich a crown: in
the year 1380. took his journey with eight thousand Hungarians and a thousand
Italians, and came to Rome, where Urban received him with the greatest pomp
and triumph that can be imagined, and created him Senator, which is the
chiefest degree of honor amongst the Romans. Afterward the year following,
having strengthened himself with many other companies, especially with the
army of the church, he marched directly toward Naples: into the which, by
means of his practices with the Citizens, he entered at one of the gates:
whilst that Otho being accompanied with the Queens forces, did issue out at
another gate, of purpose to affront and fight with him. In conclusion, being
possessed of the town, and consequently of the whole realm and especially of
the person of the Queen: he caused her by the judgment and direction of the
King of Hungary, who had expressly written unto him to that Ione queen of
Naples put to death.
effect, to be executed and put to death in the same place, and with the same
kind of punishment, which she not long before had caused Andrew her husband
most wickedly to endure and suffer. Her sister the Lady Marie was executed in
like manner Marie sister to Queen Ione executed.
being at that time the widdowe of Robert late County of Artois: to whom she
had been a most disloiall and unchaste wife, and was greatly defamed for her
dishonest familiarity with Master John Bocace so greatly renowned amongst the
Italians John Bocace.
for his eloquence and great learning: who in favor and commendation of
Flammette and Philocole.
this Lady, made those two elegant books in the vulgar Italian, entitled
Flammette and Philocole.

The affairs of Naples being settled in good order, Charles returned to Rome
where Charles of Duraz crowned king of Naples
he was anointed and crowned King by Urban with great solemnity and triumph.
Yet for all this were not the troubles appeazed nor suppressed in those
countries: for the Duke of Aniow Jews, having been before solicited by the
Queen, and Jews Duke of Aniow enters the realm of Naples with an army.
being supported both by Clement and also by the French, both to aid and
succor that unfortunate Princess, as also to disposesse Urban of the Papacy,
being ready to march with an army of thirty thousand men, or (as some say)
of five and fifty thousand, notwithstanding the death of Ione, he entered into
Italy in the pursuit of his own right and title: and coming into the
kingdom of Naples, he passed as far as Apulia upon the territory of Barie
with good success of victory: but there being enclosed and pressed upon with
the troops of the Count Alberic of Barbian Alberic de Barbian.
General of the church forces, and being enforced to come to the trial of a
battle, he was overthrown with a great slaughter of his people in the year a
thousand three hundredth eighty three: by the default of the Count Anguerrant,
called the The overthrow of Jews the first Duke of Aniow.
Lord of Consey: who being sent after the Duke with a supply of twelve thousand
horse did not keep on his way directly: but a disire took him to force Arezza
in Thuscane, whereas he should have made have on his way, and have gone on to
have joined himself with the Duke: who being sore hurt in that battle with
five several Jews the first Duke of Aniow dies at Biseilles.
wounds, (whether it were that his Physicians and surgeons did not well heal
and cure him of his wounds, or were it through the grief and sorrow of his
misfortune) he died the year following at Biseilles.

The French being expelled out of the realm of Naples: to the intent it should
not want new troubls and tumultes, fortune made Pope Urban and Charles King of
Charles King of Naples and pope Urban enemies.
Naples mortal and deadly enemies. The occasion thereof was thus: The Pope
being by nature somewhat rude, and of little civility in conversation, was come
to Naples to obtain his part of the fruit and benefit of this late obtained
victory: where he claimed a promise of the King of Naples, and urged him upon
the same a little too rudely, Boutill nephew to Pope Urban
to make one Boutill his nephewe Prince of Capua: who was a most vile and base
fellow and a man of no virtue nor other good desert, and besides he would have
had the King to have given him also the Duchy of Duras. The King was not very
well pleased at this motion, but delaying his answer, he put him off cunningly
for a long time. The Bishop of Rome on the other side did insist and urge him
very hard to bring his purpose to effect, but all was in vain: insomuch that
growing into suspicion the one of the other, from thence they proceeded to open
enmity. Charles making a fair show and carrying all matters honestly, yet did
bear so good an eye upon the Pope, that he could neither go nor speak
freely at his pleasure: but he being willing to get from him, obtained leave to
go only unto Mocrea to change the air: where he began to devise and to
consult upon the depriving of Charles, causing him to be cited, and that
process should be framed against him. The King in like case did practice with
some of the Cardinals his friends, to depose Urban from his seat: and to
this end, himself in person accompanied with his forces went to Nocera,
saying: That he was come thither by his assignement Urban besieged by Charles
within Nocera.
to present him with his obedience, and to the intent he would be near at
hand, to hear the judgment that should be given against him. During this
siege, some sallies and skirmishes there were made, in one of the which Boutill
was taken and imprisonned. The Pope being enflamed with wrath and anger,
discharged his choler upon seven of his said Cardinals, whom he caused to
be shut up in close and straight prison, and in the end having them
tormented caused them to dye as Sismatiques and fauorors of Charles. Whilst
these things were in working, the Pope invented a mean to get himself out of
Nocera by the help of a great Urban escapes out of Nocera to Genes and
curses Charles king of Naples
sum of money which he gave unto Saint Seuerin and Raimond Vrsin: who
conueighed him in galleys to Genes, where being retired, he cursed the King of
Naples. This Prince being near to the end and period of his fortune which
seemed to fawn upon him and to flatter him: under the pretense and color of
a new crown, Death of Jews King of Hungary.
took his journey into Hungary: where the Princes and Nobles of the country
did greatly desire and very earnestly expect his coming, and did offer unto
him the scepter of Jews their King, who was of late deceased without any other
issue then one only daughter.

Charles before that time had espoused Margaret the sister of Queen Ione, and
by her had two children a son and a daughter, Ladislaus and Ione: at his
departure from Naples into Hungary, he left the government of the Kingdom
unto the Charles king of Naples chosen and crowned King of Hungary, slain at
Bude.
Queen his wife and certain of the chiefest and most noble Barons of the
realm: himself being crowned King of Hungary with the outward consent and
liking of Elizabeth the Queen and widdowe of the late King, and her daughter
Marie: (who notwithstanding did it altogether of dissimulation:) with in few
days after by their practice was slain at Bude in the year 1388. The death
of this Prince gave occasion of new troubles and tumultes at Naples: whereby
the house Margaret Queen of Naples and her children fly to Gaietta.
and faction of Aniow grew to be so favored by fortune, that they became
Lords of Naples: and the Queen with her children was constrained to retire
herself to Gaietta. This mean while Jews the second son of Jews above
mentioned, (at the request of those that were of his faction) sent to Naples
for their aid and succors five galleys. But Boniface the ninth a Neapolitan
having now obtained Boniface the ^ made Po^e.
the Popedom in the year of our Lord a thousand three hundredth ninety, did
disanull and revoke the censures and curse which Urban his predecessor had
denounced Ladislaus son o. Charles crowned King of Naples by Pope Boniface
Jews second Duke of Aniow corwned king of Naples by Pope Clement and enters
Naples.
against King Charles: and he inuestd Ladislaus with his fathers kingdom: and
caused him at Gaietta to be crowned King of Naples, Sicile, and Jerusalem: as
in like manner the same year Jews the second Duke of Aniow took the crown
of Naples at the hands of Clement, by the pursuie of the King of France, and
thereuppon made his entry and was received into Naples in great honor and
magnificense by those of his faction: howbeit that many of the Nobles and
gentlemen, adhering and taking part with Ladislaus, did openly refuse to
acknowledge Jews for their Sovereign. Thus these two Kings contending for one
only crown, did confound all things with most piteous disorder, and destroyed
the country: which they labored and striued each of them to obtain as his
proper patrimony: till such time as the Partisans of the house of Aniow
(wanting money and treasure (the sinews of the wars) caused the vessels
and vtensiles of gold and silver belonging to the Churches of Naples, to be
molten and made into money for the payment of their soldiers, by the leave
and permission of Clement: who showed himself to have small devotion and little
conscience. But all this notwithstanding, the Count Alberic of Barbian being
created Constable by Laaislaus, presented himself with a strong army before
Naples: and after many assaults and brave repulses, he entered the town and
brought it under the obedience of the Dirrachium, Ladislaus the son of Charles
of Duras recouereth Naples.
with the rest of the realm also: and the sooner for that Jews himself was
absent: (who seeing himself in weak and feeble estate, and the town to be
divided by the tumultes and practices of Ladislaus (whose places and strong
holds were well and sufficiently furnished) had withdrawn himself apart out
of Italy into Prouence.

This done, Ladislaus in the year of our Lord 1403. went into Hungary, to
Ladislaus made King of Hungary.
take upon him the crown of that kingdom, which the Nobles of the country
did cast upon him: and even in an instant returning thence again to Naples, he
conceived in his haughty and ambitious heart the dominion of Rome it self, by
reason he saw it divided and distracted by sundry factions and seditions: the
which after he Ladislaus takes Rome by force.
had twice attempted by force of arms, at the third time he carried and entered
it as a conqueror in great pomp and triumph. This his prosperity growing
odious to the Italians, was a cause that Jews gat the Florentines, and the
Legate of Bologna to enter into a firm and strong league against Ladislaus: the
which being concluded Alexander the fifth made Pope at the counsel of Pisa.
by Jews his Ambassadors, he himself departed-speedily from Prouence, and
being arrived at Pisa, he kissed the feet of Alexander the fifth, then made
Pope at that Council: who confirmed him in the inuestiture of the Realms of
Naples, Sicily, and Jerusalem, pretending that Ladislaus had forfeited them by
his occupation and seizing upon the city of Rome. Yet did he refuse to crown
him, Jews confirmed in the realm of Naples by Pope Alexander.
for that Clement had lately done it in Aulgnion, nevertheless he created him
Gonfalonier of the Church, with especial charge to march against Ladislaus the
enemy of the Church, and the favorer and maintainer of Gregory the twelfth,
who had been deposed in that general Council.

Jews first made a journey into Prouence, and afterward in the year 1410.
being returned to the territories of Rome: he there had assembled and united
both his own forces and those of the Pope, under the charge and conduct of
Paul Vrsin, and Sforce Cottignole. Ladislaus with his army was at Roque
Seiche, between Pont Corue, Saint Ange, and Saint German. Jews coming
against him, and affronting him in set battle, gave the onset upon him most
courageously, in so much The battle between Jews of Aniow and Ladislaus of
Duras Kings of Naples.
as the conflict grew most furious and cruel: and the prowes both of the one
part and of the other was noted to be admirable: so that hardly could it be
discerned who was like to have the better. The two Kings in their proper
persons did that day show themselves both good champions and sufficient
Chieftaines, and they left not any thing omitted that was worthy of generous
and noble Princes. In the end Sforce on the one part, and Paul Vrsin on the
other, did charge so furiously with all their forces upon the troops of
Ladislaus, that they made them to give ground, so that being not able any
longer to keep themselves in order, they were quite broken and discomfited.
The battle being finished, each party retired into his own quarter, not any
one remembering to pursue the victory, nor to Victory of Jews not pursued.
follow after the enemy that was defeated: who thereupon having gathered his
spirits unto him, and having gotten the leisure to rally his forces, and to
consider of the matter: it caused him afterward to say, (at such time as he
devised or had any speech of this battle) That if his enemies had done their
deuoire to vanquish him thoroughly, and to have gotten a full victory: the
first day they might have Speech of Ladislaus king of Naples of the battle
between him and Jews Duke of Aniow.
made themselves masters both of his person and of his kingdom, the second day
(if they had followed him) they might have been Lords of his Realm, but not
of his person: and the third day, neither of his person nor of his kingdom.
After this oversight, Jews never enterprised any thing in Italy, but retyring
himself into France, never set foot more in that country: having either by
ignorance or I know not how, suffered the benefit of so memorable a victory
to slip out of his hands, which made Ladislaus sole and absolute King of
Naples. Yet was he not at rest from new attemptes, being of a stirring,
troublesome, and ambitious spirit, as much as any that ever lived. For he
revived his old attemptes, first against Rome, which succeeded accordingly as
he wished, and after also against Ladislaus poisoned.
the Florentines in which expedition, coming to Perusa, he fell suddenly
sick, and dyed without issue in the year of our Lord 1414: being (as some
say) poisoned the most straungely that possibly could be imagined. The novelty
thereof seems Avarice and unchaste love two most pernicious mischieues.
in my opinion, worthy to be inserted in this place: to the intent it may
serve for an instruction and ensignment to the posterity, how pernicious are
the effects of avarice and unchaste lone.

Ladislaus was enamoured of a young damsel of singular beauty, the daughter
of a Physician, who (being corrupted and inueigled with an excessive sum of
money paid unto him by the Florentines) did give unto his daughter an ointment
of the juice of napel (being a present and most strong poison) persuading her
(as it was an A strange kind of poisoning.
easy matter for him being her father, and she a simple soul of no deep
reach or conceit, and besides extremely desirous of the love of the King)
that if she did anoint herself therewithal when she was to have the company
of the King: his affection toward her would be augmented by the one half.
The silly wench did willingly do as her father had advised her: whereof she
died within a while after: and Ladislaus likewise being infected with the same
poison lost his life the very same time.

His sister the Duchess of Guelders or Sterlich (as some will) being
afterward named Ione the second by the death of her brother, obtained the
crown of Naples: Ione the second Queen of Naples.
this woman was nothing inferior but rather did far surpass the first Ione
her Aunt in all kind of lewdness, whoredom and damnable lasciviousness and
incontinencie: and she carried herself so much the higher, in pride and
insolency then the other, because she saw herself suddenly advanced to so
high a dignity, beyond all hope and expectation: and besides for that she
found the estate of Naples in peace and quietness, and (as it were) assured
unto her, were it because she had no competitor to the Crown, or by reason of
the great forces and huge numbers of soldiers which her brother had left her:
for she had an army of 1600. horse, lead by excellent and most expert
Captains. Of this Queen there was openly and commonly spread a certain verse
in Latin in manner of a prophecy, the effect and substance thereof in English
is this.

The latter Queen of Duraz line descending,
Of Naples Crown shall be the final ending.
Scarce was this Lady enstalled and settled in the siege and royal throne of
the kingdom, but she committed the whole managing and government of her
person, and Pandolphel Alop, the love or paramour of Queen Ione the 2.
her estate to Pandolphel Alop a Neopolitan county, whom she had nourished
and brought up from his infancy and tender youth, and with whom she was
extremely in love, and beyond all measure. For having lead him with her (as one
of her household train into Gelderland, after her husband was dead, she
brought him back again with her into Italy, keeping him continually near
about her person, not without the public infamy of their love and secret
familiarity. In the end when she had intelligence of this bad report that ran
upon them, and did understand the envy that those of the Court did carry to
Pandolphel: she married her self to master James Queen Ione the 2. married to
James of Narbon County of March.
of Narbonne, county of March, descended of the royal blood and house of
France, and her alley and kinsman: upon this condition notwithstanding, that he
should not usurp nor take upon him the name of King, but should hold himself
contented with the title of Prince of Tarentum, or County of March, at his
choice which pleased him. The Captains and great men of the kingdom being
both jealous, and bearing a Sforce Cottignole.
mortal hatred to Pandolphel, and to Sforce Cottignole before mentioned (in
whom only the Queen seemed to repose her special trust and confidence:) they
gave to understand to the County James, that he should not doubt to come to
Naples, assuring him that they would so effect the matter as he should be king.
And accordingly as soon as he was entered within the Realm, all the nobles and
captains went to meet him as far as Beneuent, and saluted him by the name of
King: only Sforce saluted him by the name of Count and no otherwise. This act
(by the judgment of the whole company) was held to be a very proud and
arrogant part, and worthy to be punished Julius Caesar of Capua.
with imprisonment. Julius Caesar of Capua, one of the Captains of the
company, began to grow into some altercation of words, and hard speech with
Sforce in the presence of the count: but Sforce (under color of parting and
keeping them a sunder) Sforce made prisoner.
was lead into a chamber, and there arrested as a prisoner: and his company or
train that followed him, were sacked and spoiled of that which they had
brought with them. After this the Count being arrived at Naples, and received
with great triumph both by the nobles and common people, who openly called and
proclaimed him king: This is the principal fortress of Naples. Pandolphel
beheaded. Michelet. Margaret sister of Sforce her hardines and generosity.
he had by intelligence* Chastelnoue, or the new Castle delivered unto him:
and Pandolphel being taken within the same, lost his head: and Sforce being
kept under sure and safe custody, had been put to death likewise, had it not
been for Michelet a famous Captain, who being at Tricaric, and having
suddenly armed the company of Sforce, posted presently toward Naples, being
accompanied with Margaret the sister of Sforce, and the wife of Michelin of
Rauignan, a brave Captain and fine warrior: who arming her self, and being
assisted with certain men at arms, belonging to her husband: when they were
come near Naples, they took prisoners four Gentlemen Neapolitanes, whom the
County had sent with safe conduct toward Tricaric, to treat upon some accord
and agreement with Michelet. These did she threaten, that she would cause them
to be hanged, if her brother were not delivered unto her: which was the
occasion of the liberty of Sforce. This was not the last oversight Count James
his oversight and folly.
of the County, for beginning also to deal ill with the Neapolitans, and
depriving sometimes one, and sometimes another of their offices throughout the
realm, he bestowed them upon Frenchmen, and sequestring the Queen from all
command and management of the estate and public matters, he held her shut up
as a recluse in her lodgings: besides that he lay very seldom and little with
her, sometimes also using her roughly, and with outrageous speeches, whereat
every man, and especially the Queen Ione of Naples her subtelty and policy.
chief persons of the Court began to grudge and murmr: but the Queen for
all that seemed nothing discontented, but dissembling her malicious mind and
secret malice, by a feminine craft and subtelty: she made show as if that kind
of life did please her wonderful well, as being removed and estranged from
cares and toilesome travel: and she gave her self to dancing and reuelling
(whereunto the French are naturally inclined) and so passed away the time in
great show of joy and gladness, how beit that by secret signs and sighs, and
sometimes by close and covert speeches, she did sufficiently bewray and open
unto her private friends, her secret grief and coffeehouse.

Matters thus standing between the Queen and the Count: Julius Caesar (who
was Julius Caesar of Capua intends the death of the Count: offers his
service to the Queen.
of late the first man that moved and incensed the Count against Pandolphel and
Sforce, and had thereby brought the Queen to conceive a mortal and deadly
hatred against him) having now forgotten the outrage and injury which he had
offered (a usual matter in men given to be injurious:) he began now to sound
the affections of the Queen, and in the end offered him self to work the
death and destruction of her husband. The Queen being both wary and
circumpect, and yet malicious, and seeing occasion now offered her to effect
two several things at once, both to avenge her self of the injury received by
Julius, and to recover the good grace and favor of her husband with her own
liberty: she made countenance to harken unto him, and to take great pleasure
and contentment in his discourse: counselling him to be well advised, and
accordingly to resolve himself: and that at the end of eight days he should
come again unto her, to lay down some order for the execution of the
enterprise. Thus having licensed Julius to depart, and in the mean while
beginning an extraordinary kind of sadness, she secretly disclosed all the
practice to the Count, showing her self very careful of his safety, and her
disability to resist against the inticements and instigations of that traitor:
and especially she offered to the Count, that he him self should both see
Julius Caesar his treason bewraied by the Queen.
and hear the treachery of Julius. Wherefore the eight day being come, she
conuaied him behind the curtains of her bed, with some of his most trusty and
faithful friends well armed, and afterward she caused Julius Caesar to be
called into her chamber, who having disgorged and powered forth all the
mischievous and villainous speeches that might be devised against the Count, and
against the Frenchmen, did from point to point there make known and declare
unto the Queen, what his platform and devise was to contriue the death and
destruction of the Count. Hereupon he issuing Julius Caesar executed.
presently out from the place where he stood, and had heard all his talk,
caused him to be apprehended, and openly to be executed.

This demonstration and show of the good will and affection of the Queen to
the Count her husband, was the cause of her full release and perfect liberty.
By means whereof, master Ottin Carracciole being made chief of the nobility,
and Anequin Morinell of the comminalty, by the consent and intelligence of many
that conspired and were confederate in the action: they invited the Queen one
day into the town to a feast, and from thence did conduct and convey her in
safety into the fortress or tower of* Capua: and immediately they ran to
arms, and seized upon the town, Capouana a castle within Naples. Count
James made prisoner in Chasteau de love a Casteli within Naples. John
Carracciole, the minion or paramour of Ione Queen of Naples, made Grand
Seneschall. Sforce enemy to the Grand Seneschall.
and with great fury sacked it and chased all the French officers out of the
city, and the Count himself they imprisoned in the Castle named de Love. Thus
the Queen being restored to her absolute power and sovereign authority, she
took unto her for her minion and paramour, John Carracciole, a fine young
Gentleman, and of an excellent beauty, and him she created Grand Seneschall, or
high Stuard of Naples. This man being not able to abide and endure the
greatness and authority of Sforce, had a determination both to depose him from
all credit and countenance, and also to deprive him of his life: whereof
Sforce being advertised, and being for that cause become enemy to the
Seneschall, did seize upon Naples under color that he would deliver the
Queen from the tyranny and power of the Seneschall. The Queen being mightily
incensed with anger, deprived him of the office of Constable, and stirring up
the common people against him, commanded to kill him. In the end a peace and
accord was concluded between Sforce and the Queen, wherein it was ordered,
that the Count James restored to his liberty.
Seneschall should be banished to Rome, and that the Count James should be
restored to his liberty according to the first covenants of the agreement made
between them. This Prince being delivered, imagined, and beat his brains upon
nothing else, but how he might ruinate both Sforce and the Queen: and she in
like case on the other side, conceiving an extreme grief for the exile of her
Seneschall, was wonderfully displeased with Sforce, and maligning him
extremely, did devise his ruin and destruon as the only author of her sorrow
and discomfort: in such sort, that she did soon condescend to the will and
mind of the Count her husband. Sforce being informed of the danger wherein he
stood, did very finely work and contriue the restitution Count James
forsakes Naples, and returning to France, becomes an Hermit.
of the Seneschall, whose return, and the reconciliation of Sforce with the
Queen, did so fear and terrify the Count, that he fled secretly to Tarentum,
and being pursued by the Queen with an army, he made his last retraite into
France, where he passed the residue of his days in the vows and habit of an
Hermit.

These things thus past, Braccio Fortebraccia of Perusa, in the year one
thousand Braccio Fortebraccia of Perusa warreth upon Pope Martin the 5. Sforce
sent with an army to the aid of the Pope by the Q of Naples. Sforce
oueruerthrowen by Braccio is deprived of all authority in Naples, and Braccio
hired by the queen in his room. Queen Ione deprived of her kingdom by the
Pope.
four hundredth and nineteenth, did war upon Pope Martin the fifth, who
having recourse unto the Queen of Naples, that held that Crown of him as
Feodary of the Church of Rome: and because he had crowned her Queen of Naples,
he obtained succors of three thousand horse, under the charge and command of
Sforce, both to the great contentment of the Queen her self, and of her
Minion Carracciole, who had long before been desirous to be rid of him: and
Fortune ministered her fit matter and occasion to effect her desire: for so it
fell out, that Sforce was overthrown by Braccio, whereupon the Queen deprived
him of all his honors, estate and authority, and she retained the said Braccio
into her pay and service. The Pope being highly offended with this ingratitude,
took Sforce into his pay, and having communicated all his affairs with him,
he fell to agreement and composition with the Perusin, and deprived the Queen
of the fee of the Realm of Naples: and he declared for king in her stead,
Jews the third Duke of Aniow, the son of Jews the second, and of Ioland of
Arragon, in the year 1420. Sforce according to the will and direction of the
Pope, took part with Jews, and put him self in his pay, and by his practices
having gotten possession of the town and castle of Auersa, kept them to the
use of Jews: who in the month of August next following, did present himself
before Naples with a strong and mighty army by sea. Alphonsus king of Arragon
besieges Boniface in Corsica. Port Siracusan.


About the same time it happened that Alphonsus king of Arragon, being departed
from Barcelona had assailed Corsica by sea: and held siege before Boniface, a
castle subject to the Genowaies, and named of old the Port Siracusan. The Pope
being at that time in Florence, there was one Don Garzia a Spaniard, who being
a very Don Garzia Spaniard.
wise and politic person, was ambassador from Alphonsus to his holiness:
Queen Ione likewise had her ambassador there also, named Anthony Caraffa,
otherwise Anthony Caraffa, alias Malice.
Malice. This Malice had a motion to the Spaniard, that if he would persuade
with the King his master, to take the cause of the Queen into his hands and
protection, that he for his part would procure that she should adopt him for
her son, and should declare him for her successor in the kingdom of Naples:
and so cleanly did they convey this their practice and conceit between them,
without the knowledge and priuity of the Pope: that they concluded to go
together to Plombin, and from thence to Corsica, toward the King Alphonsus:
unto whom the matter being propounded, it was held long in debate and doubt:
for that Alphonsus and Jews were cosins in the third degree, and there had
been express capitulations and couenaunts between them (when Jews first
began his attemptes for Naples) whereby Alphonsus had promised not to molest
him in that his enterprise. But the Sentence.
desire of a Crown is too great and goodly a thing for men to make a
conscience how and by what means it be gotten: for how so ever it was, the
effect made it Desire of a Crown knows no conscience.
clear and manifest, that Alphonsus in the end did accept of the offer made
unto him, yet would he not in any case set foot within the Realm, before that
the Queen had confirmed all the whole matter by authentical writings drawn
between them, and that she had put into his hands the two fortresses of
Castle noue, and De love. These Alphonsus adopted by Q. Ione and received into
Naples
sureties being delivered, and the Charters of the adoption and succession of
the Realm being orderly done and dispatched, and the siege also being leauied
before Boniface, Alphonsus was received with exceeding honor into Naples, and
was lodged in the Castle de love. Many and diverse were the warlike exploites
and martial services that passed between Alphonsus and the Queens forces on
the one side, and Jews and Sforce on the other side: but in process and
succession of time, (I know not how nor why) the * Arragonoys and Catalans
began to grow in dislike and disfavor Spaniards, their pride and envy.
with the Queen, and with the Grand Seneschall, and there grew diverse
suspicions both on the one side and the other. The Spaniards could not endure
with any patience nor abide to hear the people cry (as they went up and down
the town) God save the Queen, long may the house of Duraz prosper, with such
like acclamations: besides in all public edictes and proclamations, there was
no mention made of any other, then of the name of the Queen only, and
therefore Alphonsus determined to prevent her in that, which she perhaps, and
(as he thought) did pretend against him: and that was to take her prisoner, and
to seize upon the estate. But the first thing that he purposed was to bereave
her of the council and assistance of the Grand Seneschall, who was a personage
of great wisdom, and of a deep reach and sound judgment, and therefore he
faining him self to be sick and evil at ease, did continue three or four
days privately in his lodging without going to court the Queen, who lay in
the tower Capouane. The Queen thinking that he The Grand Seneschall held
prisoner by Alphonsus.
had been sick indeed, sent her Seneschall to Castle noue to visit him on
her behalf, where he detained him and all his train, and at the same instant
taking his horse, he went to the Capouane to have seized upon the person of
the Queen: but this his counsel proved vain and frustrate, by the
intelligence which she had received by one of the Seneschall his servant, who
was escaped from the surprise of the Seneschall. Hereuppon the Arragonois
betook him self to open force, and besieged the Queen, battering the
fortress of Capouan with the Canon. The Queen Ione besieged in Naples by
Alphonsus
Queen finding her self thus hardly bestead, had recourse to Sforce, who lay
encamped at that time for Jews of Aniow, at the Monastery near Mirabell.
Sforce (having had the better in a great conflict against the Spaniard, within
Naples at Case Queen Ione delivered out of Naples by Sforce.
noue near to Formell, and about the tower Capouane, did deliver the Queen
thence in safety, and conuaied her with all her moueables to Auersa. At the
time of her retrait from Naples, there were more then five thousand
Neapolitanes both men and women of all sorts, who mourning and lamenting at her
misfortune, did accompany her a great way off, with great sorrow and infinite
lamentation. Within a while after Sforce began to treat with her, that Jews
(who was continually resident at Rome) might return to the Realm of Naples,
whereunto she condiscended: and more then that, when he was come to Auersa,
she received him with most gracious and kind entertainment: and besides,
having assembled many great and noble personages of Alphonsus disinherited by
Queen Ione.
great wisdom and judgment, by their advise and council, she solemnly
deprived Alphonsus of the right of adoption, and from the succession of the
Crown of Naples: pretending that he had worthily forfeited it by the vice of
his foul ingratitude, and she adopted Jews the third to succeed her, as her
son in that her kingdom, upon Jews the 3. adopted by Queen Ione.
the same conditions which she had erst propounded to the king of Arragon:
giving to understand by express letters unto all the Potentates and Princes of
Christendom, both the order, tenor, and causes of the deprivation of the one,
and the adoption of the other.

About that time Alphonsus being advertised, that Henry his brother was taken
prisoner and spoiled of his Crown, by John King of Castill: he resolved to
take a journey Alphonsus returns into Spain.
into Spain for his deliverance, which he did accordingly in the year one
thousand four hundred twenty three, leaving Naples in the guard and custody of
his brother Peter. In that his voyage passing by Marseilles, and finding it but
ill guarded, he Marseilles surprised by Alphonsus.
surprised it by a sudden assault only in hatred and despite of Jews, and he
used it as enemy. For having abandonned it to the avarice and insolency of his
soldiers, that which he was not able to carry away, he caused to be burnt and
consumed with the fire: only the women were saved and preserved from the
violence and outrage of the soldiers, the King having caused them to retire
into a Church, whilst the town was rifled and sacked. Of the infinite
treasures and riches which were found S. Jews his body carried away from
Marseilies by Alphonsus. Devotion without piety or religion*
within the city, he reserved nothing to himself (as the report is) but only
the body of Saint Jews late Archbishop of Toulouse, the son of Charles the
second king of Naples: the which he carried from thence, and caused it to be
placed most religiously in a certain special place within the city of
Valentia in Spain, saying: that it was not a thing either decent or
convenient, in a town which was burnt and destroyed, to leave so holy and
precious a relic.

Jews lately made King was not idle in this mean while, but he did presently
put in execution the practices newly concluded on, between Pope Martin, the
Queen of Naples, Philip Duke of Milan, and the Genowaies. For by their means
was Naples suddenly and in an instant besieged and enclosed both by Sea, with
the Naples besieged by Philip Duke of Milan. Francis Sforce, the son of
Sforce Cottignole deceased. Naples recovered for Queen Ione. Grand Senes^hall
of Naples ransomed by Sforce.
forces and fleet of the Duke of Milan, and by land with the arms of Frauncis
Sforce, the son of Ssorce Cottignole lately deceased: in so much that without
any great violence or effusion of blood, it was recovered for the Queen in the
year, one thousand four hundred twenty four. Now Queen Ione being so
happily restored and reinuested in her estate, made her entry into Naples,
having in her company the Graund Seneschall (who was of late eschaunged for
twelve Catalans or Spanishe Nobles, by the liberality and courtesy of Sforce
before mentioned, who might have had four score thousand Crowns for their
ransom,) and Jews also her adopted and elected son, whom she had created
Duke of Calabria, being the title ordinarily given to the eldest son of the
Kings and Princes of Naples) was with her at the same time of her return to
the City of Naples. Now albeit she was not altogether free and exempted from
troubles, but that the town was sometimes endommaged by the artillery of
Castle noue (which was still at the devotion of the Spaniard): nevertheless
she lived sufficiently well and happily in her realm, until the year a
thousand, four hundred, thirty two, at which time the Graund Seneshall (who
till that time had with most happy and prosperous fortune commanded, and in a
manner absolutely ruled all the realm) was then overtaken and ensnared by the
Queen, as you shall perceive by that which follows. Within a while after he
had solemnized the marriage of his son with one of the daughters of James
Caldore, even when he saw him self (as a man may say) sitting aloft upon the
wheel of Fortune: one Monday about midnight, being lodged within the tower
Capouane, certain persons by the special commandment of the Queen, and
some other of the Nobles confederated with her, went unto his lodging, knocking
and calling at his chamber door, and willing him to arise speedily, and to
make have to come to the Queen: saying, that by reason of a sudden accident
which was befallen Grand Seneshall of Naples slain.
her, she was in great danger and peril of death. The Seneshall rising
suddenly to make him self ready, commanded his page to open the door.
Thereupon they without being armed, entered the chamber and slew him out of
hand: and having almost cut off one of his legs, they caused him to be carried
all naked out of Capouane without any pomp at all, as the most vile and
wretched creature living. A most Sentence. The immoderate love and favor of
woma^kind vain for any man to build his fortune on. Jews the third Duke of
Aniow and Calabria his death.
miserable and unhappy example of the inconstancy of Fortune, and may serve
for a notable instruction and admonition to all such persons, who relying upon
the fickle love and immoderate affections of woman kind, do found the
greatness of their fortune upon their vain and unconstant favors.

Jews being sent by Commission of the Queen against John Anthony Vrsin
Prince of Tarentum: (who taking part with Alphonsus, did trouble and molest
Calabria, when he came to Cossence fell sick of a fever, and there dyed, in
the year of our Lord a thousand, four hundred, thirty four, to the great
grief and sorrow of the whole kingdom: for that he was a Prince of singular
courtesy and benignity, and there was especial hope of his good carriage and
behavior. The Queen lived Ione 2. Queen of Naples death.
not long after, but having reigned twenty years she departed this life,
having ordained by her last will and testament that Rene Duke of Bar, brother
of the said Jews should be her heir: (albeit that some doubt of this her last
will, and say, it Rene Duke of Bar ordained to be heir to Queen Ione.
was falsified and counterfaited after her death. Thus the house and family of
Duras, which had been so notable and famous by so many descents, came now to
have an end, as it is likewise fatal to all other humane and earthly things.

Duke Rene being called and sent for by the principal persons and chief
Nobles of the realm, could not go to take the inuestiture of the kingdom of
Naples, by reason Rene Duke of Bar prisoner in Burgundy.
that he was for a long time held prisoner in Burgundy, where he had been
restrained of his liberty after the loss of the battle of Blainuille, in the
year a thousand, four hundred, thirty one, against the Earl of Vaudemont,
and the Marshall of Burgundy: and therefore he sent thither Isabell his wife,
and his children: who being aided and succored by Pope Eugenius with a power
of three thousand footmen Eugenius Pope
under the leading and conduct of the Patriarch of Aquileia, brought certain
places under her government and obeissaunce. On the other side, the king
Alphonsus (as if Fortune had meant and striued to ballaunce both parties
equally and alike) Alphonsus taken prisoner by the Duke of Millan.
understanding of the death of the Queen, and having besieged Gaietta, was
vanquished in a battle at sea by Philip Duke of Millan and the Genowayes: and
being there taken by his enemies, was led prisoner to Millan. But he found
the Italian Duke more gracious and friendly unto him, then the Burgonian was to
the Angeuin: for besides the great respect, wherewith he was used by the
Millanois, and the good entertainment which he received at his hands, they,
oftentimes meeting and falling into familiar discourses and several devises
the one with the other, the manners, the speeches, the fashions and good
behavior of Alphonsus (for he was a most absolute and accomplished Prince) did
so exceedingly please and content the humor of this Duke, that (in regard of
the inward and rare amity which this familiarity and acquaintance bred
between them) it may well be said: that his misfortune was the ready way to
his good fortune, and did purchase him the realm which he Alphonsus set at
liberty by the Duke of Millan.
so earnestly affected. For the Duke of Millan then growing suspicious of the
power and puissance of the French, for the love of the Spaniard did renounce
the friendship and alliance of France, and leagued him self with their
enemy, to the recovery and conquest of Naples: in such sort, that having
suddenly granted him his free liberty, Alphonsus was the first that set foot
within the kingdom of Naples: by means whereof (as the proverb is) being
first come, he was first served, and his right prevailed by reason of the
absence of Rene, so that he insinuated him self very Rene Duke of Bar set
at liberty, and regaineth Naples and all her fortresses. Naples besieged by
Alphonsus.
highly into the favor and affections, both of the Princes, and Nobles, and of
the people of the country. Nevertheless within a while after, Rene being also
delivered out of Burgundy, and being entered into Naples in the year of our
Lord 1438. he regained all her castles and strong holds one piece after
another, which till that time had been in the custody and possession of the
Arragonian. But Alphonsus increasing in strength from day to day, came at
length to besiege Naples with fifteen thousand men at land, and ten galleys,
lying before the haven or port of the city: and he perseuered so obstinately
in his siege, that there daily passed many goodly exploites, and glorious Anell
a mason betrayeth Naples.
deeds of arms between the assaylants and the defendants: notwithstanding
both he and his troops might have dwelt long enough before the walls of
Naples, if they had not been helped by the aduertisements of a certain Mason
named Anell: who being pricked on with the hope of gain, did adventure his
life to augment the glory and good fortune of Alphonsus. For conueying him
self closely and privily forth of the town: he showed him an ancient
cesterne, or water course, which covertly led under the ground into the town,
by the which he conveyed in two hundred Naples taken by Alphonsus.
men hardy and resolute, who issuing forth into the city by a pit or hollow
vault, did seize upon a certain turret: where maintaining the fight for a long
season (whilst the Catalans in the meanetime, partly by escalado, and partly
by breaking of the port S. Genare did make them selves way, and gained the
town) by this means he became Lord of the City, having constrained Rene to
retire him self into Castle noue.

Thus Alphonsus in the year a thousand, four hundred, forty two, and the one
and twentieth after his first expedition, obtained the kingdom and City of
Naples: Bellisarius.
the which nine hundred and five years before was recovered from the Goths,
by that Rene enforced to forgo Naples.
princely chieftaine Bellisarius, by means of the same conduit or water
course. There remained yet the three Castles or fortresses, namely the
Capouane, the mountain or Castle of Saint Hereme, and the Castle noue: all
which, king Rene being not able to defend and succor them, did follow the
estate and condition of the residue of the town, and became Arragonois, both
them and all the realm: and the Prince of Aniow forced to forgo the doubtful
and turbulent possession of that kingdom, which he had held for the space of
six years or thereabouts. Alphonsus after he had Alphonsus king of Naples his
death.
in great rest and security quietly enjoyed the Royal scepter for sixteen
years together, did then depart this life, leaving behind him one only son,
illegitimate, named Ferdinand or Fernand, who being appointed by his father to
have the inheritance of the Crown and kingdom of Naples: yet (being but
meanly favored or beloved by the country) did not enjoy it with like
quietness, nor with the public tranquillity: which was the occasion, that
he used all means and possible diligence to secure and assure unto him self
a quiet and peaceable possession of the kingdom.

The first thing that he did, was to make Pope Pius the second his friend and
Pope Pius 2.
well-willer: who being a Siennois borne, was of late substituted into the
place of Calixtus. This did he compass and bring to pass, by the mediation
and entreaty Duchy of Spoleta restored to the Church. Ferdinand crowned king
of Naples by Pope Pius 2.
of the Duke of Millan, and by the restitution of the Duchy of Spoleta to the
Church: the which, upon the death of Calixtus, the Count James Picenin had
usurped upon Peter Jews Borgia his nephewe. The Pope, being won unto him by
this courtesy, did crown Ferdinand king of Naples, Sicilie, and Jerusalem: on
this condition, that he should restore to the obeissance of the Church of Rome,
Beneuent and Terracine which his father had usurped upon the state
Ecclesiastical. Beneuent. Terracine.
Moreover, in the year next following, at the Council which was called and
kept at Mantua by the Pope, and with the assistance of the Duke of Millan,
Council of Mantua.
for the taking of arms against the great Turk, after they had determined
upon matters concerning the public weal of Christendom, it was also
concluded and decreed by the Pope, that in any case Ferdinand should not want
aid and succors against the puissaunt preparations made for the wars by
Duke John, the son of Rene, who was then at Genes. For you must understand,
that the Genowayes being John the son of Rene, aided by the Genowayes against
Ferdinand king of Naples.
then freed from the fear of their Banditi, or outlawes by the aid of the
French, were content (that they might be rid of them) to set them on in the
voyage and journey of Naples: and they concluded to give them succors. For
this cause they caused to arm and make ready ten Galleasses, and three
great ships of burden for the carriage of their train and necessaries: all
which they paid for three months before hand: and they gave him also in
ready money out of the bank of Saint George three score thousand crowns.
Besides these vessels, the Duke had of his father The Bank of S. George at
Genes.
twelve other Galleasses at Marseilles, with promise both from the French king
and from him, that he should want nothing. Wherefore all things being in a
readiness, and having appointed John Cosse a Neapolitan for the Admiral of
his Navy, he took sea the fourth day of October, in the year of our Lord a
thousand, four hundred, fifty and nine: and by the benefit of their sails
and oars he arrived at Gatetta, purposing from thence to take his course for
Calabria, where the Marquess of Crotona had called him, and did expect him:
but hearing by the way, that the Marquess of Crotona.
Marquess was overthrown, and taken prisoner by Ferdinand, he held his
enterprise utterly overthrown likewise: because that upon hope of him only he
had undertaken that journey. But, as it is commonly and often seen, that
things desperate and past all hope do many times prove more fortunate then
those that are advisedly and considerately taken in hand, so it fell out with
Duke John at this time: for Marin de Marsan Duke of Sesse, and Prince of Rossan
did revive both his courage and Marin de Marsan Duke of Sesse.
his hope. This Nobleman had his lands lying over against the town of Baie,
not far from the sea, where the French army lay a floate: and he sent unto
them, offering both him self and his forces to assist them: and so was the
first man that discovered him self to be the author, and chief procurer of
the revolt and rebellion of the Neapolitanes against Ferdinand. For the news
of this revolt being dispersed Rebellion of the Neapolitans against Ferdinand.
throughout the realm, you would not imagine how suddenly the inhabitaunts of
the country were changed, and how their affections inclined to the favor of
the Angeuin. For both the Princes, the Barons, and the people did in a manner
strive and contend together, who should be the first to kiss the hands of
Princes and Nobles of Naples confederate with the Duke of Aniow.
this new Seigniour. Besides the Prince of Tarentum (who was the chief man,
though not yet openly declared the enemy of Ferdinand:) the Princes of Besignan
and Salerne: the Duke of Venuse: Peter John Paul Duke of Sora: the Count Cola
de Campobasso: Anthony Caldore, and almost all the Nobility of Apulia,
together with all the towns and fortresses of the country, taking arms
against Ferdinand, did stand wholly for the Angeuin. By means whereof his host
being greatly increased, and Apulia being open unto him, he marched on
throughout the whole country, soliciting those towns to his devotion which as
yet stood in doubt and suspense. Afterward being entered farther up into that
part of Apulia which is Marquess de Este.
plain and champion, and was held for Ferdinand by the Marquess de Este, and
Don Alonso a Spaniard: the said Marquess (being secretly wrought by his
brother Borze Lord of Ferrara, who was a very deuote and great favorer of the
French, Borze Lord of Ferrara.
and did abound in the reasons of his coffeehouse against Ferdinand) came to
seek the Duke of Aniow, having with him in his company a train of five or
six hundred good horse, which made Alonso to be mightily abashed. By the
departure of the Marquess, they of the plain country being freed from the
yoke, by his authority became all to stand for the Angeuin, and the towns
likewise yielded franckly unto him. The Prince of Tarentum now perceiving the
good success and prosperity that followed the Angeuin, beyond all credit and
expectation, would no longer dissemble his malicious and evil mind against
Ferdinand, but made open war against him with three thousand horse, under the
charge and conduct of two Captains, Vrse Vrsin and Julius de Aquauiue. Besides
all these great Princes and Count James Picenin General of the army for Duke
John against Ferdinand.
men of mark above mentioned, the Duke had drawn into his pay, the Count
James Picenin, one of the most famous and politic Captains in that age: who
coming to his service accompanied with a good number of men, of his old bands
of mercenarie soldiers, was made General of all the power and forces of the
Duke. On the part of Ferdinand were the Duke of Dande, the Duke of Malfie, the
Counties Princes and Nobles of Naples partaking with Ferdina^d.
de Fondi, de Arriane, and Matalune: the Carasses, and the Diamedes, Gentlemen
Neapolitans and some others in a very small and little number. Both the one
part and the other having taken the field, and being both in a full resolution,
and ready appointed to try their fortune by a set battle: they assigned the
place of fight to be in the territory of Sarnie. Each of them being come to
the place appointed, and their Battle of Sarni between Ferdinand and Duke
John. Victory of John against Ferdinand.
battles being marshalled and set in order, they went together in most furious
and cruel manner, and for a long time the conflict continued with great
obstinacy. In the end many being slain on both sides, the honor of the day
remained to the French, and Ferdinand being put to flight, with the loss of
his camp, and all his baggage, was chased even to the gates of Naples.

The Bishop of Rome understanding of this disaster and misfortune fallen to
The Pope and Duke of Millan aid Ferdinand.
Ferdinand, because (for his part) he would not fail in the capitulations of
the league: and doubting least (if the realm of Naples should be subdued by
conquest) the French would encroch upon the liberty and dominion of the
Italian Princes through the insolency and pride of his victory, he advertised
the Duke of Millan, with all possible speed of the state of their affairs:
and they two with one Frederick Duke of Vrbin. Alexander Sforce. Battle of
Saint Fabian.
accord and by common advise did send Frederick Duke of Vrbin and Alexander
Sforce with a strong and puissaunt army to the aid and succor of the king of
Naples. They being entered upon the territory of Abruzze, the Count James
marched forward against them, and met with them near to Saint Fabian, where
was fought between them a most fierce and blouddie battle: but once again
the Army of the Arragonians being discomfited, the Angeuins obtained a notable
The second victory of the French against Ferdinand.
victory, howbeit it cost them full dearly. The report hereof being brought
unto Ferdinand, who was fled into Naples, began to make him muse and imagine
with him self what would follow, and he feared that ere long the town would
be besieged. He left therefore the Queen to keep Naples, and being not able
of him self to make head against the arms both of his domestical and
foreign foes, being spoiled of the most part of his dominions: he put him
self within Barie, Bary or Barlette.
with a very small and weak company. The Count Picenin being informed of his
flight, left a strong garrison in Abruzze, for fear least some new enemy on
Ferdinand besieged within Barie, by the Count Picenin.
that side, should cut off the course of his attemptes: and with the rest of
his troops he followed close after the king even to Barie. In the mean while
Pope Pius and the Millanois made new provisions, and sent them for the relief
of Ferdinand: but the enemy having seized upon all the passages, this levy
served to no purpose, but only for a vain and fruitless show.

The Pope being in greater fear and perplexity now then ever before, did
perceive well, that this matter would require foreign succors, and that the
valor Confederates of Ferdinand sent to Scanderbeg for succors in the behalf
of Ferdinand.
and prowess of strange forces was to be used in this case. Whereupon all the
confederates did think it best to send for Scanderbeg into Apulia, who being a
Prince of great estimation and renown in deeds of arms, was very serviceable
to the Sea of Rome: and withal was of late the most inward friend of
Alphonsus, and no less affectionate to Ferdinand. Besides that, they
considered that Scanderbeg coming from the Sea, they could not hinder nor deny
his landing in Apulia, but that he might open the passages toward Italy if
need were, so as the army and forces of the league might have free liberty
also to come on that side.

I cannot in this place but greatly wonder, and in some sort also it does not a
little grieve me, to see the ingratitude of writers to those persons, whose
valor has so well and excellently deserved. For whereas diverse of all sorts
have written very diligently, and recorded the sum of this war between
Ferdinand and the French: yet is there not any of them that has spoken so much
as one word of Scanderbeg, as though he had not been (I may well speak it)
the principal and chief cause of the happy success of that war: nay (if I
may lawfully say the truth) the true defendor of the Crown of Ferdinand, and
the deliver of him out of the hands of his enemies. And hereof I need give you
no other testimony, then the liberal and bountiful recompense and reward
given him by the King: for besides that he acknowledged and held him for his
father as long as he lived, he gave him also in acknowledgement of his
deserts, and the rewards of his virtue, the town of Trana, and two other
towns of as good reckoning in Aqulia, which the posterity of Scanderbeg did
continually enjoy: after that the affairs of Epire (upon the death of
Scanderbeg) fell to decay and ruin, and they do in part also enjoy them at
this present, as may well be seen even to this day.

The Ambassadors of the league were no sooner arrived in Epire, bringing with
them letters from the Pope, the king Ferdinand, and the Duke of Millan, but
that Ambassade from the Pope, Ferdinand, and the Duke of Millan to Scanderbeg.
Scanderbeg was willing to give them audience. Wherefore being brought unto his
presence, they briefly recited unto him, how the king of Naples having lost
two great battles in the very heart of his realm, his Nobles and subjects, and
the most part of his towns were revolted from him: and himself, being (as it
were) banished and exiled out of his country, was enclosed and shut up with a
tedious and troublesome siege, in a town ill fortified, ill provided, and
scarce defensible, without the hope of some present and speedy succors:
wherefore if he had any remembrance and regard of the strict friendship and
amity so faithfully held and observed between him and the king Alphonsus
father of Ferdinand, that then it would please him speedily and without delay
to pass with his forces into Apulia, to deliver and free him from the yoke and
servitude of strangers, and not him only, but all Italy, and (it might be)
the holy siege of the Sea of Rome: whereunto they did all of them entreat and
require him most earnestly.

There needed no great persuasions to the king of Albany to draw him on in this
voyage: for besides that he was most devoutly affected to the Church of Rome,
the memory of his late and most inward amity with king Alphonsus, did so far
prevail with him, that setting aside all the affairs of his own kingdom,
both public and private, he franckly and voluntarily made him self a party
in the war of Naples, and provided presently and out of hand for his
embarkement and departure. But before that he left Epire, he found the way to
assure himself of a truce with Mahomet: and Truce between Scanderbeg and
Mahomet.
yet him self was not seen to motion or move the matter, as though it
proceeded of his seeking. Whereupon having set the affairs of his realm in
good order, he ordained the Queen to be Regent of the kingdom, to whom he
adjoined for assistaunts, some of the most worthy and chief persons of the
province, to counsel and advise Goic Streese sent into Apulia by Scanderbeg.
her in the government of the Estate. Afterward he dispatched away Goic his
nephew, a Knight of great and sufficient prowess, with a choice company of
five hundred horse toward the realm of Naples, willing him there to attend
his coming: and in the mean while to keep the enemy busied by daily roades
and invasions upon them.

These things being thus accomplished, after that the public processions,
vows, and prayers were ended for their good success and victory, and for the
preservation of him self and his people, he caused his army to set forward,
part of them to the gulf of Rizic, where the Italian galleys did attend them:
and part of them to the port of Gulf of Rizic. Duras, or Durachium, Acrolissa.
Ragusa, or Epidaure.
Duras, and another part to Acrolissa or Media and the residue of his forces
him self conducted to Ascriuia, and from thence to Ragusa, where his own
vessels were prepared to receive him. But before I pass any further, I will
describe unto you (as well as I can) the town and estate of Ragusa.

That which at this day men call Ragusa, was of old and in times past termed
Epidaure, Description of Ragusa. Liburnia.
a city (as some affirm) seated in Liburnia, upon the Adriatique sea,
beautified with an excellent harbor, most fit and convenient for shipping to
ride and anchor in, and defended with a great and strong tower notably fortified
and well furnished. The compass thereof is more then a mile in circuit: her
castle being inexpugnable, is on every side environed with mountains, and
besides excellently well fortified by art and handie work of skillful
enginers. The town was once abundantly stored with Churches and Temples, and
richly beautified and adorned with goodly buildings, and with lively springs
and fountains of water, which did continually flow into the town by conduits
and cesterns. The city was wont to use the Aristocratical form of civil
government, by the greatest and chiefest persons of the Estate, and they do
attribute the first original and foundation of their city to the Epidaurians
of Peloponnesa. The territory thereof is not very large, but full of woods,
and has two little towns or hamlets belonging unto it.

But let us go on with the voyage of Scanderbeg: At his coming to Ragusa, all
Scanderbeg received at Ragusa.
the people in general went forth to meet him, with exceeding joy and
incomparable triumph: and conducting him into the town, did receive him with
all the honor that might be imagined. The next day after that the divine
service was ended, he went about the town to take a view and survey thereof:
and the third day he visited the haven, the arsenall, the fortress, and the
rampires. The day following was employed in diverse sorts of shows and
pleasant triumphs: and the fifth day he went to the Senate house, where were
presented unto him many goodly and rich gifts: besides that he was there
received with an elegant Oration, containing a commendation of his great
exploits and good deserts: and pronounced with a singular good grace by David
Chauncelor of Ragusa
David the Chancelour of that Common wealth. This Oration was answered by Paul
Angel Archbishop of Duraz: who (as another Achates) was always a companion
Paul Angel the Archbishop of Duraz.
to the Prince of Epire, and was a partaker with him in all his travels,
perils, and councounsels. These courtesies being past and ended both on the one
part and the other, Scanderbeg made stay at Ragusa only so long, till that his
whole fleet was there assembled: during which time of his abode, there was not
pretermitted any kind of sports and triumphs, at tilt, turney, barriers, and
such like. In all which exercises the Albanians did show themselves to be very
expert, as beseemed good and worthy soldiers, till such time as they were
commanded to prepare themselves to go to sea, for that the time did now
require their departure. All things being prepared in a readiness, the king
thought it best to cause all his vessels to come together to Ragusa, and that
all his troops both horse and foot, should draw thither, to the intent they
might take the benefit of the first wind to sail from thence into Apulia.
For this cause he dispatched away sundry messengers along the sea side, to will
all the ships, galleys, foists, and brigandines which had been sent from Italy
for the carriage and transportation of his army, to repair all together to
Ragusa: besides all which, as many vessels of his own as were found upon the
coasts of Epire and Macedonie, did arrive thither in great numbers: insomuch
that both the town was too little for the entertainment of so much people, and
the port was too straight for so great a fleet. All of them showed themselves
so forward and willing to pass the sea, that they seemed not as men that had
been led and drawn to the wars, but as if they had been invited to enjoy the
prize of an assured and undoubted victory: there were very few men left in
Epire or Macedon that were fit and able for the wars, but he had drawn them
into that action. Yet is there great variety and diversity of opinions
touching the certainty of the numbers that he transported to the realm of
Naples: some affirm, that he had with him five thousand foot, and five and
twenty hundred horse: others say, two thousand foot, and three thousand and
five hundred horse. Some name no certain number at all (amongst whom, the
truth being so uncertain, I mean to make one) and they say, that the
multitude which embarked themselves with him for Italy, was so great and
incredible, that it seemed there were scant left behind any sufficient or able
men, either in Albanie, Sclauonie, or Macedonie, for the keeping of their
houses and private dwellings.

Now to the intent his army might be embarked and put aboard without disorder
and confusion, Scanderbeg took the care of that matter to himself, and he
appointed Guirize de Vladienne to be Comissarie of the victuals: who made
provision thereof Guirize de Vladienne.
for fifteen days, (of the which store they had for five days ready
dressed.) Every man being gotten on ship board, he sent certain skiffes
throughout all the fleet, to give them advertisement, that the Patrons and two
soldiers of each ship should repair unto him upon the shore to understand his
will and pleasure: who being come he demanded of them, whether they had fresh
water and biscuit aboard for as many days as they had victuals: and answer
being made, that they had provision of all things for fifteen days: he then
enjoined and gave special charge to the soldiers, that they should hold them
selves still and quiet, and be in a readiness to help the Pylots and
Mariners if need were, and that every man should attend his charge and office
without any noise or altercation amongst them. Himself and Gine Musache made
the right wing with five Galleasses: Andrewe, Zachary, and Moses had the
command and charge of the left wing, in which were the same number of the like
vessels both serving for the safeguard and defense of their ships of charge.
He ordained Scanderbeg embarketh him self for Italy.
that every Galleasse should have one lantern, and that those of charge
should have two: and that the Admiral or chief Galleasse should have three
lights or lanternes. These rules and orders being set down and pronounced, the
next day he gave them the signal to weigh anchor, and to make out of the haven
to seaward, committing himself and his navy to the guide and protection of
the divine power. Many of his vessels were launched forth and put out to sea
from the gulf of Rizic, from the port of Duraz, from Valona, and from the
coast of Epyre and of Sclauony: and many of them also were gone before and had
taken their course all alone. As Soon as the day began to break, Scanderbeg
being abord the Admiral, and having commanded a general silence by sound of
trumpet, with a high voice began to pray in this manner.

Lord Jesus Christ Son of the everliving God, which sit at the right
hand Prayer by Scanderbeg ^oing to the aid of the King of Naples.
of the Father most high and omnipotent in the eternal glory, who in the
beginning did create all things of nothing, governing and guiding them
according to thy good will and pleasure: who from all eternity have forechosen
the holy Christian faith and by the effusion of thy most precious blood, and by
the blood of thy holy Martyrs and Apostles have laid the foundation of the
same, and in most wonderful manner have caused it to be dilated and dispersed
throughout the universal world: having appointed the most blessed S. Peter to
be the Vicar and the Prince of the Apostles, and have given to him and his
successors, the whole and full authority of binding and loosing both in heaven
and in earth: and have willed and commanded all men living, especially the
Christian and elect people to be obedient to their admonitions and
commandments, and to sustain, maintain, and defend the Catholic faith and
the Church of Rome even to the death: Behold o Lord, I a most humble and poor
sheep, altogether unworthy to be one of thy fold, have with a free heart and
willing taken upon me the burden of this journey and expedition by their
direction and commandment, to the intent under the conduct and protection of
thy mercy, I may maintain, and with all my power defend the liberty of thy
holy Church, thy Catholic faith, the city of Rome, and the country of Italy
against those that have invaded it, and are their professed enemies. Wherefore
most merciful God and almighty Father, who art both venerable and fearful, I
do invoke thy divine Majesty, and do most humbly require thee to be
favorable to this my enterprise: reach out thy hand thy outstretched arm, and
send unto me Michaell thy Archangell, thy holy messenger and minister: whose
favor may be with me, and may accompany me day and night (for I do gladly
reverence and honor him) who may give unto me and furnish me with force,
strength and courage: that this voyage and passage may be happy and prosperous
unto me, and that I may attain in health and safety with this my army to the
country of Apulia, that the enemies being discomfited and put to flight, I may
triumph in the spoils, and prey of the enemies, and that having obtained the
sum and end of my desires, I may return into my country and to my own
home with safety, health and victory.

This prayer being ended, the Archbishop celebrated the Mass, after which, the
trumpet gave them warning to fall to their oars, and with a fresh gale of
wind, they were soon off the coasts and shore of Albany. But within a while
after there arose a thick Scanderbeg fails toward Italy.
and foggy cloud or mist which did so cover them from the sight each of other,
that they could scarcely discern how to keep their galleys from beating one
against an other. Nevertheless holding on their course, they made sail till
it drew toward night. By this time they began to discover a little Isle, and
the Pylot demanded of the King, whether he should direct his course thither or
not: for they might easily perceive that there was a tempest coming, and the
waves of the sea began to swell, for it was in Autumn.) Scanderbeg having
willed him to bend his course to the Isle: the whole fleet did come to harbor
within the port, where having cast ankers, they rode there for eight days
together, by reason of the outrage and swelling of the sea, which being at
length grown calm, and the wind ceased, early in the morning by the rising
of the Sun, having heard divine service, they put again to sea, and made
sail all that day and the night following, so that the next morning by break
of day, they came within sight of the coast of Apulia. Scanderbeg enquired what
land that was which appeared not far off before them: it was told him, that
it was the mount Saint Angel. God be thanked (said Scanderbeg) bend your Or
mount Gargan.
course thitherwardes: for I have ever had a great devotion to Saint Michaell.
And presently as soon as he had a sight of the mountain, he fell on both his
knees and desired of God, that this his first discovery of Apulia, might be to
his glory and to the benefit of him and his confederates. After this he
commanded them to ply their tackling* and to hoyse up all their sails, which
being filled with a merry gale of wind the army in short time arrived safely
to the shore. Scanderbeg being gotten to shore together with the Archbishop,
and a good number of soldiers, sent abroad to see if they could have any news
of the enemy. His currours being returned brought him word that they were not
far off: notwithstanding he rested himself all at his Scanderbeg with his
army in Apulia. Or Barlet.
ease, and having somewhat refreshed him, he returned aborde his ships, and
from thence took his course directly to Bary, where he discharged his ships,
and set all his troops on land.

Duke John and the Count Pycenin being encamped before Bary, as soon as they
saw so great a fleet, did presently suspect and imagine what they were: for
there was Siege of Bari raised by Scanderbeg.
of late a certain brute or rumor raised in the French host, that Ferdinand
did look for the King of Epyre to come to his succor. Wherefore they trussed
up their baggage in great haste, and went to lodge about a thirty miles from
thence: at the discamping of the French, the Neapolitane King being at
liberty, issued joyfully out of the city, and went to meet Scanderbeg. Then
was the affection and mutual gladness of those two Princes, to be seen and
perceived by the multitude of their embracements and kind greetings,
intermingled with tears, and so did they make Scanderbeg received into Bari by
Ferdinand.
their entry into Bary not without the infinite clamors and acclamations of
the common sort, in sign of the public joy and gladness. Then might you
have seen all the town as it were in a tumult, by means of the people
running dispersed in several troops to meet the king of Albany: all the
inhabitants in general, of all ages and estates, and of each sex were assembled
in great confusion upon the market place, and at the Palace: day and night
might you have heard in the streets and in all places, persons singing and
triumphing for joy of the coming of Scanderbeg: on the one side the
inhabitants issued by multitudes out of the gates to see the ships and navy of
the Albanois, on the other side the Epyrots resorted into the town, and ranged
up and down the fields and the villages, busying and employing themselves in
diverse matters. Some ^ell to sadling and bridling of their horses, others to
make ready their curasses and their armors, every man employed himself about
some one thing or other, and all generally prepared themselves to the war, as
if they had been presently to fight with the enemy. The next morning
Scanderbeg taking with him a small company of his men, went forth to forage
upon the lands of such as were rebels to Ferdinand, and being soon returned
well laden with prey and pillage, he divided it equally and in common to those
of the town as well as to his own soldiers. Afterward a little before the
evening having assembled his companies, he thought good to encourage them and
used these speeches following.

I remember (my companions and good friends) that I have heard it reported of
Oration of Scanderbeg encouraging his soldiers against the Frenchmen.
Belissarius that famous warrior, how in an expedition which he made against
the Englishmen, with a puissant army by sea: his first act was after, he had
landed his men, to set ^ire on all his ships, for fear least his soldiers
being carried away with the hope and commodity of a safe passage back again,
should be always desirous to return home to their own country: and in stead
of doing their best, and aduenturing their lives to get the victory, they
might happen by their default and negligence to be overcome and vanquished.
This is now our case (my good soldiers) and our estate and condition is not
much unlike: we are now over the sea, far from our own houses, from our own
country, upon the territories and dominions of our enemies, amongst
strangers, altogether destitute and void of hope, and without any means to
return again to our own: yea our affairs are brought to that pass, that it
is impossible for us to resolve, whether is better for us to stand still or to
go forward, considering that besides our arms, our horses, and our courages
(wholly bent and addicted to deeds of arms) we have nothing else left us to
rely and build upon: for there is now no hope of life nor safety, if we get
not some notable victory upon our enemies. But courage, (my masters) let us
consider, that this is the divine will and pleasure, that we should maintain
the patrimony of Jesus Christ, the house of God, and the seat of his Church:
and doubt you not, but that he will send us even from heaven an easy and a
speedy victory, under whose name and protection we being now to fight: soon
shall we confound this our enemy, and then shall we return into our country
conquerours, joyous, and triumphant. Hereof I make no doubt nor question, when
(first of all) I call to remembrance your ordinary and wonted valor, when I
set before my eyes so many goodly victories which you have gotten upon your
enemies: and then being thus confirmed through the confidence of your virtue
and prowes, I have cheerfully undertaken this present voyage, as having
learned by your arms to break and discomfite greater armies, and far better
then this that is now opposed against us. Much more reason have you (my
companions) not to esteem of these small troops, which (as you have already
seen) at the only brute and hearing of our names, and before that ever they
had any sight of us, did (as a man may say) betake themselves to flight, and
durst not tarry our landing, but removed their siege, and are retired from us.
It remains therefore that we pursue them whilst they are in this fear and
astonishment: but yet in this would I have you to be advised (my good
friends,) that if it happen this our enemy should dare to abide us, and to
come to fight with us (which I do not believe) my counsel is, that at the
first we only hold him play by loose and light skirmishes, and that we do
endeavor to weary and overcome him with the travel and trouble of continual
onsets and often charges: in so doing either shall we put them to the sword,
or get them alive to be our prisoners. For the weight and heaviness of their
own arms does sufficiently plague and afflicte them in the fight: and these
barded horses, are neither so ready to pursue, not yet so nymble to fly from
us: but that we being lightly armed and mounted, have great advantage against
them, being able by coursing up and down, both to annoy and to disorder them
with ease. Go to then (my brave and courageous soldiers) let every man see
that his horse and armor be in a good readiness: for by the aid and help of
God* I am determined to morrow to go visit the enemy.

The Albanois (who desired nothing more then to see the enemy) being more and
more enflamed with these speeches, the next morning by the break of day
presented themselves ready and resolute to march against the enemy: and
having served God, they took the field with Ensigns displayed with a full
intent to go seek out the Scanderbeg his troops in skirmish with the French.
French: with whom when they came to encounter, they did not join with them
with the whole body of their forces in plain and set battle, but they did
only taste them with a light conflict: for that the intention of the Albanian
Prince was not as yet to make a full trial of his fortune, but only to sport
a little with the enemy, and to prove what manner of soldiers they were, and
how they could demean themselves with their arms on their backs. In this
skirmish there lay dead upon the place thirty of the French party, and
twenty taken prisoners: of the Albanois not any one either slain or taken,
only four of them were wounded, and they returned all of them with great joy
to Bari.

The next day following was a Council called of the Masters of the Camp, and
the other Chiefetaines of the army, to the which the King Ferdinand led
Scanderbeg: there was it propounded, that either they must adventure the
battle, or march into Abruzza, to open the passages for the troops of the
confederates, Ferdinand and Scanderbeg free the passages of Abruzza.
and so being conjoined with them, to go and encounter with the enemy. The
conclusion was, that they should take the way to Abruzza, and thereupon was
order given to all the soldiers both those of the King and the Albanois that
they should be in a readin esse, and that every man should furnish himself
with victuals ready dressed for five days. This done, and the town being
assured with a good garrison, the army began to march, both the King and
Scanderbeg being present: and they passed on close and in good order, with
great silence and secrecy, the darkness of the night favoring them, in such
sort that they were not discryed by the French camp, which lay not far off:
and so held on their course directly toward the country of Abruzza, where
being arrived, and coming suddenly upon those that kept and guarded the
passages, they charged upon them unprovided so furiously both behind and in
flank, and on all sides, that having dispersed and scattered them for the most
part, or Ferdinand and Scanderbeg. join with the forces of the league.
having taken or cut them in pieces: the ways and passages were made open and
free to the companies of the league, which were under the conduct and command
of Frederick Duke of Vrbin and Alexander Sforce: who being united and
incorporated one with the other army, they went and encamped nere to Vrsara a
town that stood for King Ferdinand.

Now being so far removed from Bari, and considering that they had to deal
with one the most subtle and politic warrior, and the most able and expert
soldier living: namely Pycenin, who (as they thought) might either solicit
that place to revolt: or upon the fear of their absence, and by the trauerses
of unconstant fortune if they should present themselves before the town, they
might happen with ease to carry and obtain it: it was therefore thought
convenient to send thither some good and sufficient Chiefetaine with good and
strong forces, both to secure the town (if need were) and to prevent the enemy
of any such enterprise, and the same being once done and dispatched, to return
again, and to join with them in one camp. This commission was of sufficient
difficulty, and there was none that did envy it unto Scanderbeg: and
therefore he offering himself, and requesting to have the execution of that
service, it was liberally and freely accorded unto him. He had a good devotion
and great desire to see the French once again, and to speak with Pycenin
nearer and more at hand. Being arrived at Barie with his own bands, he found
all things there as he desired, wherefore having taken order for all
accidents, he dislodged thence as speedily, and marched directly toward the
French camp. Immediately upon his approach, he sent them a defiance, and
challenged them to the battle: they who had used always to vanquish and
carry away the victory, made no Fight between Scanderbeg and the French.
long delay, but were as forward to meet him. Each party therefore took the
field in good order and well resolved: the Albanois had divided his army into
three parts: Moses of Dibria led one of his battallions, of the second Guirize
had the command, and the third he reserved to himself, having an intent
therewithal to affront Pycenin. Thus all things being orderly disposed for the
fight: he made toward the enemy by three several ways at once. The whole
day was spent almost in skirmishes and light conflictes: for the Albanois
making sometimes as though they fled and feigned themselves to be affraide:
sometimes by wheeling and casting suddenly about, then again by often and
sudden charge and retraites: coursing up and down the breadth of the plain,
did so weary and molest the French, that in the end, the battle fell out as
him self expected. Many were slain outright, and many of the Dukes side were
taken prisoners, only one of the Albanois was slain, many hurt and very
few taken. But the Count being quick conceipted and politic, and wisely
foreseeing that by this new kind of fighting: if Scanderbeg with his
soldiers so well exercised by long practice, use, and discipline, did not put
him to the worst, yet he was like enough to give him his hands full: he
bethought him self therefore, that if he could get to speak unto him, he
might peradventure obtain some stay, and so cause him Policy of Count Pycenin
to surcease from fighting. For this cause he advanced him self alone at the
head of his squadrons, and with a huge voice called Scanderbeg by his name,
inuiting and requesting him to come to a parley with him. The Albanois being of
a courteous and generous disposition, and without any apprehension of fear:
knowing that it was the County, did not disdain to speak with him, but put
himself likewise in the head of his troops. The two Chiefetaines being thus
separated from their companies, made choice of a place equally distant from the
two armies, and discovered round about on all sides to be free from all
suspicion of any ambushmentes, and there both they met to confer and
parley together. The Count greatly maruelling at the presence of the King of
Epyre, stood still without any word spoken attentively beholding him from the
head to the foot. Scanderbeg was the first that dismounted from his horse, and
approaching to the Count, he took him about the body (for he was a man of a
very little stature) and lifted him up aloft from the ground, and afterward
having kissed him (as his custom was) he let him down again very easily. The
Count to color his subtlety, feigned that he had Count Pycenin his notable
dissimulation.
great matters to entreat of with him, and which could not be expressed in a
short conference. For he promised so to contriue all things, that either the
Frenchmen, leaving the quiet and peaceable possession of the Realm of Naples
to Ferdinand should avoid Pycenin his parley with Scanderbeg.
out of Apulia, and so return over the mountains: or if not, that he would
work their confusion. And so proceeding in a most friendly and loving
discourse: he said, that he was fully assured, that if the Frenchmen (who were
naturally proud and insolent, and did bear a deadly and mortal hatred to the
Italians) should once get sure footing in the Realm of Naples: they would not
rest contented with that portion, but they would aspire to the Dominion of all
Italy, the inhabitants whereof they respected not nor regarded no more then as
slaves, and as brute beasts and unreasonable creatures. All this and many
things else, did he promise to do, both for the benefit and greatness of
Ferdinand, as also for the reputation and immortal renown of Scanderbeg. And
to this end he requested him, that he would cause his people to sound a
retrait, as he was ready for his part to do the like: that the soldiers of
both sides might take breath, and might refresh themselves from their labors
and travels which they had endured all the day long: affirming that this was a
use and custom ever observed in wars amongst the Italians: and for that it
was now growing toward night, and the soldiers on both sides being faint and
weary, he held it expedient, that the two armies should retire into their
tents, and that every man might betake himself to his rest. He also entreated
him of all courtesy, that he would meet him the next morning with a small
company (to the intent Duke John and the French men might doubt and suspect
nothing) in such a place as he would assign, that they might there confer
more at full upon these matters. This fraudulent plot did Pycenin convey with
singular dissimulation equal to his malice and despightfull humor. Count
Pycenin his dishonest practice against Scanderbeg.
For his drift was to bring the Albanois within his danger either alive or
dead (an act most dishonest, and little practiced amongst true Knights) or at
the least wise he thought by drawing out the parley at length to gain time,
and to bring it to pass, that the night should separate them: for he perceived
full well, that the Albanois had the advantage of that days journey.
Scanderbeg giving faith and credit to his speeches, by reason he was a
personage of great renown and authority, did simply and plainly condiscende
to his request, causing to sound a retrait and to cease the combat. In this
mean time Moses and Guirize (who in the late skirmish had taken prisoners
four squadrons of the enemies) did present them unto their General: which
Picenin seeing, he began to blush for shame, and being sore troubled in his
mind, he stood a while as if he had been dombe: afterward being come to
himself, he spoke again to the Prince of Albanie according to his wonted
dissembled manner to this effect.

I perceive (quoth he) most noble and generous Prince, and I cannot but be
abashed Speech of the Count Pycenin to Scanderbeg.
at it, to see that thy Captains and soldiers, do show themselves to have
but small discipline, and to have but little regard and respect of thy command.
For (as thou see) after we had set down an order and published it with one
voice and consent, that the soldiers of both the armies should withdraw
themselves from the battle: these men notwithstanding have assailed and forced
these my squadrons, who were obedient to our edict, and they have now brought
them hither prisoners unto thee to our great reproach and dishonor, a thing in
my judgment unjust and injurious, and contrary to thy faith and reputation.
Nevertheless trusting in thy virtue and valor, for that I have ever reputed
thee to be a Prince of great magnanimity and faithful of thy word, I have
good hope that thou will observe the faith and promise which thou have given
me, and wilt cause these soldiers to be set at liberty, as being unjustly
taken and made prisoners. But the Count went not away without an answer: for
Scanderbeg replied unto him in this manner.

Certainly Count James: I cannot choose but greatly marvel that thou being a
Answer of Scanderbeg to Count Pycenin.
man so famous and renowned, would either speak or so much as think such
speeches not only vain and frivolous, but of little truth or appearance. For,
to say that our Captains and men at arms have taken or defeated thy squadrons
when they were disarmed, or after that publication of our edict and agreement:
thou thy self have seen the contrary, and thou may not deny it, but that
at the very first that we two met together in this place, my men had both
foiled and taken those prisoners before that ever there was any abstinence of
arms either concluded or signified throughout our armies: and therefore I know
not how it should be that this matter should seem so strange and injurious
unto thee: for if our troops (as thy self have confessed) have been in fight
all the day long: is it possible that our agreement should in so short a space
be published and made known throughout all the quarters of our camp? and can
it be that thy men seeing my forces still in arms and in fight, could so
simply layedowne their arms and give over fighting? then must I needs think
that whilst thy soldiers would show themselves (as thou say) precise
obseruers of thy commandments: they are justly and to their shame made
prisoners unto us: or rather in despite of their wills being overcome by
right of arms, they have lost the victory and have deserved this captivity.
Moreover how cannest thou call or account my men either rebellious or careless
of discipline, with whom many times in fewer and lesser numbers (be it spoken
without boasting) I have broken and overthrown so many puissant and mighty
armies of the Barbarians? with whom I have tamed, subdued, and made captives so
many proud and brave Chieftaines of the Turks and Infidels? and if I should
speak the truth of their obedience, and their order in military discipline: I
dare auow that they fear and reverence me more as their Leader and General,
then they do stand in fear of you being their enemies. And as concerning that
request of thine, that these thy squadrons (being by right of war made my
prisoners) should be freely restored and redeliuered unto thee: truly thy
demand shall not be in vain: for those whom the fury of the fight has
spared alive, it is not my use nor custom to deprive them either of life or
liberty.

Now the number of them which were so taken, were about 100, all which
Scanderbeg delivered with their armor and gave them freely unto Pycenin: who
after that this parley was ended, betook himself to his camp, and the
Albanois went toward Bari, from whence the next morning very early, being
accompanied only with seven horsemen and no more, he went back again to
meet with Pycenin according to the promise and agreement concluded between
them the day before. As he was ryding on his way, there presented himself unto
him one that came from the enemies camp, sent (it may be) by Zachary Groppe,
who (as some write) was then in the pay of the French: or else some one of them
who had lately proved the bounty and courtesy Zachary Groppe in pay with the
French in Italy.
of the Prince, holding it an unworthy and dishonorable part, that the Count
against the laws of arms and honorable wars, should vsesuch falsehood and
disloialty toward Scanderbeg: but howsoever it was, seeing in so great want
and obscurity of writers, we cannot learn nor yet conjecture any otherwise of
the case: let it suffice that this soldier did discover and make known unto
Scanderbeg this practice of Count Picenin his practice discovered to Scanderbeg.
the County: giving him to understand, that the long parley of the day last
past, was nothing but an illusion both to draw his own army out of the danger
of that days journey, as also to entrap him and to bring him within his
danger: telling him also, that the place appointed for their meeting was full
of ambushments purposely disposed and prepared to that effect: and he willed
him in any case not to pass any farther, for if he did, he should be either
slain or taken. Scanderbeg to prove the truth of this matter, sent forth
certain horsemen to discover the country, and they found it accordingly as it
had been reported. The guile and fraud of the Count being revealed and made
manifest, the Prince of Epire began to reproach him in his absence with the
note of plain treason and infidelity: and he objected unto him a thousand
villainies, Scanderbeg challenges Count Picenin to the battle.
calling him perjured and disloiall: and he sent unto him presently a defiance,
willing him to prepare himself to the battle against the next morning. But
Picenin without returning any answer, about the first watch of the night
following, trussing up his baggage together with Duke John and his french
forces, made a long march the same night and retired himself at last to
Nocera, doubting least that Scanderbeg would Picenin and the French secretly
dislodge to Nocera.
have invaded him before day: for he had heard that the Albanois did often and
commonly use to take the advantage of the night, for the execution of his most
notable and greatest exploits. The day following early in the morning,
Scanderbeg with his army in good order and with full resolution to fight,
took the field: but there was none to be found that would come against him, by
means whereof his expectation being frustrate, he was greatly discontented and
aggrieued that he had lost the opportunity to revenge himself: and he referred
it to some other time. He returned therefore Scanderbeg joins with Ferdinand.
toward Bari, where having taken order and seen all things safe and sure, he
took his way to Vrsara where Ferdinand with his Italian forces did then lie
encamped.

Vrsara is a little town in Apulia, which being seated upon the descent of a
mountain, Description of Vrsara.
is eight miles distant from Nocera, four from Troy, and six from mount
Segian: so that the two armies were not above eight miles asunder. The town of
Segian Segian. Troie. Nocera.
being between both of them, from whence Troie was two miles, and to Nocera
six: in such sort that the common opinion was, that he which could first seize
upon this hill of Segian, was most likely without all doubt to have the honor
of the battle, not only for that the situation of this place would give them
some advantage, but also because it yielded the opportunity of a good and
commodious retraite in case there should be any need to retire: as in
battelles it falls out often and usually. Picenin who made account to be
there first and to get the possession of the place, thought it meet to
encourage his people and to put them in heart by the rehearsal of their valiant
acts, and he spoke unto them in this manner.

There is no man (my good friends and companions) but knows the greatness
Oration of Count Picenin to his soldiers.
of your valor and prowes: and I hold it needless to discourse thereof at
large. Leaving therefore to begin, with the recital of your first deserts, I
will only glaunce at some of your valiant and worthy exploites. Are not you
the men that more then once have broken and put to flight the armies of
Ferdinand in open and set battle: and reducing them to the extreamitie of a
shameful siege, first within Naples, and afterward within Bari? Are not you
those brave warriors which once or twice have scattered and cut in pieces the
forces of the Pope, and of the Duke of Milan, which came to the aid and
succor of the Catalan? what rests then (my good soldiers,) but that you
purchase unto your selves, the Empire not only of Apulia and Calabria, but
even of all Italy? Who shall say you nay? who shall be able to oppose himself
against you? Shall this Ferdinand, whom you have lately vanquished and chased
flying before the fury of your arms? Then turning his speeches to the French
forces:

And you (o valiant and thrice fortunate Frenchmen, the terror and fear of all
Italy and of all the world:) where are now the Romans, who once triumphed
over the whole earth? so often overcome and discomfited by your brave valor in
plain fight and set battle? where is Rome the capital city and Empress of
the world? has she not been made the prey and subject of your fury? All
estates Christian stand in doubt and fear of you: the Infidels the Mahumetans,
and in brief all the Barbarians, and all peoples and nations do fear and
reverence you, flying at the only brute and report of your name. You are the
true warriors; to you it is given by the Fates and divine Destinies: to you
valiancie has the heaven promised the sovereignty, not only of Apulia and
Sicilia, but even of the whole world. Be you therefore constant, resolute and
courageous: be not afraid of these men whom I will shortly deliver unto you
for your prisoners, and I will give you the spoils of their persons, their
arms and their horses. As for Scanderbeg lately come from Albanie with his
Epirots naked or half armed: they ought not to move you, neither are you to
make any reckoning of them: their fashion is to run and course up and down
here and there, rather then with resolution and constancy to enter the combat.
They shall not encounter here with Turks and Asians, who are people delicate
and effeminate: but they shall meet with men stout and valiant, hardened and
enured to the toils and travels of the wars, whose hearts are unconquerable,
and whose bodies be armed and mounted to the advantage. This is the time (my
friends) that we must bring this war to a glorious and happy end, that we
may purchase unto our selves the quiet and peaceable possession of these goodly
towns, this rich champion, and this fruitful country.

There is no doubt but the Count Pycenin was a most worthy and vigilant
Chieftaine, yet did he not rise timely enough that day to prevent the industry
and diligence of Scanderbeg, who was already seized and possessed of the
mountain when the other thought to have gone and taken it. Whereupon growing
very sad and in a manner confounded, from that time forward he was out of all
hope of victory, and (as some say) he adjudged the fortune of the field unto
Scanderbeg. Notwithstanding as that Pylot or Mariner is nothing worth, which
is not able at all times, but only in fair and calm weather, to guide and
govern the ship, and to stand to the helm: so Pycenin, to show that he knew
how to use all fortunes both good and bad, put in execution and trial at this
time all his skill and experience which he had gotten and learned by the
continual practice and exercise of arms, in ordering and disposing his
squadrons against the battle following according to a most exact and perfect
order. And first of all he held it not amiss once again to encourage his
companies, Count Picenin encourages his soldiers.
showing them, that they had no reason to despair of the victory, the events
of war being more uncertain, then in any other human action whatsoever:
and that only virtue and valor which was careless and prodigal of life, was
that which made men to be immortal. This did he speak unto his soldiers,
because he was resolved, to adventure the hazard of a general battle with all
his companies united and in one both Italians and Frenchmen.

The two Generals both on the one side and the other, did not omit by all
means and persuasions possible, to inflame and set on fire the hearts of their
soldiers, in so much that each of them speaking unto them with a loud and high
voice did urge them with these and the like considerations: That every man
should prepare himself both with his arms and in courage to the last combat
and trial of their virtue and fortune: and that they should now strive to
vanquish not for a day but for ever: that they should see the next day before
night, this quarrel decided and concluded between Duke John and king
Ferdinand, whether of them twain should be Master of the field, and give the
law to the Neapolitanes: that the realm of Apulia and Calabria should be the
prize and reward of them that were victorious: that the peril was no less
then the recompense of them whom fortune had determined to frown upon and to
disfavor: for that neither the Albanois nor the French (if they should happen
to fly and to have the worst) had no place of refuge in a strange and unknown
land. Thus those two Noble and generous Princes, those two excellent and famous
chieftaines, and those two armies of rare and undoubted prowes, did prepare and
make ready themselves to the hazard and adventure of the battle, and preferred
themselves each in view and sight of other, in hope either to augment and
increase their forepassed honor and reputation, or else utterly to make an end
thereof, and to extinguish it for ever. Their minds were distracted with
doubtful hope and fear, sometimes regarding their own troops, and sometimes
those of the contrary party: and coming to consider of their forces rather
by the eye then by their reason: they did devise unto themselves all at one
instant, sometimes matter of sorrow and grief, and sometimes of joy and
gladness. That which of themselves they did not remember: the exhortations and
brief admonishments of their Generals did supply: a matter needful amongst
so many nations differing and disagreeing in manners, in language, in laws,
arms, habit, and humors. Scanderbeg put his men in mind of their eighteen
years wars, of his noble exploites and deeds of arms in Asia, in
Macedonie, in Thrace, in Epyre, of so many Chiefetaines and numbers of Turks
and circumcised Miscreants slain by them, and of so many armies of the
Mahometistes which they had overcome and defeated: and if by chance he came to
make mention of any one of his combats, he forgot not the notable deserts and
particular commendations of each man in several. The Count James fell to
recount likewise his famous acts, and the late battelles which he had foughten
to his great honor and commendation both in the Marquesdome of Ancona, in
Apulia, in Naples, and in other parts of Italy.

Scanderbeg dividing his foot forces only into two battallions, placed in the
forefront Order of Scanderbeg his battles against Pycenin.
his harguebussiers, and after them his crossebowes, his archers, and the
slinges, the reregard he enforced with his pikes, both Sclauonians and
Albanians. He did not order his squadrons in gross, but parted them into
several bands, each at large and a little distant one from the other, to the
intent that there might be some space left between each of them, by which the
men at arms and barded horses of the enemies being received in amongst them
might pass and not trouble nor disorder their ranks. This done, he placed the
King in the left wing, being guarded with his men at arms both Neapolitans and
Italians: Moses and Guirize did guard the right side, and with their light
horses being Dibrians and Macedonians, did fill up the empty and void places
between the several squadrons of the vauntgarde, who were willed, that if they
saw the men at arms of the French to charge upon them with their barded
horses, that either they should retire themselves behind the ranks of the
middle troops, or else gallopping and coursing up and down, sometimes here,
sometimes there they should join themselves to the wings either of the right
hand or of the left, to give way unto the footmen, and to abide the shocke
of the barded horses.

The Count James in the mean space arraunged his troops in a marvelous good
Order of the Count Picenin his battles against Scanderbeg.
order of battle* first for the greater terror to the enemy, he placed his
artillery mou(...) upon wheels and cariages, in the head of his battelles:
then followed his Harguebussiers and crosse-bowes intermingled with pikes and
corselets: in the second battalion were the companies of the Neapolitans and
Apulians: who were seconded in manner of a reregard with the Genowais and
Calabrians, flanking the two points of their battelles with the men at arms,
on the right wing the French, and on the other the Italians.

Now began the drums and trumpets on the part of the Arragonois to summon
Battle of Segian between Scanderbeg and Picenin.
every man to do his deuoite: and the soldiers on that side raising a huge
and horrible ^^ye, went so furiously and vehemently to charge upon the enemy,
and with such readiness and celeritie, that their vauntgarde after some fight
was overthrown and beaten back in a manner before their pieces could have the
leisure to play upon the Kings battalions: whereby you may judge of what
importance Sentence. Diligence in the wars of great importance.
industry and diligence are in the wars: oftentimes preventing the
counselles and purposes of the enemy, and troubling and confounding their
order and directions. For the horses were so terrified with the noise of the
ordinance, that they overthrew and disordered their own troops, especially in
the left wing. Moses and Guirize did soon augment and increase the fear and
terror of this affraie: for they very egerly charging and fiercely setting
upon that side, did dis^urnish the maine battle of their horsemen: and some
of their own horses which were in the forefront of the battle near the
artillery, ran in amongst their own Harguebussiers and archers: where
albeit they were grieuouously wounded, yet did they cause a great confusion and
destruction of their own people: insomuch that on the right hand, the men at
arms of France were compelled to turn their backs and to betake themselves
to flight.

When the King Ferdinand perceived the enemy to be in disorder, he increased
their fear by pressing in upon them, so that the battalion of the Neapolitanes
was left bare and naked of her flanckes. This was even then when the infanterie
on the one side and the other, being far unequal in hope and in puissance,
came to affront each other, and to join together. The Albanois at the first
onset began of purpose to recuile and give back a little from the battalion
of the enemy: but anon after all of them at one instant both the wings and the
squadrons, charging and pressing upon them most furiously did soon cause them
to shake and to disrancke themselves, and thus pressing still forward, they
marched on a while as if nothing had stood against them, the hindmost still
thrusting and bearing forward the foremost, in such sort that they had quite
displaced the battalion of the enemies, and made them to leave and forsake
their ground: (a thing which gave them so huge a terror) that it was of great
force and efficacy to break them for altogether. The reregard of the Angeuin
namely, the Calabrians and the Genowaies presently began to yield and to
give ground also: and having their recourse to the battle of the Neapolitanes,
they did not only not sustain and second them, but rather on the contrary
fearing least if they which fought manfully in the forefront, should be
overthrown and discomfited, that then the enemy would break in next upon
them: by little and little they began to recuile. Thus the Genowaies and the
Calabrians began to make away, and turning their backs, one part of them
retired to the second battalion, and another part (as being forsaken on the one
side, and excluded on the other) began to strike in amongst their fellows
that denied to receine and entertain them: so that now you might have seen
as it were two conflicts at once mixed and intermingled together: the
Neapolitanes being forced to defend themselves both from these and from their
enemies. Notwithstanding they would not suffer them for all this to recuile
within their ranckes (were they never so fierce and despitefull) but keeping
close together, and holding their rancks in good order on the open plain, they
repulsed these their troublesome companions who were quite forlorn, both by
their own flight and also by their blows: for fear least being suffered to
enter amongst them, they should cause their battalion also (which as yet was
sure and whole) to be disordered and brought in disairay. By means of this
tumult and great trouble, the place where they fought so obstinately in the
head of the reregard, was so filled and pestered with the dead bodies of those
which were then slain and with weapons, that the passage there was almost more
hard and difficult, then through the thickest of the enemies: but the pikemen
were the first that made themselves way, who passing over those high heaps of
the dead, and of their weapons which lay scattered about: and through the blood
of the slaughtered (which lay most horrible to look unto) followed close after
their enemies to the uttermost of their powers, so that their own rancks
began to grow into disorder. The Harguebussiers and the cross bows when
they saw that their battle being gotten before them was (as it were)
wandering, disioyned and separated from them, began to be greatly astonished
and abashed: Scanderbeg incontinently perceived and manifestly saw the
disorder of the one and the astonishments of the other: whereupon he caused the
pikes to retire themselves back again, and having bestowed those which were
wounded in the rereward of the battle, he led forth the Harguebussiers and the
Archers to the two points for the better strengthening of the pikes and the
middle battle. By this means the conflict began to be renewed and to grow
more cruel and deadly then before, and so continued the better part of the
day. Many there were that fell both on the one side and the other: but the
victory continuing still variable and uncertain, did sway sometimes to the
one side and sometimes to the other: for now were they busied on all sides, and
every man had his hands full. Both sides were equal or not much unlike, in
the quality of their weapons, in practice and experience military, in honor
and reputation, and in the greatness of hope and of the present danger, but
in number and multitude they were nothing equal: for therein the Albanois and
Arragonois were superior and did exceed them, as also in courage and
resolution, and the rather for that they had put to flight both their light
horsemen, and their men at arms: and having chased their first battle, had
given the onset upon the second. Moses and Guirize having pursued and followed
the chase after the enemies horse that were fled, were now returned and in a
readiness to charge in upon the back of this battalion. This last charge and
onset did Victory of the Arragonois.
cause their utter ruin and overthrow: for many were enclosed, and murdered
upon the place, and many being scattered and dispersed as they betook
themselves to maine flight over the large and wide plain: were forced by the
horsemen to turn and return here and there: so that being enclosed and (as it
were) besieged on all sides: what with the bullettes and shot of the
Harguebussiers, and what with the sword both of horse and foot that pursued
them, many of them were shot and many of them were beaten down and slain: so
that the slaughter on all parts was most extreme and pitiful.

The number of those which were counted slain that day in the field, both of
Neapolitans and of their confederates, was valued to be better then four
thousand: of prisoners there were taken about a thousand, besides five and
twenty ensigns and standards. Of the victors there died nere a thousand. The
Count Picenin and Duke John with a few horsemen in their company being
compelled to yield and give place to their ill fortune, did save themselves
after that the combat was past all hope, and they withdrew themselves amongst
the thickest of those that fled, escaping by the goodness and swiftness of
their horses. The Count before his departure had given all good and sufficient
proof of his valor both before and during the whole time of the battle, and
Scanderbeg himself both by his own confession, and of all those (who were
skillful and practiced in arms) did yield him this praise and commendation,
Count Picenin his praise and commendation
that he ordered and martialled his battelles that day with singular skill and
judgment. For, first his artillery was placed in the head and front of his
battles in regard that the force and violence thereof was intolerable. After
it, followed the companies of mercenarie men and strangers arranged in very
good order: against whom he was in hope that the troops Albanois should have
been opposed. After those strange succors succeeded the French battallion, to
keep the other that they should not fly when they thought good, for that
being mingled of so many sorts of peoples (whom desire of gain, and not
theregard of their faith and honor did draw thither) he thought by means of
the French following at their backs, they would be enforced both to abide the
shock and charge of the enemy and also having wearied and sore traveled them
partly with their shot, and partly with the killing and wounding of them selves
in the vauntgard: the violence and fury of the enemy would by this means be
much abated. And therefore had he placed immediately after them the French and
the Neapolitanes, in whom consisted the strength and sinews of their hope: to
the intent that being in all things equal unto the enemy, they might in this
point have the advantage of them, when that they being fresh, whole, and
lusty, should be opposed against the others already wearied and wounded, with
their long fight against them of the vauntgard. As for the Genowaies and the
Calabrians, he had severed them a good space from the rest, as being a people
in whom he had no trust nor affiance whether they were either friends or foes,
and therefore had he reserved them to the rereward.

The Count Picenin after this days service, being (as it were) the last proof
of his virtue, being escaped from the field, went up and down Italy secret and
unknown as a fugitive and vagabond in a very poor estate and disguised
habit, till such time Francis Sforce duke of Millan
as being allured with the flattering speeches, and entising words of Francis
Sforce, then Duke of Millan, who beguiled him under the color and pretense of
a fained marriage, and made him his son in law, and then shortly after sent
him as a friend to King Ferdinand, by whom being received and entertained as an
enemy, he was Count Picenin his pitiful end.
in the end put to a pitiful and cruel death. The Duke John being hardly and
nearly pursued by the horsemen of the King of Albany, by very good hap and
singular Fortune recovered Troy, where he was received and drawn up over the
walls with Duke John his retraite into France.
a cord: and from thence flying away secretly by night toward the sea of
Genes, by good chance he found there a Bark which carried him into France.

The French camp being sacked, and the soldiers enriched with the spoils
Ferdinand returns to Naples in triumph
which they had gotten: the King entered into Naples with great pomp and
triumph, and Scanderbeg with him, the prisoners being led on before them. Then
in sign of gratulation and public joy, all the temples were set open:
solemn processions were made, plays and feasts of all sorts were publicly
celebrated for three days together. These things thus accomplished, Ferdinand
determined in the company of Scanderbeg to take arms for the recovery of all
those towns and places, which were lately Ferdinand recouereth all his
kingdom.
rebelled and revolted to the Angeuins: and so well did he follow and dispatch
this voyage, that in a very short space, he pacified all the country, and
reduced it to his obedience and devotion, by the help and mediation of the
King of Albany. For all of them were more willing to rely upon his word, then
upon the faith of the king: fearing that by reason of their revolt, and the
breach of their faith to his Majesty: he would have dealt very hardly and
injuriously with them: but they were very well assured, that the Albanois
should be so respected by Ferdinand, that if he gave them his faith and promise
in the word of a King, that they should have no wrong nor damage, neither in
their persons nor possessions. Thus by the means and intercession of this
Prince, did the King Ferdinand in few days reconquer his whole estate, and the
Neapolitanes continued under his obeisance in rest and quietness, all former
matters and offenses being for ever forgiven and forgotten.

There remained yet one only difficulty to be remedied within Apulia, which
Scanderbeg also accomplished and effected in good and friendly manner. Within
the town Trana. Frisian.
of Trana, there was a certain Sicilian named Frisian, a man notably fierce
and warlike, who having been sent by Ferdinand (before the coming of the
French into Apulia,) to be governor of the garrison at Trana, had there
settled and made him self very strong: he seeing that the Realm was turned in
a manner topsie turuy by the wars and tumults of the French, had seized upon
that town to his own use, and made him self absolute Lord and Seigniour of
the same, supposing that the King being in a manner spoiled of his realm,
would never be able to recover it again. Daily there came unto him in great
abundance huge troops of lewd and loose fellows, drawn thither by the desire
and covetousness of gain: and with the sweetness which they purchased upon
the Province. The report hereof being come to the ears of Scanderbeg, he had
some speech with the king touching this matter, whereupon being permitted
Scanderbeg goes to talk with Fusian.
to depart from his camp with a small troop chosen forth amongst his own
men, he marched directly on toward Fusian, who being informed that Scanderbeg
came to seek him, he went to meet him very well accompanied. Both the one and
the other of them having singled themselves from their company, and dismounting
from their horses, caused their soldiers to retire on the one side and the
other in equal and like distance, and so came to talk and confer together
all alone. Scanderbeg was the first that boorded him with these speeches.

Brave and worthy knight Fusian: I doubt not but thou have already heard, how
the Speech of Scanderbeg to Fusian.
army of the French being overthrown and discomfited, all things are now in
quiet and peaceable estate, and every man has submitted him self to the
authority and government of King Ferdinand: only thy self (I know not upon
what humor) art alienated from his Majesty: in such sort that in stead of
being his friend, his servant, and his lieutenaunt: it seems that thou do
reject his command and authority, whereat I cannot but greatly marvel.
Notwithstanding (my friend Fusian) if thou will do me the honor to give credit
to my words, assure thy self it shall be for thy good, and thou shall be in
the good grace and favor of the King, which if thou be wise, thou will not in
any sort refuse nor deny: and I promise thee on my faith, that I will cause
thee to find such honor and advancement, as thy self shall in reason demand,
on condition that thou do resign and deliver up Trana, and the fortress into
his Majesty's hands. On the other side, if thou be otherwise minded: I denounce
war against thee as against the Kings enemy, whose fury and indignation, I do
not see how thou can possibly shun and avoid.

Fusian being puffed up with the favor of the popular sort, and with his own
good fortune and prosperity, was become very proud and arrogant, and therefore
he made this answer to the Prince of Albany. That he meant not to leave the
possession of the Answer of Fusian to Scanderbeg.
place unto the King: except he were first satisfied and paid of all his wages
and pensions from the time, the day, the hour, that he first came to the Kings
service, even to that present. And moreover that he would have the chief and
principal place under the King, in the government of his realm and kingome:
With many other such conditions which he did rather prescribe, then seem to
request of the King his Majesty, being notably prejudicial to the honor and
dignity royal, and derogating greatly from the reputation of Scanderbeg, unto
whom he durst make those insolent demands. After which also, he powered forth
many vile and contumelious speeches, both against Ferdinand and the Queen.
Scanderbeg could not any longer suffer this his insolency, but choler and
despite abounding in him, and his countenance beginning Scanderbeg seizes upon
the person of Fusian, and takes him prisoner.
to change, he took him by the neck, and so seized upon him. The
Scanderbegians making have to approach to their master, bound him fast, and
lifted him to horseback without any tumult or trouble: the train and company
of Fusian not any way contradicting them, or opposing them selves against it.
Fusian seeing him self captive and in peril to fall to the mercy of
Ferdinand, began to make fair weather, and was soon contented upon condition
he might enjoy his liberty, to resign and yield up Trana into his hands,
which being accepted, and faith given to that effect: Trana yielded to
Scanderbeg by Fusian.
Scanderbeg entered freely with his company into the place to take possession
thereof: and having assured it with a good and sufficient garrison, he released
Fusian to go at his pleasure: who when he was delivered and courteously
licenced to depart, embarked himself, his train, and all his baggage in a
certain vessel, and so setting sail from the part of Trana, retired him
self into Sicilia.

Scanderbeg after this happy exploit achieved, returned to King Ferdinand:
after which both of them being very glad and joyous to see all troubles and
seditions appeased and suppressed within the Realm, and having provided and
taken good order for the surety and safety of all the towns and places of any
importance, they returned back again to Naples the chief and capital city
of the kingdom, with new joy and exceeding great triumph. And for the better
increasing and honoring of the same, the Bishop of Rome, the Duke of Millan,
and almost all the Princes and Potentates of Italy, in sign of the joy and
great contentment which they conceived for their good Scanderbeg honored with
ambassades and presents from the Pope and other Princes of Italy.
and happy success, did visit the King of Naples and Scanderbeg with most
honorable Ambassades, and rich and sumptuous presents. But above all the rest,
did the Pope honor the Prince of Albany with excellent gifts and rewards: for
he did not only gratify him with gold, silver, and other goods and temporal
things, but he adorned him with most ample and large privileges, prerogatives,
and spiritual graces: making him also a faithful and assured promise, that as
soon as his holiness with the army of the Crusado could possibly get into
Epire, (which he purposed to do very shortly, and to march in proper person
against the Turks:) he would then crown him king of Epire, Macedonie, Thrace,
and Romania, and would commit the army of the Christians to his charge, and
that he should have the command and government of the same, as chief General
of the wars against the Infidels.

By this time was there a full and whole year past and fully complet, since
the arrival of the Albanois into Apulia: now was the war ended and
determined, Ferdinand restored and reestablished in his kingdom, and all
things settled within the province according to his own desire. Scanderbeg
therefore having had long conference with the King touching many affairs of
great weight and importance, was now willing to prepare for his departure, and
to appoint a time for his journey by sea homewardes. Wherefore Ferdinand
(before he would accord or agree to any thing) first caused all his
Chiefetaines and the Captains of his army to be assembled, and in their
presence made a long oration: wherein he gave Scanderbeg great thanks and
infinite praises and commendations, oftentimes repeating and calling him by the
name of Father: and by which ever after as long as he lived he never ceased to
honor him. Afterward he commanded general processions and public prayers
to be said from Church to Church, whereat the King himself, his Court, and
all the people were present, and did assist them in all humility and devotion.
Other like services and religious ceremonies were presented and offered up unto
God for their good and happy victory, as to the sole and only author and giver
of the same. After this he fell to triumphs, as turneies, iustes, and
combattes, to public and solemn huntings, to pleasant spectacles and shows
of all fashions: the which being ended and finished, the King made a great and
bountiful largess amongst the soldiers of Albany: but principally unto their
King for a perpetual sign and memory of their mutual Towns in Apulia given
to Scanderbeg by king Ferdinand Trana. Mount Garga^ or Saint Angel. Sypont.
Saint John de Ronde.
good will and singular love and amity: for besides the inestimable treasures,
horses barded, proud and rich caparizons and such like presents fit for
Knights and men of arms, of singular prise and estimation bestowed upon him:
he gave him also the city of Trana and two other noble and strong places in
Apulia: one of the which was the mount Gargan, commonly called Saint Angel,
where is seated the famous town of Sypont, and the venerable church
consecrated to the honor of Saint Michaell upon the sea Adriaticke: the other
was Saint John de Ronde, all which places with their territories he granted
unto Scanderbeg and his heirs for ever: and he ratified and confirmed his
said gift and grant by good and authentical writings and charters.

To conclude, Scanderbeg having caused the most part of his army to go to
Trana, Scanderbeg takes his farewell of king Ferdinand.
where his ships and galleys did then attend him, and having taken his leave
of king Ferdinand, not without many kind farewels, tears, and tokens of
sorrow, with many friendly embracements and mutual congratulations: he
departed from him at the last, being accompanied and conveyed on his way
throughout Apulia, with many Princes and great Lords of the country: the high
ways also being filled with people who came scattered from all places, both
out of the towns and country to see and to salute him. Thus being come at
length to the Port, and going abord his vessels, as it were in pomp and
triumph: he found the winds favorable, and serving well for his passage.
Wherefore leaving the coasts and banckes of Apulia, he crossed the seas with a
merry wind, and in few days arrived safe and sound with all his troops in his
own country of Epire: some of them landing at Duraz, and some at another
Scanderbeg returns out of Apulia into Epire. Cape de lach.
little gulf called by the inhabitants, Cape de lach: and from thence he went
to Croie, where he found all things in good and prosperous estate. His coming
was no sooner spread and published throughout the Province, but that daily there
arrived unto him new ambassades of the Princes, Lords and estates his friends
and allies in demonstration of their joy, and in congratulation of his good and
happy return. This was the end and issue of the war of Naples, in the
seventeenth year of the reign of Scanderbeg.

The end of the tenth Book.
THE ELEVENTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
MAhomet during the truce between him and Scanderbeg atchieueth many and great
conquests: the war being renewed between them, Mahomet sends diverse of his
chieftains with puissant armies each after other against Sca^derbeg, who
remains victorious against all of them. The Sultan desires peace of
Scanderbeg, which being accorded and concluded, is at length broken by the
Infidels, who suddenly ouerrun and spoil the borders of the Albanois. The
Venetians having their dominions likewise invaded by the Turks, send
Ambassadors unto Scanderbeg, persuading him to renew the war, and to join
with them against Mahomet. Scanderbeg inuadeth and preieth upon the Turkish
territories. Pope Pius the second and the Princes of Christendom, prepare a
voyage or Croyzado against the Turks, purposing to make Scanderbeg General of
their forces. Mahomet desires to reconfirme the peace between him and
Scanderbeg, who absolutely refuses it. Seremet one of the Turk his Bassaes,
is sent with an army against Scanderbeg, by whom he is discomfited. The Pope
being come with the army of the Christians to Ancona in Italy, and ready to
take sea, sickneth and dies: whereupon the voyage of the Christians against
the Turks is broken off, to the great grief of the Albanois. Ballaban Badera
is sent with an army against Scanderbeg, by whom he is discomfited in the
battle of Valcala. Moses and certain nobles of Epire, being over rash in
following the chase upon the Turks, are taken prisoners, whom Mahomet causes
afterward to be executed with extreme torments. Ballaban is again sent
against Scanderbeg, and is defeated in the battle of Oronichea. The third
journey of Ballaban against Scanderbeg, by whom he is again overthrown in the
battle of Sfetigrade. Ballaban and Iagup are sent with two several armies at
one time and by sundry ways, to enclose and oppress Scanderbeg, who meeting
first with Ballaban in the battle of Valcala, puts him to flight, and most
of his army to the sword: and after encountreth with Iagup, who in the battle
of Cassar is slain by Scanderbeg, and his forces likewise slaughtered.
Scanderbeg inuadeth and spoileth the Turkish territories and so returns to
Croy triumphant and victorious.

Whilst that Scanderbeg was occupied in the war of Naples, and that 1460.
The conquests of Mahomet during his truce with Scanderbeg.
the truce continued still in force between him and the Turks, Mahomet had
made great profit and benefit by reason of this advantage, and had notably
enlarged the bounds of his Empire, both in Asia upon the Infidels, and in
Greece upon the Christians. For first of all interpreting it to be a sign and
token of good Fortune, and taking it for an assurance of victory, in that he
had put Vsuncassan to the retraite in the battle of Arsengua, as is before
mentioned. He held on his course, and in an instant subdued Sinope the tountrey
of Mithridates* Trebisond, or Tropez^nd, besieged and won by Mahomet.
Sinope (the country where Mithridates was both borne and buried) and all the
Province of Paphlagonia, and with the like course and success of victory,
having planted his Camp both by sea and by land before the city of Trebisonde,
and having pressed and forced it with extreme fury, in the end he obtained
both the city and all the royal treasures and riches within it, taking
prisoner also the Emperor of Trebizond (named David and his two sons) whom
most cruelly he caused to be put to death. And after he had reduced these
Realms into several Provinces, Piramet king of Caramania.
and added them to the rest of his conquests, he bent his puissaunce against
Piramet, King of Caramania whom he overcame in battle, taking from him many
towns and cities in Cilicia: and as touching Greece, before that time of these
expeditions in Asia, he entered with force of arms into Peloponnesa, commonly
called Morea, and Peloponnesa, or Morea.
deprived the Paleologues of the principality of that Province, by the
dissension of the two brethren Thomas and Demetrius. This done, he being
informed that the Venetians had restored the wall of Hexamile (a work and
building of great antiquity) Hexamile.
he laid waste and desolate the country of Coron and Modon, and by sudden
irruption Modon, or Methone, a place frequented by pilgrims from Venice to
Jerusalem.
ouerrunning it with four score thousand horse, after he had defeated the
Venetians in a bloody battle, and thrust them out of all Morea, he
appropriated the same unto him self, and overthrew the wall before mentioned
from the very foundation, laying it even with the earth, whereas from time of
antiquity it had enclosed the* Isthmus or straight of Corinth, which is a
narrow space of land running about five or Isthmus, a narrow space of land
lying between two seas.
six miles from the Mediterrane sea, to the Arche Pelagus, or sea of AEgeum.
Hereby now you may gather and conjecture, that this fortunate Prince by this
his usurpation of all these countries and estates, did not a little increase the
greatness of his forces and puissaunce. For the country of Peloponnesa, is
the most principal and chiefest part of Greece, both for the nobility, and the
puissaunce of those nations and peoples, which did once inhabit it. And if we
will but behold and contemplate only the site and situation thereof, it will
soon make show, that it deserved the principality and Empire of all Greece, by
reason that it has many goodly gul^es, many points and promontories, many
great and proud cities, and magnificall Provinces, as Achaia, Messenia,
Laconia, or Lacedemon, Argolica, and Arcadia, which is seated (as it were) in
the midst of the country.

This Monarch, whose hopes did aim at nothing else, then the dominion and
Empire of the universal world, being now puffed up in pride, and growing
insolent by the happy success of those his conquests: began to have recourse
to his wonted and former attempts, which was, to invade and ouerrunne
Scanderbeg, thinking to have oppressed and broken him to nothing. For it
grieved him exceedingly, that this only man should extend the glory of his
triumphs so near unto him, and should (as it were) brave him even under his
nose. Wherefore leuying an army of 20000. men, Sinam sent against Scanderbeg
with an army of 20000. Turks.
he committed the charge thereof to Sinam one of his Saniackes, whom de
dispatched away suddenly and speedily, to the intent he should surprise and
take Scanderbeg at an advantage and unprovided. But the Prince of Albany
standing always upon his guard, had after his return to Croy, in very good
time dispersed abroad his espials, and renewed his intelligencers near about
the Sultan: in such sort that he was advertised of the intent and drift of the
Sultan, so fitly and timely, that both he had the leisure to leauy an army, and
was the first that took the field. Notwithstanding he kept himself close and
in covert, attending the approach of the Saniacke: whereof as soon as he had
notice, he marched on against him all the whole night: in the dark whereof,
and unknown to his adversary with 8000* fighting men, both horse and foot, he
seized Scanderbeg marches with an army of 8000. men against Sinam.
upon the mountain of Mocrea, and there quietly expected the coming of Synam,
for there lay his way, and that was the place by which he was of necessity to
pass. There did hetake him so unprovided, and set upon him so suddenly, that
he easily defeated both him and all his army, and that with so notable a
slaughter and butcherie, Victory of Scanderbeg against Sinam and the Turks at
Mocrea.
that more then two third parts of them lay dead upon the place: all their
ensigns and all their baggage became a prey unto the Christians, who enjoyed
it as the reward for their pains and travel. Their General had much ado to
save himself from the fury and heat of the slaughter by the speediness of his
flight: those which yielded them selves prisoners, and whose lives were saved,
were redeemed for money, the which together with the other spoil, the Prince
of Albany freely left unto his soldiers.

About the same time had the Ottoman Emperor sent an other Turk one of his
Assambeg with an army of 30000. against Scanderbeg. Victory of Scanderbeg
against Assambeg at Ocrida.
Chieftaines also, named Assambeg with another army of 30000. men against
Scanderbeg, who having gotten somewhat of this side of Ocrida, was made to
yield so good an account of his voyage, that being vanquished, or rather
utterly broken and wholly oppressed in one only battle: his fortune was such,
that he had good experience as well of the courtesy and clemency of his enemy,
as of his martial force and fury. For as this Turk was furiously and
valiantly fighting in that battle, the gardes of his body being all slain and
his sides left all open, his horse sore hurt, though not deadly, Assambeg
wounded is in great extremity after the loss of the battle of Ocrida.
himself was also wounded in the right arm with an arrow. In this hard plight
and difficulty of all things being both confounded and discouraged, as well by
the remembrance of this fresh discomfiture, as by the grief of his wound, and
(which more troubled him) being overtaken with the darkness of the night, and
but badly accompanied, for every man, as the present danger advised him, had
withdrawn themselves out of the way, and standing more in fear of their
enemies then of the disco^modities of their way in the dark of the night, did
keep themselves close and secret. In this anguish (I say) and grief both of
body and of mind, was Assambeg retired and rested himself upon a little
mountain, or rather in a thick wood not far from the borders of the
Christians and about four miles from their camp, in a country altogether
unknown unto him, and where he was wholly ignorant of all the ways, paths,
and passages. How be it he stayed not there long ere he was discovered by the
vigilancie of the soldiers of the Albanois: for that one of them, who had
been sent before day to discover, and to make search over all the coast, having
diligently surueyed all places, came speedely unto his Captain, and acquainted
him with the whole matter, only in this one point was he deceived, in that by
reason of the shadow of the place and the thicknes of Assambeg hidden in a wood
is discovered and found by Scanderbeg.
the wood, he thought the number of the enemies to be greater then they were in
deed, and so had he assured it unto his General. In so much that Scanderbeg
him self mounting on horseback, did make have in great heat to seize upon
these relickes of his victory, being accompanied with all his cauallary. The
Turks discerning his coming a far off, you need not doubt but it troubled
them greatly, and they acquainted their Chiefetaine with the matter, who was
more aggrieued then all of them. Immediately they fell to consultation, and
resolved upon a course which perhaps was unbeseeming so great a chieftaine and
brave soldiers, and yet was it both safe and necessary: and that was to march
without arms, and without their horses, and so to go and meet the conqueror.
The captain himself, who was the author of this counsel, led the way unto his
company, and was the foremost that went against him, being all over deformed
with blood and filth. Not much unlike to Mark Anthony, at such time as he fled
from the battle of Modena or Mutina, to Lepidus the Triumuir: when he came
near him he took Scanderbeg his horse by the reins of the bridle, and by
three or four good words, he saved the lives both of him self and his
company. For he found his enemy to be wonderfully passionated at his
misfortune, upon the speech which he used unto him.

Whither go thou (quoth he) o Scanderbeg? what would thou? It is not for
Speech of Assambeg to Scanderbeg.
thine honor still to vanquish and overcome thine enemies. Suffer I pray thee,
suffer thy self sometimes to be overcome: for being so vanquished, thy
victory shall be greater then if thou were victorious: and with more glory
and commendation shall thou reckon the triumphs of thy clemency amongst thy
victories, then those which thou have purchased upon thine armed enemies.

The Christian Prince smiling, and turning about to his people: Nothing, said
he, Sentence. Answer of Scanderbeg to the speech of Assambeg.
is more subtle then adverse fortune, nothing is more sharp conceipted or
politic then necessity: o how wisely and eloquently can we speak when we
are conquered, which being conquerours, we know not how to do? And then taking
him by the hand, he said unto him: Assure thy self my friend, thou shall have
neither harm nor injury, if I can help it. And having sent him away, he
commanded, that his wound should be well looked unto, and that he should want
nothing: and afterward Clemency of Scanderbeg to Assambeg. Sentence.
he caused certain of his people to conduct him into some place of surety.
For what thing is there more honorable or commendable, then to know and to be
willing to use mercy and pity to an enemy, who is conquered, miserable, and
afflicted? Scanderbeg marched on with his army, coursing up and down on all
sides here and there, and finding the Province to be clear of all ambushments
of the enemies, he returned to his camp, and from thence near to Croy, where
he solemnized the rest of his joy and gladness for the victory.

Within a few days after came Iussumbeg being sent likewise against the
Epirot, Iussumbeg sent with an army of 18000. Turks against Scanderbeg.
but he followed the same course and fortune that his companion had done, and
he was so much the more likely to be beaten then the other, because he came in
a more weak and feeble estate to seek out that adversary, who was newly
victorious, and was as yet all embrued in the blood of his enemies. For being
entered into Scopia the chief city of Macedony with eighteen thousand men: he
presumed and had determined Scopia in Macedonie.
in his thoughts, that he would march even into the heart and bowels of Epire,
not considering with him self, nor looking into the late mishap of Assambeg,
such was his rashness and temerity. His coming being reported to the king of
Albanie, made him greatly to wonder, that these men could so straungely and (as
it were) so wilfully forget them selves: or rather at their immoderate desire
and insatiable thirst which they had after his blood and life. Then turning him
to his soldiers thus he spoke unto them.

Go to my good friends and companions, you that are borne to travels, or
rather Speech of Scanderbeg to his soldiers, encouraging them against Iussumbeg.
to continual victories: let us go on to meet with this new enemy, and with
this new Captain let us not refuse to do him this honor, who at the first
shocke (I dare assure you) will give us good matter of honor and glory.

Every man with loud clamours and acclamations did applaud his words, and so
prepared them selves to follow their Chiefetaine: who drawing near to Scopia,
and hearing by his vauntcurrours, that the enemy had taken the field, gave the
signal unto his soldiers to give the onset upon them. The Barbarian (who was
not prepared The battle of Scopia between Scanderbeg and Iussumbeg.
neither in courage nor resolution to the combat) received him notwithstanding,
yet so as he seemed to do it with the countenance of one that came rather to
talk of the matter, then to fight. For he did not think that Scanderbeg would
have had either him so greatly in contempt and disdain: or that hardiness in
him self, as that he durst (so far off from his own frontiers) come to
hazard the fortune of a battle within the territories of his enemies: from
whence (if he should be vanquished) he could not have escaped, and where he
could not either repair his forces: or (though he were victorious) be well
assured, nor in safety. This was the reason that the Painim, even at the very
beginning, loosing both strength and courage, did find no course better nor
more expedient, then to turn head and make have away: showing the way unto his
people of a most shameful and ignominious flight: who kept him company
Victory of Scanderbeg against Iussumbeg.
in like manner, excepting some 300. or thereabouts, who preferring their honor
before their lives, died valiantly with their arms in their hands. But they
that fled found themselves in worse case by flying then they expected. For,
whereas they supposed that they might have fled with safety, and should not
have been pursued by the enemy, by reason they were in their own country,
and, as it were, upon their own dunghill: therein they were greatly deceived,
and with those their fellows which Number of Turks slain at the battle of
Scopia.
were before slain in the fight, they made up the full number of 2000. at the
least. There were very few taken prisoners, by reason of the great difficulties
and discommodities which hindered the safe conucying of them, as also because of
the length of their retrait which they were to make, for that the paisants
might have assailed them on their way. Iussumbeg thought to have rallied his
troops, and to have laid some ambushment, or to have dressed some devise for
the entrapping of the enemy: but his soldiers would not by any means hearken
unto him, but holding on their scattered course, they had a greater desire to
return home (though it were with the displeasure of their Prince) then not to
return home at all. And they excused themselves upon this their discomfiture
and overthrow given them by Scanderbeg, which they pretended to be a
sufficient reason and lawful cause of their refusal. But Scanderbeg for all
this wanted not some one or other to be the successor of so many and great
dangers, neither was he at any time without enemies.

Amongst the eldest and most ancient Chiestaines of Mahomet, there was one an
Asiatique named Carazabeg, a very grave and ancient personage, and of special
mark and reputation, by reason of many honorable places of charge, and diverse
Carazabeg sueth to Mahomet to be sens against Scanderbeg.
voyages wherein he had been employed, and had acquitted himself well and
worthily. The Sultan also had him in great account, and having placed him in no
small authority, he retained him near about his own person, as of late also
his father Amurath had done the like. This aged Sire, as if he had been some
young hotspurre, found himself pricked on with the spurs of his glory (or
rather misfortune) which seemed continually to lie in wait to seduce and
entrap the greatest and most notable persons to the intent it might obscure the
brightness of all their former renown, and the merits of their forepassed
triumphs, by the unhappy success of this war of Epire: for neither the late
ignominy and opprobrious spectacle of Iussumbeg, nor the like mishap which had
ever attended upon so many others besides him, nor yet the fatal destiny of the
Albanian felicity, which had continued even to that day, could not any thing
dissuade him, but that he was desirous to prove his fortune against Scanderbeg:
wherefore repairing to the presence of the Sultan, he thus spoke unto him.

Hitherto (most sovereign Prince) and even unto this day, both under thy
Majesty, Oration of Carazabeg, to Mahomat, desiring to be employed against
Scanderbeg.
and under thy father of happy memory, I have heaped up and obtained in a
manner, so many triumphs by my merits, as years by my age and course of life.
But now both the one and the other of them is grievous and loathsome unto me,
and I take no pleasure to remember them, through an extreme despite which I
have conceived, to see Sca^derbeg obtain so many victories: to see the many
ouerthrows and disco^fitures which he has given us: and to see the pride and
insolency of the Albanians. I am resolved (as old and unfit as I am for arms)
to abandon all to the hazard and chance of fortune, and either to bring unto
thee, and to prostrate before thy feet dead or alive this wicked and
ungrateful wretch, sometimes the slave of the house of Ottoman, and now the
king of the unhappy Epirots: to the intent he may be accomptant unto thee for
the slaughter of so many and so great armies, and for the death of so many of
thy noble and worthy chieftaines: or else this head and this throat of mine
shall more and more enoble the glory of his fame and reputation. Give me leave
therefore (most worthy Emperor) presently to levy forces, and to muster an
army to my own liking: I my self will take upon me the charge and managing
of this matter, not as a commander, but as thy minister: and both in the
choosing, the arming and the trayning of the companies, I will not rely upon
any other person, but my self alone will look to the handling and dispatching
of all things. For it is with a notable thief and a famous robber that we have
to do: and the war which we make, is with such a one, as is an arch master
in policies and sleights of subtlety: who is grown haughty and insolent
with his many victories, and who is as it were fatted with the multitude of the
spoils which he has gotten of us.

Whatsoever this Turk demanded, was freely and fully accorded unto him by the
Ottoman, who referred all to his discretion, and added unto his demand an
overplus Carazabeg sent with an army of 40000. Turks against Scanderbeg.
often thousand men: for him self had made choice only of thirty thousand,
with whom he thought to have put this matter in execution, notwithstanding that
it was of so great importance. He sent before him certain spies, whom he
willed to disperse them selves over the country, for to discover and give him
some intelligence of the enemy. Scanderbeg on the other side wanted no good
aduertisements, both throughout the province of Epire, and in Macedonie, and
also in the heart and most inward parts of the enemies country, by means
whereof the journey and coming on of Carazabeg was soon made known unto him,
in such sort that our men had both time and opportunity to make ready their
preparations. But when Scanderbeg heard this news reported unto him, the
report is, that he used this speech unto some that were near him:

If this Chieftaine (quoth he) were not too far stricken in years and over
aged, I Speeches of Scanderbeg touching Carazabeg.
should have feared him alone, more then all his great puissaunce which he
brings with him: (for both of them knew each other very inwardly, and they
had been companions in arms in a certain voyage made into Asia under Amurath)
much better (said he) and more wisely should Carazabeg have done, if he had
made spare and taken compassion of his old age, and especially of his fortune
which seems now to faint and to be over* wearied, and does as it were, repent
her self of the manifold victories and favors which she has bestowed upon
him. Wherefore though he be now fifty years of age, yet being grown as it
were, crazie and decrepit, I have no reason to stand in awe of him, whom even
in the strength and prime of his youth, my self being then but a child and in
a manner a very infant, I did so little fear, that I did even despise and
contemn him.

Having thus spoken, he assembled his forces greater and more in number then
those which he had against Assambeg, by reason of the great fame and renow me
of the Turkish Captain. Then trussing up baggage, he took his way into
Dybria: and from thence with two thousand horse he ran up even to the
confines of the Tryballians Ambuscade laid by Scanderbeg against Carazabeg.
(for in this place was the coming of the Turk expected.) And he laid them in
an ambuscado here and there throughout the mountains, to the intent he might
enclose the enemy in the midst of his forces, and take them at an advantage.
The Barbarian likewise having caused the maine body of his army to stay in a
certain place within Macedonie commonly called Chieri) had sent before 4000.
horsemen, Chieri.
who being discovered, were suddenly charged by the Albanois, the greater part
Turks to the number of 4000. of the army of Carazabeg defeated by Scanderbeg.
of them being discomfited and slain, and the rest being scattered and
dispersed in their flight, carried the news of their misfortune to their
General before that ever he came near to the confines of Epire. He therefore
being before sufficiently weakened with age and sickness, began by the
astonishment of this mishap to grow more faint both in mind and in body: being
not so much aggrieued at the loss of his men, as that his coming was disclosed
and discovered to the Christian. Many and diverse things did he cast and devise
upon in his mind, being in doubt what course to take, and whether it were best
for him to hold on his journey, or else to turn head toward Constantinople,
and to defer this expedition till the next spring: for the Autumn was now in
a manner at an end. In the end, shame and fear of dishonor did so far
prevail with the old man, that he thought it not best to give over the war.
Having therefore in two days space, dispatched almost all his journey toward
his enemy, about the first watch of the night he came to a certain plain,
which they of the country call Liuad, where he The plain of Liuad.
encamped his army, and the same night he set all things in order and
readiness against the time of the conflict: and the next morning he sent an
herald unto Scanderbeg to give him the defiance, challenging him to the
encounter in a set, open, and plain battle, and not secretly and by stealth,
after the manner of thieves and robbers. Scanderbeg terming him a Dotard, and an
old Beldam, told him, he should hear of him ere long: and without any pause,
he went on roundly to give the onset upon him, who was not yet ready to
receive him, but stood consulting upon his business, as the manner Carazabeg
charged by Scanderbeg within his camp.
of old men is. Notwithstanding he sustained the brunt of that charge well
enough, by means of a great shower of rain that fell at the very beginning of
the onset: the which did soon separate them asunder: so that there was nothing
done worthy the remembering. For for three days together, there fell such
great store and abundance of water, that if the Mohammedan had not removed his
host into a higher ground, and more mountainous, it is most certain that the
quarrel had been determined by the destruction and loss of his soldiers in
that deluge and abundance of waters. And yet, as careful as he was to prevent
the danger, a great number of their horses were drowned and lost. The Infidel
taking this to be prodigious, and as a presage Carazabeg retireth secre^ly with
his armi^ out of Epyre.
of his ill fortune, gave over his enterprise, and (as soon as the time and
tempestuousnesse of the weather would give him leave) he secretly withdrew his
forces and dislodged his army, and by long iourneys he bid Epire farewell,
having an intent to return again the next spring, if so be the destinies
would be answerable to the desires of this credulous old man. At his return
toward Mahomet with those forces which he had left, the report goes, that at
the first he found but bad entertainment, and was received with a frowning
countenance: yet afterward he was highly praised, and much made Ambassador
sent by Mahomet to Scanderbeg.
of, because he had so well and carefully saved and preserved his people. But
now when the Ottoman saw that Scanderbeg was not to be forced by arms, he
advised and bethought him self how he might surprise and ouerreach him by
guile and subtil^ies. He sent unto him therefore an Ambassade with presents of
great value, and with letters: the copy whereof is as follows.

Mahomet, Beg, Amira, Sultan of all parts of the world: Lord and Emperor of
the Orient and the Occident, to Scanderbeg Prince of the Albanois and Epirots
sends health.
I know not (my dear friend Scanderbeg) any amity more cordial and hearty,
Letters of Mahomet to Scanderbeg.
nor any familiarity or friendship more fast and sure then that which
proceeds of long and mutual conuersing together, and especially when it
begins in the green and tender age of youthful years, as did the old
amity between us two: who in our first infancy, as it were, at such time as
thou were hostage in the Court of Amurath my father, did for a long time live
together in singular, and almost incredible love and concord. Wherefore (my
good Scanderbeg) as often as I do call to mind both these and other matters
wherewith our age at that time was delighted: and moreover remembering all that
which thou have heretofore done for the service of our Empire, for the house of
the Ottomans, and for the glory and enlarging of our crown and dignity: my
desire and endeavor is to love and to make much of thee with all possible and
most ardent affection. And I protest before God, that nothing can happen unto
me more acceptable or more agreeable in this life, then to see thee near about
me, and for a time to enjoy thy presence. If our soldiers have of late
violently invaded thy dominions, or entered upon thy realm, committing there
any excess or outrage, yet ought not that to be any occasion or impediment to
hinder thee from coming unto us. For whatsoever has been done in that case,
was without our command or knowledge: and (as reason would) I have and do take
it in very ill part, neither does it in any sort displease me that they have
been chastised for their misdeeds, and recompensed according to their deserts.
But omitting these matters, let us return to our ancient amity and alliance,
which does easily persuade and induce me to desire that we may be reconciled,
and that we may have peace each with other for ever from hence forward: to the
intent that by a sacred and indissoluble league and confederacy, the friendly
bond of our old and ancient acquaintance (which has in a manner been
extinguished by our long and continual absence each from other) may now
again be renewed, increased, and strongly confirmed between us. The articles
of our accord shall be these, if so be thou think it good, or that they seem
not injurious unto thee: Conditions of peace propounded by Mahomet to
Scanderbeg.
for I know that it is not for him that desires and demands peace to
prescribe and set down the conditions of the peace. The first thing that we
demand of thee, is that thou suffer our army to have free and safe passage
throughout thy realm and dominions, to invade, ouerrunne, and to make war
upon the country and towns of the Venetians: that thou deliver us in hostage
thy son John, whom we do promise and vow continually to acknowledge and
respect as one of our own children: that the traffike and trade of merchandise
may be free and open for all our subjects throughout all thy Seigniories, as in
like case it shall be for thine over all parts of our Empire. Besides also I do
offer unto thee full power and liberty in all security, safely to come and to
have access unto us. In these cases if thou will gratify and yield unto us,
we do faithfully promise thee in the word and faith of a king, that we will
keep and observe true and continual peace and friendship with thee and thy
people: and that no person what soever shall be more dear, nor more acceptable
unto us then thy self: and we will to the uttermost of our power, defend thy
country from being troubled or molested, either by our own arms, or by any
others whom soever. For other matters, we pray thee to give full credit unto
that which Mustapha our agent shall by word of mouth impart unto thee.

Dated in our Imperial city of Constantinople this second of May, in the
year of the generation of Jesus 1461.

These letters of Mahomet being openly read in a full assembly and general
Counsel of all the Princes, Lords and Captains of Epire: they did all with
one voice and full consent agree and conclude, that they esteemed it to be
greatly to the honor and reputation of Scanderbeg, and of the Estate of
Albanie, that so puissant, mighty and fortunate a Monarch as Mahomet, under
whose yoke and subjection so many realms and Empires, so many cities and
nations had submitted them selves, should now offer himself as a petitioner
for peace, and should require his friendship and amity. This was the
occasion, that all of them with one mind did set down this for their
conclusion, that rejecting all the other clauses and motions propounded by the
Ottoman, they would agree to make peace with him upon this one condition
only, namely: That the mutual traffic and trade of merchandise should be
free and open between them and their Dominions. This matter being thus agreed
on, Scanderbeg returned letters unto the Sultan, the tenor and contents whereof
were in this manner.

George Castriot, named Scanderbeg, Prince of the Epyrots and Albanois, and the
Soldier of Jesus Christ, to Mahomet sovereign of the Turks sends health.
Most noble and renowned Prince, we have received thy letters, and by the
contents Letters of Scanderbeg to Mahomet.
thereof have seen the greatness of thy love and singular affection, which
thou do protest to bear unto me: and which (as thou say) has been
ratified by our old and ancient nouriture and education, and is so bound and
deeply rooted by long use and conversation, that being in a manner converted
into a second nature it shall flourish and endure between us perpetually. Thou
say also, that whereas this our familiarity is (as it were) laid a sleep
and in a manner discontinued, by reason that we have been so far and so long
disioyned and severed each from other, thou have a great and earnest desire to
revive and recontinue the same by some new league of friendship and amity:
the conditions whereof thou do propound to be these. First that thy troops
may have free and sure passage through our country, to invade and endamage the
Venetians: to which thy demand, we cannot, nor may not consent nor agree
without the manifest breach of all right and equity, and without great
dishonor to our royal estate and dignity, for that the Venetians are our
allies and confederates. And as touching thy desire to have my son for an
hostage for the surer confirmation of the peace between us, it might be
peradventure that I would gladly do it, if the affection of a father did not
dissuade and detain me from it. But he being my only child, and of a very
young and tender age, now that it behooves him to be nourished and trained up
in our manners and customs, he cannot be taken from the embracements of his
parents, without the great and singular prejudice both of himself and me. As
for that which thou requirest of me concerning thy subjects and merchants, that
they may have free passage to come and go, to buy, sell, and traffic their
wares and marchandice throughout our Dominions: all my Captains do like and
allow of the motion, and my self also, who do desire nothing more then that
the traffic and trade of marchandice may have his full and free course every
where between us. Moreover thou do inuit me with great show of affection
to come and visit thee, and that I should not doubt to do it in all
confidence and security, to the intent that our mutual sight and conversation
each with other, might satisfy the desire of our so long continued absence. I
do highly commend most worthy Prince, the bounty of thy mind, and the
liberality of thy good nature and disposition, in regard whereof, if my urgent
affairs, and the managing of this my estate would give me leave, or would
afford me any time of leisure and opportunity, I would be so bold and hardy
as to embrace thy good advise and counsel. But what should I do? I have here
my son a very infant, a child of a most weak and tender age, and altogether
unfit and unmeet for the rule and government of this Realm, or the public
affairs of my estate. Moreover, my people (as thou know) is a Nation
altogether impatient of rest and idleness: they are a fierce and untamed kind
of people: and my self do find it a matter of sufficient trouble to rule and
govern them in good order. Nevertheless as soon as I shall see a fit and
convenient time I will not fail to come unto thee, and I will obey thy
pleasure in that behalf.

From our camp the 30. of May, 1461.

These letters being delivered to the Turkish Monarch as soon as he had perused
and read them, he presently replied unto them by other letters written to this
effect.

Mahomet Beg, Amira, Sultan, and Emperor of all parts of the world: to
Scanderbeg Prince of the Albanois and Epyrots.
Thou have written unto me by Mustapha our agent, that of those conditions of
Letters of Mal^met to Scanderbeg.
peace which we offered unto thee, there is not any but one only that likes
thee: namely, that our merchants may lawfully and freely transport and sell
their commodities: and upon this condition only thou do make offer of peace
unto me, alleging, that such is the will and mind of thy Captains. I am
content to accept of it, and as touching thy other excuses I do take them in
good part. And therefore Scanderbeg I do promise thee faithfully, that all
that which thou for thy part do demand of me is very grateful and pleasing
unto me: and I do willingly accord to the minds and good liking of thee and
thine. I do here swear unto thee by the great God whom I call to witness,
that I will observe this peace with thee, most sacred, perpetual and
inviolable during our lives, so that thy self do not first infringe it, or
give occasion to violate it. And to this end thou shall receive these present
letters signed with our own hand, and sealed with our imperial and ordinary
seal: in token and assurance of the strength and confirmation of this our
peace, that it shall be firm and permanent. For which cause also we desire
thee (if so thou please) to subscribe these of ours likewise and to firm them
with thy accustomed and usual seal, that we may have some testimony of thy
intent and meaning. Moreover we pray thee to take order throughout all thy
Dominions that upon the conclusion hereof, open proclamation may be made, and
public notice may be given by good solemn edicts to all thy subjects of
this peace and league concluded between us: which we likewise for our parts
will cause to be done throughout all parts of our Empire. And to the intent our
love and good will toward thee may be the more apparent, I will that thou
should understand, that of our own free and proper motion, and of our
frank and pure liberality we do grant unto thee, and are well content that
thou shall freely, lawfully, and entirely enjoy, hold, and keep all that
which by force and strong hand thou have taken and won from Amurath our late
Father: and that thou shall quietly possess and retain it, as if it had ever
been thy ancient inheritance, and descended unto thee from thy ancestors,
and we do absolutely renounce and release unto thee, all the right,
prerogative and authority which we have at any time heretofore had unto the
same: and we do give, grant, and confirm the same unto thee, protesting that
from henceforth we will approve and allow thee for the true and lawful King
of Epyre and of Albanie, and so will we always repute and entitle thee.
Neither will we at any time hereafter molest and trouble thee with our forces,
as I have already sworn and protested: provided that thou give us no just
cause or occasion thereunto. Wherefore we do expect that thou send unto us a
copy of these presents sealed with thy Seal, by this our Ambassador, unto
whom thou may give credence touching any thing which he shall declare unto
thee on our behalf.

Given in our Imperial city of Constantinople the two and twentieth day of
June, and in the year of the generation of Jesus 1461.

Forty days were fully past and expired since that the Turkish Herald made
his first voyage to Scanderbeg about the treaty of this peace, at such time as
he returned now again with this second charge and commission for the full
ratifying and concluding of the same according to the mind and liking of the
King of Albany, who having received it, caused the same to be read openly
before all his Princes and Chiefetaines whom he had assembled to that intent
and purpose. All of them were well contented and did allow of the peace, as
being for the honor and benefit of the whole Province: wherefore the matter
being thoroughly concluded and past between the two Princes, the peace was
solemnly and public proclaimed in all the quarters Peace between Scanderbeg
and Mahomet.
and principal places of their Realms and Dominions, to the great joy and
contentment of them all in general: and it was faithfully kept and observed
between their peoples and subjects for the space of two years or
thereaboutes, till such time as the Barbarians and Infidelles were the
infringers and breakers of the same. The occasion of the breach thereof I
think needelesse to be delivered, considering that the only reason that led
them to desire this peace, was that they might with the more ease enlarge and
amplify their Empire, by the damage and detryment of others, and that the
Epyrots in the mean while might be lulled a sleep in security. Now
therefore they did show them selves to be the first breakers of the league,
and they violated the faith which had been solemnly sworn 1463. The peace
broken and violated by the Turks who invade Epyre.
and vowed, inuading in hostile manner the lands and territories of the
Albanois from whence they carried away an inestimable prey and booty.
Scanderbeg finding himself highly aggrieued at the matter, complained thereof
by many letters and ambassades sent of purpose unto the Sultan. But all the
answer he had of him, was, that it was done unknown to him and without his
consent and priuitie. And he fed him with good words and fair promises, that
he would take order to see it remedied, and feigning himself to be displeased
with those that did it, he caused some part of the booty to be restored.

This happened about the same time, that the Infidels did likewise ouerunne
Venetian Dominions invaded by the Turks. Gabriell Treuisan Ambassador from the
Venetians to Scanderbeg.
and pill the Dominions of the Venetians, which was the occasion, that the
Senate of Venice (being in league and joined in a most straight bond of amity
with Scanderbeg) did send unto him their ambassador Gabriell Treuisan to
exhort and instantly to pray him to denounce open war against Mahomet, and to
renounce the peace and amity made with the Infidel: which he might easily
do, and with a good conscience, for that he had first broken and violated the
couenantes of their compact and agreement, and had falsified his faith
publicly given for the observation of the peace between them: he advertised
and warned him to open his eyes, Persuasions of Gabriell Treuisan to
Scanderbeg, to renew the war against Mahomet.
to awaken his spirits, and to prevent the peril which was now near at hand
and imminent over all Christendom, inferring that though the mischief were
but now in breeding, yet it would not be long ere it would seize upon all
Europe, if it were not speedily prevented. That he might clearly see and
perceive, how this Traitor and perjured wretch, had not for any other cause
made peace with him, but only of a mind purposely bent and disposed to
perjury and infidelity, and to the intent that after he had imposed the yoke
upon other Christian Princes and Estates his neighbors, and had by such
guilefull devises augmented his force and puissance, and enlarged his Empire,
that then he might all at leisure, and with more ^ase bring him also to be at
his discretion. That there could not be any such friendship or amity between
the Turks and the Epyrots, for that they were even by nature enemies each to
other. That he should note and observe it well, how that the Infidel (after he
had once assured himself not to be troubled by the arms of the Albanois) had
suddenly bent and converted his forces* against the Rascians and Triballians:
and having brought them under his subjection, he went against the Thracians and
the Illirians, and last of all having subverted and abolished the Empire of the
Greeks, he adjoined the Empire of Trebisond likewise to his own crown and
Monarchy. Now therefore that he had surmounted and made a conquest of all
others: and that fortune seemed to smile upon him in all his actions, what
other thing rested there for him to enterprise, but to oppress and swallowe up
him also, and so to surprise all of them one after another? That it behooved
them therefore betimes to look unto it, and that joining their forces and
meames all in one, it were far better to have him for their open and
professed enemy, then for their cruel and covetous Lord and Master. That it
were mere folly to think that the intent and meaning of the Turk was only to
spoil, waste, and destroy the Provinces and Dominions of the Christians, and
not to extirpate and abolish their religion: for the very name and profession
of Christianity was so odious and hateful to those Miscreants, as their whole
drift and meaning is to root out both the knowledge and the remembrance there
of from the face of the earth. Wherefore the most safest, fittest, and shortest
course for them was to get the start of the Infidel, and in time to oppose
themselves against the mischief, rather then to stay till they should find
themselves oppressed by their enemies, and then to go seek a remedy for
their wounds. That all the peoples and nations of Christendom did call upon
him, entreat him and inuit him thereunto: that the most noble and famous
Senate of Venice by name, did instantly pray and request him to betake himself
to arms, offering to furnish him with gold, silver and men, and with all other
things and provisions whatsoever that should be needful and necessary for
such an expedition.

Scanderbeg having heard these* reasons and persuasions of the Venetian, albeit
of himself he was not unresolved in his own opinion, yet because he used not
to determine upon any matters of consequence without the advice of the people*
he called a council of all his Chieftaines and Colonels: where after long
debating and discoursing Answer of the Albanois to the Ambassador of the
Venetians.
upon the matter, there was not so much as any one of them who had a desire to
renew the war with the Mahometist, for that the Sultan himself seemed to the
uttermost of his power to shun and avoid it, and was unwilling to enter
again into arms: and the rather because he had of late caused the most part
of the booty to be restored, which (as he protested) his soldiers only in
sport and of a certain military licentiousness had taken and carried away out
of Epyre. Hereupon the Ambassador having heard this answer and resolution of
the Albanois, departed from thence very sad and sorrowful for this repulse:
and he took his way to the Archbishop of Duras, whom he knew to be in
wonderful good credit with the King of Albanie, and that all the people of
Epyre had a marvelous good opinion of him, in so much as there was not any
thing (were it never so hard and difficult, but if he pleased to undertake it,
he could persuade them unto it. The cause that made him to resort unto this
personage, was to see if he could persuade him to take the matter in hand, and
to deal with the King and his Captains to make open war upon the Ottoman.
For he was as yet in some hope, that the case was not altogether* desperate.
This Prelate being most affectionate to the service of the common wealth of
Venice, Paul Angel Arch bishop of Duras, his descent and virtues
in regard of the reverence which he bare to that Senate was content to make a
journey to Scanderbeg. This Archbishop being an Epyrot borne, and in the city
of Driuasta, was the son of Andrew Angel (of whom we have heretofore made
some mention) he was a man of excellent conceit and understanding, of
incomparable* cloquence, perfectly well seen in all good letters both divine
and human, and not ably learned in the languages both Greek and Latin, and
therewithal his gravity and integrity of life was so singular, and so great
was his zeal and feruentnesse in the Christian religion, that it purchased him
high praise and commendation with all men. And Scanderbeg had him in great
honor, reverence and estimation in regard of his modesty, sincerity, and
vncorrupt life: and the people of Albany did always hearken unto him and
believe him, as if he had been some divine Oracle. Now this personage coming
to see Scanderbeg, and having humbly besought him, that he would assemble his
Captains and the several companies of his soldiers, enforced himself by his
persuasions to induce them to resume their arms, and to renew the war
against the Turks, speaking unto them in this manner.

The divine Plato (most worthy Prince) did affirm those co^monweales, realms,
The oration of the Archbishop of Duras* to Scanderbeg and the Epirots
persuading them to renew their wars against the Turks.
and Empires to be most happy and fortunate, which were governed by men of
wisdom and virtue. The truth whereof we our selves do see more clear then
the daylight to be now verified in the people and estate of Albanie, living
under the rule and command of thy Majesty, a most sage and virtuous Prince,
and a peerless and invincible Chieftaine. Good reason therefore had the Kings
and Potentates thy next neighbors to elect, choose and nominate thee alone for
their worthy Chief and General, as being sent from heaven to defend and
protect their crowns and estates from the rage and fury of the Ottomans, and
from the fierceness of the Barbarians, as they have been hitherto most
excellently well defended and preserved under the protection of thy arms and
the valor of thy soldiers. The which being well perceived by Mahomet a most
subtle and wily Fox (who lies continually in wait to entrap and beguile all
Christians, and is the most cruel and vehement persecutor of the Christian
faith, far exceeding all that ever lived) he having a greedy desire to
satisfy his brutish and extreme hatred conceived against the name and
profession of Christianity, by his crafty and cunning dissimulation (a
thingifamiliar and usual to the house of Ottoman) has gotten and procured
thee to conclude a peace with him, condescending gladly unto such laws and
covenants as it pleased thee to prescribe unto him, only because he would not
be molested and troubled by thy arms, of which he stood in doubt more then of
any thing else whatsoever. But alas (most sage and prudent Prince) who is there
that cannot discern and discover, how this Barbarian by a barbarous kind of
craft and deceit, has drawn thee to this treaty, and has fradulently won
thee to this peace, only first of all to root out the other Princes thy
neighbors, that afterward he might come upon thee also as he has already
begun, and partly put in practice? where are the Rascian Princes? where are
the Kings of the Illirians or Sclauonians? what is become of the Emperor of
Trebysond? See how this traitor even now of late against his own faith, and
all couenantes and rights of the law of Nations, has bent his forces against
thee also, wasting and ^acking thy Province, and by daily inroades and
continual invasions does trouble and vex thy allies and confederates. For who
can express the immortal rancour of this tyrant against thee? do thou
think, that he will suffer the death of his father, such huge slaughters of
his armies, so many murders of his Captains and Chiefetaines to remain
unrevenged? Is it possible that thou can repose any trust and confidence in
the words of this infamous deceiuer? or can thou admit his excuses? do
thou think that he will keep his promise and faith with thee, who never yet
had any faith in him, nor ever to this day did keep his faith with any man
living? Good God, who can number the villainies and mischiefs of this fellonous
and cruel tyrant? and yet to let them pass in silence and untouched, I hold
it no less then plain impiety. For to inueigh against one that is
notoriously wicked* and to make them known unto the world which are the
authors of vice and wickedness, is a thing not only delectable and
delightful, but it is greatly profitable and beneficial: because that men
being terrified by their examples, may abstain from mischief and vicious
actions. And therefore as virtue ought not to be suffered to go unrewarded or
to be without commendation, so ought vice likewise to be checked and
reprehended. For by the one and the other of those twain, do we reap like
fruit and benefit both by the exalting of the good and the suppressing of the
wicked. This then is a thing both just and reasonable, that they which are
vicious and lewdly given should hear their wickedness openly reproved and
condemned: and above all others this Turkish tyrant Mahomet, as being one that
far surpasses and excels in all kinds of mischief and villainies: whose
life, manners, and detestable deeds, I hold it not amiss briefly to run
over, and to lay open, to the intent they may be the better known unto thee,
and that thou may the sooner shun and eschew them. First of all, to say
nothing of his original and offspring as that he is descended of the Scithians,
issued out of a base village called Otmanach from whence proceeded the family
of the Ottomans: this Mahomet being endowed with a notable vigor and
dexterity both of spirit and of body, but of a most perverse and mischeeuous
nature, is become the common enemy of mankind, a cruel bloudsucker, a chief
ringleader to all vice, a Prince of all wickedness, delighting in the death
and destruction of men, the father of all mischiefs, and an insatiable
murderer. And as his ancestors were of little better disposition, so has he
retained this barbarous fierceness and intemperance, perseuering in the whole
course of his life in one and the same perverseness of a most crooked and
devilish nature. From the very beginning of his youth, he has ever had a
singular delight in wars, murders, rapines and dissentions, and in these
has he always been trained and exercised. A man of a most stout courage and
audatious, and withal variable and unconstant, full of deceit and double
dealing, a deep dissembler in all his actions, greedy of other men's goods,
burning in his own lusts and desires, and continually covetous of things
immoderate and impossible. First of all there grew in him an unmeasurable
desire of money, and afterward of Empire and dominion: his soul being
plentifully furnished with wicked and damnable arts, wants not corrupt and
lewd lusts, a most shameless ribaud, a common adulterer, an inuenter of new
vices which even nature it self has in horror and detestation. This is that
same Mahomet, who of an ambitious humor strangled his own natural brother,
and with notable treachery and infidelity murdered the Princes of Rascia, and
the King of Bosnia: and all those which were of their blood and lineage, some of
them he brought into miserable bondage and servitude, others he deprived of
their sight, and put out their eyes, or else mangled them in some part of their
bodies. What should I speak of infinite others, upon whom he has practiced
all kinds of torments? and I do verily believe that in the end, if he find
none elsewhere upon whom to execute his monstrous cruelty, he will not spare
to use it against him self, so infinitely is his nature inclined to
fierceness and inhumanitie, that the wrathful and fiery rage of his mind
can never be contented or satisfied. For toward God his soul is mostimpure,
toward men it is dangerous, and it never cease from plotting and contriuing
how to work the damage and ruin of others. He makes no account of the
amity or enmity of any man, but only to serve his own turn. He regards
not to keep a mean or measure in any thing, but commits all kind of
villainies and cruelties against his friends and against his own subjects. He
spoyleth and robs the temples both in public and in private, he profaneth
all holy and sacred things, he polluteth all things, he seizes upon every
thing, he makes no difference of honor and dishonor, of shame and
shamefastness, of honesty and dishonestie, of divine things and of human
things: but he mingleth and confounds them one with another. All those to
whom he ever gave any faith or made any promise, has he not contrary to his
faith and his own covenants, either subdued them or slain them, or enthralled
them? Is it therefore any novelty most worthy Prince, if this perinted Mahomet
do not keep his word and promise with thee? especially seeing that he being
defiled and polluted with all kind of vice, does possess impiety (as it were)
by descent, and his perjury is hereditarie unto him. Trust not therefore to
this tyrant, build not upon his promises, but shake off his acquaintance and
repute that peace for dissolved and broken which he was not afraid first of
all to infringe and violate, and let it not cause thee to refrain from
inuading his dominions with sword and fire. Provide I say, provide for thy
self and thy estate (most prudent Prince) for fear least the Barbarian do by
his trains entrappe and oppress all of us. This false traitor who is so well
beaten and practiced in fraud and subtlety, deuiseth nor meditateth upon
nothing else, but only how he may destroy and extirpate the faith of Christ,
for the which (as thou know) thou did once determine, yea thou did
vow by a solemn oath, that thou would always labor and travel even to
the death: and I do well remember, I have oftentimes heard thee say, That
only for the defense and preservation thereof, thou did think thy self
to be created and to be borne into this world. What reason then have thou, o
Scanderbeg, (pardon me I beseech thee in speaking it) to lay aside thy arms?
what, will thou now live for thy self alone? do thou think that thy
estate will be little or nothing the worse, in that thou being an old soldier
do now sit still and do nothing? is it not a shame that any man-should see
that same ancient liveliness and quickness of spirit in so excellent and
worthy a Prince, now to wax rustie through idleness, and to vanish away to
nothing? the stirring spirit of thy good friend Mahomet is not idle: he does
not pass away the time in sloth, nor sits still as thou do. He
accustometh himself to waking and watching, he labors and bestirreth
himself, and he hasteneth with all possible speed and celeritie, to defile and
profane the Gospel of the son of God: to ouerwhelme the ship of blessed
Saint Peter: to tear and rend in pieces the coat of Christ our savior being
without seame: following therein the steps of his ancestors, and the
traditions of his false Prophet, who ordained that the name of Jesus Christ
should be persecuted as profane and odious: and that the blood of the innocent
and faithful Christians should be spilt by those which were his followers:
hence is it, that this bloody hangman has continually more then any other,
pursued the faith and religion of the Christians with a most mortal and deadly
hatred: against whom if thou most worthy Prince, do not display thy arms:
if thou do not advance thy forces: if thou do not invade and make war
upon him, it is not to be doubted, but that all men generally will repute and
hold thee for faint hearted, fearful, and given over to sloth and idleness.
Have thou not heard how all the Kings and Princes of the Catholic faith
together with the sovereign pastor of the church have conspired against this
bloody tirant and are fully determined by God his assistance to pursue and
persecute him with all their power and puissance, and to expel him wholly out
of Europe? Already has the holy father sent forth his Bull, and published the
same throughout all Christendom, by virtue whereof all those Kings and
christian Princes, are to have full remission of their sins as soon as they
shall come to accompany the supreme Bishop and shall march with him against
this cursed enemy both of God and men. Wherefore the Venetians, both the Duke
and the Senate also, who have made incredible

preparations both by sea and land, and the Popes holiness likewise, and all
the Christians in general do conuite thee, do call upon thee, and they do
nominate and appoint thee to be their chief and principal leader, as a Prince
most worthy of this charge in so holy a war and expedition. And as soon as
his holiness shall be arrived on this side the sea, and shall have made his
entry within Duras, he is determined to crown thee King of Epyre and of
Albany. What do thou then o Scanderbeg most fortunate and happy Prince?
wherefore do thou temporize? either must thou from henceforth for ever give
over to bear arms and forgo the wars, and so quietly submit thy neck unto
the yoke of the Infidel, or else thou must contend with this common enemy,
and thou must not in any case yield unto him either in patience or in virtue,
with whom thou art to contend, for the total sum of supreme power and
soueraignitie. Stir up once again the vigor of thy haughty courage and of
thy puissant forces, call together thy Chieftaines, leauy men and soldiers
from all parts, inuit the Princes thy neighbors and confederates, dress in a
readiness, and dispose in order thy squadrons and thy legions: march on before
the general assembly of the faithful, and the college of Christians,
conform thy self to the will and counsel of the universal Bishop, purchase
thou pardon for thy own offenses, and for thy army likewise. Behold thy
friends the Venetians have sent me hither to declare these things unto thee, to
summon and inuit thee, to exhort and persuade thee; to the intent thou may
conioyne thy forces with their forces, thy ensigns with their ensigns, and
thy troops with their troops. Thou know that the Venetians are most
Christian Princes, most bountiful, and most puissant both by sea and by land:
they do promise and proffer unto thee, gold, silver, and men, in all
plentiful manner. Go to then Scanderbeg, now or never, show thy self truly
to be Scanderbeg: thou who art the honor and the glory of Princes: be thou
the foremost man with thy bands to war upon the miscreants: invade his land,
give him just cause of fear and terror, even to him I say, who having broken
his covenants and falsified his faith, and violated the peace, did first
provoke thee to betake thy self to arms: for all laws and all rights do
openly Sentence.
permit and allow this for lawful: That faith and promise is not to be
observed toward such as have first violated their faith and fidelity. March
on therefore, march on hardily before the Catholic army, give the first
charge and attempt upon thy enemy: denounce open and general war to the
Barbarian: prepare the way to the sovereign Pastor of Christendom: for
behold now Pope Pius, behold the Venetians, behold the French and the Almaines,
the Spaniardes, the Flemmings, the Hungarians, the Bohemians, the Polonians,
the Italians, and briefly, all Christian nations and peoples do follow after
thee, and they do come to help and to second thee: now therefore will not
this Pagan, this Mahometist be ever able to resist so many Kings, so many
Princes, so many nations and warlike armies: he will soon betake himself to
flight, he will soon forsake and forgo Europe: the pride and insolency of
the Ottoman, his fraudulent and deceiptfull dealings, his secret trains and
wicked devises will now profit him little or nothing: his wonted policies and
sleightes will not be able to help him. Nevertheless it is needful that thou
be circumspect and provident, and thou must use singular prudence and wisdom:
for that as soon as this wily and crafty fox shall perceive these
preparations to be made against him, he will speedily send his Ambassadors unto
thee to flatter thee, to entise thee and to diswade thee from taking arms
against him: but harken not unto him, alienat thy mind from his wicked and
perverse nature, stop thy ears against his flatteries and smooth persuasions:
thou art sufficiently acquainted with the inward affections of his heart: thou
see well enough what a manner of man he is: and there was never any one in
this world to whom the frauds of the line and house of Ottoman were more
perfectly and better known, then they are now discovered and laid open unto
thee.

This oration being pronounced by the Archbishop of Duras with great
vehemency, Scanderbeg withdrewe himself to counsel with his Chieftaines and
soldiers, and the matter was long and doubtfully debated between them. There
were two especial yet diverse and different opinions: the one which argued
that the spirits and thoughts of the Albanians were now estranged from deeds of
arms (as it is commonly seen, that the sweetness of gain and interrest does
corrupt and oastardize our spirits, and by little and little does make them to
degenerate into another nature) Sentence.
they would in no case hear any speech of renewing the war with Mahomet, but
they wished that the covenants and conditions of the peace concluded between
them should be in all points observed and fulfilled: of the wdich (said some
of them) there does proceed great benefit and commodity: the people, the
towns and cities, growing rich and welthy, and their profit was like daily to
be augmented: besides that, the Turkish monarch had restored in a manner all the
pillage which had been taken upon the country of the Albanois. The other
opinion was clean contrary: for they held that in any case it was needful to
have recourse to arms, and that they ought not to trust to the words of the
Sultan who never kept his promise with any, especially with any that was a
Christian: and that so much the rather they ought to do it for that he had
first broken the peace, and had violated the sum of the capitulations past
between them. Moreover that there was little or no faith to be given to the
tirant, or to his promises, which tended to no other end then to draw them on
by deceit and cunning, and to entertain them with fair words now that he saw
all the Christians joined in league against him: and that shortly he was like
to feel the weight and burden of their fearful and terrible forces to the
singular damage of the circumcised: which was the only cause that kept him in
fear and awe, and that brought him to this point to promise wonders: that
otherwise he would never have suffered them to rest in quiet nor would have
restored the booty which had been taken: that therefore it behooued them
without delay, and with most cheerful and resolute minds, to begin the war
against this common enemy of the Christian faith, the preservation whereof was
to be preserred before their own particular safety and commodity: and so much
the rather, for that the head of the church did mind to be there in person, and
to come with all his forces of Christendom in arms against the Mohammedan.
This latter opinion being held as the best and most sound, and being also most
agreeable to the mind and liking both of the King and the better part of his
Captains, was allowed and chosen as being for the good and benefit of them
all: and it was fully concluded and agreed, that they should renew the wars and
take arms for the defense of the common weal of Christendom. Besides they
held it requisite, and an act well beseeming Christians, to be obedient to the
supreme Bishop and the vicar of Christ, and to adhere close to the congregation
of the faithful. Moreover there was not any one of them but would have made it
scrupulous to reprove the persuasions of the Archbishop, whose counsels and
admonitions they held it no less needful to observe and obey, then as if they
had been the divine precepts. For (as we have already said) the gravity, good
life and worthy example of this personage had purchased him wonderful
authority amongst them: insomuch that all matters were managed by his counsel
and sage advise: for that ordinarily being with the King in court, Scanderbeg
would ever harken and give ear unto him, and had learned of him all the
ancient histories and worthy exploits both of the Greeks and Latins: and he
was also maruellously well beloved of all the Chieftaines, Lords and Princes
of Albanie. The war therefore being generally concluded and agreed on,
commissions were directed War renewed by Scanderbeg against the Turks.
forth and commandments were given to diverse Captains to muster soldiers on
all sides, and to assemble and leauie an army, and that as soon as it should
be in a readiness, they should without all delay set forward against the
enemy.

Upon the rumor and report of this news, those soldiers of Scanderbeg which
lay in garrison upon the frontiers were the first that took the field, and
they ouerranne Epirots invade and ouerrunne the Turk his territories.
and ransacked the country of the Ottoman with great violence and terror to
the inhabitants: and having far and wide forraged and wasted all places, they
retired with a notable prey and booty, driving away with them at the least
60000. head of kine, and oxen, 80000. sheep, and 3000. mares with their coltes
which were of the race and breed that the Ottoman had for his own store: and
yet this was not all: for being entered very far into the province of the
Barbarian, they put all to sword and fire, and left not standing upon the
ground either trees or any thing else bearing fruit, but filled all parts with
horrible fear and terror: the tidings whereof when it came to the ears of
Mahomet, he was newly enflamed and incensed against Scanderbeg beyond all
credit and imagination: nevertheless afterward stroking his forhead with his
hand, and suppressing his extreme grief, the report is, that with a
cheerful and gladsome countenance, he uttered these words. What meanest thou
Scanderbeg? what do thou think to do unto me, who am the great commander
and supreme Prince both of the Orient and the Occident?

Notwithstanding having conceived and imprinted a deep revenge in the inward
Speech of Mahomet upon the invasion of his territories by the Epirots.
thoughts of his heart, he then swear and vowed the ruin and destruction of
Scanderbeg. But by reason of the great report and brute that ran of the
Christian forces, and for that he had heard how they were already raised and
on foot ready to march against him, he was greatly troubled and perplexed:
and therefore he thought it best to have recourse to his wonted cunning and
sleights (familiar to the Ottomans) and he sought by his trains and devises,
to reconcile himself unto him. Now was it commonly reported and it ran rife in
every man's mouth, that Pope Pius had assembled Pope Pius and the Christian
princes prepare a journey against the Turks.
from all parts of Christendom great and huge forces, and that he would within
few days set forward against the Turk: and that the first thing which he
meant to do after his arriual into Epire, and after he had celebrated a mass
within Duras, was to honor the Archbishop of that place, with the hat and
honor of a Cardinal, and to crown Scanderbeg King of the Albanians and
Epirots; whereupon the infidels also gave it out openly amongst themselves:
that if Scanderbeg did take the field as the general and supreme commander in
this enterprise, there was no doubt but the victory would fall to the
Christians: and they were all of an opinion, that the Turkish forces would be
hard bested, and that they could not but be reduced to a most desperate estate:
so great an astonishment and horror had the very name of Scanderbeg brought
upon them. And this was the principal and chiefest reason that made Mahomet to
beat all his brains, and to set abroach all his plots and cunning devises to
allure Scanderbeg unto him: to fall to a new composition with him for all
matters, and to reconfirme and reassure by a solemn oath both on the one part
and the other, the first covenants and conditions of the agreement past
between them: he wrote unto him therefore certain letters in manner and form
following.

Mahomet, Beg, Amira, Sultan, Emperor of the Orient and the Occident, to
Scanderbeg King of the Albanois and Epirots.
I have always heretofore admired the excellency of thy faith and thy rare
integrity Letters of Mahomet to Scanderbeg desiring to renew the peace between
them.
and instice (most noble and princely Scanderbeg:) and therefore I cannot easily
be persuaded, that so generous and magnanimous a Prince, should so
inconsiderately falsify his faith and break the peace established between
thee and me. For (as I am given to understand) thou have with great forces
invaded my lands and territories, and turning all things vpside down in most
pitiful and foul disorder, thou have gotten and carried away an inestimable
booty and infinite goods from me and my subjects. Of the which excess (as I am
credibly informed and fully persuaded) the Venetians have been the cause and
motive: by whose instigation and enticement, thou have been pricked forward and
incited against us. By their practices and flatteries have thou been drawn on
to make war upon me, openly showing thy self to be a breaker of thy
promises, and the violatour of the rightes and the law of Nations. Wherefore I
neither do, nor will attribute any or very little fault and blame unto thee,
considering the cause of the ignominy rather then the ignominy it self: but I
do impute the whole offense unto them who have been always my sworn and
professed enemies. But what harm is this unto me, o Scanderbeg, who am the
Lord and commander of so many peoples and Provinces? do thou think that
thou have done me so great or notable a displeasure, or that thou have wrought
any great damage to our crown and dignity, by wasting and spoiling of our
fields so insolently, and by the chasing and dryuing away of our beasts and
cattle, after the guise and manner of thieves and freebooters rather then of
true and worthy soldiers? And yet for my part I repute it no injury: nay I
can be content that thou go forward in doing the like, and that thou do
continue and hold on still thy courses and invasions, if so be thou think it
meet and convenient. For I protest unto thee I do more prize and set by thy
friendship and amity, then any thing whatsoever, which is most dear unto me:
because, as thou know, I have always loved and highly affected thee: and as
often as I recall to mind our tender age, and the years of our youth, wherein
we were nourished and brought up together in the court of Amurath, I cannot
choose, I assure thee, but acknowledge my self to be thy debtour in all
possible means wherein I may any way pleasure thee. Wherefore my good friend
Scanderbeg I do heartily pray thee, and earnestly entreat thee, that we may
renew our former covenants, and that we may once again reconfirme the peace
with a solemn and mutual oath between us: which course if we had heretofore
taken, or had thought upon it in our first treaty: I am sure thou would
never have suffered thy self to be seduced and lead away by the Venetians.
This if thou will now do at my request, and wilt give credit unto me as I
hope thou will: I swear and protest unto thee, that both thou and thy
posterity shall reign peaceably, quietly, and in good security and assurance
continually: otherwise believe me and be thou sure thou will repent it
speedily: thou know the greatness of my puissance, against the which I
would wish thee to be well advised, and to consider thoroughly, whether thou be
able to resist or not: neither thy neighbors, nor thy friends the Venetians
can protect and defend thee from the just violence of my anger, wrath and
fury. Do not thou see the Greeks how they are all destroyed and consumed
away to nothing? The Emperor of Trebisond whom we have despoyled and deprived
of his empire? The Princes of the Rascians and Triballians how they are rooted
out and subverted? the Illyrians broken and wasted, and all the realms of
Asia, with many other Princes tamed and subdued? Hearken therefore to our
counsel o Scanderbeg: be thou stable and constant in thy word and promise: so
shall thou be sure to prosper, and it shall go well with the: we have
committed the care of this business to Mustapha to whom thou need not doubt
to give assured faith and credit.

Farewell from our imperial city the seventh of May in the year of the
generation of Jesus 1463.

These letters being perused and read, Scanderbeg returned an answer from his
Answer and reply of Scanderbeg to the last letters of Mahomet.
camp by other letters in the five and twentieth of the same month: wherein
after a summarie and brief recollection of the principal points of the
Ottoman letters, in the first place was contained: that the Sultan ought not to
think it strange, if the Albanois had sought a just revenge of their wrongs
upon his country and subjects: seeing the laws and rights of war were equal
and indifferent for both of them: that there was no cause of marvel if the
Albanois as well as his own subjects, had sought by a certain military kind of
licentiousnes (as himself did before excuse them in that sort) to revenge an
old in^^^y, and not to offer him any new wrong, but as good husbands had
provided for their own estate, and had recompensed one damage for another.
That although his people were vehemently incensed at the injury offered them,
yet he would nevertheless have restrained them from ouerrunning and inuading his
borders, if he for his part had showed himself willing either to make full
restitution and recompense of that which had been taken and destroyed: or else
if he had chas^^^ed the licentiousnes of his soldiers as he ought to have
done. And whereas in regard of the particular love and good opinion which he
had of him, he did impute the whole fault of the renewing of the war to no
other then to the Venetians, he did wrongfully slander them, for that there was
not any likelihood or probability, that they should go about to seduce him and
to make them enemies: seeing that the Venetian common weal is of sufficient
puissance by themselves alone whenever they see cause, not only to compare
and contend with him marmes, but also to surmount and excel him. And as
touching the persuasions which he used unto him, to leave their friendship,
he had little reason to persuade him to that matter, seeing himself knew very
well, that the amity between them was very ancient and of long continuance:
whereof it seemed he had small or no regard, when notwithstanding the same, he
had not forborne to waste and destroy their country and possessions in Morea,
but had chased them in a manner clean out of all, to the great prejudice and
contempt of the accord and peace between them. As for those vain magnificall
titles of Emperor of the Orient and Occident, in which he seemed so to glory
and boast himself: herecounted unto him infinite Provinces and Realms, who
had scarce as yet heard of the bare name of Mahomet, and put the case (which
God defend) that all were brought under the yoke of his subjection, and that
his Dominions did extend even to the maine Ocean: yet ought not he for all that
to be so puffed up in glory, and to exalt himself about others: but he was
rather to look into the revolution and inconstancy of worldly things: and to
take an example by the Assirians who were once the Monarchs of the whole
world, and by the Medes, the Persians, the Greeks, and last of all the
Romans, yea by Tamberlain himself, who was even of late years the proud and
mighty King of the Tartarians, the scourge of the race of Ottoman, and the
terror of nations: all which notwithstanding were now consumed and extinguished
by the extinguisher of Kingdoms, Empires and Nations, even the finger of the
great God: That he therefore ought to acknowledge himself to be but an earthly
mortal creature, and the vassal and slave of fortune: and that he was not to
put his trust and confidence in his innumerable legions and huge armies: the
which oftentimes (as is to be seen by the testimony of many histories) are
confounded and overthrown by those which are much lesser and far inferior
unto them: and that therefore neither he, nor any other Chieftaine how great
and fortunate soever, could justly merit any true praise or commendation: till
such time as he should see himself even entered into his triumph. That in vain
he did solicit him to renew the friendship and alliance between them, so
notably was his faith suspected unto him, and so odious was his acquaintance.
Last of all having threatened him with the general league of Christendom, and
with the incomparable forces of Europe coming upon him, he friendly and
charitably advised him to abjure the impure sect of Mahomet, and to turn to
the truth of the Gospel of Christ, showing him that that was the true and only
mean (besides the salvation of his soul) to retain continually, and to make
sure his estate and Empire for ever to him and his posterity, and to make the
possession thereof most quiet and peaceable: whereunto he counseled him
betimes to have an eye and to do that willingly, which shortly he should be
forced and compelled to do, by pure constraint and necessity.

This then was the reply which the Prince of Epire, made to the importunate and
Letters from Pope Pius the second to Scanderbeg.
fallacious letters of the great Turk: the which was no sooner dispatched, and
sent away, but that he received letters from the Pope, aduertising him that he
would shortly remove from the city of Rome, accompanied with infinite forces
which had taken the Croysado against the Ottoman, and that from thence passing
to Ancona, and so embarking himself to the sea, he meant to pass into Epire,
where he was determined to make the Archbishop of Duraz, Paul Angel a
Cardinal, and then to crown Scanderbeg king of Epire and Albany, and to
commit the absolute authority of the Christian army to his charge and conduct:
to the intent that all their forces being united, he might pursue the war
against the Infidel, which all the Christians in common had undertaken against
him. And therefore he admonished and solicited him to march on with his own
forces, and to denounce open war against the Painim. These news caused great
joy and gladness both to the Princes and Chieftaines Albanois, and to the common
sort of soldiers: and thereupon did Scanderbeg with a strong and puissant
army, enter Invasion by Scanderbeg upon the Turk his dominions.
into the enemies frontiers, marching a good way into their country,
ouerrunning and spoiling all things both far and wide: and he plagued them
with all sorts of miseries and calamities, and wheresoever he came, he left
nothing but a most hideous and horrible view of extreme desolation, making the
whole Province as a wild and solitary desert: and in this manner, did he begin
a general and open war against Mahomet. Scarcely were the letters of
Scanderbeg come to Constantinople, when the fame and renow me of those his
blouddy exploits was brought to the ears of the Ottoman: who being both in an
extreme fear and terror, and enraged with wrath and fury against the king of
Epire, presently he dispatched away one of his Basses named Seremet, with
14000. horse, more to stay and hinder the violence of the roades and invasions
Seremet sent with an army of 14000. Turks against Scanderbeg. Oration of
Mahomet to his chieftains animating the^ to the war against the Christians. This
is the lesser Tartaria, called by the Barbarians Gazaria there is the noble
city of Capha which Mahomet won from the Genowaies, and was once called
Theodosia.
made by the Albanois, then for any great glory or honor which he expected by
that voyage: and in the mean time, having caused his Chiefetaines and
Colonelles to be called together before him, he thus began to speak unto them.

You are not ignorant (my good friends) how that at all times you have been
partners with me of all my good fortunes, as well as my self have borne a part
with you, of your sinister and adverse fortunes. Wherefore the safety and
preservation of this our Empire, ought to concern and import you no less then
me: you know all of you, how I have always honored and respected you, with
what courtesy, love, and benevolence I have ever used you, carrying my self
amongst you, not as your king and sovereign, but rather as your soldier and
companion. It has been granted unto us by the divine clemency, and by means
of your virtue and prowess, that all things have succeeded according to our
desires: what should I reckon up Asia which is now become ours through your
victorious arms? the dominion of Thrace gotten out of the hands of the
Christians, the Rascians, the Seruians, and the Bulgarians subdued, the region
of Tauriqua * brought under our subjection, Negrepont possessed, the Princes of
Sclauony expelled their estates, and the Hungarians extremely weakened? what
nations are there, be they never so invincible, but they have stood in fear of
your name and valor even before they have felt or perceived the force of your
strength and power? and yet * Or the Isle of Euboea in the sea of AEgeum.
now at this present, fie for shame, I see you all amazed and astonished, and
it seems that these new tumults have terrified you: it seems that the new
brauadoes, and vain menaces of this petty gallant Scanderbeg, do make you to
quake and tremble. What, shall the world find you now so faint hearted, so
besorted and senseless, so deuoide of courage and magnanimity, that you will
show your selves like men that are mindful rather of flight, then of your
wonted and accustomed virtue? will you without fight, without resistance, yield
unto these effeminat and idle Christians those goodly conquests which both your
auncesters and your selves have gotten and purchased, with so many and so great
labors and travels, and with so many wounds and dangers? What, will you now
without any expense and loss of blood abandon and forsake Europe, which you
have with so great pain and desire obtained, and will you so shamefully fly
back again into Asia? tell me (I pray you) shall you be more safe on the
other side of the s^^ then on this side? assure your selves they will not cease
to pursue you in all places: then what will you do? what hope have you? what
King or Prince will receive us, whom the whole world does hold so hateful and
odious? Hearken to me therefore (my good friends and companions) pluck up
your hearts, awaken your corages, revive and strengthen your spirits, to the
intent your enemies grow not too too audacious: hold your selves quiet, and let
not your minds be troubled with any tumultuous counsels or imaginations, but do
all of you with one mind and general consent (as your duty is) cast the care
of this matter so weighty and important upon me: commit it into my hands, and
refer it to my discretion. If you count it a glorious and honorable act to
defend your own lives, and the lives of your wives and children: to maintain
so many scepters and Empires granted unto you, even by the divine favor: then
do you bravely betake you to your arms, and arm your selves against the
Christians: behave your selves manfully in the fight against them, and let the
world see the fircenes of your corages. Let it not trouble you though you hear
that the princes of christendom are combined in league against you, and that
they are entered into a common concord together to make war upon us. All this
ought not to make you doubt of the victory: for you have had trial enough of
this kind of men, how nice, delicate and weak they are. They be all of them
slothful, fearful, faint, secure and careless, idle, and addicted Mahomet
despises and dispraiseth the christians.
to all pleasures and delights: they are all of them brought up daintily: they
lie upon their beds of Down and soft feathers: they are trained up in
luxuriousnes and voluptuousness: they are brave men and valiant in the courts
and palaces of Princes, borne to nothing but to play the courtiers: they have
not any care to study or practice deeds of arms: they have no desire or
delight to follow the wars, or to profess the art and profession military:
their bodies are impatient of labor and travel, and their minds cannot away
with the hazard of perils and dangers: their members are delicate and
effeminate, not enured nor hardened to discipline, nor to endure heat and cold,
hunger and travel. In sum they are ignorant and careless of martial matters,
and of the train of arms, in comparison of you (my dear companions) amongst
whom I see not any one that bears the name of a soldier, but I account him a
good and perfect captain: for it is an usual thing with you to spend your
life in continual services, and day and night are you accustomed to watch in
arms, and to weary your selves in warlike exploits: there is nothing so hard,
nothing so rough and difficult, but seems unto you most pleasant, acceptable,
and easy: you are so acquainted daily and hourly with a million of perils,
that you are grown into a contempt and carelesnes of all perils, and as you
are free from the fear of dangers, so are you ignorant how to fear them: it
is your fashion to contemn and despise soft featherbeds, you use your hardened
members, to a more strict and hard yoke of discipline both in war and in
fight: you are contented with a little, yea with nothing in a manner: you make
your beds of the hard ground, and you do accustom your selves to all
extremities: your use is so to march and to run on to the victory, as that you
never dream what you must endure and suffer, but only whither and whereabouts
you are going: and you are altogether forgetful both of death, of wounds, and
of danger. Behold (my brave Captains) this is the true deuoir and duty, this is
the true exercise, this is the true art and discipline of sovereign and
excellent soldiers: these be they that do fight valiantly, these be they that
do vanquish their enemies easily, these be they that are ever sure and
certain of the victory. Let come then these great Princes of the Christians,
these magnificall bablers and great talkers, whose fierceness is only in their
glorious show and ostentation, who are merely ignorant and unskillful of
martial matters. Shall such persons be able to astonish you? shall they make
you to give back? call to remembrance your prosperous fortune, the which in
all your warlike exploits has ever followed and seconded you. Shall not the
fortunate success of your affairs, make you to grow courageous, and to pluck
up your valiant hearts? These tumultuous Christians have not yet forgotten, but
they have still before their eyes the fresh testimony of their lamentable
misfortune, even the scattered and dispersed relickes of their calamity at
Varna, and Basil. And what do the Greeks? All these alterations, changes and
emotions, what harm have they done us? save only that they brought them selves
to be bought and sold for slaves and vassals unto us? Some of them have come to
destruction by the ignorance and unskillfulness of their Chieftains: others by
the pusillanimity of their troops and legions. Some of them have been
overthrown by the doubtful chance and hazard of diverse battles, and other
some by their own seditious and intestine eiuill wars. Some of them have been
ruinated by the gross credulity and the infidelity of their own domestical
friends, and other some in brief have found them selves most endammaged by the
over careless and dissolute contempt of their enemies. What reason then have
you to fear their coming? If I should speak openly what I think, I am fully
persuaded that they will not come at all: they will keep still at home in
their houses, and they need not greatly to be entreated to lay aside (even of
themselves) these their insolent threats and menaces. Moreover, I know well
that they are distracted and troubled with private seditions and continual
partialities: every man will be a commander: each man seeks to be the highest
and chiefest: none of them will obey: none of them will be commanded: so
strange and diverse are their affections, and so greatly do they differ
between themselves. There be amongst them many Kings, many commanders, and
every one of them is transported and carried away, according to his own
appetite, and they do all follow their own wills in their counsels and
deliberations: the^e is none of them that seeks the public good, nor the
common profit and commodity. The Christians do dissemble one with another
notably, they are all of them exceedingly ambitious, and immoderatly covetous,
and they do exercise immoderat hatreds and rancors each against other. There is
no consent, no agreement, no regard of duty or obedience: in which nevertheless
consists all the strength and virtue of Monarchies, and kingdoms, especially
in the time of war: and if these happen once to fail, the art and science
military must needs come to naught and be utterly extinguished. More then this,
these holy, godly, and religious people, do take a singular delight in mutual
murders, poisons, and massacres, and there is no other talk amongst them,
then of revenge, of conspiracies, and of secret trains and counterwaits. I see
that all Christendomr with their Pope (as they term him) have conspired
against us: I see that all their Kings and Potentates have combined them selves
together against our Empire and estate: they have betaken them to arms on all
sides, to deprive us of Europe their ancient patrimony: so did Agamemnon in
Homer, one day determine to overthrow the walls of Troy before sunset, but
Jupiter turned his cies another way, and derided the vows of that foolish
Prince: the like (I doubt not) will happen to the fond presumption of the
Christians, they hasten to purchase unto themselves some singular and glorious
renown upon us, albeit very difficult, but indeed they will enlarge and
amplify your triumphs and your Empire: I know it well, and I dare promise you
as much upon my honor. For (not to speak of the commodities of places, of
victuals, munitions, and such like helps: in which the strength and succor of
the wars, does consist very much) and whereof the Christians will have great
scarsity, and we shall have plenty, I can assure you that the Empire and
dominion of the whole world is promised unto us by the celestial powers, as I
have learned by the course of the stars, and the science of Astrology, by which
I have reaped wonderful profit, and whosoever has the perfect knowledge
thereof, cannot possibly err nor be deceived. For without all doubt, the whole
frame of this world here below, is ruled and governed by the superior motions
of the stars and planets. Moreover you shall not want store of resolute and
obedient soldiers, you shall have ready at hand diverse great and puissant
armies, you shall have infinite troops and bands of men, and you shall have
plenty of arms, horses, engines: and in brief, all kinds of necessary and
needful provisions, whereby the victory may be purchased and gotten with ease
and facility. Only have you a regard for your parts, that you be well advised
in all your councels, that you bring with you coragious hearts and stout
stomachs, and that your hands be prompt and valorous. This is it (my good
soldiers) that must purchase you, either assured liberty or perpetual
servitude: this is that knot and band of the whole matter, this is it wherein
consists the preservation of your country, of your Empire, of your children,
of your goods, and possessions: to this does the common peril, and the common
ruin of your selves and all yours, both inuit you, admonish you, yea and
constrain you: and all of you are equally and alike summoned thereunto, by the
equal hazard and danger of this war. Hereunto also ought the variable events
and alteration of great things to spur and prick you forward, the which in all
human actions are oftentimes in great peril, and subject to notable dangers,
for default of prompt and ready deliberation, and for want of good and settled
resolution.

This oration of the Turkish Emperor, was generally approved by all the
assistants, and it wrought in them with such efficacy, that all of them
confirmed the devotion of their fidelity and obeisaunce, with a new and solemn
oath, promising without any regard of perils, pains or travel, to expose their
lives and uttermost means for the Majesty of the Ottoman name and Empire, and
for the amplifying of his crown and dignity. Thus did they show them selves
deuoide of all fear, of hazards and dangers, and they seemed to regard nothing
else, but only to conform themselves to the will and pleasure of their Prince
to the service of the weal public.

Let us leave Mahomet for a while, beating his brain and bending all his
thoughts and imaginations, to provide fit and necessary preparation for the
general war of the Christians, and let us return to our religious Prince
Scanderbeg, who being enriched with the spoils of the Turks, was now retired
into his camp, where he was no sooner arrived, but that it was told him, that
Seremet did approach and was near at hand, one of the brauest Captains that
the Sultan had, and that with a strong and mighty army, he was come upon the
confines of Thrace and Macedony: and Scanderbeg being no less forward then he
was always wont, took the field three hours before day, being determined to
fight with him if it were possible. The Mohammedan was come only to assure and
defend the frontiers, and to hinder the inroads and invasions of the Albanois:
he lodged part of his men within Ocrida, or Alchria, and part of them in
Alchria, or Ocrida.
the subburbs and thereabouts, where they had entrenched them selves very
strongly. Near to the town was a large and great lake abounding in fish of
diverse kinds, out The river of Drine, or Drinon. Ambushment by Scanderbeg
against Seremet. Piec Manuell. Andrew Angel.
of the which the river of Drine has his source and beginning. Toward this
place was the Albanois advanced within three miles of it or thereabouts, where
he placed himself in an ambush with ten thousand men, and he sent before him
about 500. horse, of the most resolute and hardiest soldiers, conducted by
Peic Manuell, and Andrew Angel, brother to the Archbishop of Duraz, both of
them worthy personages, and highly accounted of, both for their experience, and
for the antiquity of their blood and lineage, and he gave them instructions to
skirmishe with the enemy, only to draw and allure them forth to the fight. For
Scanderbeg was advertised, that there was one in the Barbarian army, who was
the treasurer or receiver of the imposts and tributes of the great Turk, a man
that was very rich, and that took great delight in deeds of arms, who he
thought would soon and easily be drawn out with the first to adventure the
fight. Now Scanderbeg had charged these two Captains, that in case the
Infidels did come forth to the skirmish, they should make but could resistance,
but by little and little recuiling, they should feign them selves to fly: to the
intent that the others pursuing them, might approach to the place of the
ambuscado, where he meant to hold himself still and to attend them, and it fell
out accordingly. For the Infidels being gotten very near the Victory of
Scanderbeg against Seremet near Alchria. Number of Turks slain near Alchria.
place, saw themselves suddenly charged most bravely by the Epirots, on all
sides, both in front and in flank, and behind at their backs, in such sort
that being soon broken and scattered, there lay dead upon the place more then
10000. There were also a great number taken prisoners, amongst whom was the
treasurer above mentioned, and the son of Seremet, with twelve others of
especial reckoning and estimat, who being brought to Scanderbeg, paid a
ransom of 40000. crowns, and being set at liberty, they bestowed many gifts
and rich rewards throughout the camp of the Albanois: especially the
treasurer who made a larges of his imposts of fish both fresh and salt amongst
the christians: which came in a very good and convenient time, as if God had
sent it of purpose. For it was then the vigill of the Assumption of the blessed
Virgin the mother of our Savior, upon which day, as men religiously disposed,
they did abstain from eating of any fleshmeats. Thus making merry amongst
themselves, they said by way of mirth, that their prince was the Apostle of him
who had fed the Jews with five loaves and Saying of the soldiers Epirots of
Scanderbeg.
two fishes. This done, they returned victorious with great joy into their
Province, where they enjoyed the fruit of their happy exploit, attending in
great devotion the troops of the Croysado, which they daily expected to pass
over the seas into Epire.

But Fortune, envious and despitefull Fortune, which never suffers men to
enjoy any long contentment, which lies continually in wait, and watches for
some occasion, either to cross all our good and glorious enterprises, or else
utterly to overthrow and disappoint them, did now turn all these Princely and
honorable attemptes to nothing, and the preparations of this great and holy
voyage vanished away like smoke in the air. For within few days after, news
were brought to Scanderbeg, how that the Pope having already set forward on the
way with a goodly army, of Almains, Hungarians, Death of Pope Pius the 2.
Spaniards, French, and Italians, and being accompanied with the Duke of
Venice, immediately upon his entry into Ancona, was departed and gone to God,
which was the occasion that this noble assembly was dissolved: and all those
which had disposed themselves to this holy voyage, were disbanded and dispersed
here and there on al parts, Voyage of the Christians against the Turks broken.
and were returned to their own houses, as if they had bin come together, and
had made that journey only at the will and pleasure of one mortal man, who was
now laid in his Sepulcher, and not for the common cause of Christendom, nor
for the glory and service of the son of God, whose venerable image and
representation, they carried not in their hearts and in their souls, but only
in their outward garments, and in their ensigns and standards: such and so
great is the inconstancy and vanity of mankind. But I doubt I should do great
wrong unto this reverent personage, if I should let pass in ungrateful
silence, these deserved praises of his rare virtues and perfections.

Pius called Aeneas Siluius the Poet, sometimes chancellor to the Emperor
Frederick Pope Pius the second his birth and commendation.
the third, was a Sienois by birth, descended of the ancient family of the
Picolhominins in Siena. He was a man of most rare virtues, and most renowned
for the holiness and integrity of his life: he was so addicted to the study of
human letters, that it was hard to judge whether were more excellent in him
his knowledge or his eloquence: the which he employed so happily in the
council of Mantua, that he moved and persuaded all the nations and Princes of
Europe to take arms against the miscreants, excepting only Jews the
eleventh. The Frenchmen who at that time had an hard opinion of him, by reason
that they took part with king Rene, of the house of Anoiw, whereas this Pope
did mightily impugn his title, in favor of the Arragonois in the war of
Naples, (as you have seen in the book last going before.) He was wonderfully
zealous of religion, and of the glory of God, seeking nothing but the
advancement of the same, and the safety of the Christian flock: by reason
whereof his end was greatly lamented over all Christendom, but above all
others, the subjects of Scanderbeg made great sorrow and lamentation. For
although they were yet fierce and glorious through their victory lately gotten
against Seremet, yet upon the hearing of this news, they were as men amassed
and confounded, and as if they had been stricken with thunder and lightning from
Heaven, so infinitely did they grieve for that this enterprise and expedition
against the Turks was broken off, but Scanderbeg carrying a courage, and a mind
pliable to all the assaults and crosses of Fortune, did not in any sort bewray
himself to be grieved or discomforted, neither did he show any alteration for
this unfortunate and unhappy chance, but with a cheerful countenance, nothing
changed nor troubled, he comforted his friends and familiars with these
speeches and persuasions.

God the searcher of all secrets, who knows all things before they be done,
to The oration or speech of Scanderbeg to his subjects comforting them after
the breaking of the voyage intended by the Christians against the Turks.
whom things past and to come are open and manifest, as well as things present,
by whom all things are made and established in equity and judgment, and are
perfectly guided and governed, whose divine and incomprehensible wisdom,
extends it self from the beginning to the ending, graciously disposing and
ordering every thing in particular: God I say, that ancient of days and of
all eternity, does sometimes make frustrate and disappoint the wishes and
desires of mortall-men, and does not suffer them always to enjoy them,
according to their own wills and contentment. For though in the eye of man
the may seem good and profitable, yet in the sight and secret knowledge of his
divine Majesty, he knows them to be otherwise: and there be many things which
unto us appear to be profitable and beneficial, but his wisdom foreseeth
that they will greatly prejudice us. For example: there is no city so populous,
there is no nation so puissant, but if they want enemies abroad, they are sure
to find some even at home amongst them selves: and you shall never see any
body so strong and lusty, but if there be no external cause to molest or
grieve them, yet they will at one time or another be oppressed and ouerborne by
their own proper forces, by reason of some inward contrariety. If it had
pleased God that the Romans had not ruinated Carthage, which was emulous and
envious of their greatness, and that they had not rooted out this their
foreign enemy, but that they had still had him to have kept them in fear and
awe, they had not then been consumed by intestine civil wars within
themselves, they had not then turned their swords against their own throats,
and their Empire peradventure had been standing even till this day. For the
fear of a foreign and outward foe (which as some say, is a sure guardian, and
a most straight and perfect bond of amity and concord) had preserved Sentence.
and still maintained them in safety. The like may we say perhaps of the
Christians, and of the nations professing the faith of Christ: for if we were
exempted from an external and foreign enemies, and had not an aduersatie
elsewhere to keep us in awe, considering our impiety and ambition, our
rancours and divisions past all hope of reconciliation, and the bloody streams
of troubles and tumults nourished from time to time within the body of the
common weal of Christendom, do you not think that we should find a hundredth
times more disadvantage and mischief by our own enmities and dissentions,
then by the violence of our outward enemies? Assure your selves we had long ere
this time been consumed and worn out by the fury and outrage of our own
proper arms. I conclude therefore, that it is not happened altogether for the
worst, that this voyage is discontinued and broken off: for it was greatly to
be feared, that when we had once chased away this grievous and bloody enemy
far from us, least that then we would have kindled some fire within out own
houses, which should have proved more bloody and fatal unto us. Howbeit it is
not to be doubted, and we may hold it for a certain and infallible truth,
Empire of the Turks is not durable.
that the Empire of the Ottoman cannot continue long but that it must needs
decay and perish, if at least wise this may be called or termed an Empire,
which is but a wast and solitary desert of Barbarism deprived of all light of
true doctrine, being without laws, without judgments, without any good order
and policy, and even in those parts, especially where as once, the arts, and
sciences, the true and perfect discipline, the most famous Churches with many
other ornaments were most glorious and flourishing: as we see it now come to
pass in Asia, and a great part of Europe subdued by the arms and violence of
the Turks. And albeit Daniell in his Prophecies distinguishing the fortune and
virtue of every Empire, has described all of them: namely that in this old and
declining age of the world, there shall be more confusions then have been in
times past: and that God notwithstanding (as long as mankind shall endure upon
the face of the earth) will preserve some Kingdoms and Empires: which as the
end of the world does more and more approach; so shall they grow more faint and
feeble: and yet nevertheless; that there should arise a certain Barbarous
nation of a wonderful puissance, named in the divine Prophecies Gog and Magog:
howbeit let us not be troubled at the power and puissance of the Turks, which
by manifest and ancient testimonies is condemned and rejected of God, as being
raised and increased by deceiptfull and unlawful means, and plunged in all
kinds of vices, filthiness, and wickedness. And let us not make any doubt of
the promises and predictions left unto us by the voice of the son of God: but
let us fully assure our selves, that the dignity of the Empire is not nor
shall not fall into the hands of so Barbarous and execrable tyranny, which
vomiteth forth blasphemies against Christ the Savior of the Dignity of the
true Empire where it is to be sound.
world, and abolisheth all honest and eiuill policies, but let us rather assure
our selves, that there only and not elsewhere the sacred majesty of the
Empire both is and shall be continued, where the true Religion is maintained and
observed, where the divine laws, and other civil laws and good ordinances
derived out of them do rule and bear sway, where the lawful administration of
justice is vpheld in our strength and vigor, where good men are rewarded, and
offenders are punished: last of all where the honest and godly assemblies and
societies of good men, are preserved and maintained by the use of lawful and
just arms, there only and not elsewhere is the dignity and majesty
Imperial howsoever that the greatness thereof do appear to be very little or
small in comparison of that of the Mohammedan. For (as has been said) it will
not be long ere the same will be ruinated and come to nothing, because as wise
men have written,) things evil gotten, are soon wasted, and do speedely
perish, and no man can long possess or retain the dominion, that is purchased
by injurious force and violence. Contrariwise, the Christian Empire, and the
Church of God founded and erected by the divine oracle, shall endure for ever,
and shall never have an end. Wherefore let us pray our good God, the king
almighty and omnipotent (who knows better what is good and needful for us,
then we know how or what to demand at his hands) that it would please him to
wash away our sins by his grace, and to defend his holy faith, and his chosen
people from the rage and fury of the Infidels, the which this cruel tyrant
does continually persecute, and by his brutish fierceness does endeavor to
destroy and suppress.

Thus did Scanderbeg comfort and encourage his people, that they might not be
dismayed for the breaking up and dispersing of the Christian army. But leaving
him for a while with these discourses, we will now return to speak of
Mahomet. After he understood of the slaughter and flight of the people of
Seremet, the Painim Prince being incensed with rage and fury, rather then
discouraged with this misfortune, speedily dispatched away Ballaban Badera one
of his Colonels with fifteen thousand Ballaban Badera sent against Sca^derbeg
with an army of 18000. Turks.
horse and three thousand footmen. This Chieftaine was no less prompt and
hardy in executing any thing with his hand, then he was of an expert and
advised judgment in the politic handling of martial affairs: for he was a
man that had been long practiced in arms, and had given many proofs of his
sufficiency and valor under Mahomet, especially at the taking of
Constantinople: where he was the first Ballaban his birth and description* Aga,
the place of a Colonel amongst the Turks.
man that mounted upon the wall, and entered into the City. For this cause the
Sultan had exalted him to the estate of an Aga or Colonel: he was an Epirot,
borne of a very base and obscure race and kindred, and the subject of John
Castriot the father of Scanderbeg: but in his younger years, being a very
lad, as he and other little children were keeping of beasts in the fields, he
was taken and carried away by the infidels, who presented him for a slave unto
the Great Turk. Touching the stature of his body, he was not very tall, but
of a middle size: but he was of a notable quick and ready wit, his mind was
extremely great and haughty, besides that he was very resolute and courageous,
fearing nothing. So as it may well be said of him, as Homer wrote of Tydeus.

A little man of body, and but small of stature,
Yet great in deeds of arms, and a mighty warrior.
He was very strongly made in his limbs, active and valiant of his person,
desirous of battle, and hot and eager in fight. This man being come to
Alchria, in the confines of Macedonie, after he had taken a view and muster of
his army, sent secretly (as some say) unto Scanderbeg certain presents of
great estimate, for a token of friendship and amity: and to provide (it may
be) if by chance he should happen to have the worst, and to fall into his
hands, that he might not be used with extremity. Howbeit it is most probable
and likely, that he did it only of a cautelous and subtle meaning, as
afterward* the event and issue did make it manifest* For he employed all his
forces, and set abroach all his sleights and cunning devises to work the utter
confusion and destruction of Scanderbeg. But the Christian Prince, who was not
unacquainted with the Turkish wiles and suttleties, did reject both his gifts
and his acquaintance* and he sent back unto him, a mattock, a plowshard, and a
hedging bill, with such like rustical instruments, and he willed him to let
alone the exercise of arms, as not being a profession Contumely offered by
Scanderbeg to Ballaban.
for him to deal withal: but that it was fittest for him to return to
husbandry according to the use of his predecessors, who were all of them
peysants and of abase and vile condition. Ballaban took this very impatiently
and he conceived by reason thereof a more deadly hatred against Scanderbeg then
ever, swearing and vowing that he would take some notable revenge upon him for
this ignominy, if ever he could find a fit time and opportunity: he
determined therefore secretly in the night time to surprise and assail him.
Whereupon in the dark of the night he began to set forward and to remove his
Camp. But (as the saying is) it is bad halting before a criple: for the
Albanois being informed of his coming, and what way he took, went against him
with all speed, which caused Ballaban to hold bridle and to make a stand, and
he pitched his tents about a two miles from the Camp of the Christians.
Scanderbeg had not with him in all his army above four thousand horse, and
five and twenty hundredth footmen, not for that he was not able to have
assembled greater forces if he had liked: but because he had made choice at
that time of his oldest and most expert soldiers, and the flower of all his
men, in whose virtue and valiant prowess, he did repose his principal trust
and confidence: and he thought it better (as Fabius Maximus was wont to say) to
bring all of them back again rich and Saying of Fabius Maximus used by
Scanderbeg. Sayings of Scanderbeg.
wealthy, then to use the service of a great number of soldiers: and many
times also he used these speeches, that that Captain which with ten or twelve
thousand men at the most knew not how to beat his enemy, would hardly be able
to do any honorable exploit with greater forces. For he affirmed that the
multitude of troops, and the excessive numbers of soldiers had many times
caused confusion, and had been the disturbance, and an hinderance to the
victory. Now the Infidel as has been said, had fiften thousand horse, and
three hundred foot. The Scanderbegians were encamped at the one end of a
pleasant valley, which they of the country call Valcala, which being of a
goodly breadth, it was more long then The valley of Valcala.
large. The Barbarians had seized upon the other end of the valley, near to a
mountain which lay at the end of Valcala, the entry whereof was very straight
and narrow, and the enemy having both the mountain and the passage in their
power and puissance, Ambuscado laid by Ballaba^ at the entry of Valcala.
had laid there an ambuscado, to the intent that the fight being begun, and
the Christians having the better, if they did pursue the victory, and did enter
within the straight of that narrow passage to get to the sacking of their
Camp, they should be enclosed in the midst of their enemies, lying there in
the ambushment, and by that means should be at their mercy and discretion. The
king of Epire who was encamped at the other end of the valley, forseeing well
that this their near neighborhood to their enemies, could not be parted
without talking nearer together, and for that his forces were the weakest, he
judged it needful for him to seek some advantage against them, and therefore
he used these speeches unto his soldiers.

My good friends and companions, I see well that it behooves us this day as much
Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers before the battle of Valcala.
as ever, to make our enemies to feel who we are. Ballaban is come to seek
us, and to make proof whether Fortune will be more friendly unto him, then
she has been to his predecessors: but before that he begin to march, I hold
it best that we remove our Camp to this mountain which is at our backs.
Notwithstanding, this you must mark: that as soon as he sees us departing
hence, he will imagine (because we are so few, that we mean to fly:) and
therefore it is to bethought, that he will immediately charge us with all
possible violence at our backs, which if he do, then do you receive him
valiantly: and after you have a little shifted your place and fained a retraite,
suddenly do you turn head, and with a round and brave charge, do you bear in
upon them with all your strength, and (as your custom is) break and disorder
them: in so doing I doubt not, but you shall have them at your discretion. But
take heed (my good soldiers) I pray you, and be you well advised when you
have put them to flight, and that you have them in chase, and do follow them in
execution upon them: takeheed, I say, that you enter not in any case within
the mouth of the straight of Valcala: but stopping your course pass no further
forwards. For within that passage I know there are certain squadrons of the
enemy laid to entrappe us: I know it well, I am well acquainted both with
the place, and the policies of the Barbarians: if you once enter in, you will
never get out again. Let it suffice you therefore (my friends) to pursue the
victory even to the entry of that place and no further.

As soon as he had thus spoken, he espied Ballaban marching on directly
toward The battle of Valcala between Ballaban and Scanderbeg.
him: whereupon he sent a certain number of light horsemen to seize upon that
hill which he had chosen for the lodging of his army: and immediately he
followed after them with the body of his troops, making as though he meant to
have made a retrait: the which the Turks perceauing and believing verelie,
that they had been in a true and plain flight, they galloped after them
without any good order, and with great fury they held on their course the
length of all the valley. Then did the Epyrots begin to bear up close
together, and being nothing astonished with the clamours or violent charge of
the Turks, they turned about, and with a hardy resolution they received them
to the shocke, and so joined with them in combat. Then began the fight to grow
most sharp, cruel, and bloody, and many fell both of the one side and the
other, and the victory rested for a long time doubtful and uncertain. In
fine the Albanois fought with such a constant and settled resolution and
obstinacy against the Infidelles, being out of order Victory of Scanderbeg
against Ballaban and the Turks.
and in some confusion, that they got the advantage, killing and beating them
down on all parts and drove them back even to the streightes of Valcala, and
there they took breath and made a stand, excepting eight only of the
Christian army (each of whom without all doubt, was worthy to have had the
absolute command of a good and great army.) These being transported with the
fury of the fight, and the heat of arms, and forgetting the express
commandment of their General, but being spurred forward with an eager desire
of following the chase upon the enemy, and with a mortal hatred against
Ballaban, were drawn on into the ambuscado of the Infidels, and did very
unadvisedly entangle themselves within these streights, which by means of this
unhappy accident were, I dare say, as famous by the loss Forkes of Candyum.
See Lyuie. lib. 5
and calamity of these brave Epyrotes, as the forkes of Candyum were in times
past by the ignominy of the Romans. Long did they maintain the fight
against the Infidelles there ambusqued, and passing still further and further
within those valleys* they came at last to the trenches of the Barbarians,
where they were to yield a reckoning of their coming, and to pay the shot unto
their hosts. Nevertheless continuing there also in a most cruel fight: they
showed them selves so valiant, and did so bestirre themselves by their valor
and dexterity, that in the end they gained the top of a mountain, which
being possessed by the infanterie of the Turks, they had thought to have been
of their own company, and so they fell again into a new and second peril
greater then the former. In the end after infinite proves of their Moses,
Guirize, Musache and other nobles of the Epyrots taken prisoners by the Turks.
wonderful prowess and valor, being wearied with striking and killing of
their enemies, both men and horses growing faint through the multitude of their
wounds, they were taken alive by the Ballabanians. The virtue, courage, and
incomparable prowess of these brave warriors may not be let pass and omitted
in silence, and yet if I should in this place set down the singular
perfectio^s wherein all of them were most accomplished, and the memorable acts
achieved by their virtue in the service of God, of the religion, and of their
country, I should make a long and exceeding great history: and therefore I
will only and barely set down their names unto you. The Moses. Guirize de
Vladienne. Musache de Augeline. Gine Musache John Terlat. Nicholas Berisee.
George Chuque Gine Manesse.
first that offers him self to be remembered, was that great Moses the
Dibrian, of whom we have so often made mention, the only and chief man that
was most dear and faithful unto Scanderbeg, and who was the Lieutenant of the
army. Next to him was Guirize de Vladienne, the near kinseman of Scanderbeg:
after him followed Musache de Angeline, nephew to Scanderbeg, and Gyne Musache,
John Perlat, Nicholas Berise, George Chuque, and Gine Manesse. These men by
their miserable and unhappy fortune, made the estate of Albanie more to be
deplored and lamented, then any one thing at any time before whatsoever. For as
all of them were of singular account and estimation, both for their corporal
strength and vigor, for the magnanimity of their courages, and for their
excellent skill and knowledge in arms and the science military: so were they
no less fearful and terrible to the Mahometans. In so much that when their
Monarke the Ottoman heard, that they were taken, and brought unto him alive, he
conceived such an exceeding and extreme joy thereby, that he cried out aloft,
and with a loud voice uttered these words.

Now do I know for a truth and certainty, now may I well and justly say, that
Scanderbeg Speech of Mahomet, hearing of the taking of Moses and other Epirots.
is overthrown, that his pride is fallen, that his forces are abated, that his
audacitie and courage is clean gone and lost: seeing that Ballaban my son,
my child, the only man amongst my Captains and Chieftaines that went before
him, has showed him self the only man of valor, the only warrior, and he
alone has known how to overcome him by whom so many brave men of ours have
been surmounted and overthrown, of which some have been made slaves, others
have been murdered and put to the sword.

Thus after he had highly commended and exalted Ballaban, he sent unto him a
great quantity of gold and silver and other gifts, with a commission to
restore his bands with new supplies, and to pursue the war against
Scanderbeg. Who in this Ambassade sent by Scanderbeg to Mahomet for the
ransom of Moses and his other Nobles. Cruelty most barbarous of Mahomet.
mean while being in a marvelous distress and care for the captivity of
these Noble men, dispatched away speedily a notable Ambassade, with great
presents, and letters unto the Sultan, praying him most effectually, to ransom
the prisoners according to the right of arms, or else to exchange them for
other prisoners, of which he had a great number. But the felonious tyrant,
being carried away with rage and fury, made no account of this Embassage: but
after all kinds of ignominy and barbarous cruelty used and practiced upon
them, he caused them to be flayed alive by little and little for fifteen days
together: during the which they yielded up their Death of Moses and other
prisoners by the tyranny of Mahomet.
constant and glorious souls unto God, and did augment (as it is to be
believed) the happy company of the Martyrs in Paradise. The abominable
cruelty of this torment, made the ignominy of the Christians more notable and
notorious: and all the army of the Albanians did infinitely bewail and grieve
at their miserable end: and the country of Albanie did feel much more grief
and sorrow through the want of their dear and beloved citizens, then they
conceived joy for the victory had against their enemies: neither was the
sorrow and lamentation less which was made generally and in public, then
that which was seen particularly and in private. For many (as the report
goes) did change their habit and their garments, and many also did let the
hair of their heads and beards to grow at length, in token that they mourned,
and grievously lamented for this great and lamentable loss of these excellent
and heroycall persons. The king him self was no less grieved in heart, for
their misfortune. Nevertheless bearing a mind hardened against all the
assaults and encombraunces of fortune, he presently invaded and overcame the
enemies country, showing him self more desirous of revenge then of booty and
pillage, and he turned all things vpside down not leaving any thing in whole
and good estate which either the sword or the fire could possibly wast, destroy
and consume.

Certain days were spent in these courses, and acts of hostility, during the
which, Ballaban his second journey against Scanderbeg with 18000. Turks.
Ballaban by virtue of his commission renewed for the war of Albanie, had made
and finished the increase and supply of his companies to the ancient number
of fifteen thousand men on horse back, and three thousand footmen, which done
he returned to Achaia upon the frontiers of Macedonie, and there did he
endeavor by his wonted sleightes and his ordinary disguised shows of cunning
to reconcile him self unto Scanderbeg with new presents and honest offers of
service and amity. In the end seeing that he had but a cold suite, and that
his guile and dissimulation was too well known, as also that he had less hope
and power to attain to the end of his desires by plain and open arms, he
employed therefore all his wits and devises to more secret and close
attemptes, that by some more short and more ready course he might ouer-reach
and entrappe him.

Scanderbeg being accompanied with 4000. horse, and five and twenty hundredth
footmen, he pitched his tents at Oronichea in the upper Dibria, and upon all
parts and Ballaban his exploit against Scanderbeg whom he thinks to surprise
in his Camp.
passages of his Camp, he had placed very conveniently both sentinels and
scoutes. It happened by chance, that at one of those passages, there were
placed certain soldiers Epyrotes in whom the king had great trust and
confidence, but he knew not that they were allied and of kin unto Ballaban.
These being corrupted and won with great store of money; the Turkishe
General took his way in the dead of Soldiers of Scanderbeg being of kin
to Ballaban corrupted by him to betray the army of the Albanois.
the night with all his army, and an hour before day having passed beyond
those scouts, he began to approach very near to the Camp of the Albanois,
which he had surprised without all doubt and oppressed, had it not been for the
prompt vigilancie and watchfulness of Scanderbeg him self, who having his eye
open to all chances and inconveniences, did ordinarily and oftentimes go the
round on horseback, visiting and surueying all parts of his Camp, both the
courts of guard and the other quarters, as God would at the very same time, he
being thus busily employed discerned a far off, by the noise and neighing the
horses of the Infidels. Behold here the singular Scanderbeg his vigilancie
preuenteth Ballaban his treachery and suttletie.
benefit, and a worthy example of diligent and careful observation of martial
discipline, the king himself gave alarm to his people, and presently
disposing and ordering them in array of battle (howbeit in tumultuous manner
and according to the shortness of the time, and as the discommoditie of the
dark would give him leave,) in two or three words animated his soldiers, to
do their deuoir upon this sudden occasion, and so marched on furiously against
the Turk. Ballaban not looking to have found him in such order and readiness
breathed him self a while, and that he The battle of Oronichea between
Ballaban and Scanderbeg.
might also better arraunge his men to the battle, whilst Scanderbeg in the
mean time laying hold upon the present occasion, with a strong troop of horse
the most resolute of all his army, and with a number of harquebussiers
Italians, he conveyed him self closely all alongest the covert of the valley,
and so got behind all the backs of his enemies, and immediately charging them
with all his force upon the tail and rereward of their army, he did so
trouble and molest them, that being charged likewise in front by the residue of
his troops, they were constrained to fall to the fight on all sides before
that ever they could take any time to arraunge them selves in any good order.
Nevertheless the conflict was long and mortal between them, especially on
the part of the Epirots, both because that many of them had not yet put
themselves in rank within their battle, as also by reason of the great
number of their enemies: but in the end finding the Infidels to be better
furnished and armed with cords and chains to bind the Christians, then with
hardy and obstinate hearts to put them to utterance: and perceiving that they
fought but faintly, they did Victory of Scanderbeg the second time against
Ballaban and the Turks.
press upon them so violently, that being not able to endure them any longer,
they made them to turn their backs and to betake themselves to flight.
Whereupon being closely pursued and lively followed by the Christians, they
were handled so rudely that they were not able to recover their trenches, but
were enforced to abandon their camp to the pillage of their enemies. The
massacre and the booty also was inestimable. Ballaban himself with a very
small train, without ensigns, without baggage did carry the news of his
own discomfiture. Mahomet received him, but with sour looks, and he was long
in a doubt and perplexity, whether he should employ any other Chieftaine in
this war, seeing that so small a handful of men (as he objected unto him)
had had the power to overcome him so shamefully.

After diverse consultations, he concluded in the end once again to employ
him against the Albanois, and to send him back into Epyre, many causes and
considerations urging him thereunto. First of all, he knew him to be a mortal
enemy to Scanderbeg: besides he was an Epyrot borne, and he was very well
practiced and acquainted with all the places and passages of the country which
were most fit and apt for ambuscadoes. Besides amongst so many thousands of
excellent Knights and men of command under the obeisance of the Ottoman
Empire, he knew not any one so worthy and sufficient as him alone. Moreover
knowing the disposition of all men, and how insatiably covetous the mind of
man is of honor and authority, he promised him the crown of Epyre, in case
he could find the means to make Scanderbeg away and to destroy him. Now
Ballaban being a man of notable resolution, and withal very desirous to make
his life glorious in the world, which otherwise was but ignoble and subject to
uncertainty, he thought nothing impossible which might purchase him honor and
estimation: and therefore albeit he had been twice beaten by the Albanois, yet
he accepted this commission very willingly, and departed from Constantinople
Ballaban his third journey against Scanderbeg with 20000. Turks
with an army of 20000. fighting men, of which 17000. were horsemen, and the
residue were footmen. Being arrived at Alchria, at the first he held on his
wonted course, and sent unto the king of Epyre excellent good and swift horses
for a present, besides certain goodly robes of rich work and embroderie,
humbly entreating him not to disdain his service and amity, the proof and
trial whereof he promised and protested should be always in a readiness, and
that he should find him most faithfully affected unto him during his life. All
this did this crafty Fox to the intent he might surprise him, if so be he
found him any thing plyant and credulous to believe his fair and ^ugred
speeches, but little did he know whom he had to deal with all: for Scanderbeg
being sufficiently acquainted with his traitorous and fraudulent practices, did
scorn and disdain his gifts and pretended courtesies: returning him in a
mockery certain counterpresents vile and rusticall, such as he had before times
sent unto him. Wherefore the Aga having all in vain consumed and spent three
whole months in these bootles practices, determined at the last to hazard the
fortune of a plain and set battle, and in open fight to encounter with his
enemy, who was as willing to accept of the co^bat. Wherefore after public
and devout prayers made to God for the victory, and for the preservation of the
estate of Albanie: and having procured and prepared all things requisite for
the journey, he encouraged his people one while with short speeches, and
effectual orations, another while with gifts and rewards, to some of them
horses, to others furniture of arms and weapons, to some of them rich
apparel, and to others he gave money, with other commodities. This done, he
drew forth his army into The battle of Sfetigrade between Ballaban and
Scanderbeg.
to the field, consisting of 8000. horse, and 2500. foot, all of them chosen
soldiers and resolute, and he arranged them in order of battle upon a fair
plain before Sfetigrade, where Ballaban was encamped. He divided his army into
four parts or battles: Over the first commanded Goic Streeze his Nephew: the
second was lead by Tanusee Ducagin: Musache had the conduct of the third: and
Scanderbeg himself kept the fourth battallion for the guard of his own body.
The infanterie he had arranged and bestowed Order of Scanderbeg and Ballaban
their armies at the battle of Sfetigrade.
within the wings of the cauallarie, and he had appointed for the leading of
them four Chieftaines, gentlemen of good worth and experience: namely, Paul
Manessey, Pei^ Manuell, Demetrius Berisse, and Raian Chuque. The General Turk
likewise did differ very little from him in the ordering of his battallions. In
this sort the armies on both parts being disposed ready to the combat, and
being animated by their co^manders, they went on cheerfully with high and
mighty clamors, and affronting each other with great hatred and courage, they
fell bravely to the encounter, and the battles joined together with great fury.
Many were overthrown on both sides, many were slain and gave up the ghost,
many were trampled and trodden under the horse feet, but the greatest loss and
slaughter fell to the Mahometistes. It was an horror to hear the noise and
clattering of their armours, the soundes of their weapons and strokes
resounding in the air, the pitiful voices, cries and gronings of those that
lay a dying. He that had seen how eger and sharp set the Christians were,
fleshing themselves in the slaughter and butcherie of the Infidels, would not
have taken them for men but for so many Lions chaffed and hunting after their
prey. For bearing up close and straight together, they did so rudely press
upon their enemies, terrifying and fearing them with their incredible bravery
and couragiousnesse, that they enforced them to give ground, themselves not
yielding nor recuiling, so much as one foot backewardes, as men that were led
on with despair and resolution, and whose eyes were closed up against all
perils whatsoever. Ballaban who had more then once made proof of the rude
entertainment of the Albanois, and knew well what belonged thereunto, did
continue the fight with singular prudence and dexterity, laboring with great
and exceeding care and travel to prevent and eschew all perils and
inconveniences. For being guarded with a strong troop of horse, he held firm
in the forefront of the battle, comforting and cheering up those which were
wearied, and still supplying with fresh men the places of those which were
wounded: and thus being intentive with a provident eye and regard to all
parts, he made no spare of his person in discharging the deuoire and duty
both of an excellent Captain, and a most tall soldier. Scanderbeg likewise
wheresoever he saw any of his squadrons to waver, did readily succor and
relieve them, and did continually restore the fight: and if it happened at any
time that his people did begin to grow weary, or to have the worst of the
fight, the would speedily make from one part to another, and he would on all
sides sustain the hazard of the battle, he would thrust in amongst the
thickest of his enemies, and by his presence would withstand the fury and
tempest of their attempts. So that on what side soever the Barbarians turned
themselves, still did they meet and encounter with the fury of Scanderbeg,
then the which nothing could present it self more terrible in their sight,
nothing could have happened more to their discouragement: and whersoeuer he
became he still drew after him an assured victory, insomuch, that both the
enemy and the Albanois did openly confess and affirm with one general
consent and voice, that Scanderbeg was the best soldier and brauest warrior in
the world. As he was thus gotten in amongst the thickest of the Infidels, doing
wonderful deeds of arms in killing all that came in his way, it happened that
his horse being mortally wounded did stumble at a great trunk or root of a
tree couched close by the ground, so that they fell both Scanderbeg in danger
of his life.
horse and man together. Scanderbeg lying under his horse was so sore crushed
with the fall, and so grievously hurt in one of his shoulders, that he lay a
while as one in a swound. The Turks thought verily he had been dead, and
therefore advancing themselves in a great troop together, they came flocking
about him, and began to light on foot, that they might have cut off his
head. But Scanderbeg his men at arms rushing in furiously, and breaking
thorough the press, did cover him with their bodies and their shields till
such time as being come again to himself, and having recovered his weapons,
he was mounted again upon a fresh horse. Thereupon the vehemency of the grief
past, and his spirits newly gathered, made him to enter again into the midst
of the battle with greater fury and fiercenes then before, insomuch that
making way on all sides with the edge of his sword amongst the Infidels, he
seemed not much unlike to a raging tempest which falling in a field of corn,
beats it al down, and presses it even with the ground: so the King of Albany
making a great slaughter and butchery amongst the Turks, encountered at length
with one that was a man of principal account and chiefest regard in all their
army, whose name was Sulyman, and him did he overthrow dead upon the place.
This act gave him the whole advantage of the field, which till that time was
uncertain and equally balanced between both parties. But even at that
instant so sudden and strange a fear did surprise the barbarians, that their
force and courage began to fail them all at once: and they were not able any
longer to endure the violence of the Christians, who had usually been
accustomed to beat and master them. Wherefore in this their general
astonishme^t, they were so lively and roundly pressed, and so hardly followed,
that they were constrained to turn their backs, and to fly with might and
maine for the safeguard of their lives. But the flight was more pernicious unto
them then the fight: for all of them in a manner remained dead Victory of
Scanderbeg the third time against Ballaban and the Turks.
in the fields of Dibria, which seemed to be fattened with the blood of the
Infidels, by reason that the vanquishers did so egerly follow and pursue them,
that they would never leave nor give over the chase as long as they found any
one with his weapons in his hand. I should have enough to do, if I should tell
you how notable a booty, and what great riches were found in the tents and
camp of the Paynims; all which was liberally granted to the soldiers, to
comfort them for the hardness and difficulty of their labors, and to assuage
the grief and sorrow of their hearts conceived for the loss of their fellows
and companions, of whom there were slain in this battle to the number of
three hundred, besides infinite of them sore wounded.

Scanderbeg after this notable and famous journey, found himself so payned in
his shoulder and in his arm, that he was compelled in a manner to keep house
for three whole months together. Ballaban who had saved himself by the
benefit of his Mahomet highly displeased with Ballaban for the loss of his
army.
spurs, and had gotten within Alchria, departed from thence within a while
after to Constantinople, where being come with a very small train, he had but
bad welcome of his Prince, who entertained him with a very angry and frowning
countenance. He reproched him continually with this foul and grievous
overthrow, and he demanded of him the lives of so many brave soldiers, and
the flower of so many gallant youths which (as he said) were betrayed and
wilfully lead to the butcherie, by his folly and rashness. But the wily and
cunning gallant, by a long and artificial Oration found the means to appease
and mitigate the wrath and anger of the Sultan: Speeches used by Ballaban to
Mahomet in excuse of his overthrow by Scanderbeg.
calling the gods to witness, and appealing to those soldiers which were
escaped from the slaughter, he referred himself to their examination and
testimonies whether that before he began the fight, he had not with singular
providence and exact prudence carefully foreseen and regarded all matters:
whether that the choice of the time and the place, or the manner of the
ordering of his battles were in any respect to be condemned: whether that
either the soldiers or the General had failed in their duty, and in brief,
whether that he had omitted or neglected any thing, which might have purchased
or furthered his victory. And casting the whole fault of his defaster and
misfortune upon the will and inevitable pleasure of the gods, and the
uncertainty of fortune the perpetual friend of inconstancy which makes
deeds of arms doubtful and subject to daily alteration, he would not in any
sort seem to acknowledge, that he was inferior to the King of Albanie in
virtue or desert. He did allow and confess him to be one of the most
accomplished and most fortunate warriors in the whole world; but yet
nevertheless, that he was mortal, and not invincible as was to be seen by
Sebalias before at the siege of Belgrade, and by himself also at the battle
of Valcala, where he had taken and defeated diverse of his best and most
valiant Knights and Chieftaines. And thus did he excuse himself as finely as
he could. So well could he handle the matter by his smooth and fair speeches,
that he made the Sultan to give him the hearing of any thing. Whereupon he
adventured to propound unto him a new and seeldome used course which he had
conceived in his mind, by means whereof he was in hope to obtain an easy
and assured victory of the Prince of Albanie, which he uttered in this manner.

May it please your excellent Majesty, quoth he, (most happy and mighty
Monarch) Speech of Ballaban to Mahomet propounding a course for the destruction
of Scanderbeg.
to choose out and nominate two notable and sufficient Chieftaines, who with
two puissant armies by diverse and sundry ways, and severally each from
other, may with all diligence and secrecy make their entry into Epyre,
pretending that their journey lies some other way. And let not any one of them
come to fight with the enemy without the other: but staying and expecting the
coming of his companion, let them both together with a common advise and
mutual counsel, suddenly turn bridle, and marching against him, both at one
time, they may enclose and entangle him in the midst between them, and so
easily overthrow him. By this course and means both himself and his people
shall be soon overcome and cut in pieces, and so shall we make a final end of
the war and insolency of the Albanois.

Mahomet took so great a liking of the reasons and devise of Ballaban, and the
conceit which he had propounded pleased him so well, that without any delay,
he gave him full power and authority to ordain what he thought good for the
prosecuting of this war and for the bringing of it to an end. And that he
should make choice amongst all his Captains of such a one whom himself should
best like of, for his colleague and compartner in that journey: as also that he
should take such a number of men as he should think needful: and he urged him
to hasten this voyage into Speech of Mahomet to Ballaban, urging him to the
destruction of Scanderbeg.
Epyre, and to follow it with all possible care, policy, and good counsel. He
told him, that nothing could be more acceptable or welcome unto him, then to
hear that Scanderbeg with his forces were expelled and banished out of Epyre.
That he could not think, nor account himself a Prince of any good fortune of
happiness, as long as he should see this his enemy to be alive, by whom he
had suffered so many outrages and discommodities. Ballaban being desirous to
repair his honor, caused forth with a wonderful company of soldiers to be
leauied, with the which he Iagup Arnauth sent with an army against Scanderbeg
of sixteen thousand horsemen.
made so puissant an army, that it was sufficient to have made the Realm of
Albanie to tremble for very fear: and he adjoined unto him for his companion
Iagup Arnauth (which is as much to say) as James the Albanois. For he also was
borne in that country, and he was a Knight of great estimate and reckoning,
and one that had won great honor by deeds of arms. These troops being
now assembled together, and parted between them, Ballaban directed his
compartner to take his way all alongest the seacoastes, and so crossing over
Greece and Thessaly to enter into Epyre: and he charged him expressly, that in
any case he should not discover himself, or make any attempt against the
enemy, till such time as he perceived Ballaban him Ballaban his fourth journey
against Scanderbeg with 28000. Turks
self with his people to be arrived, and to approach near him. For he taking a
shorter and nearer cut through Thrace and Macedonie, was the first of the two
that came into Albanie, and was there a great deal sooner then Iagup: the
army which Ballaban had with him only, exceeded above four and twenty
thousand horsemen, besides four thousand that served on foot.

Let us now turn our speech to the General of the Christians, and let us see
a little with what diligence, and with what preparations, he provided to feast
these his guestes, who had bidden themselves in so great a company, without
being invited by him. For you must understand, that Arnauth who went the other
way, had with him also sixteen thousand horse at the least. Ballaban had no
sooner taken the field, but that Scanderbeg had as speedy intelligence of his
coming both by letters written to him of purpose, as also by his espyals, of
whom he kept a good number continually dispersed in all parts of the Turk his
country, and even within the cabinet (if I may so speak) of the tyrant: by
occasion whereof he caused a speedy leauy to be made of eight thousand horse,
and fourethousand footmen, with as great silence and secrecy as was possible,
and with them he held himself in a readiness, being fully prepared both in
courage and in arms to receive the Barbarian. Who being at length arrived
within the frontiers of Epyre, the Albanian Prince determined to go and visit
him, purposing to make an end of that matter, and to try his fortune first
with him, before that Arnauth should be able to come and join with him, for
fear least being assailed all at one time with two so puissant enemies, he
should not be able to make head against them, and so might his enemies have
their desire of him. And without all doubt I do not think that it would have
fallen out any otherwise, if the plot laid by the Paynim had sorted to his
effect. But the divine providence (which governs and rules all things
according to his own will and pleasure) had a special care to the affairs of
the Christians and of Scanderbeg. And he would not permit that he which of so
ardent a zeal, and so sincere and entire an affection did daily expose and
adventure his life, and did incessantly labor and travel for the preservation
of the Catholic faith, should so ignominiously and traitorously be surprised,
vanquished or oppressed. Ballaban therefore having passed over Thrace and
Macedonie, was now Ballaban encamped at the plain of Valcala.
encamped in the plain of Valcala: wherefore Scanderbeg having knowledge, by
the favor and benefit of the dark, he caused his troops to march in great
secrecy directly toward him, and sent before him three soldiers (such as he
thought most advised and best accustomed to that office) to discover and take a
view of the enemies camp, and to observe their countenance, with an express
commandment that as soon as they had seen and considered all things, they
should not fail to return unto him presently, and to make report unto him
what they had learned. One of these three soldiers (as some say) was of kin
to Ballaban, or at leastwise was before corrupted. And he had won his
companions likewise promising them in the behalf of Ballaban great sums of
gold and silver: the which we see does daily work miracles in the minds of
mortal men, especially such as are greedily set Sentence.
upon the desire of worldly riches. These three then went on directly to the
Mohammedan, Treason of certain soldiers serving under Scanderbeg.
and revealed unto him all the secret counsels and enterprises of Scanderbeg.
The Prince of Epyre having his thoughts continually upon his scoutes did for
a while expect and look for them: but seeing that they stayed over long and
came not again, he was in a doubt least some misaduenture had befallen them,
and that they had been intercepted by the enemy. Himself therefore (as he
was always prompt and venturous in all military actions) would needs go and
see what should be the cause of their stay, taking with him in his company
only five soldiers and no more, to the intent he might take a view, and be
informed of the estate of the enemy, and hear some news also of his own
people. But Ballaban (who to his own cost was passing well acquainted and
experienced with the cunning and politic draughts of his enemy) misdoubting
some such matter, thought that he would beat him at his own weapons, and
therefore he used this counterpolicie in hope to ouerreach him. He made choice
of certain stout and very hardy men, all excellently well mounted on
horseback, and with them did he beset a certain passage, by which he
Ambushment dressed by Ballaban to surprise Scanderbeg.
suspected that Scanderbeg himself would come to take a view of his camp, and
the demeanor of his army: and he was not any thing deceived in his
imagination. For behold Scanderbeg was now come to the place of this
ambushment, but yet before he would proceed any further, he caused (according
to his wonted custom) one of his soldiers to go before him, who soon
discovered the danger of the Turks which lay there ambushed. The Infidels
seeing themselves bewrayed, issued out upon him with great fury, and after
some resistance made, constrained him to fly. In his flight he put himself
into a certain wood or thicket, which came next to hand, Scanderbeg in great
danger of his life, escapes the ambushment of Ballaban.
and which lay on the other side of the mountain, which encloseth the plain
of Valcala, where by ill hap he chanced upon a great tree, which being
withered with age, was fallen down and lay cross the path by which he was to
pass. Scanderbeg setting spurs to his horse made him to leap roundly over,
the like did one of his soldiers which followed him: but his companions not
being able to do the like, and perceiving that their last refuge, and their
only hope to save their lives consisted in their arms: couching themselves
close, they gave in valiantly amongst their enemies, and having both slain and
hurt some of them, they yielded up their lives as became men of valor and
resolution. One of the Barbarians following hard after Scanderbeg, leapt
likewise over the trunk of the tree, and gathered very close and near upon
him: Scanderbeg casting his eye about, and seeing one only to follow him,
made back directly toward him, and quickly overthrew him dead to the ground:
the rest being not willing to pursue him any farther, were content to let him
go and to depart quietly. After this fair and happy escape, Scanderbeg being
returned to his camp near Petralba about fifteen miles from the enemy, made
ready his squadrons for to march against the Infidels. At that time more then
ever did the Prince of Albanie employ all his senses to encourage and animate
his men with good words, and all other good means to do their deuoire against
their enemies. He offered them gifts and large rewards: he invited and
importuned them with prayers and earnest entreaties both in general and in
particular to take such things at his hand whereof they stood in any need,
were it either for themselves or for their horses. As the King was very
bountiful to offer them freely of his own, so assure your selves, that the
soldiers showed their wonderful modesty, and did (as it were) conted with him
in gratitude and courtesy, not taking any thing but in such measurable and
modest manner, as might serve only for the present need and necessity. Then
the Albanois having Scanderbeg marches against Ballaban.
taken some repast, began to march toward the enemy, and traveling on
continually day and night, they took little or no rest, scarce so much as might
suffice nature. They were not long therefore ere they had gotten to the valley,
where the army of Ballaban lay encamped. Scanderbeg seizing upon the top of
the same valley, did pitch his camp with most excellent advantage, by reason
that he enuironned the enemy who lay below him in the plain: for he extended
his companies throughout all the tops of the mountains which enclosed the
valley, occupying all the streights and passages, in such sort that he had
enclosed on all sides, and (as it were) hedged in the Barbarians, whom he
visited also with often and daily skirmishes, sometimes on the flanckes and
sides of their camp, sometimes at their backs, because he would hold them in
doubt and suspense of his intent and meaning.

The next day following Scanderbeg called a council of his nobles and
Chieftains, Council held by Scanderbeg for his proceedings against Ballaban.
at the which were present Tanusee Thopie, Zachary Groppe and Peic Manuell his
Lieutenants. Many of them were of this opinion: that the battle should be
deferred till such time as the soldiers were very well refreshed of their long
journey and watching lately endured: and that Tanusee should have some leisure
to take a taste of the enemy, and to keep him doing in the mean while. But
Scanderbeg was of another mind, and he did not only persuade, but he did
instantly urge and press them, that they should not by their delays and
daliance bring his determinations and counsels into hazard and danger, the
suertie whereof consisted in nothing so much as in prompt and speedy
execution:: That Ballaban his army might easily be broken and defeated, Speech
of Scanderbeg to his Captains counselling them presently to set upon Ballaban.
whilst that Iagup being ignorant of this attempt, did tarry away and keep
himself absent, which (quoth he) being deferred by our prolonging of the time,
we shall give them space and leisure to join together, and so shall we cause
our enterprise (which of it self is without danger) to come to a doubtful
and uncertain issue. Wherefore it behooves us with all speed to found to
horseback, to bid the battle to our enemies, and not to lose this advantage
which their error and oversight has given us now that their two Generalles are
thus divided, the one absent, the other present. This opinion prevailed, and
the assembly being dissolved: behold now how Scanderbeg did prepare himself to
the combat. Of all his squadrons he made four Order of Scanderbeg his army
against Ballaban in the second battle of Valcala.
battles: the one he committed to Tanusee, the second to Zachary Groppe, and
of the third, Peic Manuell had the charge and conduct: the infanterie was
mingled among the horsemen, and the Harguebussiers and Archers were mixed pell
mell with the pikes and certain horsemen, whom he sent forth to skirmish with
the enemy, and to begin the fight. The residue of the army together with the
squadron which he had for the guard of his person, he reserved to be commanded
by himself. Having thus disposed and ordered his troops: he thought it
requisite with some short speech to encourage his companies, which he did in
this manner.

The importunity of the time (my companions) and your approved valor will
Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers encouraging them against Ballaban and
the Turks in the second battle of Valcala.
not suffer me at this time to make any long discourse: you are sufficiently
well acquainted with this enemy who is but the scumme and offscouring of those
troops which your swords have left alive, and they are but the reffuse and
relics of those battles which you lately gained. These are not the martial
and generous Frenchmen: these are not the warlike and brave Italians whom you
notwithstanding have beaten and defeated; but they are your slaves, their lives
are at your mercy, and they are the ordinary subject of your glory. See
therefore that you bestirre your selves valiantly, so as this journey may shut
up and determine the course of twenty years triumphs and victories, which
you have most gloriously gotten against them. They are come hither by force and
constraint: they are drawn hither by the blinded ambition of that infamous
peisant Ballaban, who being in disgrace both with God and man, does
desperately seek by some exploit against us to recover his reputation, and to
reenter into the grace and favor of his Mahomet. Now is the time my friends or
never, wherein you are to hope for an honorable end of your wearisome travels,
and of sheading of your blood: behold this is the last attempt of your
adversary: who being now destitute of Chieftaines that either dare, or are
able from henceforth to hurt you, by reason that you have either slain them or
discomforted them: he is now constrained to aid himself with them of your own
nation: but you need not to stand in doubt or fear, for such people, traitors
to God and their country, the worm of whose conscience is ever gnawing and
tormenting of their souls, cannot possibly be able to do you any great harm:
Go to then my good soldiers, let the noble and famous acts of your
ancestors, and your own honorable exploites sharpen and set spurs to your
courages: pluck up your hearts, gather your strength and forces unto you:
press upon your enemies, charge upon them bravely, break in valiantly
amongst these base rascals: trample these dogs and circumcised curres under
your ^eete, and march over their cursed carcasses like valiant soldiers, and
invincible conquerors.

Having thus spoken, the alarm was sounded, and they began to march all at
once. The Barbarians who stood ready raunged in order of battle with ensigns
displaied before their camp, did now expect and were determined to have been
doing with their enemies: but Ballaban staying for his companion did prolong
the time of the fight, and sounded the retrait, commanding some to watch when
Iagup would appear in sight. But Scanderbeg imagining that a minute of delay
might work his utter disadvantage, commanded those bands which were appointed
to begin the skirmish, and were now placed for the battle, to issue forth
roundly upon the Infidels; whilst that he with the residue of his army
descending down into the plain, did draw on directly toward the enemies
camp, with a full resolution to force the enemy to fight, and to dispatch the
matter before the coming of Arnauth. Hereupon he presented himself before the
camp of the Infidels with loud cries, reproaches and scoffs used by his
soldiers against them, challenging and provoking them to the Scanderbeg
challenges Ballaban to the battle.
combat. For all this was the Painim firm in his determination, and he would
not move a foot: but refusing to enter the listes, or to come to fight, he
kept his: people within their trenches: and the more that our men did press
upon them and importune them, being even ready to give the aslault unto his
camp, the more did he recuile and make from them. Ballaban his soldiers
conceiving foul despite, and being vehemently incensed for that they could not
be suffered to issue out to encounter with their enemies, they cried out and
exclaimed against their General, they murmured and gnashed with their teeth
for very rage and anger: and if the holding of them back by their General on
the one side did animate and set them in a heat: no less did the insolency
and bravery of the Epirots make them eger and sharp set, who were now upon
the point to force their rampires: insomuch that both on the one part and the
other, their courages were terribly enflamed and incensed each against other.
Ballaban nevertheless still stayed his soldiers and temporized to the
uttermost of his power. In the end, when he saw that he could not repress the
heat and Order of Ballaban his army in the second battle of Valcala.
fury of his Turks: he disposed his army in order of battle, placing the
Asappy before the ensigns of the vauntgard: and next to them upon the left
wing he put the Olophanges or Alophages are mercenarie soldiers.
Olophanges, who were notable and warlike soldiers, opposing them against
Tanusee. Against Zachary Groppe he set the Achanzes: and right opposite
against Peic Manuell, he ordained the Ianissaries who were a very stout and
hardy kind of men, enured and accustomed to the travel and toil of arms.
The right wing he himself commanded being defended with a strong squadron
which were for the guard of his The second battle of Valcala between Ballaban
and Scanderbeg.
body, and with all the old and most expert soldiers, upon whom he builded
his chiefest hope and confidence: placing him self directly against
Scanderbeg. Then began a most fierce and cruel fight between the Albanois and
the Mohammedan. Horrible was the slaughter on the one side and the other: and
the two Generals in proper person, drew the eyes of all men toward them. There
might you have seen the infanterie and cauallarie of Albanie, the old bands of
Croie, used and accustomed to maine battelles with the valiant and resolute
Dibrians: how they did make show of their notable skill and practice in the
Art military: and how at the very beginning of the fight, they did so
trouble the vauntgard of the Infidels, that they made their Ensigns to give
ground, till such time as the fury of the fight increasing, and the cry on
both sides growing to be redoubled, they did again advance themselves more
courageously then at the first. Then did Scanderbeg give a new charge upon
them, pressing them both before and behind, and enforcing himself by all
possible means to put them out of array, he cried all aloft unto his people,
saying.

How now (my friends) what did we make such have hitherwardes, did we rid so
Speech of Scanderbeg to his soldiers encouraging them in fight against Ballaban
much way, and did we make so long and speedy iourneyes to no end and
purpose? Shall we suffer our selves to be held so short by the same
Chiefetaine, by the same troops which we have so many times discomfited,
chased, and ouerrunne?

All this notwithstanding having more then once endeavored and striued but all
in vain to break and scatter them on that side, he made choice of certain
squadrons out of the right wing which he thought would have least to do, and
would rather stand idle then be employed in the fight, and causing them to
wheel about and to convey themselves behind the enemy at their backs,
without being apperceiued either by the adverse party or by their own
company, he did therewithal strike in upon the left wing of the enemy with
such fury and celeritie: that when as they thought to have found and to have
received him upon the flancke and side of their battallion, he was suddenly
gotten behind them and charged them at their backs: in such sort that the
Alchanzes and the Alophages found themselves assailed and endammaged on all
sides both in front and in flancke, and in their rereward: so that the
slaughter began now also to grow upon the Asappi who made little and no
resistaunce. For the most part of them the night before had absented themselves
from their ensigns, and were licentiously dispersed all over the fields, and
there lay some of them still wallowing upon the ground, overcome with sleep
and travel, and the rest which were then present in the battle being wearied
with their late travel and with ouerwatching (being a tender and soft kind of
people, and ill able to endure the heat of the year and hard travel) scarce
could they abide their arms upon their backs. For the sun being then at the
highest, made them in that case, that partly with extreme heat, and partly
with thirst, their enemies found them as men half dead, and they fell into
their hands by heaps to be taken or slain at their pleasures. Ballaban, who
had oftentimes purchased great honor and commendation in the like battelles,
in this journey behaved himself more nobly then in any other whatsoever. For
partly by encouraging his men in the fight, and partly also by hazarding his
person to all dangers: one while egging and pressing them forward, another
while blaming and rebuking those that were backward, and sometimes by recalling
of such as fled: he did for a long time maintain the fight well and worthily:
still animating his soldiers, and renewing the conflict in many places where
he saw his people to wax faint and to give over. At the last when he saw that
the fortune of the field did incline Victory of Scanderbeg the fourth time
against Ballaban and the Turks.
to the Epirots, and that he could no longer sustain their violence, he
changed his resolution, and setting spurs to his horse, he turned his back
and withdrew himself from the fight of the Christians. After him their whole
army did the like: for perceiving their rancks to be scattered and disordered,
every man began to fly some here, some there, over the fields into the
mountains and through the woods according as each man his fortune good or bad
did guide and direct him. Some few there were who following their General,
escaped together with him, and got away from the swords of their enemies, and
from the slaughter of their fellows. All the rest of the Barbarians were
either slain or taken prisoners: and if it happened, that any were gotten free
from the fury and confusion of the chase, yet were they cut in pieces by those
that kept the tops and passages of the mountains: in so much, that of the
whole host and army of Ballaban, there were very few left alive. As for
those small relics which remained, they were not in any sort pursued, because
there was a sudden rumor and report, that there was a new and fresh enemy
coming against them.

Scarce were the Christians departed out of the valley of Valcala, and the
soldiers had not yet made an end of parting and dividing the spoils of their
slain enemies: but that there came a messenger from Mamisa the Kings sister,
in poast haste from Petrella (where this Lady then lay with her guard and her
household) by whom she advertised Scanderbeg that Iagup Arnauth with sixteen
thousand horse was entered into Epyre by the way of Belgrade, where he wasted
and destroyed all things: and that he was then encamped in the lower Tyranna,
near adjoining to Iagup Arnauth encamped at Argilat in Epire.
a river which the inhabitants name Argilat. This Turk was an Epyrot by birth,
and his parents were both of them Christians: himself having been taken and
circumcised by the Turks did profess their superstitions. He was a man of
great hardiness and valor, and in times past both in Asia and in Greece, had
left many goodly and commendable testimonies of his prowes under Mahomet. His
coming into Epyre was (as we have said) to enclose the Prince of Albanie
between his forces and the army of his companion: for one of his own
soldiers having been taken by the people of Mamisa, and being examined upon
the cause and motive to this voyage, had confessed the same and did justify
the truth hereof unto them. Presently upon this advertisement, Scanderbeg
concluded to go with his whole army dirctly to Tiranna: which being now in a
readiness to march, he thought it good before his departure, thus to encourage
his soldiers.

This day (my good soldiers and friends) have we obtained by the assistance
of Oration of Scanderbeg to his soldiers being ready to march against Iagup
Arnauth.
the divine power, a most memorable victory according to our hearts desire,
against our capital and deadly enemy. Such was his rashness (unhappy man)
that he presumed to enclose us in the midst between two puissant and mighty
armies, and so most traitorously to have destroyed and oppressed us: and he was
in good hope by this notable draught and plot which he had devised to abolish
and wipe away his own shame and infamy, and the memory of those rude
discomfitures which he had received at our hands. Now by the grace of God and
your virtue, in stead of diminishing his shame and ignominy, he has made it a
great deal greater. Yet behold how even now again, before our hands be
clean, or that we have made an end of this last repaste, and before that the
cloth (as I may say) is taken away: see I pray you, how Iagup Arnauth a noble
and bountiful banquettour is come to inuit us to a new banquet, because he
would have us to make an end of our feast: and being loath that his guestes
should be defrauded of good and convenient entertainment, he has brought us
his army also for a second course: see I say (my dear friends) how before we
are gotten out of this valley, and have (as it were) washed our hands embrued
with the blood of our enemies: before we have wiped the blood off our swords,
or have sheathed them in our scabbords: Iagup is likewise come unto us: he
offreth us good and friendly presents, that is, his troops and squadrons, that
you may use and dispose of them at your pleasures, either to take a taste of
them, or else altogether to devour and consume them. Go we therefore (my good
companions) go we to this marriage feast whereunto Iagup does inuit us and does
so earnestly call us: let us eat our fill of his dainties, and when we shall
have gluttted our selves, let us carry some part also away with us. Let us make
all speed and diligence to be gone from hence, let us go and meet with Iagup,
whom (I dare assure you) we will quickly overthrow and bring to confusion: for
these are but a handful of men in comparison of those that were with Ballaban:
besides, me thinks I see that the warlike fury, and the martial fierceness
of your courages does yet continue burning and flaming within you.

Scarcely had Scanderbeg ended his speech, but he might see his soldiers
wonderfully incensed and inflamed: all of them with high cries and clamours
entreated him Scanderbeg marches against Iagup.
to lead them presently to this second banquet: whereupon being full of hope
and courage they removed their camp, and with ensigns displaied took their
way toward Tiranna there to affront and encounter with Iagup. Is it not a
strange matter to see and consider the marvelous audacitie, and the confident
resolution of this people, that being but newly gotten out of so great a
danger, and their wounds yet scarce staunched, and the sweat of their former
toil and labor yet scant wiped off their faces, yet you should now see them
thus prompt and forward to depart presently and out of hand against a new
enemy, and one that had so great a puissance and whole forces which were yet
fresh, sound and entire? But you may think that they were not a little hardened
and emboldened by the presence and happy fortune of Scanderbeg, by his sage
experience and prudent conduct, and by the consideration of his invincible
valor and prowes. In like manner, the daily exercise and continual
frequentation of deeds of arms by this nation did not a little increase that
confidence in them: and besides, what reason had they to stand in any fear of
the Turkish power and puissance, which had been the ordinary and continual
subject of their glory and reputation? Notwithstanding, to speak more like a
Christian, and to conjecture aright of this their wonderful resolution and
hardines: I for my part do verily believe, (the issue and event of matters does
argue no less) and that this was a thing merely divine and miraculous. But to
our history.

Arnauth being informed that Scanderbeg did approach, trussed up baggage and
dislodged from thence: being not as yet acquainted nor knowing any thing of the
misfortune of his companion: and he retired himself into one of the most
recuiled angles and corners of Tiranna near unto a little mountainet or hill
upon the which Iagup encamped at Cassar.
was a certain small village, of the inhabitaunts named Cassar: which place he
found to be of most safety and security to encampe in. Scanderbeg seized
upon that place from whence the other was lately departed. During all that day
both the camps lay very quiet. Howbeit, true it is, that the Albanois did
pass the night following in great care and iealouzie for fear least that
Iagup and his army should discampe the same night, if by chance he should
have any inckling of the defait of Ballaban. For this cause, all the ways and
passages were seized upon and beset with armed men. The next morning as soon as
the sun was risen, and that the reflection of the sun beams did beat upon
the tents and eyes of the Barbarians: Scanderbeg being very considerate, and
having no doubt of the victory, marched in order of battle directly toward
Iagup, causing the heads of certain slain Turks to be cast before the
tents of the Infidelles, and some of those ensigns also to be displayed,
which had been purposely kept and reserved after the defaite of Ballaban: and
he showed them also certain captives chained and tied together. Arnauth being
wounded with extreme grief and sorrow for this unexpected mishappe and
misfortune, presently exclaimed and said.

Now (quoth he) do I acknowledge the misfortune of the house of Ottoman, and
Speech of Iagup of the fortune of Scanderbeg.
the good fortune of Scanderbeg.

The King of Albanie sent forth 500 vauntcurrours to draw forth Iagup to the
combat: and he charged them not to join in fight with the Infidel, but when
they should see them to break out upon them, that then they should retire in
good order: The battle of Cassar between Scanderbeg and Iagup.
and so it happened accordingly. Iagup had divided his army into three troops
or battallions, and he was quickly gotten out of his trenches to follow after
the Albanian horsemen: unto whom Scanderbeg calling and willing them to turn
about, and to make head against the enemy: in an instant he joined himself
unto them: and all of them together endured the shocke of the Paynim coming
fiercely upon them. Then there began a most sharp and cruel conflict: at the
very entry whereof many a brave man lost his life both on the one side and
the other, and each party was so incensed and egerly enflamed against other
with such rage and choler: that the battle continued doubtful and bloody
for a long time: but the wonted stratageme, and accustomed policy of
Scanderbeg did soon end and determine the combat: and the inequality of the
parties came to be discerned by the speedy end and slaughter of the General
Turk: upon whom the Prince of Epire having had a continual eye: and having by
pure force made himself way through the rancks of his enemies, he charged him
with his lance, and at the very first stroke ran him clean through the Iagup
slain by Scanderbeg.
throat. Their Chieftaine being laid on the ground, every man striued who
should fly fastest: they that were best mounted were most happy in this
danger: every man forgot his brother, his friend and his companion, and
happy was he that could make shift for himself. The chase continued long, and
it was very mortal: infinite Victory of Scanderbeg against Iagup and the
Turks.
being put to the sword in the midst of their flight: many also were taken
prisoners: all which found like fortune and entertainment: for that the
Christians having yet fresh in memory the late wounds and the barbarous and
inhumaine usage of their brethren and kinsmen murdered by Mahomet, the grief
and remembrance thereof made them to execute all their prisoners with diverse
and sundry kinds of torments. And especially those Turks who being escaped
from the tumult and slaughter of the battle, did happen alive into the hands
of the peysants: they found no better entertainment, but were put to all the
tortures and torments that could be possibly devised or imagined.

It was never seen that of two armies at one and the same time, and in one and
the same war, that the King of Epire had put to the sword so many miscreants.
Besides by the mishap of both their Generals (of whom the one was fled with the
loss of his army, and the other was slain, and all his troops likewise
destroyed) it seemed ^umber of Turks slain and taken in the battelles of
Valcala and Cassar.
that the misfortune of Belgrade was now equally and sufficiently recompensed.
There were slain of the Infidels four and twenty thousand: and six thousand
taken prisoners with an incredible booty of prey and pillage, especially of
gold and silver. Besides, there were about four thousand Christians set free
and delivered from the servitude of the Turks, who being laborours and other
inhabitaunts of the plain country, had been taken by the Infidels in many
courses and roades which they had made upon the Province, which was some
comfort for the dolorous loss received at the streights of Valcala. In these
two iourneies: (for you must not think they were gotten without blood) there
were missing, about 1000. Christians: and the victors themselves were so
satiated and wearied with killing and slaughtering of the Turks: that when it
was reported unto Scanderbeg the next morning how that Ballaban was fled and
retired with one only company of horse, and without any Ensigns, and without
any good order, and that if there were never so small a troop sent after him
to follow him close at the heels, it would be an easy matter to take and
oppress Speech of Sca^derbeg touching the flight of Ballaban.
both him and all his company. Let them go (quoth he) and seeing we have gotten
the honor of the field, let there be some left to carry the news of the
slaughter and calamity of our enemies, and of our virtue and prowess.

These things being thus accomplished, the Marshall of the Camp took his
journey toward Croy, who was received with the less concourse and
preparation, because there had not bin sent any messenger before hand to give
any notice of his coming: but the joy and gladness was so unmeasurable, that
they knew not almost how to express it: and to say the truth, it cannot be
declared in what estate the whole city stood, neither in what extreme fear
they had always continued through their uncertain expectation of the success
and event of the fight: nor how exceedingly they rejoiced and triumphed on all
parts, when they heard the news and report of the victory. For in all that
time after the first tidings was brought the^, how that Scanderbeg was gone
Croi^s their estate, and demea nour, before and after the victory of Scanderbeg.
against the enemy, there was not any one of the great men of the town, that
from morning to night would be absent from the Palace, or from the
magistrates: neither would the people forgo the market place: their wives
which had little or none other business, would seldom be from the Churches, or
from their prayers and devotion. The town being in this great fear and
suspense, did at the first receive this doubtful and uncertain news, namely:
that two horsemen Dibrians (who were returned from the battle to the Camp
upon the confines of Epire) had reported: that the enemy was defeated. This
report was entertained at the first more with their ears, then with any
belief of their minds, as a thing too strange, and so much desired, that it
was thought too good to be true, besides the hastiness and celerity of the
report did make it of the less credit, because it was spoken two days before
the fight fell out. After this Tanuse sent letters from the Camp, signifying
the coming of those two Dibrian horsemen: those letters being carried through
the market place of Croy to the palace, did cause so great a concourse of
people to assemble at the gate of the palace, that the bearer could not pass
through them, but he was pulled and drawn with great violence by some that
were inquisitiue after news: and they cried out aloft that the letters should
be read openly in the market place, before they should be carried to the
Magistrate. After that they had been read in the Palace, according as the
diversity of men's humors did carry them, so did they think and imagine of the
truth of the matter: some were fully satisfied, and rejoiced at the news:
others believed never a word, till such time as they had heard either the
messengers themselves to speak it, who were sent from the Marshall, or else the
letters read unto them. After all this the report went, that the Marshall
himself was coming thither in person: at which time all sorts of persons, and
of all ages, ran hastily forth to meet him, and they went out in such
continual flocks and troops, that they reached about half a league without
the gates, every one striving to be the first, that should with their eyes and
with their ears, swallow up the exceeding greatness of this expected joy.
Tanuse was the man whom they went thus to meet withal, who being enuironned
on all sides with this rude and confused multitude, arrived at last in the
market place, of the city: where some enquiring of him self, others of them
that followed him, how all matters stood, and what good news they had brought:
when they heard for certain, that both the armies of the enemy were
discomfited: that one of the Generals was slain: that the Albanian Legions
were safe and ^ound, and that their Prince and his Captains were in good
health: every man rejoiced at the news, and made others likewise partakers of
their joy. When Tanuse was come with much ado to the Palace, yet for all this
would not the common people be drawn to depart, and to retire themselves: but
that they did in a manner thrust themselves amongst the Magistrates. At length,
the letters being read in the Senate, then did Tanuse recount more at large the
proceedings and issue of the whole voyage, whereat there was a most wonderful
applause and acclamation of all the Senate: and they were not in any sort able
to moderate the extremity of their joy. After this, some visited the temples to
yield thanks and praises unto God: others made have to repair to their own
houses, to the intent they might communicate and impart these happy tidings to
their wives and children. The Magistrates by a solemn edict, commanded
public prayers and processions for three days together, for the victory and
health of Scanderbeg and his army: the like decree was made by the Queen and
her counsel, which was very devoutly observed and kept. During all which time,
you might have seen the Churches filled and frequented, both with men and
women all alike: and the ancient Matrones and Ladies being richly and
sumptuously apparelled, with their little children, did humbly and cheerfully
perform their vows and public thanks unto the divine Majesty, as if the
enemy had been utterly destroyed and consumed, and as if the war had been
fully determined and ended, and that all fear and suspicion had been quite
gone and exiled: and more then that, this victory did so settle and establish
the estate of the town, as if they had gotten an assured rest and tranquillity
for ever.

These things being thus accomplished and ended, with no small religion and
devotion: Scanderbeg (because he would the more terrify the enemy) entered upon
his territories, and passing on a good way into the country, filled all places
with fire and Invasion by Scanderbeg into the Turkish territories.
sword, with blood and terror: besides that, he carried away an incredible booty
without any resistaunce made against him: and so retyring with exceeding joy
into his own Province, and having left (according to his wonted custom) a
strong garrison upon his frontiers, he returned with great triumph and general
reioycings to Croy his Scanderbeg his return and triumph at Croy after his
victory.
chief city, where having for certain days (together with his citizens)
celebrated the solemnity and common joy of this glorious victory: he dispatched
away letters and messengers to the most part of the Kings and Princes of
Christendom, with magnificent gifts of diverse sorts, chosen out of the
spoils, that had been taken upon his enemies, as excellent good horses,
slaves, armours, and rich furnitures and caparisons for horses, with such like
rare and goodly presents. After all which, he brake up his Camp, and dismissed
all his companies: so that this year was no less famous and memorable, then
full of joy and gladness to the Epirots.

The end of the eleventh book.
THE TWELFTH BOOK OF THE FAMOVS ACTS OF GEORGE CASTRIOT, SVRNAMED SCANDERBEG.
THE ARGUMENT.
MAhomet enraged for the discomfiture of Ballaban and Iagup, prepares to come
into Epire in proper person: and Scanderbeg provides to receive him. Mahomet
conspireth the death of Scanderbeg by treason: which is discovered, and the
traitors executed. Croy is besieged by Ballaban, Mahomet him self coming to
the siege, and being out of hope to carry the town by force, returns toward
Constantinople, and leaves Ballaban to continue the siege of Croy. Mahomet in
his return surprizeth Chidna by treason, and infidelity, putting the
inhabitants to the sword. Scanderbeg makes a journey to Rome, to get aid of
the Pope and the Christians for the relief of Croy, but returns with small
comfort: he is succored by the Venetians. Ionima the brother of Ballaban, with
his son Heder, coming to the aid of Ballaban, are surprised by Scanderbeg,
and both of them taken prisoners. Scanderbeg inuadeth the Camp of the
Infidels: a sallie is made by the Croians upon the Turks, wherein Ballaban is
slain. The Turks break up their siege before Croy: and depart out of Epire.
Chidna is recovered, and Epire cleansed of the Infidels. Mahomet makes a
second journey into Epire: builds Valor, and besieges first Duraz, and
after Croy: but he raises his siege from both of them. Chiurill a town newly
builded, and unfinished by Scanderbeg, is razed by Mahomet, who returns to
Constantinople. Alibeg and Aliazbeg are sent with an army to safeguard the
Turkish frontiers. Scanderbeg preparing to recover Valures from the Turks,
sickeneth: he disposes and orders his affairs. Ahamat with an army of
fifteen thousand Turks, inuading and spoiling the Venetian territories flies
out of Epire, and is defeated by the Epirots. Scanderbeg dies and is buried,
his dead body is honored and reverenced by the Turks. Certain memorable acts
done by Scanderbeg in his lifetime.

THe haught exploit, and the mortal accident happened to the armies of
Ballaban and Iagup, being published and spread abroad over all places: the fame
thereof (like a flying Post) came with wonderful speed to the ears of the
Ottoman, whose heart was replenished, and well near overcome with extremity of
grief and incomparable astonishment. Wherefore being afraied least that
Fortune would now prove a stepdame unto him, and cross him in his attempts,
and that (after so many prosperities and continual favors, she would now in
the end revolt and fall away from him, and retiring unto his fiercest enemy,
would entertain him for her fauorit, and oppose her self against him, he
began Council called by Mahomet to consult for the oppressing of Scanderbeg.
to grow into a most strange passion: afflicting and tormenting his mind with
extreme care and melancholy. And being thus perplexed, irresolute and
distracted within him self, he caused all his chieftaines and councillors to
be called and assembled together, to the intent he might consult with them, and
devise upon some remedy against this mischief. Now when they were all of them
gathered together and set in council, the tyrant giving the bridle to his
passion and choler, did break forth into most bitter inuectiues and injurious
reproachful terms against Scanderbeg, and he used this or the like speech
unto them.

You are not ignorant (my good friends) how that I never made any spare of my
Oration of Mahomet to his chieftains purposing a journey against Scanderbeg in
proper person.
travel and pains, nor of any hazardes or dangers, but that I have been
always prodigal of my proper life and safety, for the increase of the faith
of our chief Prophet: for the augmentation of the name and Empire of the house
of Ottoman: for the surety and safety of you and your families: and to make
this estate of ours peaceable, quiet, and flourishing. In all our actions and
expeditions wherein we our selves have been present, and which have been
undertaken by us in proper person, we have found Fortune friendly and favorable
unto us: and yet at this time I know not what to say, of this petty Province of
Epire, and of this petty Prince Scanderbeg; as often as I consider the infamous
death of so many excellent chieftaines and generals of our hoasts, and the
total discomfiture or shameful captivity of so many flourishing armies: nor
can I tell what to make of it, unless it be that the Demon or Angel of this
Apostata, and rebellious renegado do fight for him, and do surmount the Demon
of all those who are opposed against him. We may see then that this business
does require the rigor of a more furious and violent hand, and of some
Chieftaine who is more happy and fortunate in his enterprises. I am determined
(my good friends) and in my opinion it is the best and most convenient course,
that we take this war into our own hands, and that we make a journey into
Epire in our proper person, with more puissant and solemn preparations then
Amurath our father did at his going against the Albanois. Then shall that
fugitive and traitor Scanderbeg well perceive, even with the loss of his
hateful head, that it is nothing to have a Bassa, a Saniacke, or an Aga to
beard him: but that it is another manner of matter, to be invaded with the
presence and majesty of a most mighty, puissant, and fortunate Monarch, that
shall employ his whole power, and bend the fury of all his forces against him.
And although the glorious memory of our deceased father, did not carry away the
entire honor of this voyage, but did yield up his ghost in the persuite
thereof, yet ought not the honor and praise of that journey, be attributed to
the virtue or prowess of that slave, or his Christians: but rather to the
imbecility of his age, and the infirmity of his decaying years, as shortly
also we shall see the like to befall and betide even to Scanderbeg him self,
who is now upon the declining of his age, and will even in a moment find his
fortune to wax old and faint: and that same viuacity and liuelines of his
spirit, and the vigorous disposition of his lims and members will fail and
forsake him: so as in the end he will sink under the burden of his affairs.
For the nature and property of Fortune, is to delight in the flourishing time
of youth, and she seeks out and desires to be resident with those, whose
minds are transported with swelling ambition, and with Sentence.
stirring thoughts: and as the heat of blood waxes cool, and as this vigor
of the mind grows to be weakened: so does fortune likewise wax cold, and does
use to discontinue her favors: and therefore I make no doubt, but that in an
instant, I shall utterly confound this unhappy Christian, together with his
people and posterity: who being become more arrogant by the happy success of
so many good encounters, does daily molest my subjects, ouerrunning and
destroying all my Province of Macedonie. And if it happen that he fall into my
snares, and that I can get him within my reach, I will execute upon his
wretched body, (being the subject of all vice and wickedness) all kinds and
examples of extreme cruelty: because, besides the dispeasure done me in the
death of my father, this Hydra, this monster of all mischiefs, has infinitely
provoked against him my just wrath and indignation. But foolish man as he is,
let him take his pleasure for a time, let him hold on his course yet a while,
let him glory in his goodly realm, and in his ambitious poverty, whilst the
destinies do permit and suffer him: it shall not be long, ere I will swallow
him up in endless ruin and perdition. This therefore is my advise, that we
go right on to Croy, the capital and chief city of that Province, with so
great forces and puissance, that it shall not be able to hold out against us.
For when Croy is overcome and conquered, all the other places and strong holds
of the country will be soon reduced to the same estate and condition.

This matter being propounded by Mahomet, and approved by the general consent
and voices of his Visits and Captains: infinite commissions were granted
forth, and public proclamation was made throughout all the territories and
dominions Mahomet leauteth a mighty army against Scanderbeg.
under the Turk his obeysaunce: that all men which were apt to bear arms,
should repair to the Commissioners, and cause their names to be enrolled:
insomuch that innumerable forces were leauied, and in the mean time, provision
was made of munitions, instruments, engines, and other necessaries for the
Camp, all which being in a readiness, the Turkish Monarch with a most proud
and glorious train, took his way toward Epire.

Upon these troubles and tumults approaching, Scanderbeg wanted not his
intelligencers, and ordinary spies, but that they gave him sure and speedy
aduertisements of all things, which was the occasion that he assembled all his
friends and nobles, and amongst others, Paul Angel Archbishop of Duraz, unto
whom he imparted his most Iosaphat Barbare, some say he was the Admiral or
Proueditore of the Venetians.
secret counsels: and to them he adjoined also Iosaphat Barbare the Venetian
Ambassador, a worthy personage of great judgment and experience, and
singularly zealous of the Christian religion, who together with the Archbishop,
was seldom or never from the side of the Prince of Albanie. By the general
advise and consent of this assembly, it was ordained, that all the towns,
places, and fortresses of the realm, should be diligently furnished and
provided with victuals, and other necessary provisions, and fortified with good
and faithful garrisons: especially Croy, the principal bulwark, and stay of
all the estate of Albany, and whereupon all the rest depended. He provided
therefore, and stuffed it with good store of soldiers, part of them Albanois,
and part Italians, all of them of approved loyalty and resolution: and he made
Balthazar Perduce, governor of Croy.
choice of an Italian Gentleman to be governor of the town, one Balthazar
Perduce, a man highly esteemed for his prudence, judgment, and resolution.

But before I pass any further, it shall be requisite, that I recount unto you
one plot or devise forged and framed in the shop or storehouse of the Ottomans
treachery and infidelity, the invention and practice whereof as it was subtle
and deuilish, so was it Conspiracy and traitorous plot of Mahomet to contriue
the death of Scanderbeg.
miraculously discovered and avoided: by the knowledge whereof you may easily
conjecture, how greatly they redoubted and stood in awe of Scanderbeg, whom
they could not suffer and endure, no more then a thorn sticking in their
foot. The Turkish Monarch perceauing that the Prince of Epyre was now grown
to that height of honor, that his name began to be fearful and terrible unto
all the Mahometistes, was in great fear least that by reason of this exceeding
fame and renown of the Epyrots, his own people and subjects should take an
occasion to grow mutinous and to raise some sedition; and so taking arms
against him, should either seek to murder there him and to cut his throat, or
else might chase and expel him out of his ^eate an^ throne Imperial, and
bestow the same upon the king of Albanie: for he was not ignorant that his
notable cruelty had made him most hateful and odious unto al men, whereas
this is not the mean to reign long and happily, but clemency and i^stice
Sentence.
are the firm pillars of each estate and Empire: for this cause did he imagine
an^ determine to surprise Scanderbeg by deceit and treachery, whom he saw he
was no^ able to destroy by force and violence: he procured therefore and
provided him self o^ two men practiced and expert in most languages, (as it is
commonly seen that Princes and great personages do never want ministers to
execute their dissolute and unlawful Sentence.
passions,) and having corrupted them with great gifts and bountiful
rewards, and assuring them that he would continually and daily heap upon them
greater and better benefits, he persuaded and instructed them to feign and
dissemble them selves to be fugitives from the country and dominions of the
Turk, and that for the zeal of Religion, they were come to offer their
service unto Scanderbeg and to pray him to have pity and compassion of their
estate, and that they might be received and admitted to the holy Sacrament of
Baptism as good Christians, the which after they had persuaded him according
to their desires, that then they should find the means to work his death,
either by poison or otherwise. These wicked wretches had no sooner presented
them selves to the presence of Scanderbeg, but that both of them were baptized
and (as the common report is) were enrolled and admitted to be of the guard,
and to wait upon him for the ordinary safegarde of his person. Within a while
after, it pleased God (who had this Prince in his especial protection) to
reveal their pernicious attempt and conspiracy, such was his good pleasure
that this good Prince and faithful seruitour of Christ, should not dye so
miserable and unhappy a death: for the parties them selves were made the
bewrayers and discouerers of Conspiracy against Scanderbeg wonderfully
detected.
their own deuilish intent and practice. For so it happened that a jar and
contention fell between them (and it may be it was in their cups, and in a
dronken humor) but their choler and fury grew so outrageous and immoderat,
that each vpbrayding other with injurious and gross words, they fell in the
end to accuse and detect one an other: openly obiecting, that they were
purposely sent by Mahomet to empoyson Scanderbeg: wherepon being apprehended,
and put to the tortures, they presently confessed the whole order of the
matter, by means whereof, being delivered to the executioner, they were both
hanged according to their deserts.

Let us now return to the course of our discourse: The places and fortresses
of Epire being carefully furnished and provided with necessaries in such sort
as we have showed; it was not long, but that often letters and messengers did
arrive from all parts, giving the alarm and making report, that Mahomet with
two hundredth thousand men, would be shortly before Croy, and that his light
horsemen and vauntcurrours were even at hand: who accordingly did make their
present entry into Albany, and for two days were seen to course up and down
the country, and to put all to sword and fire: and the night following, about
two hours after evening, they presented themselves before the town,
enuironning it on all sides round about. Ballaban Badera Ballaban besieges
Croy with an army of 80000. men.
had the conduct and command of these troops, amounting to the number of
four score thousand horse, all picked and choice men. This enemy having
entrenched and fortified his Camp, did daily skirmishe with the Croians, who
made many and often sallies out upon the Turks: the event and success
whereof, was very variable and diverse. During these doings between the forces
of Ballaban, and the besieged, the Sultan being accompanied with the gross, or
body of his maine army, arrived before Croy: and before that he attempted any
thing against the town (according to the use and custom of war) he caused
the same to be summoned upon certain Mahomet comes to the siege of Croy and
summoneth the town.
offers and conditions. The defendants gave him such answer as men resolute
are wont to make, namely, that they would sooner be torn in pieces then to
commit any act that should sound to their reproach, or that might violate and
change their faith given to God and to their Prince: or that should blemish
the honor and reputation which they had gotten in his service: and with their
muskets, harguebusse, and other shot they made sign unto them that they would
not have them to approach near the town: and immediately issuing out with great
fury upon the Infidels, they came to handystrokes with them, not without a
notable slaughter of the Turks, and afterward Sally by the Croians upon the
Turks.
returned joyfully into the town carrying with them in sign of victory many
of the heads of these enemies. Mahomet being incensed with this brauado, caused
his Canons to be planted, and to play against the walls. For he had brought
thither abundance of metals to cast artillery of all sizes: and he had
provided him self of expert and skillful workmen, in the making of all kinds
of warlike engines, wherewith he determined to thunder against Croy, and meant
to make them sing another song. But Scanderbeg with his troops sometimes here
sometimes there, by the mountain and other places, out of the reach and
access of the enemy, did daily vex and trouble the army of the Infidels, not
suffering them to have any space or time to breath or to rest themselves, but
was continually at their backs on all sides, giving them a thousand alarums
and invasions day and night, without any intermission, one while upon their
foragers, and another while upon their Camp. And like as a mighty river
Iwelling and raging with continual rain, does role and tumble down most
impetuously from the tops of the mountains, carrying and drawing along with it,
whatsoever it encountreth, and turning all things vpside down which it finds
in the way: in like manner Scanderbeg rushing with extreme fury and violence
upon the Turkish host, now of one side then of another, he did commit notable
slaughters of the infidelles, beating them down on all hands, and afflicting
them with all kinds of mischieues and discommodities, which was an occasion,
that the Ottoman thought it high time to look to his affairs, both in regard
of the calamity of his people, which seemed likely to increase daily more and
more, as also in respect of his own person, which might be in evident and
apparent danger, by reason that he had no hope nor likelihood, to get any
profit or honor by this voyage, (for that Croy was so far from being
forceable, that it could not conveniently be made assaultable:) and therefore
he determined not to make any longer abode before the town, but to retire
back again, to Constantinople. Notwithstanding for that he could not do it
with any honesty, Ballaban left to continue the siege before Croy, with a huge
army.
nor without great blemish of his honor and reputation, if at the least wise
he left not behind him some show or token of some worthy exploit in this
voyage, he determined that Ballaban should continue and hold on the siege with
a strong and mighty army over which he made him General: he appointed
therefore unto him a power of eighteen thousand horse, and five thousand foot,
and besides he adjoined unto him eight Saniackes of great account and estimate,
giving unto each of them a regiment of seven thousand good and tall soldiers:
all which nevertheless were commanded to take and acknowledge him for their
chief, and to be at his commandment. These things thus concluded and
accomplished, Mahomet with shame enough Mahomet his departure from the siege of
Croy. Chaonia. Chidna.
after his short stay, trussing up his baggage in the night time lest Croy, and
with long iourneys took his way home to Constantinople.

In his passage through the country, he surprised certain people of Chaonia,
and certain places called Chidna in this manner. He suborned two soldiers
Albanians, promising to make them great men, and to advance them to high
honor, whom he sent with instructions to lie, and to tell them of Chidna, that
they were Stratageme of Mahomet to surprise Chidna.
come from Croy purposly to advertise their friends, and to wish them to look
unto the^ selves, for fear least being ignorant of the lamentable and
desperate estate of the province, they might peradventure be the cause of their
own ruin and destruction if they would carry themselves with too much
obstinacy toward the Turkish Monarch: for that Scanderbeg (as they made them
believe) durst not abide the face of the Ottoman, nor the fury of his arms
which were so terrible, that they made him to play least in sight, and that it
was verily thought, that he had abandoned and forsaken Epyre, for which cause,
Croy also seeing it self without hope of succors, was now upon terms to
yield upon composition to Ballaban, who pressed it very hard with a wonderful
straight siege, that Mahomet for his part was now disloged from Croy with part
of his army to reduce all the province under his obeissance, and that there
was scant any place or fortress of account, but that they were at his
devotion, that therefore they should look to them selves, and that they should
do well to imitate their example, choosing rather to take the benefit of his
clemency, and singular love toward them which yielded them selves
voluntarily, then to taste the extreme rigor of the war, and the misery of
bondage and servitude reserved for those persons which should be found
rebellious and obstinat: so well did these traitorous wretches play their
parts; and so vehemently did their perswasio^s work with those poor people
being too too credulous, that (as it is ordinarily seen, that the vulgar sort
do follow that Sentence.
side which they think to have the best fortune,) so these unhappy folks at
the first Cruelty and infidelity of Mahomet used to the inhabitants of Chidna.
summons made by the Sultan, upon his fair and smooth promises of entire and
free liberty of conscience, and of their goods, fraunchises, and immunities,
did simply yield them selves, by the enticements of these false Synons, to the
faith and fidelity of the Turk, which they found to be such, as is usual
with one that makes public profession of perjury, impiety, and
disloyalty: for which most monstrous and inhumane cruelty he caused eight
thousand of them to be put to the sword, besides women and children. Thus did
this hateful tyrant upon pure rage and despite shead the blood of innocents,
because he could not execute the venom of his malice and hatred Sentence.
against Scanderbeg, who stood so surely upon his guard. Undoubtedly the wrath
and displeasure of Princes is heavy and horrible, and (as the saying is) it is
not light as feathers, but weighty as lead. Thus went Mahomet out of Epyre
bathed in the blood of innocents, and having left Ballaban behind him with
innumerable troops, he had given him straight charge to continue the siege of
Croy, even to the last point of extremity, and till such time as the
inhabitants being worn out with the length of time, and being consumed and
weakened with famine and calamities, should be enforced to yield them selves
unto him, even with halters about their necks.

All this while was Scanderbeg very sad and pensive to see so many enemies
within the heart of his Realm, but that which grieved him most was, that such a
villain as Ballaban (whose parents and predecessors, had ever been but as base
varlets, and servile drudges to the house and family of the Castriots, and to
whom he had given so many overthrows and disgraces) should yet for all this be
still opposed and make war against him, and that he should dare to compare with
him, and to brave him. For this cause he had an extreme desire by all means
possible to entrappe him, and if he could by any devise in the world, to work
his confusion, but he wanted means and ability, to compass so high and
difficult an enterprise, especially since the loss of Chidna, whereof he made
great reckoning, by reason of the good number of brave soldiers, which he had
in that place. Wherefore by the counsel and advise of his friends and
Captains, he determined to solicit, and press both by letters and
ambassades, all the Princes, great Lords, and peoples his next neighbors, by
the spurs of common Persuasions used by Scanderbeg seeking aid of his
neighbors for the relief of Croy.
necessity to embrace at this time especially the defense of Albanie, and the
repulse of the Infidel from the siege of Croy: accordingly with great
promptnes and celeritie, he put the matter in execution by men of a sharp and
quick conceit: showing them first of all with what rage and brutishness the
tyrant Mahomet had conspired to abolish the name of Christ, and the professors
of his holy Religion, that his ancestors having laid Asia wast and desolate,
and passing into Europe had by deceit and other detestable means, destroyed
and rooted out infinite Kings and Potentats of Christendom, and that this
helhound following the tract and steps of his ancestors having subdued and
conquered the Greeks, the Tryballians, and the Sclauonians, and repulsed and
weakened the Hungarians, did now display all his forces and powered forth the
venom of his malice and fury upon him and his people, as being the last
Relickes of Christendom, which he had of late made show of upon the Chaonians
his subjects, in putting to the sword, contrary to his faith, and oath 8000.
men, who if they had been now living, he should not need to implore or desire
the aid and succors of his neighbors and co^federats to drive Ballaba^ from
the siege of Croy, and to cut in pieces both him and all his forces, that they
should call to remembrance, how in the former wars which he had most happily
achieved, he never had any recourse to the^ nor required their aid, but only
with his own men had continually (by the power and blessing of God) made
resistance against the common enemy, and had gotten the victory always against
the Insidels, with great expense of the blood of his Albanians, even in a
manner, to the last drop thereof* by the long continuance of which wars his best
and most valiant soldiers were either dead, or slain in fight, or taken
prisoners, or else maimed, so that by the multitude of battles, and continual
services of so many years wars, his country was altogether drawn dry of
able and sufficient forces to make resistance against the Infidels.

These reasons did easily persuade the minds of his confederates and induce
them to incline unto his demand, but (as it is commonly seen that the face
and countenance Sentence. Princes of Epyre confederates of Scanderbeg promise
to aid him for the relief of Croy.
of a man carries with it the chiefest power and virtue to persuade men.) So
Scanderbeg went unto some of them, himself in proper person, which was the
occasion, that all of them promised and swore unto him by a new league and
allyaunce, that they would not make spare of their lives, nor of their best
means to succor him against his enemies, and from thence-forward, they began
to put to their helping hands, laboring in the matter tooth and nail, and
with greater courage and fotwardnesse then they had done at any time before.
Nevertheless the Prince of Albany, considering with himself that those Turks
which lay encamped and in leager before Croy were for the most part good and
hardy soldiers, men of courage, and warlike, besides that being masters of
the mountain of Cruyna, which they had excellently Or Crayna.
well fortified and rampierd, his forces would hardly suffice to remove them
from thence, Voyage of Sca^derbeg into Italy to get aid against the Turks.
he having communicated his counsel and conceit with the Archbishop of Duraz,
and the Ambassadors of Venice and no other, left Tanusee Lieutenant General
in his army, and departed secretly out of Albanie in a disguised habit
toward Italy to his holiness, there to obtain some further succors of the
Christians.

You must give me leave upon this voyage of the Epyrote Prince, somewhat
Exclamatio^ of the author upon the indignity offered to Scanderbeg, in his
voyage into Italy.
to wander from the course of my history. Is it not a pitiful thing, and a
matter full of commiseration, that a Prince of so great merit, vowed and
dedicated to the service of God, and the Christian commonwealth, whose
victories had sounded over the whole earth, who of late refused the peace, and
scorned even the shortest truce with this great Monarch the Turk, who at the
solicitation and urgent persuasions of the Pope, of the kings and great
Princes of Europe, did not long since with a mighty army pass the sea into
Italy, for the service of the Italians, now, as a poor fugitive and exile
should be constrained in his aged years to abandon his country, covered and
filled with Infidelles, his capital and chief town straightly besieged, and
him self in a strange country to beg for aid, and to seek the favor and
support of others? O the inconstancy of this worlds glory! o the incertaintie
of humane fortunes! o the mockery of fortunes flatteries! where are your eyes,
o you Christians? where are your hearts? what was your deuoir and duty? and
what ought you to have done in this case? seeing God presented unto you so
noble, so faithful, so zealous a Chieftaine. Was it not your duty at the
least, to have given some time of truce to your wicked rancours and cursed
deuisions? to have followed this brave champion, and under the happy fortune of
his invincible virtue, to have joined your arms to his arms, and your forces
to his forces, that you might have chased and expelled out of Europe the cursed
sect of Mahomet, and the bloody wolf which deuoureth the holy flock of
Christ? did it stand with your honor, or with your Religion to hold off from
succoring those provinces, and to suffer so worthy and incomparable a
Chieftaine, so Religious and devout a Prince, to come and seek unto you within
your own doors and houses: but seeing such was his mishap, and your hearts so
impassionat, let us see what was the success and issue of this his voyage.

The king of Albanie being come to Rome, had gracious entertainment of the
Scanderbeg at Rome with the Pope.
sovereign Bishop, and of the holy Senate in regard of the glory of his name,
and the great and excellent majesty of his presence, and being brought into
the Consistory or Conclaue before the Pope and his Cardinals, he pronounced an
eloquent and vehement oration: wherein he began first with the exaltation of
the holy siege Apostolic, Oration of Scanderbeg to Pope Paul the 2. of the
Cardinals at Rome.
and his own singular devotion and service, which he had ever borne to the
same, which wrought in him an incredible contentment, in that he was so happy
as to come and to kiss the feet of his holiness, whom he reputed and
reverenced as the light and singular ornament of the Church of God, being
divinely chosen for the successor of the blessed Saint Peter the first Vicar
of Christ, and of so many holy and Religious Pastors and excellent fathers:
who being replenished with all virtues and knowledge, adorned with simplicity,
and purity of life, had crected and raised the faith of Christ, and had
beautified the world with miracles and examples of perfection: your merits
(quoth he) most holy Father, are in all points correspondent to those of your
predecessors in all rare and divine qualities, so that it is no marvel, if
every man have conceived a singular hope of your worthiness, the which if you
do not excel and exceed, yet do you at the least in all respects equal,
well deserving the public opinion conceived of you, not only for freeing and
delivering your holy flock from the bloody jaws and throat of those hungry
wolves the Mahometistes, but also for spreading and enlarging the faith and
Religion of Jesus Christ, even to the extremest and farthest parts of the
world. Good God that my tongue and eloquence were able to recount your virtues,
which do exceed far beyond all praises and commendations: but if I were able
to do it, yet the infinite tumultes and perils, wherein, by a certain fatal
and inevitable destiny, both I and my people are plunged and drowned more then
any other nation in Christendom, do not permit nor suffer me, to enjoy the
sweet pleasure and benefit of your perfections: the just grief of my
oppressed estate does withdraw me: the Turkish Prince will not suffer me, who
following the tract of his ancestors, does every day invade your flock, and
does dismember and persecute it, and being not satisfied with so many murders,
with so many rapines, and burnings, which he has committed in Asia, and in
Europe, and wherewith he has polluted even the whole earth, does now strive
with all his strength and puissance to destroy and suppress me and my people
with our poor little Realm, as being left unto him, for the last subject of
his cruelty. The long continuance of the wars and the multitude of the battles,
which we have had, has worn out, eaten up, and consumed all our forces, and
we are now at the last cast, in so much that there is not left in our whole
body any part whole and sound, which may receive any more wounds, neither have
we any blood left us, which we may shed or bestow for the commonweal of
Christendom. Wherefore (most reverent father of all Princes Christian, and the
brightness and glory of the Church of God,) if your holiness and clemency do
not speedely and readily help to withstand and prevent this mischief, the
estate and welfare of Albany is for ever gone and lost. This is the cause (most
reverend Father) that has brought me hither: this is it that has caused me to
have recourse unto you, I have left a great fire kindled and flaming in my
house, the enemy is even at my doors, who has not only destroyed and laid
desolate, and wasted my province, but has murdered and captiuated my people,
he holds Croy the key and bulwark of my Realm straightly besieged, and is
resolved not to depart from thence, till he have brought and made it to be
Turkish, and I doubt me, he will go near to do it, if we be not succored by
your greatness and authority: whilst it is time therefore think upon me
(most worthy Prelates and Fathers) provide for me betimes I beseech you, it
stands you upon to repress his violence, and to bridle his rage which is
grown so strong and mighty, that it threatens and menaceth with all
extremities not only the estate of Christendom, and the Church of God, but
even the ground and foundation of our Religion also. He has already inflicted
upon the Christian people all the examples and acts of inhumanitie which can be
possibly invented, in such sort that it would be no less difficult and
troublesome for me to tell them, then it would be reproachful for you to hear
them. You see most holy Pastor, you see most reverend Fathers, not only the
doubt, but even the certainty of a most horrible ruin and calamity? you see
(most Religious Prelates) how this ambitious Prince has already seized upon
two Christian Empires: the most part of Asia is in slavery and thraldom under
him: all the Greeks are in a manner destroyed, the Tryballians, the Rascians,
and the Thracians are brought under his subjection, Sclauonie is subdued by his
forces, Morea is in servitude, and almost all Macedonie and Epyre, is burned,
sacked, and made desert by his fury and outrage: you see the relics of so
many Princes, of so many Chieftaines of Macedonie and of all Greece: you have
heard (most sovereign Prelate and you most reverend Fathers) how many wars,
how many travels and tedious exploits and toils my ancestors have had
against this perjured and faithless nation, and how my self after them, have
not had one day, not one minute of rest and quietness, but without ceasing for
more the^ these 20. years, I have had most sharp and bloody conflicts against
this profane people, and especially against this fierce beast Mahomet, who
has now afflicted my estate with so many ruins, and mischieues, that I have
no other way but to give place unto him, I have eue^ till this day resisted and
opposed my self against him, and I have almost continually, by the divine
bounty, gone away with the victory, but now at this time (most holy Father)
being wearied with so many travels and disco^modities both past and present:
being wasted and consumed with so many battles: having lost so many excellent
Captains, and so many of my soldiers and subjects being slain and
destroyed, we have no part of our ancient fortune now left us, but our
generous hearts, and devout souls: whereas this Barbarous Scithian (it may be
our sins have been the cause there of) has increased his forces and has
amplified his Empire beyond all discourse of humane reason: humbly therefore
(most holy father) I do prostrat my self, here before your holiness, I do
invoke and call upon your sacred name, and I do implore your aid and
succors, most worthy Prelates. Co^sult, I beseech you, make provision, and take
such order, that I may have some means to resist against so many tempests, and
storms of the war, and that I may with the less peril of my life, and
prejudice of my affairs, be able to bear and sustain the brunt thereof, and
if the private misery of your soldier do nothing move you, if the affliction
of your cha^pion^ do not passionate you, at leastwise let the common
necessity, the imminent peril of your flock, and the future desolation of the
estate of Christendom stir you up and persuade you: is there any servitude
more grievous, the^ the Turkish bondage? what accide^t can happen more bitter
to godly and Christian souls, the^ to see their infants now united unto Christ
by holy baptism, and redeemed by the precious blood of the son of God, to the
eternal communion and society of the faithful, afterward again to be cut
away and separated from him, and to be nusled in the execrable blasphemies of
Mahomet: to be made open, professed, and cruel enemies of Christ and his
Church, to make war against heaven, and to perish in eternal death and
damnation? Is there any thing more hard, and lamentable, then to see our own
children, issued from our own bowels to become our enemies, and to see them
made the only means and ministers to cut our throats, and to work our ruin
and destruction? it cannot be but this servitude and bondage of Christian
souls is an evil much more grievous and intolerable, then death it self.

This Oration of the King of Epyre, was harkened unto with no less
attentiveness, then accepted with the allowaunce, and good liking of the whole
Consistory, and every man said openly, that it was most requisite and
necessary to succor, with all speed and diligence, their Christian brethren,
and not to suffer so noble a province and so virtuous a people to be devoured
and swallowed up by so cruel and bloudthirsty an enemy. But all these smooth
speeches, fair words and goodly promises, whereof they gave him plenty,
proved in the end nothing else then court favors, and vanished into smoke:
what the cause thereof should be I know not, but so it happened, that at his
departure from thence (which was soon after) he had little and Scanderbeg ill
succored by the Christians.
very small succor of Pope Paul the second, who (though he were a Venetian
borne) yet was but badly affectioned toward his own country: to the which
Scanderbeg was a most inward and faithful friend, over and besides the strict
and ancient knot of friendship and confederacy, which had been preserved and
nourished with great devotion between him and that commonwealth. Three
thousand Crowns were delivered Demetrius Frank treasurer to Scanderbeg.
into the hands of Demetrius Frank: who being one of the chief and principal
citizens of Driuasta, and cousin to the Archbishop of Duraz, was treasurer to
Scanderbeg: and this was all the aid that he found or had from them: yet did
not this any thing trouble the Prince of Epire, neither was he discontented at
this sorry and simple Return of Scanderbeg from Rome to Epyre.
entertainment: but praising God for all, he took his leave of the Pope, and
returned into his own country. He was once in the mind to have gone as far
as Venice: but taking advise upon the matter, and not finding it expedient, by
reason of the piteous estate wherein he had left his kingdom and country of
Epire: he contented himself to send thither his Secretary, to let the Senate
of that city understand, the hard success of his voyage to Rome, and to
animate and persuade them to ministersome aid Aid given by the Venetians and
others to Scanderbeg for the relief of Croy against the Turks. Lech and
Nicholas Ducagin.
and succors unto him: the which he obtained as you shall hear. Scanderbeg
being upon the way of his return toward Epire, went first to Scutary, where
Iosaphat Barbare had great command and authority, (of whom we have spoken
heretofore) and there having made a notable leauy of the subjects of the
Venetians, he adjoined them to his own forces. In like manner Lech Ducagin, and
Nicholas his brother, being bravely mounted, came unto him with 400. valiant
horsemen, and as many footmen, all of them most expert and skillful soldiers.
To these did adioyne them selves a hundredth men at arms armed all in white,
and 500. footmen Italians, being in the pay and entertainment of the
Seigniorie of Venice within Scutarie: besides 1000. good horse, and three
thousand footmen gathered out from amongst the Scutarians, the Driuastines, the
Antiuarians, the Lissians, and the Dirrachians: in so much that those aides
being united and incorporated all in one, did make up the full and complet
number of 13400. chosen men. For you are to note that the Princes and peoples
of Epyre, Macedony, Sclauony and Dalmatia, which were leagued and allied
together, did not fail to send each of them certain forces, all which made
their rende vous at a place appointed, and were at the command and disposition
of Scanderbeg, who divided them into two troops: one part whereof he committed
to the conduct and leading of Lech Ducagin above named, being a knight of no
less policy then hardiness in the wars: and Nicholas Nicholas Moneta
governor of Scutarie.
Moneta borne in Scutarie, the Vaiuoda, or governor of that city, being a
Gentleman of great estimate and valor, had the guiding of the other part of
those forces. Now it was set down and appointed, that these troops being
dislodged from Lissa, and having cut over the plain country or fields of
Pharsalia, and the forest of Ionimes, Forest of Ionimes.
should make their approach, and charge upon the enemy on that side. And that
the King of Epyre being accompanied with his own bands both horse and foot,
should make toward the mountain of Cruyna, there to assail and set upon
Ballaban on the otherside, who had enclosed and fortified himself exceeding
strongly and conveniently upon that mountain. But before I will lead our
Christians any further into the country, I hold it not amiss to figure and
describe unto you the site of the place where the Mohammedan had entrenched him
self, to the intent the matter may be the better represented to your sight,
and made more plain and apparent unto you.

I told you long sithence, that Croy is in Epyre, in the fields of Emathia or
Pharsalia, The situation of Croy.
seated upon the high crest or ridge of a mountain: which in the circuit and
compass thereof is on all parts environed with many steep downefals,
excepting in one only place where it is very hardly to be approached, and is
divided and cut off from the mount Cruyna, which being very nigh, and
continuing on even close to the town, does seem much higher then the same,
and to have the command thereof. This mountain runs a long by the side of
the Castle of Croy, where hanging over it with a deep cliffe, after a small
descent it does divide it self into diverse hills or little mounts. In this
place had Ballaban placed his camp, and having drawn thither the mass or
maine strength of his army, he had gotten the possession of the mountain of
Cruyna, the which having fortified and guarded with a great and strong garrison,
he did press the town with a hard and grievous siege.

But leaving him there encamped, let us return to our troops. Their plot
being laid as is before mentioned, and their bands being divided, Scanderbeg
with his forces went first on to visit the enemy: and being come to the said
mountain, he received advertisement, that Ionyme the brother of Ballaban was
marching on toward Ionime brother to Ballaban coming with a supply of Turks
to his brother is surprised by Scanderbeg.
his brother with a good number of Turks: and the report went that he was
already past the mountain of Bulgarie. Immediately upon these news
Scanderbeg with singular promptness and resolution, took with him the choice
and flower of his army: and (having caused the residue to keep themselves
still and quiet) he road all that night with extreme speed and diligence to
meet with Ionyme, whom having surprised on a sudden and unprovided, he soon
broke and dispersed, taking him Ionyme and his son Heder taken prisoners
alive with Heder his son likewise, and the same night with no less speed
then he went forward, he returned to his company with the victory. The next
morning he brought forth and presented to the sight of Ballaban, his brother
and his Nephew bound and tied together. And thereupon giving a brave charge
upon the garrison of the Turks which lay upon the mount Cruyna, he chased
them from Scanderbeg chaseth the Turks from the mount Cruyna.
thence, and being seized of the place, he took up his lodging upon the top
of the mountain, giving present order that his confederates should have notice
thereof out of hand. Now Ballaban (who promised him self some intelligence
within Croy) was wonderfully abashed to see the Christians so suddenly to
come so near him, and to be in a manner over his head, and where they might
command him. Wherefore having newly encouraged and reassured part of his
people who were somewhat troubled with the alarm: and letting them to
understand, that the town was surely their own, if they would make any haste
to enter it, and so provide for their own safety, whereas otherwise if they
failed in the enterprise, it was not for them to stay there any longer before
Croie: knowing well that they should but loose their labor, that the dangers
would be very great to continue there at the siege, and that it could not but
cost them dear, now that he saw his brother defeated and the enemy so
forward which could not but be an occasion of great inconvenience Ballaban
solliciteth the Croians to yield unto him.
unto them. Thus being accompanied with a good troop, he presented himself
before the walls, and went on even almost to the port of the city, persuading
and soliciting them within, to render themselves unto him: and there did he
continue for a while attending the issue of that which he expected. The Croians
being incensed Sallie by the Croians upon Ballaban.
with his presumption made a brave sallie out upon him, and falling into
skirmish with the Turks, they enforced them to the retreat, and made their
Chieftaine to know the vanity of his practices. Herewithall Ballaban being
enraged and even mad for anger, and making head a fresh against the Croyans,
thought by pure force to have driven them into the town. But the citizens
beginning to retire in very good order, without the loss of any one of their
company: it happened that one George Alexie an Epyrot borne, and a good
harguebussier discharging a bullet upon Ballaban George Alexie.
hit him quite thorough the throat, giving him a mortal and deadly wound. Yet
did not Ballaban fall presently, but when he found himself shot, he kept
himself Death of Ballaban slain with a shot before Croy.
sure within his saddle, and setting spurs to his horse, h^ranne with great
speed and a swift pace even to his tents, where he was no sooner arrived, but
he tumbled from his horse, and fell rudely to the ground, embrewing his
country soil with his own blood, the destruction whereof he had so
bloudilie desired. The fall and death of the General put the whole camp of
the Infidelles in extreme fear and terror: in so much, that the night
following, the Barbarians in great silence Siege of Croy raised.
and secrecy abandoned the siege of Croie, and retyring themselves about eight
long miles off, they encamped and fortified them selves very diligently at
Tyranna. The next morning upon break of day, Scanderbeg coming to take a
view of the enemies tents, found them void and empty of men, but fully
furnished with baggage and provisions, so that there was no want of any thing,
either of corn or other victuals: all which he caused to be removed and
carried thence into Croie, the same being in a manner sufficient to victual it
for one whole year. After this himself entered with great triumph into the
city, where he was received with great honor and joy by the inhabitants, whom
he highly commended (and that worthily) for their fidelity and good
perseverance, adding therewithal many gifts and rewards in recompense of their
deserts. Messengers from the army of the Turks to Scanderbeg desiring leave
to depart out of Epyre.


Whilst these offices of civil courtesies passed between Scanderbeg and his
citizens, there came from the camp of the Barbarians lying at Tyranna, two
horsemen, seeming to be persons of good account and reckoning, who presenting
themselves before Scanderbeg in the name of the Chieftains and Commanders of
their army, prayed him to grant them that favor which he had never refused to
men of their quality, namely that leaving their baggage, horses, and armor,
they might be suffered to depart with their lives only. For they were sore
afraid, least that the passages being forestalled and laid for them, should
have been shut up and fortified to enclose and famish them within the
country. Hereupon the King caused his Princes, Nobles, and Captains speedily
to be assembled, that he might deliberate and determine upon some answer to
be given to the Turks, and might hear the advice of every man in particular:
and he took order in the mean while, that those two horsemen should Council
called by Scanderbeg to consult upon the message and demand of the Turks.
be conducted into a tent, and thereto be well and graciously entertained.
Iosaphat Barbare was the first whose opinion was demanded in this matter, but
he excused himself, saying: That the Seigniorie of Venice had sent him thither
to be resident near about the person of the Prince, only to do what it
should please him to command him: and therefore for his part he referred
himself for this matter to his own good will and pleasure. Lech Ducagin spoke
more liberally, and as he was a man of a fierce and forward disposition prompt
of hand, and quick of invention: so in one word did he acquaint them with
his mind, saying: Embetha: which in the Albanian language signifies, to
horseback: for he saw no reason why any grace or mercy should be showed to
this people, who were deuoide of all pity, and were so mightily given to
bloud-thirstinesse and cruelty, but that all of them ought rather to pass
under the edge of the sword. Of the same opinion were the most part of the
assembly, especially Paul Angel the Archbishop, who propounded and set
before his eyes the example of Julius Caesar, who in times past having in those
very marches broken and defeated the Pompeyans, did pursue them even to the
last extreamitie: that he also ought not to forsake his own good fortune,
which oftentimes Sentence.
when she sees her self not to be lively and roundly followed, turns her
self with a contrary byas, to favor those upon whom she before frowned. And
many other reasons did he allege to that effect. Scanderbeg replied unto them
in this manner.

I know right well (most worthy and valiant Epyrots, and my fellow
soldiers) Oration of Scanderbeg dissuading his soldiers from pursuing the
Turks after the relief of Croy.
and I have already had good experience of your singular valor, your notable
resolution and the greatness of your courage, whereby you have always
terrified and discomfited your enemies: and I do not think but that even now
also you have both the courage and the power to break and to trample under
your feet the relics and remainders of these amazed Infidels. Nevertheless
(gentle warriors) it behooves us often to bethink our selves, and to call to
mind that sage sentence of the wise man. That it is the part and property of
fools to wish for a tempest in fair Sentence.
and calm weather: but it is the guise and fashion of them that are wise, to
seek by all means, how to remedy and avoid it, when the time and
necessity do press them to it. It has pleased our good God, without blood,
without fight, without murder, to send us the victory even from heaven: the
city is delivered, the siege is raised, Ballaban our capital and mortal
adversary, is now laid dead upon the ground, his army is fled, we our
selves are in rest and quiet, and all things do seem to smyle and fawn upon
us: wherefore then should we seek to have warte? wherefore should we desire
our own torment? why should we tempt fortune that is so blind and variable?
you are not ignorant (my good friends) that any fault or error committed in
the war is irreparable and impossible to be Sentence.
amended. In other businesses and affaies, if a man be forgetful of anything,
it may be amended and corrected: but the ouersightes of martial matters, and
of battles are past all hope of recovery or amends. This is the reason why
those ancients and thrice renowned Captains, did not so much esteem and set
by those armies which were great and populous, as those which were well
governed with good order and discipline. For the success of battles is
doubtful, the issue of wars is uncertain, and does not depend of our hand
and industry, but of the power and disposition of fortune. An enemy is
always to be redoubted, never to be despised, never to be disesteemed: and
more then that, when the war is ended, when the victory is obtained, yet is
there no less diligence even then to be used, then was at the very first
beginning of the same: and we must not any time rashly and unadvisedly come to
the fight or combat with our enemy. Wherefore if we should desire to adventure
the chance of war, and to try the fortune of the field with this enemy
which is now before us, we shall endaunger and put in hazard (which God
defend) our own safety and our estate, which now (God be thanked) are in good
case and security. Refrain therefore this ardent and burning feruentnesse of
your courages: let the victory which we have already gotten suffice and
content us: we have had many and great triumphs upon our enemies, and you
ought to hold your selves satisfied with so many murders, with so many
overthrows given them, and with the manifold favors of fortune, which has
hitherto so graciously fawned upon you. Moreover you see that the troops of
the Barbarians are excessive, and in a manner innumerable, they are not of the
baser and rascal sort of people collected and gathered at adventures: but they
are the flower and strength of all the Turkish forces, chosen men, stout,
expert, ready provided and prepared to fight, armed with necessity (which of
all weapons is the most extreme and dangerous) and they desire not, nor seek
after any thing else but battle: either to revenge the death of their
General, or to carry home unto their Sovereign the report of some notable
and worthy exploit. This their offer of rendering themselves is but coulorable
and feigned; believe me, it is but dissimulation, and they do make a semblance
only of fear and terror: I am well acquainted with their cunning draughts
and disguisements, I know that this is nothing but one of their subtle
sleights and guilefull policies, wherein these men more then in any thing else,
do make singular profession. Assure your selves, they desire nothing so much
as to come to fight with you, and to be revenged: wherefore if we be wise, let
us keep our selves from them, let us not trouble them. But let it be that they
do not intend any malice nor any deceit against us: yet they are enraged,
they are desperate, their shame and ignominy does press them on against us,
being affraide of all things, they fear nothing. Nothing is so perilous as
to set upon men whose safety consists in being desperate and without hope
of safety. He commonly fights and combatteth Sentence.
outragiously, who has no comfort left him, who relyeth not upon hope of any
thing. And what if we do put them all to the sword? what if we make them to
betake themselves to flight? yet cannot this be done without your damage,
without your loss, without your blood, without the expense and cost of many of
your lives: how then can such a victory be otherwise to me then ruefull and
lamentable? Wherefore (my loving and good soldiers) if you will believe me, if
you will be counseled and advised by me: be you assured we will have them all
at our mercy without fight, without using swords or weapon against them. For
they are in great want of all things especially of bread, which failing and
being not to be gotten, an army is easily vanquished without fighting. Let us
shut up all the ways and passages, so that no succors nor victual may not
by any means come unto them: let us newly fortify and stuff our town with a
good and strong garrison, and let us furnish it with all sorts of munitions,
for the provision of many years: so shall we see that these our enemies being
shut up and besieged within our confines shall all perish and die miserably of
pure famine and hunger. And we shall see them utterly overthrown and
destroyed, without sword, without arms, and without bloodshed.

Some there were who showed themselves well pleased with this oration, and did
allow of Scanderbeg his persuasions, but others would not be satisfied
therewith, especially the common sort of soldiers, who being grown more
fierce and audacious against the enemy, began to make a great noise not
without some tumult and Soldiers of Scanderbeg murmr against him, and will
not be dissuaded from following the Turks.
vproare enclyning to a mutiny on all parts within the camp of the
Christians: crying out aloft with a loud voice, that they ought to march on
directly and presently, and to go seek out the Turks who were already
vanquished and discomfited. That it was not expedient in this matter to yield
unto the motion of Scanderbeg, who showed himself to be grown fearful and
faint-hearted: considering that of a most fierce and furious combatant, and who
had never refused any occasion of fighting in open and plain battle, he was
now become a fearful temporizer, and would seem to dissuade them from arms
who were borne and bredde to follow arms, and whose only desire was to be
doing with their enemies: that now the General did fail and was wanting to
the soldiers, and not the soldiers to their General. Thus the heat and
vehemency of the Epyrots was scarce repressed and withh^lde by the Captains
and masters of the camp, till such time as it was generally concluded and
agreed, that as soon as Croy was provided and fortified with all necessaries,
they should have free liberty to pursue the Infidels, and to force their
camp. Wherefore Scanderbeg calling unto him the two Turkish messengers gave
them this answer: That they should go and tell their companions, that as
they came into that Answer of Scanderbeg to the two messengers sent from the
Turks.
country without his commandment, so should they not for his part be
commanded to return from thence. Now in this mean time, the King of Epyre
had sent and dispatched away certain forces to gain and shut up the passages
from the Barbarians, whilst that the residue of the Christian troops by the
order and direction of their Captains did go to the river of Isme, where
certain vessels lay at an ancker charged and laden with corn, meal,
salt-meates, and biscuit, and did unlade all, bringing it on land, in such
sort, that in three days Croie was well and sufficiently reuictualled for six
years space at the least. Whilst every man was thus busied and intentiuely
occupied in this work, and that every one did set forward and hasten this
provision to the uttermost of his power: behold news were brought unto
Scanderbeg, that the very same night about the second watch, when that men are
in their soundest and deepest sleep, hunger and necessity (which works
masteries beyond all impossibility) had pressed the Turks to dislodge
secretly from Tyranna, and with the hazard of their lives to make way for
themselves by force, and to open the passages which were defended against them
by the Scanderbegians. Howbeit they could not do it so closely, but that those
soldiers which had the guarde and custody of the passages, and the
inhabitants of the country joined together with them, did maintain a long and
obstinate conflict with the Infidels, who with the slaughter of a great number
of their companions, and the loss of the most part of their baggage, did at
length by their swords make way through the midst, and in despite of their
enemies. When Scanderbeg his army heard thereof, it cannot be expressed how
extremely they were aggrieued and displeased at the matter: for their murmuring
and muttering against Scanderbeg did sufficiently testify the greatness of
their coffeehouse, imputing the whole blame thereof to him, as if this
evasion and escape of the enemy, had been by his default only. But he
pacified and appeased them both with his bountiful gifts, and with gracious
speeches: and more then that, to content them the better, he caused them
immediately to take arms, and to march with Ensigns displayed into the field,
where he gave them the spoils of those other Turks and Infidels which were
found in garrison within Chaonia and other places of Epyre: not suffering any
one of them to escape but that they were either slain or taken, being spoiled
and stripped out of all. Thus having purged and cleansed the Province of this
vermin, and having settled all things in good and peaceable order, every man
returned to his own quarter laden with the spoils of the Barbarians, and
with many commendations, presents, and great thanks given them by the King of
Albanie.

The affairs of Epyre thus standing in sufficient good and flourishing estate,
we will now leave them for a while, and turn our discourse to the Turkish
Monarch to show unto you the grief and displeasure which he conceived in his
haughty and great stomach, as well for the death of Ballaban, and the
dishonorable and shameful flight of his army: as also for that the siege of
Croie was raised to the great glory and advantage of the Christians. For he
did so vnmeasurably afflict and passionate himself with the conceit hereof,
that he could not take any rest, nor eat, nor drink: but that still day and
night his spirit and thoughts were troubled, beating his brain, and devising
Mahomet purposes a second journey into Epyre against Scanderbeg.
with himself, how he might deface and abolish the blot of this shame and
ignominy, and take some notable revenge upon Scanderbeg. In the end his
deliberation was, once again to return himself in proper person, and with
more puissant forces into Epyre, that by his presence he might give the more
grace and majesty to the enterprise. Hereof Scanderbeg being speedily
infourmed, made no delay to prepare for the receiving Scanderbeg makes
preparations against the coming of Mahomet.
of him with all the best means and preparations that he could possibly make:
he gave the Princes, Seigniors and peoples his confederates to understand of
the purpose and intent of the Turk, willing them to be in a readiness against
such time as he should send unto them: and he made good provision of all kind
of munition, victuals, and all other necessaries in all his strong holds and
fortresses: in such sort, that they needed not to be affraide of any thing that
the Turk could attempt against them.

The year being past and spent in these preparations on both parts, now
began the spring to come on, which being a time wherein all things begin to
budde, and grow pleasant to the eye, and most fit and convenient for warlike
voyages and expeditions, Mahomet had deferred his journey to that season, and
accordingly as soon Second journey of Mahomet into Epyre.
as he saw the time to serve, he took his journey with infinite troops,
engines, and instruments for assault of all sorts, and with an incredible
number of expert workmen and artificers for this end and purpose which I will
show you. Being come to a certain large and wide plain commonly called Saura,
he determined there to abide Plain of Saura.
and soiourne for a while, and he encamped his army near to the river of
Scombin, within the signiorie or principality of Aryamnites Comynat father in
law to Scanderbeg The river of Scombyn.
During the time of his abode in that place, the Sultan did employ not only
his artificers and workmen, but a great part also of his soldiers about the
repayring or reedefying of the town of Valmes (which at this present the
Albanois do account and call a city) and in times past was ruinated and laid
even with the ground by the Gallo-Grecians and other strange Nations. It is
seated in an anglet or little corner of Valmes a city in Epyre new built by
Mahomet.
Epyre near unto the peoples of the Iates, Bratescosages, Cherabes*
Buserseches, and Sopotanies. Having fully ended and perfected that work with
incredible diligence, and having furnished and fortified it with able men,
victuals, and such like necessaries for the sure keeping and defense thereof
against his enemies: he speedily dislodged from thence, and marched on with his
army toward the city of Duras, with a determination The city of Duras
besieged by Mahomet.
to carry that town at the first assault: supposing that it had been
unprovided both of men of war and of victuals. But he found himself deceived
in his hope by the vigilancie and providence of the Venetians and of
Scanderbeg, who had wisely foreseen and prevented that tempest, by means
whereof it was well and sufficiently furnished and defended both by sea and by
land, in such sort, that it scorned all the power and assayes of the Infidel,
who saw himself most rudely and bravely repulsed from thence with the notable
slaughter and loss of many of his people. But for the better contentment of
the reader, by the variety of this discourse, you must give me leave a little
to wander and digress from my matter, and to honor this town with her due
praises and commendations.

Dirrachium, by the Italians called Duraz, was in times of antiquity named
Epydamnum: The city of Dyrrachium or Duraz aunciently called Epidamnum her
original and foundation*
it is a town situated within Epire, and builded of old (as it is thought) by
one Epidamnus of whom also it had her first name: and this man's nephew or
grandchilde by his daughter, being named Dyrrachus did add unto the town the
port or haven calling it Dyrrachium. But there he others of another opinion,
who hold that Dirrachium (being atowne seated upon the sea coasts of Albanie,
is the capital and chief city of those peoples which are called the
Taulantians, Pyrreans, and Pratinians, and it lies between Lissa and
Apollonia: and they say that the Romans finding it to be called Epidamnum by
reason of the unlucky sound and sense of that name which they held to be
ominous and unhappy, did change the same into the name of Dyrrachium, taking
this term for the Cherronese or demi Isle whereon it was seated, or rather
reedified (as some do affirm) by the Corcirians or the inhabitants of Corcyre
or Corfu.
Corfu. For if we will give credit unto the common report, and to those authors
that are most ancient: it has been numbered amongst the most ancient cities:
and there are yet extant to be seen many great and goodly praises and
commendations of this place. For as Lucan says:

This town is not a work as others are
Of ancient structure built of lime and stone,
No work of man, nor such as time or war,
Can easily bring to alteration.
Great is their power and they can do much,
Yet greater is the strength of Duraz town,
Her fortress is so strong, her seat is such,
That mines nor engines cannot beat her down.
Nature it self has fortified her seat,
Having enclosed it on every side,
With cliffes that break the billows as they beat,
And with a gulf that is both deep and wide:
Naught but one mountain from an Isle her saues,
Rocks are her rampire threatening ships to dash,
And Cliffes her walls on which the foming waves,
In storms do beat and her strong buildings wash.
For this city is environed with the sea on all sides but one, where the rocks
being Description of the city of Duras in Epyre.
divided and cut a sunder each from other, do join it to the firm land. On
the one side it has a goodly haven or harbor, wherein ships may safely lie
and anckor: on the other side it has large and pleasant fields and pastures,
abounding in fertility and plenty of all good commodities: and within the
walls, he goodly temples and sumptuous churches do make the city much more
stately and venerable: besides that it is adorned with the statues and proud
monuments of sundry Kings and Emperors: especially that of Adryan: or rather
his monstrous Colossus or image of Colossus.
copper, which is erected in a place very high and emminent near to the gate
Caballyn toward the North. Besides there is to be seen his Amphy-theater
made by Amplry-theater a place made with seats and scaffolds for the beholding
of shows, games, plays, and triumphs.
wonderful art and industry. The walls of the city are passing strong,
flanked with their towers, bulwarks and other excellent works wherewith they
are beautified and adorned. Besides this city is very famous for the
commodity of the rare saltpits which it has, and for the great abundance of
all kinds of merchandise which are brought unto it. To be brief, this is that
famous city of Duras which enjoyed the presence, and with singular
entertainment received the Roman Senate, and was no less famous then
unfortunate through the civil wars and notable slaughters and bloodshed of
the Romans. But what the estate of it may be at this instant, since it is
become Turk, and that it is reduced under the servitude of so fierce and
barbarous a nation who are mortal enemies to all good order and civility, I
had rather leave it to you to imagine it, then to speak what I think of it.
But to our matter.

After that the Sultan had been so rudely entertained before Duraz, and that
his bloody actions and attempts proved vain and to none effect: he conceived
an opinion that Scanderbeg had put himself within the town for the defense
thereof; because The departure of Mahomet from the siege of Duras.
a great number of his people were known and discerned to be within it. This
was the occasion that he dislodged speedily from thence, and made directly
toward Croy, pitching his tents before the town in hope to astonish and
appall them by the suddenness of his coming. For experience having taught
him, that the endeavors and assayes both of his predecessors and of himself
had profited him little or nothing: Croy besieged the second time by Mahomet.
he was not of the mind that he could carry the town by this course, but his
determination was to bring them to reason by a long and obstinate siege, if
Scanderbeg would permit him. Wherefore neglecting and leaving all other
counselles, he summoned the Croians to yield themselves unto him, making them
great offers of riches and inestimable honors, if they would deliver the town
into his hands. But he had no better answer now then he had the year
before: for they gave him good store of cannon and musket shot for his
good morrow: and more then that, they issued forth to visit him nearer home,
with a furious and stout salley made upon the infidels, carrying away with
honor and glory many of their heads, for an argument and proof of their good
deuoire and worthy demeanor. On the other side, Scanderbeg according to his
wonted and accustomed manner, keeping continually upon the skirtes of this
fearful and huge army, and being attended with his ordinary forces, did
incessantly importune and endaunger the enemy by his often invasions made
upon their camp both by day and by night: and the slaughters and butcheries
which he committed upon them were notable and wonderful, insomuch that Mahomet
perceiving the small profit which he was like to purchase by this enterprise,
was glad to leave the pursuit thereof, and to reserve himself to some other
exploit which might be more for his honor and advantage. Wherefore raising his
camp from before Croie, he bent his course toward a certain Siege of Croi^
raised by Mahomet.
place lying on the coast of the Adriatique sea, or gulf of Venice not far
from Duras: now called the head of Redoni, where Scanderbeg had begun of late
to build a town which he called Chiurill. The Barbarian finding it without
inhabitants The town of Chiuril begun to be builded by Scanderbeg rased by
Mahomet.
and unfinished did raze it from the very foundation. From thence he went
forward purposing to destroy certain peoples subject to Scanderbeg: but the
army of the Christians did follow him so close at the heels, coasting him
continually wheresoever he went: and sometimes by day, sometimes by night would
he charge and set upon him, one while in the tail, another while in the
flanck, and many times in the front and head of his army: that he took from
him all occasions and means to profit himself in that country: yea the
inhabitants themselves dwelling in the forrestes and mountains did so annoy
and molest him, afflicting him with infinite mischieues, slaughters and
discommodities: that being in utter despair of doing any good upon the
Province, he returned back again to Constantinople more confounded and full
of despite and grief then he was at his coming forth.

Nevertheless the Ottoman was no sooner removed out of Epire: but because he
Alybeg and Aiasbeg sent with an army of 28000. Turks to safeguard their
frontiers from the Albanois.
would keep the Christians still in breath, he sent two of his chief
Captains, men of great renown and reckoning Alibeg and Aiasbeg with an army
of 28000. Turks: willing them only to look to the safety and defense of his
own frontiers, and not to stir or to offer any warlike violence upon the
country of the Christians. As Soon as they were come and had settled themselves
upon their borders: they fell to their wonted cunning and practices, sending
unto Scanderbeg secretly and under hand certain presents of great value and
estimate, in hope to draw him to have some amity and friendship with them, and
to make him secure and negligent. The King of Albanie though he were an old
Courtier, and had been well acquainted with these kinds of dealings, so as he
could not be ouerreached nor deceived by their sottish devises, yet he was
content to accept of their presents: and he sent unto them back again others
of no less value, in counter change of those which they had given him. And
this was all that was done between them, because he was too clear sighted,
and too circumspect for them to go beyond him. For notwithstanding these
private courtesies and kindnesses past between him and them, Scanderbeg was
minded to keep them doing, and therefore caused a general muster and leauie
of men to be made throughout all his dominions, purposing to get again from
the Turks the town of Valmes, which had been lately built and edified by
Mahomet. But (such 1467.
was the will and pleasure of the cruel destinies) that being detained with a
grievous malady, he was constrained to desist from his attempt. For after he
had reuisited all parts and quarters of his realm, and had caused a general
enrollment to be made of all such able men, as were fit to do him service and
to bear arms for the safety and defense of his estate: he came to the city
of Lissa (which being under the siegniorie and government of the Venetians, he
had ever loved and most dearly affected) where being determined to have called
a council and assembly of all the Princes and Lords of the league, he was
suddenly taken with a strong and violent fever: and the Scanderbeg sickeneth.
force of this disease increasing every day more then other, he imagined that
his last end began now to approach, wherefore being in doubt least that death
which is inevitable, should take him away before he had disposed and set in
order his affairs, he prayed the said Princes and Lords his confederates to
enter into his bedchamber together with the Ambassadors of the Siegniorie of
Venice, and his chief Captains and officers of his camp: unto whom he framed
his speech in this manner.

The sovereign and chiefest virtue, and the true and most perfect religion
(most Speech and last words of Scanderbeg to his Princes and nobles before his
death.
worthy Princes and you my beloved companions) in my opinion is this. First to
reverence, to serve, and to adore God most high and omnipotent, in justice,
sanctity and piety: and next, not only to love dearly, and to have a
continual care and regard of the good and benefit of our country: but if
need be, to spend even our lives, and to shed our best blood for the
preservation and safety of the same: for to all such as behave themselves in
that sort, by the opinion of them that are wise, there is a special and
peculiar place reserved aloft in the highest heavens. For my part, with what
singular desire and affection I have always sought and embraced these things,
how all my thoughts have continually been bent and employed upon them, and how
I have endeavored al my forces, and to the uttermost of my power to attain unto
them. First God himself can witness it with me, and next, all of you my good
friends can well testify. The three and twentieth year is now past and
expired since that I escaped out of the impure hands of wicked Amurath King of
the Turks, and that I fled into this realm being the ancient patrimony
and inheritance of my ancestors: ever since that time have I held and
endured the wars against a most perjured and faithless nation, and against
the rage and fury of the Ottomans for the particular safety and defense of
our crown and kingdom, and for the dignity of the public estate and weal
of Christendom: in all which time (by the grace and favor of the divine
clemency) we have had most happy and fortunate success, according to our
hearts desire: and you never yet saw me return either vanquished or repulsed
in true and set battle. But (if I may speak it lawfully) I had always the
advantage upon the enemy: and I do not remember that I was ever hurt or
wounded but only once: when being shot with an arrow in my right foot, by a
Turk, yet did I presently kill him even in the head and front of the enemy,
and threw down his bloody head at your feet. But now (according to the
ordinary course of humane things) in the three score and third year of my
age, old age being grown upon me, seized with a grievous sickness, and
destitute of all my wonted strength and corporal forces, Behold my good
friends, behold my dear companions, how I now begin to wax feeble, and by
little and little I go the way of all flesh. I perceive (my friends,) I see
well; that it is the will and pleasure of the divine providence (by the which I
confess and do acknowledge, that all things are subsisting and have their
being, and whereby all things are guided and governed) that it behooves me now
to lay aside this mortal and frail burden of my body, to go to another and
better place, and that I must exchange the brevity and miseries of this life
for the felicity of true and everlasting joys: and I protest unto you before
God, that the thought hereof, or rather this necessity which is laid upon me,
does not in any sort trouble nor grieve me. I do not repine against that law
which the destinies did impose upon us at the time of our nativity: for we
ought not to be aggrieued or to find fault with that which we suffer according
to law and justice: with this condition were we borne, that we should be
subject to this necessity of our mortality. And I know well, that whatsoever
is of necessity cannot be accounted miserable to any man particularly. It
behooves us in the end to yield earth to earth, and to be obedient to nature:
and it is required of us as our due, that we resign up this our soul being
eternal and immortal: and this spirit of ours which is heavenly and
celestial, to him which has only lent it us for a time. Nevertheless (my
dear friends and companions) I do not receive and embrace this fatal lot of
my death and departure with such courage and cheerfulness: because I am
willing to be freed from the perilles and dangers, or because I would eschew
and shun the travels and labors, or because I would withdraw my self from
those mischieues and inconveniences, wherein even till this time I have
consumed all my best years, and have ended my days for the service of God and
the religion of Christ: for I am ready and could find in my heart to expose
and adventure my life continually for the same, to the like or greater
hazardes: but I see I see well, that this is Gods good will and pleasure: I
perceive it is my good God that calls me (to whom we must be obedient) and I
must now retire my self out of this earthly and filthy dungeon, and from this
miserable and wretched prison. I have followed nature long enough, I have lived
long enough, I have finished the course, and I have run the race, which it
pleased God to appoint for me. But yet before my soul depart from my body,
and before I do leave you, one thing there is of which I hold it expedient now
to admonish and advertise you, as I have always used in cases of importance,
when I was able in former times, and in the better years of my age. And that
is, That as heretofore during my life time, even till now, you have endured all
travels and labors even to the last gasp, for the safety and dignity of the
Christian religion and the Catholic faith, by means whereof you have made
all the Princes of Christendom to favor, honor, and admire you: even so
hereafter when I am dead and gone, let that be the only and the whole desire
of your hearts, let that be the only thing that you shall set before your
eyes. All things (I can assure you) will fall out easy and happily unto you,
as long as you continue steadfast in concord and unity (by which small things
and contemptible do grow great and invincible) and as long as you entertain
mutual love and fidelity: and that you do make little account of all other
things in comparison of the common profit and general good of all of you. For
there is no Empire so puissant and so well grounded, which falls not to
present ruin Sentence.
and declineth not to destruction, where mutual enmities and dissentions are
suffered to have an entry, and where private profit and particular commodity
is preferred before the public and common good. But if you shall join
together as brethren and friends, and shall live one with another in perfect
love and amity: no attempts nor practices of your enemies whatsoever shall be
able to grieve or hurt you. Your Scepters and your crowns shall be durable and
permanent, and you shall maintain your peoples, your Provinces, your wives,
your children, and your riches in quietness, and in perpetual felicity. You
shall not need to fear the fury of the Ottoman, nor the rage of the
Barbarians: their frauds, subtilties, trains, and cunning sleights, shall not
be able to harm you nor to prevail against you. Doubt you not but the tirant
does seek to disioyne you, and to disunite your forces, he does lay many plots
and devises, he is very watchful and vigilant, he does spare no pains nor
labor to divide and separate you: which if he can once bring to pass, and do
see you never so little at variance, he will oppress you one after another, and
in the end he will utterly destroy and consume all of you. Moreover (my good
friends and confederates) there is John my son, whom with all possible care,
affection and diligence (as heartily as a father can do) I do recommend unto
you. I do commit, I do give and dedicate him to your faith and fidelity, and
to your singular virtue. His tender years and the infirmity of his age which
is yet (as it were) stuttering and stammering, do make him unfit either to
foresee or to repulse the imminent calamity: he is not able to preserve
himself from being torne-in pieces and devoured by those fierce and enraged
Tigers: to keep himself from being oppressed by that perjured and common
enemy Mahomet, who is of him and his kingdom so greedy and desirous, that he
cease not to watch continually, how he may swallow up both in his bloody and
cruel throt. And (alas) he will work it, he will effect it, he will oppress
him poor wretch: if your arms, if your valor do not protect and preserve
him. For as soon as he shall perceive that I am dead, the cruel tirant will
not make any stay at all, but he will come flying as a savage and wild beast,
to the intent he may revenge so many losses, so many outrages and calamities
which he has suffered and endured by the father, upon the poor and unhappy
infant: and to the intent he may execute upon him (silly wretch) all kinds of
cruelties, and whatsoever his barbarous and felonous heart can put in practice.
Let me therefore (my loving friends and good companions) entreat you, to
embrace his estate and his affairs with like love, fidelity and promptnes of
affection, as I have embraced your commodity and your glory, all the days of
my life, if you list to acknowledge the truth of that which I now speak. For
you know I have not lived to my self alone, but for all you and your children:
I have so labored and toyled my self, that day nor night I have not spared
any pains or travels for your sakes. In the whole course of my life, I have
not enjoyed any time or space of rest or leisure, I never had any place
certain, I never kept any hours nor time limited to eat and drink, or to
sleep in: the nights and the days have been to me all one and alike: I took
no less care for the prosperity of your estates then of mine own: and God is
my witness, (for now that I am fallen into speech of that matter, I will
freely discover my thoughts unto you) I never dreamed nor meant any fraud or
deceit against you, but I did always repute you, not as soldiers, as
servants, or as subjects, but I have ever held and loved you as my brethren
and companions. Not any one of you (as far as I remember) was ever wronged or
outraged by me in word or in deed. In all cares and services of the field, in
all duties either of scouts, watches, or sentinels, I was never inferior to any
of you: but I have still borne my self as one of the most simple and meanest
of my soldiers: having always had a desire to be followed and imitated in my
deeds and actions, and not in my words or speeches: and that my soldiers
should learn by me, not only good order and discipline, but the example and
imitation thereof also. I never refused any labor, hazard or peril: I never
made excuses by any shows of unwillingness or dissimulation: whenever the
onset was to be given upon the enemy (be it spoken without envy) I was one of
the foremost in going against them, and one of the last in returning from the
combat. The spoils and booty gotten upon our enemies, I always shared and
divided amongst you, and never reserved any part or portion thereof to my
self. In brief, even my realm, my goods, my fortune, and all that I had, I
held in common with you. Nothing was proper or peculiar to my self, I held:
nothing divided or in several. And now (my companions, my friends) behold I
die, I leave you, and I must go hence. Wherefore I pray and request all of
you, I require and adjure you: that the faith, affection, and love which was
never wanting on my part toward you: the same you would bestow and employ
toward John my son, whom as the lively image and resemblance of the father,
I offer and dedicate unto you, as Vicar and Lieutenant for me and in my stead.

Having ended this speech, he caused likewise the young Prince his son to be
sent for: to whom being come, he used some speeches in the presence of the
Queen his mother, exhorting him sweetly and lovingly in this manner.

My son: John my son: thou see that I now die, and that I leave thee but
a Speeches and last words of Scanderbeg to his son before his death.
child, an infant, young and tender: behold I leave thee a Realm and Kingdom,
if thou be good and virtuous, stable and firm: if thou be otherwise, most
weak and feeble. Study therefore (my son) and strive to prefer goodness
and virtue, before all other goods whatsoever. For thereby thou shall both
maintain and make thy estate not only peaceable and quiet, but thou shall
increase it daily, and make it more glorious: but for as much (my son) as thy
age is yet weak, unapt, and unable to sway the Scepter and Crown of this thy
kingdom, for that thou have on all parts great and mighty enemies, most
fierce and savage beasts, which will seek to dismember and to devour thee.
There is Mahomet that wicked tyrant and common enemy of Christians, who (if
thou should so young and weak of years take upon thee the managing and
government of thy Realm) would presently oppress, and utterly subvert thee:
for this cause (sweet heart) as soon as thou have closed and covered thy
fathers eyes, and have yielded this mybodie to the sepulture, get thee
presently from hence, and taking thy mother with thee: pass the seas into
Apulia, and make no delay, but hasten to thy own towns and Lordships, and see
that thou continue and abide there, till such time as thou be grown to man's
estate, and that thou be capable and sufficient for the affairs and
government of thy kingdom. When thou art come to be of years, make thy
repair to the noble Senate and Seigniorie of Venice, who will reestablish thee
in the seat and throne of thy ancestors. For that now I leave and commit thee
to their government, fidelity, and tutorship to the intent they may undertake
the guard and custody of thy kingdom, and may defend it from the enemy, and
may keep it to thy use and benefit. For so are the conuentions and articles
of agreement between the Venetians and me, that they shall preserve thy estate
from thy enemies, and reserve it for thee: and that when thou shall be able to
undertake the charge thereof, they shall reinuest thee in the possession of the
same. I have no doubt of their diligence in thy affairs considering that they
only amongst all the Princes of Christendom (be it spoken without offense) are
not inferior to any in gravity, prudence, and worthy exploits: besides that
for the excellency of their faith and bounty they do merit and deserve to be
beloned and reverenced above all others. Of the which I have had good trial
and experience more then any others, during the whole time of my reign and
life, in all sorts of actions, and by the proof of many matters: and they have
been continually leagued and confederated with me in strict friendship and
amity, and I have always found them in stead of kind and loving parents unto
me. Them therefore (my son) do I leave to be as Parents, as Princes, as
Tutors unto thee: depart not from their instructions, precepts, and counsels.
The Venetians only are the most just, the most religious, the most constant
tutors and defenders of the Christians faith, the protectors of Orphans and
widows, and of all weak, miserable, and afflicted persons: and therewithal,
they have showed themselves so good and assured friends unto me, that all my
life long I have had their Seigniorie in no less regard and recommendation
then mine own kingdom and Dominions. And they again have had such confidence
in me, and have so affected me, that they have put the whole right and full
disposition of their towns and territories into my hands, and have referred
the government of them to my discretion: and (I praise God) I have maintained
them in good and happy estate, and have kept them to their good liking and
contentment, as long as I had the charge and command of them. Wherefore (my
good son) thou may live safe and secure under the shadow and support of
their puissance, and when thou shall be of age, fail not to resort unto them,
with a good courage and confidence. For they will gladly and willingly
repossesse thee of thy crown and dignity, they will friendly and lovingly
restore thy Realm and strong holds unto thee, and if thou be sage, wise, and
virtuous, they will continually maintain and defend thee against all the
violence, arms, and forces of any enemies: they will keep thy estate whole
and entire for thee, as most puissant, most sage, and most invincible Princes
both by sea and land, and such as never abandoned their faithful friends and
allies, nor never abused or deceived any person that put their trust and
affiance in them. And whenever (my son the joy of my heart) thou shall
return and be seated in thy royal throne, and that it shall please God to
give thee the quiet and peaceable possession thereof, and that thou shall have
taken upon thee the government and managing of thy estate: principally and
above all things see that thou do administer and yield justice to all men
indifferently, Precepts of Scanderbeg to his son for the institution of a
Prince.
for of all virtues she is the most noble and most excellent: keep and observe
equity without any acceptance or difference of the faces of poor or rich, of
the weak or mighty: use temperance and moderation in all thy actions,
strengthen thy realm with friendship and amity of good men: for neither are
great treasures, nor strong armies, the garrison or fortress of estates and
Empires: but true and faithful friends, which are not to be gotten with silver
and gold, but are purchased with good offices of courtesy, kindness, and
fidelity. And therefore that divine speech of king Philip Saying of Philip of
Macedon to his son Alexander.
reprehending the great Alexander his son, is yet extant in record: what
motion (quoth he) has induced thee my son, to this vain hope, to think or
surmise that they will continue faithful and trusty unto thee, whom thou have
purchased for money to be thy friends? It is love, that must yield true and
unfeigned friendship. For as this earth on which we live, does desire above all
things the presence and comfort of the sun, which we see in the heavens: so
the life of man cannot be without friendship and amity. Thou therefore my
son shall soon get and purchase all these things, if thou believe and follow
my counsel: thou shall draw unto thee, thou shall bind unto thee all the
world by thy benefits, if thou observe my precepts and commandments.
Commendation of humanity, courtesy, and beneficence.
For courtesy, beneficence, and bounty, are the only virtues, acceptable to
God, pleasing to men, sure and secure in all places, exempted from all perils,
and they do engender and stir up in the spirits and minds of men a
wonderful and admirable love and liking of them, easily surmounting and
exceeding all other virtues, and excelling far beyond them: they only (by
the testimony and consent of the sage and wise) are the most necessary
virtues for all kinds, estates, and degrees of men: but especially for Princes
and great personages: for they be the virtues which have the command and
possession of the affections and humors of every man, and they only have the
disposing of the hearts of all men. Moreover my son, in adversity, and in
things that are high and difficult, I would advertise thee to be magnanimous
and valiant: in prosperity remember that thou moderate and temper thy good
fortune with virtue. Fly sloth and idleness, the nurse of effeminacie: for
from thence proceed all mischiefs, and it is the root of all vices. Suffer
not thy soldiers to lie idle, or to be slothful, but exercise them in
continual travel, watchings, and daily labors. Howbeit use them not as
vassals and servants, but as thy fellows and companions. In the camp and in
the field demean thy self not only as a Captain, but as a soldier also:
above all things abhor delicacie, and fly luxuriousness and incontinencie:
for by these, the most stout and strongest men have grown faint and
effeminate. Too much severity and cruelty avoid equally and alike, for they
are proper to fierce and savage beasts: be patient of labor without
weariness: and let not any perils make thee learefull or timorous: the
variety and change of thy affairs, do thou moderate with prudence and
magnanimity, the cross accidents of contrary fortune see that thou endure
and bear them with that wisdom and discretion, that (dissembling and
concealing thy grief) thy enemy have no cause to glory or triumph over thee,
nor to insult at thy calamity. For what can be more unfitting and unbeseeming
the constancy of a brave Chieftaine, and General of an army, then that his
countenance should discover the passion of his heart? Be not forgetful but
bear it always in mind, that thou foresee and eschew the trains and snares
of the Barbarians, whereof the Turks make an ordinary and principal
profession: shun the perjury, the cautels, and guilefull sleights of this
faithless Nation; disdain their amity, and let the friendship and society
of this disloyal tyrant be abominable unto thee: neglect and contemn his
gifts and presents, his flatteries, and his promises, for fear least in
drawing and alluring thee to trust him, he do oppress thee unawares, and cast
thee down headlong into perpetual and endless mischieues. And for this cause
be thou sure to be always provided of good Counselors, such as are well
known unto thee: faithful, and loving. These are the precepts (my son, the
light of my life,) these are the ensignments and instructions, which I heard
and learned of my father, a master of no small experience, and my delight was
to meditate upon them continually: by them was I instructed and taught, by them
did I fashion and frame my life; and my whole age: and to be short by them have
I reaped no small fruit and benefit, wherefore I do now exhort thee, I do
admonish, and (if thou can endure to be entreated by thy father) then I thy
father do pray and request thee, yea even from the very bowels and entrails of
my heart, I do again and again pray and double pray thee, that thou would
teach thy self these things which I have taught thee, that thou would
carefully and diligently embrace, retain, and digest them in thy memory.

Whilst Scanderbeg was thus speaking and persuading with his son, there
Invasion by the Turks upon the Venetian territories.
sprang up a strange rumor throughout all the town, and a sudden brute and
tumult arose, by reason of a message brought from the fields, that the Turks
were near at hand, and that they had ouerrunne and burned the country near
adjoining. At the report of these news, Scanderbeg although he kept his bed in
great extreamitie, yet could he not repress nor refrain that ancient and
invincible courage, nor that lively and martial spirit which was wont to dwell
and be resident in his noble heart. For Courage of Scanderbeg in uincible even
at point of death.
raising himself up in his bed, as well as his fainting and feeble limbs would
give him leave, he called for his armor and commanded his horse to be made
ready. So lively and flourishing was his spirit still remaining sound and
disposed within his stomach abounding in courage and vigor. But when his
members being now destitute of strength and growing weak, did begin to yield
and sink down again into the bed: then falling and bearing himself forward
upon his couch with his face turned toward his Captains, he thus spoke unto
them.

Forth forth (my companions) issue out upon those traitors, and Infidels: go
Speech of Scanderbeg to his Captains upon an alarm given by the enemy.
you before, I will follow after you immediately.

Herewithall a troop of horse making out of the town, went to seek out the
enemy not ceasing till they had found them, who having newly sacked the
territory of the Scutarians were encamped upon the brook Clyre near to the
city of Scutarie. For Ahamat (the General of those troops) was come thither
with fifteen thousand Ahamat with 15000. Turks fly upon the conceit of
Scanderbeg his presence.
horse purposely to wast and spoil the country about Scutarie. Now as soon as
the Barbarians did discover the Christians coming toward them, imagining
that it was Scanderbeg, they took suddenly the alarm, and being in great
fear and tumult, they left the better part of their booty and fled away in
the night time over the mountains, which by reason of their roughness were in
a manner impassable. For it was in January at which time the Snow and the Ise
did cover all places with their whiteness. These Infidels thus retyring
themselves by the tops and craggie passages of the mountains, and holding no
certain way nor path, did find themselves so hardly pressed and rudely
entreated by the Lords and inhabitants of those quarters, that they compelled
them to yield a good account of their journey, and of the havoc and spoil
which they had made upon the country. For many of them being taken prisoners,
and a great number slain, they lost almost all their prey and booty.

The same night that the Turks did fly away so hastily from the Christians no
man following nor pursuing them: Scanderbeg after the confession of his sins
with great penitencie, having received the Sacraments with good devotion,
according to the rites of the holy Church, and recommending himself and his
soul without ceasing The death of Scanderbeg.
to God his creator, he gave up the ghoast, and exchanged this life, for the
happy joys of that which is eternal. The time of his departure wherein he
left this world, was the 17. of January in the year of grace 1460. and (as
the report goes) in the three score and third year of his age, and of his
reign the four and twentieth. The beginning of his reign and the time wherein
he recovered the crown of Epyre was the eight and twentieth of November in the
year of our Lord, 1443.

Lech Ducagin (of whom we have often made mention) perceiving by the
exclamations and lamentable voices every where given out that he was dead: he
made have to the place, and in the open view and hearing of all men with a sad
and sorrowful countenance, and a voice full of confusion, pulling himself by
the beard, and the hairs of his head, he brake out into these speeches.

Hasten you, hasten you hither (quoth he) you Princes and Lords of Albany, this
Speech of Lech Ducagin bewayling the death of Scanderbeg.
day are the gates and rampires of Epyre and Macedonie broken open: this day
are our fortresses and walls fallen to the ground: this is the day wherein our
strength and forces begin to fail us: this is the day wherein our Crowns
and Scepters are overthrown: and from henceforth all our help, all our hope
with his good Prince is quite gone and extinquished.

His body was interred at Lissa in the Cathedral Church of S. Nicholas. His
funerals according to the custom of his ancestors were celebrated with great
pomp, Scanderbeg buried at Lissa.
and with the incomparable sorrow and mourning both of his Captains and
soldiers, as also of all the Princes and Lords his confederates. It is a thing
incredible to report the exceeding tears and lamentations made both by the
Province of Albany and the countries near adjoining, and in diverse other
places of Christendom. His body being there entombed, did rest in peace, till
the coming of Mahomet into Epyre to the siege of Scutarie which was about
four years after. At which time the Turks having gotten the town of Lissa,
did with a vehement and earnest desire search out the body of SCanderbeg: and
having found it, they drew it forth of the supulture, The body of Scanderbeg
taken out of his sepulture and highly honored and admired by the Turks.
and (it may be some divine dispensation working that motion in them) they
took a singular pleasure and contentment to see it, to reverence it, and in a
manner to adore it being now dead and dissolved, which being a live they so
greatly redoubted and stood in fear of, that the only brute and sound of his
name did make them to fly away confounded and astonished. They ran thither
from all parts, flocking together in troops and companies with so greedy and
vehement a desire and longing to see his bones, that happy was he which might
come to touch them, or but to have a sight of them only: but much more glad
and joyful was he that could get or carry away any piece of his body were it
never so little: and those that had any part thereof, caused the same most
religiously to be set and curiously enchased, some in silver, some in gold,
bearing it about them upon some part of their bodies as a thing most holy,
divine and fatal: and they did with singular reverence and devotion observe
and keep it very carefully: being fully persuaded, that all such as did bear
those relics about them, should enjoy the like fortune, felicity and
privilege during their lives which Scanderbeg (by the gift and grace of God)
only and alone within the memory of man, had used and enjoyed all his life
time.

It may be, that the Turks were induced to be of this mind, and were drawn
to Certain private acts and exploits done by Scanderbeg most rare and
memorable.
this persuasion, by reason of many strange and wonderful reports, that went
of the rare strength and corporal force and vigor of this worthy personage,
amongst many notable examples, making show thereof one was, upon a savage and
wild Bull whose extreme fierceness, and huge greatness made him fearful
to all the inhabitants dwelling in the lands and country of Mamisa sister to
Scanderbeg, where this furious beast did a thousand outrages and damages and
committed many most Scanderbeg kills a wild Bull in Epyre.
pitiful and cruel murders: insomuch that Scanderbeg coming where he
haunted and setting upon him on horseback, with one only blow of his
Cimitarie, he cut his neck clean from his shoulders. The like exploit was
that which he did upon a Scanderbeg kills a wild Bore in Apulia
monstrous Boar in Apulia, which had made many of the Courtiers of King
Ferdinand to bear his marks: nevertheless Scanderbeg being one day on
hunting with the King, in the open and plain field encountered with this
beast, where assayling him in the same sort as he had done the former, he soon
parted the head from the body. This also is reported of Scanderbeg, that after
the death of Ballaban, and the discamping of his army from the siege of Croy:
Ionima and Heder the brother and Nephew of Ballaban being brought before him
straight tied and bound together, the Ionima and Heder slain by Scanderbeg and
cut in twain with one blow.
sight and presence of those two (putting him in remembrance of Ballaban, and
the cruelty which by his means was executed upon the persons of Moses and his
companions) did cause him to enter into so great a vehemency of wrath and
choler against them: that not staying for any other to lay hand upon them, he
divided them in two pieces, and with one only blow parted both their bodies a
sunder in the midst. This Cimitary was made at Damasco in Siria, it was of a
most perfect goodness and excellent temper: and many times he would bear two
of them in one scabbard both of the which sometimes he should break in one
only battle. This weapon was generally reputed so rare and excellent, that
Mahomet on a time having heard thereof, Mahomet demands Scanderbeg his sword
in gift.
that it would cut helmets, head pieces, and powdrons clean a sunder: one day
when they were in truce together he sent unto him, demanding this sword to be
given him; which being granted, and proof being made thereof in the presence
of the Sultan by many of the strongest and ablest men of his Court, and such as
were thought to have the best arm: but perceiving none of these wonders and
miracles that had been reported of it, he sent it back again unto Scanderbeg
in great scorn and disdain, Speech or message of Mahomet unto Scanderbeg,
returning his sword again unto him.
with this message, That he would not be beholding unto him for such a thing as
he could get for his money, and which should be of much greater and better
perfection: and that he did not give any credit to any of those reports that
had been given out touching the excellency of that sword. But Scanderbeg in
the sight and presence of the messenger, having made strange and admirable
proves with this same Cimitarie willed him to tell his Lord and Master what he
had seen, and withal to Answer of Scanderbeg to the message of Mahomet.
let him know, That it was not the virtue and goodness of the sword which
wrought such rare and extraordinary effects: but that it was the strength and
force of his arm, which he reserved against his enemies.

But to make an end of this work, I could here add many reports of like
quality, which are written of the force and wonderful disposition of the
body of Scanderbeg, exceeding perhaps the common course and law of nature, and
which would hardly be credited or believed: but I will let them pass and not
speak of them. Howbeit that we might with as good reason and as well enlarge
our consciences, and give credit unto them, as to those which are reported of
elder times, and which antiquity has commended unto us: the which
nevertheless even at this day we do celebrate and greatly set by; as the
labors of Hercules, the adventures of Jason, of Perseus, of Castor, of Pollux,
of Bellerophon, of Hector, of Achilles, with infinite other most famous and
heroical personages, whose glory is not bounded nor confined within any
straighter limits, then the large and spacious circuit and compass of the wide
world: and yet notwithstanding we have no other proof of their exploites, nor
any certainty of the acts ascribed to those ancient Princes, but only the
bare prescription of the time and the tradition of our forefathers, which have
admitted them for true beyond time out of memory. But the truth of these
wonderful matters reported of Scanderbeg does carry greater show of likelihood
and probability: for (to omit those two thundering tempests of war Hunyades
and his son Mathias Coruinus King of Hungary, who lived in the time of
Scanderbeg, and of whom are reported as great and strange matters) we may see
in Scanderbeg a pure work of the finger of God, and the evident assistance of
his divine hand and power, for the succor and relief of his Church and chosen
people: in that it pleased him to raise upper his worthy and Christian Prince,
and to endow him with so many special prerogatives as another David against
these two Goliaths, Amurath and Mahomet, the most cruel and bloody
persecutors of the house and Church of God that ever lived. So did God in times
past provide the Israelites of a Joshua against the Hethites and Cana^nites, and
of a Gedeon against the Medianites and Amalechites: and of a Samson against the
Philistines, and of a Martell, a Pypin, a Charlemaine against the Sarracens. So
will God still do the like, and he will provide our France of another Pucell,
he will never fail to raise up some one or other for the defense and delivery
of his people from their enemies: if that we with true contrition and hearty
repentance for our sins and enormities, with a loathing and detestation of
our abominable Sects and Schisms, of our partialities and deuisions, of our
ambition and mortal hatreds and mutual enmities, will beat down that
partition wall which has separated and disioyned us from his grace: and if we
will humble our selves under his hand, and if in faith, zeal, and hope we will
implore his gracious favor, to protect and assist us.

FINIS.
AN INDEX OR TABLE OF ALL THE PRINCIPAL AND most memorable matters contained
in this History.
A
ARmath a Turk with Barach promises Mahomet to kill Scanderbeg. 292. he is
slain by Scanderbeg. 300 Acts and exploites done by Scanderbeg privately most
rare and memorable. 496 Adrian Emperor of Rome his Colossus or statue, and his
Amphi-theater at Duras in Epire. 488 Ahamat and the Turks fly upon the
conceit of Scanderbeg his presence. 495 Ahemaz a Turk. 338. his combat with
Zachary Groppe. 339. he is slame by Groppe. 340 Aidin brother of Gnee Musache.
58 Airadin agent for Amurath with Scanderbeg. 81 Albanians their original. 44
Albericke de Barbian General of the Pope his forces, overthrows Jews the
first Duke of Aniow in battle. 393 Alcanzi Turkish adventurers and
vauntcurrors without pay. 138. 207 Alchria, once named Pharsalia in Macedome.
36 Alexander the 5. made Pope. 399 Alexander Sforce aideth Ferdinand King of
Naples against the Duke of Aniow. 405 Alphonsus King of Naples, sends
succors to Scanderbeg. 280. his bountiful presents to Scanderbeg. 249. his
death. 381. his praises and commendations. 382. he is adopted by Queen Ione of
Naples, and received into that city. 400 he besieges the Queen in Naples,
who disinheriteth him. 401. he returns into Spain and loses the kingdom
of Naples. ibid. he is taken prisoner by the Duke of Milan. 402. he is
delivered. 403. he besiegth and recouereth Naples. ibid. he dies. ibidem.
Alybeg and Aiasbeg sent with an army to defend the Turkish frontiers. 489
Ambassade of Scanderbeg to the Despot of Misia praying passage for his army
against the Turks. 73. to Alphonsus King of Naples. 378. 309. 344. to diverse
Christian Princes. 377. to Ferdinand King of Naples. 382. to Mahomet for the
redemption of Moses and other his Nobles. 455. Ambassade from Amurath to the
Sfetigradians. 150. to Vranocontes to corrupt him to betray Croy. 231. to
Scanderdeg to conclude a peace with him. 236 Ambassade from Mahomet to
Scanderbeg with offers of peace. 259. 431. from the Venetians to Scanderbeg.
127. 435. 437. from the Princes of Epire to Scanderbeg, offering him their aid
against Amurath 154. from Alphonsus to Scanderbeg. 280. 281. 311. from diverse
Princes to comfort Scanderbeg for his misfortune at Belgrade. 311. from
Vsuncassan king of Persia to Mahomet. 386. from the Pope and Ferdinand and the
Duke of Milan to Scanderbeg. 406 Ambition of Debreas. 267. of the Turkish
Chieftaines. ibid. of the Greeks. 324 Ambuscado by Scanderbeg against Haly
Bassa. 56. against the Turks besieging Sfetigrade. 143. against the Turks
within Sfetigrade. 196. against the Turks his victuallers at the siege of
Croy. 226. against Isaac Bassa. 363. 365. against Carazabeg. 430. against
Seremet. 449 Ambuscado by Ballaban against the Epirots at Valcala. 453. against
Scanderbeg to entrappe him. 462 Amesa son of Reposius Nephew to Scanderbeg
reuolteth with him from Amurath. 18. he is baptized 35. he is made joint
governor of Baleze with Marin Span. 107. he attempteth the surprising of
Driuasta. 108. he spoileth their territories. 112. he is reproved by
Scanderbeg. 114. he rebelleth against Scanderbeg. 349. he goes to Mahomet and
carries his wife and children with him. 350. he is created a Saniacke, and
sent to accompany Isaac Bassa with an army against Scanderbeg. 354. he is
proclaimed King of Epire by Isaac Bassa and the Turkish army. 361. he is taken
prisoner by the Epirots. 371. he is brought to Scanderbeg. 372. he is sent to
Naples to be kept in prison. 377. he is brought back again into Epire, and is
reconciled to his Uncle. 382. he faineth flight to Constantinople for the
delivering of his wife and children: and is there prisoned by Mahomet. 384
Amesa a Turk sent with an army by Mahomet against Scanderbeg. 264. he is
surprised and overthrown. ibid. he is taken prisoner by Amesa the Nephew of
Scanderbeg. 265. he is ransommed. 267. he commends Scanderbeg to the Turks.
267 Amurath the second King of Turks usurps the kingdom of Epire. 12. he
practices the death of Scanderbeg. 15. he marches against Vladislaus king of
Hungary. 73. he professes a religious life. 87. he comes in person to the
siege of Sfetigrade. 147. he endeuoreth to corrupt the Sfetigradians. 179. he
departs out of Epire to Andrinople 189. he returns into Epire to the siege
of Croy. 209. he sickneth upon grief and melancholy. 240. he dies. 245. his
manifold exploits and famous acts. ibidem. he is buried at Bursa. 246. his age
at the time of his death. ibidem. his death is deplored and lamented by his
subjects. 251 Amurath Bassa a Greek, descended of the Emperors of
Constantinople slain in the battle of Euphrates by Vsuncassan King of Persia.
387. Andrew Angel General of the Driuastines against Amesa. 110 Andrew Angel
brother to Paul Angel. 449 Andrew Thopie, father of Comine and Musache Thopie.
45 Andrewe Humoi. 102. prisoner to Scanderbeg. 107 Andrew second son of
Carolobert king of Hungary married to Ione the first Queen of Naples. 389. he
is murdered. ibid. Andrinople the chief seat of the great Turk in the days
of Amurath. 7 Anell a mason betraieth Naples to Alphonsus. 403 Angelina
daughter of John Castriot and Voisaua: sister to Scanderbeg 3. mother to
Musache de Angeline. 271 Antibara a town in Epire. 113 Antonie de Bouchardes.
318 Antonie de Dieds. 319 Antonie Caraffa, ambassador for Queen Ione of
Naples to the Pope. 400 Ariamnites Theopie, tributarie to Amurath reuolteth to
Scanderbeg. 45. his praise and virtues. ibid. and 257. his descent. 271 Arms
of Scanderbeg his family. 42 Army leauied by the Christians against the
Turks. 63 Army leauied by Scanderbeg for the aid of Vladislaus king of
Hungary against the Turks. 70 Army leauied by Pope Pius the second, and the
Princes of Christendom against the Turks. 442. it is dissolved and broken.
449 Argilat a place in Epire. 466 Assambeg sent by Mahomet with an army against
Scanderbeg, is overthrown and hurt in battle: and is afterward in great
extreamitie. 427. he yields himself to Scanderbeg, and is freely delivered.
428 Avarice of Christians. 73 Avarice naturally in the Turks. 92 Avarice of
the Greeks in Constantinople. 319 Avarice and treachery of a Christian
Cannonier. 321 Avarice of the Greeks. 322 Aueniades certain towers in
Constantinople. 319 Auignion in France purchased to the sea of Rome by Pope
Clement. 370 Aid vide Succors. Answers of Scanderbeg to Amurath dissembling
with him upon the death of his father. 13 to the ambassadors of the Princes of
Epyre. 154. to his Nobles dissuading him from the combat with Ferybassa. 174.
to a Turk demanding truce at Belgrade. 202. to the Sfetigradians offering
conditions of surrender. 202. to Isup his ambassade. 239. to the Ambassadors
of Mahomet. 259. to his Chiefetaines persuading him to grant truce to the
Belgradians. 287. to the ambassadors of Alphonsus. 311. to the ambassadors of
other Princes. ibidem. to his soldiers being inquisitiue of his proceedings
against the Turks. 357. to Meisseit Saniacke refusing to have truce with
Mahomet. 376. to the message of Hamur. 380. 381. to the speech of Amesa. 383.
to Count Pycenin. 414. to Assambeg. 428. to the last letters of Mahomet. 444.
to the two messengers of the Turkish army. 485. to the message of Mahomet. 497
Answer of the Daynians to Scanderbeg. 106 Answer of Paul Manassey to
Caragusa. 121 Answer of the Sfetigradians to the enticements of Amurath. 179
Answers of Amesa to Marin Span. 109. 110. to Isaac Bassa questioning with him
upon the retrait of Scanderbeg. 360 Answers of Amurath to the reasons and
advise of his Counselors. 179. to the speeches of his son Mahomet. 186
Answers of Peter Perlat to the Heralds of Amurath. 148. to the ambassador of
Amurath. 150 Answers of Vranocontes to Scanderbeg. 153. to the oration of
Scanderbeg in the name of all the Epirots. 262 Answer of Alphonsus king of
Naples to the letters of Scanderbeg. 280 Answer of the Turks within
Sfetigrade summoned by Scanderbeg. 195 Answer of the citizens of Belgrade to
their governor. 283. 286. Answer of Mahomet to his Captains persuading him
to hold on his siege before Constantinople. 326 Answer of Fusian to
Scanderbeg. 422 Answer of the Epyrots to Gabriell Treuisan ambassador from the
Venetians. 436 Answer or Oration of the Turkish ambassador to Vranocontes.
232
B
Baiazeth the first King of Turks taken prisoner by Tamberlaine the Scithian.
2 Baiazeth the second Emperor of Turks destroieth the Darnisses in Turkey for
their villainies. 5. his act upon the river of Danow in Hungary. 291 Baldus of
Perusa a famous Lawyer. 388 Balesia a town in Epyre. 47. reedefied and
fortified by Scanderbeg. 107. razed by the Scutarians. 118 Ballaban Badera sent
against Scanderbeg: his birth and description, he is made Aga or Colonel. 452.
he is reproched by Scanderbeg. 453. he is overthrown by Scanderbeg. 454. he is
rewarded by Mahomet for the taking of Moses and other Nobles of Epyre. 455. his
second journey against Scanderbeg. 456. his third journey against Scanderbeg.
457. he is in disgrace with Mahomet. 459. his fourth journey against Scanderbeg.
461. he besieges Croy. 474. He is slain. 482 Balthazar Perduce Governor of
Croy. 473 Baltogle Admiral to Mahomet at the siege of Constantinople in
disgrace for the loss of the battle at sea. 321 Bank of Saint* George at
Genes. 404 Baptista Fellizan a Genoway. 320 Barie or Barletta a city in
Apulia, besieged by Count Pycenin and John Duke of Aniow. 406 Barach a Turk^^
and Acmah his companion promise Mahomet to kill Scanderbeg. 291. ^e is slain
by Scanderbeg. 299 Battatinea a Tower in Constantinople. 316 Battles at sea
between the Turks and Christians at Constantinople. 320. between Philippe
Duke of Milan and Alphonsus king of Arragon. 402 Battle of Moraua between
Huniades and the Turks. 17 Battle of Belgrade in Hungary between Huniades
and Mahomet. 354 Battle of Varna between Vladislaus King of Hungary, and
Amurath king of Turks. 73 Battle of Euphrates between the Persians and the
Turks. 387 Battle of Arsengua between Vsuncassan king of Persia and Mahomet
Emperor of Turks. 387 Battle of Roque Siech between Jews the second Duke of
Aniow, and Ladislaus of Duras king of Naples. 396 Battle of Farney between
John Duke of Aniow and Ferdinand king of Naples. 405 Battle of S. Fabian
between the army of Ferdinand and the Duke of Aniow. 405 Battles fought by
Scanderbeg. Battle against Haly bassa. 58 Battle of Mocrea against Ferisee.
88 Battle against Mustapha. 92 Battle of Drinon against the Venetians. 102
Battle of S. Segian against Count Pycenin. 418 Battle of Oronichea against
Mustapha. 123 Battle against Feribassa. 171 Battle of Modrissa against Amesa
a Turk. 264 Battle of Pologue against Debreas. 270 Battle of Belgrade in
Bulgarie against Sebalias. 298 Battle of Oronichea against Moses. 341. 342
Battle of Pharsalia against Isaac Bassa and Amesa his Nephew. 369 Battle
against Synam. 427 Battle of Alchria against Assambeg. 427 Battle of Scopia
against Iussumbeg. 428 Battle of Alchria against Seremet. 449 Battle of
Valcala against Ballaban. 454 Battle of Sfetigrade against Ballaban. 458
Battle of Oronichea against Ballaban. 456 Battle of Valcala the second
against Ballaban. 464 Battle of Cassar against Iagup. 468 Beglerbey a chief
officer under the great Turk, one of Europe, another of Asia. 140 Belgrade in
Hungary once called Alba Greca, or Taururum. 353. besieged by Mahomet. 354
Belgrade in Bulgarie besieged by Scanderbeg. 283. battered. 285. relieved,
repaired and victualed by Sebalias. 303 Belgradians give hostages to the Turks
in garrison at Belgrade for assurance of their faith. 284. they demand truce
of Scanderbeg. 285. they repair the breach of their walls contrary to
promise. 293. they sack the camp of Scanderbeg. 297 Bellisarius takes
Naples. 403 Bishops of Varadia and Strigonium by their folly hinder the
victory of the Christians in the battle of Varna. 73. they are drowned. 75
Body of S. Jews of France carried away from Marseilles by Alphonsus. 401 Body
of Scanderbeg adored and reverenced by the Turks after his death. 496 Boniface
the ninth made Pope. 395 Boniface or Port Siracusan a castle in Corsica
besieged by Alphonsus king of Arragon. 399 Bosa the mother of Lech or Luke
Zachary puts her self and her estate in the protection of the Venetians.
94 Braccio Fort Bracci^ of Perusa vvarreth upon Pope Martin the fifth,
overthrows Sforce in battle, and is retained in pay with Queen Ione of
Naples. 399 Brethren of Scanderdeg poisoned by Amurath. 13. Bursa or Prusa in
Bithinia the place of Amurath his sepulcher. 246 Busegiarpeni a country in
Epire near Scutarie. 128.
C
Calegarie a place in Constantinople. 316 Calepin brother to Mahomet or one in
his steed strangled. 253 Calybassa a Turk Councellor to Mahomet, and friend to
the Christians. 316. he councelleth Mahomet to leave the siege of
Constantinople. 325. he aduertiseth the Emperor of Constantinople of the
council of the Turks. 326. he is betrayed by Chirlucke, and put to death by
Mahomet. 332 Calixtus the fourth, see Pope. Campobasso a Neapolitan county,
joins with John Duke of Aniow against Ferdinand. 405 Camp of the Turks
before Croy victualed out of Macedonie. 226. and by the Venetians. 227
Campupescupi a place in Epire where Scanderbeg had rich saltpits. ^1 Canuazado
by Scanderbeg to the Turkish camp. 165. 221. 228. 241. Carambey and Scanderbeg
sent with an army of Turks against the Hungarians. 17 Caragusa a Turk
slain by Paul Manassey in combat. 122 Carazebeg sueth to be sent against
Scanderbeg. 429. he is sent against him. 430. he challenges Scanderbeg to a
set battle, who sets upon him in his camp, and he retireth to
Constantinople. 431 Carolobert King of Hungary son of Charles Martell. 388
Cassar a village in Epire. 467 Cathagusina daughter of the Despot of Misia
married to Amurath. 71 Cause of the war between Scanderbeg and the Venetians.
95 Cause and ground of the treason causing the loss of Sfetigrade. 180 Causes
of the conquests of the Turks upon the Christians. 248 Cause of the Schism in
the church of Rome between Pope Urban and Pope Clement. 391 Causes of the
treachery of the Despot of Seruia. 71. Ceremony of the Turks in their
circumcision. 5 Charles Thopie first founder of Croy. 31 Charles the second
king of Naples, Nephew to the French king S. Jews, his marriage and issue. 388
Charles Martell king of Hungary. 388 Charles the first Duke of Duras overcome
in battle by Jews king of Hungary, is beheaded. 389 Charles the second Duke
of Duras, carried away into Hungary by king Jews. 389. in^ested with the
crown of Naples by Pope Urban. 392. he conquereth Naples, and is crowned king
of Naples. 393. he is chosen and crowned king of Hungary. 394. he is slain at
Buda. ibidem. his issue. ibidem. Chaonia a country in Epire. 475 Chidna a
place in Epire surprised by Mahomet, the manner of it. 475 Chieri a place in
Macedonie. 431 Chios an Island in the mediterran sea. 319 Chirluc a Greek of
Canstantinople. 319. his infidelity and notable treachery. 332. his death and
execution. 333 Chiurill a town in Epire begun to be builded by Scanderbeg,
and razed by Mahomet. 488 Chrisoceras a Promontorie by Constantinople. 315
Christian Princes their carelessenesse of the loss and danger of
Constantinople. 314 Christians their voyage against the Turks broken. 449
Christians their delays and security. 291 Christians, subjects of the great
Turk their miserable estate. 217 Christians slain at Belgrade, buried. 307
Cimerians a people of Epire. 45 Clement the seventh made Antipope. 391
Clemency and rare humanity of Scanderbeg. 348. and toward Assambeg. 428
Colchina a city of the Venetians in Dalmatia upon the sea or gulf of Venice.
263 Colla Humo^. 102 Combat between Scanderbeg and a Scithian. 8. between him
and two Persians. 9. between Paul Manassey and Caragusa. 120. between
Scanderbeg and Feribassa. 174. of Acmath and Barach with Scanderbeg. 299.
between Zachary Groppe and Ahemaz. 339 Comparison of Scanderbeg and Huniades.
75 Complaints of the Turks of Macedonie to Amurath against Scanderbeg. 77. of
the Despot of Seruia against Scanderbeg. 78. of A^esa to his soldiers. 119. by
Amurath at his death. 243 Conditions of peace offered by the Venetians to
Scanderbeg. 127. by Mahomet to Scanderbeg. 432. by Amurath to Scanderbeg. 81
Conditions of composition offered by Amurath to the Sfetigradians. 148. by the
Turks within Sfetigrade to Scanderbeg. 202. by Amurath to Vranocontes and the
Croians. 210 Confederacy between Scanderbeg and the Princes of Epire against
the Turks. 51 Confederacy and leauie of the Christians against the Turks. 63
Confederates of Ferdinand send to Scanderbeg for succors in his behalf. 406
Confederates of Scanderbeg promise him aid for the relief of Croy. 477
Conference between the Governor of Belgrade and the citizens upon the
suspicion conceived of their faith. 283. between Hamur and Scanderbeg. 380
Conflict between Amesa and the Driuastines. 112. between the Turks and the
Epyrots. 146. between Scanderbeg and the French in Apulia. 413. between the
forces of Carazabeg and Scanderbeg. 431 Conquests gotten of late days by the
Turks upon Christendom. 248 Conquests of Mahomet during his truce with
Scanderbeg. 425 Constancy of the Dainians. 127 Constantin Paleologus Emperor
of Constantinople. 314. he craves aid of Christian Princes against the
Turks. ibidem. his oversight. 329. he is smothered and trodden to death by his
subjects flying from the Turks. 330. he is the last Emperor of
Constantinople. 333 Constantine the Great the son of Helen, first Emperor of
Constantinople. 332. ill advised to translate the Empire from Rome thither. 336
Constantine a name fatal to Constantinople. 333 Constantinopolitans their
wretched covetousness. 319. 322. 325. their miserable estate. 323. their
devotion. ibid. Constantinople besieged by the Turks. 323. the description of
it. 314. it is battered. 316. 322. ill furnished with provisions. 317. the
manner of the defense thereof by the Christians. 318. it is assaulted. 322*
327. it is lost by the covetousness of the Greeks. 225. it is taken by the
Turks. 330. the sack thereof with all horrible cruelty. 331 Conspiracy by
Mahomet against Scanderbeg. 291. 473. Conspiracy against Scanderbeg straungely
detected* 474 Consultation by Amurath for the war against Scanderbeg. 39.
130. 138. for his proceedings against Sfetigrade. 178. for his proceedings
against Croy. 235 Consultations of Mahomet for his proceedings in the siege of
Constantinople. 225. for the war of Epire. 375. 472 Consultation of the
Governor of Belgrade with the citizens. 286 Consultation of Isaac Bassa for
his proceedings against Scanderbeg. 360. 367 Consultations of Scanderbeg for
aid to be given to Vladislaus against the Turks. 66. for his proceedings
against Sfetigrade. 196. for the resisting of Isaac Bassa his invasion* 355.
for his proceedings against Ballaban. 463. for the answering of the message and
demand of the Turks. 483 Contaren a Venetian gentleman. 319. twice ransommed
by the Turks. 333 Continency of Scanderbeg. 349 Contumely offered by
Scanderbeg to Ballaban. 453 Corfu or Corcira an Isle upon the coast of Epire.
45. 478. Corsica an Island in the mediterrane sea, assailed by Alphonsus king
of Arragon. 399 Courage of Scanderbeg invincible even at point of death. 495
Courtesy and magnanimity of Scanderbeg to the Venetian captives. 107 Council
of Mantua, called by Pope Pius the second, for the taking of arms against the
Turks. 404 Cowardice of Antonie de Dieds. 319. of John Justinian. 329. of the
Greeks at Constantinople. 323. Covetousness see Avarice. Craina or Cruina a
mountain over Croy. 243 Croy the chief city of Epire resigned to Scanderbeg
by the Governor. 20. the foundation thereof. 31. the strong situation thereof.
136. 481. repaired and fortified. 206. besieged by Amurath. 208. battered. 211.
222. assaulted. 216. 220. 224. 234. mined by the Turks. 227. repaired and new
fortified. 255. it was besieged by Mahomet. 475. 488. by Ballaban. 474 Croians
their notable courage. 210. their resolution. 212. their demeanor before and
after the victories of Scanderbeg against Ballaban and lagup. 469 Cruelty of
Mahomet most extreme. 253. 232. 455. 476. Cruelty of the Turks most
Barbarous upon the dead bodies of the Christians. 301
D
Daina a city in Epire. 46. besieged by Scanderbeg. 95 Dainians their
constancy. 127 Dalmatia or Sclauony upon the sea, a country bordering upon
Epire under the Venetians. 207. Damalique a Promontorie near Constantinople.
315 Daniel Iurich Vaiuoda or Governor of Scutarie for the Venetians, and
General of their army against Scanderbeg. 98 Darnisses a kind of Priests
amongst the Turks. 5. Daughter of the Despot of Seruia married to Amurath. 71
Daughter of Sponderbeg Prince of Penderacia married to Amurath. 253 Daughter of
Ariamnit married to Scanderbeg. 257 Daughter of John Commenes Emperor of
Trebyzond married to Vsuncassan king of Persia. 386 David Emperor of Trebizond
and his two sons put to death by Mahomet. 426 David Chancellor of Ragusa. 408
Debreas sent with an army by Mahomet against Scanderbeg. 267. his ambition.
ibidem. he is slain by Scanderbeg. 273 his horse and armor given to Moses.
ibid. Demetrius Berissey. 304 Demetrius frank treasurer to Scanderbeg. 480
Devotion without piety or religion. 401 Despina daughter of the Emperor of
Trebizond and the wife of Vsuncassan king of Persia. 386 Description of
Scanderbeg his person. 72. of Dibria. 180. of the soil and territory about
Croy. 208. of the Despot of Misia. 71. of Driuasta. 113. of Mahomet his person.
255. of the country about Petralba. 263. of the country about Pologue. 269.
of Constantinople. 314. of the gulf of Hellespont. 315. of Amesa his person
and qualities. 351. of Ragusa. 407. of Vrsara in Apulia. 416. of Ballaban his
person. 452. of the city of Duraz. 487. of Croy. 481 Despot of Misia or Seruia
restored to his estate, and expelled again by Amurath. 16. he is aided by
Vladislaus king of Hungary. 17. he hinders Scanderbeg marching to the aid
of Vladislaus and partaketh with the Turks against the Christians. 71. his
irreligion. ibid. his country is spoiled by Scanderbeg. 76 Dibria a town and
country in Epire receives Scanderbeg and reuolteth with him. 19 Dibrians
their discipline and readiness in vvarres 57. their notable superstition. 181.
they yield Sfetigrade to Amurath. 185. they are pardoned by Scanderbeg. 187
Discord between the Genowaies and Venetians at the siege of Constantinople.
321 Discourse of the Author upon celestial signs and prognostications of
future accidents. 364 Disgrace offered to Pope Urban to M. Nicholas of Naples.
391 Discipline of the Dibrians. 57. by Scanderbeg observed in his camp. 349.
the original of it. 356 Dissimulation of Amurath with Scanderbeg. 13. of Moses
to Scanderbeg. 279. of Mahomet with the Christians at Constantinople. 322. of
Picenin to deceive Scanderbeg. 413 Dominicke of Nouara. 320 Don Garzia a
Spaniard ambassador for Alphonsus king of Arragon to the Pope. 400 Doniqua the
wife of Scanderbeg. 257 Drynon a river in Epire. 46. the source and head
thereof near Alchria. 449 Driuasta a city in Epyre. 47. the description of
it. 113 Duras or Durachium or Epydamnum a city of Epire subject to the
Venetians. 45. besiegned by Mahomet. 487. her original and foundation, and the
description of it. ibid. Dyrrachians the inhabitants of Duras, they aid
Scanderbeg with victuals. 222 Dukes of Sesse, of Sora, of Venuse in the kingdom
of Naples rebel against Ferdinand 404. 405 Duke of Milan and the Genowaies
take Alphonsus prisoner. 402 Duke of Milan and the Pope aid Ferdinand against
the Duke of Aniow. 405 Duke of Vrbin Frederick aideth Ferdinand against the
Duke of Aniow. ibid. Duchy of Spoleta restored to the Church of Rome by
Ferdinand. 404 Dukes of Dande and of Malsie, partake with Ferdinand against
John Duke of Aniow. 405 Duke of Emathia, see Vranocontes.
E
Emanuell Gregare. 324 Emperors of the Turks their manner of succeeding to the
crown. 252 Emperor of Greece, see Constantine. Emperor of Trebizond
conquered and put to death by Mahomet. 426 Empire of Trebizond conquered by
Mahomet. ibidem. Encouragement of Moses to his soldiers in the battle of
Drynon, against the Venetians. 104 Encorageme^t of Sca^derbeg to Paul Manassey
ammating him to the co^bat with Caraguza. 121 Encouragement of Scanderbeg to
the Croyans against the invasion threatened by Amurath. 136 Encouragement of
Fery-Bassa to his soldiers in the battle against Scanderbeg. 172
Encouragement of Scanderbeg to his soldiers for a new assault to Sfetigrade.
203 Encorageme^t of Vranocontes to the Croyans their walls being battered by
the Turks. 212 Encouragement of Amurath and Mahomet to the Turks, being to
assault Croy. 213 Encouragement of Scanderbeg to his soldiers not to fear the
tempest. 269 Encouragement of Scanderbeg to his soldiers to give the charge
upon Debreas. 273 Encoragement of Scanderbeg to his soldiers against Sebalias.
298 Encouragement of Amesa to the Turks against Scanderbeg. 369. 370
Encouragement of Moses to his soldiers at the battle of Pharsalia. ibidem
Encouragement of Picenyn to his soldiers. 416 Encouragement of Scanderbeg in
the battle against Ballaban. 465 Enmity between Pope Urban and master
Nicholas of Naples. 391. between Charles king of Naples and Pope Urban. 394.
between Sforce and the grand Seneschall. 399 Envy of the Turks against
Scanderbeg. 14. 267 Eugenius Pope aideth Rene Duke of Bar against Alphonsus.
402 Exclamation of the author upon the miserable estate of the Christians
under the Turks. 218. 223. against the invention of ordinance. 255. upon the
indignity offered to Scanderbeg in his voyage into Italy. 477 Exhortation of
the author to all Christians. 333
F
Falcon a town in Epyre under the dominion of Stephen Cernouitche. 77 Farrafin
a tower in Constantinople. 319 Ferdinand, bastard son to Alphonsus king of
Naples succeeded in that kingdom. 387. and is crowned. 404. he flies to Bary
or Barlette, and is besieged by Count Picenyn. 406. he is rescued by
Scanderbeg. 410. he ouercometh Picenyn and the Duke of Aniow in battle. 419.
he recouereth his kingdom. 421. he gives certain towns in Apulia to
Scanderbeg. 423 Feri-Bassa sent against Scanderbeg by Amurath. 86. he is sent
to renew the assault of Sfetigrade. 157. he is appointed with an army to
restrain Scanderbeg from hindering the assault of Sfetigrade. 168. his praises
and commendations. ibid. he chalengeth Scanderbeg to the combat. 172. and is by
him s(...). 174 Flambur a Turkish regiment. 139 Flectanella. 320 Forest of
Ionimes. 481 Fortress builded at Modrissa by Scanderbeg. 259. finished and
furnished. 260 Francis Sforce, son of Sforce Cotignolle aideth Ione second
Queen of Naples, in the recovery of her kingdom. 401. his liberality to the
graund Seneschall. ibid. he is Duke of Millan and deceives Count Picenyn. 42
Frontier war between the Turks in Sfetigrade and the garrison of the
Albanois. 193 Friar John Capistran. 71 Fusian a Sicilian governor of Trana in
Apulia for Ferdinand, usurps it to himself. 421. he is taken prisoner by
Scanderbeg and yields up Trana. 422. he is released and departs into
Sicilia. 423
G
Gabriell Treuisan, governor of the Venetian foysts. 319. he is sent
Ambassador from the Venetians to persuade Scanderbeg to open war with
Mahomet. 435 Gampsa Sultan of the Tartarians. 386 Gentill Bellin a painter of
Venice. 255 George Alexie an Epirot kills Ballaban. 482 George Castriot the
youngest son of John Castriot. 3. delivered in hostage to the great Turk. 4. by
the Turks circumcised or named Scanderbeg. 5 George Cernouitche, nephew to
Scanderbeg. 47 George Chuque taken prisoner by the Turks and put to death by
Mahomet. 455 George Despot of Misia. See Despot. George and Goic Streezes,
Nephews to Scanderbeg by his sister Iella, do come to his aid. 25 George
Thopie, brother to Tanusee, his misfortune. 298 Gilbert Ortafane, a Knight of
Naples, sent by Alphonsus to the aid of Scanderbeg. 280 Goic Streeze sent by
Scanderbeg into Apulia. 407 Goleme Ariamnite, the auncester of Moses. 271
Governor of Stellusa, named Desdrot, by the Turks of his own garrison
delivered prisoner to Scanderbeg. 30. is executed. 33 Greeks their negligence
in furnishing, fortifying and defending of Constantinople. 324 Grudge and
hatred between Justinian and Chirluc, and between the Greeks and the Latins.
324 Gulf of Ambracia in Epyre. 45 Gulf of Cape de Lach in Epyre. 424 Gulf of
Hellespont described. 315 Gulf of Rizic or Catarra. 47. 407 Guirize
d'Vladienne. 408 Gyne Musache husband to Vraica, the sister of Scanderbeg
comes to his aid. 25 Gyne Musache, Gyne Manasse, and Guirize d'Vladienne
taken prisoners by the Turks, and put to death by Mahomet. 455
H
Haly-Bassa with an army of 40000. Turks sent against Scanderbeg. 52. he is
appointed governor of Mahomet the son of Amurath. 87 Hamur sent with an
army to defend the Turkish frontiers. 377. conferring with Scanderbeg, he
persuadeth him to peace. 380 Hebdomi a Promontorie near Constantinople. 315
Heder the son of Ionime and nephew to Ballaban together with his father
taken prisoners by Scanderbeg and slain. 481 Helena Queen of Misia and
Esclauonie. 113 Helena mother to Constantin the great. 333 Helena mother to
Constantin Paleologus. 333 Hemas a mountain by Varna near to Thrace. 72
Hexamile a wall made by the Greeks at the entry into Morea, thrown down by
Amurath. 246. reedified by the Venetians and overthrown by Mahomet. 426
Hippodrome a tower in Constantinople. 315 History how it should be written.
254 Horatius Cocles his strange prowess. 215 Hozes a kind of Priests among
the Turks. 5 Huniades, see John.
I
Iagub Arnauth sent with an army against Scanderbeg. 460. he is slain by
Scanderbeg. 468 James Coque a Venetian, with others drowned. 321 James of
Narbone, Count of March marieth Ione the second Queen of Naples. 397. his
folly and oversight. 398. he is taken prisoner and again restored to liberty.
399. he forsakes Naples, returns into France, and becomes an hermit.
ibidem Ianissaries footmen of the guard of the great Turks person. 140. their
custom to sack the houses both of Christians and Jews at the death of their
Prince. 251 Iella daughter to John Castriot and Voisaue, sister to Scanderbeg.
3 Ierom Mind. 319. beheaded. 333 Impatiencie of Amurath, enraged for his ill
success at the siege of Croy. 235 Impiety of the Despot of Seruia. 71. of
Mahomet. 253. of the Greeks. 322 Incontinencie of soldiers. 249 Industry and
carfulness of Scanderbeg. 205. of Mahomet at the siege of Croy. 212. of John
Justinian at the siege of Constantinople. 329 Infidelity of Amurath against
the Greeks and others. 55 Infidelity and avarice of some Christians who
help to transport the arm of Amurath over Hellespont against the Christians.
73 Infidelity and perjury of Mahomet. 322. 333 Infidelity and treachery of
Chirluc. 332 Invasion. Vide Roades. John Boccace. 393 John Carracciola paramour
to Ione Queen of Naples is made graund Seneschall. 399. he is taken prisoner
by Alphonsus. 400. and raunsomed by Francis Sforce. 401. he is slain by the
practice of Queen Ione. 402 John Castriot father to Scanderbeg, his issue. 3.
being invaded by Amurath the great Turk, making peace with him, he delivers
all his sons in hostage. 4. he dies. 12 John Castriot son to Scanderbeg.
496 John Cernouitche, nephew to Scanderbeg. 47 John Comenes Emperor of
Trebyzond in league with Vsuncassan king of Persia against Mahomet. 386 John
Cosse a Neapolitaine Admiral, to John Duke of Aniow. 401 John Duke of Aniow,
son to Rene Duke of Bar, aided by the Genoways against Ferdinand, king of
Naples. 404. he is overcome in the field by Ferdinand and Scanderbeg. 420. he
returns into France. 421 John Duke of Calabria. 388 John Huniades Lieutenant
General of the Hungarians at the battle of Moraua. 17. he is Despot of
Transiluania, and father to Matthias Coruinus king of Hungary. 53. Lieutenant
General at the battle of Varna. 73. after the loss of the field he flies
and is imprisoned by the Despot of Seruia. 75 John Justinian a Genoway,
Lieutenant General for the Emperor within Constantinople. 318. he is highly
commended by Mahomet. 324. his industry and virtue. 329. being vvounded, he
faints and forsakes his charge. ibidem. his death. 331 John le Graund, a
German. 319. 321 John Maria of Vince^tia, slave to Mustapha. 254 John of
Sclauonie his honorable death and end. 330 John Perlat taken prisoner by the
Turks and by Mahomet put to death. 455 Ione or Jane the first, Queen of
Naphes married Andrew the younger son to the king of Hungary 389. she procures
his death and takes a second husband. ibidem. her third and fourth marriage.
390. she is enemy to Pope Urban, who depriueth her of her kingdom. 392. she
flies with Pope Clement to Auignon. ibid. she adopteth Jews. the first Duke
of Aniow for her heir and so returns to Naples. 392. she is put to death by
Charles Duke of Duraz. 393 Ione the second Queen of Naples, sister to
Ladislaus and daughter to Charles the second of Duraz. 396. her familiarity
with Pandolphel Alop. 397. she marieth James Count of March. ibid. she
entertaineth John Caraecciolle for her minion, and is by the Pope deprived of
her kingdom. 399. she disinheriteth Alphonsus, adopteth Jews the third of
Aniow, and is restored to her kingdom. ibidem. she causes the grand
Seneschall, her minion to be slain. 402. making her will and ordaining Rene
Duke of Bar to be her heir, she dies. ibidem. Iosaphat Barbare Ambassador
for the Venetians to Scanderbeg, and one of his counsel. 473 Isaac Bassa of
Romania sent with an army against Scanderbeg. 354 Isidore Rutheniam
Cardinal, the Popes Legate at Constantinople, prisoner to the Turks, ransomed.
333 Island of Lissa, in the Adriaticke sea, upon the coast of Epyre. 47
Isthmus, or straight of Corinth, what it is. 426 Isup sent Ambassador to
Scanderbeg. 235 Julian Cardinal of S. Angel causes the king of Hungary to
break his faith and league with the Turks. 63. his miserable end. 75 Julius
Caesar of Capua takes Sforce Cotignolle prisoner. 397. he intends the death
of the Count of March, is bewrays by Queen Ione, and executed. 398 Iussumbeg
sent against Scanderbeg. 428
L
Ladislaus son to Charles of Duraz, king of Naples is crowned king of Naples by
Pope Boniface. 399. he is made king of Hungary. ibid. he takes Rome by force.
ibid. he vvarreth upon the Florentines and is poisoned. 396 Lech or Luke
Dusman. 47. he aideth the Venetians against Scanderbeg. 96 Lech or Luke
Zachary, Lord of Dayna in Epire. 46. he is murdered by Lech Ducagin. 93
Legion what it is. 359 Leon the sage his table of the Emperors of
Constantinople. 336 Leonard Longaske. 319 Leonidas his valor. 215 Letters from
Francis Albert Cardinal to Vladislaus king of Hungary. 63 Letters of
Vladislaus to Scanderbeg. ibidem. of Scanderbeg in answer to Vladislaus. 69. of
Amurath to Scanderbeg. 79. of Scanderbeg to Amurath. 84. of Amurath to
Mustapha. 116. of Mahomet to the Governor of Sfetigrade to practice the revolt
of Moses from Scanderbeg. 276. of Scanderbeg to Alphonsus king of Naples. 279.
of Mahomet to Scanderbeg. 431. 434. 442. of Scanderbeg to Mahomet. 433. of Pope
Pius the second to Scanderbeg. 445 Jews Duke of Duraz the 3. son of Charles
the second king of Hungary. 339 Jews king of Hungary son of Carolobert. 388.
he warreth upon Ione Queen of Naples. 389. He sends Charles of Duraz with
an army against her. 393. he causes her to be put to death. ibidem. he dies.
394 Jews Prince of Tarent, son of Philip husband or paramour to Ione, the
first Queen of Naples. 389 Jews the first Duke of Aniow, second son to John
king of France, adopted by Queen Ione. 392. he inuadeth the kingdom of Naples
and is overthrown in battle. 393. he is sore hurt and dies. ibidem Jews the
second Duke of Aniow, crowned king of Naples by Pope Clement, and enters
Naples. 395. He is confirmed in the kingdom by Pope Alexander the fifth.
ibidem. he is overcome in battle by Ladislaus, and returns into France. 396
Jews the third Duke of Aniow, adopted by Queen Ione, whom he restores to her
kingdom of Naples. 401. he dies. 402 Liberality of Christian Princes,
sending great gifts and presents to Scanderbeg, upon the death of Amurath.
248 Liberality of Amesa the nephew of Scanderbeg. 266 Liberality of Francis
Sforce. 401 Lassa or Alexia, a city of Epyre, subject to the Venetians. 44.
359 Lyuad a plain in Macedonie. 431 Magnanimity of the Epirotes in the days
of Scanderbeg. 239 Mahomet brought up under the government of Haly-Bassa. 87.
he is at the siege of Sfetigrade with Amurath. 186. and at the siege of Croy.
209. his mortal hatred to the Christians. 213. he voweth the destruction of
Scanderbeg, 215. he is named Emperor of the Turks. 251. his cruelty,
impiety, Atheism, tyranny and notable vices. 224. his description. 255. his
voyage to Constantinople. 313. he violateth the peace sworn to the Emperor of
Constantinople. ibibem. his perjury to the Peratines. 333. he is overthrown
by Humades in a battle before Belgrade in Hungary and wounded, with a great
slaughter of the Turks. 353. he seeks truce with Scanderbeg. 375. in two
battles he is overcome by Vsuncassan, but in the third overthrows him. 387.
his conquestes in the East during his truce with Scanderbeg. 425. 426. he
sends Ballaban to begin the siege of Croy, and after follows in person.
475. he makes a second journey into Epire. 486. he returns to Constantinople
and craves Scanderbeg his sword in gift. 497 Maloncre or Demire king of
Persia, son to Gampsa Sultan of the Persians slain in battle by Vsuncassan.
386 Mamiza daughter to John Castriot and Voisaue. 3. by her brother Scanderbeg
given in marriage to Musache Thopie. 25. she celebrateth the obsequtes of her
husband. 305. her perfections and praises. 309 Mara daughter to John Castriot
and Voisaue. 3. sister to Scanderbeg and married to Stephen Cernouitche. 25
Margaret the wife of Charles king of Naples, sister to Queen Ione flies
with her children to Gaietta. 394 Margaret the sister of Sforce Cotignolle,
her hardiness and generositie. 397 Marin Span and Amesa governors of Baleza.
107 Marquise of Crotona overthrown and taken prisoner by Ferdinand. 404
Marquise d'Est. 405 Mary daughter to Stephen king of Hungary married to Charles
the second, king of Naples, her issue. 388 Mary sister to Ione Queen of
Naples, wife to Robert Earl of Arthois, her familiarity with John Boccace.
393. she is put to death by Charles of Duraz. ibidem Maurice Cataneo a Genoway.
318 Messeit a Saniack taken prisoner. 371. he is raunsomed. 377 Messenger of
Amurath rejected by the Croyans. 211. Messenger of Perlat to Moses. 276. from
Hamur to Scanderbeg. 379. from the Turkish army to Scanderbeg. 482 Metopick a
Promontory near Constantinople. 315 Miliander a place in Constantinople. 318
Misia, Vide Seruia. Modon or Methone in Greece spoiled by Mahomet. 426
Monticlea. 221 Morea, Vide Peloponesus. Mocrea vvonne by Scanderbeg. 42 Morsena
his prophecy of Constantinople. 338 Moses Bassa, the murderer of Tursines,
murdered by the mother of the infant. 253 Moses Goleme of Dibria aideth
Scanderbeg, in his revolt. 24. he is left to continue the siege of Sfetigrade.
33. he goes disguised as aspie into the Turks Camp. 164. he is vvounded.
198. his immoderate fury in the heat of fight. 271. his original and
descent. ibide^. his hardy act in the battle of Pologue. 271. 272. his valor
and virtue rewarded by Scanderbeg. 273. he reuolteth from Scanderbeg. 278. 302.
his goods and livings are confiscate. 305. he comes to Andrinople and is
honorably entertained. 310. he is sent with an army against Scanderbeg. 312.
337. he chalengeth Scanderbeg to the combat, yet refuses him. 344. being
overthrown he is in disgrace with Mahomet, and in danger of his life. 345.
346. he returns into Epire, submiteth himself to Scanderbeg, is pardoned and
restored to his goods, livings, and dignities. 347. 348. he is taken prisoner
by the Turks and put to death by Mahomet. 455 Mount Gargan in Apulia or mount
Saint Angel. 410 Mountain of Mocrea. 264 Mountain of Modrissa. 258. 264
Musache de Angeline nephew of Scanderbeg son of Vladienne Goleme and nephew to
Scanderbeg, by his sister Angeline. 271. he is vvounded. 299. he is taken
prisoner by the Turks and put to death by Mahomet. 455 Musache de Thopy, the
son of Mamiza Scanderbegs sister. 25. he is surprised by the Turks before
Belgrade where he makes a most glorious end. 295. 296. his virtues and
praises. 309 Mustapha sent against Scanderbeg by Amurath. 89. he is sent the
second time. 94. he is taken prisoner by the Albanois. 125. he is raunsomed.
127 Mines discovered by a devise. 230 Mines of the Turks against
Constantinople disappointed by countermynes. 321
N
Naples kingdom an example of fortunes inconstancy. 387. conquered by Jews
king of Hungary, restored to Queen Ione. 389. besieged by Philip Duke of
Millan and others, and vvon for Queen Ione. 401. recovered by Rene Duke of
Bar besieged and vvon by Alphonsus. 403. taken by Bellisarius from the
Goths. ibidem Neapolitanes their humor and disposition. 387. their rebellion
against Ferdinand, and confederacy with John Duke of Aniow. 404. 405. they
are reconciled to Ferdinand, and pardoned by means of Scanderbeg. 421 Natolia
or Asia Minor, named Turkey. 6 Negligence and security of the Turkish army.
163. 366. 367 Neophite a monk at Constantinople. 324 Nicholas. Berize. 304.
taken prisoner by the Turks or put to death by Mahomet. 455 Nicholas Ducagin,
the son of Paul. 46. his valor and prowess. 89 Nicholas de Gullelle. 319
Nicholas Moneta, governor of Scutarie. 481 Nicholas of Naples at enmity with
Pope Urban the sixth, and the cause thereof. 391 Number of Turks slain in the
battle against Haly Bassa. 60. in the battle against Fery-Bassa. 175. at the
siege of Sfetigrade under Amurath. 189. at the siege of Belgrade in Macedonie.
304. at Belgrade in Hungary. 353. in the battle of Pharsalia. 301 Number of
Christians slain at the siege of Sfetigrade under Scanderbeg. 204. at the
battle of Belgrade. 301 Number of Christians prisoners at the taking of
Constantinople. 332 Number of soldiers in garrison at Constantinople. 314
Number of Scanderbegs army against Amurath at the siege of Sfetigrade. 133. at
the siege of Croy. 208 Number of Amuraths army brought to the siege of
Sfetigrade. 140. to the siege of Croy. 207
O
Oration of Amese to Mahomet. 351 Oration of Amurath to his counselors for
war to be made against Scanderbeg. 130. to his Chieftains before Croy,
reproching their faintness and cowardice. 223 Oration of Andrew Angel, to the
Driuastines. 111 Oration of Carazabeg to Mahomet. 429 Oration of a common
soldier in Sfetigrade. 31 Oration of Daniell Iurich, General of the Venetian
army against Scanderbeg. 98 Oration of Debreas, encouraging his soldiers
against Scanderbeg. 270 Oration of the Emperor of Constantinople. 327 Oration
of the governor of Belgrade to his people. 284 Oration of Isup to Scanderbeg,
persuading him to peace with Amurath. 236 Oration of Mahomet to his
Chrieftaines against the Christians. 445. purposing a journey against
Scanderbeg in proper person. 472 Oration of Paul Angel Archbishop of Duraz to
Scanderbeg, incensing the Epirots against Mahomet. 437 Oration of Paul Ducagin
touching the sending of succors to Vladislaus king of Hungary. 67 Oration of
Perlat to the Dybrians within Sfetigrade, dissuading them from yielding to
Amurath. 183 Oration of Scanderbeg to the Citizens of Sfetigrade. 137. to Pope
Paul the second and his Cardinals at Rome. 478. to the Princes of Epyre,
assembled in Parliament at Lissa, 47. to his subjects, to comfort them after
that the voyage of the Christians against the Turks was broken. 450. to the
Venetian Ambassadors upon the conclusion of peace between them. 128 Oration
of Zagan counselling Mahomet to continue the siege of Constantinople. 326
Orations of Scanderbeg to his soldiers. 1 At his going to recover the
fortresses of Epyre against the Turks. 25 2 After the recovery of the
fortresses of Epyre. 34 3 Marching against Haly Bassa. 54 4 After the battle
with Haly Bassa inuiting them to the sack and spoil of the Turkishe
territories. 60 5 Consulting to assay Mustapha. 91 6 Before the battle
between him and the Venetians. 99 7 Before the battle of Oronichea against
Mustapha. 122 8 Being to give a canuazado to the Turkishe Camp. 165 9
Persuading the^ to proceed in their Conquests against the Turks. 260 10
Before the battle against Debreas. 270 11 Marching to the siege of Belgrade.
281 12 Before the battle of Oronichea against Moses. 341 13 Being to march
against Isaac Bassa. 355 14 Encouraging them against the French in Apulia. 411
15 Before the battle of Valcala. 453. 24 16 Before the second battle of
Valcala. 463 17 Being ready to march against Iagup. 466 18 Dissuading them
from pursuing the Turks after the relief of Croy. 483
Order observed by the Turks in the division of their armies. 139 Ordinance
cast for the battery of Croy. 211. the authors exclamation against the
invention thereof. 255 Original and antiquity of the towns in Epyre. 30. of
the Turks. 55. of the city of Duras. 487 Oronichea, a place in the upper
Dibria. III. 358 Ottoman the surname of the great Turk. 4
P
Paleologus brethren Thomas and Demetrius, Lords of Peloponnesus, but deprived
thereof by Mahomet. 426 Pandolphel Alop a Neapolitane Count, the paramour of
Ione Queen of Naples beheaded. 397. Parliament of all the Lords and Princes
of Epire to consult with Scanderbeg for the war against the Turks. 44. 45
Parthinia now called Praese, a town in Epyre, her original. 208. was ruinated
by Julius Caesar. ibidem. Passages of Abruzza freed by Ferdinand and
Scanderbeg. 412 Paul Angel Archbishop of Duras, a near friend to Scanderbeg.
408. his descent and virtues. 436 he comes as Ambassador from the Venetians
to Scanderbeg. 437. he is one of Scanderbegs chiefest Counselors. 473 Paul
Ducagin his religiousnesse, 46. his praises and commendations. 69 Paul
Manassey. 120. rewarded by Scanderbeg. for killing of Caragusa. 122. assailed
by the Turks. 124 Paul Troylus Bouchardes. 318 Paysants of Albany surprised by
the Turks. 362 Peace between Amurath and the Hungarians. 40. between Mahomet
and Scanderbeg. 435. violated. ibidem. between Scanderbeg and the Venetians.
127. 128 Peloponnesus or Morea a country in Greece, the commendation thereof.
426. vide Morea. Peneropole or Persair a town in Thrace. 69 Pera or Galata, a
city near to Constantinople. 315, voluntarily yielded to Mahomet. 333
Perjury, see Infidelity and cruelty. Peter Dusmam Lord of the Peonians,
Pelagonians and Sardicians people of Epire. 47 Peter Jews Borgias nephew to
Pope Eugenius, is a competitor with Ferdinand for the kingdom of Naples. 388
Peter Perlat goueruour of Sfetigrade. 137. his providence and prudence. 149.
his good deserts for the defense of Sfetigrade. 188. he is rewarded by
Scanderbeg and made an Abbot. ibidem. Peter Span or Spaniard and his sons.
47. he aydeth the Venetians against Scanderdeg. 96 Petralba a town in Epire
and the description thereof. 29. yielded to Scanderbeg. 30 Petrella besieged by
Scanderbeg, and yielded by the Turks. 28. the situation thereof. ibid. Phare a
tower and lantern at the entry into the haven of Constantinople. 315 Philip
Prince of Tarentum, the fourth son of Charles the second king of Hungary.
389 Picenin General of an army for Duke John of Aniow against Ferdinand. 405.
he moves parlie with Scanderbeg. 413. his dishonest practice against
Scanderbeg. 414. which discovered he is challenged by Scanderbeg. 415. he
dislodgeth secretly. ibid. his praise and commendation. 420. his pitiful death
and end. 421 Piec Manuell. 146. 363. 449. he is Lieutenant to Scanderbeg in the
battle of Valcala. 463 Plombine in Thuscan besieged by Alphonsus. 344 Poast
sent by Sebalias to certify the Belgradians of succors. 292 Poasts of Turkey
what their order is. ibid. Policy of Count Picenin. 413. of Ione the second
Queen of Naples. 398. of Perlat within Sfetigrade. 151 Policy and prudence of
Amurath before Sfetigrade. 158 Policy of Scanderbeg in causing counterfeit
letters to be written to the governor of Croy for the delivery of the town to
him. 18. in marching with his army. 163. in giving a canuazado to the Turkish
army before Croy. 221. in a set battle to aim at the death of the enemies
General. 272 Policy used by the Turks to oppress the Christians. 232. used
by the Turks within Sfetigrade. 201 Pologue, a country in Epire or a part of
Macedonie and Bulgarie. 3. the description thereof. 268. 269. Pope Calixtus the
fourth, claims the kingdom of Naples by escheate. 388 Pope Pius the second
persuades the Christians to make a voyage against the Turks. 442. his birth,
death, and commendation. 449. 450 Port S. Roman at Constantinople. 316 Port
imperial at Constantinople. 319 Poisoning and a strange kind thereof. 396
Prayer of Scanderbeg going to the aid of Ferdinand. 409 Precepts of Scanderbeg
for his son, comprehending the institution of a Prince. 493 Priests, their
diverse orders and estates in the Turkish religion. 5 Princes of Tarent,
Beseignan and Salerne with others rebel against Ferdinand. 405 Princes and
Nobles of Naples partakers with Ferdinand. ibidem. Prisoners Christians taken
at Belgrade. 301. put to extreme torments. 310. beheaded by Mahomet. 321
Prisoners Turks feasted by Scanderbeg. 264 Prisoners Venetians freely set at
liberty by Scanderbeg. 107 Prognostications foreshewing the future greatness of
Scanderbeg. 3. foreshewing the great slaughter in the battle between
Scanderbeg and Isaac Bassa. 363 Prophesies foreshewing the ruin of
Constantinople. 336 Proverb. 399. 340 Proverb used by Scanderbeg. 190
Proverb of Princes children. 252 Providence and care of Scanderbeg to prevent
surprises. 236. 456 Providence of Amesa in the wars. 361 Punishment inflicted
upon spies. 149 Pyramet king of Caramania overcome by Mahomet. 426
Q
Quarrel between two private soldiers for their booty. 373 Question between
Musache and a Turk his prisoner, decided by Scanderbeg. 274
R
Ragusa the description thereof. 407 Rebellion of Amesa against Scanderbeg.
349. of Moses Goleme against Scanderbeg. 302. of the Neapolitans against
Ferdinand. 404 Redd plain in Epire. 236 Redona a country in Epire. 349 Rene
Duke of Bar, brother to Jews the third of Aniow ordained heir to the
kingdom of Naples by Queen Ione, and is prisoner in Burgundy. 402. being
delivered he gains Naples, which he loses again, and is forced to for sake
the kingdom. 403 Reposius son of John Castriot. 3. by the Turks named
Caragusa and poisoned. 18 Retraite of Scanderbeg from the army of Isaac Bassa
and Amesa. 358 Revenues of Scanderbeg. 51 Rewards given by Scanderbeg to
Perlat. 188. also to the citizens, soldiers, and inhabitants of Croy. 247 Road
into the Turkish frontiers by Scanderbeg. 36. 442. 445. 470. into the dominions
of Scanderbeg by the Turks. 435. into the Venetian territories by the Turks.
435. 495 Robert king of Naples, son to Charles the second, his wisdom. 388.
his will and death. 389 Roislaue the wife of Musache Goleme, and the mother of
Goleme Ariamnite, the auncester of Moses. 271 River of Aoe, or Aeas, or Vauisa
in Epire. 45 River of Cydrus and Barbiza. 315 River of Isme. 222 River of
Mathia. 366 River of Scombine in Epire. 486
S
Saying of Scanderbeg. 453. touching the often removing of an army. 42.
touching surprises by enemies. 163. touching the cutting off the General of an
army in battle. 272. touching the obstinacy of Moses in the battle of
Oronichea 343. touching incontinencie of soldiers. 349 Saying of Amurath
touching Scanderbeg. 214 Saying of Hanniball touching Fabius Maximus and Varro.
355 Saying of Mahomet touching the marriage of Scanderbeg. 258 Saying of the
Epirots to Scanderbeg. 449 Saying of Fabius Maximus. 453 Saying of Philip of
Macedon to his son Alexander. 494 Saint Nicholas de la Pierre a mountain in
Epire 51 Saint Angellor mount Gargan a town in Apulia given to Scanderbeg by
Ferdinand. 423 Saint John de Ronde a town in Apulia given to Scanderbeg by
Ferdinand. ibid. Sallie made by the Driuastines upon Amesa. 112 Sallie by the
Sfetigradians upon the Turks. 159 Sallie by the Croians upon the Turks. 224.
228. 275 Sallie by the Belgradians upon Tanusee. 305 Saniacque a Turkish
Colonel of horsemen. 139 Saura a plain in Epire. 486 Scanderbeg his
disposition and education under Amurath, his first services and preferment. 6.
he is made a Saniacque. ibid. he is made General of an army in Asia. 7. he is
envied, slandered, and suspected in the court of Amurath. 14 he is sent against
the Despot of Seruia, and conquereth his country. ibid. He is sent against the
Hungarians with Carambeg. 47. he reuolteth from the Turks. ibidem. he is
chosen General of the wars against the Turks by the Princes of Epire. 50.
he is chosen king of Epire. 51. he is made free of the city of Venice, and
Lieutenant general of the Venetian territories in Epire. 130. he is persuaded
to marriage by his Nobles. 192. he offends in overmuch courtesy. 202. he
goes disguised as a spy into the Turks camp before Croy. 164. and a^ a spy
unto Sfetigrade. 205. he is in hazard of his life. 214. 459. 462. he is married.
257. he goes on progress with his Queen. 258. his provident order for the
sudden arming of his subjects, and the speedy raising of an army. 268 he
uses the aid of Italians in his wars. 278 his strange quality in the heat
of fight and in his anger. 296. his retrait at the battle of Belgrade. 300. he
is felled upon his horse crouper 343. he is received at Ragusa. 407. he
embarketh himself for Italy to the aid of Ferdinand. 409. he is honored with
ambassades and presents from the Pope and all the Princes of Italy. 423. he
restores Ferdinand to his kingdom. 421. he has certain towns in Apulia
given him by Ferdinand. 423. he returns out of Apulia into Epire. 424. he
comes to Rome to the Pope to crave aid against the Turks. 478. he is ill
succored by the Christians. 480. he sickneth and makes his last will and
testament. 489. he dies. 495. he is buried at Lissa 496. his body is taken
out of his sepulcher and highly reverenced by the Turks. ibid. his private
acts and exploites most rare and memorable. ibid. Sclauonie. 43. divided from
Epire by the river Drinon. 47 Sclauonian tongue very ample. 185 Scopia a
chief town in Macedony. 269. 428 Schism in the Church of Rome the motive and
occasion thereof. 390 Scouts of Scanderbeg surprised by the Turks. 295 Scouts
of the Turks surprised by the Epirots. 362 Scouts placed by Scanderbeg to
observe the passing of the Turkish army. 363 Scutarie or Scodra a city of
Epire subject to the Venetians. 47. besieged by the Turks. 218 Scutarians
their exploit against Baleza. 117 Sea of Propontide. 315 Sea of Bosphore or
Thrace. ibid. Sebalias Lenrenese sent by Amurath to begin the siege of Croy.
207. to divert Scanderbeg from troubling the Turkish camp. 224. to raise the
siege of Belgrade. 291. he surpriseth the army of Scanderbeg before Belgrade.
294. his oversight. 297 he is put to the retire in the battle of Belgrade. 300.
his return to Andrinople and his triumph. 310 Security, vide negligence.
Secrecy of the Ottomans in co^cealing their councels. 132 Selit a mountain in
Epire. 51 Seraill a place where the great Turk uses to keep his Concubines.
254 Seremet sent against Scanderbeg. 214. 445. his son is taken prisoner in
the battle of Alchria. 449. he is put to flight by Scanderbeg. ibid. Seruia
alias Bosnia or Rascia, or Misia called by the Turks Segoria. 14. restored to
the Despot by Amurath upon peace made between him and the Hungarians. 40
Sfetigrade besieged by Scanderbeg and described 30. it is yielded to Moses. 51.
fortified by Moses. 137. besieged by the Turks. 141. the natural strength and
situation of it. 160. battered. 154. 160. Assaulted. 155. 167. 169. yielded to
Amurath. 185. fortified by Amurath. 187. besieged by Scanderbeg. 194. the
suburbs thereof assaulted and burnt by Scanderbeg. 195 assaulted by the
Epirots. ibid. 197. 200. 203 Sforce Cottignole Lieutenant of the Popes forces
395. 396. he is made prisoner. 397. he is delivered. 398. he is sent to the
aid of the Pope by Queen Ione of Naples, and is overthrown by Braccio, the
Queen depriueth him of all authority. 399. he is reconciled to the Queen
400. he delivers her from the siege of Alphonsus, and gets a victory of
the Spaniards in Naples, and dies. 401 Sibilla Erithrea. 336 Siege of Dayna
given over by Scanderbeg. 129 Siege of Sfetigrade given over by Scanderbeg. 204
Siege of Scutarie by the Turks. 218 Siege of Croy given over by Mahomet. 246.
475 488. and given over by the Turks after the death of Ballaban. 482 Siege of
Belgrade raised by Sebalias. 297 Siege of Constantinople the manner of it. 316
Siege of Barie or Barlet in Apulia raised by Scanderbeg. 410 Siege of Duras
given over by Mahomet. 488 Simeon Volcathagne. 102. prisoner to Scanderbeg. 107
Simeon de Nemague king of the Misians and Sclauonians. 113 Skirmish between
the Turks and Epirots. 143. between the Turks garrison within Sfetigrade, and
the garrison of the Epirots in Dibria. 193. between the French and the Epirots
in Apulia. 412 Soldiers of several Nations serve under Scanderbeg. 194
Soldiers of Scanderbeg terrified at a tempest. 269 Soldiers of diverse
Nations Christians serve under Mahomet at the siege of Constantinople. 313
Soldiers of Scanderbeg the kinsemen of Ballaban corrupted by him to betray
Scanderbeg. 456 Soldiers of Scanderbeg murmr against him about pursuing of
the Turks after the siege of Croy. 485 Spachi, or Sulastari, or Vlufagi,
Turkish horsemen guarding the pauilion of the great Turk. 140 Spaniardes their
intolerable pride and envy. 400 Speeches of Scanderbeg to his subjects
excepting against the making of peace with Amurath and the Turks. 82. to
certain of his soldiers touching the security of the Turkishe army. 163. to
the Dibrians. 187 Speeches also of Scanderbeg to his Nobles concerning the
estate of the married life. 192. to Moses reprehending his over much
hardiness. 271. to Musache and a Turk deciding a controversy between them.
274. to his Nobles upon the revolt of Moses. 307 to his Nobles touching the
rebellion of Amesa. 350 Speeches moreover of Scanderbeg to two soldiers
quarrelling together. 373. to Fusian. 422. to his soldiers encouraging them
against Iussumbeg. 428. to his Nobles touching Carazabeg. 430. to his
Chiefetaines aduising them to give an onset upon Ballaban. 463. to his
neighbors and allies seeking their aid for the relief of Croy. 477. to the
Epirots touching the flight of Ballaban. 469. to his Princes and Nobles upon
his death bed. 489. to his son upon his death bed. 492. to his
Chiefetaines upon his death bed, upon an alarm given by the Turks. 495
Speeches of Amurath to the Turks upon the receipt of Scanderbeg his letters,
86. to his soldiers reproaching them for flying from Scanderbeg. 159 Speeches
also of Amurath to his soldiers encouraging them to a new assault of
Sfetigrade. 168. to the Turks concerning Scanderbeg. 230. to his son Mahomet
upon his death bed. 234 Speeches of the Turkish Chiefetaines and Councillors
to Feribassa, dissuading him from the combat with Scanderbeg. 173. to Amurath
persuading him to renew the assault of Croy. 219. to Mahomet calling for an
assault to be given against Constantinople. 326 Speeches of Mahomet to Amurath,
persuading him to violate his faith with the Sfetigradians. 186. to his
Courtiers animating him against Scanderbeg. 275. to his Bassaes persuading him
not to leave his voyage to Constantinople for Belgrade. 290. between him and
Moses. 312 Speeches also of Mahomet to the Turks in commendation of John
Justinian. 324. to himself upon the invasion of his territories by the
Epyrots. 442. to himself upon the hearing of the taking of Moses and other
Nobles of Epire. 455 Speeches of Mahomet to Ballaban urging him to the
destrustion of Scanderbeg. 460. to Scanderbeg by a messenger, by whom he
returned his sword unto him. 497 Speeches of the Nobles of Epire to Scanderbeg,
dissuading him from the combat with Feribassa. 173. persuading him to
marriage. 192. persuading him to grant truce to the Belgradians. 286 Speeches
of Moses to the Turkish messenger. 278. to Scanderbeg in dissembling with him.
279. to his friends persuading them to revolt with him from Scanderbeg. 303.
to the Turks his soldiers, after his overthrow by Scanderbeg. 345 Speeches of
Amesa to the Epirots upon the rebuke given him by his Uncle. 114. to
Scanderbeg upon his delivery out of prison. 383 Speeches of Vranocontes
governor of the city of Croy, to the Ambassador of Amurath. 232. 234
Speeches of Vranocontes and Tanusee, touching the oration of Scanderbeg to them
and the citizens of Croy. 357 Speech of Ariamnites offering him self tributary
to Scanderbeg. 51 Speech used by a paysaunt unto Scanderbeg. 91 Speech of
Marin Span to Amesa, nephew to Sca^derbeg. 108 Speech of a Turk, called
Caragusa to Paul Manassey. 121 Speech of Paul Manassey to the Turks flying
from the battle. 125 Speech of a Turk of Sfetigrade desiring a parley and
truce. 201 Speeches of the Christians subjects of the great Turk, to the
Christians their enemies at the siege of Scutarie. 218 Speech of the Governor
of Belgrade to the citizens. 283 Speech of Sebalias deryding and reproaching
the Christians. 298 Speech of the soldiers of Scanderbeg desiring that their
fellows slain at Belgrade might be buried. 308 Speeches of Demetrius and
others to Scanderbeg comforting him after his great misfortunes. 306 Speeches
of the Ambassadors of diverse Princes to Scanderbeg touching his loss at
Belgrade. 311. Speeches of Ahemaz to Moses desiring leave to fight a combat.
338 Speeches between Ahemaz and Zachary Groppe 339 Speech of master Nicholas
of Naples touching the disgrace offered unto him by the Pope. 391 Speech of
Ladislaus King of Naples of the battle between him and Jews the second of
Aniow. 396 Speech of Count Picenin used unto Scanderbeg. 414. Speech of
Assambeg a Chiefetame of the Turks to Scanderbeg. 428 Speechs used by Ballaban
to Mahomet excusing his overthrow by Scanderbeg. 459. 460 Speech of Iagup of
the fortune of Scanderbeg. 468 Speech of Lech Ducagin bewayling the death of
Scanderbeg. 496 Speech of Scanderbeg to a Scithian before his combat with him.
8 Speech of Zampsa a Persian to Amurath challenging his Courtiers to the
combat. 9 Speech of Amurath to Scanderbeg animating him to undertake the combat
against two Persians. 10 Speech of Scanderbeg touching the oration made by a
soldier Turk within Sfetigrade. 33 Speech of the citizens of Sfetigrade to
Scanderbeg. 41 Speech of Haly Bassa touching the order observed by Scanderbeg
in setting of his battles. 58 Speech of the Despot of Seruia to Friar John
Capistran. 71 Speech of John Huniades to Vladislaus King of Hungary in the
battle of Varna. 74 Spies their punishment. 149 Sponderbeg Prince of
Penderacia. 253 Stellusa a town in Epire described, it is yielded to
Scanderbeg. 30 Stephen Cernouiche husband of Mara the sister of Scanderbeg
aideth him against the Turks 35. his issue. 47 Stephen King of Hungary. 388
Stratagemes of Scanderbeg against Haly Bassa. 57. against the Turks before
Sfetigrade. 142. in the often removing of his camp. 160 in retyring from the
Turks. 359. in the battle of Pharsalia. 367 Stratageme usual with the Turks
against the Christians. 140 Stratageme of Amurath to divert Scanderbeg from
troubling his army during the assault of Croy. 224 Stratagemes or strange
enterprises of the Turks against Constantinople to get the haven. 317 and in
building a bridge. ibidem. Stratageme of Mahomet to surprise Chidna. 476.
Streezes their family. 46. the nephews of Scanderbeg. 25 Subassides a Turkish
leader of horsemen. 139 Subjects of Scanderbeg, vvilling to have peace with
the Turks. 82 Succors sent by Alphonsus king of Naples to Scanderbeg. 280. by
the Venetians and others to Scanderbeg for the relief of Croy. 480
Superstition of the Dibrians most strange. 181. causes the loss of
Sfetigrade. ibidem Synam sent with an army to defend the Turkish frontiers.
377. 378. sent with an army to invade Epire. 426. surprised and overthrown
by Scanderbeg. 427 Synope the country of Mithridates. 426
T
Talasmans a kind of Priests among the Turks. 5. Tanusee Thopie. 45. inuadeth
the Turkish camp before Croy. 229. sent to begin the siege of Belgrade. 282.
his valor in the battle of Belgrad. 296. he is sent with an army to bury the
Christians slain at Belgrade. 308. he spoileth and burns all the country
about Belgrade. 305 he is appointed to keep the frontiers of Epire against
Sinam and the Turks. 379. he is Scanderbegs Lieutenant at the battle of
Valcala. 463 Theodore Caristin a Greek, a good archer. 318 Theodore Corona
Lord of Belgrade in Bulgary. 282 Theophilus Paleologus. 318. his honorable end
and death. 330 Thuraca, Saniacke of Romania counselor to Mahomet. 326
Timariot a Turkish horseman. 139 Towns in Apulia given to Scanderbeg by
Ferdinand. 423 Trana a city in Apulia usurped by Fusian against Ferdinand,
421. yielded to Scanderbeg and by Ferdinand given unto him. 422. 423 Treachery
intended by Amurath to corrupt some of the garrison of Sfetigrade. 180
Treachery intended by Mahomet to corrupt some of Scanderbegs friends. 275. 276
Treason of Anell a Mason betraying Naples to Alphonsus. 403 Treason of certain
soldiers serving under Scanderbeg. 461 Treason of a labourer corrupted by
Amurath to betray Sfetigrade. 180. the manner thereof. 181 rewarded by Amurath.
186. the end and estimate of it. ibid. Trebizond besieged and won by Mahomet.
476 Triballians people of Misia. 19. enhabite the upper Dibria. 181. they hold
of the Greek Church. ibidem. Truce granted by Scanderbeg to the Turks within
Sfetigrade. 202 Truce for sixteen days granted by Scanderbeg. to the
Belgradians. 287 Truce between Scanderbeg and Mahomet. 407 Triumphs and
general joy of the Christians for the death of Amurath. 247 Triumphs in Epire
for the overthrow and death of Amurath. 249. for the victory against Moses.
344. for his return and reconciliation. 348 Triumph of Scanderbeg for the
overthrow of Amesa and the Turks. 373. after his victory of Iagub and
Ballaban. 470 Triumph of Sebalias after his return from relieuing Belgrade.
310 Tumenist a amountaine in Epire four miles from Croy. 208 Turks massacred
within Croy. 20. their obstinacy. 22. they make head against Scanderbeg and
are put to the sword. 24. their devise in their ensigns. 125. within Belgrade
they doubt of the faith of the citizens. 283. their wonderful care to preserve
their conquests. 291. they cut off the heads of the Christians slain at
Belgrade. 301. Their opinion of the Epirots. 310. they honor virtue and valor
even in their enemies. 346 Turks conspiring the death of Scanderbeg are
executed. 474 Tursines brother to Mahomet drowned. 253 Tyranna the greater a
town in Epire. 28 Tyranna the lesser in Epire. 208 Tire the lesser in Epire.
45
V
Valachia the country of Huniades. 72 Valley of Mocrea. 88 Valley called the
fair Valley. 167 Valley of Valcala. 453 Valmes a city in Epire. 271.
reedified by Mahomet. 486 Variety of opimons touching Amuraths religious life.
86 Varna or Dionisiopolis a city near to Romania 73 Venetians aid Scanderbeg
in his wars with supplues of money. 205. in peace and amity with the Turks.
ibidem. their subjects relieve the Turks before Croy with victuals. 227
Viziers counselors to the great Turk. 330 Vlach Poastes of Turkey. 292
Vladien Goleme de Ariamnite, father to Goleme Ariamnite or Musache de Angeline.
271 Vladislaus king of Hungary craves aid of Scanderbeg against the Turks.
63. he marches against the Turks. 72. his rashness or over great hardiness.
74. he is slain. ibidem Vlaica daughter to John Castriot and Voisaue, sister
to Scanderbeg. 3 Vlixians a people of Epyre. 45 Voyage of the Christians
against the Turks broken. 449 Voyage of Scanderbeg into Italy. 477 Voysaue
the mother of Scanderbeg dies. 12 Vranocontes. 58. made governor of Croy.
361. his praise and commendations. 209. he is by Scanderbeg made Duke of
Emathia. 247 Urban the sixth created Pope. 390. enmity between him and master
Nicholas of Naples. 391 he is besieged within Nocera by Charles of Duras king
of Naples. 394 Vsuncassan king of Capadocia, Armenia, and Persia, his descent.
386. his acts and marriage. ibidem. in two battles he overcomes Mahomet, but
in the third is himself overcome by Mahomet in the battle of Arsengua. 387
W
War determined by Amurath against Scanderbeg. 79 War between the Turks
and the Hungarians. 62. between Scanderbeg and the Venetians. 94. between
Mahomet and the Persians. 386 War renewed between Mahomet and Scanderbeg. 442
Waters of Albulae. 366 Winter wars most disco^modious and hurtful. 262
X
Xabiac a town in Epyre under the dominion of Stephen Cernouitch. 47
Z
Zachary Groppe. 196. 197. he desires leave of Scanderbeg to answer the
challenge of Ahemaze. 333. he is in pay with the French in Italy. 415. he is
Lieutenant to Scanderbeg at the two battles of Valcala. 463 Zadrime a country
in Epire, upon the river Drine, belonging to the family of the Ducagines. 46
Zagan a counselor to Mahomet. 326 Zemalda eldest son to Vsuncassan king of
Persia slain in the battle of Arsenuag. 387
FINIS.

